2D Virtual Learning Environments for Tertiary Education 
 
Gerhard Hube, Kevin Pfeffel, Nicholas H. Müller 
Faculty of Economics and Business Administration and  
Faculty of Computer Science and Business Information Systems 
University of Applied Sciences Würzburg-Schweinfurt  
Würzburg, Germany 
e-mail: gerhard.hube@fhws.de 
e-mail: kevin.pfeffel@fhws.de 
e-mail: nicholas.mueller@fhws.de 
 
 
Abstract — In the last two years, university teaching has been 
strongly influenced by online formats, mainly by video 
conference systems. Beyond that, there are also some practical 
examples for the use of immersive environments in higher 
education, mainly focused on the usage of virtual reality (VR) or 
augmented reality (AR) environments. However, this study aims 
to see if immersive 2D environments are also holistically suitable 
for teaching in terms of presence, participation, collaboration 
and active learning for higher education, as they can offer 
advantages over video conferencing systems, but are not as 
costly as VR and AR solutions. A Master's program at the 
University of Applied Sciences Würzburg-Schweinfurt was 
chosen for the study. The selected course was held completely in 
an 
immersive 
2D 
environment 
over 
one 
semester. 
Accompanying the course, subjects were asked to complete the 
Online Learning Environment Survey (OLLES) questionnaire 
weekly for analysis. In addition, qualitative interviews were 
conducted with the subjects afterwards. Thereby a descriptive 
analysis of the questionnaires takes place. All dimensions of the 
OLLES questionnaire achieve high to very high values. In doing 
so, the interviews provide insights into the reasons for the 
ratings. From a purely descriptive point of view, it can therefore 
be assumed that the used immersive 2D environment is 
holistically suitable as a learning environment in the tertiary 
sector. 
Keywords - Virtual Learning Environments; Online Teaching; 
Tertiary Education; 2D Environments; Desktop virtual reality 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
This contribution is based on the IARIA conference 
contribution “Suitability of Immersive 2D Environments for 
Tertiary Education using the Gather Environment as an 
Example” published in June 2022 [1]. University teaching has 
been heavily influenced by online teaching over the past two 
years as a result of the COVID 19 pandemic measures. 
Besides the isolated usage of VR or AR environments [2], 
primarily the classic video conferencing tools such as “zoom”, 
“GoToWebinar” or “Cisco Webex” were used, according to 
their market shares [3]. All of the classic video conferencing 
tools use video and audio transmission in a simple 
representation of the participants on the screen of the end 
device. Due to the continuous and long lasting use of these 
systems, signs of fatigue and weariness could be observed, 
often referred to as "zoom fatigue" [4] [5] also and especially 
for 
university 
students 
within 
online 
courses 
[6]. 
Nevertheless, it can be assumed that online communications 
and events will continue to some extent after the COVID 19 
pandemic [7]. Therefore, alternatives or additions to classic 
video conferencing systems such as VR should also be 
analyzed, in order to check their suitability, especially for 
online university lectures. A first pilot study showed higher 
spatial and social presence for VR group meetings in 
comparison with video conference systems [8]. In contrast to 
video conferencing systems, the representation of the 
participant in VR is integrated into a virtual world and allows 
to explore and interact within a dynamic virtual environment 
[9]. 
In this introduction, some definitions and explanations of 
the basic terms are given. These are VR and immersion, for 
example. Additionally, the status quo of VR in education, as 
well as virtual learning environments (VLE) will be discussed. 
Section 2 shows the related works for VR and VLE in higher 
education and especially in tertiary education. Section 3 
presents the virtual learning environment gather.town and 
their specific software features, which are used in the study 
and also the measuring instrument OLLES [10] for analyzing 
the different dimensions. Section 4 resumes the results, which 
are then discussed in detail in Section 5 with some limitations. 
Section 6 forms the end of the paper and contains the 
conclusion with the main results and future studies. 
A. VR/immersion 
VR can be distinguished between immersive VR (I-VR) 
including additional devices like a head mounted display 
(HMD) and non-immersive VR on the screen of some end 
devices, also declared as desktop VR (D-VR) [11] [12] [13] 
[14]. Di Natale [15] proposes a tripartition. He differentiates 
at the poles between non-immersive systems such as desktop 
VR (D-VR) and immersive systems such as HMD or specially 
designed rooms with projected walls (CAVE). In between, he 
places semi-immersive systems such as AR or wide-field-
displays. While the definition for VR seems to be clear in 
literature, the term of immersion is a multifaceted concept 
without clarification [2]. On the one side, immersion is viewed 
as a kind of objective characteristics in terms of technical 
systems and affordances [16] or a psychological subjective 
characterized by one’s perception of presence and interaction 
[17]. While Bergstrom [18] defines immersion as an objective 
81
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

property of the platform environment and presence as a 
subjective feeling, it seems that the term of immersion started 
to become synonymous with “presence” [19]. Despite the 
strict separation between non-immersive and immersive VR, 
recent studies tend to consider immersion as a kind of 
continuum from highly immersive or high-end for I-VR and 
low immersive or low-end for desktop VR systems (D-VR) 
[19] [20] [21]. This is probably because there can be some 
kind of immersion and spatial presence on desktop VR 
systems as well. 
B. Virtual learning environment (VLE) 
Another keyword often used in connection with virtual 
learning is virtual learning environment (VLE). This term 
includes a wide range of systems like simple web pages, 
learning management systems like MOODLE but also three-
dimensional learning environments like Second Life or 
OpenSim [22]. Reisoğlu [23], following Zuiker [24], defines 
the term “3D Virtual Learning Environment” (3DVLE) and 
describes it as platforms for virtual worlds with avatars as 
representatives and the ability to communicate via audio or 
text, such as Second Life or OpenSim. Other authors use the 
term of “immersive 3D virtual world” or “immersive 3D 
virtual environment” for similar systems to describe computer 
based simulated environments, in which users are able to 
immerse themselves through avatars [25] [26]. We will follow 
the wording of “immersive 3D/2D virtual environment” to 
describe desktop VR with different levels of immersion. If 
3D-like representations are used in the desktop environment, 
we assign them to an immersive 3D desktop environment and, 
in the case of a two-dimensional representation, to an 
immersive 2D desktop environment. Within this paper we do 
not include learning management platforms (LMS) for 
distribution 
of 
contents, 
messages, 
notices 
and 
communication via forums and chats, like e.g., Moodle 
although they are included in the term of virtual learning 
environment (VLE) [27] [28]. We want to focus on low 
immersion desktop solutions that provide the ability to move, 
interact, collaborate and communicate in a kind of virtual 
environment using an avatar. The aim is to use them for online 
master lectures at universities. 
In this paper, the related works are presented below. This 
is followed by the method section, in which the learning 
environment used is presented in detail. In addition, the 
measurement instruments used are explained. Afterwards the 
results are given. This is followed by a discussion of the 
results, the limitations of the study and finally the conclusion. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In the following sections, the state-of-the-art, several 
studies on VLE in specific topics are discussed. But there is a 
research gap regarding the basic suitability of such virtual 
environments in higher education. In particular, usage in the 
tertiary education sector for the implementation of regular 
courses, and not just for individual specific and short learning 
units, does not seem to have been sufficiently analyzed. 
A. VR in education 
The high-end immersive VR seems to fascinate and 
inspire people in their first reaction, probably because of the 
high level of immersion and appearance [29] [30]. Especially 
in terms of education, there were several announcements 
about groundbreaking improvements by the usage of 
immersive VR, like increasing memory capacity or making 
better decisions [31]. Wu et al. [32] reported that I-VR-
lectures are more effective than non-immersive environments 
and Gao [33] assumes better learning outcomes because I-VR 
is more engaging than traditional methods. A meta-study 
found that the majority of studies on immersive learning 
environments from 2014-2019 used AR or VR applications, 
although all forms of immersion in learning and education 
were explicitly included. Among other things, the study shows 
the need for more research on less immersive learning 
environments with higher narrative and greater challenge [2]. 
Although the level of immersion in desktop VR systems is not 
as intense as fully immersive VR technologies, it is not the 
case that higher immersion and presence directly lead to better 
learning performance [20]. Johnson-Glenberg [19] discovered 
that the main effect for better learning is not the level of 
immersion between 2D or 3D virtual environment but the 
level of embodiment. The study compared the learning 
outcomes between groups learning with a low immersion 
platform on a desktop and a high immersive platform with an 
HMD (I-VR). The low embodied I-VR group performed 
significantly worse than the desktop group with high level 
embodying. Radianti [34] states that immersive VR 
technologies are particularly used in education, even if their 
level of maturity still seems questionable and there are several 
research gaps. Hamilton [14] found in his literature review 
that in most I-VR studies between 2013 and 2019, there was a 
significant benefit of using I-VR in education. However, he 
also restricts that most studies used short interventions and 
were mainly focused on scientific topics such as biology or 
physics. Additionally, there are still limitations while using 
immersive VR. Besides higher costs for immersive VR, above 
all cyber sickness in terms of e.g., headache, blurred vision or 
dizziness are effects of using HMD technologies [35]. This is 
one reason why such systems should be used only for a limited 
span of time [36]. Due to this and considering the specific 
requirements and accommodations for university lectures, 
desktop VR applications appear to be more suitable for online 
education [10] [21] [37]. 
B. Immersive VR (I-VR) in higher education 
There are several studies on the impact of mainly 
immersive VR (I-VR) in higher education. Chien et al. [38] 
stated that a VR environment increases the motivation and 
critical thinking skills. Tepe [39] concluded that a VR 
environment increases performance and professional skill 
development. Other studies also showed several positive 
effects on the academic success and motivation [40] [41]. 
Wen-Yu Lee [42] discovered higher scores in science 
concepts for sixth-grade students learning with I-VR systems 
in comparison to students without the help of immersive 
systems. In the field of higher education, a meta-study 
analyzed studies on desktop-based virtual environments, 
82
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

games and simulations in particular. They concluded that 
these virtual tools could be effective in improving learning 
outcomes [13]. Mystakidis et al. [43] conducted a literature 
review analyzing the outcomes of distant learning and their 
effect on various criteria of "deep and meaningful learning" 
such as cognitive, social or affective aspects for K-12 high 
school students. As a result, positive outcomes were found, 
especially in terms of performance, satisfaction, cooperation 
and motivation. Although it is also emphasized that 
insufficient didactic quality cannot be compensated by online 
formats. In a metastudy on the effects of immersive VR on 
students' academic performance, Akgün [44] concluded that 
there are many positive effects on students' abilities, such as 
an increase in motivation and other positive contributions to 
learning. Despite these positive results, the study also 
determined that there are still technical and health problems to 
be solved.  
C. Virtual learning environment (VLE) in higher education 
In addition, studies with desktop VR in higher education 
detected better performance achieved in groups using desktop 
VR. However, dependent from the individual spatial ability 
[45], Reisoğlu [23] analyzed studies between 2000 and 2015 
on 3D virtual learning environments (3DVLEs) and various 
aspects such as platforms used, research topics and 
achievements. He found that the Second Life platform was the 
most used platform and that studies on 3DVLEs peaked 
around 2012 for simulation and learning support. He 
concluded some overall positive emotional and cognitive 
achievements on presence, satisfaction, communication skills 
and engagement. Coffey [26] also analyzed the second life 
platform against a normal computer surface for comparing the 
impact on intercultural sensitivity and reveals significant 
gains with the usage of a virtual environment. Another study 
analyzed the effects of collaborative learning in virtual 
environments with the use of 3D avatars in a virtual learning 
environment (VLE). The results showed that regardless of a 
collaborative group or an individual group, learning 
improved, but participation in a collaborative group had a 
significant positive effect on academic achievement and 
satisfaction in higher education [46]. In a systematic literature 
review on "simulation games", it was discovered that better 
results in terms of declarative knowledge, procedural 
knowledge and knowledge retention could be achieved 
through the use of desktop-based immersive environments for 
the education of trainees [47]. 
D. VR/VLE in tertiary education: 
One of the early publications on "desktop 3D learning 
environments" without the use of head-up displays in tertiary 
education comes from Charles Sturt University [48]. Here it 
is already pointed out that a desktop application is easier for 
the users and reduces physical and psychological stress 
compared to immersive virtual worlds with head-mounted 
displays. A combination of learning management system with 
Moodle and 3D desktop environment with OpenSim was used 
in a study to design and evaluate a VLE for teaching with 
undergraduate students. There were effects on learning skills 
and understanding of sociocultural aspects that have a strong 
impact on social interaction when students participate and 
collaborate in common tasks and activities [30]. Collaboration 
and interaction seemed to be a high demanded factor 
influencing VLE systems, either by students as well as 
academic staff [49]. A special form of 3D virtual learning 
environment is used for analyzing dental students’ 
performance. When comparing stereoscopic 3D vision with 
passive circular polarized glasses to 2D vision on screen, 
significantly better results and higher appreciation for the 3D 
vision were found [50]. Another specific anatomy medical 
study about the role of stereopsis in virtual and mixed reality 
conducted that virtual and mixed reality is inferior to physical 
models [51]. 
Overall, there are several studies of desktop VR (D-VR) 
respectively VLE for specific topics, often computer science 
or medicine [35] [50] [51] [52]. These studies include various 
intensities of immersion, but still lack an evaluation of the 
overall and holistic suitability of 2D desktop learning 
environments for higher education, including the new 
immersive 2D environments that have appeared in the last 
three years. 
There are many different forms of virtual learning 
environments that are used in one way or another. The 
difference between the individual environments lies 
especially in the level of immersion. Fig. 1 shows an overview 
of the different virtual learning environments and their 
classification on the level of immersion. 
III. METHOD 
In the following we present the immersive learning 
environment gather.town, in which the course took place and 
the measuring instrument OLLES, which was used for the 
assessment. In addition, qualitative interviews were 
 
Figure 1. Overview of different virtual learning environments according to the level of immersion. 
 
83
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

subsequently conducted with some of the subjects, which will 
also be presented here. 
A. Immersive 2D environment gather.town 
The software gather.town [53] was used as an immersive 
2D environment. This is a web conferencing software, which 
allows to create a complete virtual replica of the teaching 
building. Within this virtual space, users can move around 
using avatars and interact with each other and their 
environment, similar to real life. If the avatars now walk 
around in the virtual environment and then meet each other at 
a certain distance, the camera and the microphone of the 
computers are automatically switched on, and the users have 
the opportunity to communicate. The graphical user interface 
is quite simple and it does not demand any special 
requirements to run on a variety of computers. In preparation, 
the entire real seminar building was recreated in the 
gather.town 
environment 
and 
the 
following 
virtual 
environment settings and software features were used: 
1) 
Podium: 
The podium is the classic teaching situation (see Fig. 2). 
Within the gather.town environment, all students and the tutor 
are in one large room. The tutor stands in front at the lectern, 
while the students take their places at the tables. All students 
can see, hear and of course communicate with each other via 
camera and microphone. It is possible to share the screen to 
provide lecture slides or other content to all participants in the 
plenum area. In this way, the tutor can use lecture slides in 
addition to a verbal execution of the learning topic, as they 
would be used in a real teaching situation. 
 
2) 
Workshops: 
Workshops are smaller rooms that provide fewer seats 
than the large seminar rooms. Here, there are tables with seats 
and a whiteboard (see Fig. 3). Thus, the users have the 
possibility to do smaller group work. They can use the table 
for meetings via the camera, or the whiteboard for joint work 
or screen sharing for presentation. 
3) 
Whiteboards: 
The whiteboard (see Fig. 4) provides an opportunity for 
collaborative work. To do this, the whiteboard must first be 
activated. After that, all users who access the whiteboard at 
the same time can work together on it. This means that all 
users get write permissions and can interact with the 
whiteboard. In addition, a video and audio function for 
communication is available for the workgroup to discuss and 
exchange while working on the board. 
4) 
Group discussion: 
This is a room that is designed in such a way that a pro and 
a con side can sit opposite each other and participate in a group 
discussion by means of the camera (see Fig. 5). The whole 
setting is accompanied by possible viewers but would also be 
monitored by a jury that rules the discussion and evaluates the 
individual arguments. 
 
5) 
Break rooms: 
In the break rooms, users can stay between the individual 
seminars and have the opportunity to play various card games 
at a game table, making music or watching videos (see Fig. 6). 
In another break room, users have the opportunity to get on a 
yoga mat. A 10-minute instructional video is then played so 
users can join in on the yoga session from home. 
 
6) 
Other Interactive Objects: 
Within the environment, other interactive objects are 
stationed in the individual rooms or corridors. In the entrance 
area, for example, there is a blackboard, on which the 
timetable can be viewed. Next door, there is a tutorial that 
once again describes the functionality of the gather.town 
environment in a video. There is also a bookcase. If you use 
it, you get a web window within the gather.town environment, 
 
Figure 2. This is the podium. You can see a classic 
teaching situation in a shared space. 
 
Figure 3. Here you can see a small workshop room with 
several seats and a whiteboard in the room. 
 
 
Figure 4. In the upper part of the picture, you can see the 
whiteboard placed in the room. Below you can see the 
view when using the interactive whiteboard. 
84
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

which leads you to the online catalog of the university (see 
Fig. 7). There the literature search can be accomplished. 
 
B. Measuring instrument 
The OLLES questionnaire [10] in its modified 35-item 
form was used as the measurement instrument. The OLLES 
questionnaire is a web-based survey instrument for use in 
online learning environments in tertiary education. In this 
context, the OLLES questionnaire provides inferences about 
students' perceptions of interaction opportunities within an 
online environment in terms of economy and efficiency. The 
dimensions of the OLLES are Student Collaboration (SC), 
Computer Competence (CC), Active Learning (AL), Tutor 
Support (TS), Information Design and Appeal (IDA), Material 
Environment (ME) and Reflective Thinking (RT). In addition, 
questions about general computer use and Internet use were 
also recorded. All items were measured using a 5-point Likert 
scale. 
For the qualitative interviews, a separate questionnaire 
was developed, which can be viewed in full in the appendix. 
First, an introductory question was asked in order to lead the 
test persons into the interview situation in a relaxed manner 
and to check whether they could still remember the seminar 
well within the virtual learning environment gather.town. 
Building on this, at least one question was asked about each 
dimension of the OLLES to develop a deeper understanding 
of why one of the dimensions had performed well or poorly. 
In addition, the questions of the questionnaire still investigate 
whether the subjects prefer face-to-face classes, a virtual 
learning environment such as gather.town or classic video 
conferencing software such as Zoom and why this is so. 
Finally, the questionnaire examines whether the virtual 
learning environment gather.town was also used outside the 
actual seminar and, if so, for what other purposes and, 
questions are asked about the highlights and the low of the 
software used. 
C. Experimental procedure 
Even before the first seminar, all test persons were 
familiarized with the gather.town environment. Especially the 
basic functions were tested, so that everybody knows them 
and can use them independently. In addition, the OLLES 
questionnaire was introduced, since this was used in its 
original language English, but the test persons were not native 
English speakers. 
There were a total of four measurement time points. The 
seminar duration was always from 8:15 am to 13:15 pm. From 
the start of the test, the seminar was always first held in the 
gather.town environment and at all four measurement times 
the entire questionnaire was completed online directly 
afterwards. 
The qualitative interviews were collected with a time lag 
after the actual seminar, but they were conducted within 
gather.town. An appointment was made with a respondent 
within gather.town, where the interview was conducted and 
the audio track was recorded. The audio track was then 
transcribed, analyzed and interpreted. 
D. Sample 
All data were collected at the University of Applied 
Sciences Würzburg-Schweinfurt within the seminar “trend 
analysis and innovation assessment” of the master study 
 
Figure 5. This is a group discussion room, where users sit 
across from each other in teams and a jury sits in the 
middle. 
 
 
Figure 6. Here you can see the break rooms, where 
multiple users can gather and share interactive 
applications like a gaming table or a yoga room where a 
yoga tutorial is played as a video as soon as you step onto 
one of the green mats. 
 
 
Figure 7. In the upper part of the picture, you can see a 
bookshelf, which stands freely in the room. Below is the 
view when you use the bookshelf. This is the online 
catalog of the university. 
85
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

program “Innovation for small and medium Enterprises”. A 
total of 17 subjects participated in the study. However, there 
were not measured values from all subjects at all four 
measurement time points. From two subjects there were only 
three measured values and from four subjects there were only 
two measured values. This is still sufficient to form an 
arithmetic mean. Nevertheless, one subject was excluded from 
the final analysis because he produced outlier values on three 
dimensions. This leaves n = 16 valid subjects for the final 
analysis. The average age of the subjects is 24.44 years, with 
a minimum of 22 years and a maximum of 30 years. Of the n 
= 16 subjects, 7 are female and 9 are male. 
Five randomly selected subjects were used for the 
qualitative interviews. Afterwards, it was checked to what 
extent the answers of the subjects overlapped or whether new 
insights could still be gained with further surveys, but a 
feeling of saturation set in. Therefore, n = 5 interviews were 
considered sufficient. Of the n = 5 subjects, 2 are female and 
3 are male. 
IV. RESULTS 
The results section is divided into different areas. First, 
there is a purely descriptive part, in which the mean values of 
the OLLES questionnaire are considered. After that there is a 
statistical part, where the Wilcoxon signed-ranked test was 
used to find out if there are differences between different 
measuring times. Finally follows the part, in which the results 
of the qualitative interview are reported. 
A. Analysis of the OLLES Questionnaire 
In the case of computer use, it was found that all subjects 
use their computers daily or at least several times a week. In 
the case of Internet use, it was found that all subjects used the 
Internet on a daily basis. 
When tested for normal distribution with respect to the 
dimensions of the OLLES, Student Collaboration (SC), 
Computer Competence (CC), Active Learning (AL), Tutor 
Support (TS), Information Design and Appeal (IDA), Material 
Environment (ME) and Reflective Thinking (RT), all were 
found to be normally distributed. Those descriptive values can 
be seen in Tab. 1. 
Then, the Wilcoxon signed-ranked test was used to 
examine whether there were differences between the 
individual measurement points and thus whether there was a 
change in the evaluation with regard to the repetition of the 
use of the gather.town environment. 
Since a normal distribution could not be determined for all 
variables, even after the exclusion of six subjects with partly 
missing values, the Wilcoxon test was used. Here, all 
requirements were met. 
There were only significant differences between 
measurement time point 3 and measurement time point 4 for 
the dimensions Student Collaboration (Exact Wilcoxon Test: 
z = -2.09, p = .037, n = 12) and Material Environment (Exact 
Wilcoxon Test: z = -2.41, p = .016, n = 12). Otherwise, there 
were no other significant differences between measurement 
time points. 
B. Analysis of the qualitative Interviews 
A complete overview of the guideline interview can be 
found in the appendix and can be referred to for better 
understanding. Question 1 revealed that all subjects could still 
remember the seminar and the use of gather.town well to very 
well. Question 2 revealed that the majority perceived 
collaboration within gather.town as practical, fun, relaxed and 
easy. Group work in particular was rated very positively. The 
whiteboard function, on the other hand, was sometimes 
perceived negatively, as it did not always function correctly 
from a technical point of view. This was also confirmed by the 
query. All subjects found that there were sufficient 
opportunities for successful collaboration, although, as 
already mentioned, the whiteboard was sometimes replaced 
by external software in the form of Miro. Question 3 showed 
that although there were sometimes technical problems in 
using gather.town, the use itself was always understandable 
and simple and therefore it did not represent a technical 
hurdle. Question 4 showed that subjects found teaching within 
the gather.town environment motivating. Upon further 
inquiry, it turned out that this was due in particular to a higher 
degree of interactivity. For example, simply by moving or 
controlling one's own avatar. In addition, the virtual learning 
environment was also perceived as varied and interesting, 
TABLE I.  
OLLES 
Descriptive Analysis 
Dimension 
Mean Value 
Standard Error of the 
Mean 
Standard 
Deviation 
Minimum 
Value 
Maximum 
Value 
Student Collaboartion (SC) 
3.76 
0.11 
0.42 
3.10 
4.60 
Computer Competence (CC) 
4.57 
0.11 
0.44 
3.55 
5.00 
Active Learning (AL) 
3.64 
0.13 
0.46 
2.70 
4.60 
Tutor Support (TS) 
4.10 
0.12 
0.55 
3.20 
4.80 
Information Design and Appeal (IDA) 
3.73 
0.12 
0.47 
2.93 
4.80 
Material Environment (ME) 
3.84 
0.07 
0.28 
3.50 
4.45 
Reflective Thinking (RT) 
3.19 
0.16 
0.62 
2.25 
4.10 
 
86
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

since it is a diverse world. Question 5 and the related query 
revealed that the tutor's contact and accessibility was good, 
and enough opportunities were given for feedback and further 
questions were answered quickly. Question 6 revealed that the 
working slides as well as the sources were partly a bit outdated 
and would need optimization. An inconsistent design was also 
pointed out. Nevertheless, it was not perceived as particularly 
negative. On the other hand, the feedback showed that the 
gather.town environment was initially perceived as taking 
some getting used to, but after a period of getting used to it 
was evaluated with positive attributes such as entertaining, 
appealing and varied. In particular, the real proximity and thus 
easy navigation, as well as the possibilities for decorating and 
designing were mentioned positively. Nevertheless, a 
somewhat unprofessional impression remained. Question 7 
showed that subjects rated their learning success within 
gather.town as good. This was also due in particular to the 
high level of interactivity, the richness of variety and the 
motivating aspect. Nevertheless, it was already apparent here 
that all test subjects prefer face-to-face teaching, but would 
prefer a virtual learning environment such as gather.town to 
classic video conferencing software such as Zoom. This was 
also confirmed in question 8, where all subjects preferred 
gather.town to Zoom. The most frequently mentioned point 
was the constant availability, since one could log in 24/7 
within gather.town and did not have to send links by e-mail 
for a meeting. In addition, it was said that the exchange among 
each other worked better and there were several opportunities 
to collaborate. In addition, there are aspects like a higher 
individuality, a small gamification approach, higher activity 
and better design possibilities. One response should still be 
highlighted, as one respondent also made the point that the 
avatars created more closeness to fellow students than simple 
tiles. That this is a particularly important point was then 
shown in question 9, where all respondents answered that they 
prefer classroom teaching. In particular, the proximity to the 
person sitting next to them, the contact itself, but also the 
additional body language were cited as reasons. In addition, 
face-to-face teaching is more interactive, it is easier to work 
together and there are no connection problems. Question 10 
then showed that the gather.town environment was also used 
by the subjects outside the actual seminar. Mainly for group 
work of other seminars, but also for private meetings such as 
vacation planning. The environment was also used for a 
Christmas party. Finally, question 11 and the two follow-up 
questions showed that the subjects particularly appreciated the 
fact that they did not have to register and could get started 
straight away. They also liked the conversation circle 
function, where you only took part in a conversation if you 
were within a certain radius. This gave a real-world feel. The 
usability beyond the seminar and the design options were also 
rated very positively. If something was rated as bad, it was 
mainly technical problems in the form of connection problems 
and the technical problems with the whiteboard function. 
V. DISCUSSION 
In the discussion section, the OLLES questionnaire scores 
are first discussed in relation to the findings from the 
qualitative interviews. Each dimension of the OLLES 
questionnaire is analyzed individually. Subsequently, the 
limitations of this study will be discussed. 
A. Overall 
Repeated measurement of user ratings of the gather.town 
environment showed that there was virtually no difference. 
Although a meta-study by Merchant et al. [13] found small 
effects in simulation studies in terms of number of sessions, 
these were measures of learning outcome and not an 
assessment of the immersive environment as in this study. 
Therefore, it can be assumed that a one-time survey after the 
first unit or even after the last unit is quite sufficient. 
In the dimensions of computer use and Internet use, the 
subjects indicated that they use this on a daily basis. In 
addition, the gather.town environment and all basic functions 
were sufficiently explained before the start of the study. Thus, 
we assume that there were no poor ratings for the environment 
due to possible lack of technical skills. 
All dimensions of the OLLES questionnaire reach high to 
very high scores. From a purely descriptive point of view, it 
can therefore be assumed that the gather.town environment is 
holistically suitable as a learning environment in the tertiary 
sector. Nevertheless, the individual dimensions will be 
examined below. 
B. Student Collaboration (SC) 
The Student Collaboration (SC) dimension asks in 
particular about the frequency of communication between 
students. This includes the question of help and feedback as 
well as the mutual exchange of information and resources. As 
already mentioned, studies have shown that collaboration [43] 
[46] [49] and communication [23] [49] have positive effects 
on users within a VLE. Therefore, this is an important factor 
for learning. It can be assumed that high values were achieved 
here in the evaluation, since gather.town provides enough 
possibilities, especially through the functions whiteboard, 
workshops, group discussion and informal encountering, that 
this can also be used profitably. This assumption can also be 
further supported in part by the interview results, since from 
the subjects' point of view, the simple and fast group work in 
particular was decisive for good collaboration. This could also 
be due to the fact that group formation is similar to a face-to-
face event and the individual groups can then move 
individually to their own meeting rooms. Whiteboards in 
particular, on the other hand, had technical problems more 
often and thus certainly led to a point deduction in the rating. 
Nevertheless, it became apparent that there were enough 
possibilities for the test persons to collaborate successfully. 
C. Computer Competence (CC) 
The dimension Computer Competence (CC) asks in 
particular about the assessed competence of one's own 
computer and Internet use and also the ability to solve minor 
problems oneself. Since the highest values were achieved 
here, this further supports the assumption that all subjects had 
more than sufficient technical skills to use the gather.town 
environment to its full extent. This was also confirmed by the 
interviews. Although there were sometimes technical 
problems with the connection, there were no fundamental 
87
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

problems in understanding how to use it. On the contrary, 
everything was very easy and intuitive to use. 
D. Active Learning (AL) 
The Active Learning (AL) dimension specifically asks 
about the motivation created, as well as the feedback received 
through the activities or the teaching unit within the 
environment itself. Again, various studies already showed that 
motivation [38] [40] [41] [43] [44] is a crucial factor in the use 
of VLE's. That there was increased motivation was confirmed 
by the interviews. The motivation arose primarily through 
increased interactivity. For the test persons, it was clearly 
more motivating to walk through the virtual environment by 
moving the avatar and not just to sit in front of the laptop. This 
also led to the environment being perceived as very varied. It 
was also mentioned here that a kind of fatigue nevertheless 
developed over a certain period of time. However, this was 
not evident in the Wilcoxon signed-ranked test, in which the 
individual values of the dimensions were compared across the 
individual measurement time points. Nevertheless, this could 
have led to a deduction of the score. 
E. Tutor Support (TS) 
The dimension Tutor Support (TS) asks in particular about 
the participation and accessibility of the tutor. In this respect, 
the response time to questions and feedback play an important 
role. Good communication [23] and interaction [49] lead to 
positively perceived VLEs. The second highest score was 
obtained for this dimension. This may be due to constant 
availability and timely communication, as the tutor himself 
was also always present and responsive within the 
environment. 
Therefore, 
from 
this 
perspective, 
the 
gather.town environment is well suited for interactive 
teaching. This assumption could also be confirmed by the 
interviews. All subjects felt that the tutor's accessibility was 
good and sometimes even saw advantages over a face-to-face 
lecture in the form of direct messages, which thus did not have 
to be put in front of all seminar participants. In addition, there 
was sufficient feedback and questions were also answered 
quickly. 
F. Information Design and Appeal (IDA) 
The dimension Information Design and Appeal (IDA) 
asks in particular how creative and original presented teaching 
materials are and whether graphics used are helpful and 
visually appealing. This mainly refers to the teaching slides 
presented as if they were in a presentation. Nevertheless, the 
colors and walking around within the environment can also 
have an impact on visual perception and lead to improved 
learning. In addition, there are the varied break rooms, so that 
there is also a fairly high rating here. The impression that the 
subjects evaluated not only the work materials per se, but also 
the design of the environment per se on this dimension was 
confirmed by the interviews. The work slides were perceived 
as outdated and somewhat confusing. The environment, on the 
other hand, took some getting used to at first, but after using 
it, the variety, the decoration and the discovery of little things 
were perceived as nice and fun. Perhaps this double 
assessment was due to the fact that, in this particular case, it 
was not always clear to the subjects what the individual 
question items referred to in this dimension. It could also play 
a role here that English is not the native language. 
G. Material Environment (ME) 
The dimension Material Environment (ME) asks in 
particular about the installation process and clarity in using the 
software. Since very high values were also achieved here, this 
further supports the point that all test subjects had more than 
sufficient technical skills to use the gather.town environment 
to its full extent. In addition, it can also be assumed that the 
environment is easy to learn and therefore has a high practical 
value. In general, it can be assumed that VLEs must be 
accessible and not have too many hurdles to ensure a 
successful learning environment. The interviews revealed that 
the usage was very understandable, simple and intuitive. Only 
the web interface was used, which is particularly easy to use. 
H. Reflective Thinking (RT) 
The dimension Reflective Thinking (RT) asks in particular 
how well subjects were able to learn within the online 
environment, but also for a comparison to a real classroom. 
Here, too, high scores were generated, but these are the lowest 
in comparison with the other dimensions. Nevertheless, it can 
be deduced that an online environment can be a sufficient 
substitute due to sufficient positively rated features, but real 
classrooms are still the most suitable form of teaching. This 
was also confirmed by the interviews. All subjects were 
motivated by the virtual learning environment and rated their 
learning success as good. Especially the interactivity and the 
richness of variety seemed to be conducive to learning. 
Nevertheless, all test persons also preferred face-to-face 
teaching. Probably the most crucial point that a virtual 
learning environment in the form of gather.town cannot copy 
is human proximity. The interviews showed that face-to-face 
teaching is primarily characterized by direct contact and 
closeness to the person sitting next to you, as well as to all 
other seminar participants. This again leads to more 
interactivity, 
better 
collaboration 
and 
simply 
closer 
togetherness among the test persons and thus also to a 
different feeling. However, since a virtual learning 
environment such as gather.town is always preferred to classic 
video conferencing software such as Zoom, it can be said that 
the closer the learning environment used resembles a real-
world experience, the better it is accepted. This is also shown, 
for example, by the statement that a special highlight was the 
conversation function. You could walk towards other avatars 
and as soon as you were within a certain radius, the camera 
and microphone automatically started and you could start a 
conversation, while avatars outside the radius could not take 
part in the conversation. It was said here that this made the 
environment feel more real. 
I. 
Limitations 
This study has some limitations, which are discussed 
below. The main limitation is that there is not yet a 
comparison group. The OLLES questionnaire is applied, 
resulting in a set of scores. These scores only reach their full 
significance when they are also put into relation. However, 
this limitation will be addressed by follow-up studies. At the 
time of publication, a second study had already been started. 
88
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

This time two courses are running in parallel, with one course 
using the gather.town environment while the other course 
takes place in Zoom. Thus, in the follow-up study, the two 
teaching environments can be compared with each other, but 
also a comparison of the two gather.town courses can be 
carried out. This is interesting in that it cannot be assumed that 
very high scores will again be generated on the OLLES 
questionnaire. For instance, the scores in this study could be 
biased due to the effect that the test persons rate new and 
exciting interfaces better and this effect could wear out. It is 
also important to keep in mind that this study was conducted 
in the midst of the Corona pandemic and students had no 
choice but online teaching. This has changed again and there 
is also the option of real-world teaching again. This could 
result in the online teaching being rated significantly lower. 
Another limitation is the small number of subjects, but this 
could not be implemented otherwise due to the small class 
size. 
Furthermore, it should be noted that the qualitative 
interviews were only collected retrospectively for this study. 
This meant that there was a period of several months between 
the last teaching unit in gather.town and the survey of the 
qualitative interviews. Even though subjects reported that the 
complete teaching unit was well remembered for them, this 
remains a limitation. In the follow-up study, all data will be 
collected directly afterwards. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
This study was exploratory in nature with the primary goal 
of seeing if an immersive 2D environment is holistically 
suitable for teaching in terms of presence, participation, 
collaboration and active learning, and thus an enhancement 
over classic video transmission tools such as “zoom”, 
“GoToWebinar” or “Cisco Webex” and the like. As the main 
result of the study, the high scores of the OLLES 
questionnaire can be mentioned. In connection with the 
interviews, it can be said that an immersive 2D environment 
can be used holistically as a form of teaching and also has 
advantages over classic video transmission tools. As a 
practical implication, it can be deduced that the use of virtual 
learning environments in the tertiary sector, on the one hand, 
can be relatively easily deployed with existing software 
solutions and, on the other hand, are also well received and 
therefore offer added value for students. In future online 
seminars, instructors should therefore think carefully about 
what kind of learning environment they want to use. 
Nevertheless, for now, only an overview of the use of an 
immersive 2D environment as a learning tool could be 
provided through this study. Group comparisons with other 
teaching formats could not yet be made. However, this is the 
next step in the research. At the time of publication, another 
survey has already started. Here the same teaching unit is 
being tested again in gather.town and at the same time another 
teaching unit is being tested in Zoom. Again, the OLLES 
questionnaire is used and additionally the Igroup Presence 
Questionnaire (IPQ). The IPQ is a scale for measuring the 
sense of presence experienced in a virtual environment (VE). 
The qualitative interviews will also be used again for data 
collection. Afterwards a comparison of the two forms of 
teaching can be made using t-tests. 
The interviews further provided new insights. Here, it 
should be particularly emphasized that face-to-face teaching 
is always preferred. However, it also became apparent that an 
enriched virtual learning environment can lead to greater 
acceptance, more motivation and thus a better learning 
experience compared to classic video conferencing software. 
Therefore, in future experiments not only virtual 2D learning 
environments and classical videoconferencing software will 
be compared, but also an extension with a 3D virtual learning 
environment as well as I-VR environments is planned to be 
able to make a comparisons for this as well. Since it has been 
found that realism plays an important factor in the evaluation 
of virtual learning environments, this will also be used to 
explore, which factors contribute to a higher degree of 
realism. For example, the change from a 2D learning 
environment to a 3D learning environment with 3D avatars 
could be an improvement. This could best be explored by 
expanding the interview questions by asking more questions 
that specifically ask about a sense of reality. At the moment, 
there are many indications that hybrid forms of teaching and 
learning will be used in the future. However, the goal here 
should always be to provide the best possible teaching and 
learning experience for all involved. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Hube, and K. Pfeffel, “Suitability of Immersive 2D 
Environments for Tertiary Education using the Gather 
Environment as an Example” The Fifteenth International 
Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions 
(ACHI 2022) IARIA, June 2022, pp 44-52, ISSN: 2308-4138, 
ISBN: 978-1-61208-982-9  
[2] D. Beck, L. Morgado, and P. O. Shea, “Finding the Gaps about 
Uses of Immersive Learning Environments: A Survey of 
Surveys” in: Journal of Universal Computer Science, vol. 26, 
no. 8, pp. 1043-1073, 2020. [Online]. Available from: 
https://repositorioaberto.uab.pt/bitstream/10400.2/10070/1/juc
s_26_08_1043_1073_beck.pdf 2022.12.07 
[3] Datanyze, LLC: zoom, top competitors of zoom, [Online]. 
Available from: https://www.datanyze.com/market-share/web-
conferencing--52/zoom-market-share 2022.12.07 
[4] G. Fauville, M. Luo, A. C. Muller-Queiroz, J. N. Bailenson, 
and J. Hancock, (2021) “Nonverbal Mechanisms Predict Zoom 
Fatigue and Explain Why Women Experience Higher Levels, 
than Men” SSRN Electronic Journal. [Online]. Available from: 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/Delivery.cfm/SSRN_ID3820035
code4557167.pdf?abstractid=3820035&mirid=1K 2022.12.07 
[5] J. Rump and M. Brandt, “Zoom-Fatigue” 2020. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.ibe-ludwigshafen.de/wp-
content/uploads/2020/09/EN_IBE-Studie-Zoom-Fatigue.pdf 
2022.12.07 
[6] E. Peper, V. Wilson, M. Martin, E. Rosegard, and R. Harvey, 
“Avoid Zoom Fatigue, Be Present and Learn” International 
society for neurofeedback and research ISNR, 2021. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.neuroregulation.org/article/view/21206/13976 
2022.12.07 
[7] S. Lund, A. Madgavkar, J .J. Manyika, S. S. Smit, K. Ellingrud, 
M. Robinson, and O. Meaney, “The future of work after 
COVID-19” McKinsey Global Institute, 2021 [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-
insights/future-of-work/the-future-of-work-after-covid-19 
2022.12.07 
89
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[8] F. Steinicke, N. Lehmann-Willenbrock, and A. L. Meinecke, 
“A First Pilot Study to Compare Virtual Group Meetings using 
Video Conferences and (Immersive) virtual reality” In 
Symposium on Spatial User Interaction (SUI '20). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 19, 
pp. 1–2, 2020. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3385959.3422699 
[9] K. M. Chuah, C. J. Chen, and C. S. Teh, “Incorporating Kansei 
engineering in instructional design: designing virtual reality 
based learning environments from a novel, perspective,” 
Themes in Science and Technology Education, 1(1), pp. 37-48, 
2008. 
[10] J. Clayton, “Development and Validation of an Instrument for 
Assessing Online Learning Environments in Tertiary 
Education: The Online Learning Environment Survey 
(OLLES),” doctoral thesis at Curtin university, 2007, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://espace.curtin.edu.au/handle/20.500.11937/550 
2022.12.07 
[11] G. G. Robertson, S. K. Card, and J. Mackinlay, “Three views 
of virtual reality: nonimmersive virtual reality,” Computer, 
26(2), 
pp. 
81, 
1993. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=1
92002 2022.12.07 
[12] C. J. Chen, S. C. Toh, and M. F. Wan, “The theoretical 
framework for designing desktop virtual reality-based learning 
environments,” Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 
15(2), pp. 147-167, 2004. 
[13] Z. Merchant, E. T. Goetz, L. Cifuentes, W. Keeney-Kennicutt, 
and T. J. Davis, “Effectiveness of virtual reality-based 
instruction on students’ learning outcomes in K-12 and higher 
education: A meta-analysis,” in: Computers & Education 70 
pp. 
29–40, 
2014. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S03601315
13002108 2022.12.07 
[14] D. Hamilton, J. McKechnie, E. Edgerton, and C. Wilson, 
“Immersive virtual reality as a pedagogical tool in education: a 
systematic literature review of quantitative learning outcomes 
and experimental design,” in J. Comput. Educ. 8 (1), pp. 1–32, 
2021. DOI: 10.1007/s40692-020-00169-2 
[15] A. F. Di Natale, C. Repetto, G. Riva, and D. Villani, 
“Immersive virtual reality in K‐12 and higher education: A 10‐
year systematic review of empirical research,” in: Br. J. Educ. 
Technol. 
51 
(6), 
pp. 
2006–2033, 
2020. 
DOI: 
10.1111/bjet.13030 
[16] M. Slater, “Place illusion and plausibility can lead to realistic 
behaviour in immersive virtual environments,” Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, Vol. 
36, 
pp. 
3549-3557, 
2009. 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2009.0138  
[17] B. G. Witmer and M. J. Singer, “Measuring Presence in Virtual 
Environments: 
A 
Presence 
Questionnaire,” 
Presence: 
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 1998 Vol. 7, No. 3 p. 
22, 1998. https://doi.org/10.1162/105474698565686  
[18] I. Bergstrom, S. Azevedo, P. Papiotis, N. Saldanha, and M. 
Slater, “The plausibility of a string quartet performance in 
virtual reality,” IEEE Xplore, 23(4), pp. 1352–1359, 2017. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2017.2657138  
[19] M. C. Johnson-Glenberg, H. Bartolomea, and E. Kalina, 
“Platform is not destiny: Embodied learning effects comparing 
2D desktop to 3D virtual reality,” STEM experiences Journal 
of Computer Assisted Learning, 37(5), pp. 1263–1284, 2021. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jcal.12567  
[20] J. Zhao, T. Sensibaugh, B. Bodenheimer, T. P. McNamara, A. 
Nazareth, N. Newcombe, M. Minear, and A. Klippel “Desktop 
versus immersive virtual environments: effects on spatial 
learning, Spatial Cognition & Computation,” 2020. DOI: 
10.1080/13875868.2020.1817925 
[21] M. N. Selzer, N. F. Gazcon, and M. L. Larrea, “Effects of 
virtual presence and learning outcome using low-end virtual 
reality systems,” Displays, vol. 59, pp. 9-15, 2019. ISSN 0141-
9382, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.displa.2019.04.002 
[22] J. Khlaisang and N. Songkram, “Designing a Virtual Learning 
Environment System for Teaching Twenty-First Century Skills 
to Higher Education Students in ASEAN,” Technology, 
Knowledge 
and 
Learning, 
24, 
pp. 
41-63, 
2019. 
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10758-017-9310-7 
[23] I. Reisoğlu, B. Topu, R. Yılmaz, T. K. Yılmaz, and Y. Göktaş, 
“3D virtual learning environments in education: a meta-
review,” in: Asia Pacific Educ. Rev. 18 (1), pp. 81–100, 2017. 
DOI: 10.1007/s12564-016-9467-0  
[24] S. J. Zuiker, “Educational virtual environments as a lens for 
understanding both precise repeatability and specific variation 
in learning ecologies,” British Journal of Educational 
Technology. 2012. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8535.2011.01266.x  
[25] B. Dalgarno, M. J. W. Lee, L.Carlson, S. Gregory, and B. 
Tynan, “Institutional support for and barriers to the use of 3D 
immersive virtual worlds in higher education,” in G. Williams, 
P. Statham, N. Brown & B. Cleland (Eds), Changing Demands, 
Changing Directions. Proceedings ascilite Hobart 2011 pp. 
316-330, 
2011. 
http://www.ascilite.org.au/conferences/hobart11/procs/dalgar
nofull.pdf 
[26] A. J. Coffey, R. Kamhawi,P. Fishwick, and J. Henderson, “The 
efficacy of an immersive 3D virtual versus 2D web 
environment in intercultural sensitivity acquisition,” in: 
Education Tech Research Dev 65 (2), pp. 455–479, 2017. DOI: 
10.1007/s11423-017-9510-9 
[27] P. Alves, L. Miranda, and C. Morais, “The Influence of Virtual 
Learning Environments in Students' Performance,” in: ujer 5 
(3), pp. 517–527, 2017 DOI: 10.13189/ujer.2017.050325  
[28] L. V. Magalhães and L. M. Li, “Web-Based Undergraduate 
Medical Education in a Virtual Learning Environment Using 
an Original Pedagogical Approach: an Observational 
Longitudinal Study,” Revista Brasileira de Educação Médica, 
2019. 
https://www.scielo.br/j/rbem/a/TcFDTxnxzMgrbLyCRPmhn
Xd/?format=pdf&lang=en  
[29] S. S. Sundar, D. J. Tamul, and M. Wu, “Capturing “cool”: 
Measures for assessing coolness of technological products,” 
International Journal of Human-computer Studies, 72(2), pp. 
169–180, 2014. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2013.09.008 
[30] D. Quesnel and B. E. Riecke, “Awestruck: Natural interaction 
with virtual reality on eliciting awe. In B. Thomas, R. J. 
Teather, & M. Marchal (Eds.), 2017 IEEE symposium on 3D 
user interfaces (3DUI): Proceedings,” March 18- 19,2017, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA pp. 205–206, 2017. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/3DUI.2017.7893343 
[31] N. Elmquaddem, “Augmented and virtual reality in education. 
Myth or reality?” International Journal of Emerging 
Technologies in Learning, 14(3), pp. 234–242, 2019. 
https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v14i03.9289  
[32] Y. Wu, Z. Yuan, D. Zhou, and Y. Cai, “A mobile Chinese 
calligraphic training system using virtual reality technology,” 
AASRI Procedia, 5, pp. 200-208, 2013. 
[33] Y. Gao, V. A. Gonzalez, and T. W. Yiu, “The effectiveness of 
traditional tools and computer-aided technologies for health 
and safety training in the construction sector: A systematic 
review,” Computers & Education, 138, pp. 101–115, 2019. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2019.05.003 
[34] J. Radianti, T. Majchrzak, J. Fromm, and I. Wohlgenannt, “A 
systematic review of immersive virtual reality applications for 
higher education: Design elements, lessons learned, and 
research,” in Computers & Education 147, 2020. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
90
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S03601315
19303276 08 2020.12.07 
[35] T. M. Porcino, E. Clua, D. Trevisan, C. N. Vasconcelos, and L. 
Valente, “Minimizing cyber sickness in head mounted display 
systems: Design guidelines and applications,” in IEEE 5th 
International Conference on Serious Games and Applications 
for 
Health 
(SeGAH) 
pp. 
1–6, 
2017. 
doi:10.1109/SeGAH.2017.7939283 . 
[36] L. Freina and M. Ott, “A Literature Review on Immersive 
virtual reality in Education: State Of The Art and 
Perspectives,” in: LE@D - Laboratório de Educação a 
Distância e Elearning | Artigos em revistas / Papers in journals, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/280566372_A_Liter
ature_Review_on_Immersive_Virtual_Reality_in_Education_
State_Of_The_Art_and_Perspectives 2022.12.07 
[37] H.-M. Huang, U. Rauch, and S.-S. Liaw, “Investigating 
learners' attitudes toward virtual reality learning environments: 
based on a constructivist approach,” Computers & Education, 
55(3), pp. 1171-1182, 2010. 
[38] S. Y. Chien, G. J. Hwang, M. S. Y. Jong, “Effects of peer 
assessment within the context of spherical video-based virtual 
reality on EFL students’ English-Speaking performance and 
learning perceptions,” Computers & Education, 146, 103751, 
2020. 
[39] T. Tepe, “Başa Takılan Görüntüleyiciler İçin Geliştirilmiş 
Sanal Gerçeklik Ortamlarının Öğrenme ve Buradalık Algısı 
Üzerine Etkilerinin İncelenmesi [Investigating The Effects of 
virtual reality Environments Developed for HeadMounted 
Display on Learning and Presence]”. (Unpublished Doctoral 
Thesis). Hacettepe University. Institute of Education Sciences. 
Ankara, 2019. 
[40] M. H. Kim, “Effects of Collaborative Learning in a Virtual 
Environment on Students’ Academic Achievement and 
Satisfaction,” Journal of Digital Convergence, 19(4), pp 1–8, 
2021. https://doi.org/10.14400/JDC.2021.19.4.001 . 
[41] B. Yildirim, E. Sahin-Topalcengiz, G. Arikan, and S. Timur, 
“Using virtual reality in the classroom: Reflections of STEM 
teachers on the use of teaching and learning tools,” Journal of 
Education in Science, Environment and Health (JESEH), 6(3), 
pp. 231-245, 2020. DOI:10.21891/jeseh.711779  
[42] S. W.-Y. Lee, Y.-T. Hsu, and K.-H. Cheng, “Do curious 
students learn more science in an immersive virtual reality 
environment? Exploring the impact of advance organizers and 
epistemic curiosity,” Computers & Education, vol. 182, 2022, 
104456, 
ISSN 
0360-1315, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2022.104456  
[43] S. Mystakidis, E. Berki, and J. Valtanen, “Deep and 
Meaningful 
E-Learning 
with 
Social 
virtual 
reality 
Environments in Higher Education: A Systematic Literature 
Review,” MDPI, Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 2412. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://doi.org/10.3390/app11052412 
2022.12.07 
[44] M. Akgün and B. Atıcı, “The Effects of Immersive virtual 
reality Environments on Students' Academic Achievement: A 
Meta-analytical and Meta-thematic Study,” Participatory 
Educational Research, 9 (3), pp. 111-131, 2022. DOI: 
10.17275/per.22.57.9.3 
[45] E. A.-L. Lee and K. W. Wong, “Learning with desktop VR: 
Low spatial ability learners are more positively affected,” 
Computers & Education, vol.79, pp. 49-58, 2014. ISSN 0360-
1315, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2014.07.010.  
[46] D. Kim and D. Jo, “Effects on Co-Presence of a Virtual 
Human: A Comparison of Display and Interaction Types,” in: 
Electronics 2022, 11, 367. [Online]. Available from: 
https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics11030367 2022.12.07 
[47] T. Sitzmann, “A meta-analytic examination of the instructional 
effectiveness of computer-based simulation games,” Pers. 
Psychol. 64, pp. 489–528, 2011. [Online]. Available from: 
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/j.1744-
6570.2011.01190.x 2022.12.07 
[48] B. Dalgarno and J. Hedberg, “3D learning environments in 
tertiary education,” paper published at 18th Annual Conference 
of thje Australasian Society for Computers in Learning in 
Tertiary Education (ASCILITE), Publisher: BMU, University 
Melbourne, 
2001. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://researchoutput.csu.edu.au/ws/portalfiles/portal/963291
7/PID%26%2320%3B6456%26%2320%3Bpre-pub.pdf 
2022.12.07 
[49] R. Charanya and M. Kesavan, “Analysis of Factors Influencing 
the Virtual Learning Environment in a Sri Lankan Higher 
Studies Institution,” 2019 International Research Conference 
on Smart Computing and Systems Engineering (SCSE), 2019. 
DOI: 240-244 https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8842719  
[50] I. R. Boer, P. R. Wesselink, and J. M. Vervoorn, “Student 
performance and appreciation using 3D vs. 2D vision in a 
virtual learning environment,” in: European Journal of Dental 
Education 20 (3), pp. 142–147, 2016. DOI:10.1111/eje.12152. 
[51] B. Wainman, G. Pukas, L. Wolak, S. Mohanraj, J. Lamb, and 
G. R. Norman, “The Critical Role of Stereopsis in Virtual and 
Mixed Reality Learning Environments,” in: Anatomical 
Sciences 
Education 
13 
(3), 
pp. 
401–412, 
2020. 
DOI:10.1002/ase.1928. 
[52] Y.-P. Chao, H.-H. Chuang, L.-J. Hsin, C.-J. Kang, T.-J. Fang, 
H.-Y. Li, C.-G. Huang, T. Kuo, C. Yang, H.-Y. Shyu, S.-L. 
Wang, L.-Y. Shyu, and L.-A. Lee, “Using a 360° virtual reality 
or 2D Video to Learn History Taking and Physical 
Examination Skills for Undergraduate Medical Students: Pilot 
Randomized Controlled Trial,” JMIR Serious Games. 9. 
e13124. 10.2196/13124, 2021. 
[53] Gather Presence, Inc. (2022). gather.town. [Online]. Available 
from https://www.gather.town 2022.07.12 
91
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

APPENDIX - GUIDELINE INTERVIEW 
 
Question 1: You participated in the gather.town study, do you remember the virtual learning environment and the seminar 
well? 
Question 2a: How did you feel about the collaboration within gather.town? Did you enjoy using the individual features like 
whiteboard, workshops and group discussions? 
Question 2b: So there were enough opportunities for successful collaboration? Or were you still missing something specific? 
Question 3: From the technical side, were there any ambiguities in using gather.town or was everything understandable from 
installation to use? 
Question 4a: Did the teaching within gather.town motivate or demotivate you? 
Question 4b: What do you think led you to be motivated / demotivated? 
Question 5a: How did you feel about the tutor's contact/participation and accessibility? 
Question 5b: Did you receive enough feedback and were questions also answered quickly? 
Question 6a: Were the learning materials well prepared and understandable? This really only refers to the learning materials, 
i.e., mainly slides and materials or graphics? 
Question 6b: Away from the learning materials how appealing or off-putting did you find the gather.town environment? 
Question 7: How well or poorly do you rate your learning success within gather.town? 
Question 8: You have also used video conferencing software such as Zoom. Which virtual learning environment would you 
prefer and why? 
Question 9: Normally, teaching takes place in presence. Do you prefer face-to-face teaching or gather.town? Please give 
reasons for your decision. 
Question 10: Have you used gather.town outside the actual seminar? And if so, why and for what? 
Question 11a: Can you think of anything else you would like to say? 
Question 11b: Was there anything that you found particularly good? 
Question 11c: Was there anything that you found particularly bad? 
92
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

