148
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
How Resonance Works for Development and
Propagation of Memes
Muneo Kitajima
Nagaoka University of Technology
Niigata, Japan
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0310-2796
Makoto Toyota
T-Method
Chiba, Japan
pubmtoyota@mac.com
J´erˆome Dinet
Universit´e de Lorraine, CNRS, INRIA, Loria
Nancy, France
jerome.dinet@univ-lorraine.fr
Abstract—Meme is a type of behavior that is passed from one
member of a group to another, not through the genes but by other
means. This paper claims that the concept of resonance should
play an important role in the propagation of memes among
group members and the development of meme in individual
members. Dinet et al. pointed out that the concept of resonance
originally issued from physics that has been successfully applied
to cognitive processes for behavior selection; the Model Human
Processor with Real-Time Constraints (MHP/RT) model pro-
posed by Kitajima and Toyota is a unique model that incorporates
a resonance mechanism to connect perceptual-cognitive-motor
(PCM) processes that work synchronously, and memory processes
that work asynchronously with the environment. This paper
elaborates the resonance mechanism implemented in MHP/RT
and its associated multi-dimensional memory frames from three
perspectives: how resonance works in a single-action selection
process that happens in a hierarchically organized structure of
behavior; what types of memes can exist in multi-dimensional
memory frames; how PCM processes and memory develop from
birth to the end of adolescence in terms of the detailed workings
of resonance. This paper concludes with the implications of the
mechanistic understanding of the role of resonance, the effect of
resonance malfunction and the effect of the existence of memory
that does not resonate with the real environment.
Index Terms—Resonance; Meme; MHP/RT; Development.
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper is based on the previous work originally pre-
sented in [1]. It extends the described concepts in Section III
by providing new Sections III-D, III-E, and III-F.
At the 0-th order approximation, a person interacts with
the environment by running an endless stream of perceptions
involving the external and internal environments through the
ﬁve senses, i.e., taste, sight, touch, smell, and sound, via
sensory neurons as parallel processing, and acting in response
to the external environment using body parts, e.g., limbs, eye
balls, and so on, via motor neurons using serial processing (see
Figure 1). As s/he perceives the results of movement of his/her
body parts as well as the changes in the external environment
with the passage of time, the next cycle of perceptual-motor
processes occur. Interneurons between the sensory neurons and
motor neurons convert the input patterns to the output patterns
– this constitutes a Perceptual-Cognitive-Motor (PCM) pro-
cess. Starting from this basic cycle (see Figure 1), Kitajima
and Toyota [2][3] constructed a comprehensive theory of
action selection and memory, Model-Human Processor with
Real-time Constraints (MHP/RT), that provides a basis for
Fig. 1. Continuous cyclic loop of perception and movement (adapted from
[8, Figure 1]).
constructing any models for an acting person (see Figure 2).
MHP/RT is an extension of Model Human Processor proposed
by Card, Moran, and Newell [4] that can simulate routine goal-
directed behaviors. The processes involved in action selection
is a dynamic interaction that evolves in the irreversible time
dimension. The purpose of MHP/RT is to explain the fol-
lowing three facts: 1) the fundamental processing mechanism
of the brain is Parallel Distributed Processing (PDP) [5],
which is referred to as Organic PDP (O-PDP) system in the
development of MHP/RT; 2) human behavior emerges as a
result of competition of the dual processes of System 1, fast
unconscious processes for intuitive reaction with feedforward
control that connect perception with motor movements, and
System 2, slow conscious processes for deliberate reasoning
with feedback control; this is called Two Minds [6]; 3) human
behavior is organized under happiness goals [7].
MHP/RT consists of two parts. The ﬁrst part comprises
cyclic PCM processes (see Figure 2, left), in which PDP
for these processes is implemented in hierarchically organized
bands with characteristic times for operations by associating
relative times (not absolute) to the PCM processes that carry

149
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
WMD (Word MD)-frame is the memory
structure for language. It is constructed on
a very simple one-dimensional array.
RMD (Relation MD)-frame is the memory
structure associated with the conscious in-
formation processing. It combines a set of
BMD-frames into a manipulable unit.
BMD (Behavior MD)-frame is the memory
structure associated with the autonomous
automatic behavior control processing. It
combines a set of MMD-frames into a ma-
nipulable unit.
PMD (Perceptual MD)-frame constitutes
perceptual memory as a relational matrix
structure. It incrementally grows as it cre-
ates memory from the input information and
matches it against the past memory in par-
allel.
MMD (Motion MD)-frame constitutes be-
havioral memory as a matrix structure. It
gathers a variety of perceptual information
as well to connect muscles with nerves us-
ing spinals as a reﬂection point. In accor-
dance with one’s physical growth, it widens
the range of activities the behavioral action
processing can cover autonomously.
Fig. 2. MHP/RT and the distributed memory system implemented as multi-dimensional memory frames (modiﬁed from [3, Figure 3]).
TABLE I
NEWELL’S TIME SCALE OF HUMAN ACTION. (ADAPTED FROM NEWELL [9,
PAGE 122, FIG. 3-3]).
Scale
Time Units
System
World
(sec)
(Theory)
107
months
106
weeks
SOCIAL
105
days
BAND
104
hours
Task
103
10min
Task
RATIONAL
102
minutes
Task
BAND
101
10sec
Unit Task
100
1sec
Operations
COGNITIVE
10−1
100ms
Deliberate Act
BAND
10−2
10ms
Neural Circuit
10−3
1ms
Neuron
BIOLOGICAL
10−4
100µsec
Organelle
BAND
out a series of events in synchronous with changes in the
external environment. Table I shows the bands, i.e., biological,
cognitive, rational, and social bands, as deﬁned by Newell [9].
It should be noted that there is a gap between two adja-
cent bands; these two bands are non-linearly connected and
therefore it is inappropriate to understand the phenomena that
happen across these bands by constructing a linear model. The
phenomena occur by connecting what happens in a band to
what happens in its adjacent band non-linearly. A mechanism
is required to connect the phenomena; MHP/RT suggests that
this connection is provided by the resonance mechanism.
The bottom left and middle portions of Figure 2 show the
autonomous memory system consisting of multi-dimensional
memory frames of perception, motion, behavior, relation, and
word. These memory frames store information associated with
the corresponding autonomous processes deﬁned in the PCM
processes. The middle portion of Figure 2 shows the ﬁve
memory frames and their relationship with the PCM processes.
The right portion of Figure 2 provides brief explanations
of the respective memory frames. The important feature of
the memory system is that it works asynchronously with the
external environment. MHP/RT assumes that the synchronous
PCM processes, including the perceptual system, System 1,
System 2, and the motor system, and the asynchronous mem-
ory system communicate with each other through a resonance
mechanism. The concept of resonance has been borrowed from
physics to describe the linkage between the asynchronous
memory system and the synchronous PCM processes. As
Dinet et al. [10] suggested, apprehension of psychological
phenomena using concepts issued from physics is useful be-
cause the majority of the interactions, including psychological
interactions, between humans and the environment (social or
physical environment) can be derived from physical processes.
The PCM process cycle in a human being continues from his
or her birth until death in the ecological system that consists
of the self and the environment. The linkage between the
memory system and the PCM processes through resonance
supports the development of the PCM processes. At the same
time, the PCM processes are accompanied by changes in the
connections of neurons that constitute the multi-dimensional
memory frames. The purpose of this paper is to understand the
development process from the viewpoint of the memory-PCM
linkage through resonance.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II focuses on the
role of resonance in the use of memory and its relationship
with the changes in memory when a human being interacts
with the environment. Section III extends the snap-shot view
of resonance explored in the previous section in the time

150
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
dimension to understand the nature of external objects that
generate sustainable resonance. We deﬁne these sustainable
objects as “memes” and this section describes how memes
propagate over time and space. Section IV describes the
development of the PCM processes and the multi-dimensional
memory frames from birth to the end of adolescence. Sec-
tion V concludes the paper by summarizing the contents and
pointing out implications derived from the considerations of
the role of resonance described in this paper.
II. MEMORIZING THE RESULTS OF RESONANCE
The network of sensory neurons, motor neurons, and in-
terneurons shown in Figure 1 develop as a human being
interacts with the external environment in time. This section
starts by describing a general feature of the development
process in Section II-A, followed by the descriptions of
what is memorized in Section II-B, and how the resonance
mechanism relates to memory usage and memory formation
in Section II-C.
A. Forming an O-PDP System
Life emerges in a preexisting structure, which is the global
environment that surrounds the human being who is born, and
exists as a system that operates under the mechanism of PDP.
Life has evolved through adaptation to the global environ-
ments, which are characterized by the following preexisting
structures:
• Atmosphere: ﬂuctuates at the meteorological scales
showing chaotic behavior,
• Sea: has tidal currents and the surface layer is affected
by the atmosphere showing chaotic behavior,
• Periodic circular structures: stable periods of rotation
and revolution around the sun with a close-circular orbit
as a planet of the solar system,
• Gravity: upper vs. lower directions, deﬁned by the earth’s
gravity, and
• Energy: future vs. past directions, deﬁned by the direc-
tion of energy ﬂow as the dissipative structure of the
earth.
Life is formed under these preexisting structures and the
direction of the evolution of life is determined by the pressure
caused by these structures. Under the dissipative structural
space, i.e., the earth, the fundamental structural pressure is
a prerequisite to life, which is born and active in it, and
prescribes the direction of life evolution. Life is formed as an
adaptive body with the functional and structural features that
work most efﬁciently in the environment having the features
best conceived by the four concepts of Goals, Operators,
Methods, and Selection rules (GOMS) [4].
In the global environment before life occurred, there existed
multiple-layered structures equipped with means of commu-
nicating information in a multi-dimensional space, including
such physical and chemical entities as light, sound, heat, ion,
etc. Under these preexisting conditions, life emerged. Life
interacts with the multi-dimensional environment by using
perception and motion as interfaces to it. Assuming the size
of dimension of perception and that of motor to be M and
N, respectively, the function of interface is represented as
mappings in the M ⊗ N space. Speciﬁc numbers of M and
N reﬂect the preexisting conditions of the environment.
Sensory 
Neuron
Motor 
Neuron
Interneuron
Perceptual 
Development
Motor 
Development
Action 
Selection
Fig. 3.
Development of the sensory nervous system and the motor ner-
vous system, and interneurons connecting them with action selection pro-
cess.(adapted from [11, Figure 1]).
B. Interneurons to memorize effective M ⊗ N mappings
Table I shows that human actions are hierarchically or-
ganized in four bands. In general, in-band closed processes
are executed in feedforward. Processes carried out in the
upper bands provide feedback to the processes carried out
in the lower bands. Life activities perform mappings of
M-dimensional perceptual input (Biological band) to N-
dimensional motor output (Biological band) by the system of
interneurons that belongs to the Cognitive band. Activities at
an upper band emerge, each of which is associated with a
part of the entire sequence of activities, i.e., a sub-sequence,
performed at a lower band. The action sequence belonging to
the lower band is segmented into sub-sequences, each of which
corresponds to one of activities in the upper band; due to the
ﬂuctuations in processing times of the upper-band activities,
relativization of processing times and functionalization of sub-
sequences occur. It is possible to establish an association
between the processing in the upper band activity (Cognitive
band) with an effective sequence of M ⊗ N mappings in the
lower band (Biological band) to form a hard-wired circuit of
interneurons that is characteristic of this processing, which is
the process of memory formation and development. Once the
memory is formed, life activities perform mappings of M-
dimensional perceptual input to N-dimensional motor output
by using the memory stored in the system of interneurons.
In addition, trajectories of the life activities ﬂuctuate, which
provides opportunities to the O-PDP system to develop by
adaptation.
The genealogy of DNA of vertebrates suggests that
Perception, Interneuron, and Motion as the basis for develop-
ment. Figure 3 shows that PIM is the basis of the formation of
the concept of the body based on neural circuits and the whole

151
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
is formed as PIM develops. Perception (P) captures various
kinds of environmental changes via the sensors with different
properties (M-dimension). Motor movement (M) is carried
out continuously and cyclically from one’s birth with gradual
development via the accuracy and strength (N-dimension).
Interneurons (I) memorize effective interlocked relationships
between P and M to form neural circuits naturally in the form
of feedforward (System 1) and more complex feedback to
increase the effectiveness of reactions (System 2). PIM devel-
ops by expanding behavioral-ecological bandwidth. Behavioral
ecological categories of vertebrates such as acquiring food,
raising children, and so on, are almost identical and within a
limited range. Everyday human life is performed cyclically in a
behavioral ecological band, which is expanded by performing
new actions to realize a goal within the limited behavioral
ecological categories and adding these to the existing band.
Actions are realized as an ad hoc adaptive combination
of various elements of the O-PDP system each time. Quasi-
stable relationships between elements are generated by local
relativization of the time relationship between the participating
elements and added to the existing band. Since each process of
performing actions is autonomous, it is possible for multiple
processes to be initiated in a certain environment, resulting
in coincidental parallel activities. Even if the timing of the
execution of two or more parallel processes changes, it is
possible for all of the processes to be completed within a
certain time range with or without any relationships in the
results. If the overall results are good, behavior selection in
the future might be changed by this memory associated with
rewards. Arbitrarily activated processes through conscious
System 2 thinking, which may or may not be directly related
to the current on-going external situation, can become a part of
these expanded memories. Conscious thinking facilitates the
expansion of memory.
C. Conscious/Unconscious Processes Before/After an Event
MHP/RT maps M ⊗ N with the help of memory (Fig-
ure 2, left). It assumes the multi-dimensional memory frames
and the resonance mechanism for incorporating memory,
i.e., interneurons, in the mapping process. Perception with
the M-dimensional perceptual information resonates with the
contents in the PMD-frame. The activation in the PMD-
frame spreads to the other memory frames. The activated
portions of memory frames resonate with the System 1 and
System 2 processes and are included in these processes. In the
left portion of Figure 2, the resonance processes are shown
graphically by •——•. It is suggested that the mirror-neuron
system is the physical/neurological support for the resonance
in human behavior [10] that can be regarded as the process of
M ⊗ N mapping. The mirror system is thought to directly
match visual input from an observed action with a stored
motor program for the same behavior (e.g. [12][13][14]). If
that motor program is then executed, the result is imitation.
MHP/RT assumes that actions are carried out by feedfor-
ward processes (System 1) or feedback processes (System 2)
with the help of the resonance mechanism for utilizing existing
memory. The processing principle of MHP/RT is that it should
work in one of four different modes when one looks at it
from a particular event that occurred at the absolute time
T [15]. These modes are called Four-Process in the MHP/RT
architecture. In Figure 2, these four modes are indicated where
appropriate to show how they are supported by the resonance
mechanism to utilize the contents stored in memory (System 1
and System 2 Before modes), and how they affect in forming
memory (System 1 and System 2 After modes) as described
below.
1) Rise of Resonance: Two modes work before the event. In
the time range of T −β ≤ t < T −β′, MHP/RT uses memory
for consciously preparing for what would happen in the future
(System 2 Before Mode), and in the time range of T − β′ ≤
t < T, it unconsciously coordinates motor activities to the
interacting environment (System 1 Before Mode), where β′ ∼
500msec and β ranges from a few seconds to hours, and even
to months. In these two modes, the part of memory activated
through resonance in response to perceptual processing could
resonate with System 1 processing and System 2 processing
(see Figure 2, left).
2) Convergence of Resonance: The other two modes work
after the event. In the time range of T < t ≤ T +α′, MHP/RT
unconsciously tunes the connections between sensory inputs
and motor outputs for better performance for the same event in
the future (System 1 After Mode), and in the time range of T +
α′ < t ≤ T + α, it consciously recognizes what has happened
and then modiﬁes memory concerning the event (System 2
After Mode), where α′ ∼ 500msec and α ranges from a few
seconds to minutes, and even to hours. In these two modes, the
results of action selection for the event at T would be reﬂected
in the network connections of the respective multi-dimensional
memory frames (see Figure 2, middle).
III. MEME PROPAGATION BY MEANS OF RESONANCE
Memory is represented as a network of neurons. It is
initially activated through an M-dimensional multimodal sen-
sory input through a resonance mechanism, a large part of
which originates from the other human beings or artifacts
they have created; then the activation spreads in the connected
memory regions. The information generated by human beings
propagates among them by means of imitative behavior in
which resonance connects memory and the PCM processes
to carry out imitation. This raises the question of what causes
resonance to be maintained in humans. This section introduces
the Structured Meme Theory [16] which provides an answer to
this question and provides the micro mechanism of resonance
at the level of PCM processes, which is called weak synchro-
nization [17], to see how the process of resonance could occur.
A. What Can Resonate
The O-PDP system that deﬁnes a human being interacts
with the environment, which consists of not only inanimate
objects but also other O-PDP systems (people who interact
with him/her). Resonance is the mechanism by which action
is taken at appropriate times. Resonance increases when the

152
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
organism is in System 1 and 2 Before Modes of the MHP/RT,
but converges when in the System 1 and 2 After Modes
which effectively update the internal neural networks for future
resonance. This section describes what resonates in an O-PDP
system. The resonance mechanism, which is implemented by
means of mirror neurons [10] in the human brain, is incorpo-
rated in the MHP/RT as the mechanism for making available
the part of memory activated by perception in System 1 and
2 (see Figure 2, left).
The cyclic loop of perception and movement shown in
Figure 1 carries out continuous updates of network con-
nections of constituent neurons during the convergence of
resonance period in the MHP/RT. Human behavior is struc-
tured in four bands (biological, cognitive, rational, and social
bands) [9], and memory is constructed as ﬁve distinctive
multi-dimensional memory frames (see Figure 2, middle). This
suggests that the information is coming from an environment
where the informant could either be other humans or inani-
mate objects. This information will generate resonance in the
recipient of the information in a speciﬁc way that reﬂects the
states of the development of the multi-dimensional memory
frames. For a set of given external stimuli, a human being
generates resonance by using the current memory for carrying
out the next action and updates it. On the one hand, the
PCM processes utilize the resonance mechanism to create the
subsequent actions. On the other hand, the external entities,
that make resonance generate internally, are created ultimately
by humans. Human action associated with a band of the
Newell’s time scale could be associated with the part of
memory that participates via the resonance mechanism.
From the above argument, it is plausible to assume that a
human could create an entity that makes the others generate
resonance for performing the subsequent actions and vice
versa. This assumption represents what was meant by the term
“meme” that Richard Dawkins [18] coined in the 1970s, which
was conceptual and was not deﬁned clearly. The Structured
Meme Theory (SMT) proposed by Toyota et al. [16] deﬁnes
memes as entities that represent the information associated
with the objects that the brain can recognize.
B. Propagation of Meme
Figure 4 depicts how memes propagate in the reality ﬁeld.
The process of propagation is facilitated by symbolization. A
symbolized meme enables human beings to think at abstract
levels. Suppose that Object-O1, Object-O2, or Object-O3
appear in the environment. Each of these resonates with
memory by using patterns stored in the PMD-frame and causes
activation of RMD-, BMD-, and MMD-frames. The part of
memory that is activated, Pattern-Pa (see Figure 4, bottom),
will be used in action selection through resonance. Any entities
in the environment that match Pattern-Pa are treated in the
same way in the action selection process as Object-O[Pa].
Pattern-Pa will be given a unique name Symbol-Sa and it
will be stored in WMD-frame. In the future, when Symbol-Sa
appears in the environment in someone’s utterances, it might
resonate with Pattern-Pa. Symbol-Sa could be associated with
Object-O1, Object-O2, or Object-O3. Therefore Symbol-Sa
effectively functions as its abstraction, AbstractSymbol-ASa,
when it is used in communication. It is reasonable to assume
that the higher the resonance level of Symbol-Sa becomes, the
longer AbstractSymbol-ASa is maintained and inherited as an
effective communication medium.
C. Structured Meme
The recent consensus is that the range of information inher-
ited by the genes is limited to physical functions and infantile
behavior. Human beings need to acquire basic behavioral skills
and communication skills through the experience of acting in
the environment. As described in Section III-A, memes that
can cause resonance constitute an important part of experience.
This section explains that memes are structured in such a way
that the memory is structured in multi-dimensional memory
frames.
Figure 5 expands Pattern-Pa, that appears at the bottom of
Figure 4, and the processes shown in Figure 5 as “Mapping
Patterns on Brain” and “Mapping Patterns on WMD-frame”
in order to show which portions of the neural networks
would participate while a human being utilizes the WMD-
frame in communication. As shown by Figure 4, symbols
in the WMD-frame are gradually incorporated into the en-
vironment in the form of a thesaurus, i.e., lists of words in
groups of synonyms and related concepts, languages used for
person-to-person communication (individual language), which
might include not only direct but also metaphorical uses, and
languages used in cultural contexts (cultural language), in
which appropriate understanding of common sense that has
been established in the speciﬁc community, is essential for
successful communication. Thesauruses, individual languages,
and cultural languages increase their complexity in this order
in terms of the patterns they are linked with the objects in
the environment. Thesauruses are associated with the objects
in the environment that are encoded in the neural networks
in the initial development stage from the birth to 3 years.
Individual languages are associated with not only the objects
in the environment but also the symbols that have already been
incorporated in the environment. The same is true for cultural
languages.
The process of “Mapping patterns on symbols in WMD-
frame” shown in Figure 4 can be subdivided into three
processes based on the degree of complexity of mapping.
The patterns that were mapped on the thesauruses, individual
languages, and cultural languages are shown as Action-Level
Meme, Behavior-Level Meme, and Culture-Level Meme (see
Figure 5), respectively, that were introduced in the Structured
Meme Theory proposed by Toyota et al. [16] . The mechanism
by which the three levels of memes and genes inherit infor-
mation is analogous to an information system. Genes serve
as ﬁrmware that mimics behavior-level activities. Action-level
memes serve as the operating system that deﬁnes general
patterns of spatial-temporal behavioral functions. Behavior-
level memes represent middleware that extends the general
patterns to concrete patterns. Culture-level memes act as

153
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Fig. 4. Propagation of Meme (adapted from [1])
application tools that extend the concrete patterns to the ones
that work in a number of groups of people.
The relationships between the three levels of memes and
multi-dimensional memory frames are as follows:
• Action-level memes represent bodily actions stored in the
MMD-frame;
• Behavior-level memes represent behaviors in the environ-
ment stored in the BMD-frame; and
• Culture-level memes represent culture stored in the RMD-
frame and the WMD-frame.
D. Process and Structure, and Resonance
Figure
4
shows
that
the
appearances
of
Object-O1,
Object-O2, Object-O3, or Symbol-Sa in the environment
causes resonance with memory by using patterns stored in the
PMD-frame. This resonance process is shown by the leftmost
•——• in Figure 2. Figure 6 schematically illustrates the
process of chain-ﬁring in the PMD-frame that follows the
resonance with the objects. The accessible memory region,
depicted in the red oval in the ﬁgure, corresponds to the
region where activation levels are kept above certain threshold
values necessary for maintaining chain-ﬁring using primarily
perceptual stimuli. Chain-ﬁring originates from continuous
input from the current environment.
This initial resonance process follows activation of the
patterns of relations stored in the RMD-frame and the patterns
of temporal changes stored in the BMD- and MMD-frames.
The part of memory that is activated, Pattern-Pa (see Figure 4,
bottom), will be used in action selection by means of System 1
and System 2 through the subsequent resonance processes,
which correspond to the rightmost and the middle •——•’s
in the left portion of Figure 2, respectively. These resonance
processes occur in the “Rise of Resonance” phase introduced
in Section II-C, where the current network structure of memory
is used. The memory is updated in the “Convergence of Reso-
nance” phase by reﬂecting the outcome of the execution of the
selected action. The cyclic process of resonating with memory
using patterns, performing action by applying patterns, and
updating patterns in memory continues endlessly from one’s
birth to death.
A pattern refers to the snapshot of the state of activation of
the current memory network. However, the activated network
involves not only memories which are directly relevant to the
current situation but also sequences of actions that have lead
to success in the past. The latter is very useful in determining
which action to select at the moment. In other words, past
successful experiences are integrated in the memory as part of
the process of resonance, i.e., the Convergence of Resonance.

154
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Fig. 5. Structure of meme (adapted from [1])
Perceptual OBJECT-1
FIRE
FIRE
Perceptual OBJECT-2
Perceptual OBJECT-3
Perceptual OBJECT-n
Accessible
Memory 
Region
Fig. 6.
Chain-ﬁring triggered by perceptual stimuli in a cross-networked
memory structure. (adapted from [19, Figure 2]).
The pattern stored in memory develops as one accumulates
experiences. In the ever-changing environment in which the
degree of variations is restricted by Mother Nature, the patterns
that can occur are restricted, which results in a structure of
patterns. In other words, a certain structure emerges which
should restrict the ranges of possible patters which can occur,
which circularly restricts the direction of development of the
structure. At the primitive level, Figure 7 shows the ﬁxed hi-
erarchy in behaviors accompanied with instinct of procreation
Fig. 7.
Fixed hierarchy in the behaviors accompanied with instinct of
procreation (redrawn Figure 8.10 in [20]).
through the observation of behavior of Nemipterus virgatus
[20]. Since the evolution of vertebrata is no more than a history
of increasing complexity, the results of any ecological analyses
of animal behavior would tend to lead to implicit structures,
which is free from he complications of society and cultural
diversity.
Exploring the phenomenon wherein a living creature acts in

155
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the ever-changing environment through reciprocal relationship
between processes and structures, and that it establishes a
quasi-stable universe through self-organization is worth con-
sidering for a deeper investigation of the role of resonance.
Given a certain stable system, a question may arise: why is
the system stable? A system can be viewed as the processes
that are carried out in the system stably, or the structure
that makes the processes stable [21]. Newell’s time scales of
human actions as shown in Table I deﬁne the structure of
human actions that are carried out by conducting the processes
shown in MHP/RT (Fig. 2). Chain-ﬁring deﬁnes the processes
which take place in the memory deﬁned by multi-dimensional
memory frames (the middle portions of Figure 2 ).
Patterns encode a time series of events at the levels of
perceived elements in the PMD-frame, relations in the RMD-
frame, and temporal changes in the BMD- and MMD-frames.
The encodings of the current situation at these levels include
not only a time series of encodings up to the present, St (t =
−n, −(n−1), · · · , 0), but also other encodings of future time
series, St′ (t′ = 1, · · · ). A pattern can resonate with the
current situation if its past encodings match well with how
the current situation was achieved. In other words, the time
series of the current situation matches the pattern in memory,
and synchronization is established between the external and
internal worlds in memory. The degree of synchronization will
be kept at a good level if the external world develops as the
memorized pattern; however, it will become weak if the degree
of discrepancy between them becomes large. The patterns that
have a good match both in the past and in the future can
result in the development of action-level memes, behavior-
level memes, and cultural level memes. On the other hand, or
those that cannot establish good matches, the corresponding
part of memory will lose its strength and the associated memes
will become extinct.
E. Resonance Implemented as Weak Synchronization
Patterns encode the time series of an event. Resonance
activates patterns. Living creatures need to take appropri-
ate actions in a timely manner as the external environment
develops. In other words, synchronization occurs between
a living creature and the external environment. The term
“synchronization” places emphasis on the dimension of time
that proceeds independently in relation to the living creature
and the external environment. On the other hand, the term “res-
onance” emphasizes the phenomenon that happens between
the two entities.
A state of resonance may be described from the view point
of synchronization, and it is referred to as weak synchroniza-
tion [17]. Its mechanism, shown by Figure 8, is described as
follows. Any event that occurs at T can be viewed by the
person as an event that has happened in the time range of
[T − β, T + α], which corresponds to the beginning of “Rise
of Resonance” and the end of “Convergence of Resonance” in-
troduced in Section II-C. Regarding the event that occurs at T,
it is important to note that the consciousness which is related to
the event comes to play in System 2 After Mode at T +α′. This
implies that consciousness lags by a certain amount of time,
α′, in the real world. Therefore, a person is consciously blind
during the period of [T − β′, T + α′]. However, this person
would consciously integrate the blind period into conscious
activities during the time range of [T − β, T + α]. Therefore,
a consciously retrievable experience has to be considered as
a memory structure related to the event at T in the extended
time range of [T − β, T + α], with a consciously inaccessible
but integrated memory region corresponding to the consciously
blind time range of [T − β′, T + α′].
The external event at T is mapped internally as a con-
sciously retrievable event. Speciﬁcally, a person’s activity
related to an event has to be considered from the four
processing modes, which ranges between a relatively long time
before and after the actual time the event happens. Therefore,
“synchronization” has to be considered as an alternative to the
phenomena as follows.
A person’s activities during the time range of [T − β, T +
α] are linked with a speciﬁc recognizable event at time T.
Furthermore, the activities are carried out using any of the
four processing modes. When this is satisﬁed, the event is
considered synchronized with a person’s activities, which is
referred to as weak synchronization.
The schematic presented in Figure 8 shows how MHP/RT
works under weak synchronization during the time range
of [T − β, T + α]. During [T − β, T − β′), activities at
upper bands, social, rational, and upper cognitive bands are
carried out consciously, The conscious activities are taken over
to unconsciously performed activities, which are carried out
during the period of [T − β′, T), the time when the event
happens. This is followed by unconscious tuning activities
during the period of (T, T + α′]. Finally, these activities are
taken over to the activities carried out during the period of
(T +α′, T +α] for conscious reﬂection. Now, we must explain
the mechanism for establishing chains between activities.
Firstly, we think about what are combined. An O-PDP
system is composed of autonomous elements in a band-
structure. The bands are: Biological, Cognitive, Rational, and
Social Bands as suggested by Newell [9]. Activities carried
out in the respective bands are combined with each other to
form a function, then coherently integrated for the event at T.
Now, how are these activities combined? The combined entity
indirectly reﬂects the circularity of the existing environment
and ﬂuctuations inherent to the environment, which is called
autopoiesis [22]. Circularity connotes the relativization of
time: no distinction between “after” and “before,” and these
ﬂuctuations indicate that the resulting system is a complex
system. The event appears recursively in the PCM processes,
and is likely to extend the relevant time range, i.e., β and α
would become larger. The larger β becomes, the farther the
person can foresee. The larger α becomes, the more the person
can elaborate on the event. These should make the person live
smarter by widening the range of resonance.
Now we consider what results from weak synchronization.
Various combinations of chains between parallel processes can
occur, causing path proliferation within the network. When the

156
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Fig. 8. A schematic illustration of the mechanism of weak synchronization during the period of [T − β, T + α].
recall rate of speciﬁc paths becomes higher, proliferation along
these paths is suppressed to centralize the activations on the
subsequent paths. This makes it possible for the O-PDP system
to survive in the cyclic and ﬂuctuating environment. Each
element of the O-PDP system plays a certain role in achieving
the overall goal of the whole O-PDP system. However, its role
is not determined from the beginning and it exists only as
the result of each element’s own efforts to survive since its
activation.
F. Resonance in a Circular Environment
At the microscopic level of the Newell’s time scale of hu-
man action (see Table I), i.e., at the Cognitive Band, resonance
can be understood as the phenomenon that occurs between the
external environment and the PMD-frame, and between the
multi-dimensional memory frames and Two Minds, which is
implemented by means of weak synchronization as described
in Section III-E. However, the PCM process for performing
weak synchronization is circular even at this level because
memories stored under System 2 After Mode during the
“Convergence of Resonance” may be used in the future under
System 2 Before Mode, and this happens recursively. This
recursive process accumulates past experiences in the BMD-
and RMD- frames. Since the characteristic times become
longer as the more the number of experiences accumulate,
the appropriate time scale for conceiving the phenomena shifts
from Cognitive Band to the upper band of Rational and Social
bands.
Figure 9 illustrates the results of the process of accumulation
of experiences which cause the extension of networks in the
BMD- and RMD-frames. This ﬁgure shifts attention from the
microscopic processes of weak synchronization to the resultant
networks in BMD- and RMD-frames that should be formed
after a number of recursions of resonances, and that should
support human actions at the Rational and Social bands. Input
of perceptual stimuli as presented in the middle-left of Figure 9
awakens a person who receives it, and causes resonance with
the patterns in the PMD-frame, followed by activation of
relevant patterns in the BMD-frame. The activation of mem-
ory leads to System 2’s conscious activities and System 1’s
unconscious activities, before leading to physical activities
under the MMD-frame. The networks under the BMD-frame
are extended by reﬂecting on the physical activities. Even
during sleep, contents of the networks in the BMD-frame
are continuously updated by autonomous activities. Under the
BMD-frame, a circular neural network formed as a result of
physical activities that are continuously performed from the
time the BMD-frame was originally generated to the time
when the organism dies and stops its activities.
The top half of Figure 9 shows the contents of the RMD-
frame. A variety of relations are stored in the RMD-frame.
Relations pertain to those between the person and his or her
concerns at the time of performing physical activities. As
shown in the ﬁgure, the targets of the person’s concerns could
be individual, i.e., self, his or her family, any communities
to which they belong, or any enterprises they work for. If
physical activities are characterized as individual activities
as shown in the top-left of Figure 9, its related memory in
the RMD-frame is continuously formed as a neural circuit
in relation with the activated PMD-frame from the time that
the conscious activity is initiated. Since conscious activities
which are executed intermittently are accumulated, it becomes
discontinuous. However, since conscious activity is executed
periodically in the external environment, this results in a
circular network that reﬂects it. These formed networks should
reside at the Rational or Social bands and serve as patterns
which resonate in the future when the person encounters
similar situations. If the physical activities are characterized
as group activities as shown in the top-right of Figure 9,
their related memories in the RMD-frame are continuously
formed as neural circuits in relation with the activated PMD-
frame from the time when the activity was initiated. Since
this is formed by an accumulation of each group activity, i.e.,
family, community, and enterprise, it becomes discontinuous.

157
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Fig. 9. Development of the BMD- and RMD-frames in a circular environment.
However, since these group activities are executed periodically,
it becomes a circular network that reﬂects it.
It is important to note that the different portions of the
RMD-frame resonate with the same perceptual stimuli that
should resonate with the same part of the PMD-frame. How-
ever, this might lead to different physical activities. The
mappings of a single perceptual stimulus in relation to phys-
ical activities could multiply via the social-role dependent
activation of the RMD-frame. This has deep implications for
development of a person, i.e., a person behaves differently
depending on the environment of the group in which he or she
participates.
IV. DEVELOPMENT OF PIM AND MULTI-DIMENSIONAL
MEMORY FRAMES
In Section II, we described the mechanism by which PIM
develops with the Four-Process by utilizing the resonance
mechanism. Section III described how the contents of multi-
dimensional memory frames, which could resonate with the
PCM processes running synchronously with the environment,
are maintained among human beings through communication.
This section describes the changes in the contents of PIM and
multi-dimensional memory frames over time as human beings
grow up from birth to the end of adolescent. This explains
human development in terms of PIM and multi-dimensional
memory frames (Figure 5, bottom).
This section elaborates the four stages in PIM development
as described in [8]. Table II shows the age range, rate of
autonomous development of perception and motion, and the
method of connecting sensory and motor neurons via in-
terneurons and the resultant control method. Figure 10 depicts
schematically the development of PIM (the sensory nervous
system and the motor nervous system characterized by the
functioning of interneurons connecting them (Figure 3)) and
the development of multi-dimensional memory frames that
shows the structured inter-connections of interneurons along
with each stage (Figure 2, center). The multi-dimensional
memory frames that develop at a particular stage are shown
by adding shades.
A. Stage 1
At 0 ∼ 6 years of age, feedforward loops are the dominant
control mechanism and these establish fundamental relation-
ships between MMD- and BMD-frames by means of “uplink-
ing.” In the ﬁrst half of this period, at 0 ∼ 3 years of age, sen-
sory and motor neurons experience rapid autonomous develop-
ment. Interneurons connect them by subordinate-intervention,
resulting in feedforward control (Figure 10-1A). During this
period, human beings establish inter-connections between
PMD- and MMD-frames, and PMD-, MMD-, and BMD-
frames. The former is related to action-level memes and
the latter, to behavior-level memes. These make integrated
movements of bodily actions possible on the basis of the

158
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Stage 1
1A
1B
Stage 2
2A
2B
Stage 3
3A
3B
Stage 4
4A
4B
Fig. 10. Development of PIM and multi-dimensional memory frames (adapted from [1])

159
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE II
PIM DEVELOPMENT PROCESS (ADAPTED FROM [1])
Speed of Autonomous Development
Method for Establishing Connection
Resulting Control Mechanism
Stage
Age
Perception
Motion
Interneurons
1
0∼ 3
Rapid
Rapid
subordinate
Feedforward control
2
4∼ 7
Fast
Fast
memory-mediated
Limited feedback control
3
7∼ 12
Stable
Stable
memory-mediated-proactive
Wide feedback control
4
13∼ 18
Settled
Settled
memory-mediated-autonomous
Extended feedback control
relationships between the input from the perceptual system
in the PMD-frame and the output expressed as reﬂexive
movements in the MMD- and BMD-frames, for example,
simple utterances (Figure 10-1B).
B. Stage 2
In the latter half of this period, at 4 ∼ 6 years of age, there is
rapid autonomous development of sensory and motor neurons.
Interneurons connect these by memory-mediated interventions,
resulting in feedback controls (Figure 10-2A). During this
period, human beings acquire the skill of behaving in relation
with other persons and the methods for conversing with others
such as the ability to explain using simple syntax. Acquisition
of utterances and combined motor movements become pos-
sible by using the RMD-frame that connects simple syntax
of symbols in the WMD-frame by linking PMD-, BMD-,
and MMD-frames. At this stage, the conscious processes of
System 2 Before and System 2 After that make feedback
controls possible are initiated (Figure 10-2B).
C. Stage 3
Later, at 7 ∼ 12 years of age, parallel distributed activities
are almost complete. There is stable autonomous develop-
ment of the sensory and motor neurons. Interneurons connect
them by memory-mediated proactive interventions, resulting in
wider feedback controls (Figure 10-3A). During this period,
human beings acquire the skill of ﬁrst-order logical thinking
by using letters or symbols and that of cooperation with other
persons. These activities facilitate the development of inter-
connections among the multi-dimensional memory frames,
resulting in very complex networks. Figure 10-3B) shows the
development of interconnections in the RMD- and WMD-
frames. The key is the presence of symbols that intervene
between the various input and output connections; these sym-
bols are related to culture-level memes.
Structural development precedes procedural development.
The former refers to the development of connections between
PMD- and MMD-frames with the support of the BMD-
frame. The BMD-frame stores repetitive sequences of motor
actions in the MMD-frame as single units; therefore, the action
sequences in the BMD-frame can be carried out unconsciously.
The latter refers to the development of connections between
WMD- and RMD-frames. The connections start from spoken
informal language to more abstract structural representations
of formal language. The WMD-frame stores sequences of
symbols as language dissociated from the real world; the
RMD-frame stores a set of BMD-frames into a manipulable
unit. The connections between the contents in the WMD-frame
and those in the RMD-frame give reality to the contents in the
WMD-frame. Structural development and procedural develop-
ment interact with each other in the RMD-frame occasionally
and proceed in parallel. Procedural development in the RMD-
frame is critical to extend the range of behavior. Once elements
in the RMD-frame are compiled in the System 2 After mode,
the compiled rule can be used to initiate a behavior with longer
action steps.
D. Stage 4
Finally, at age 13 ∼ 18 years, parallel distributed activities
are complete. There is settled autonomous development of
sensory and motor neurons. Interneurons connect these us-
ing memory-mediated autonomous intervention, resulting in
even wider feedback control
(Figure 10-4A). During this
period, feedback loops are established; these are used to form
language processing circuits in a single-layer, WMD-frame.
During this period, the ability of logical writing and the
generation of grammatically correct sentences by using or-
dinary language affects signiﬁcantly the development process.
The WMD-frame can evolve autonomously and extensively;
part of the WMD-frame is associated with the BMD-frame
and ultimately connected with the real world but the rest of
the WMD-frame is dissociated from the real world because
there is no connection between the WMD-frame and RMD-
frame (Figure 10-4B).
V. CONCLUSION
Resonance connects remote systems enabling them to work
jointly. Human beings act in the environment by using two
systems: a cyclic PCM system that works in synchronization
with the environment and an autonomous memory system
that operates asynchronously with the environment. Based on
MHP/RT, this paper describes the hypothesis that the PCM
system and the memory system interact with each other via
a resonance mechanism. First, this paper shows that a single
action selection carried out by the PCM system was conceived
as a mapping of the input from the environment represented

160
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
in M-dimensional information in the PMD-frame on the
output to the environment represented in N-dimensional motor
actions in the MMD-frame, connected with the BMD- and
RMD-frames, and discusses the role played by resonance in
the PCM processes deﬁned by the MHP/RT and updates of the
memory represented by the multi-dimensional memory frames.
Second, in situations where the environment comprises objects
created by humans, i.e., artifacts such as symbols, manners,
language, and culture, this paper discusses how artifacts are
maintained over time and space with the help of resonance. A
necessary condition for the survival of artifacts is that they
resonate with human beings. This paper introduces action-
level, behavior-level, and culture-level memes to represent
resonating entities stored in memory. Third, we also described
the human development process from birth to the end of
adolescence in terms of the changes in PIM and memory,
taking into account the changes in memes that human beings
develop in memory as they grow older.
The argument this paper has profound implications for cases
where there is malfunction of resonance, and where memory
that fails to resonate as reality develops.
An example of the ﬁrst case is Autism Spectrum Disorder
(ASD). Is ASD a resonance problem? Imitation is a potentially
crucial aspect of social cognitive development [23] because
imitation is an efﬁcient tool for two main adaptive functions:
learning and communication. Imitation-based communication
is possible through the use of the two aspects of imitation:
imitating and being imitated [24]. These two aspects give rise
to two roles that partners can exchange by taking turns while
they synchronize matched activities. Neuroimaging studies
of interactive imitation have shown that such communicative
systems involve a coordination of bottom-up and top-down
processes. In accordance with some authors (e.g. [25]) and
based on the MHP/RT model, we hypothesize that perceptive-
motor resonance plays a more central role in imitation in
infancy than does a rational evaluation of the observed action.
Thus, because individuals with ASD have difﬁculties with
imitation, the nature of which remains unclear, it is plausible
to postulate that one of the main problems of ASD is related to
difﬁculties with the mechanisms underlying resonance. Several
studies have shown that very young children with ASD (M
Age < 48 months; for a synthesis: [26]) used imitation less
often when copying the actions of others, spent less time
looking at others’ faces and more time looking at the actions
of others; attentional, social and executive factors underlie
different aspects of imitation difﬁculties in this population.
In other words, ASD is characterized by a deﬁciency in
the development of imitation capacity, and this deﬁciency
implies a deﬁcit in mapping neural codings for actions between
sensory and motor modalities, rather than in motivation or
executive function [27]. Thus, ASD could be characterized
by abnormal development of these mappings and that of
resonance mechanisms.
Another important implication of our hypothesis is related
to the autonomous development of the WMD-frame at the
later stage of development. This paper showed that part of the
contents in the WMD-frame do not necessarily have reality,
which is established by linking the WMD-frame with the chain
of RMD-, BMD-, and MMD-frames. Systematic and logical
knowledge as a group norm could become part of the WMD-
frame through education. It could resonate with the symbols
that refer to the knowledge but would not resonate with real
objects in the environment. The larger the non-resonant part
of memory, the less the person will resonate with reality in
the environment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Num-
ber 20H04290. The author would like to thank Editage
(www.editage.com) for English language editing.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Kitajima, M. Toyota, and J. Dinet, “The Role of Resonance in the
Development and Propagation of Memes,” in COGNITIVE 2021 : The
Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technolo-
gies and Applications, 2021, pp. 28–36.
[2] M. Kitajima, Memory and Action Selection in Human-Machine Interac-
tion.
Wiley-ISTE, 2016.
[3] M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Decision-making and action selection
in Two Minds: An analysis based on Model Human Processor with
Realtime Constraints (MHP/RT),” Biologically Inspired Cognitive Ar-
chitectures, vol. 5, pp. 82–93, 2013.
[4] S. K. Card, T. P. Moran, and A. Newell, The Psychology of Human-
Computer Interaction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
1983.
[5] J. L. McClelland and D. E. Rumelhart, Parallel Distributed Processing:
Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition : Psychological and
Biological Models.
The MIT Press, 6 1986.
[6] D. Kahneman, “A perspective on judgment and choice,” American
Psychologist, vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 697–720, 2003.
[7] D. Morris, The nature of happiness.
London: Little Books Ltd., 2006.
[8] M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Hierarchical Structure of Human Action
Selections – An Update of Newell’s Time Scale of Human Action,”
in Procedia Computer Science, BICA 2014. 5th Annual International
Conference on Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures, vol. 41,
2014, pp. 321–325.
[9] A. Newell, Uniﬁed Theories of Cognition (The William James Lectures,
1987).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990.
[10] J. Dinet and M. Kitajima, “The Concept of Resonance: From Physics to
Cognitive Psychology,” in COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International
Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications,
2020, pp. 62–67.
[11] M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Guidelines for designing artifacts for
the dual-process,” in Procedia Computer Science, BICA 2015. 6th
Annual International Conference on Biologically Inspired Cognitive
Architectures, vol. 71, 2015, pp. 62–67.
[12] J. Decety, T. Chaminade, J. Gr`ezes, and A. Meltzoff, “A pet
exploration
of
the
neural
mechanisms
involved
in
reciprocal
imitation,” NeuroImage, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 265 – 272, 2002.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1053811901909383[retrieved:March,2021]
[13] M. Iacoboni and M. Dapretto, “The mirror neuron system and
the consequences of its dysfunction,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
vol.
7,
no.
12,
pp.
942–951,
2006.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//doi.org/10.1038/nrn2024[retrieved:March,2021]
[14] M. Iacoboni, R. P. Woods, M. Brass, H. Bekkering, J. C. Mazziotta,
and G. Rizzolatti, “Cortical mechanisms of human imitation,” Science,
vol.
286,
no.
5449,
pp.
2526–2528,
1999.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.286.5449.252[retrieved:March,2021]
[15] M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Four Processing Modes of in situ Hu-
man Behavior,” in Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures 2011
- Proceedings of the Second Annual Meeting of the BICA Society,
A. V. Samsonovich and K. R. J´ohannsd´ottir, Eds.
Amsterdam, The
Netherlands: IOS Press, 2011, pp. 194–199.

161
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[16] M. Toyota, M. Kitajima, and H. Shimada, “Structured Meme Theory:
How is informational inheritance maintained?” in Proceedings of the
30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, B. C. Love,
K. McRae, and V. M. Sloutsky, Eds.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society, 2008, p. 2288.
[17] M. Kitajima, J. Dinet, and M. Toyota, “Multimodal Interactions Viewed
as Dual Process on Multi-Dimensional Memory Frames under Weak
Synchronization,” in COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International
Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications,
2019, pp. 44–51.
[18] R. Dawkins, The Selﬁsh Gene.
New York City: Oxford University
Press, 1976.
[19] M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Topological Considerations of Memory
Structure,” in Procedia Computer Science, BICA 2014. 5th Annual In-
ternational Conference on Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures,
vol. 41, 2014, pp. 45–50.
[20] L. W. Swanson, Brain Architecture.
Oxford University Press, 2011.
[21] E. Jantsch, The Self-Organizing Universe: Scientiﬁc and Human Impli-
cations of the Emerging Paradigm of Evolution (Systems Science and
World Order Library. Innovations in Systems Science).
Pergamon, 3
1980.
[22] H. Maturana and F. Varela, Autopoiesis and Cognition (Boston Studies in
the Philosophy and History of Science), softcover reprint of the original
1st ed. 1980 ed.
D. Reidel Publishing Company, 8 1991.
[23] H. J. Stewart, R. D. McIntosh, and J. H. Williams, “A speciﬁc deﬁcit
of imitation in autism spectrum disorder,” Autism Res, vol. 6, no. 6, pp.
522–530, Dec 2013.
[24] J. Nadel, “Perception-action coupling and imitation in autism spectrum
disorder,” Dev Med Child Neurol, vol. 57 Suppl 2, pp. 55–58, Apr 2015.
[25] M. Paulus, S. Hunnius, M. Vissers, and H. Bekkering, “Imitation
in
infancy:
Rational
or
motor
resonance?”
Child
Development,
vol. 82, no. 4, pp. 1047–1057, 2011. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.jstor.org/stable/41289825[retrieved:March,2021]
[26] G. Vivanti, D. Trembath, and C. Dissanayake, “Mechanisms of imitation
impairment in autism spectrum disorder,” J Abnorm Child Psychol,
vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 1395–1405, Nov 2014.
[27] J. H. Williams, A. Whiten, and T. Singh, “A systematic review of action
imitation in autistic spectrum disorder,” J Autism Dev Disord, vol. 34,
no. 3, pp. 285–299, Jun 2004.

