Two-Level Validation and Data Acquisition for
Microscopic Trafﬁc Simulation Models
Stefan Detering, Lars Schnieder, Eckehard Schnieder
Institute for Trafﬁc Safety and Automation Engineering
Technische Universit¨at Braunschweig
38106 Braunschweig, Germany
E-mail: Detering@iva.ing.tu-bs.de, L.Schnieder@iva.ing.tu-bs.de, E.Schnieder@tu-bs.de
Abstract—Advanced driver assistance systems can have con-
sequential effects on trafﬁc ﬂow. For the design, optimization
and evaluation of these systems investigative simulations are
necessary. Previous calibration and validation methods for these
simulations utilized either microscopic or macroscopic measure-
ment data. This paper’s purpose is to argue that the formerly
held calibration and validation perspectives with regard to trafﬁc
simulations are incomplete. Moreover, these assistance systems
have their own set of particular requirements, and require
the simultaneous consideration of microscopic and macroscopic
system behavior. Therefore, this paper presents a new mea-
surement concept that is needed to gain the required data
necessary for proper calibration and validation. This concept
advocates simultaneous measurements sourced in both a vehicle
(microscopic) and overall trafﬁc (macroscopic) perspective. Mi-
croscopic measurement results obtained by an equipped vehicle
are presented.
Index Terms—Trafﬁc simulation; validation; calibration; mi-
croscopic and macroscopic perception, equipped vehicle
I. INTRODUCTION
In this paper we extend our previous work [1][2]. The
extensions and new contributions are as follows: the simulation
requirements for investigation of recent developed advanced
driver assistance systems (ADAS) are presented in a more
structural method, therefore the difference between the pre-
vious and the new calibration and validation method becomes
more clear. The measurement concept is presented in more
detail and ﬁrst empirical results from own test drives with an
equipped vehicle are presented.
To date, exclusively the driver and the physical behavior
of the vehicle have determined the overall driving behavior.
More and more, it is becoming the trend to have assistance
systems take over functions in areas of longitudinal and lateral
dynamics of the vehicle. An already established system in
the ﬁeld of longitudinal guidance is the Adaptive Cruise
Control (ACC) system. Using ACC, the driver chooses a
target speed, and depending upon trafﬁc conditions, the system
automatically accelerates the vehicle to this target speed. If
there is a preceding vehicle the vehicle decelerates and follows
the preceding vehicle at a safe distance. Radar or laser sensor
systems are used for distance and speed measurement. The
driver assistance system uses distance or relative speed to the
preceding vehicle as input variable. The combined vehicles’
behavior as a system determines the macroscopic trafﬁc char-
acteristic, e.g. trafﬁc ﬂow or mean-speed. Therefore, the driver
Fig. 1.
Driver assistance system perception at the microscopic and macro-
scopic levels
assistance system also inﬂuences these characteristics (see Fig.
1). Since the introduction of these systems to the market,
there have been many simulation investigations concerning the
inﬂuences of ACC on trafﬁc ﬂow. For an overview of the past
work considering the effect of conventional ACC systems on
trafﬁc ﬂow see [3][4].
In recent years, initial proposals have been presented for
advanced ACC systems which recognize the current trafﬁc
state and adapt system parameters to optimize trafﬁc ﬂow
[5]. Simulation investigations are carried out for design, opti-
mization and evaluation, and are essential for the improvement
of the system. Models employed for trafﬁc simulations have
been examined for over ﬁfty years. However, the investigations
associated with the advanced driver assistance systems, make
new requirements essential which have not been considered
over the last several decades since those simulation investiga-
tions were designed with different objectives in mind. This
paper investigates these new requirements and proposes a
measurement concept to fulﬁll these requirements.
This paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 an overview
of current simulation models and tools is presented, which are
most popular for examination of recently developed ADAS. In
order to obtain quantitative results, a calibration and validation
of the simulation model is mandatory, and this signiﬁcance
is presented in Section 3. Subsequently, Section 4 describes
three typical simulation investigation cases, and based on
this knowledge identiﬁes the new requirements for simulation
investigations for this kind of assistance system which have not
48
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

yet been considered. Section 5 presents a new measurement
concept to fulﬁll the determined requirements. First results
from an own equipped vehicle are presented.
II. TRAFFIC FLOW MODELING
In this section the most common trafﬁc stream features are
explained and different model structures are classiﬁed. Con-
cluding the most widely-used simulation tools are presented.
A. Measures for Trafﬁc Stream Features
One makes a distinction in general between microscopic
and macroscopic measured variables. When considering the
microscopic driving condition it is necessary to have: the
position on the street s, the speed v as well as the acceleration
(positive values) or deceleration (negative values) a of the
vehicle as a function of time. In the case of the consideration
of two successive vehicles, the distance ∆s as well the relative
speed ∆v are also considered.
When considering the macroscopic trafﬁc state, the trafﬁc
ﬂow, sometimes also referred to as ”trafﬁc volume”, density,
as well as space-mean speed are essential. The dimensions are
deﬁned in detail as follows:
The number of vehicles Nq observed at a ﬁxed location
during a time interval ∆t is the trafﬁc ﬂow Q (veh/h) for
this interval:
Q = Nq
∆t
(1)
The trafﬁc density k (veh/km) is the instantaneous number
of vehicles Nk for a given road segment with the length ∆x :
k = Nk
∆x
(2)
k and Q yield the space-mean speed v (km/h):
v = Q
k
(3)
For a detailed discussion about trafﬁc variables see e.g.
[6][7][8].
B. Trafﬁc Simulation Models and Tools
Modeling of trafﬁc reaches back to the middle of the
20th century when mainly physicists began to describe the
phenomena of trafﬁc by differential equations. There exist
fundamentally different model structures that may be classiﬁed
in agreement with e.g. [6][8][9]:
1) Microscopic trafﬁc models
2) Macroscopic trafﬁc models
3) Hybrid trafﬁc models
4) Mesoscopic trafﬁc models
Microscopic trafﬁc models simulate the behavior of single
vehicle-driver-units and describe their interactions by rule-
bases that specify acceleration or velocity. Generally the
dynamics are based on local variables like distance or relative
speed to the front or rear vehicle.
Macroscopic trafﬁc models neglect individual vehicles.
They are devoted to aggregate state variables like density
and ﬂow for representing the collective behavior of vehicles.
The equations are derived from the laws of nature and are
structurally often similar to ﬂuid mechanics.
Hybrid trafﬁc models are a combination of macroscopic
and microscopic approaches. Regions of the trafﬁc network
are modeled either in a macroscopic or microscopic manner,
depending on which manner is more reasonable. For example
at on and off ramps it may be interesting to regard the mi-
croscopic interactions of cars entering or leaving the highway,
whereas trafﬁc dynamics on the highway between ramps is
sufﬁciently modeled by a macroscopic approach.
Mesoscopic trafﬁc models combine the properties of mi-
croscopic and macroscopic trafﬁc models. Single vehicles are
simulated, but instead of considering vehicle-vehicle interac-
tions macroscopic relationships are used to determine vehicle
behavior.
Trafﬁc simulation tools offer a network model for storing
the data for the relevant trafﬁc route properties as well as a
trafﬁc demand model for determining the amount of vehicles
depending on time and day. The movement of the vehicles is
determined by the behavior model. The behavior model itself
consists of sub-models. In microscopic trafﬁc models these
are models for car-following, lane changing and route choice
behavior.
The most well-known car-following models include Gazis
Herman, Gipps, Wiedemann, IDM as well as the Cellular
Automata ([10][11][12][13][14]). Popular lane changing algo-
rithms have been presented by Sparmann, Gipps and for Cellu-
lar Automata ([15][16][17]). An integrated approach including
car-following and lane changing behavior is investigated by
[18].
At this time, the commercially most successful trafﬁc sim-
ulation tools like VISSIM, PARAMICS and AIMSUN use
the microscopic approach for the behavior model. Some of
them also offer a macroscopic approach. Additionally, there
are simulation tools, such as PELOPS, which have not been
widely marketed, which use a more detailed description of
human and vehicle behavior than in other microscopic models,
therefore this type is called nanoscopic model.
III. CALIBRATION AND VALIDATION OF TRAFFIC MODELS
The behavior of the driver-vehicle units is determined gen-
erally by the model behavior and especially by the parameters
for the individual models. In order to obtain reliable simulation
results, it is necessary to prove the validity of the selected
parameters for each individual application [19].
Calibration involves adjusting the model parameters so that
the simulation is sufﬁciently accurate when compared to actual
behavior. It is necessary that a comparable set of actual
measurement data for the selected route or network section
is available for calibration. The goal is that the deviation is
minimized between the model result and the recorded, actual
measurement data. For this, an application adapted measured
variable needs to be selected, such as measurement of travel
times, velocities, time gaps or waiting periods. In general the
measurement data, which originates from the varying behavior
of the individual vehicles, illustrate the trafﬁc behavior in an
49
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

aggregated form. A calibration according to non-aggregated,
real comparative data (such as car-following or lane change
behavior) seldom takes place, if at all, since this data often
is not available. As shown below, a representation of the
actual behavior on both microscopic and macroscopic levels
is difﬁcult to achieve.
The validation of model parameters immediately follows the
calibration. Therefore, an additional set of data measurements
is necessary. Calibration and validation data sets should also be
collected under comparable conditions and ”the core problem
should be directly or indirectly described” [9]. For validation
purposes, the simulation parameters must not be changed
beyond this point. The simulation results are to be compared to
the second measurement data set. The model gives valid results
when the previously determined error measurement bound is
not exceeded. Quantitative statements can only be made from
a sufﬁciently validated model.
The account described above is based on information from
[9]. The American equivalent is [20]. The makeup of both
documents is very similar. A large difference originates from
the validation evaluation of the trafﬁc model. While [20]
”presumes that the software developer has already completed
this validation of the software and its underlying algorithms in
a number of research and practical applications”, [9] says that
the ”Validation [. ..] therefore serves for determination of the
reliability of attainable statements in the particular application
case” and ”The calibration and validation step is of crucial
importance for the reliability of reachable statements in every
application case.”
IV. SIMULATION REQUIREMENTS FOR INVESTIGATION OF
RECENT DEVELOPED ADAS
Although the models employed for trafﬁc simulations have
been examined for over ﬁfty years, previous research com-
pleted on simulation models consider either the microscopic
or the macroscopic level during calibration and validation. In
general four different approaches can be identiﬁed:
• The approach of calibrating a macroscopic simulation
with empirical microscopic data is not possible as macro-
scopic simulations do not model the details of the
microscopic level. Therefore this approach will not be
discussed in the following.
• Approach I deals with the calibration and validation of a
microscopic simulation with empirical microscopical data
(c.f. Subsection IV-A)
• Approach II deals with the calibration and validation of a
macroscopic simulation with empirical macroscopic data
(c.f. Subsection IV-B)
• Approach III deals with the calibration and validation of a
microscopic simulation with empirical macroscopic data
(c.f. Subsection IV-C)
The existing approaches are discussed in the following section
along with their speciﬁc pros and cons. With this knowledge
the new two-level approach is explained in Subsection IV-D.
A. Calibration and validation following approach I
There are a lot of investigations considering car-following
behavior. Calibration and validation is performed for one
or several car-following models and the differences between
measuring data and simulation results are evaluated. The
investigation of lane changing behavior seldom takes place.
Figure 2 shows the approach for calibration and validation
on microscopic level. This investigation is only possible with
microscopic simulation models, since macroscopic models
neglect the details of the microscopic level. Calibration can be
seen as a closed loop which involves the iterative execution
of the following steps: First a microscopic simulation run
is performed. In the second step the microscopic parameters
empirically observed in the ﬁeld are compared against the set
of data resulting from the simulation. As stated before the
investigation on the microscopic level is often restricted to
the investigation of car-following behavior. Depending on the
use case it may also be necessary to consider lane changing
behavior. The deviation is compared against a predeﬁned
threshold.
In case the deviation between empirical results and simula-
tion results is above the threshold in a third step, a thorough
analysis of the underlying causes is needed. This is the crucial
step in the calibration process. In order to properly identify the
reasons of the deviation a deep knowledge of the qualitative
correlations of the model parameters is required. Especially
for the causal analysis, a good understanding of the trafﬁc
simulation model is necessary. The fourth step is the model
adjustment. As soon as the cause has been identiﬁed the
simulation can be adjusted. This can either be an adjustment
of the parameters (parameter variation), or a change in the
underlying mathematical functions relating the parameters to
each other (structural variation). After having adjusted the
model we have to start with step one again and perform a
new simulation run.
In the case the deviation during calibration is below the
threshold, the validation of microscopic model parameters
immediately follows the calibration. Calibration and validation
are closely related to each other. The calibrated model is
transferred into a new, but comparable situation. For this
situation an additional set of measured (microscopic) data is
necessary. For this new situation a simulation run is performed.
The microscopic simulation results are to be compared to
the second measurement data set. The simulation run should
deliver sufﬁciently accurate results for the new situation as
well. In case the previously deﬁned threshold is exceeded
a re-calibration is needed, thus the causal analysis is the
subsequent step. The model gives valid results on the consid-
ered microscopic level when the previously determined error
measurement bound is not exceeded.
Macroscopic measurement data is not considered in this
approach. Therefore a validation on macroscopic level is
lacking. The validation is achieved only for one single driver-
vehicle unit. In the case of considering only car-following
behavior the validation is only achieved for one single function
50
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

not considered
comparison
deviation
microscopic 
sim. results
causal 
analysis
identified 
cause
microscopic 
simulation (B)
model 
adjustment
adjusted 
model
microscopic
simulation (A)
microscopic 
sim. results
comparison
> threshold
else
deviation
> threshold
calibration
validation
microscopic level
macroscopic level
not considered
simulation
systemic level of abstraction
else
empirical 
results (A)
empirical 
results (B)
Model before 
calibration
application of 
validated model
reality
measurement
Fig. 2.
Calibration and validation of a microscopic simulation model on
microscopic level
of the driver-vehicle unit. The validation of one function as a
subsystem of the complex simulation model does not result in
a validation of a higher level of the model.
This conclusion is conﬁrmed by the work of [21]. The
authors of [21] present a multi-stage calibration and validation
procedure. The microscopic calibration of headway behavior
is one of the ﬁrst steps. After completing the parameter ﬁne-
tuning to reconstruct trafﬁc variations, the parameter values
for the Mean Target Headway are raised by almost 25%,
in comparison to values after headway behavior calibration.
The reaction time is even raised by 59% in comparison to
the previously determined value. With [21] it was therefore
necessary to make an adjustment of the microscopic headway
behavior in order to model the measured values from the
macroscopic behavior. The question naturally arises whether or
not it is advantageous to conduct a microscopic calibration and
validation, and afterwards evaluate the macroscopic simulation
results. As a restriction, it must be pointed out that in the
investigation mentioned above the authors used measurement
data from different trafﬁc sites and different days.
In conclusion it can be stated that the validation of the sim-
ulation model does not walk hand in hand with the validation
of separate sub-models.
Another crucial point is, that for the acquisition of the
measurement data used for calibration and validation of car-
following behavior many simpliﬁcations are used: the tracks in
use are often single lane roads, sometimes the data is obtained
on special test tracks or only consider inner city driving.
Nevertheless these measurement data or the parameters de-
termined by these measurement data is used for investigating
trafﬁc behavior on motorways. For example [22] found as a
result of their car-following investigations that calibration with
measurement data from urban rides cause strong deviations
between the calculated parameters in comparision to suburban
rides.
Many investigations also consider only a very small amount
of car-following rides. For example [5] uses only three
following-rides to determine the parameters of the model in
use. When attempting to use only a very small amount of car-
following rides, it does not seem possible to distinguish the
not supported
not supported
comparison
deviation
macroscopic 
sim. results
causal 
analysis
identified 
cause
macroscopic 
simulation (B)
model 
adjustment
adjusted 
model
macroscopic
simulation (A)
macroscopic 
sim. results
comparison
> threshold
else
deviation
> threshold
calibration
validation
microscopic level
macroscopic level
simulation
systemic level of abstraction
else
empirical 
results (A)
empirical 
results (B)
Model before 
calibration
application of 
validated model
reality
measurement
Fig. 3.
Calibration and validation of a macroscopic simulation model on
macroscopic level
behavior of different drivers (inter-driver variability) and the
variation of the behavior of a single driver in the course of
time (intra-driver variability).
B. Calibration and validation following approach II
Often the primary focus is not on the detailed analysis of
the behavior of individual vehicles. Instead the major interest
lays on the aggregated macroscopic trafﬁc behavior. Examples
for this can be found in trafﬁc planing where the effects
changes in the control of trafﬁc light signals or modiﬁed trafﬁc
routings can be evaluated. For those analyses both microscopic
and macroscopic trafﬁc simulation models are applied. In the
following Section we elaborate on how the calibration and
validation of a macroscopic trafﬁc simulation model based on
macroscopic data can be performed. In the next Section we
describe how a microscopic trafﬁc simulation can be calibrated
and validated taking into consideration macroscopic simulation
results.
Figure 3 shows the procedure of calibrating and validating a
macroscopic trafﬁc simulation on the macroscopic level. This
procedure is comparable to the the procedure of calibration
and validation on microscopic level. In contrast to this only
the macroscopic level is considered in this case. As the ﬁrst
step a macroscopic simulation is performed with standard
parameters and during calibration and validation the results of
the macroscopic simulation are compared to the macroscopic
empirical data. Again the adjustment of the parameters of
the macroscopic simulation requires a thorough and deep
understanding of the model as the model’s parameters often
do not have an explicit relation to empirically observable
parameters. Validation follows the succesful calibration. In the
validation phase macroscopic simulation results are compared
with a second data set of macroscopic empirical data. It should
be stressed, that the macroscopic simulation does not simulate
individual driver-vehicle-units and thus does not allow an
analysis on the microscopic level.
However, for design and evaluation of advanced driver
assistance systems optimizing trafﬁc ﬂow it is required that the
model is valid and explains the differences of the microscopic
behavior of the driver and the macroscopic behavior at the
system level. This will become obvious in different driving
51
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

comparison
deviation
macroscopic 
sim. results
causal 
analysis
identified 
cause
microscopic 
simulation (B)
model 
adjustment
adjusted 
model
macroscopic 
sim. results
comparison
> threshold
else
deviation
> threshold
calibration
validation
microscopic level
macroscopic level
empirical 
results (B)
simulation
systemic level of abstraction
empirical 
results (A)
else
microscopic
simulation (A)
Model before 
calibration
application of 
validated model
reality
measurement
Fig. 4.
Calibration and validation of a microscopic simulation model on
macroscopic level
situations, where for example a following vehicle approaches
the preceding vehicle, follows a preceding vehicle, brakes due
to the decelaration of the preceding vehicle or accelerates to
the level of the previously entered desired value as soon as
no other vehicle is in front of the own vehicle. In order to
show the differences of the vehicles’ longitudinal dynamics
performed by a human driver compared to an assistance system
it is necessary to simulate the behavior of indvidual vehicles.
The design of advanced driver assistance systems brings about
requirements macroscopic simulations can never meet due to
these principal considerations.
C. Calibration and validation following approach III
For the same investigations as mentioned in IV-B also
microscopic simulation models are used. But in these cases
the detailed microscopic behavior is not considered. Instead,
the microscopic simulation is used only with regards to
macroscopic results.
Figure 4 shows the approach for calibration and validation
on macroscopic level. The calibration is comparable to the cal-
ibration process in subsection IV-A. During calibration almost
the same steps have to be performed. Only the second step
differs. As unlike before not the microscopic empirical results
and microscopic simulation results are considered, but the
macrosopic empirical results are compared to the macroscopic
simulation results. For validation also a second macroscopic
measurement data set is necessary. Finally in this case the
model offers valid results on the considered macroscopic level
when the previously determined error measurement bound is
not exceeded.
Microscopic measurement data is not considered in this
approach and therefore a validation on microscopic level is
lacking. The validation on the macroscopic level of the simu-
lation model does not result in a validation of the sub-models.
It is possible that different combinations of the microscopic
sub-models result in the same macroscopic behavior.
D. Two-level approach for calibration and validation
The review of currently available research shows that the
microscopic and macroscopic levels of simulation currently
co-exist and are not interwoven. Current research did not
reﬂect that for the optimization of advanced driver assistance
systems the interrelations of both levels of simulation need
to be reﬂected. For this reason a two-level approach for
calibration and validation is stipulated in this paper. It is to
calibrate and validate a trafﬁc simulation both on microscopic
and macroscopic level. The microscopic simulation model
simulates each vehicle individually. Each vehicle behavior
in the simulation has to be valid especially concerning the
crucial input factors for the advanced driver assistance system.
Improving the macroscopic trafﬁc ﬂow with the advanced
driver assistance system, the simulation has to be validated
on a macroscopic level too.
Taking the ACC system as an example, the system changes
the following behavior of the vehicle to its preceding vehicle.
Therefore it is absolutely necessary to use a microscopic trafﬁc
model for testing such a system which includes the headway
behavior of the human driver as well as the ACC system.
The ACC equipped vehicles exhibit different vehicle headway
behavior than those vehicles driven by humans. It must be
particularly assured that human following behavior is modeled
precisely as long as no 100% system equipment is considered,
since the interaction between system headway behavior and
human headway behavior can be of particular importance.
It seems reasonable to conduct both a microscopic cali-
bration and validation of the vehicle headway behavior for
human and ACC system behavior in the ﬁrst step. This step
is the same as described in subsection IV-A. Subsequently,
it is possible to estimate the accuracy and reliability of
the simulated vehicle headway behavior of humans and the
system.
As stated in Section I the previously mentioned ACC system
will inﬂuence trafﬁc ﬂow behavior. In recently developed
ADASs the individual vehicle will even optimize trafﬁc ﬂow
[5]. The microscopic behavior is thus changed in order to op-
timize the macroscopic behavior. Subsection IV-A stated that
a valid model on microsopic level does not have to be valid on
macroscopic level. However, for evaluating system efﬁciency
macroscopic variables, e.g. trafﬁc ﬂow or travel times are used
as a measurement variable. Therefore after calibrating and
validating the simulation model only on microscopic level the
simulation seems not yet suitable for investigation of these
ADAS. Therefore a microscopic calibration and validation of
the individual models and a concluding macroscopic validation
appear to be meaningful. This is the reason for proposing a
two-level approach of trafﬁc simulation models.
The basic idea of a microscopic calibration and a macro-
scopic validation has been already described in [23] in the
explanation of calibration and validation.
”This should ideally be undertaken at both a
macroscopic scale (validation) to ensure the overall
behavior of the model matches that readily observ-
able, but also at a microscopic scale, with regard to
individual vehicle-vehicle interactions (the calibra-
tion, and ”tuning” of the many behavioral parameters
comprising the decision making processes).”
One of the ﬁrst research using this approach can be seen
52
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

comparison
deviation
empirical 
results (A)
microscopic 
sim. results
causal 
analysis
identified 
cause
empirical 
results (B)
microscopic 
simulation (B)
model 
adjustment
adjusted 
model
microscopic
simulation (A)
microscopic 
sim. results
comparison
> threshold
else
deviation
> threshold
calibration
validation
microscopic level
macroscopic level
else
macroscopic 
sim. results
comparison
> threshold
empirical 
results (B)
simulation
reality
systemic level of abstraction
else
Model before 
calibration
application of 
validated model
deviation
measurement
Fig. 5.
Calibration and validation of a microscopic simulation model on
microscopic and macroscopic level
in [24]. Witte, the author of [24], carried out a microscopic
calibration and afterwards a macroscopic validation. Unfor-
tunately, this validation is limited to a purely qualitative
consideration. Moreover the validation is carried out with the
help of an single-lane roundabout, therefore overtaking and
merging are not considered. Witte comments that he observes
relatively high trafﬁc ﬂows and trafﬁc densities from the
simulation. He attributes these results to the absence of trucks
and the measuring data used for calibration.
The new proposed two-level approach is shown in Fig. 5.
The ﬁrst steps for calibrating and validating the model on
microscopic level is the same procedure as in subsection IV-A.
As soon as microscopic parameters have been successfully
validated a validation of macroscopic variables (e.g. trafﬁc
ﬂow, trafﬁc density, mean speed) is possible. Again, this can
be done by doing the following steps. First a microscopic
simulation run is performed. This time the behavior of the
sum of all individual driver-vehicle units in the simulation
is measured. This simulation run yields the macroscopic
variables previously identiﬁed. In a second step the simulation
results are compared against empirical data observed in the
ﬁeld. In case the results stay within the permissible range
the calibration and validation on microscopic and macroscopic
level has been successful. Otherwise a re-calibration on mi-
croscopic level becomes necessary. Now it becomes obvious
that calibration is only possible on the microscopic level, as
well as the fact that the microscopic variables are independent
variables whereas the macroscopic variables can be considered
as dependent variables.
The next step is to gather both the macroscopic and mi-
croscopic real-trafﬁc variables in such a manner that they
share the same time and geographical reference. A plausible
measurement concept is proposed in the next Section.
V. MEASUREMENT CONCEPT
In general three different approaches for the acquisition of
measurement data can be identiﬁed:
• The approach of acquisition of macroscopic data (c.f.
Subsection V-A)
• The approach of acquisition of microscopic data (c.f.
Subsection V-B)
Fig. 6.
System layout of a trafﬁc control center
• The approach of acquisition of both macroscopic and
microscopic data (c.f. Subsection V-C)
Based on the knowledge of the previous measurement concepts
a new approach for acquisition of both macroscopic and
microscopic data is presented. First empirical results regarding
the measurement of microscopic variables are shown.
A. Acquisition of macroscopic data
Primarily, the calibration and validation of simulation mod-
els is done with macroscopic measurement data. This measure-
ment data is often obtained by trafﬁc centers which typically
store aggregated measurement data. The general system layout
of a trafﬁc control center is shown in Fig. 6. Trafﬁc Control
Center often consists of sub-Centers and the road-side-units
near the highway. The main sensor in use is the inductive loop
sensor to measure trafﬁc ﬂow and vehicle speed, and to differ
between different vehicle classes. Variable message signs are
used to inﬂuence driver and trafﬁc ﬂow behavior. The data
from the sensors is aggregated in the road side units - often
is used a time span of 1 minute or more. The typical distance
between the sensor systems is one or several kilometers.
B. Acquisition of microscopic data
To obtain microscopic measurement data different methods
are used. This can either be a terrestrial or an aerial perspec-
tive.
Following the terrestrial perspective, test vehicles are in
most cases equipped with an appropriate sensor system. The
test vehicle speed, distance and the relative velocity to the
vehicle driving ahead are measured by the system. Usually it is
well-known by test drivers that they are being observed while
driving, and in some cases they are given special driving tasks.
53
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

It is accepted that the drivers in these special test conditions
do not react as they might under normal conditions. Such
an investigation was conducted for example in [25]. In this
investigation the suitability of 10 trafﬁc ﬂow models of vehicle
headway behavior was tested for emulating measured data.
Another terrestrial perspective is the equipment of several
test vehicles with a GPS system. The test vehicles have to drive
behind each other. Therefore these kind of investigation is
often performed on special test tracks. Using the GPS position
data of the individual vehicles the speed, acceleration and
distance information is calculated.
Following the aerial perspective, trafﬁc observations are
carried out from a helicopter. Initial investigations already have
been conducted as found in [26]. The latest investigations with
a video camera installed under a helicopter come from [27].
This approach has the advantage that the observed drivers
remain uninﬂuenced as much as possible. The disadvantage
exists that a great effort is needed to collect data, and inac-
curacies occur when determining the distance and velocity of
the observed vehicles from the video material. This inaccuracy
directly inﬂuences the calibration of the trafﬁc model.
C. Acquisition of both macroscopic and microscopic data
Presently, there are empirical investigations acquiring ei-
ther macroscopic trafﬁc data or microscopic trafﬁc data. As
previously discussed, it would make sense to simultaneously
measure data from microscopic vehicle headway data and lane
change data from several vehicles as well as macroscopic
measurement data for the same section and the same time
span.
One approach already exists for the collection of such data.
In the NGSIM project [28] vehicle positions are extracted
from video material obtained by several cameras and translated
into vehicle tracking data. Additionally, for the road segment
observed by the video macroscopic data can be calculated. In
NGSIM project loop detector and weather data also have been
recorded.
The data sets originate exclusively from the USA and
indicate the road network layout that is typical there, as well
as drivers’ behavior. It is otherwise undetermined whether or
not this data can universally be applied to driving scenarios
in Europe or Germany. A comparable European project does
not exist. Another problem with the NGSIM project exists as
a result of the camera technology used. For this data only
relatively short road segments a maximum of 640 m were
considered. In current databases there exist two data sets from
freeways, the sides measuring 500 m and 640 m, respectively.
The mean-speed of the vehicles is less than 50 km/h and there-
fore each car is tracked for about a maximum of 50 seconds.
Additionally, estimating vehicle trajectories from video data
leads to measurement errors that cannot be neglected. These
errors have to be taken into consideration using the data for
calibration and validation [29].
D. A new approach towards the acquisition of macroscopic
and microscopic data
A new approach towards the acquisition of microscopic data
is the continuous and entire movement data acquisition of
single vehicles on longer road segments and for greater time
periods in combination with the acquisition of the macroscopic
data from trafﬁc centers. Without inﬂuencing the trafﬁc behav-
ior extensive data sets can be collected from the equipment
of the measuring vehicles participating in the real ﬂow of
trafﬁc. By means of suitable sensor facilities (radar, lidar), the
measuring vehicles are able to capture the behavior of several
surrounding vehicles precisely and pursue them continuously
for a longer period.
At the same time a trafﬁc center provides aggregate data for
this road segment. This data, among other things, represents
the trafﬁc ﬂow, truck percentage and mean vehicle speed. To
simulate the real trafﬁc ﬂow, it is at least necessary to know
the amount of vehicles entering the section under observation,
and the amount of vehicles entering or leaving this section
by on- or off-ramp. Figure 8 shows a road segment with the
necessary inductive loop sensors as well as several equipped
vehicles and observed vehicles.
Up to now test vehicles were equipped with sensor systems
measuring the vehicles in front of the test vehicle. With this
approach the behavior of the test driver and the test vehicle
itself can be monitored, especially regarding the movement of
the preceding vehicle. The test driver can be monitored for
a longer time period, therefore intra-driver variability can be
investigated. The disadvantage of this application is that the
test driver knows that he is observed personally.
In addition to the sensors monitoring the activity ahead of
the vehicle, sensors should also be mounted on the vehicle’s
rear in order to observe the following trafﬁc, including the
following driver’s behavior. As soon as the following vehicle
changes with another vehicle, the next following vehicle can
be observed. This procedure has the advantage that within
a short time frame the behavior of multiple drivers can be
examined without the examined drivers’ awareness. Therefore,
the following driver’s inﬂuence on the measurement can be
neglected. Hence with this data the calibration of the vehicle
subsequent model of the trafﬁc simulation can be carried
out. Due to the large number of observed drivers, where
behavior can vary from driver to driver, the so-called inter-
driver variability is determined and can be applied to the trafﬁc
simulation.
The Institute for Trafﬁc Safety and Automation Engineering
equipped a Volkswagen Passat with a radar sensor in the front
and a lidar senor in the back to monitor the preceding and
following vehicles. In addition a lot of measurement data from
the own vehicle (speed, steering angle, actuation of throttle and
brake, ...) is recorded. For veriﬁcation of the measurement
data a video system is recording the view to the front and
back. Figure 7 shows the general system layout.
Up to now only one vehicle was equipped with the sensor
system. The goal is to equip several vehicles with this system.
54
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Radar sensor
(front)
Lidar sensor
(back)
Data 
conversion
Data 
processing 
and storage
GPS
Camera 
(front)
Camera 
(back)
Vehicle 
sensors
Fig. 7.
General layout of the in-vehicle measurement system
Road Side Unit
equipped vehicle
observed vehicle
other vehicle
Fig. 8.
Measurement concept with several cars
In this case the GPS device is an important component for
the measurement concept with several cars. Of course on
the one hand the GPS device allows the measurement of the
position of the vehicles. On the other hand it is much more
important that the GPS device delivers a unique time base.
This unique time base is absolutely necessary to merge the
measurement data of several vehicles. The GPS time base is
available almost everywhere. The advantage of this approach
is that the vehicles don’t have to exchange any data between
each other to synchronize the measurement time.
E. Empirical results
Our equipped vehicle was tested and gathered data from
trips with more than one thousand kilometers. The measure-
ment data shows, that our measurement system is excellent
for observing the own vehicle, the preceding vehicle and
the following vehicle. Due to the developments in sensor
technology over the past several years, testing on microscopic
level is feasible with signiﬁcantly lower technical effort in
comparison to a few years ago.
Figure 9 shows a small section of our measurement data.
The ﬁgure shows the trajectory of the movement of our
equiped vehicle and the trajectory of the following and preced-
ing vehicle in a typical stop-and-go situation on the Autobahn
A2 near Hannover, Germany. In this measurement data we
can identify the driving situations mentioned in Subsection
IV-B. In phase A the vehicles follow with almost constant
speed of about 70 km/h. In phase B the equipped vehicle
and the following vehicle brake due to the deceleration of the
preceding vehicle. The vehicles comes almost to standstill. In
phase C the vehicles accelerate very slowly up to a speed of
almost 80 km/h before starting to decelerate in phase D again.
Finally the vehicles drive at almost constant speed in phase E
of about 40 km/h.
With this measurement data the car-follwing behavior of
our test driver and our equipped vehicle as well as the car-
Fig. 9.
Different driving situations observed by an equipped vehicle
following behavior of the following driver and vehicle can be
investigated.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
For future investigations of ADAS it is necessary to validate
the simulation at the microscopic and the macroscopic level.
As a result, it has been deemed necessary to simultaneously
obtain both microscopic and macroscopic data.
After verifying the qualiﬁcation of our measurement system
to observe car-following, the next step is to extend our
analysis to lane changing behavior. With the knowledge of
the preceding and following vehicle and some additional
information it should also be possible to observe lane changing
behavior. Afterwards several vehicles can be equipped with
this measurement system. It is noteworthy that fortunately a
large number of institutes and research facilities already own
one or several such measuring vehicles. It is possible to use
GPS signals as a uniform time and local reference. Therefore,
only the coordination of a uniform data format is necessary
in order to enable these vehicles to examine together trafﬁc
behavior together. With such common measurements, a new
data base can be achieved for the ﬁrst time.
The ﬁnal goal is to coordinate the measuring vehicles
on a predetermined road segment where for the same time
span a trafﬁc center provides macroscopic data for this road
segment. Therefore the details for this measurement have to
be developed together with experts from trafﬁc centers and
institutes, and research facilities interested in participating in
such an investigation with their own test vehicles.
If video data of the segment is available it can be used as
a reference. For example in Germany on the Autobahn A7,
a long stretch is equipped with such a video camera system.
Because the videos are used only as a supplement, a clearly
larger road segment, as opposed to the NGSIM project, can
be considered.
This approach makes it possible to connect the microscopic
and macroscopic view. Using the evaluation of the data of all
55
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

measuring vehicles and the data from trafﬁc centers the current
trafﬁc behavior of a large road segment can be developed.
A calibration and validation on microscopic and macroscopic
scale can then also be achieved.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Detering and E. Schnieder, “Two level approach for validation of
microscopic simulation models,” in Advances in System Simulation,
2009. SIMUL ’09. First International Conference on, Sept. 2009, pp.
18–22.
[2] L. Schnieder and S. Detering, “Systemische kalibrierung und validierung
von simulationen zur auslegung von verkehrsassistenzsystemen,” in
AAET 2010 - Automatisierungssysteme, Assistenzsysteme und eingebet-
tete Systeme f¨ur Transportmittel.
Gesamtzentrum f¨ur Verkehr e.V.,
2010.
[3] P. Zwaneveld and B. van Arem, “Trafﬁc effects of automated vehicle
guidance systems - a literature survey,” TNO Inro, Delft, The Nether-
lands, Tech. Rep. INRO-VVG 1997-17, 1997.
[4] J. VanderWerf, S. Shladover, N. Kourjanskaia, M. Miller, and H. Krish-
nan, “Modeling effects of driver control assistance systems on trafﬁc,”
Transportation Research Record, vol. 1748, pp. 167–174, 2001.
[5] A.
Kesting,
“Microscopic
modeling
of
human
and
automated
driving: Towards trafﬁc-adaptive cruise control,” Ph.D. dissertation,
Technische Universit¨at Dresden, Fakult¨at f¨ur Verkehrswissenschaften
”’Friedrich
List”’,
2008.
[Online].
Available:
http://nbn-
resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:bsz:14-ds-1204804167720-57734
[6] S. Detering, Verkehrsleittechnik - Automatisierung des Straßen- und
Schienenverkehrs, E. Schnieder, Ed. Springer, 2007, ch. Flusssteuerung
im Straßenverkehr, pp. 155 – 194.
[7] C. F. Daganzo, Fundamentals of Transportation and Trafﬁc Operations.
Elsevier Science Ltd, 1997.
[8] D.
Helbing,
Verkehrsdynamik
-
Neue
physikalische
Model-
lierungskonzepte.
Springer, 1997.
[9] R. Trapp, Hinweise zur mikroskopischen Verkehrsﬂusssimulation, Ar-
beitsgruppe Verkehrsf¨uhrung und Verkehrssicherheit, Ed. FGSV Verlag,
2006.
[10] D. Gazis, R. Herman, and R. Rothery, “Nonlinear follow the leader
models of trafﬁc ﬂow,” Operations Research, vol. 9, pp. 545–567, 1961.
[11] P. G. Gipps, “A behavioural car-following model for computer simula-
tion,” Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, vol. 15, no. 2,
pp. 105–111, April 1981.
[12] R. Wiedemann, Simulation des Strassenverkehrsﬂusses.
Institut
f¨ur Verkehrswesen der Universit¨at Karlsruhe, 1974, vol. Heft 8 der
Schriftenreihe des IfV.
[13] M.
Treiber
and
D.
Helbing,
“Realistische
Mikrosimulation
von
Straßenverkehr
mit
einem
einfachen
Modell,”
in
16.
Symposium ”’Simulationstechnik ASIM 2002”’, D. Tavangarian and
R. Gr¨utzner, Eds., Rostock, 2005, pp. 514–520. [Online]. Available:
http://www.cs.wm.edu/˜coppit/csci435-spring2005/project/index.php
[14] K. Nagel and M. Schreckenberg, “A cellular automaton model for free-
way trafﬁc,” Journal de Physique I, vol. 2, no. 12, pp. 2221–2229, 1992.
[Online]. Available: http://www.edpsciences.org/10.1051/jp1:1992277
[15] U.
Sparmann,
Spurwechselvorg¨ange
auf
zweispurigen
BAB-
Richtungsfahrbahnen,
ser.
Forschung
Straßenbau
und
Straßen-
verkehrstechnik.
Bundesminister f¨ur Verkehr, Abteilung Strassenbau,
1978, vol. 263.
[16] P. Gipps, “A model for the structure of lane-changing decisions,”
Transportation Research Part B, vol. 20, pp. 403–414, 1986.
[17] F. Mazur, D. Weber, R. Chrobok, S. F. Hafstein, A. Pottmeier, and
M. Schreckenberg, “Basics of the online trafﬁc information system
autobahn.nrw,” Physics of Transport and Trafﬁc, Universit¨at Duisburg-
Essen, Tech. Rep., 2005, hannover Messe 2005.
[18] T. Toledo, H. N. Koutsopoulos, and M. Ben-Akiva, “Integrated driving
behavior
modeling,”
Transportation
Research
Part
C:
Emerging
Technologies,
vol.
15,
no.
2,
pp.
96
–
112,
2007.
[On-
line]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6VGJ-
4NGBB0J-1/2/b0ba6b4bc502c5d1de2bb3d392dee6c1
[19] S. Detering and E. Schnieder, “Requirements for precise simulation
models for trafﬁc ﬂow optimizing adas,” in 12th IFAC Symposium on
Control in Transportation Systems (CTS’09), Redondo Beach, USA,
2009, pp. 467–471.
[20] R. Dowling, A. Skarbardonis, and V. Alexiadis, “Trafﬁc analysis toolbox
volume III: Guidelines for applying trafﬁc microsimulation software,”
The Federal Highway Administration, Tech. Rep., 2004.
[21] L. Chu, H. Liu, J.-S. Oh, and W. Recker, “A calibration procedure
for microscopic trafﬁc simulation,” Proceedings of IEEE Intelligent
Transportation Systems, vol. 2, pp. 1574–1579, 2003.
[22] V. Punzo and F. Simonelli, “Analysis and comparison of microscopic
trafﬁc ﬂow models with real trafﬁc microscopic data,” Transportation
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, vol.
1934, pp. 53–63, 2005.
[23] M. Brackstone and M. McDonald, “Validity of microscopic modelling
of motorway trafﬁc,” Proceedings of the Intelligent Vehicles ’94 Sym-
posium, pp. 576–581, Oct. 1994.
[24] S. Witte, “Simulationsuntersuchnungen zum Einﬂuß von Fahrverhal-
ten und technischen Abstandsregelsystemen auf den Kolonnenverkehr,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Universit¨at Fridericiana zu Karlsruhe (TH), 1996.
[25] E. Brockfeld, R. Kelpin, and P. Wagner, “Performance of car following
behaviour in microscopic trafﬁc ﬂow models,” in 2nd International
Symposium ”‘Networks for Mobility”’, W. M¨ohlenbrink, F. Englmann,
M. Friedrich, U. Martin, and U. Hangleiter, Eds.
Universit¨at Stuttgart,
2004, pp. 43 – 43. [Online]. Available: http://elib.dlr.de/21349
[26] J. Treiterer, “Some aspects of the stability of trafﬁc ﬂow,” in Beitr¨age zur
Theorie des Verkehrsﬂusses : Referate anl¨aßlich des IV. Internationalen
Symposiums ¨uber die Theorie des Verkehrsﬂusses in Karlsruhe im Juni
1968, W. Leutzbach and P. Baron, Eds., no. 86. Bundesmin. f. Verkehr,
Abt. Straßenbau, 1969, pp. 8–13.
[27] S. Hoogendoorn, S. Ossen, and M. Schreuder, “Empirics of multiantic-
ipative car-following behavior,” Transportation Research Record, vol.
1965, pp. 112–120, 2006.
[28] “NGSIM - Home of the Next Generation SIMimulation community,”
2009. [Online]. Available: http://ngsim.fhwa.dot.gov/
[29] V. Punzo, M. T. Borzacchiello, and B. Ciuffo, “Estimation of vehicle
trajectories from observed discrete positions and next-generation simu-
lation program (NGSIM) data,” in TRB 2009 Annual Meeting, 2009.
56
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

