Continuous Monitoring of Gender Equality  
The development of a counter-account system for the hospitality industry 
 
Anais Heeren 
Hotel Management  
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Maastricht, the Netherlands 
lectoraat.okb@zuyd.nl 
Martijn Zoet, Eric Mantelaers 
Finance and Control & Accountancy 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Maastricht, the Netherlands 
Martijn.zoet@zuyd.nl 
  
 
Abstract - Sustainability reporting has become common 
practice in organizations. A factor that is associated with the rise 
of sustainability reporting is greenwashing. To counter 
greenwashing practices, counter-accounting, referring to the 
use of information produced by actors outside a given 
organization or industry, aims to help verify statements made 
by organizations. Although counter-accounting already exists in 
the toolbox of the auditor, it is mainly applied in an ad-hoc 
manner and rarely continuous. In this study, a continuous 
monitoring system for counter-accounts is proposed to measure 
gender inequality. The usefulness of the system is demonstrated 
by analyzing 22075 job appointment announcements in the 
hospitality sector and 55 statements regarding organizations’ 
efforts and goals in the field of workforce equality. The 
presented results shed light on occupational gender segregation 
and provide a basis from which more continuous counter-
accounting systems can be developed. In this paper, we re-
address and - present our earlier work, yet we extend the 
previous study with additional research by increasing the 
appointment announcement dataset from 1000 instances to 
22075 and by adding an additional form of usefulness validation 
for the developed system. In addition, we provide a more 
detailed description of the related literature, findings, and 
results.  
 
Keywords - continuous monitoring; hospitality sector; 
sustainability 
reporting; 
counter-accounting; 
continuous 
auditing;  job titles; occupational gender segregation 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
Over the last few decades, social and environmental 
challenges have led to a push in organizations’ sustainability-
related activities. With regard to this topic, we extend our 
previous work presented in [1]. The consensus regarding 
organizations’ shared responsibility to act in accordance with 
sustainable purposes for all stakeholders resulted in increased 
regulations and policies [2] and consequently, also growth in 
organizations’ sustainability reporting. For instance, in 2020, 
92% of the S&P 500 companies published sustainability 
reports or disclosures as opposed to only 20% in 2011 [3]. 
Such reports are an important part of the conversation 
between organizations and their stakeholders.  
Simultaneously, parallel to the increased sustainability 
communication, 
skepticism 
has 
grown 
toward 
the 
authenticity of such reporting [4]. A large body of research 
addresses how some organizations use such sustainability 
disclosures to “greenwash” in order to develop a more 
sustainable image and “window dress” corporate behavior 
[5][6]. Hence, greater emphasis has been placed on ensuring 
the reliability of corporate sustainability reporting. The 
growing awareness of the (lack of) reliability of such reports 
has, for instance, translated into the implementation of a 
standardized reporting framework with principles to define 
the content and the quality of these reports, as proposed by 
the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) [7]. 
Despite this development, there still remains tension 
between corporate sustainability discourse and practice [5]. 
To address the critique regarding the credibility and 
reliability of sustainability reporting and to restore 
confidence in such disclosures, auditors and assurance 
providers are introduced to verify the statements made by the 
reporting organizations [7].  However, given the questioned 
honesty of corporate disclosures, it becomes increasingly 
more worthwhile to explore other accounts of organizational 
activities such as “counter-accounts”, that are, contrary to 
voluntary published corporate reports, outside the control of 
the organization that is the subject of the account [8]. 
Counter-accounting through media such as the internet and 
social media contributes to verifying the organization’s 
legitimacy as it provides an alternative representation of an 
organization with the aim to rectify otherwise harmful or 
undesired practices [6][8]. As previous research suggests, the 
use of counter-accounts should be further explored [6]. 
Specifically, to systematically include such counter-accounts 
when challenging organizations’ operations, auditors are in 
need of an appropriate toolbox existing of a continuous 
monitoring system [9].  
Whereas a continuous monitoring system would be useful 
to review organizations’ disclosures with regard to each and 
every one of the United Nations’ 17 Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), this paper proposes a 
continuous monitoring system that addresses the fifth goal, 
gender equality. Specifically, an application of the system is 
provided for the hospitality industry, providing insights into 
occupational gender segregation by mapping the differences 
in the job titles fulfilled by male and female executives.  The 
60
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

research question addressed in this study is the following: 
“How can a counter-account monitoring system for gender 
equality in the hospitality industry be designed?”.  
The remaining part of the paper is structured as follows. 
Section II provides a literature review on counter-accounts, 
occupational gender segregation, and available monitoring 
systems. In Section III, a description of the research method 
is presented. Section IV gives insight into the data collection 
and Section V describes the data analysis procedure. Section 
VI shows the results from the job title labels, the system 
architecture, the usefulness evaluation, and the gender quality 
results across job titles. Lastly, Section VII concludes the 
paper.  
II. LITERATURE  
In 2015, all United Nations Member States endorsed the 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, a roadmap for 
peace and prosperity for both people and the planet, with 17 
SDGs at its core [10]. After having defined these integrated, 
universal goals for sustainable development, the next step 
toward achieving them was to set specific targets for each 
goal, which were then in turn further broken down into 
measurable indicators. However, the incompleteness of the 
indicators, even after more than three years into the program, 
make tracking the progress toward meeting the SDGs 
challenging [11]. 
To assess whether the actions taken by countries and 
organizations to reach the SDGs are effective and in 
correspondence with their own reporting, scholars have 
argued 
the 
need 
to 
explore 
new 
Information, 
Communication, and Technology (ICT) in combination with 
multiple data sources to provide a common, continuous, and 
transparent representation of their efforts [11]. 
A. 
Counter-accounts 
As sustainability becomes an indispensable topic on 
corporate 
agendas, 
growing 
skepticism 
toward 
the 
authenticity of organizations’ sustainability reporting arises. 
This calls for effective monitoring and auditing in this 
environment in order to ensure the trust and credibility of the 
information contained in such reports.  
With the acceleration of available, real-time information 
flows, the “archival audit”, where the auditor evaluates 
organizations’ yearly reports, is complemented if not 
replaced by a more real-time evaluation called “continuous 
auditing” [12]. Together with continuous monitoring, which 
is described as an ongoing management process to monitor 
internal controls, continuous auditing aims to provide the 
organization with a reasonable level of objective assurance 
[13].  
Aside from introducing a continuous monitoring 
mechanism to provide assurance on these reports and the 
organizations behind them, scholars have argued the need to 
explore other accounts, or “counter-accounts”, that are 
outside the control of the respective organization [8]. 
Counter-accounts are defined as accountings that challenge 
the representation established by the subject organization and 
contribute to critically assessing the organization’s corporate 
accountability or lack thereof [6].  
B. 
Occupational gender segregation 
Over the past decades, one of the most pressing social 
issues is inequality [14]. Previous research linked inequality 
to the emergence of free-market capitalism in which, at a 
macro-level, organizations and those working for them 
remain rather invisible. Viewing organizations as rational 
entities with neutral structures and practices is particularly 
problematic when addressing inequality as they play a vital 
role in people’s daily lives, such as employment and other 
opportunities that in turn impact their social and economic 
status [15][16]. Therefore, equality plays a central role in 
many of the SDGs.  
Inequality is shown in a broad range of forms, however, 
this paper focuses on gender equality, the fifth United 
Nations SDG. A recent study commissioned by the European 
Parliament’s Policy Department for Citizens’ Rights and 
Constitutional Affairs [17], shows not only a difference in the 
share of employment between working-age men (79%) and 
working-age women (67%) but also that those women who 
are employed, are on average paid 14.1% less per hour 
compared to their male counterparts.  
The gender gap, with its key dimension being the gender 
pay gap, has a considerable impact on individuals’ 
socioeconomic status since gender equality contributes to 
both economic growth and sustainable development [17]. 
Evidently, aside from being listed as one of the United 
Nations SDGs, gender equality is also addressed by the 
European Commission in the 2020-2025 Gender Equality 
Strategy, which strives for equal access to the economy 
across genders. In addition, the European Parliament in 2021 
called for a new gender pay gap action plan, addressing 
women’s accessibility to study and work in male-dominated 
sectors, more flexible work arrangements, and improved 
wages in female-dominated sectors.  
According to Blackburn and Jarman [18], the topic of 
occupational gender segregation has been at the heart of the 
gender inequality debate due to its significant role in the 
gender pay gap and career constraints. Occupational gender 
segregation refers to a phenomenon in which occupations are 
stereotyped according to gender. For example, as shown in a 
study by He et al. [19], women are more represented in 
occupations that are characterized by high warmth and low 
competence. For example, statistics show that women in the 
European Union, in general, tend to be overrepresented in 
service industries, and professional fields like the arts and 
humanities, whereas they tend to be excluded from fields like 
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics [17]. 
These occupational stereotypes have a widespread effect on 
how workers are distributed across different jobs. For 
example, with respect to people’s career choices, they may 
opt for an occupation whose stereotyped attributes are 
corresponding 
with 
their 
self-perceptions. 
Similarly, 
61
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

regarding prejudice and discrimination, preconceived notions 
about individuals, that are not based on reason or reality, may 
lead to unjust and differential treatment of certain social 
groups [19]. As a result, the gendered division of the labor 
market largely explains the gender pay gap due to women’s 
overrepresentation in lower-paid sectors and women’s 
difficulty accessing other, higher-paid sectors [17].  
The presence of occupational gender segregation and its 
role in gender inequality has been widely addressed 
[18][19][20], yet there remains little work on the monitoring 
and auditing process of occupational gender segregation. 
Therefore, this paper proposes a continuous monitoring 
system for counter-accounts that allows auditors to map both 
the current state of gender division across different jobs and 
their evolution over time.  
C. 
Continuous monitoring systems 
Monitoring 
statements 
and 
claims 
organizations 
communicate on the one hand, and monitoring counter-
accounts related to the statements on the other hand can 
provide valuable insights and prevent greenwashing and/or 
brownwashing [8]. Multiple studies have focused on 
analyzing such statements and their counter-accounts. For 
example, Perkiss et al. [6] analyze counter-accounts and 
responses by various groups to challenge Nestlé on its 
sustainability actions. Although data analysis is conducted 
during these studies, commonly the research is performed 
once, and is singular problem-oriented, meaning that a 
specific study focuses on one organization and/or one 
problem, and executes the analyses once for the purpose of 
the study [21]. At the end of the studies, there is no 
information system in place that continuously monitors 
organizations' claims and related external data to compare 
both. Some examples of previous studies in which continuous 
monitoring systems have been developed concern the 
analysis of stock prices [22] and political analyses [23]. Also, 
research has been conducted that focus on extracting the right 
information from texts to be able to conduct the analyses [22]. 
Information systems that “enable independent parties to 
provide assurance on a subject matter, using a series of 
reports, issued simultaneously with or a short period of time 
after, the occurrence of events underlying the subject matter” 
are called Continuous Monitoring Systems. In general, such 
systems are used automatically to monitor internal controls 
within business processes [22].  
However, two changes in the current business 
environment force organizations to start continuous 
monitoring of external sources. The first change is that 
organizations are exposed to increased requirements in terms 
of regulations and business objectives that require managing 
and monitoring the entire value chain [24]. Second, 
organizations more and more have to deal with actors that 
provide counter-accounts through the monitoring of external 
sources that provide statements about the organization. The 
focus of this study is automated continuous monitoring of 
gender equality across job titles and the challenges that occur. 
To overcome these challenges a system architecture is 
proposed and its application is presented. Similar to previous 
research, we consider Named Entity Recognition (NER) as 
the basis of our counter-accounting system [22][25]. 
III. METHODOLOGY 
The research problem addressed in this study concerns the 
establishment of an automated, continuous monitoring 
system for gender equality in job titles. The need for such a 
system is a consequence of the growing need for 
organizations to comply with the various laws and standards 
implemented in the field of sustainability reporting. To be 
able to continuously monitor gender equality in an automated 
manner, an information technology artifact must be built. A 
research methodology that focuses on the development and 
performance of artifacts, specifically with the intention to 
improve them, is design science research [26][27]. Therefore, 
a design science approach is employed to perform this study. 
Although different authors propose different approaches to 
executing design science research, consensus exists on the 
following method to execute such a study: awareness of the 
problem, 
suggestion, 
development, 
evaluation, 
and 
conclusion. As stated by Kuechler et al. [28]: “the research 
process frequently iterates between development and 
evaluation phases rather than flowing in waterfall fashion 
from one phase into the next.” Design research is therefore a 
continuous cycle of building and evaluation, making it 
practically impossible to measure all elements of the designed 
artifact and/or related theories in one study [27]. Regarding 
the counter-accounting system, multiple elements need to be 
built and evaluated. Examples of these components are the job 
classification component, the job analysis component, and the 
overall system (architecture). The main task of the counter-
accounting system is to show how job titles are distributed 
across gender. If the system is unable to perform this task it is 
useless. Therefore, in this study, we perform the first iteration 
of the building and evaluation cycle. Specifically, we focus on 
the mutual exclusivity and completeness of the job titles (goal 
1), the development of a system that can map and monitor how 
those job titles are distributed across gender (goal 2), and the 
use and usefulness of the system in relation to the 
organizations’ current report content (goal 3). 
The first goal, ‘create a mutually exclusive and complete 
list of job titles’, requires the development of a framework in 
which job titles are listed and classified. To achieve this goal, 
a research approach is needed in which job titles are identified, 
compared, and standardized. Therefore, an inductive approach 
is chosen. Through grounded theory-based data collection and 
analysis [29][30], we search for job titles and their relationship 
to each other. This study design will strengthen the validity of 
the results as it enables the possibility to compare and combine 
existing knowledge with observations from practice [29]. The 
inductive approach is suitable for this research objective given 
that an industry-wide standard for job titles is not available or  
adhered to by hospitality organizations. Therefore, based on 
the job titles used in the appointment announcements posted 
62
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

on the internet, a standardized list of job titles can be induced. 
Furthermore, grounded theory-based data collection is 
selected because, to the knowledge of the authors, most 
research around job titles focuses on the perspective of job 
titles mentioned in job advertisements and human resources 
systems rather than the perspective of job appointment 
announcements. In total 81 iterations of open coding and axial 
coding with multiple cycles of ordinal comparison have been 
conducted. The entire research process is visualized in Figure 
1, with the above-described procedure for the first goal 
depicted in the upper section; ‘Goal 1’. 
To reach the second goal, ‘the development of a system 
that can map and monitor how those job titles are distributed 
across gender’, a research technique is needed that can 
compare job titles that are more characteristic to males or 
females than others in a collection of job appointments. A 
technique that is used to [31] “extract words and phrases that 
are more characteristic of a category than others in a text 
corpus” is Scattertext [32][33][34][35][36]. Based on 
Scattertext we created an experimental setup (pilot) of the 
system (architecture) to see if it is possible to create a report 
that can counter account organizations’ claims based on open 
source.  
Although the start of design science research is “the 
identification of a challenging problem or opportunity in an 
interesting application environment,” [28] which in this case 
is the need for organizations to comply with the various laws 
and standards implemented in the field of sustainability 
reporting, this study aims to complete a third research goal, 
namely, ‘to measure the usefulness of the artifact (Scattertext 
architecture) in providing answers to these new laws and 
standards.’ Specifically, to evaluate the use and usefulness of 
the developed Scattertext system, its results should be 
compared against the organizations’ current reporting content, 
which it aims to counteract. To accomplish this goal, data 
needs 
to 
be 
extracted 
from 
the 
hotel 
chains’ 
annual/integrated/sustainability 
reports. 
Therefore, 
an 
inductive approach is chosen. Through grounded theory-
based data collection and analysis [29], we search for 
statements 
regarding 
workforce 
equality 
and 
their 
relationship to each other. This data analysis process 
consisted of two coding cycles. Specifically, the report 
analysis involved 1 iteration following a cycle of (1) open 
coding and (2) axial coding. During the open coding cycle, 55 
statements regarding organizations’ efforts and goals in the 
field of workforce equality have been identified and coded as 
such. The axial coding cycle focused on identifying 
relationships among the statements and forming unique 
categories within the topic of workforce equality that are 
addressed by organizations in their reports. As can be seen in 
Figure 1, following the first research goal, the results of the 
coding cycles (‘GOAL 3’) are compared to the results 
produced by the current version of the system (‘GOAL 2’) to 
evaluate the usefulness of the system in relation to the current 
reporting content.  
 
IV. DATA COLLECTION 
Grounded theory states that the first selection of 
respondents and documentation is based on the phenomenon 
studied by a group of individuals, organizations, information 
technology, or community that best represents this 
phenomenon [29]. With the first goal of this study being the 
creation of mutually exclusive, complete, and useful labels for 
job titles, the currently used job titles must be collected. In our 
case, we collected job titles from two sources, with the main 
source being Hospitality.net and the second source being 
LinkedIn. From Hospitality.net we collected appointment 
announcements from which the job titles could be derived. 
The collected data has been posted between the 19th of April 
2011 and the 25th of August 2022. The data collection started 
with a batch collection of 1652 announcements forming the 
base of the job title dataset. Subsequently, daily new 
appointment announcements were collected, leading to a total 
of 22075 announcements.  
Figure 1. Full Research Process Visualization  
 
63
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Design research states that after the artifact is built, it 
needs to be measured on predefined elements. In this research, 
the focus is on usefulness. Since usefulness is considered a 
prerequisite for the intent to adopt a specific system [37]. 
Usefulness in this study is defined as the degree to which the 
counter-accounts monitoring system can measure and either 
confirm or counter-act the statements made by the hotels. 
Therefore, in this research, documents are needed in which 
hotel chains make formal statements about gender equality in 
their hotels. Organizations provide such information in their 
annual reports, integrated reports, and/or sustainability 
reports. We have collected a total of 77 reports. The unit of 
analysis in these documents is every statement made about 
equality in the workforce.   
V. DATA ANALYSIS 
Data analysis for the first goal: ‘create mutually exclusive, 
complete, and useful categories’, was conducted in 81 
iterations following two cycles of coding, namely (1) open 
coding and (2) axial coding with multiple cycles of ordinal 
comparison. The coding procedure has been completed by a 
group of five researchers, each having a hospitality education 
background. During the first cycle, the open coding, job titles 
were identified and extracted from the collected appointment 
announcements and coded accordingly. This resulted in a total 
of 6201 different job titles. Due to the extent of the list, the 
complete list of job titles has not been added to the paper, 
however, a snapshot can be found in Table I.  
TABLE I. SNAPSHOT JOB TITLE LIST FROM HOSPITALITY.NET 
ANNOUNCEMENTS  
Job Title  
CEO 
CFO 
General manager 
Hotel manager 
Director 
Director of sales 
Chef de Cuisine 
Senior Vice President 
Spa Director 
 
 
After the open coding was finished, axial coding has been 
applied. The collection of job titles revealed a wide variety 
and inconsistency among them. To combat this disparity and 
allow for comparison, the second cycle of coding, axial 
coding, is performed to identify more precise categories and 
relationships within the data. During axial coding, different 
job titles describing the same ‘job’ have been coded to 
represent this. For example, the role of ‘Chief executive 
officer’ is described in appointment announcements as ‘CEO’, 
‘New company CEO’, ‘Chief executive officer’, and multiple 
other variations as can be seen in the example in Table II. The 
standardized labels were determined using both the 
hermeneutic skills of the researchers involved and the job 
description information that described the job content. 
Whereas the determination of standardized labels was 
straightforward for many job titles, such as the ‘Chief 
Executive Officer’ presented in the example (Table II), also 
less obvious axial codings have been encountered. For 
example, the difference between an area manager, multi-
property manager, group manager, and regional manager. In 
some cases, an area manager had the area Australia whereas 
others had the area Washington DC. These differences had to 
be discussed and registered to allow for consistent, mutually 
exclusive labeling. In these cases, the coding families of 
grounded theory have been applied to standardize the job 
titles, specifically, the dimension family type. Moreover, 
certain job titles were decided to be removed from the dataset. 
The reason for omitting certain titles was due to them being 
non-management level jobs such as ‘Associate’, ‘Secretary’, 
and ‘Mixologist’, award appointments, or appointments of 
jobs that are unique to certain hotels like the ‘Duck Master’ at 
the Peabody in Memphis [38].  
TABLE II. EXAMPLE JOB TITLE STANDARDIZATION 
Standardized Job Title 
Job Title  
Chief Executive Officer 
CEO 
 
Interim CEO 
 
Chief Executive 
 
Acting CEO 
 
CO-CEO 
 
Chief exe. Officer 
New Company CEO 
 
 
To create mutually exclusive, complete, and useful labels 
a procedure had to be adopted among the coders. Specifically, 
after the first round of open and axial coding, coded parts were 
discussed among the coders to understand the process and 
agree on how certain elements had to be coded. Each of the 
five coders coded all elements and for those elements that 
were not consistently coded, they discussed their reasoning 
until they agreed upon a certain label. The unique coding as 
well as the business rules leading to this coding have been 
codified in patterns for a rule-based matcher engine. An 
example of such a pattern included in the matcher engine is 
‘director of people and culture’ leading to the label ‘Director 
of Human Resources’: {"label": "Director of Human 
Resources", "pattern": [{"LOWER": "director"}, {"LOWER": 
"of"}, 
{"LOWER": 
"people"},{"LOWER": 
"and"},{"LOWER": "culture"}]}. After this first round, 80 
additional rounds of coding have been conducted in which the 
rule-based matcher engine was used as an additional coder. 
The process of this worked as follows. First, the rule-based 
matcher engine coded the new job title, which could lead to 
two results. The first result would be the matcher engine 
assigning a standardized job title label, whereas the second 
result would be labeling the element with a ‘999’ 
64
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

classification. In the first case, the coders would compare the 
coding of the rule-based matcher engine to what they would 
have coded the job titles as. In the second case, the rule-based 
matcher engine can not propose a label for that certain job 
title, and the coders must label it themselves. After the coders 
have agreed upon the label, a new rule is added to the pattern 
file and fed to the matcher engine. After 81 rounds of coding, 
the matcher engine no longer returned any ‘999’ 
classifications, meaning the current job titles in the dataset 
could be successfully labeled to one of the standardized job 
titles.  
With regards to the second research goal: ‘the 
development of a system that can map and monitor how those 
job titles are distributed across gender’, Figure 3 and Figure 
4 show a visualization (ScatterText) of the job title dataset. A 
Scattertext system shows what words and phrases are more 
characteristic of a category than others. The X-axis and Y-
axis indicate the term frequency in male and female job 
appointments, respectively. For instance, the upper-left area 
shows the job titles frequently appointed to women, while the 
lower-right area shows the frequently appointed job titles to 
men. Job titles that are presented in the middle are evenly 
distributed amongst male and female executives. To 
determine the gender of the person to whom the job title was 
appointed, the gender indication words in the appointment 
announcement are considered (e.g., he/she/him/her).  
Finally, to evaluate the use and usefulness of the 
developed system, data needs to be extracted from the hotel 
chains’ annual/integrated/sustainability reports. This data 
analysis process consisted of two coding cycles. Specifically, 
the report analysis involved 1 iteration following a cycle of (1) 
open coding and (2) axial coding. During the open coding 
cycle, 55 statements regarding organizations’ efforts and 
goals in the field of workforce equality have been identified 
and coded as such. For example, a statement saying “We aim 
to increase representation of people of color in executive 
positions from 20.5% to 25% by 2025” has been recoded to 
‘Racial Equality’, whereas a statement like “The percentage 
of female leaders shall be the same as the percentage of 
female employees” has been coded to ‘Man/Woman Parity’. 
A snapshot of the axial coding of the statements can be found 
in Table III.  
VI. RESULTS 
The result of the research is discussed in four sections. 
First, the results of the patterns and labels are discussed. Next, 
the current system architecture is explained. Following that, 
the system’s usefulness to counteract on the organizations’ 
formal statements is discussed. Lastly, the overall results on 
the male/female parity across job titles are reviewed. 
A. 
Pattern and Label Results 
As described in the Data Analysis Section, in order to 
create standardized, mutually exclusive job title labels, the 
business rules defining labels had to be codified in patterns. 
These patterns include a word or a combination of words that 
are assigned a predefined label. The 81 rounds of coding 
resulted in a total of 1266 patterns which were fed to the 
Label 
Statement 
 
Man/Woman Parity 
 
 
Racial Equality  
 
 
 
Man/Woman Parity 
 
 
Racial Equality 
 
 
Man/Woman Parity  
 
 
L.G.B.T.Q.I.A.+  
 
Equal Compensation 
 
Disability Equality  
 
 
Man/Woman Parity 
 
 
 
“We aim to increase representation of people of color in executive positions from 20.5% to 25% 
by 2025.” 
 
“Our talent management team is working with leadership to identify ways to help high-
performing Black employees advance within their careers and to broaden our sources of Black 
recruitment.” 
 
“We are very close to reaching the goal of gender equality in top management roles: 46% 
female executives.” 
 
“We promote pluralism of origins and seeks diversity through recruitment and career 
management.”  
 
“At the executive levels, we have achieved 100% gender equity and below our executive levels 
we have achieved 95% compared to the external marketplace of 80%.” 
 
“We support  LGBT-owned businesses and spent $4+ million with these businesses in 2020.” 
 
“Ratio of average base salary for women to average base salary for men: 87,5%.” 
 
“We now employ 47 differently abled persons across business, and continues to guide industry 
initiatives to create inclusive workplaces.” 
 
“Currently, more management roles are held by men (56 percent) than women (44 percent), and 
more than two-thirds (70 percent) of top management positions are occupied by men.” 
TABLE III. AXIAL CODING EXAMPLE OF WORKFORCE EQUALITY STATEMENTS 
65
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

matcher engine. These patterns included a total of 323 unique 
job titles. An example of the patterns can be found in Table 
IV.  
Whereas the current pattern list covers the job titles 
presently occurring in the data, it should be considered that 
new titles, such as ‘vice president sustainability’ or ‘vice 
president happiness’, and new title variations, like the 
example in Table II, will appear as the data collection 
continues over time. A process is in place to facilitate such 
pattern list adjustments. Specifically, when a new title arises, 
the matching engine will simply return a ‘999’ classification, 
after which the coders can decide on a label for the job title 
and add it to the pattern list.  
TABLE IV. PATTERN LIST EXAMPLE 
Label 
Pattern 
Area Director of Sales and Marketing 
area director of 
marketing 
Area Director of Communications 
apac media 
relations 
Chairman of the Board of Directors 
chairperson 
General Manager 
hotel manager 
Senior Meeting and Events Manager 
senior weddings 
department man.  
 
B. 
System Architecture 
Part of the design science research process is the 
development of a system architecture in which the artifact’s 
structure is presented [39]. Having described the analysis of 
different system elements, the architecture to ground the 
counter-accounting system for gender equality as proposed in 
this study is visualized in Figure 2. The architecture includes 
three different sections (Collection, Cleaning, and Analysis & 
Visualization), which are each supported by a different tool 
(Selenium, Spacy, and ScatterText). The application of each 
section is discussed.  
1) Collection of counter-account data: First, counter-
account data, that can counter the statements made by the 
organization concerning gender equality, need to be 
identified and collected. For this application, external 
sources, that publish information on individual management-
level appointments, should be consulted. The hotel chains 
themselves mainly report individual appointments on a board 
level, e.g., CEO, CFO, and COO as these are mandatory for 
investor relationships. In their annual reports, the 
organizations do not report on individual management 
appointments, therefore, other sources are needed that may 
serve as counter-account data. Within the hospitality 
industry, multiple sources, of different types, report on 
individual management appointments. The first type of 
sources are websites that collect and publish management 
appointments such as Hospitality.net [40] and Lodging [41]. 
Related to this first type are professional network platforms 
like LinkedIn on which people indicate their current jobs. The 
third type of website provides global travel industry news and 
also reports on job appointments such as Hotel Management 
[42] and Travel News Asia [42][43]. The last type of website 
is tourism and newspaper websites, for example, Romania 
Journal [44] and Aruba Today [45]. The appointments per 
website can be collected by hand or using a variety of tools.  
For this specific research, Selenium, a tool for automated web 
scraping is employed to extract useful information from the 
identified sources, being the appointment announcements on 
employees’ new positions. Important to notice when applying 
these tools is to respect the privacy policies and the robot.txt 
files.  
2) Cleaning of counter-account data: The second section 
of the system includes the cleaning of the collected counter-
account data, existing of multiple steps. First, duplicate 
appointment announcements need to be removed. Those 
occur in the dataset when an appointment announcement is 
published on multiple sources. For example, one specific 
appointment [46] was announced at Hospitality.Net, 
TravelNewsAsia, AsianTravelTips, and Business Today. 
Consequently, after merging the collected data, those 
duplicates need to be removed. Aside from removing 
duplicates, other data-cleaning measures may be taken. For 
this system, it was decided to omit non-management 
appointments, award appointments, and appointments of 
Figure 2. System Architecture: Continuous Monitoring System for 
Counter-Accounts 
 
 
 
 
66
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

hotel-specific 
positions. 
Remaining 
with 
unique, 
management-level appointment announcements, the next 
cleaning step involves the coding procedure to bring the large 
number of variations in the job titles back to a manageable, 
standardized set of job titles. This step is important to allow 
for the gender comparison analysis across job titles. As 
described in detail in the Data Analysis Section, the coding 
procedure involved various rounds of coding resulting in the 
development of a pattern list. This pattern list is fed to a rule-
based matcher engine. To automate this process, a tool called 
Spacy is used [25]. When the matcher engine returns an 
unlabeled job title, the pattern list can be adjusted by either 
adding a new label in the case of a new job title or labeling 
the title with an existing label in the case of a new title 
variation. This procedure accommodates the completeness of 
the job title labels over time.  The last step is to remove all 
privacy-related information. 
3) Analysis and Visualization: After having the data 
collected and cleaned, the following element of the system 
involves the comparative analysis of job titles fulfilled by 
males and females. To visually present the counter-account 
data, the system makes use of ScatterText [32]. The 
interactive scatter plot allows for comparison between job 
titles fulfilled by male and female executives. The 
longitudinal nature of the dataset allows for the evaluation of 
changes over the past 10 years and the potential identification 
of trends. The covered period per plot can thus be manually 
determined, however, for this research the gender 
comparison was performed per year. The ScatterText 
visualizations for 2011 (Figure 3) and 2022 (Figure 4) are 
presented below to review the most apparent changes over 
the past 10 years.  
C. 
System Usefulness  
Having developed the artifact and presented its system 
architecture, the usefulness of the system should be 
evaluated. The outcome of the counter-account analysis can 
be of value to auditors and assurance providers in their 
assessment of the reporting organizations’ credibility and 
reliability. For this application, this refers to the verification 
of statements made about gender equality efforts in the 
hospitality industry. As discussed in previous literature, 
equality has a broad range of dimensions, of which many 
relate to one another. To assess the extent to which the 
counter-account data could counter-act the reported equality 
statements, the statements are first codified according to their 
topic. Specifically, for this study, the hotel chains’ statements 
on workforce equality were collected and analyzed following 
the two folded coding cycles as lined out in the Data Analysis 
Section. The results show that, within the hotel industry, the 
currently reported information on workforce equality could 
be categorized using six different labels as specified in Table 
V.  
Considering the different categories of statements, it can 
be established that the developed counter-accounting system 
mainly has counter-acting power regarding the ‘Man/Woman 
Parity’ statements. For example, organizations frequently 
report figures on man/woman representation across the 
workforce of which some also specify the man/woman 
representation on management levels. The developed 
counter-accounting system could not only provide insights 
into the man/woman representation but also shed light on 
what kind of positions are fulfilled by men and women. For 
example, when an organization proudly reports on achieving 
gender parity in management positions, the counter-
accounting system may show how there are indeed an equal 
number of appointments to man and woman executives, but, 
there may remain occupational gender segregation. 
Specifically, the counter-account system may identify cases 
where organizations only reach their gender parity goals by 
promoting women in stereotyped positions, like ‘Spa 
Manager’, ‘Sales and Marketing Manager’, and ‘Human 
Resources Manager’. In sum, the systems’ usefulness 
currently focuses on the ‘Man/Woman Parity’ statements, 
painting a detailed picture of the real-life gender parity across 
job titles, however, its usefulness could potentially be 
expanded to different categories by collecting and analyzing 
different counter-account data.  
TABLE V. CLASS LABELS FOR WORKFORCE EQUALITY STATEMENTS IN THE 
HOTEL INDUSTRY (2022). 
Label 
 
Man/Woman Parity 
Racial Equality 
Disability Equality  
L.G.B.T.Q.I.A.+ Equality 
Equal Compensation  
Other 
 
D. 
System Results for Man/Woman Parity  
As discussed, the system results could be viewed per 
organization and per year, however, for this study, the 
counter-accounting system is applied to the full dataset of 
appointment announcements in the hospitality industry. The 
results show an industry overview per year on how job titles 
are fulfilled by men or women. In this section, the results 
shown in Figure 3 (2011) and Figure 4 (2022) will be 
reviewed in more detail.  
As can be observed in Figure 3 and Figure 4, with several 
job titles positioned more towards either the y-axis (female 
appointments) or the x-axis (male appointments), some of the 
stereotypes in occupational gender segregation could be 
identified. For example, in line with arguments in from He et 
al. [19] regarding women’s presence in occupations 
characterized by high warmth and low competence and 
evidence showing women tend to be excluded from fields like 
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics [17], 
results in Figure 3 show job titles like ‘Sales and Marketing 
Manager’ and ‘Spa Director’ to be more frequently fulfilled 
67
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 3. ScatterText Visualization of Gender Segregation on Job Title Level for Hospitality Industry  (2011) 
Figure 4. ScatterText Visualization of Gender Segregation on Job Title Level for Hospitality Industry  (2022) 
68
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

by females. On the other hand, job titles like ‘Chief Operating 
Officer’, ‘Chief Executive Officer’, ‘Director of Food and 
Beverage’, ‘President’, and ‘Chairman of the Board of 
Directors’ are substantially more often fulfilled by males. 
These results correspond with some of the preconceived 
stereotypes of gender division in the hospitality workforce, 
however, for some job titles, an equal gender division was 
already established ten years ago. For example, as shown in 
Figure 3, the position of ‘General Manager’ is approximately 
equally fulfilled by male and female executives.  
When reviewing the current gender division in the 
hospitality workforce in Figure 4, some changes can be 
observed when comparing the division of titles with those in 
Figure 3. Some of the stereotypes can still be observed, of 
which some are even more pronounced. For example, aside 
from titles like ‘Sales and Marketing Manager’ and ‘Spa 
Director’, titles such as ‘Director of Human Resources’ 
became more frequently appointed to female executives. The 
position of ‘Executive Chef’ has been significantly more 
frequently fulfilled by Male Executives.  
Despite the continued stereotyped gender division of 
some positions, a general trend could be observed, mostly for 
high-level positions, showing how certain job titles are 
moving towards a more linear relationship between male and 
female appointments. Some examples are positions such as 
‘President’, ‘Vice President’, and ‘Chief Operating Officer’, 
which are more equally balanced in gender in Figure 4 as 
opposed to 10 years ago. Ideally, continued monitoring 
would show a similar trend for all positions, striving for a less 
gender-segregated workforce. 
A final interesting element to consider when reviewing 
the system results in Figure 4, is the gender division of ‘new’ 
positions. For instance, relatively new positions such as ‘Vice 
President of Sustainability’ and ‘Chief Sustainability Officer’ 
do not appear to be appointed to any gender specifically. 
Mapping the gender division on a continued basis allows for 
tracking changes in occupational gender segregation within 
organizations or industries.  
VII. CONCLUSION 
With the growing awareness of social and environmental 
challenges as well as the changing regulatory environment, 
sustainability reporting has become common practice.  This 
development accelerates the need to develop appropriate 
monitoring tools with the aim to provide a reasonable level 
of objective assurance on the claims made in such reports. In 
this study, we aim to answer the following research question: 
“How can a counter-account monitoring system for gender 
equality in the hospitality industry be designed?” To answer 
the research question, a system has been designed and tested. 
The purpose of such a system is to review organizations’ 
gender diversity policies and monitor the progress of their 
action plan. Our paper offers several theoretical and practical 
contributions.  
The first result of the study consists of the standardization 
of job titles used in the hospitality industry. In this study, a 
large array of job titles have been identified. The study has 
shown that multiple titles are used to indicate the same job. 
This array of job titles can be confusing to the public, 
applicants, and to employers. It is necessary to address this 
vagueness and the overwhelming amount of job titles. The 
second result is a pilot system architecture for the counter-
accounting system on gender equality. The third result is a 
categorization of workforce equality topics reported upon in 
hotel chains’ integrated, annual, or sustainability reports. The 
topics of the statements found in the reports could be grouped 
into six different categories. This categorization could form a 
foundation for a standardized reporting outline for workforce 
equality in the hotel industry.  The fourth and final result of 
the study is a view of the industry’s gender division in 
different positions for the past 10 years.  
With regards to organizations’ gender equality reporting, 
it can be seen that within their own documentation, 
organizations (can) choose their own level of granularity on 
which to report. Most organizations subject to our analysis 
choose to report on a low level of granularity, for example, 
the male/female ratio of executives. This gives them the 
ability to steer and control communication with external 
stakeholders. Our research has shown that based on the 
analysis of counter-accounts, a higher level of granularity 
with respect to reporting can be achieved, which may in turn 
change the narrative of a specific hotel chain, positively or 
negatively. We need to challenge not only hotel chains, but 
organizations in general, to start reporting on a higher level 
of granularity and provide a complete narrative. In addition, 
hotel chains may also choose to include counter-accounts in 
their reporting to provide context to these counter-
accountants. 
The research has several limitations, both on the subject 
matter of hospitality and on the actual counter-account 
system. First, the current use of the counter-accounting system 
is limited to challenging workforce equality statements made 
about man/woman parity. Future research should be devoted 
to extending the current system so that it can also counter-act 
statements made on other workforce equality topics, such as 
Racial Equality, Disability Equality, L.G.B.T.Q.I.A.+ 
Equality, and Equal Compensation. Another direction for 
future research is to focus on collecting more and different job 
titles to improve the current system, which is an integrated 
part of the application. Lastly, future research could focus on 
additional sectors to expand the results.     
REFERENCES 
[1] A. M. Y. Heeren, M. M. Zoet, and E. Mantelaers, “Continuous 
Monitoring of Counter-Accounts in Hospitality,” Proceedings 
of the Fourteenth International Conference on Information, 
Process, and Knowledge Management (eKNOW 22) IARIA, 
Porto, Portugal, June 2022, pp. 23-28, ISSN: 2308-4375, 
ISBN: 978-1-61208-986-7.   
[2] C. van Aartsen, R. Bauer, T. Bauer, and M. Olaerts, 
“Sustainability Embedding in Dutch Listed Companies. VBA 
Journal, vol. 37, no. 149, pp. 32-38, October 2021, doi: 
10.2139/ssrn.3957250.  
[3] Governance & Accountability Institute, “Sustainability 
reporting in focus 2021,” 2021, Retrieved: April 2022 from: 
69
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

https://www.gainstitute.com/fileadmin/ga_institute/images/Fl
ashReports/2021/Russell-1000/G_A-Russell-Report-2021-
Final.pdf?vgo_ee=1GwDh4sTgtYj0oCrAM%2BSEBwUnRnl
mwiuCIJkd9A7F3A%3D.  
[4] T. P. Lyon and A. W. Montgomery, “The Means and End of 
Greenwash. Organization & Environment, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 
223-249, March 2015, doi: 10.1177/1086026615575332.  
[5] C. H. Cho, M. Laine, R. W. Roberts, and M. Rodrigue, 
“Organized 
Hypocrisy, 
Organizational 
Facades, 
and 
Sustainability Reporting,” Accounting, Organizations and 
Society, vol. 40, no. 40, pp. 78–94, January 2015, doi: 
10.1016/j.aos.2014.12.003. 
[6] S. Perkiss, C. Bernardi, J. Dumay, and J. Haslam, “A Sticky 
Chocolate Problem: Impression Management and Counter 
Accounts in the Shaping of Corporate Image,” Critical 
Perspectives on Accounting, vol. 81, pp. 102229, December 
2021, doi: 10.1016/j.cpa.2020.102229.  
[7] O. Boiral, I. Heras-Saizarbitoria, and M. C. Brotherton, 
“Assessing and Improving the Quality of Sustainability 
Reports: The Auditors’ Perspective”, Journal of Business 
Ethics, vol. 155, no. 3, pp. 703-721, March 2019, doi: 
10.1007/s10551-017-3516-4.  
[8] E. Vinnari and M. Laine, “The Moral Mechanism of Counter 
Accounts: The Case of Industrial Animal Production,” 
Accounting, Organizations, and Society, vol. 57, pp. 1-17, 
February 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.aos.2017.01.002. 
[9] J. Kuhn, J. Courtney, and B. Morris, “A Theory of Complex 
Adaptive Inquiring Organizations: Application to Continuous 
Assurance 
of 
Corporate Financial 
Information,” 
The 
Knowledge Engineering Review, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 265–296, 
May 2015, doi: 10.1017/S0269888913000428.  
[10] United Nations, “The 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable 
Development Goals: An opportunity for Latin America and the 
Caribbean,” January 2018, Retrieved: May 2022, from 
https://repositorio.cepal.org/handle/11362/40156.  
[11] R. Saner, L. Yiu, and M. Nguyen, “Monitoring the SDGs: 
Digital 
and 
Social 
Technologies 
to 
ensure 
Citizen 
Participation, Inclusiveness, and Transparency. Development 
Policy Review, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 483-500, February 2019, doi: 
10.1111/dpr.12433.  
[12] M. G. Alles, A. Kogan, and M. A. Vasarhelyi, “Feasibility and 
Economics of Continuous Assurance,” Auditing, vol. 21, no. 1, 
pp. 125-138, March 2002, doi: 10.2308/aud.2002.21.1.125. 
[13] The Institute of Internal Auditors, “Global technology audit 
guide continuous auditing: Implications for assurance, 
monitoring, and risk assessment”, 2005. 
[14] A. B. Atkinson, Inequality: What can be done?, Cambridge 
(Mass.) Harvard University Press, 2015, pp. 384. 
[15] J. M. Amis, J. Mair, and K. A. Munir, “The organizational 
reproduction of inequality,” Academy of Management Annals, 
vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 195–230, 2020. 
[16] A. B. Atkinson, T. Piketty, and E. Saez, “Top Incomes in the 
Long Run of History,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 49, 
pp. 3–71, March 2011, doi: 10.1257/jel.49.1.3. 
[17] European Parliament, “Reporting obligations regarding gender 
equality and equal pay,” 2021, Retrieved: May 2022 from 
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/STUD/2021/
698641/IPOL_STU(2021)698641_EN.pdf.  
[18] R. M. Blackburn and J. Jarman, Occupational gender 
segregation. Social Research Update, vol. 16, Spring 1997. 
[19] J. C. He, S. K. Kang, K. Tse, and S. M. Toh, “Stereotypes at 
Work: Occupational Stereotypes Predict Race and Gender 
Segregation in the Workforce,” Journal of Vocational 
Behavior, vol. 115, pp. 103318, December 2019, doi: 
10.1016/j.jvb.2019.103318. 
[20] P. Valet, “Social Structure and the Paradox of the Contented 
Female Worker: How Occupational Gender Segregation 
Biases Justice Perceptions of Wages. Work and Occupations, 
vol. 
45, 
no. 
2, 
pp. 
168-193, 
January 
2018, 
doi: 
10.1177/0730888417753048.  
[21] G. Goncharenko,  “In the spotlight: Rethinking NGO 
accountability in the #MeToo era,” Critical Perspectives on 
Accounting, March 2021, in press.   
[22] X. Sibande, R. Gupta, R. Demirer, and E. Bouri, “Investor 
Sentiment and (Anti) Herding in the Currency Market: 
Evidence from Twitter Feed Data,” Journal of Behavioral 
Finance, 
pp. 
1-17, 
May 
2021, 
doi: 
10.1080/15427560.2021.1917579.  
[23] A. Bermingham and A. Smeaton, “On Using Twitter to 
Monitor Political Sentiment and Predict Election Results,” 
Proc. Workshop on Sentiment Analysis where AI meets 
Psychology (SAAIP 11), AFNLP Press, November 2011, pp. 
2-10.  
[24] European Commission, “Proposal for a Directive of the 
European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 
2013/34/EU, Directive 2004/109/EC, Directive 2006/43/EC 
and Regulation (EU) No 537/2014, as regards corporate 
sustainability reporting, COM (2021) 189 final,” 2021b,  
Retrieved: May 2022 from: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52021PC0189. Accessed on 
June 26, 2021. 
[25] A. Fantechi, S. Gnesi, S. Livi, and L. Semini, “A SpaCy-based 
Tool for Extracting Variability from NL Requirements,” Proc. 
ACM International Systems and Software Product Line (SPLC 
21), ACM Press, September 2021, pp. 32-35, doi:  
10.1145/3461002.3473074. 
[26] A. Hevner and S. Chatterjee, Design research in information 
systems, 1ste ed. Springer New York, 2010.  
[27] A. Hevner, S. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design Science in 
Information,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 75-105, March 
2004, doi: 10.2307/25148625. 
[28] B. Kuechler and V. Vaishnavi, “On theory development in 
design science research: anatomy of a research project.” 
European Journal of Information Systems, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 
489-504, 2017, doi: 10.1057/ejis.2008.40. 
[29] J. M. Corbin and A. Strauss, “Grounded Theory Research: 
Procedures, Canons, and Evaluative Criteria,” Qualitative 
Sociology, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 3-21, March 1990, doi: 
10.1007/BF00988593. 
[30] L. K. Nelson, “Computational Grounded Theory: A 
Methodological 
Framework. 
Sociological 
Methods 
& 
Research, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 3-42, November 2017, doi: 
10.1177/0049124117729703.  
[31] F. Jubair, N. A. Salim, O. Al-Karadsheh, Y. Hassona, R. 
Saifan, and M. Abdel-Majeed, "Sentiment Analysis for Twitter 
Chatter During the Early Outbreak Period of COVID-19," 2021 
4th International Seminar on Research of Information 
Technology and Intelligent Systems (ISRITI), 2021, pp. 257-
262, doi: 10.1109/ISRITI54043.2021.9702837. 
[32] J. S. Kessler, “Scattertext: a browser-based tool for visualizing 
how corpora differ,” ArXiv, April 2017, unpublished.  
[33] M. U. S. Khan, A. Abbas, A. Rehman, and R. Nawaz, 
"HateClassify: A Service Framework for Hate Speech 
Identification on Social Media," in IEEE Internet Computing, 
vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 40-49, 1 Jan.-Feb. 2021, doi: 
10.1109/MIC.2020.3037034. 
[34] R. Kalaiarasan, T.K. Agrawal, J. Olhager, M. Wiktorsson, and 
J. B. Hauge, “Supply chain visibility for improving inbound 
logistics: a design science approach.” International Journal of   
Production 
Research, 
pp. 
1-16, 
2022, 
doi: 
10.1080/00207543.2022.2099321 
[35] S. Yan Eureka Ho and P. Crosthwaite, “Exploring stance in the 
manifestos of 3 candidates for the Hong Kong Chief Executive 
election 2017: Combining CDA and corpus-like insights,” 
70
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Discourse & Society, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 629-654, 2018, doi: 
10.1177/0957926518802934. 
[36] K. Robinson and V. Mago, “Birds of prey: identifying lexical 
irregularities in spam on Twitter,” Wireless Networks, vol. 28, 
pp. 1189–1196, 2022, doi: 10.1007/s11276-018-01900-9. 
[37] N. Prat, I. Comyn-Wattiau, and J. Akoka, “A taxonomy of 
evaluation methods for Information Systems artifacts,” Journal 
of Management Information Systems, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 229–
267, 2015. 
[38] “The Peabody ducks are marching with a new Duckmaster,” 
Hospitality 
Net, 
10-Feb-2012. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.hospitalitynet.org/news/4054822.html. 
[Accessed: 18-Aug-2022]. 
[39] P. Offermann, O. Levina, M. Schönherr, and U. Bub, “Outline 
of a design science research process,” In Proceedings of the 4th 
International Conference on Design Science Research in 
Information Systems and Technology, pp. 1-11, May 2009. 
[40] “Hospitality net,” Hospitality Net. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.hospitalitynet.org/. [Accessed: 06-Sep-2022]. 
[41] “LODGING,” LODGING Magazine. [Online]. Available: 
https://lodgingmagazine.com/. [Accessed: 06-Sep-2022]. 
[42] “Hotel Management Homepage: Hotel Management,” Hotel 
Management. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.hotelmanagement.net/. [Accessed: 15-Oct-2022]. 
[43] “Travel News Asia” Travel News Asia. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.travelnewsasia.com/. [Accessed: 15-Oct-2022]. 
[44] “The Romania Journal,” The Romania Journal. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.romaniajournal.ro/. [Accessed: 06-
Sep-2022]. 
[45] “Aruba 
today,” 
Aruba 
Today. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.arubatoday.com/. [Accessed: 06-Sep-2022]. 
[46] “Jeff Nicholson has been appointed chief marketing officer 
(CMO) at Duetto,” Hospitality Net, 06-Sep-2022. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.hospitalitynet.org/appointment/79024749.html. 
[Accessed: 10-Sep-2022]. 
71
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

