Furnace Operational Parameters and Reproducible Annealing of Thin Films 
 
Victor Ovchinnikov 
Department of Aalto Nanofab 
School of Electrical Engineering, Aalto University 
Espoo, Finland 
e-mail: Victor.Ovchinnikov@aalto.fi 
 
 
Abstract—Annealing of thin silver films on oxidized silicon 
substrates in different furnaces is studied. It is shown that 
identical temperatures and durations of thermal treatment do 
not guarantee reproducibility, i.e., the annealing provides 
different results, e.g., shape and size of nanostructures in 
different furnaces. To clarify the source of the variation, 
morphology and optical properties of the samples are 
analyzed. Spectroscopic ellipsometry is used to measure 
thickness and composition of the oxide layer before and after 
annealing. Reflectance spectra, obtained for different angles of 
incidence and polarizations, demonstrate the dependence of 
sample 
plasmonic 
properties 
on 
the furnace design. 
Additionally, a numerical simulation of the heating process in 
a diffusion furnace has been performed. It is concluded that 
uncontrollable overheating of silver film with regards to the 
substrate produced by thermal radiation of the environment 
leads to variation in annealing results. 
Keywords-silver thin film; diffusion furnace; annealing; 
nanostructures. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recently, the variation of annealing results for thin silver 
films heated at identical temperatures and during identical 
times has been demonstrated by using thermal processing 
tools of different designs [1]. 
Annealing is well known and broadly used in 
microfabrication for controlled heating of inorganic 
materials to alter their properties. In case of polymer, similar 
heat treatment is called baking, curing or drying. From the 
beginning of semiconductor technology, annealing has been 
used to modify properties of thin films, substrates and 
interfaces. Annealing is not a major microfabrication method 
like lithography or etching, however it is always included in 
fabrication of all micro- and nanodevices. The main 
application areas of annealing are doping of semiconductors, 
silicide formation, densification of deposited films, contact 
resistance decreasing, sample surface conditioning, etc. [2]. 
Annealing is done by heat treatment equipment, which can 
have completely different designs: convection and diffusion 
furnaces, hot plates and rapid thermal processing tools, 
infrared (IR) and curing ovens and so on. At the same time, 
annealing is usually characterized by only process 
temperature and time. Furthermore, temperature can be 
measured in different places: on a sample surface, in a fixed 
point of the heated volume, or on heating surfaces. Clearly, 
results of the annealing of the same samples, at the same 
time  and  temperature,  but  in  various  furnaces  can  be  
different. In this work, we anneal identical samples in 
identical conditions (time and temperature), but in different 
furnaces and study the effect of the furnace design on the 
obtained results. 
The paper is organized as follows. In the subsequent 
Section II, the solved problem is formulated. In Section III, 
the details of sample preparation are given, the designs of 
three annealed furnaces are described and the measurement 
procedures are presented. In Section IV, the results of the 
work are demonstrated by scanning electron microscope 
(SEM) images, optical parameters of the layers obtained by 
spectroscopic ellipsometry, reflectance spectra of the 
samples for different angles of incidence and polarizations 
and also by a simulation of the heating process. The effect of 
furnace design on silver film annealing is discussed in 
Section V. In Section VI, the conclusions are drawn. 
II. 
PROBLEM STATEMENT 
The standard description of annealing in publications 
includes only temperature and duration of the process [3, 4]. 
Sometimes information about ambient or gas flow is added 
[5, 6]. The heat equipment and the sample position in the 
process chamber are rarely written about [7, 8]. However, 
different annealing tools deliver heat energy to a sample in 
different ways, which directly affects the obtained results. 
During annealing heat exchange between the sample and 
a furnace is performed by thermal conductivity, convection 
and thermal radiation. Depending on the furnace design, one 
or another heat transfer mode may be dominant. For 
example, a hot plate mainly heats a sample by thermal 
conductivity, a diffusion furnace by thermal radiation and 
convection, an IR oven - by thermal radiation. In all furnaces 
heat is not only generated, but it is also dissipated. As a 
result, the sample temperature is controlled by thermal 
balance between the heating and cooling processes. 
Additionally, the sample thermal parameters (emissivity, 
thermal conductivity and heat capacitance) and sample 
arrangement in a furnace (position, holder design and 
shields) affect the heating process dynamics and the sample 
temperature. The most complicate situation happens in the 
instance of phase transition of the heated thin film, e.g., 
melting or recrystallization. As a consequence, the sample 
emissivity is changed and the new thermal balance is 
installed. 
In this paper, we demonstrate that identical heating ramp, 
temperature and time of the annealing are not sufficient 
145
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
a)
b)
c)
 
conditions for reproducibility of nanostructures fabricated by 
the annealing of thin silver films. We compare the designs of 
three annealing tools and analyze the relative strength of 
different heating modes in all tools. On the basis of optical 
properties and crystalline structure of the annealed and as-
deposited samples we draw conclusions about melting and 
crystallization of silver nanostructures. To find the 
temperature field of the furnace and to estimate the real 
sample temperature we simulate the heating process in the 
diffusion furnace for different gas flows and sample 
emissivities. The obtained results are used to find correlation 
between annealing conditions and properties of silver 
nanostructures. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTS 
Four identical samples were prepared to compare 
annealing in different furnaces. For this purpose, a 12 nm 
thick silver film was deposited by electron beam evaporation 
at a rate 0.2 nm/s. As a substrate was used a 4” silicon wafer 
with 21 nm layer of thermal oxide. After the deposition the 
whole wafer was cut in four quotas, which were further 
processed separately. Annealing was done at 400 ºC during 5 
minutes with a heating ramp of 21 ºC/min, and a cooling 
ramp of 3.6 ºC/min. However, all samples were processed in 
various furnaces (Fig. 1). 
The sample #1 was annealed in the diffusion furnace 
(Fig. 1a). A 4” silicon wafer on a quartz boat was used as a 
sample holder, which was located in the centre of the furnace 
during the experiment. It was assumed that heat exchange 
through the quartz boat was negligible. The quartz furnace  
Figure 1.  Design of the diffusion furnace (a), the fast ramping furnace (b) 
and the hot plate (c). Thermocouple positions and gas flows are denoted by 
blue and vilolet arrows, respectively. Heating surfaces are orange. 
tube had a 4½ inch diameter, was 96 cm in length and with 3 
mm thick walls. The resistive heater (orange strips in Fig. 1a) 
was situated around the tube with a gap of 1 cm. The furnace 
temperature was controlled according to thermocouple 
measurements on the tube surface. Room temperature 
nitrogen with a flow of 8.3×10-5 standard m3/s was 
introduced in the furnace along its axis. 
The sample #2 was annealed in a fast ramping furnace 
(Fig. 1b). The temperature, gas flow and process duration 
were the same as in the diffusion furnace (Fig. 1a). However, 
in the fast ramping furnace the quartz tube length was 35 cm 
and the sample position was close to the exhaust of the 
furnace. Tungsten lamps were used as heaters. The quartz 
tube was covered by a heat absorbing shield (black lines in 
Fig. 1b). The gas temperature in the tube was measured by 
thermocouple and was used for process control. Nitrogen 
was introduced through an array of holes in the right part of 
the furnace. 
The sample #3 was annealed between two hot plates in 
vacuum (Fig. 1c). The diameter of both hot plates was 10 cm 
and they were separated by a 2.5 mm gap. The chamber wall 
temperature was close to room temperature. 
The sample #4 is deposited silver film. The silver films 
were deposited in the e-beam evaporation system IM-9912 
(Instrumentti Mattila Oy) at a base pressure of 2.7×10-5 Pa 
and at room temperature of the substrate. Annealing of the 
sample #1 was done in the diffusion furnace THERMCO 
Mini Brute MB-71. Annealing of the sample #2 was done in 
the fast ramping furnace PEO-601 from ATV Technology 
GmBH. Annealing of the sample #3 was done in the wafer 
bonder AML AWB-04 from Microengineering Ltd. 
For selective etching of the samples were used diluted 
nitric acid (HNO3 min. 69% from Honeywell) HNO3:H2O = 
1:1 and diluted buffered hydrofluoric acid (BHF) BHF:H2O 
= 1:3. As BHF was used standard ammonium fluoride 
etching mixture AF 90-10 LST from Honeywell. Two small  
Figure 2.  Optical images of the annealed (#1 - #3) and as-deposited (#4) 
samples. 
146
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 3.  Plan view SEM images of the annealed (#1 - #3) and as-deposited (#4) samples. 
chips (1×1 cm2) were prepared from every annealed sample. 
The first chip was etched by diluted HNO3 during 50 
seconds without preliminary treatment (HNO3 processing), 
the second one was dipped in diluted BHF for 10 seconds, 
rinsed in deionized water, dried by nitrogen and etched by 
diluted HNO3 during 50 seconds (BHF/HNO3 processing). 
Plan view and tilted SEM images of the samples were 
observed with the Zeiss Supra 40 field emission scanning 
electron microscope. Reflectance measurements were carried 
out using the FilmTek 4000 reflectometer in the spectral 
range of 400–1700 nm or the spectrometer Axiospeed FT 
(Opton Feintechnik GmbH) in the range of 400–750 nm. 
Spectroscopic ellipsometry and reflectance measurements in 
the range of 650–1700 nm were done by spectroscopic 
ellipsometer SE 805 (SENTECH Instruments GmbH). The 
crystalline structure of the silver films was estimated by 
RHEED 
(reflection 
high-energy electron 
diffraction) 
observations with the help of the diffractometer embedded in 
a molecular beam epitaxy tool. EDS (Energy-Dispersive X-
ray Spectroscopy) analyses were done with the help of a 
Genesis Apex 4i EDS system. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Fig. 2 shows the optical image of three annealed samples 
(#1–#3) and deposited silver film (#4). The picture was taken 
with a digital camera with a flash. Despite identical 
temperature and time of annealing all samples have different 
colored surfaces. The sample #1 is yellow-green, the sample 
#2 is brown-red, the sample #3 is yellow-blue and the as-
deposited sample is grey. Bulk silver is a perfect reflector, 
however, 
nanostructured 
silver 
possesses 
plasmon 
resonances, which modify reflection spectra of the samples 
[7, 9, 10]. Therefore, the obtained colour variation could be 
explained by silver nanostructures formed on the sample 
surface instead of the continuous film. For a detailed 
understanding of the effect of annealing conditions on film 
transformation, the structure and optical properties of the 
prepared samples were studied by SEM, spectroscopic 
ellipsometry and reflectometry. 
A. Morphology of silver nanostructures 
To justify the formation of silver nanostructures all 
samples were observed in SEM (Fig. 3). The as-deposited 
silver film (sample #4) is already discontinuous and has lace 
like structure. Silver covers a relatively large part of the 
sample surface in comparison with annealed films. The 
annealed samples have close values of silver areal density 
and nanostructure sizes, but the shape of the nanoislands 
depends on annealing conditions. The sample #2  
Figure 4.  Tilted SEM image of the sample #2. 
(e) 
(f) 
 
#1 
#2 
#3 
#4 
147
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
8
10
12
ȥº
#1
#2
#3
#4
130
140
150
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
ǻº
Wavelength (nm)
 
7
8
9
10
ȥº
#1
#2
#3
#4
154
164
174
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
ǻº
Wavelength (nm)
Figure 5.  Plan SEM images of the sample #2 after HNO3 (a) and 
BHF/HNO3 (b) treatments, respectively. 
Figure 6.  ȥ, ǻ spectra at 70º after HNO3 treatment. 
demonstrates the most irregular islands with straight flats on 
some of them. The sample #3 has roundish nanostructures 
with large shape deviation and the sample #1 shows an 
intermediate picture between the previous cases. The tilted 
SEM image of the sample #2 is shown in Fig. 4. The silver 
islands have the shape of a distorted and bended ellipsoid 
with a flat bottom. The height of all annealed nanostructures 
is around 30 nm. 
To investigate the modification of the SiO2 layer below 
the silver nanostructures after annealing we selectively 
removed Ag by diluted nitric acid. The acid does not react 
with Si and stoichiometric SiO2. The etched samples were 
studied by SEM and spectroscopic ellepsometry. SEM 
investigation of samples #1, #3 and #4 did not reveal 
anything on the sample surfaces. However, SEM images of 
HNO3 and BHF/HNO3 processed chips from the sample #2 
demonstrate surface modification (Fig. 5a and Fig. 5b). The 
SEM plan view taken in the “in lens” mode shows dark 
contours of nanostructures on the lighter background. In the 
“in lens” tilted image and plan view taken in the “secondary 
electrons” mode, the mentioned contours were not observed. 
The surface of the sample #2 was also scanned by an atomic 
force microscope and contours were not found. “In lens” 
mode provides better resolution, but it is more sensitive to 
electrical charge on the sample surface than “secondary 
electrons” mode. Therefore, we can conclude that the black 
contours in Fig. 5 coincide with electrical charge variation, 
which in turn appears due to changing of local chemical  
Figure 7.  ȥ, ǻ spectra at 70º  after BHF/HNO3 treatment. 
a) 
b) 
148
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
0
20
40
60
80
R (%)
1
2
3
4
Calculated
0
20
40
60
Rp (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
300
500
700
900
1100
1300
1500
1700
Rs (%)
Wavelength (nm)
TABLE I.  
SAMPLE DETAILS 
 
composition. Contours in Fig. 5b are more contrast and 
smoother than in Fig. 5a. Furthermore, there are bright spots 
in the field of Fig. 5b, which can correspond to the pinholes 
in the silicon oxide layer.  
The RHEED showed relatively sharp, continuous Laue 
circles in addition to amorphous background patterns for the 
sample #3. Therefore, this sample contains separate 
crystalline particles, but their orientation varies from island 
to island [11]. For other samples, the intensity and sharpness 
of the diffraction patterns were weaker and decreased in the 
following order: sample #1, as-deposited sample, sample #2. 
In other words, the sample #2 contains nanoislands with the 
most disordered crystalline structure. 
B. Properties of oxide sublayer 
Spectroscopic ellipsometry is based on measurement of 
ellipsometric angles ȥ, ǻ for different wavelengths. The 
sample is described by a simplified model from several 
optical layers and ȥ, ǻ are calculated for the model. After 
that the matching between measured and calculated ȥ, ǻ is 
done for different parameters of the optical layers. 
Unfortunately, this approach is valid only for systems 
described by Fresnel equations. Silver nanostructures cause 
light scattering requiring application of Mie theory [12] and 
cannot be simulated by Fresnel equations. However, samples 
with removed silver, i.e., a Si substrate with residual SiO2 
layer can be analyzed by spectroscopic ellipsometry. 
The obtained spectra of ȥ, ǻ after HNO3 and BHF/HNO3 
treatments are given in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7, respectively. The 
samples after HNO3 processing demonstrate small difference 
in ȥ, ǻ spectra (Fig. 6). However, BHF/HNO3 processing 
results in a big difference between spectrum of the sample #2 
and other spectra (Fig. 7). The reconstruction of the sample 
layers after HNO3 and BHF/HNO3 treatments was done  
Figure 8.  Optical models of oxide sublayer after HNO3 (a) and 
BHF/HNO3 (b) treatments, respectively. 
 
using the optical models shown in Fig. 8a and Fig. 8b, 
respectively. Before this, EDS analyses were performed to 
ascertain the presence of silver in the etched samples. Traces 
of Ag were found both after HNO3, and after BHF/HNO3 
processing. Therefore, the former SiO2 layer is enriched by  
Figure 9.  Reflection spectra at normal (a) and inclined (70º) light 
incidence for p-(b) and s- polarization (c). Dashed lines show calculated 
spectra. 
Sample 
 
SiO2 sublayer details after HNO3 processing 
Original 
peak, nm 
BHF 
peak, nm 
Blueshift, 
nm 
Thickness, nm 
h1, nm 
h1 composition 
h2, nm 
Thickness loss, nm 
#1 
18.8 
12.2 
SiO2 
6.6 
2.2 
439 
425 
14 
#2 
19.1 
12.6  
2% of Si in SiO2 
6.5 
1.9 
494 
443 
51 
#3 
17.6 
10.5 
SiO2 
7.1 
3.4 
430 
411 
19 
#4 
18.6 
11.4 
SiO2 
7.2 
2.4 
- 
- 
- 
 
a) 
b) 
c) 
b) 
a) 
149
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
0
10
20
30
Rp (%)
40
50
60
70
80
0
20
40
60
80
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Rs (%)
Wavelength (nm)
0
20
40
60
R (%)
#1
#2
#3
#1 BHF
#2 BHF
#3 BHF
0
20
40
60
300
400
500
600
700
800
R (%)
Wavelength (nm)
#4
#4 BHF
Figure 10.  Reflection spectra at different angles of incidence for p-(a) and 
s- polarization (b). 
Ag and consists of pure SiO2 (thickness h1) and composite 
Ag-SiO2 (thickness h2) sublayers. Additionally, a composite 
layer  (35%  of  Ag  in  Si)  with  a  thickness  of  0.35  nm  is  
required between the substrate and SiO2 layer to provide the 
best matching (Fig. 8). The Si and SiO2 layers with silver 
inclusions (Ag-Si and Ag-SiO2) were described with the 
help of effective medium approximation (Bruggeman 
model). 
The results obtained after HNO3 processing are given in 
Table  I.  For  all  samples  the  Ag-rich  layer  has  the  same  
composition (11% of Ag in SiO2). Thicknesses of the pure 
SiO2 layer h1 and Ag-SiO2 layer h2 are changed from sample 
to sample. Due to this the total thickness of oxide sublayer 
after HNO3 processing is varied, but it is always less than 
SiO2 thickness (21nm) before Ag deposition. The highest 
thickness loss was observed in the sample #3 (Table I). The 
sample #2 differs from others by the presence of Si-rich 
oxide (2% of Si in SiO2) instead of stoichiometric SiO2. 
After BHF/HNO3 processing the SiO2 layer in the 
samples #1, #3, #4 was removed and the samples turned into 
bare Si substrates with thin surface layers. The composition 
of these layers cannot be found by means of ellipsometry 
[13]. The sample #2 has a residual SiO2 layer  with  a  
thickness of 10.0 nm and an Ag-Si layer (19% of Ag in Si) 
at the interface with a thickness of 0.15 nm. 
C. Optical properties 
It has been already mentioned that colour variation of the 
samples could be explained by their reflection spectra, which 
are 
connected 
with 
plasmonic 
properties 
of 
the 
nanostructures. Fig. 9a demonstrates reflection spectra of the 
annealed and as-deposited samples at normal light incidence. 
In Fig. 9b and Fig. 9c, the same spectra are given at inclined 
light incidence (70º) and for p- and s- polarization, 
respectively. According to surface colour, the sample #2 has 
the main peak at the longest wavelength of 497 nm, the 
sample #3 at the shortest wavelength of 425 nm and the 
sample #1 at the intermediate wavelength of 448 nm for 
normal light incident (Fig. 9a). The as-deposited sample #4 
has no reflection peaks in the range of the measurements, but 
it has trough at the wavelength of 654 nm. On the other 
hand, the sample #2 has no troughs at all and the samples #3 
and #1 have troughs at 694 nm and 767 nm, respectively. 
For p-polarized light strong reflection is observed only in 
the visible range (below 800 nm). IR reflectance falls down 
to 2% for all annealed samples and to 5% for the as-
deposited sample. Peaks of reflection for p-polarization shift 
to shorter wavelength and for the sample #2 the peak is 
observed at 470 nm. For s-polarized light spectra of the 
annealed samples coincide with each other in the IR range 
(above 1200 nm), which justifies the suggestion concerning 
identical silver areal density. Blueshift of the peak positions 
between Fig. 9a and Fig. 9c is equal 12 nm for samples #2,#3 
and 4 nm for the sample #1, respectively. 
Angle dependence of reflection was studied in near IR 
range. Fig. 10 demonstrates the reflectance of the sample #2 
(the  behavior  of  other  samples  is  similar)  for  both  
polarizations in the range of 650–1700 nm. Reflectance of p-
polarized light falls down with increasing the incident angle  
Figure 11.  Reflection spectra at normal light incidence before and after 
BHF treatment. 
a) 
b) 
150
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
0
4
8
12
Rp (%)
0
20
40
60
80
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Rs (%)
Wavelength (nm)
60
70
80
60 BHF
70 BHF
80 BHF
 
Figure 12.  Reflection spectra at different angles of incidence before and 
after BHF treatment for p-polarisaion (a) and s-polarization (b). 
and reaches its minimum at 70º. After that the wavelength 
behavior of reflection is changed and the spectrum at 80º 
looks like a mirror reflection of the 60º spectrum. At the 
same time, trough positions are redshifted with increasing 
incident angle. For s-polarization the spectrum shape and 
trough position (1050 nm) are independent from the angle of 
incidence and reflectance intensity growths with increasing 
the incident angle. 
In IR range scattering is negligible and sample reflection 
can be described by Fresnel equations. The proposed model 
consists of a 21 nm thick oxide layer and a Bruggeman Ag-
air layer. Reflectance spectra of the sample #4 were used for 
matching with the optical model, because its silver layer is 
closest to a continuous film. It was found that the sample #4 
can be approximated by a 37 nm thick Ag-air layer (31.5% 
of Ag). Dashed lines in Fig. 9 show spectra calculated with 
the help of the obtained model. 
For one set of samples (#1–#4) BHF/HNO3 processing 
was  stopped  after  BHF  etching.  After  that  the  SEM  
investigation did not show any difference between BHF 
processed and just annealed samples. However, reflectance 
spectra of all samples were modified in a similar way 
(Fig.11). After BHF processing the spectrum peaks were 
shifted to shorter wavelengths and their intensity decreased 
(Table I). 
Reflectance in IR range is not sensitive to BHF 
processing, excluding the angle of incidence 80º and p-
polarization (Fig. 12). The spectrum for this angle is shifted 
down (reflectance decreased) and preserves invariable shape. 
D. Simulations 
The purpose of simulations in this work is to find out the 
effect of different heat transfer modes on sample heating in 
the diffusion furnace (Fig. 1a). 3D simulations of the 
annealing process were done with the help of software 
COMSOL Multiphysics 3.5a. Gas flow in the furnace is non-
isothermal, which assumes the coupling of fluid dynamics 
and heat transfer equations in the whole volume of the 96 cm 
long furnace. Preliminary simulations demonstrate that a 
converging solution can be obtained for mesh element size 
less than 5 mm near the surface of the heated wafer (it is the 
most problematic place for modeling). In this case, the 
required numbers of mesh elements and degrees of freedom 
are 70000 and 455000, respectively. The corresponding 
solution time and memory use for this model are tens of 
hours and 15 Gb, respectively. However, finding suitable 
mesh parameters and proper stabilization techniques requires 
multiple attempts, which leads to high computational load 
and makes this approach unpractical. 
Taking the above mentioned into consideration, the 
simulations were done in two phases. Firstly, the 
temperature and velocity fields inside the empty furnace 
were found. For this purpose two transient models were used 
in coupled mode: a general heat transfer model and a weakly 
compressible Navier–Stokes model for non-isothermal flow. 
The first one calculates gas temperature distribution in the 
furnace volume due to thermal conduction and convection. 
Boundary conditions are a fixed temperature of 400 ºC for 
quartz tube walls and room temperature for input gas. At the 
gas outlet from the furnace heat exchange was provided by 
Figure 13.  Temperature fields of the diffusion furnace for high (a) and low 
(b) nitrogen flows. The gas inlet is on the right. 
a) 
b) 
a) 
b) 
151
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
convective flux. The second model calculates gas velocity 
distribution in the furnace volume caused by inlet pressure 
and non-uniform temperature. Boundary conditions are 
laminar inlet flow and atmospheric pressure without viscous 
stress at the outlet. Appeared gravitational force due to gas 
density variation was taken into account as the vertical 
volume force. 
At the second phase, the obtained temperature and 
velocity of gas were used as inlet boundary conditions for 
the simulation of silicon wafer heating in the hot cylindrical 
tube. The rest of the boundary conditions were the same as at 
the first phase. All heat transfer modes, including sample, 
tube and gas thermal conduction, convection in nitrogen and 
surface-to-surface radiation were taken into account. 
Fig. 13 demonstrates the simulation results obtained at 
the first phase. Temperature distributions in the diffusion 
furnace were calculated for the quartz tube with a 
temperature of 400 ºC and for gas flows 8.3×10-5 standard 
m3/s (Fig. 13a) and 1.0×10-5 standard  m3/s (Fig. 13b), 
respectively. The large flow of cold gas creates non-uniform 
temperature distribution inside the tube and gas temperature 
in the middle of the furnace (below the sample holder) can 
be 150 ºC lower than the tube temperature (Fig. 13a). At the 
same place gas velocity reaches a maximum value of 0.18 
m/s. At the small flow of nitrogen (Fig. 13b), temperature 
variation and gas velocity in the centre of the furnace do not 
exceed 15 ºC and 0.03 m/s, respectively. 
Temperature and velocity fields near the wafer are 
illustrated in Fig. 14a and Fig. 14b, respectively. They are 
obtained at the second phase of simulations (temperature and  
Figure 14.  Temperature (a) and velocity (b) fields near the wafer for high 
nitrogen flow and İ=1. Gas moves from right to left. 
Figure 15.  Vertical cross sections of the temperature field at high nitroghen 
flow in the centre of the furnace for İ=1 (a )and İ=0 (b). 
velocity of the gas at the entrance are taken from Fig. 13a) 
for nitrogen flow 8.3×10-5 standard  m3/s and sample 
emissivity İ=1. The internal furnace volume is divided by the 
wafer holder in two parts – the upper one with high 
temperature and low velocity and the lower one with low 
temperature and high velocity. In the upper volume gas has a 
temperature of 398 ºC and slowly moves with a velocity of 
0.02 m/s. In the lower volume high temperature and velocity 
gradient exist. However, the wafer temperature variation 
does not exceed 1ºC due to high thermal conductivity of 
silicon. In the present experiment, the wafer temperature 
depends on tube temperature, nitrogen flow and wafer 
emissivity İ. Cross sections of the temperature fields in the 
centre of the furnace for İ=1 and İ=0 are given in Fig. 15a 
and Fig. 15b, respectively. The temperature of the heat 
absorbing sample (İ=1) is 35 ºC higher than the temperature 
of the reflective sample (İ=0). As a consequence, the 
temperature distribution in the upper volume is more 
uniform for İ=1. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Annealing of thin silver films is complicated due to three 
circumstances. Firstly, silver films and nanostructures are 
melted at low temperatures [5, 14, 15]. In our previous study 
a) 
b) 
a) 
b) 
152
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
[7], it was shown that this melting point is close to 250 ºC. 
However, this transformation happens only once and the 
second heating of the sample does not change morphology of 
the silver nanostructures. Secondly, liquid silver has a 
tendency to form spherical shapes of nanoislands due to low 
cohesive forces to SiO2 surface. Thirdly, silver is the best 
plasmonic material [9] and the silver nanostructures 
appeared after breaking apart the continuous film, modify 
optical properties of the sample surface [10]. 
The first sign of not identical annealing conditions in the 
studied furnaces is different sample colours (Fig. 2) and the 
corresponding changing of reflection spectra after annealing 
(Fig. 9). The reflection spectra demonstrate strong plasmon 
properties of the silver nanostructures formed after silver 
film annealing. The troughs in the range 690–1050 nm 
correspond to dipole plasmon resonance and peaks at 410–
500 nm correspond to quadrupole resonance [10]. The non-
annealed sample #4 possesses only very weak dipolar 
plasmon resonance (see spectrum of as-deposited sample). 
The second consequence of not identical annealing is 
variation in chemical composition and thickness of the oxide 
sublayer below the silver nanostructures from sample to 
sample. The resulting thicknesses of the SiO2 and Ag-SiO2 
layers (Table I) obtained after HNO3 processing are defined 
by concentration and distribution of silver in the oxide 
matrix (Fig. 8). Nitric acid cannot remove silver from SiO2, 
if silver concentration is below the corresponding threshold 
(11% in our samples). Due to this, the Ag-SiO2 layer left 
after etching has a silver concentration below 11% (Fig. 8). 
Therefore, the uppermost Ag-rich SiO2 (more than 11% of 
Ag) is removed and thickness loss is higher for samples with 
higher Ag concentration. The sample #3 has maximal 
thickness loss and contains maximum amount of silver in 
oxide. 
The sample #2 has minimal thickness loss and contains 
2% of excess Si in the lower part of the oxide sublayer 
(Table I). On the other hand, the sample #2 demonstrates 
black contours after HNO3 processing (Fig. 5). One might 
suppose that excess silicon may be concentrated in these 
contours, corresponding to removed Ag islands. Electrical 
field of plasmon oscillations is strongest along the contact 
line between silver and oxide. Therefore, Si enrichment may 
be connected with light stimulated diffusion around contact 
line. Furthermore, silicon can diffuse through deposited 
silver and can be oxidized on top of it [16]. In our case it 
means that Si can diffuse through the interface Ag-Si layer 
(Fig. 8) and is oxidized on top of it. Both light stimulated 
diffusion and interface stimulated diffusion can lead to 
compensation of thickness loss. 
Section III mentioned that p-polarized light is reflected in 
different way for small (less than 70º) and large (more than 
70 º) angles of incidence. We believe that it can be related to 
Brewster’s angle of silicon (74º at 1200 nm) and there are 
two reasons for this. Firstly, p-polarized light is not reflected, 
but only refracted at Brewster’s angle. This was observed in 
our measurements at 70º (Fig. 9b). Only in this configuration 
the right position of quadrupole resonance can be visible, 
because the scattering from silver nanostructures is not 
disturbed by the reflection from the substrate. Secondly,  
Figure 16.  Void layer formation after BHF processing. 
there is a jump in the reflection phase at Brewster’s angle, 
i.e., for smaller angles of incidence original and reflected 
lights have a phase shift of 180º, but for larger angles the 
phase shift is 0º. It is illustrated by distinguished behavior of 
the reflection spectrum for 80º in Fig. 10a. Therefore, 
reflection from Si/SiO2 interface plays a crucial role in 
modification of the observed spectra and redshift of troughs 
for p-polarized light with increasing of the incident angle 
may be explained by destructive interference (Fig. 10a). 
To some extent plasmon properties can be estimated by 
the difference between calculated Fresnel equations and 
measured spectrum, i.e., the larger difference, the stronger 
plasmon resonance. Based on this criteria, the strongest 
plasmon resonances are observed in the samples #1 and #3 
(Fig. 9). 
In Section III, we have shown that all annealed samples 
have similar values of silver areal density and nanostructure 
sizes. Therefore, relatively large redshift of peaks and 
troughs in Fig. 9 cannot be only explained by the changing 
of island geometry. Due to the identity of the studied 
samples, the spectrum variations can be also connected with 
material modification, e.g., changing of Ag or SiO2 dielectric 
functions. Spectral peak and trough broadening (sample #2 
has the broadest peak) tells about an increase of the 
imaginary part of Ag dielectric function. Peak shift is 
connected with changing of a real part of the dielectric 
function, i.e., refractive index [9, 12]. It is clearly 
demonstrated by blueshift of plasmon resonances in the 
experiment with BHF etching (Fig. 11 and Table I). Due to 
pinholes in silver residues between the nanostructures (Fig. 
16), SiO2 is partially etched and voids are formed below the 
Ag nanostructures. It results in decrease of the effective 
refractive index n of the substrate (nair=1, nSiO2=1.45) and a 
corresponding shift of the plasmon resonance. Additionally, 
the same voids can increase scattering of the light travelling 
in the SiO2 layer, which leads to uniform decrease in 
intensity of the light reflected at 80º (Fig. 12). 
Typically, annealing is used to improve and restore 
crystalline  structure.  However,  there  are  reports  about  
increased defect concentration in melted silver samples [17]. 
Our RHEED observations also showed that the crystalline 
structure of the annealed sample #2 is worse than the 
structure of the as-deposited one. Taking into account the 
broadest reflection peak and the absence of a dipolar trough 
in the sample #2, we can conclude that this sample has the 
153
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

highest disorder of crystalline structure among the studied 
samples. 
In the diffusion furnace (Fig. 1a) the target temperature 
400 ºC was supported on the external side of the quartz tube. 
In the fast ramping furnace (Fig. 1b) the target temperature 
400 ºC was supported inside the furnace, at 1cm above the 
bottom of the quartz tube. According to Fig. 14a, the 
measured temperature in this point can be 150 ºC lower than 
the tube temperature, i.e., in our experiment the tube 
temperature of the fast ramping furnace could be close to 
550 ºC. Nitrogen flow 8.3×10-5 standard m3/s is very low for 
the fast ramping furnace (Fig. 1b) and provides laminar gas 
flow inside the tube. In the case of the diffusion furnace (Fig. 
1a), the same nitrogen flow is too high and provides 
turbulent gas flow in the lower part of the tube (Fig. 13a). 
Higher temperature of the absorber shield (İ~1) around the 
quartz tube makes thermal radiation in the fast ramping 
furnace much higher than in the diffusion one. 
In the case of a thin silver layer on silicon, most of 
radiation energy is absorbed in the silver and during heating 
up in the laminar gas flow (the fast ramping furnace) the 
silver temperature is higher than the temperature of the 
substrate. In turbulent gas flow (the diffusion furnace), 
intensive heat exchange between the silver and nitrogen 
prevents overheating of the silver nanostructures. 
After melting silver starts to form droplets due to surface 
tension forces and decreases silver areal density. However, 
absorbed thermal radiation is proportional to silver areal 
density or absorbing cross-section. Thus, geometry change 
decreases radiative heat transfer to the silver. The cold 
substrate cools down silver nanostructures and causes their 
rapid solidification. The quenching happens without proper 
crystallization and silver solidifies in amorphous phase 
(sample #2). 
In the case of low radiative heat transfer (samples #1, 
#3), melting happens at higher substrate temperature and 
without silver overheating. Depending on conductive and 
radiative heat fluxes the melted silver is cooled with a much 
lower rate and solidifies in polycrystalline phase. In our 
study, the sample #3 has the best crystalline structure due to 
lower cooling rate between two hot plates in vacuum. One of 
the reasons for quenching in this case is the reduction of the 
surface energy [18]. Another reason is the heating of silver 
nanostructures by conductive flux through thermal contact 
with substrate. Silver melting acquires additional heat flux 
from the substrate to the nanostructure. This heat flux 
increases the temperature drop on the interface between the 
substrate and the silver droplet, which in turn leads to 
decreasing of the silver temperature and quenching. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
Annealing of identical samples at identical times and 
temperatures, but in different furnaces leads to different 
results. We have demonstrated that optical properties and 
morphology of silver nanostructures produced by annealing 
of thin film are very sensitive to the heat delivering method. 
Relative strength of the heat transfer modes affects the 
wavelength of plasmon resonance, nanostructure geometry 
and chemical composition of the oxide sublayer. The effect 
of furnace operational parameters (gas flow, sample and 
thermocouple position, sample and environment emissivity) 
on annealing results has been confirmed. Radiation heating 
of silver can be very strong and provides overheating of film 
with regards to the substrate. It results in silver melting and 
droplet formation. The appearing of nanostructures and 
shrinking of silver areal density lead to a decrease of 
radiation heating. As a result, melted structures are quenched 
to solid state with irregular shape and high crystalline 
disorder. The effect depends on the rate of solidification and 
explains the variation of annealing results from furnace to 
furnace. 
The results presented here have demonstrated the 
significance of all furnace operational parameters and can be 
used for controllable heat processing of different materials. 
However, the work can be further developed for various 
furnace designs and thin film materials. Furthermore, 
accuracy and validity of the process simulations can be 
improved. Proper understanding of film transformation 
during annealing opens an effective way for the formation of 
nanostructures of different shapes, e.g., arrays of spherical 
nanoislands. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was undertaken at the Micronova 
Nanofabrication Centre of Aalto University. 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. 
Ovchinnikov, 
“Analysis 
of 
Furnace 
Operational 
Parameters for Controllable Annealing of Thin Films,” 
Proceedings of ICQNM 2014, ThinkMind Digital Library 
(ISBN: 978-1-61208-380-3), pp. 32-37. 
[2] Handbook of Semiconductor Manufacturing Technology, 2nd 
edition edited by R. Doering and Y. Nishi, CRC Press, 2007, 
1720p. 
[3] S. Franssila, “Introduction to Microfabrication,” 2nd edition, 
Wiley, 2010, 534p. 
[4] V. Ovchinnikov, A. Malinin, S. Novikov, and C. Tuovinen, 
”Silicon Nanopillars Formed by Reactive Ion Etching Using a 
Self-Organized Gold Mask,” Physica Scripta, vol.T79, 1999, 
pp. 263-265. 
[5] S.  R.  Bhattacharyya  et  al.,  “Growth  and  Melting  of  Silicon  
Supported Silver Nanocluster Films,” J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 
vol. 42, 2009, pp. 035306-1 - 035306-9. 
[6] D. Adams, T. L. Alford, and J. W. Mayer, “Silver 
Metallization: Stability and Reliability,” Springer, 2008, 
123p. 
[7] V. Ovchinnikov, “Effect of Thermal Radiation during 
Annealing on Self-organization of Thin Silver Films,” 
Proceedings of ICQNM 2013, ThinkMind Digital Library 
(ISBN: 978-1-61208-303-2), pp. 1-6. 
[8] D. Guo, S. Ikeda, K. Saiki, H. Miyazoe, and K. Terashima, 
“Effect of annealing on the mobility and morphology of 
thermally activated pentacene thin film transistors,” J. Appl. 
Phys., vol. 99, 2006, pp. 094502-1 – 094502-7. 
[9] M. A. Garcia, “Surface Plasmons in Metallic Nanoparticles: 
Fundamentals and Applications,” J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., vol. 
44, 2011, pp. 283001-1 - 283001-20. 
[10] V. Ovchinnikov and A. Shevchenko, “Self-Organization-
Based Fabrication of Stable Noble-Metal Nanostructures on 
Large-Area Dielectric Substrates,” Journal of Chemistry, vol. 
2013, 
2013, 
Article 
ID 
158431, 
pp. 
1 
- 
10., 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2013/158431. 
154
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[11] A. Ichimiya and P. I. Cohen, “Reflection High-Energy 
Electron Diffraction,” Cambridge University Press, 2004, 
353p. 
[12] E.  C.  Le  Ru  and  P.  G.  Etchegoin,  “Principles  of  Surface-
Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy and Related Plasmonic 
Eơects,” Elsevier, 2008, 688 p. 
[13] H. G. Tompkins, “A User's Guide to Ellipsometry,” 
Academic Press, 1993, 260p. 
[14] O. A. Yeshchenko, I. M. Dmitruk, A. A. Alexeenko, and A. 
V. Kotko, “Surface Plasmon as a Probe for Melting of Silver 
Nanoparticles,” Nanotechnology, vol. 21, 2010, pp. 045203-1 
- 045203-6. 
[15] M. Khan, S. Kumar, M. Ahamed, S. Alrokayan, and M. Salhi, 
“Structural and Thermal Studies of Silver Nanoparticles and 
Electrical Transport Study of Their Thin Films,” Nanoscale 
Research Letters, vol. 6, 2011, pp. 434-1 - 434-8. 
[16] A. Hiraki and E. Lugujjo, “Low-Temperature Migration of 
Silicon in Metal Films on Silicon Substrates Studied by 
Backscattering Techniques,” J. Vac.Sci.Technol., vol. 9, 
1972, pp.155-158. 
[17] S.  A.  Little,  T.  Begou,  R.  E.  Collins,  and  S.  Marsillac,  
“Optical Detection of Melting Point Depression for Silver 
Nanoparticles 
via 
in 
situ 
Real 
Time 
Spectroscopic 
Ellipsometry,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 100, 2012, pp. 051107-
1 -1 051107-4. 
[18]  E. P. Kitsyuk, D. G. Gromov, E. N. Redichev, and I. V. 
Sagunova, “Specifics of LowTemperature Melting and 
Disintegration into Drops of Silver Thin Films,” Protection of 
Metals and Physical Chemistry of Surfaces, vol. 48, 2012, pp. 
304–309. 
 
 
 
155
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

