An Extended Study on the Usage of Audit Data Analytics within the Accountancy 
Sector
 
Lotte Verhoeven and Eric Mantelaers 
Research Centre – Future-proof Auditor 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences & RSM Netherlands 
Accountants N.V. 
Sittard/Heerlen, the Netherlands 
lotte.verhoeven@zuyd.nl 
eric.mantelaers@zuyd.nl 
 
 
 
Martijn Zoet 
Research Centre – Future-proof Financial 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Sittard, the Netherlands 
martijn.zoet@zuyd.nl
 
Abstract— Evidence from the various reports and articles 
as well as the importance of the audit process shows that 
adjustment and/or improvement of the current audit 
approach within the accountancy sector is necessary. 
Research demonstrates that technology can contribute to an 
improvement of audit quality, by enhancing audit 
effectiveness and efficiency. Additionally, previous research 
increasingly recognizes that audit data analytics is likely to 
transform the conduct of the audit significantly. The goal of 
this research is to study how Audit Data Analytics is currently 
used within the audit. In order to answer this question, a 
survey was distributed via the Dutch National Accountants 
Association, focusing on how Audit Data Analytics is used in 
the accountancy sector. This paper extends the previous 
research [1], including a more detailed literature review, data 
collection, analysis and results. The results and the non-
chronological order of the data analysis types indicate a 
misinterpretation or lack of understanding of the data 
analysis types (implemented in the survey) and their 
chronological order. 
 
Keywords-audit data analytics; audit quality; process 
mining; process mining algorithms. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Audit quality consistently received substantial attention 
from regulators and academics over the past years due to 
numerous audit scandals. Caused by a lack of independent 
oversight and enforcement, various accounting and audit 
scandals took place in the beginning of the 21st century. 
Recent reports from the Dutch Authority for the Financial 
Markets (AFM), and recent published reports from, among 
others, the Future Accountancy Sector Committee (CTA) 
and the Accountancy Monitoring Committee (MCA), show 
that the quality of annual audits is inadequate [2]–[5]. 
Internationally the lack of audit quality is also visible. In the 
Brydon report, Brydon states that the audit quality is 
insufficient and improvements including new reporting 
duty with respect to fraud and more auditor transparency are 
recommended [6]. Evidence from the various reports and 
articles as well as the importance of the audit process shows 
that adjustment and/or improvement of the current audit 
approach within the accountancy sector is necessary [7]. 
Research demonstrates that technology can contribute to an 
improvement of audit quality [8].  
This research, therefore, focuses on the current usage of 
Audit Data Analytics (ADA) within the audit. The goal of 
this research is to achieve a view of the application of ADA 
within the financial audit. To achieve this, this paper 
answers the following main question: How and to what 
extent is Audit Data Analytics currently used by 
auditors/accountants? 
 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: 
Section II describes the relevant literature regarding audit 
quality and ADA. In Section III, the research method is 
described, followed by the data collection and analysis in 
Section IV. Finally, the results, conclusion and future work 
are presented in Sections V and VI, respectively. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Audit quality is a very broad concept and can be 
defined in various ways. DeAngelo describes audit quality 
as “the market assessed joint probability that a given 
auditor will both discover a breach in the client’s 
accounting system and reports the breach” [9]. Whereas the 
Government Accountability Office uses a more extensive 
approach and states that high audit quality is achieved 
when performed according to the corresponding standards 
and no material misstatements due to error or fraud are 
present [10]. The legal definition of audit quality is on the 
other hand very concise, as it states audit quality as either 
“audit failure” or “no audit failure” [11]. In conclusion, 
audit quality is a broad concept and difficult to summarize 
in a single definition. Next to that, these different 
definitions show that audit quality is not yet recognized 
universally across the world. As mentioned before, 
evidence from the various reports and articles as well as the 
importance of the audit process shows that adjustment and 
/ or improvement of the current approach within the 
accountancy sector is necessary [1]–[4][7].  
Previous research shows that technology/ADA can 
contribute to an improvement of audit quality [8]. By 
automating certain audit analyses, more time and resources 
can be allocated to the interpretation of these analyses. This 
maximizes the dual aspects of audit quality: independence 
and expertise [8][9]. Additionally, previous research 
increasingly recognizes that ADA is likely to transform the 
conduct of the audit significantly [12]–[14]. As Barr-
130
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Pulliam et al. state: “The use of advanced testing methods 
such as ADAs can occur at any stage of the audit and can 
significantly transform the process of auditing financial 
statements, resulting in enhanced audit effectiveness and 
audit efficiency – both elements and signals of audit 
quality” [12]. To support the individual and personal 
judgement of the auditor, ADA could provide a solution. 
ADA is a method of using data analysis techniques to 
evaluate financial information and assess the accuracy and 
reliability of an organization's financial statements. This 
involves collecting and examining large amounts of data, 
and using statistical and computational tools to identify 
patterns, trends, and anomalies that may indicate potential 
problems or issues. Data-driven audits are becoming 
increasingly familiar within the accountancy sector, due to 
innovation, increase in technology/data and the pursuit of 
continuous assurance [15]. Data-driven ‘control’ is also 
used by the AFM (regulator), as they want to implement 
data-driven supervision to enhance the efficiency and 
effectivity of the supervision of audit firms. To achieve this, 
the AFM will structurally request data from the audit firms 
to gain insight into the current quality control and risk 
characteristics [16]. 
Despite the fact that the use of ADA within the audit 
practice is relatively new, various previous research has 
been performed. The Financial Reporting Council (FRC), 
regulator to auditors, accountants and actuaries and setter of 
UK’s Corporate Governance and Stewardship Codes, 
conducted a review of the use of technology in the audit of 
financial statements. Within this review, the FRC found that 
ADA was currently used mostly for risk assessment and the 
audit of revenue, and that advanced ADA was only used 
sporadic [17]. This was also highlighted by Eilifsen et al. 
who explored the use of ADA in current audit practice in 
Norway. Eilifsen et al. found that despite the positive 
attitude with regards to the usefulness of ADA, the use of 
‘advanced’ ADA is rare [18]. Eilifsen et al. also found that 
this is caused by its complexity and lack of implementation 
guidelines and confidence in the ability of ADA to provide 
sufficient and appropriate audit evidence. It is suggested 
that this is likely to persist until ADA will be incorporated 
in the audit methodologies and ADA is explicitly supported 
and accepted by supervisory bodies and standard-setters 
[18]. However, this research focuses not only on the use of 
ADA, but also on the sequentially of its use. 
To analyze the sequential use of ADA, process mining 
will be used [19] [20]. Process mining is a technique used 
to analyze and visualize end-to-end processes, by ordering 
the events based on the timestamps/event logs. Ordering 
these events is a crucial step for understanding the sequence 
of activities within a process and to detect possible 
deviations from the expected process [19] [20]. As van der 
Aalst (2011) stated: “Process mining aims to discover, 
monitor and improve real processes by extracting 
knowledge from event logs” [20]. The initial stage in 
process mining involves the utilization of event logs, which 
document individual activities or events associated with 
specific cases. These events, arranged in chronological 
order, collectively represent a single "execution" of the 
process [21]. 
For the use of this research process mining algorithms 
from the Python package ‘Pm4py’, a Process Mining 
package for Python, were used [22]. In specific, the 
heuristic miner will be used. A heuristic analysis simplifies 
the information by removing redundant details and 
exceptions, concentrating on the primary behaviors [23]. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
The goal of this research is to study how ADA is 
currently used within the audit. In order to answer this 
question, a survey was distributed focusing on how ADA is 
used in the accountancy sector. The survey is distributed via 
the Dutch National Accountants Association (NBA) across 
members of the Accounttech working group, a total of 
7,008. The members of the NBA are spread over several 
accountancy firms in the Netherlands and consists out of 
accounting consultants/auditors (AA in Dutch), chartered 
auditors (RA in Dutch) and people working in the 
accountancy sector.  
The survey consists of 20 questions which are divided 
into seven subsections. These subsections relate to 1) 
composition/descriptive (general), 2) the scope of ADA, 3) 
assessing the possibility to detect misstatements, 4) 
sequence, 5) possibility to assist decisions, 6) materiality 
and 7) phase of the audit in which ADA is used. The 
questions are answered on a Likert-scale basis [24], in 
which answers range from ‘1 – I never use it’, to ‘7 – I 
always use it’. Likert scales are considered a good fit for 
analytical purposes, due to their relatively large number of 
categories [25]. In addition, the respondents were able to 
answer: ‘I don’t know’ or ‘Not relevant’. For the purpose of 
this research the latter two are classified as ‘1 – I never use 
it’.  
By formulating the survey questions, the Value Through 
Analytics (VTA) model from Zoet is used [26]. This model 
concretizes data analytics into subtypes. The VTA model 
incorporates the six different types of analyses from Leek 
and Peng (2015), namely: The 1) descriptive, 2) 
explanatory, 3) inferential, 4) predictive, 5) causal, and 6) 
mechanistic [27]. The VTA model also includes the three 
types of process mining as described by Van der Aalst 
(2011): discovery, conformance and improvement [28]. The 
VTA model is a tool to classify data analytics into different 
categories [29] and is shown in Figure 1. The VTA model 
distinguishes 54 different types of data analysis which can 
be derived by walking through the three circles within the 
model. The inner circle starts with the question: “What do I 
want to analyze?” In which a 1) process, 2) decision or 3) 
object can be chosen. The second circle questions “Why do 
I want to analyze?” Which can be answered by 1) discovery, 
2) conformance, and 3) improvement. Finally, the outer 
circle asks the question “To what extent do I want to analyze 
it?” The last question indicates the choice to the following 
types of data analytics: 1) descriptive, 2) explanatory, 3) 
inferential, 4) predictive, 5) causal, and 6) mechanistic. 
131
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Additionally, the types of analysis within the VTA model 
are layered in sequence, which indicates that if an inferential 
analysis can be carried out, one should also be able to carry 
out a descriptive and explanatory analysis. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Value Through Analytics model [26] 
To assess which competences can be utilized with the 
help of ADA, a so-called analysis quotient can be 
computed, which visualizes the type of questions that can 
be answered [29]. An example of this is shown in Figure 2, 
in which the questions are set against audit organizations.   
indicates that an audit organization cannot perform the 
analysis, green indicates that the type of analysis is 
standard procedure within each audit. Blue indicates that 
the analysis is used within every audit, but expertise is 
needed. Purple indicates that the analysis is executed by 
only one employee for their own use, but the results are not 
communicated throughout the team. Finally, yellow 
indicates that it is not executed for every audit [29].  
The survey questions were set up by dr. Mantelaers 
(chartered auditor) and dr. Zoet, founder of the VTA model 
[26], based on the analysis quotient. In order to validate and 
refine the survey questions and to ensure the correct 
questioning a pilot test was conducted by five master 
students 
(Accounting 
and 
Control 
– 
Maastricht 
University). Moreover, the pilot test was executed by two 
members of the Accounttech group, of which one is related 
to the Post-Master IT-Auditing &Advisory (Erasmus 
University Rotterdam).  
 
Figure 2.  Periodic system types of analyses [29] 
Within the survey questions, a particular sequence is 
followed related to several ‘levels’ of ADA usage in 
practice, which can be linked to the data analysis 
types/levels in the VTA model. In Table I the survey 
questions are linked to the type of data analyses derived 
from Figure 2. Each question focuses on the frequency of 
use of the ADA types as mentioned in Table I. As the 
questions and data analysis types, are listed in a 
chronological order, this implies that if an auditor uses 
ADA type five, the auditor will also be expected to be able 
to perform ADA type two and four. 
TABLE I. SURVEY DESIGN 
Survey 
question 
ADA 
type 
ADA description 
7.1 
2 
Object – Discover – Explanatory 
7.2 
4 
Object – Discover – Predictive 
7.3 
5 
Object – Discover – Causal 
7.4 
7 
Object – Discover – Descriptive 
7.5 
8 
Object – Discover – Explanatory 
8.1 
19 
Process – Discover - Descriptive 
8.2 
20 
Process – Discover – Explanatory 
8.3 
25 
Process – Conformance – Descriptive 
8.4 
26 
Process – Conformance – Explanatory 
8.5 
37 
Decision – Discover – Descriptive 
8.6 
43 
Decision – Conformance - Descriptive 
 
The questions were arranged in chronological order, 
following the sequence and complexity of ADA types. This 
means that the data analysis types embedded in these 
questions are used systematically in the expected 
chronological sequence. This approach of progressing step 
by step improves the clarity and relevance of the data 
analysis, making it a more methodical and understandable 
exploration of the subject matter. With this set up, we 
expect that ADA types with lower complexity, such as 2, 
will be utilized more frequently than the more intricate 
ADA types like 37 or 43. Furthermore, considering the 
hierarchy of complexity in ADA types, proficiency in 
132
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

ADA type 5 should imply competence in performing ADA 
type 7 as well. 
The sequence of the data from the survey will be 
analyzed with the help of process mining algorithms. For 
the use of this research, a heuristic analysis will be 
performed due to the scope of possible responses and 
outcomes. A heuristic analysis eliminates any redundant 
details and exceptions and focuses on the main behavior 
[23]. 
IV. 
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS 
The survey was distributed to a population of 7,008 
respondents in total, of which initially 203 responded, a 
response rate of 2.90%. The respondents consist out of 167 
males and 36 females, of which 72 are a chartered auditor 
(RA in Dutch) and 39 accounting consultants (AA in 
Dutch). Around 25% of the respondents works for one of 
the Big 4 auditing firms (EY, PWC, Deloitte and KPMG). 
Based on the initial results some first analysis was carried 
out, this paper includes the total dataset and expands the 
earlier analysis/research. The final dataset consists out of 
609 respondents, a response rate of 8.69%. The respondents 
consist out of 488 males, 119 females and 2 (none of) both. 
Within the respondents there are 198 chartered auditors 
and 133 accounting consultants. Around 20% works for one 
of the Big 4 auditing firms. The most common jobs within 
the respondents are external auditor (chartered auditor and 
accounting consultants), accountant in business or 
public/internal auditor. However, the work experience 
varies across the respondents as is shown in Table II. 
The overall response rate is relatively low, possibly 
caused by the non-committal nature and scope of the 
survey. Moreover, surveys are frequently distributed within 
the Accounttech working group and NBA, which also 
causes the low response rate. From an NBA perspective this 
can be considered a representative response rate. The survey 
was distributed in the first half of 2021. 
TABLE II. WORK EXPERIENCE RESPONDENTS
 
To analyze the outcomes of the survey a heuristic 
process mining algorithm is applied by using three input 
variables. These input variables consist out of 1) case 
concept name, represented by the respondents ID, 2) 
concept name, represented by the question number and 3) 
the timestamp, represented by the answer based on the 
Likert scale. To ensure the chronological order a timestamp 
is added to the data by converting the Likert scale. In which 
‘7 – I always use it’ is matched to the earliest timestamp, as 
it is always used (used now). ‘1 – I never use it’ is matched 
to the latest timestamp, since its use will be furthest in the 
future. The options in between (two to six) are matched 
accordingly. 
V. 
RESULTS 
A. Initial Results 
The initial analysis distinguishes 132 types of unique 
variants within a total of 203 respondents (65.0%). A total 
overview of the data analysis types in order of usage is 
shown in Figure 3. The numbers 7.1 until 8.6 refer to the 
questions of the survey, the link to the data analysis types 
is shown in Table II. As the Likert scale was converted to 
a timestamp in order to perform these analyses, the order 
of the questions depends on the usage of the specific ADA. 
For example, question 7.1 relates to the use of data 
analysis: Object – Discover – Explanatory. 60.6% of the 
respondents (n=123) indicated that this analysis is always 
used (Likert scale – 7). Due to the rating of ‘7 – I always 
use it’, this data analysis type is matched to the earliest 
timestamp and therefore shown at the start of the path in 
Figure 3.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Result heuristic miner. 
 
 
133
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Due to the high number of unique variants (65.0%), an 
overview of the top ten variants is shown in Table III. For 
clarity purposes, the number of occurrences per unique 
variant is added.  
TABLE III. TOP 10 VARIANTS 
 
 
The most common variant (variant 1) occurs 58 times. 
This variant is, also chronologically seen, the most logical 
variant, as the occurrence of the questions are in a 
chronological order (7.1 to 8.6). This means that the data 
analysis types, intertwined in the questions, are used in the 
(expected) chronological order. However, this is only 
applicable to 28.6% of the respondents (n=58). The number 
of occurrences for the other variances is widely spread as 
can be seen for variant two to ten (max. four occurrences 
per variant). The results from variant two show that 
question 8.1 (related to data analysis type Process – 
Discover – Descriptive) is used less compared to question 
8.2 to 8.6 (related to the more advanced data analysis 
types). In variant three to ten a non-chronological order is 
also apparent, indicating that the more ‘basis’ analysis 
types are carried out less frequently than the more 
‘advanced’ types. However, variant four indicates that 
analyses with regards to a process and/or decision 
(questions 8.1-8.6) are frequently used, and analysis 
regarding an object (questions 7.1-7.5) less frequently, 
despite the fact that most of the analyses regarding 
‘Objects’ are expected to be used standard in every audit, 
as can be derived from Figure 2.  
As the results vary widely, an additional analysis solely 
on the external auditors (chartered auditor and accounting 
consultants) as they are expected to have the most 
experience with regards to audits. Within the total sample, 
111 external auditors and 79 unique variants are identified 
(variance of 71.2%). Compared to the total sample, an even 
higher variance can be recorded. The results are shown in 
Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4.  Result heuristic miner external auditors. 
Due to the high number of unique variants (65.0%), an 
overview of the top ten variants is shown in Table IV. For 
clarity purposes, the number of occurrences per unique 
variant is added.  
TABLE IV. TOP 10 VARIANTS EXTERNAL AUDITORS 
 
The most common variant (variant 1) occurs 31 times. 
This variant is, also chronologically seen, the most logical 
variant, as the occurrence of the questions are in a 
chronological order (7.1 to 8.6). However, this is only 
applicable to 27.9% of the respondents (n=31). The number 
of occurrences for the other variances is widely spread as 
can be seen for variant two to ten (max. two occurrences 
per variant).  
 
B. Subsequent analysis 
In addition to the initial analysis, the analyses were 
repeated based on the expanded survey (n=609). The 
analysis based on the expanded survey distinguishes 357 
unique variants within a total of 609 respondents (58.6%). 
134
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A total overview of the data analysis types in order of usage 
is shown in Figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Results heuristic miner – subsequent analysis 
Due to the high number of unique variants (58.6%), an 
overview of the top ten variants is shown in Table V. For 
clarity purposes, the number of occurrences per unique 
variant is added. 
 
TABLE V. TOP 10 VARIANTS – SUBSEQUENT ANALYSIS 
  
 
The most frequent variant, referred to as variant 1, 
appears 179 times. Chronologically, this variant aligns 
logically with the sequential order of questions (7.1 to 8.6). 
Consequently, the data analysis types embedded in these 
questions are employed in the expected chronological 
sequence. However, this pattern is applicable to only 
29.4% of the respondents (n=179). The occurrences for 
other variants are widely dispersed, ranging from twelve to 
four instances for variants two through ten. 
Due to the significant variation in results, a 
supplementary analysis will be carried out focusing solely 
on the external auditors (who are anticipated to possess the 
most extensive audit experience. The expanded sample 
consists of 332 external auditors. Based on the external 
auditor sample, 195 unique variants were identified 
(58.7%). This closely reflects the variance observed in the 
total 
population. 
Nevertheless, 
the 
anticipated 
chronological order is acknowledged by only 105 
respondents (31.6%). This percentage is marginally higher 
among external auditors when compared to the total 
sample. A total overview of the data analysis types in order 
of usage for the external auditors is shown in Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 6. Results heuristic miner external auditors– subsequent analysis 
Due to the high number of unique variants (58.7%), an 
overview of the top ten variants is shown in Table VI. For 
clarity purposes, the number of occurrences per unique 
variant is added.  
TABLE VI. TOP 10 VARIANTS EXTERNAL AUDITORS – SUBSEQUENT 
ANALYSIS 
 
 
135
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The most common variant, variant one, is observed 105 
times. It follows a chronological alignment with questions 
ranging from 7.1 to 8.6, wherein the embedded data 
analysis types are logically applied in the expected 
sequence. Notably, this pattern is found in only 31.6% of 
the respondents (n=105). Occurrences for other variants are 
widely scattered, with instances ranging from six to two for 
variants two through ten. 
 
C. Final analysis 
Initially, both responses 'I don't know' and 'Not relevant' 
were categorized under '1- I never use it.' However, in our 
effort to refine and clarify the dataset, we are revisiting this 
classification. 
To establish a more distinct differentiation, the decision 
has been made to equate 'Not relevant' with '1 – I never use 
it.' This choice is grounded in the understanding that 'Not 
relevant' implies a lack of usage for the particular item. 
Conversely, 'I don't know' will undergo a dedicated 
analysis. We recognize that this response cannot be 
seamlessly linked to the Likert scale without potentially 
introducing distortions to the overall data overview. This 
approach allows for a nuanced separation between explicit 
non-usage, represented by 'Not relevant,' and uncertainty, 
as indicated by 'I don't know.' By doing so, we aim to 
preserve an accurate understanding of the dataset, while 
acknowledging the intricacies associated with the 'I don't 
know' response. This reconsideration is intended to 
enhance the overall reliability and interpretability of the 
data. 
First, a descriptive analysis will be performed on the 
usage of 'I don’t know.' On average, each respondent 
answered 'I don’t know' to 0.90 questions. In addition, 17 
respondents (out of the 609 total respondents) answered 'I 
don’t know' to all 11 questions. The frequency of 'I don’t 
know' responses for each question is presented in Table 
VII.  
TABLE VII. ANALYSIS RESPONSE ‘I DON’T KNOW’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To enhance clarity, the results are visualized in Figure 
7. This shows that for the first questions, relatively more ‘I 
don’t know’ responses were registered. From question 7.4 
onwards, a drop is visible, indicating a decreasing 
frequency of 'I don't know' responses. However, a notable 
trend emerges beyond this point, revealing an increasing 
amount of 'I don't know' responses as the complexity of the 
data analysis types rises. 
 
 
Figure 7. Number of occurences response ‘I don’t know’ per question. 
These results indicate that respondents initially grapple 
with uncertainty in the early questions, possibly due to the 
novelty of the survey or the initial learning curve. The 
observed drop in 'I don't know' responses from question 7.4 
may suggest a level of familiarity or increased confidence 
among respondents in handling less complex data analysis 
types. However, the subsequent rise in 'I don't know' 
responses from question 7.4 onwards suggests a growing 
challenge for respondents as the survey progresses into 
more intricate aspects of data analysis. This pattern 
underscores the need for targeted support or training in the 
latter stages of the survey, where the complexity of 
questions seems to pose a greater difficulty for participants. 
Based on the refined dataset, the heuristic process 
mining algorithm will be reapplied to analyze the results. 
The refined dataset is identical to the dataset used in the 
subsequent analysis (V. Results – B), excluding responses 
labeled 'I don’t know' to eliminate noise. This analysis will 
be conducted on both the entire sample and the subset of 
external auditors. The entire sample comprises the 609 
respondents, excluding the 17 who answered all questions 
with 'I don’t know' (n=592). The analysis based on the 
expanded survey distinguishes 374 unique variants within 
a total of 592 respondents (63.2%). A total overview of the 
data analysis types in order of usage is shown in Figure 8. 
 
136
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 8. Results heuristic miner – final analysis 
Due to the high number of unique variants (63.2%), an 
overview of the top ten variants is shown in Table VIII. For 
clarity purposes, the number of occurrences per unique 
variant is added.  
TABLE VIII. TOP 10 VARIANTS – FINAL ANALYSIS 
 
Appearing 158 times, variant 1 stands out as the most 
frequent. It conforms chronologically to the order of 
questions (7.1 to 8.6), where the associated data analysis 
types are logically employed in the anticipated sequence. 
However, this specific pattern is evident in just 26.7% of 
the respondents (n=158). The occurrences of other variants 
are widely distributed, with instances varying from two to 
four for variants two through ten. 
The analysis based on the expanded survey, solely 
focused on the external auditors, distinguishes 200 unique 
variants within a total of 323 respondents (61.9%). A total 
overview of the data analysis types in order of usage is 
shown in Figure 9. 
 
Figure 9. Results heuristic miner external auditors – final analysis 
The top ten variants are shown in Table IX. For clarity 
purposes, the number of occurrences per unique variant is 
added. 
TABLE IX. TOP 10 VARIANTS EXTERNAL AUDITORS – FINAL ANALYSIS 
 
 
With a frequency of 95 occurrences, variant 1 emerges 
as the most prevalent. Sequentially, this variant aligns with 
the order of questions (7.1 to 8.6), showcasing a logical 
utilization of data analysis types in the expected sequence. 
It's noteworthy that this pattern applies to only 29.4% of 
the respondents (n=95). The instances of other variants are 
dispersed widely, ranging from two to four occurrences for 
variants two through ten. 
 
 
 
137
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

D. Summary results 
All results, combining initial, subsequent and final 
analyses, are summarized in Table X. 
TABLE X. SUMMARY RESULTS  
 
 
The results from both the initial and subsequent 
analyses exhibit a considerable degree of similarity. The 
anticipated sequence in the utilization of data analysis is 
observed in only 28-30% of the respondents. Even after 
refining the data by excluding 'I don’t know' responses in 
the final analysis, the percentage of the expected sequence 
remains within the range of 26-30%. Additionally, all 
analyses indicate a high percentage of variance, exceeding 
58%. Despite the increase in variances resulting from the 
elimination of 'I don’t know' responses in the final analysis, 
the overarching trend remains consistent. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this article, we aimed to answer the main question: 
“How and to what extent is Audit Data Analytics currently 
used by auditors/accountants?” With the help of a survey 
distributed across members of the NBA working group 
Accounttech, an overview was given of the use (and its 
extent) of ADA. The insights derived from our study 
provide a better understanding of how and to which extent 
ADA is currently used by auditors/accountants and specific 
external auditors. However, the results in conjunction with 
the non-chronological order of the data analysis types, 
indicate the presence of a misinterpretation or possible gap 
in comprehending the data analysis types utilized in the 
survey and their appropriate chronological order. This 
discrepancy raises questions about the competence and 
understanding of the survey participants in applying these 
data analysis techniques in a correct and coherent manner. 
Remarkable are the similar results within the external 
auditor group, as they are expected to have the most 
experience regarding audits. Future research could 
therefore focus on concretizing (and creating an 
understanding of) the data analysis types. This could be 
achieved by creating a more practice-oriented survey.  
Moreover, in future research we would like to follow up on 
the answers: ‘I don’t know’ or ‘Not relevant’ to identify the 
underlying reasons and expand our results/knowledge. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We would like to thank Michelle van Wamelen for 
collecting the data. Moreover, we would like to thank the 
NBA working group Accounttech for collaborating on this 
survey.   
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
L. Verhoeven, E. Mantelaers, and M. Zoet, “Usage of 
Audit Data Analytics within the Accountancy Sector,” 
in Proc. eKNOW, 2023, pp.14-19. 
[2] 
MCA, 
“Accountancy 
Monitoring 
Committee.” 
Accessed: Mar. 24, 2023. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.monitoringaccountancy.nl/ 
[3] 
Future Accountancy Sector Committee, “Confidence in 
Control Final Report of the Committee on the Future of 
the Accountancy Sector | Parliamentary Document | 
Central 
Government.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/kamerstukke
n/2020/01/30/vertrouwen-op-controle-eindrapport-van-
de-commissie-toekomst-accountancysector 
[4] 
AFM, “AFM supervisory agenda 2022,” 2022. 
[5] 
AFM, “Research reports on supervision of audit firms | 
Audit firms | AFM Professionals.” Accessed: Mar. 24, 
2023. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.afm.nl/nl-
nl/sector/accountantsorganisaties/rapporten-publicaties 
[6] 
D. Brydon, “Assess, assure and inform: improving audit 
quality and effectiveness,” UK Government, 2019. 
[7] 
Future Accountancy Sector Committee, “Reliance on 
Audit,” Ministerie van Financiën, 2020. 
[8] 
E. Mantelaers, “An Evaluation of Technologies to 
Improve Auditing,” Open University, 2021. 
[9] 
L. E. DeAngelo, “Auditor Size and Audit Quality,” 
Journal of Accounting and Economics, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 
183–199, 1981, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-
4101(81)90002-1. 
[10] 
Government Accountability Office, “Public Accounting 
Firms: Required Study on the Potential Effects of 
Mandatory Audit Firm Rotation,” Government Printing 
Office, Washington D.C., 2003. 
[11] 
J. R. Francis, “What do we know about audit quality?,” 
British Accounting Review, vol. 36, no. 4. pp. 345–368, 
2004. doi: 10.1016/j.bar.2004.09.003. 
[12] 
D. Barr-Pulliam, H. L. Brown-Liburd, and K. A. 
Sanderson, “The Effects of the internal control opinion 
and use of audit data analytics on perceptions of audit 
quality, assurance, and auditor negligence,” A Journal of 
Practice & Theory (2022), vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 25–48, 
2022, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://doi.org/10.2308/AJPT-19-064 
[13] 
G. Salijeni, A. Samsonova-Tadderu, and S. Turley, “Big 
Data and changes in audit technology: contemplating a 
research agenda,” Accounting and Business Research, 
vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 95–119, 2019. 
[14] 
M. Cao, R. Chychyla, and T. Stewart, “Big Data 
analytics in financial statement audits,” Accounting 
Horizons, vol. 2, no. 29, pp. 423–429, 2015. 
[15] 
J. van Buuren and W. Wijma, “On quality assurance of 
data-driven control methodology,” Maandblad Voor 
Accountancy en Bedrijfseconomie, vol. 96, no. 1/2, pp. 
15–25, 2021. 
[16] 
AFM, “Legislative letter.” 2021. 
[17] 
FRC, “The use of technology in the audit of financial 
statements,” 2020. 
[18] 
A. Eilifsen, F. Kinserdal, W. F. Jr. Messier, and T. E. 
McKee, “An Exploratory Study into the Use of Audit 
Data Analytics on Audit Engagements,” American 
Accounting Association, pp. 1–23, 2020. 
138
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[19] 
M. Jans, P. Soffer, and T. Jouck, “Building a valuable 
event log for process mining: an experimental 
exploration of a guided process,” Enterp Inf Syst, vol. 13, 
no. 
5, 
pp. 
601–630, 
May 
2019, 
doi: 
10.1080/17517575.2019.1587788. 
[20] 
W. M. P. Van Der Aalst, “Process Mining,” in 
Discovery, Conformance and Enhancement of Business 
Processess, 2011, pp. 215–217. 
[21] 
W. van der Aalst, “Process Mining,” ACM Trans Manag 
Inf Syst, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 1–17, Jul. 2012, doi: 
10.1145/2229156.2229157. 
[22] 
A. Berti, S. van Zelst, and D. Schuster, “PM4Py: A 
process mining library for Python,” Software Impacts, 
vol. 
17, 
p. 
100556, 
Sep. 
2023, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.simpa.2023.100556. 
[23] 
A. J. M. M. Weijters, W. M. P. van der Aalst, and A. K. 
A. 
de 
Medeiros;, 
“Process 
Mining 
with 
the 
HeuristicsMiner Algorithm,” Beta working papers, no. 
May, 2006. 
[24] 
R. Likert, “A Technique for the Measurement of 
Attitudes,” rchives of Psychology, no. 140, pp. 1–55, 
1932. 
[25] 
L. H. Kidder, C. M. Judd, and E. R. Smith, Research 
methods in social relations, 5th ed. CBS College 
Publishing, 1986. 
[26] 
M. Zoet, “VTA-model,” 2018. Accessed: Feb. 01, 2023. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://martijnzoet.com/2018/10/22/het-value-through-
analytics-vta-model/ 
[27] 
J. Leek and R. D. Peng, “What is the question?,” Science 
Magazine, pp. 1314–1315, 2015. 
[28] 
W. M. P. Van Der Aalst, “Process Mining,” in 
Discovery, Conformance and Enhancement of Business 
Processess, 2011, pp. 215–217. 
[29] 
E. Mantelaers and M. Zoet, “Data-analysis (III).” 
Accessed: Mar. 27, 2023. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.accountant.nl/vaktechniek/2021/1/data-
analyse-nader-geanalyseerd-iii/ 
  
 
139
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

