 
Acoustic Emission Sensing of Materials and Structures at Mechanical Strengths 
 
Irinela Chilibon 
 
 
 
Optospintronics Department 
National Institute of Research and Development for Optoelectronics, INOE-2000 
Magurele, Romania 
e-mail: qilib@yahoo.com 
 
 
Abstract—Acoustic Emission (AE) sensing is used in the field 
for the testing of metal, composite and structures, as non-
destructive techniques. The AE technique allows determining 
the size of the cracks, damages, fractures and failures into 
materials. Possible causes of the internal-structure changes are 
crack initiation and growth, crack opening and closure, 
dislocation movement, twinning, and phase transformation in 
monolithic materials and fibre breakage and fibre-matrix 
debonding in composites. AE technology involves the use of 
ultrasonic transducers to listen for the sounds of failure 
occurring in materials and structures. Monitoring the stability 
of construction structures, by AE techniques get involve 
detecting the onset and evolution of stress-induced cracks and 
preventing the structural failures. 
Keywords-Acoustic Emission (AE); Acoustic Emission 
technique (AET); Non-Destructive Testing (NDT); Structural 
Health Monitoring (SHM); Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF). 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Acoustic Emission (AE) techniques have attracted 
attention to the diagnostic applications, material testing and 
study of deformation, fracture and corrosion, because they 
give an immediate indication of the response and behavior of 
materials under stresses, intimately connected with strength, 
damage, fracture and failure. AE technology involves the use 
of ultrasonic sensors (20 kHz - 1 MHz) to listen to the 
sounds of failure occurring in materials and structures [1], 
[2]. 
The roughest localization method is guessing the source 
origin using the “first hit” technique. The sensor which 
detects an AE first defines a radius or a half sphere, 
respectively, in which the signal originated. For instance, this 
can be done for some cases in combination with other 
techniques or knowledge to “localize” the source of failures. 
Fibre breakage, matrix cracking, and delaminating are 
three mechanisms that can produce AE signals when stress is 
applied to the material or structure.  Most of the sources of 
AEs are damage-related to the detection of these emissions. 
The continuous research evolution in this field may be 
useful for a targeted diagnosis of the corrosion-induced 
damage severity and the recognition of corrosion sources 
through the AE online inspection and monitoring [3]. Also, 
integrated 
with 
additional 
information, 
such 
as 
metallography, AE technique can provide a valid tool for 
identifying specific features related to crack initiation and 
propagation mechanisms. 
AE technology uses ultrasonic transducers in the 
frequency range (20 kHz - 1 MHz) to detect sounds emitted 
by defects that occur in materials and structures, which are 
subjected to mechanical pressure or temperature variations. 
Determining the degree of degradation of mechanical 
properties and the residual life of metal structures under 
complex dynamic deformation demands has various 
applications related to bending, static and dynamic tensile 
loads and defect initiation processes [4].  
In case of metal structures, fatigue failure occurs due to 
cyclic stress from operating conditions. The main 
mechanisms of failure occur from mechanical fatigue or 
thermal fatigue, such as: mechanical fatigue failure is due to 
cyclic stresses and thermal fatigue failure is due to cyclic 
temperature changes. The tipping point for failure is when 
the material fails at loads lower than the yield strength of the 
material. The acoustic emission as a monitoring tool has 
capabilities to detect fatigue crack initiation and propagation 
in mooring chains [5]. 
Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) allows the early 
detection of potential damages resulting from the natural 
deterioration of structural materials and the optimization of 
decisions over maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of the 
bridge asset [6].  
The structure of this paper is organized as follow: Section 
II describes the Acoustic Emission sensors. Section III 
describes the Acoustic emission monitoring methods. The 
conclusions and acknowledgment close the article. 
II. 
ACOUSTIC EMISSION SENSORS 
The future market for electronic devices will focus on 
miniaturized flexible electronic devices with low power 
consumption. The development of piezoelectric films with 
excellent piezoelectric responses and low coercive voltages 
would therefore be advantageous [7]. Acoustic emission 
sensors are usual piezoelectric receiver transducer, having as 
active elements discs made by piezoceramic lead titanate 
zirconate (PZT), lead titanate (PT), barium titanate (BP) [8], 
PVDF materials, copolymers, and composites. Piezoelectric 
materials are among the most important new materials in this 
century because of their excellent performances.  
Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), also known as 
polyvinylidene difluoride and PVF2, is part of the 
fluoropolymers family, a group of specialized, versatile 
polymeric materials with distinct properties that result from 
the strong bond between their carbon atoms and fluorine 
23
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
atoms and the fluorine shielding of the carbon backbone. 
PVDF is a polymer with pyroelectric and piezoelectric 
properties and is used in the manufacturing of diverse high-
purity, high-strength, and high-chemical-resistance products 
for applications in electrical, electronic, biomedical, 
construction, etc.; PVDF has a similar structure to poly 
(tetrafluoro-ethylene) PTFE, except that the hydrogen atoms 
are only replaced by fluorine on every alternate carbon [9]. 
Piezoceramic-based AE sensors measure the acoustic 
emissions and are sensitive to the flexural wave motion 
(vertical motion to the surface). The acoustic emissions due 
to impact hammering, fatal failure, large disturbances, and 
glass fracture had a high-amplitude vertical component of 
wave motion, detected by AE sensors. Attempts were made 
to capture the in-plane component of the wave motion using 
fiber-Bragg grating sensors. Coupled piezoelectric film strain 
sensors, monolithic piezoceramic patches were used to 
measure the acoustic waves [10]. The schematic of the cross-
section of a typical commercial AE sensor is shown in 
Figure 2. It has several components inside a steel housing. It 
has a backing plate, PZT material, electrodes, and damping 
material inside the housing. The top electrode of the PZT 
material is connected to the center conductor of the 
connector and the bottom electrode is grounded to the 
housing. A bonding agent is used to connect the AE sensor 
to the host structure [10]. Piezoelectric elements inside the 
sensor convert this pressure into current, which then 
converted to a voltage signal.  
 
 
Figure 1. Cross-section of a typical commercial AE sensor which measures 
out-of-plane wave motion [10]. 
 
Figure 2. Image of an AE sensor 
Figure 1 presents a cross-section of a typical commercial 
AE typical commercial AE sensor which measures out-of-
plane wave motion [10], and Figure 2 is the image of a usual 
AE sensor. 
 
Figure 3. AE sensor placed on a metal bar 
As an application, a piezoceramic AE sensor was fixed 
on the surface of a metal bar by means of a silicone 
Vaseline-type coupling material (Figure 3), which ensures 
the maximum coupled transmission coefficient of the 
acoustic elastic waves at the piezoelectric element of the 
sensor. 
 
 
Figure 4. Block diagram of a module with acoustic emission sensor (SEA) 
[11]. 
More sophisticated devices were constructed as 
intelligent modules with AE sensor (SEA), used to pick up 
the acoustic emission signals. For example, an intelligent 
module with AE sensor (MSEA) is composed by: Acoustic 
emission sensor (SEA), Wireless transmitter (ES), Wireless 
receiver (RS), Stabilized voltage source with battery, 
Amplifier, PIC 18F452 microcontroller (µC) (Figure 4) 
[11]. 
III. 
ACOUSTIC EMISSION MONITORING METHODS 
A. Non-Destructive Evaluation Techniques 
For historical buildings, Non-Destructive Evaluation 
(NDE) techniques are used for several purposes: (1) 
detecting hidden structural elements, such as floor structures, 
arches and piers; (2) determining masonry characteristics, 
mapping the heterogeneity of the materials used in the walls 
(e.g., use of different bricks during the life of a building); (3) 
evaluating the extent of the mechanical damage in cracked 
structures; (4) detecting voids and flaws; (5) determining 
moisture content and rising by capillary action; (6) detecting 
surface decay phenomena; and (7) evaluating the mechanical 
24
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
and physical properties of mortar and brick, or stone [12]. 
The choice of a technique for controlling and monitoring 
reinforced concrete or masonry structures is strictly 
correlated with the kind of structure to be analyzed and the 
data to be extracted. 
A general approach for AE data analysis, which will be 
followed here is stepwise: (a) evaluating AE activity, e.g.,  
the rate or cumulative number of selected AE hits or located 
events and noting their correlation with time or applied load; 
(b) evaluating AE intensity, e.g., the burst signal peak 
amplitude, burst signal energy, or continuous signal 
parameters and their behavior with load; (c) AE source 
location, if more than one AE sensor has been used, e.g., 
spatial or spatial-temporal clustering of AE event sources; 
and finally (d) looking for indications of different damage 
mechanisms, e.g., from AE intensity or waveform analysis 
[13]. 
Delamination behaviour of composites is a standard 
reference for all those researching laminated composites and 
using them in such diverse applications as microelectronics, 
aerospace, marine, automotive and civil engineering. In AE 
small amounts of elastic energy are released within a 
structure by a mechanical mechanism. Such energy release 
may arise from a variety of mechanisms, such as crack tip 
advance, plastic deformation, or other mechanical behaviour 
like friction and rubbing. This energy radiates from its point 
of release, known as the source, in all directions, 
propagating as an elastic wave [14]. The nature of this 
technique means that a source mechanism must be active 
(i.e., damage must be growing) in order for it to be detected, 
making it ideal for in-service structural health monitoring 
(SHM) and non-destructive testing (NDT).  
AE monitoring appears to be a promising technique that 
can be used for bridge inspection to quantify the condition 
of steel-reinforced concrete, where corrosion is occurring, 
and where repair is needed. 
Material study is another field of acoustic emission 
application. Particularly, acoustic emission is used for 
studies of: 
 
Environmental 
cracking 
including 
stress 
corrosion cracking, hydrogen embrittlement. 
 
Fatigue and creep crack growth. 
 
Material 
properties 
including 
material 
ductility or embrittlement, inclusions content. 
 
Plastic deformation development. 
 
Phase transformation, and many other. 
B. Acoustic Emission Testing Methods 
Acoustic emission is a very versatile, non-invasive way 
to gather information about a material or structure.  
Acoustic Emission Testing (AET) can be applied to inspect 
and monitor pipelines, pressure vessels, storage tanks, 
bridges, aircraft, and bucket trucks, and a variety of 
composite and ceramic components. It is also used in 
process control applications such as monitoring welding 
processes. Acoustic Emission Testing is a non-destructive 
testing method that "listens" for transient elastic-waves 
generated due to a rapid release of strain energy caused by a 
structural alteration in a solid material. 
Piping inspection is another common application, and 
Acoustic Emission is used efficiently and fast for detection 
of cracks, corrosion damage and leaks. There are multiple 
advantages of the method in case of piping inspection.  
For example, in case of buried or insulated pipelines 
(Figure 5), there is no need to open the entire surface of the 
pipe but just a small opening for installation of sensors, 
while a distance between sensors can be from few meters to 
100 meters. Acoustic emission testing is applied also for 
inspection of high pressure and temperature piping systems 
during their normal operation. 
 
 
Figure 5. AE sources related to corrosion development and a leak in an 
underground pipeline. 
As example, inspections of concrete and reinforced 
concrete bridges are applications where acoustic emission is 
used for detection of cracks, other concrete flaws, rebar 
corrosion, failure of cables and other. The method allows an 
overall inspection of a structure and long-term condition 
monitoring when it is necessary providing important 
information for bridge maintenance. 
An elastic wave is a combination of longitudinal, 
transverse, and reflected waves, with a broadband frequency 
range from kHz to MHz. The AE is a phenomenon in which 
transient elastic waves are generated by rapid release waves, 
and a monitoring system requires a source and crack 
propagation or a tendon failure (Figure 6) [6]. 
 
Figure 6. Working principle of an AE monitoring system [6]. 
The evaluation by AE monitoring of the complex 
mechanisms acting during stress corrosion crack (SCC) is 
still far from a clear, well accepted interpretation [3]. SCC is 
one of the most critical corrosion types and can also cause 
25
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
premature failures of structural components and should not 
be neglected in damage risk managements. 
Monitoring a structure by means of the AE technique 
makes it possible to detect the onset and evolution of stress-
induced cracks. Crack opening, in fact, is accompanied by 
the emission of elastic waves that propagate within the bulk 
of the material (Figure 7) [3]. 
 
Figure 7. Schematic of an Acoustic Emission event and related parameters 
[3]. 
These waves can be captured and recorded by 
transducers applied to the surface of the structural elements 
[12]. The signal identified by the transducer (Figure 8) is 
preamplified and transformed into electric voltage; it is then 
filtered to eliminate unwanted frequencies, such as the 
vibrations caused by the mechanical instrumentation, which 
are generally lower than 100 kHz. In the Ring-Down 
Counting method, the signal is analyzed by a threshold 
measuring unit, which counts the oscillations exceeding a 
certain voltage value.  
Non-destructive techniques were not accepted for long 
time for the testing bridges and other components of the 
infrastructures, because of inability of AE technique to 
determine the size of cracks [15].  
 
 
Figure 8. Counting methods in AE technique [12]. 
For example, one of the major issues in offshore 
equipment design is preventing the accumulation of fatigue 
damage over a long period of time.  
A full-scale fatigue test rig and the monitoring setup 
were arranged to perform the AE measurements [5]. The 
chain failure most likely occurs at the point of the intrados 
(the lower or inner curve of an arch) (KT point) and crown 
positions, due to higher localized stresses in these areas 
(Figure 9). Four sensors were used on links and a water-
based couplant was used to facilitate the transmission of the 
sound signal between the transducer and the link’s surface. 
Also, each sensor was equipped with an integrated 34 dB 
pre-amplification. 
 
 
Figure 9. Test rig illustration: the chain is fixed at one end (right) and the 
loading (strain) is applied at the other end (left) [5]. 
After careful evaluation of the different AE signal 
features and all possible correlations, it appears that the 
frequency content of the AE signals is the most promising 
parameter. An increase of the average frequency is observed 
with the growth of the crack in the chain [5]. 
AE sensor manufacturers typically provide a sensitivity 
curve based on face-to-face calibration. This calibration 
procedure has been treated as proprietary information and 
described only inadequately. Calibration curves are usually 
in reference to the reference level of 1 V/µbar, but this 
reference remains undefined [16].  
AE technique (AET) has found applications in 
monitoring the health of aerospace structures because 
sensors can be attached in easily accessed areas that are 
remotely located from damage prone sites.  AET has been 
used in laboratory structural tests, as well as in flight test 
applications. 
By signal graphic representation analysis in time and 
frequency can be determined the attenuation coefficient of 
the pulse into material. Figure 10 shows an aluminum pipe 
structure subjected to the mechanical stretching after its 
rupture [17]. 
 
 
Figure 10. Broken aluminium pipe at maximum mechanical stretch [17]. 
26
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 11 presents prevailed AE signals by the sensor in 
the breaking moment of aluminium pipe at the maximum 
stretch. Therefore, one can detect these emissions and 
predict the moment of material failure, and causing damage 
to the overall structure.  
 
 
Figure 11. AE time spectrum for aluminium pipe (ϕ20x150 mm, and 
thickness 1 mm) subjected to the mechanical stretching [17]. 
The use of the phenomenon of acoustic emission during 
deformations of tension and bending makes it possible to 
predict the onset of critically dangerous states of loss of 
working capacity of metal structures. 
The Acoustic Emission Technique (AET) is one of the 
non-destructive methods usually implemented to investigate 
the damage onset, damage evolution, and damage location 
in civil engineering structure [18].  
Investigating the performance of acoustic emission (AE) 
technique on material deterioration of masonry is subjected 
to uniaxial monotonic and cyclic tensile loadings [19]. The 
basic acoustic emission (AE) counting, considering the 
cumulative or averaged number of AE hits or AE energy, 
proves the capacity of AET for damage assessment in 
masonry. Auto Sensor Test (AST) is carried out 
preliminarily to ensure no variation of sensor sensitivity. 
In the case of localization AE events at a minimum error, 
an experimental set-up with four AE sensors, formed into a 
three-dimensional space is placed at the four corners of 
specimen, near the expected initial crack, each sensor placed 
about 2 cm from the stone edge (Figure 12) [19] . 
 
 
Figure 12. Experimental setup and instrumentations [19]. 
 
Experimental tests reveal that the signal durations 
represent a dominant parameter which can distinguish the 
signal from micro crack to macro crack, based on the 
correlation between the evolution of AE energy and fracture 
energy. Also, the scale effect should be considered, 
according to [20], as the mechanical analysis of masonry 
specimen under tensile loading is concentrated in the 
mesoscale, while the emission is received in a micro scale, 
more fundamental research is needed to uncover this relation 
at microscale. 
Average Frequency (AF) is defined as the ratio between 
the number of counts and duration of an AE waveform. It 
basically determines the number of threshold crossings per 
unit time of an AE waveform [21]. 
 
Average Frequency (AF) [in kHz] = Counts/Duration      (1) 
 
where “Counts” indicates the number of times the signal 
amplitude exceeds the fixed threshold over the entire 
duration of the AE waveform, and RA value of an AE 
waveform is defined as the ratio between the rise time and 
amplitude: 
 
            RA [in μs⁄V] = Rise time/Amplitude                  (2)  
 
 
 
Figure 13. Schematic representation of (a) an AE signal and some 
important AE parameters, (b) tensile crack, and (c) shear crack [21].  
 
AE waveforms generated due to tensile cracks (Figure 
13) have shorter rise time, tensile-type cracks usually 
generate AE signals with lower RA values and higher AF, 
and in the case of shear-type cracks, the AE waveforms are 
longer, RA values are relatively higher, and AF is lower. 
Various features, such as, amplitude, rise time, counts, 
duration, energy, number of hits, etc. [21] of the acoustic 
emission signals can be analyse and monitored the 
progressive damage of the samples under the four-point 
bending test. 
 
27
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 14. Reinforced concrete T-beam subjected to four-point bending and 
acoustic monitoring [21]. 
 
Much more, AE activity evolves as function of the 
applied load, where amplitudes of the involved AE hits 
become higher in the case of a major crack, and the 
cumulative number of hits can be considered as a global 
parameter, which can be sensitive to the mechanical test 
conditions for instance the load rate. The evolution of the 
cumulative hits per unit time is constant for each mechanical 
test and the evolution of the cumulative hits per unit time is 
proportional to the loading rate, where the highest value is 
for the loading rate corresponding to 4 mm/s, which creates 
the shortest nonlinear zone.  
In order to classify the AE data, machine learning 
methods type supervised and unsupervised are employed.  
Guo et al. present experimental quasi-static splitting 
tensile tests corresponding to a strain rate of ∼2×10−6 s−1 
using a Shimadzu universal testing machine. Each 
cylindrical specimen is placed on the lower loading platen 
with its axis parallel to the platen, and the upper loading 
platen was set to move downwards at a speed of 0.2 
mm/min to compress the specimen (Figure 15) [22]. 
 
 
 
Figure 15. Experimental arrangement for quasi-static splitting tensile tests 
[22]. 
 
It is useful to verify, for the length scale studied, 
whether a homogeneous-linear-elastic analysis yields 
reasonable estimates of stress and deformation. Using 
elastic analysis one can determine material tensile stresses 
(Ɛ) derived at 00, 450 and 900 [22], and the theoretical values 
are compared with those measured by the strain gauges 
(Figure 16).  
Concrete is heterogeneous at the meso-scale, comprising 
a mortar matrix with randomly distributed coarse aggregate 
particles, and is able to display a small degree of plasticity. 
 
 
 
Figure 16. Variation of tensile stress at specimen centre (2P/(πLD)) with 
average strain in three directions (0°, 45° and 90°), for a splitting test on a 
C80 specimen – comparison of experimental results with theoretical 
predictions based on elastic analysis [22]. 
 
A monitoring system can analyse parameters like count, 
hit, event, rise time, duration, peak amplitude, energy, RMS 
(root mean square), voltage, frequency spectrum, arrival – 
time difference, etc. Considering AE measurement in 
concrete, one can use the standard ISO 16836 / 2019[23]. A 
measuring system with a digital-signal processor includes 
the following main elements: (S) - AE sensor, (Pa) - pre-
amplifier, (Ma) - main amplifier and (Bf) - band-pass filter. 
The AE localization algorithms are based on the distance 
travelled by the emitted waves. Their value can be achieved 
by multiplying arrival time to the propagation speed in the 
specific medium. The speed of the P-wave in a structure is 
closely related to the travel path. 
Localization of AE sources in different structures can be 
done by using one or more AE sensors and representation in 
1D linear, 2D planar and  3D localization technique (Figure 
17) [24]. 
Single-sensor approaches are based on modal acoustic 
emission (MAE), which requires identification of the arrival 
time of extensional and flexural wave modes. 
 
28
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
Figure 17. Localization of AE sources in 3-D structures [24]. 
 
Since the velocities for both modes are different, it is 
possible to calculate the distance traveled by the 
propagation of the wave modes if the respective velocities 
are known. The implementation of MAE has several 
associated problems, such as wave reflections and the 
separation of multiple AE events [24]. 
The attenuation of the extension wave is measured to 
appreciate its applicability in the long-range localization of 
sources. Time reversal technique and the artificial neural 
network are used in the literature for the AE localization 
problem. The convolutional neural network is more stable in 
allowing more information rich inputs in the frequency 
domain.  
Triangulation method for AE source localization relies 
on the identification of precise arrival times and the 
knowledge of an appropriate propagation velocity.  
The experimental works can determine practical 
information concerning the AE response of different 
materials and structures at mechanical strength and predict 
their behaviour and maximum strengths.  
As novelty, monitoring the stability of important 
construction structures, by AE technique makes possible to 
detect the onset and evolution of stress-induced cracks and 
prevent the structural failures. Also, AETs investigate the 
damage onset, damage evolution, and damage location in 
civil engineering structure, material deterioration of 
masonry. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The acoustic emission techniques are well applied for 
the identification, characterization, and localization of 
deformations in civil engineering structures. Numerous 
localization techniques, i. e. Structural Health Monitoring, 
Modal Acoustic Emission, Neural Networks, Beamforming, 
and Triangulation methods with or without prior knowledge 
of wave velocity can detect into material structure the 
fatigue cracks, delaminations, corrosions, etc.  
Monitoring structures by AE techniques could detect the 
onset and evolution of stress-induced cracks into materials 
(metals, non-metals, composites) and the crack opening is 
accompanied by the acoustic emission of elastic waves that 
propagate within the bulk of the materials and structures. 
These waves (AE) can be captured and recorded by 
transducers, type AE sensors, applied to the surface of the 
structural elements and provide the material behavior at 
mechanical stresses, fatigue and vibrations.  
Crack initiation into material is determined by the 
appearance of the AE signal at low stretch stress levels. 
After the crack initiated, the AE signals around the zero 
stress could be the cause by crack-face grinding when the 
cracks are closed. By experimental works one can determine 
practical information concerning the strength of different 
type of materials, their mechanical limits at different stretch 
values. More, it can obtain practical information about AE 
of monitories complex construction structures, such as: 
bridges, containers fulfilled with liquids, etc., in order to 
prevent their possible breaking due to hostile environmental 
(shocks, long time vibrations, bending, temperature 
differences, etc.).  
The internal stress redistribution of the materials caused 
by the changes in the internal structure can be predicted by 
the monitoring the acoustic emissions of the stress waves 
generated by the structures.  
Possible causes of the internal-structure changes are 
crack initiation and growth, crack opening and closure, 
dislocation movement, twinning, and phase transformation 
in monolithic materials and fiber breakage. A number of 
challenges related to accurate localization and classification 
of sources still remain, which must be addressed in order to 
exploit the full potential of the AE technique. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Romanian Ministry of 
Research, Innovation and Digitalization (MRID) for:1) Core 
Program PN 18N/2019 and PN 23 05 No. 11N /2023, and 2) 
Program I – Development of the National R & D System, 
Subprogram 1.2 Institutional Performance-Projects for 
Excellence Financing in RDI, contr.18PFE/2021. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
I. Chilibon, “Acoustic Emission Sensing of Materials 
and Structures”, The Thirteenth International Conference on 
Sensor 
Device 
Technologies 
and 
Applications 
(SENSORDEVICES 2022) IARIA, Oct. 2022, pp. 32-37, ISSN: 
2308-3514, ISBN: 978-1-68558-006-3. 
[2] 
D. H. Kim, W. K. Lee, and S. W. Kim, “Analysis of 
Acoustic Emission Signal for the Detection of Defective 
Manufactures in Press Process,” World Academy of Science, 
Engineering and Technology, vol. 53, pp. 1301-1305, 2009. 
[3] 
L. Calabrese and E. Proverbio, “A Review on the 
Applications of Acoustic Emission Technique in the Study of 
Stress Corrosion Cracking,” Corros. Mater. Degrad. vol. 2, pp. 1–
30, 2021, https://doi.org/10.3390/cmd2010001. 
[4] 
P. Louda, A. Sharko, and D. Stepanchikov, “An Acoustic 
Emission Method for Assessing the Degree of Degradation of 
Mechanical Properties and Residual Life of Metal Structures under 
29
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Complex Dynamic Deformation Stresses,” Materials, vol. 14, pp. 
2090, 2021, https://doi.org/10.3390/ma14092090. 
[5] 
Á. Angulo et al. “Acoustic Emission Monitoring of 
Fatigue Crack Growth in Mooring Chains,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, pp. 
2187, 2019; doi:10.3390/app9112187. 
[6] 
D. Tonelli, M. Luchetta, F. Rossi, and P. Migliorino, 
“Structural Health Monitoring Based on Acoustic Emissions: 
Validation on a Prestressed Concrete Bridge Tested to Failure,” 
Sensors, vol. 20, pp. 7272, 2020, doi:10.3390/s20247272. 
[7] 
J-X. Chen, J-W Li, C-C. Cheng, and C-W. Chiu, 
“Piezoelectric 
Property 
Enhancement 
of 
PZT/Poly(vinylidenefluoride-co-trifluoroethylene) Hybrid Films 
for Flexible Piezoelectric Energy Harvesters,” ACS Omega, vol. 7, 
pp. 793−803, 2022. 
[8] 
R. Lay, G. S. Deijs, and J. Malmstrom, “The intrinsic 
piezoelectric properties of materials –a review with a focus on 
biological materials,” RSC Adv., vol. 11, pp. 30657, 2021. 
[9] 
J. E. Marshall et al. “On the Solubility and Stability of 
Polyvinylidene Fluoride,” Polymers, vol. 13, Issue 9,  pp. 1354, 
2021, https://doi.org/10.3390/polym13091354. 
[10] 
Y. Bhuiyan, B. Lin, and V. Giurgiutiu, “Characterization 
of piezoelectric wafer active sensor for acoustic emission sensing,” 
Ultrasonics, vol. 92, pp. 35-49, 2019. 
[11] 
I. Chilibon, M. Mogildea, and G. Mogildea, “Wireless 
acoustic emission sensor device with microcontroller,” Edited by: 
R. Walczak, J. Dziuban, Conference: 26th European Conference on 
Solid-State Transducers (Eurosensors), September 2012. 
[12] 
A. Carpinteri, S. Invernizzi, and G. Lacidogna, 
“Historical brick-masonry subjected to double flat-jack test: 
Acoustic emissions and scale effects on cracking density,” 
Construction and Building materials, vol. 23, Issue 8, pp. 2813-
2820, August 2009. 
[13] 
J. Bohse, “Acoustic emission characteristics of micro-
failure processes in polymer blends and composites,” Composites 
Science and Technology, vol. 60(8), pp. 1213–1226, 2000,  
doi:10.1016/S0266-3538(00)00060-9. 
[14] 
K. M. Holford, M. J. Eaton, J. J. Hensman, R. Pullin, S. 
L. Evans, N. Dervilis, and K. Worden,“A new methodology for 
automating acoustic emission detection of metallic fatigue 
fractures in highly demanding aerospace environments: An 
overview,” Progress in Aerospace Science, vol. 90, pp. 1-11, April 
2017, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paerosci.2016.11.003. 
[15] 
S. Uppal, D. Yoshino, and H.I. Dunegang, “Using 
Acoustic Emission to Monitor Fatigue cracks on the Bridge at 
FAST,” Technology Digest, February 2002. 
[16] 
K. Ono, “Calibration Methods of Acoustic Emission 
Sensors,” 
Materials, 
vol. 
 
9(7), 
pp. 
508, 
2016, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ma9070508. 
[17] 
I. Chilibon, “Metallic Structures Behaviour under 
Mechanical Stretches” 17th International Congress on Sound and 
Vibration (ICSV17), pp. 1-5, July 2010. 
[18] 
A. Boniface, J. Saliba, Z.M. Sbartaï, N. Ranaivomanana, 
and J.-P Balayssac, “Evaluation of the acoustic emission 3D 
localisation accuracy for the mechanical damage monitoring in 
concrete,” Eng. Fract. Mech., vol. 223, pp. 106742, 2020, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engfracmech.2019.106742. 
[19] 
S. Peng et al., “Mechanical damage evaluation of 
masonry under tensile loading by acoustic emission technique,” 
Construction and Building Materials, vol. 258, pp. 120336, 2020 
[20] 
A. Carpinteri, G. Lacidogna, M. Corrado, and E. Di 
Battista, “Cracking and crackling in concrete-like materials: a 
dynamic energy balance,” Eng. Fract. Mech., vol.  155, pp. 130–
144, 
Apr. 
2016, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engfracmech.2016.01.013. 
[21] 
D. D. Mandal, M. Bentahar, A. E. Mahi, A. Brouste, R. 
E. Guerjouma, S. Montresor, and F.-B. Cartiaux, “Acoustic 
Emission Monitoring of Progressive Damage of Reinforced 
Concrete T-Beams  under Four-Point Bending,” Materials, vol. 15, 
3486,  pp. 1-25, 2022, https://doi.org/10.3390/ma15103486. 
[22] 
Y. B. Guo, G. F. Gao, L. Jing, and V. P. W. Shim, 
“Quasi-static and dynamic splitting of high-strength concretes—
Tensile stress–strain response and effects of strain rat,” Int. J. 
Impact Eng. vol. 125, pp. 188–211, 2019. 
[23] 
International Standard ISO 16836: 2019, Non-destructive 
testing – acoustic emission inspectrion measurement method for 
acoustic emission signals in concrete 
[24] 
F. Hassan et al. “State-of-the-Art Review on AE Source 
Localization Techniques,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 101246-
101266, 2021. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

