High-Speed Video Analysis of Ballistic Trials to Investigate Simulation Methods  
for Fiber-Reinforced Plastics Under Impact Loading 
Using the Example of Ultra-High Molecular Weight Polyethylene 
 
Arash Ramezani and Hendrik Rothe 
Chair of Measurement and Information Technology 
University of the Federal Armed Forces  
Hamburg, Germany 
Email: ramezani@hsu-hh.de, rothe@hsu-hh.de 
 
 
Abstract—In the security sector, the partly insufficient safety of 
people and equipment due to failure of industrial components 
are ongoing problems that cause great concern. Since 
computers and software have spread into all fields of industry, 
extensive efforts are currently made in order to improve the 
safety by applying certain numerical solutions. This work 
presents a set of numerical simulations of ballistic tests which 
analyze the effects of composite armor plates. The focus lies on 
high-speed videos and modern investigation methods. The goal 
is to improve fiber-reinforced plastics in order to be able to 
cope with current challenges. Of course, the maximization of 
security is the primary goal, but keeping down the costs is 
becoming increasingly important. This is why numerical 
simulations are more frequently applied than experimental 
tests which are thus being replaced gradually. 
Keywords-solver technologies; simulation models; fiber-
reinforced plastics; optimization; armor systems; ballistic trials. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
This work will focus on composite armor structures 
consisting of several layers of ultra-high molecular weight 
polyethylene (UHMW-PE), a promising ballistic armor 
material due to its high specific strength and stiffness. The 
goal is to evaluate the ballistic efficiency of UHMW-PE 
composite with numerical simulations, promoting an 
effective development process. First approaches are 
discussed in detail in [1]. 
Due to the fact that all engineering simulation is based 
on geometry to represent the design, the target and all its 
components are simulated as CAD models. The work will 
also provide a brief overview of ballistic tests to offer some 
basic knowledge of the subject, serving as a basis for the 
comparison of the simulation results. Details of ballistic 
trials on composite armor systems are presented. Instead of 
running expensive trials, numerical simulations should 
identify vulnerabilities of structures. Contrary to the 
experimental result, numerical methods allow easy and 
comprehensive studying of all mechanical parameters. 
Modeling will also help to understand how the fiber-
reinforced plastic armor schemes behave during impact and 
how the failure processes can be controlled to our 
advantage. By progressively changing the composition of 
several layers and the material thickness, the composite 
armor will be optimized. There is every reason to expect 
possible weight savings and a significant increase in 
protection, through the use of numerical techniques 
combined with a small number of physical experiments. 
After a brief introduction and description of the different 
methods of space discretization in Section III, there is a 
short section on ballistic trials where the experimental set-
up is depicted, followed by Section V describing the 
analysis with numerical simulations. The paper ends with a 
concluding paragraph in Section VI.  
II. 
STATE-OF-THE-ART 
The numerical modeling of composite materials under 
impact can be performed at a constituent level (i.e., explicit 
modeling of fibre and matrix elements, e.g., [2]), a meso-
mechanical level (i.e., consolidated plies or fibre bundles, 
e.g., [3]), or macromechanically in which the composite 
laminate is represented as a continuum.  
In [4–7] a non-linear orthotropic continuum material 
model was developed and implemented in a commercial 
hydrocode (i.e., ANSYS® AUTODYN®) for application 
with 
aramid 
and 
carbon 
fibre 
composites 
under 
hypervelocity impact. The non-linear orthotropic material 
model includes orthotropic coupling of the material 
volumetric and deviatoric responses, a non-linear equation 
of state (EoS), orthotropic hardening, combined stress 
failure criteria and orthotropic energy-based softening. For 
more detail refer to [8].  
Lässig et al. [9] conducted extensive experimental 
characterization of Dyneema® HB26 UHMW-PE composite 
for application in the continuum non-linear orthotropic 
material model, and validated the derived material 
parameters through simulation of spherical projectile 
impacts 
at 
hypervelocity. 
The 
target 
geometry 
is 
homogenized. The projectile is an aluminum ball in 
simplified terms. However, homogenized target geometries 
with orthotropic material models are not able to reproduce 
different modes of failure. The results are valid for 
64
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

aluminum spherical-shaped projectiles in hypervelocity 
range only. 
Nguyen et al. [10] evaluated and refined the modeling 
approach and material model parameter set developed in [9] 
for the simulation of impact events from 400 m/s to 6600 
m/s. Across this velocity range the sensitivity of the 
numerical output is driven by different aspects of the 
material model, e.g., the strength model in the ballistic 
regime and the equation of state (EoS) in the hypervelocity 
regime. Here, the target geometry is divided into sub-
laminates joined by bonded contacts breakable through a 
combined tensile and shear stress failure criterion.  
The models mentioned above are valid for blunt FSP´s 
from a velocity range of 400 to 6600 m/s. They show 
considerable shortcomings in simulating pointed projectiles 
and thick HB26-composites. 
This paper will present an optimal solution of this 
problem with an enhanced model for ultra-high molecular 
weight polyethylene under impact loading. For the first 
time, composite armor structures consisting of several layers 
of fiber-reinforced plastics are simulated for all the current 
military threats. 
III. 
METHODS OF SPACE DISCRETIZATION 
To deal with problems involving the release of a large 
amount of energy over a very short period of time, e.g., 
explosions and impacts, there are three approaches: as the 
problems are highly non-linear and require information 
regarding material behavior at ultra-high loading rates 
which is generally not available, most of the work is 
experimental and thus may cause tremendous expenses. 
Analytical approaches are possible if the geometries 
involved are relatively simple and if the loading can be 
described through boundary conditions, initial conditions or 
a combination of the two. Numerical solutions are far more 
general in scope and remove any difficulties associated with 
geometry [11]. They apply an explicit method and use very 
small time steps for stable results. 
The most commonly used spatial discretization methods 
are Lagrange, Euler, ALE (a mixture of Lagrange and Euler), 
and mesh-free methods, such as Smooth Particles 
Hydrodynamics (SPH) [12].  
A. Lagrange 
The Lagrange method of space discretization uses a mesh 
that moves and distorts with the material it models as a result 
of forces from neighboring elements (meshes are imbedded 
in material). There is no grid required for the external space, 
as the conservation of mass is automatically satisfied and 
material boundaries are clearly defined. This is the most 
efficient solution methodology with an accurate pressure 
history definition.  
The 
Lagrange 
method 
is 
most 
appropriate 
for 
representing solids, such as structures and projectiles. If 
however, there is too much deformation of any element, it 
results in a very slowly advancing solution and is usually 
terminated because the smallest dimension of an element 
results in a time step that is below the threshold level.  
B. Euler 
The Euler (multi-material) solver utilizes a fixed mesh, 
allowing materials to flow (advect) from one element to the 
next (meshes are fixed in space). Therefore, an external 
space needs to be modeled. Due to the fixed grid, the Euler 
method avoids problems of mesh distortion and tangling that 
are prevalent in Lagrange simulations with large flows. The 
Euler solver is very well-suited for problems involving 
extreme material movement, such as fluids and gases. To 
describe solid behavior, additional calculations are required 
to transport the solid stress tensor and the history of the 
material through the grid. Euler is generally more 
computationally intensive than Lagrange and requires a 
higher resolution (smaller elements) to accurately capture 
sharp pressure peaks that often occur with shock waves.  
C. ALE  
The ALE method of space discretization is a hybrid of 
the Lagrange and Euler methods. It allows redefining the 
grid continuously in arbitrary and predefined ways as the 
calculation 
proceeds, 
which 
effectively 
provides 
a 
continuous rezoning facility. Various predefined grid 
motions can be specified, such as free (Lagrange), fixed 
(Euler), equipotential, equal spacing, and others. The ALE 
method can model solids as well as liquids. The advantage of 
ALE is the ability to reduce and sometimes eliminate 
difficulties caused by severe mesh distortions encountered by 
the Lagrange method, thus allowing a calculation to continue 
efficiently. However, compared to Lagrange, an additional 
computational step of rezoning is employed to move the grid 
and remap the solution onto a new grid [13].  
D. SPH 
The mesh-free Lagrangian method of space discretization 
(or SPH method) is a particle-based solver and was initially 
used in astrophysics. The particles are imbedded in material 
and they are not only interacting mass points but also 
interpolation points used to calculate the value of physical 
variables based on the data from neighboring SPH particles, 
scaled by a weighting function. Because there is no grid 
defined, distortion and tangling problems are avoided as 
well. Compared to the Euler method, material boundaries 
and interfaces in the SPH are rather well defined and 
material separation is naturally handled. Therefore, the SPH 
solver is ideally suited for certain types of problems with 
extensive material damage and separation, such as cracking. 
This type of response often occurs with brittle materials and 
hypervelocity impacts. However, mesh-free methods, such as 
Smooth Particles Hydrodynamics, can be less efficient than 
mesh-based 
Lagrangian 
methods 
with 
comparable 
resolution. 
Fig. 1 gives a short overview of the solver technologies 
mentioned above. The crucial factor is the grid that causes 
different outcomes.  
65
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 1.  Examples of Lagrange, Euler, ALE, and SPH simulations on an 
impact problem [14]. 
The behavior (deflection) of the simple elements is well-
known and may be calculated and analyzed using simple 
equations called shape functions. By applying coupling 
conditions between the elements at their nodes, the overall 
stiffness of the structure may be built up and the 
deflection/distortion of any node – and subsequently of the 
whole structure – can be calculated approximately [15]. 
For problems of dynamic fluid-structure interaction and 
impact, there typically is no single best numerical method 
which is applicable to all parts of a problem. Techniques to 
couple types of numerical solvers in a single simulation can 
allow the use of the most appropriate solver for each domain 
of the problem.  
The goal of this paper is to evaluate a hydrocode, a 
computational tool for modeling the behavior of continuous 
media. In its purest sense, a hydrocode is a computer code 
for modeling fluid flow at all speeds [11]. For that reason a 
structure will be split into a number of small elements. The 
elements are connected through their nodes (see Fig. 2).  
The behavior (deflection) of the simple elements is well-
known and may be calculated and analyzed using simple 
equations called shape functions. By applying coupling 
conditions between the elements at their nodes, the overall 
stiffness of the structure may be built up and the 
deflection/distortion of any node – and subsequently of the 
whole structure – can be calculated approximately [16].  
Using a CAD-neutral environment that supports 
bidirectional, direct, and associative interfaces with CAD 
systems, the geometry can be optimized successively [17].  
 
Figure 2.  Example grid. 
Therefore, several runs are necessary: from modeling to 
calculation to the evaluation and subsequent improvement 
of the model (see Fig. 3). 
Bullet-resistant materials are usually tested by using a 
gun to fire a projectile from a set distance into the material in 
a set pattern. Levels of protection (see Fig. 4) are based on 
the ability of the target to stop a specific type of projectile 
traveling at a specific speed.  
IV. 
BALLISTIC TRIALS 
Ballistics is an essential component for the evaluation of 
our results. Here, terminal ballistics is the most important 
sub-field. It describes the interaction of a projectile with its 
target. Terminal ballistics is relevant for both small and 
large caliber projectiles. The task is to analyze and evaluate 
the impact and its various modes of action. This will 
provide information on the effect of the projectile and the 
extinction risk.  
Terminal ballistics is the general name for a large 
number of processes which take place during the high 
velocity impact of various projectiles/target combinations. 
There are two related disciplines which deal with launching 
these 
projectiles. 
Interior 
ballistics 
concerns 
their 
acceleration to the desired velocity, and exterior ballistics 
deals with their flight dynamics from the launcher to the 
target. 
The science and engineering of impacting bodies have a 
large range of applications depending on their type and their 
impact velocities. At very low velocities, these impacts can 
be limited to the elastic range of response, with practically 
no damage to the impacted bodies. In contrast, at very high 
impact velocities these bodies experience gross deformation, 
local melting, and even total disintegration upon impact. 
Various scientific and engineering disciplines are devoted to 
specific areas in this field such as: vehicle impacts, rain 
erosion, armor and anti-armor design, spacecraft protection 
against meteorites and the impact of planets by large 
meteors at extremely high velocities.  
 
Figure 3.  Basically iterative procedure of a FE analysis [15]. 
66
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In order to follow these different events the researcher 
has to be acquainted with diverse scientific fields which 
include: elasticity and plasticity of solids, fracture 
mechanics and the physics of materials at high pressures and 
temperatures.  
Terminal ballistics is the generic name for the science 
and engineering of impacts which are of interest to armor 
and anti-armor engineers. The relevant impact velocities 
usually range between 0.5 and 2.0 km/s, the so-called 
ordnance velocity range. These are the velocities at which 
projectiles are launched against personnel, armored vehicles 
and buildings, by rifles and guns. The impact velocities of 
shaped charge jets are within the hypervelocity range of 
2.0–8.0 km/s, and their interaction with armor is also of 
major interest to both armor and anti-armor engineers.  
The science of terminal ballistics started with the works 
of the great mathematician Leonard Euler (1745) and the 
British engineer Benjamin Robins (1742), who analyzed 
data for the penetration of steel cannonballs in soil as a 
function of their impact velocities. In the following two 
centuries, until the Second World War, the field of terminal 
ballistics was based on empirically derived relations 
between the penetration depth and the impact velocity of 
various projectiles into different targets. The reviews of 
Hermann and Jones (1961) and Backman and Goldsmith 
(1978), summarize many of these empirical formulas which 
were suggested over this period.  
During the years of WW-II, scientists in the US and UK 
have analyzed the penetration process of shaped charge jets 
and rigid steel projectiles into armor plates, through 
analytical 
models 
which 
were 
based 
on 
physical 
considerations. These models identify the main force 
exerted on the projectile during penetration, which is then 
inserted in its equation of motion. The aim of these models 
is to reduce the mathematical description of a complicated 
three dimensional problem to a simple form which retains 
the essential physics of the penetration process. This 
simplification results in either a low dimensional system of 
ordinary differential equations or a few one-dimensional 
partial differential equations, which can be easily solved. 
The models can be tested by controlled experiments, in 
which the parameters are varied in a systematic way, in 
order to establish the non-dimensional parameters of the 
process. With these analytical models data correlation is 
made easy and extrapolations, to areas beyond the ability of 
experimental facilities, are possible. On the other hand, 
these analytical models require some compromise to be 
made, limiting their use to ideal cases where only a single 
mechanism is at work. Still, these models have been used 
successfully in order to account for the data and to reduce 
the number of the necessary experiments in terminal 
ballistics. Since the advancements in numerical simulations, 
the role of analytical models seems to decline as the codes 
are getting better and more efficient. However, these 
numerical simulations are often used just to account for 
experimental data, offering little physical insight for the 
process. Our strong belief is that analytical modeling is 
crucial for the field of terminal ballistics in order to 
understand the physics involved, and to highlight the 
important parameters which influence these processes.  
Predictive numerical simulation of any structural 
deformation 
process 
requires 
objective 
constitutive 
equations including parameters that are derived objectively 
for the material. Objective, in this context, means that the 
parameters are valid for the whole spectrum of loading 
conditions covered by the material model. This includes its 
applicability to arbitrary domains or geometries without 
restriction to specific structures. Experimental parameter 
derivation providing that kind of data can be called material 
test. The objectivity criterion to the parameters distinguishes 
the material test from a structural test used for verification 
or validation purposes. 
Given that a projectile strikes a target, compressive 
waves propagate into both the projectile and the target. 
Relief waves propagate inward from the lateral free surfaces 
of the penetrator, cross at the centerline, and generate a high 
tensile stress. If the impact was normal, we would have a 
two-dimensional stress state. If the impact was oblique, 
bending stresses will be generated in the penetrator. When 
the compressive wave reached the free surface of the target, 
it would rebound as a tensile wave. The target may fracture 
at this point. The projectile may change direction if it 
perforates (usually towards the normal of the target surface).  
Because of the differences in target behavior based on 
the proximity of the distal surface, we must categorize 
targets into four broad groups. A semi-infinite target is one 
where there is no influence of distal boundary on 
penetration. A thick target is one in which the boundary 
influences penetration after the projectile is some distance 
into the target. An intermediate thickness target is a target 
where the boundaries exert influence throughout the impact. 
Finally, a thin target is one in which stress or deformation 
gradients are negligible throughout the thickness.   
There are several methods by which a target will fail 
when subjected to an impact. The major variables are the 
target and penetrator material properties, the impact 
velocity, the projectile shape (especially the ogive), the 
geometry of the target supporting structure, and the 
dimensions of the projectile and target. 
In order to develop a numerical model, a ballistic test 
program is necessary. The ballistic trials are thoroughly 
documented and analyzed – even fragments must be 
collected. They provide information about the used armor 
and the projectile behavior after fire, which must be 
consistent with the simulation results (see Fig. 5). 
67
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
In order to create a data set for the numerical 
simulations, several experiments have to be performed. 
Ballistic tests are recorded with high-speed videos and 
analyzed afterwards. The experimental set-up is shown in 
Fig. 6.  
Testing was undertaken at an indoor ballistic testing 
facility (see Fig. 7). The target stand provides support 
behind the target on all four sides. Every ballistic test 
program includes several trials with different composites. 
The set-up has to remain unchanged.  
The camera system is a PHANTOM v1611 that enables 
fast image rates up to 646,000 frames per second (fps) at 
full resolution of 1280 x 800 pixels. The use of a polarizer 
and a neutral density filter is advisable, so that waves of 
some polarizations can be blocked while the light of a 
specific polarization can be passed. 
Several targets of different laminate configurations were 
tested to assess the ballistic limit (V50). The ballistic limit is 
considered the velocity required for a particular projectile to 
reliably (at least 50% of the time) penetrate a particular 
piece of material [20]. After the impact, the projectile is 
examined regarding any kind of change it might have 
undergone. 
Figure 4. The APR 2006 resistance classification and related CAD models [19]. 
68
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 5.  Ballistic tests and the analysis of fragments. 
 
Figure 6.  Experimental set-up. 
 
Figure 7.  Indoor ballistic testing facility. 
The damage propagation is analyzed using the software 
called COMEF [21], image processing software for highly 
accurate measuring functions. The measurement takes place 
via setting measuring points manually on the monitor. Area 
measurement is made by the free choice of grey tones 
(0…255). Optionally the object with the largest surface area 
can be recognized automatically as object.  Smaller particles 
within the same grey tone range as the sample under test are 
automatically ignored by this filter.   
Fig. 8 shows an example of measuring and analyzing 
damages after impact.  
V. 
NUMERICAL SIMULATION 
The ballistic tests are followed by computational 
modeling of the experimental set-up. Then, the experiment is 
reproduced using numerical simulations. Fig. 1 shows a 
cross-section of the projectile and a CAD model. The 
geometry and observed response of the laminate to ballistic 
impact is approximately symmetric to the axis through the 
bullet impact point.   
Numerical simulation of modern armor structures 
requires the selection of appropriate material models for the 
constituent materials and the derivation of suitable material 
model input data. The laminate system studied here is an 
ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene composite. Lead 
and copper are also required for the projectiles.  
The projectile was divided into different parts - the jacket 
and the base - which have different properties and even 
different meshes. These elements have quadratic shape 
functions and nodes between the element edges. In this way, 
the computational accuracy, as well as the quality of curved 
model shapes increases. Using the same mesh density, the 
application of parabolic elements leads to a higher accuracy 
compared to linear elements (1st order elements). 
A. Modelling 
In [9], numerical simulations of 15 kg/m2 Dyneema® 
HB26 panels impacted by 6 mm diameter aluminum spheres 
between 2052 m/s to 6591 m/s were shown to provide very 
good agreement with experimental measurements of the 
panel ballistic limit and residual velocities, see Fig. 9.  
69
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 8.  Ballistic tests and the analysis of fragments. 
The modelling approach and material parameter set from 
[8] were applied to simulate impact experiments at 
velocities in the ballistic regime (here considered as < 1000 
m/s). In Fig. 9 the results of modelling impact of 20 mm 
fragment simulating projectiles (FSPs) against 10 mm thick 
Dyneema® HB26 are shown. The model shows a significant 
under prediction of the ballistic limit, 236 m/s compared to 
394 m/s. 
B. Simulation Results 
Relatively newer numerical discretization methods, such 
as Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH), have been 
proposed that rectifies the issue of grid entanglement. The 
SPH method has shown good agreement with high velocity 
impact of metallic targets, better predictions of crack 
propagation in ceramics and fragmentation of composites 
under hypervelocity impact (HVI) compared to grid-based 
Lagrange and Euler methods. Although promising, SPH 
suffers from consistency and stability issues that lead to 
lower accuracy and instabilities under tensile perturbation. 
The latter makes it unsuitable for use with UHMW-PE 
composite under ballistic impact, because this material 
derives most of its resistance to penetration when it is 
loaded in tension. For these types of problems, the grid-
based Lagrangian formulation still remains the most feasible 
for modeling UHMW-PE composite. 
3D numerical simulations were performed of the full 
target and projectile, where both were meshed using 8-node 
hexahedral elements. The projectile was meshed with 9 
elements across the diameter. The target is composed of 
sub-laminates that are one element thick, separated by a 
small gap to satisfy the master-slave contact algorithm 
(external gap in AUTODYN®) and bonded together as 
previously discussed. The mesh size of the target is 
approximately equal to the projectile at the impact site. The 
mesh was then graded towards the edge, increasing in 
coarseness to reduce the computational load of the model. 
Since UHMW-PE composite has a very low coefficient of 
friction, force fit clamping provides little restraint. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Experimental and numerical impact residual velocity results for 
impact of 6 mm diameter aluminum spheres against 15 kg/m2 Dyneema® 
HB26 at normal incidence (left) and impact of 20 mm fragment simulating 
projectiles against 10 mm thick Dyneema® HB26 at normal incidence 
(right). Lambert-Jonas parameters (a, p, Vbl) are provided in the legend. 
70
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

High speed video of ballistic impact tests typical showed 
the action of loosening and moving clamps upon impact. As 
such no boundary conditions were imposed on the target. 
The FSP material was modelled as Steel S-7 from the 
AUTODYN® library described using a linear EoS and the 
Johnson-Cook strength model [22]. The aluminum sphere 
was modelled using AL1100-O from the AUTODYN® 
library that uses a shock EoS and the Steinburg Guinan 
strength model [23]. The master-slave contact algorithm 
was used to detect contact between the target and projectile. 
The sub-laminate model with shock EoS was applied to 
the aluminum sphere hypervelocity impact series and 20 
mm FSP ballistic impact series presented in Fig. 9, the 
results of which are shown in Fig. 10. The sub-laminate 
model is shown to provide a significant improvement in 
predicting the experimental V50 of 394 m/s for the FSP 
ballistic impacts (377 m/s) compared to the monolithic 
model (236 m/s).  
 
 
Figure 10.  Comparison of the experimental results with the two numerical 
models for impact of 20 mm fragment simulating projectiles against 10 mm 
thick Dyneema HB26® at normal incidence (left) , and impact of 6 mm 
diameter aluminium spheres against 15 kg/m2 Dyneema® HB26 at normal 
incidence (right). Lambert-Jonas parameters (a, p, Vbl) are provided in the 
legend. 
 
Figure 11.  Bulge of a 10 mm target impact by a 20 mm FSP at 365 m/s 
(experiment) and 350 m/s (simulations), 400 µs after the initial impact. 
The ballistic limit and residual velocity predicted with 
the sub-laminate model for the hypervelocity impact case 
are shown to be comparable with the original monolithic 
model. For conditions closer to the ballistic limit, the sub-
laminate model is shown to predict increased target 
resistance (i.e., lower residual velocity). For higher 
overmatch conditions there is some small variance between 
the two approaches. 
In Fig. 11, a qualitative assessment of the bulge 
formation is made for the 10 mm panel impacted at 365 m/s 
(i.e., below the V50) by a 20 mm FSP. Prediction of bulge 
development is important as it is characteristic of the 
material wave speed and is also a key measure in defence 
applications, particularly in personnel protection (i.e., vests 
and helmets). The sub-laminate model is shown to 
reproduce the characteristic pyramid bulge shape and 
drawing of material from the lateral edge. In comparison, 
the bulge prediction of the baseline model is poor, showing 
71
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

a conical shape with the projectile significantly behind the 
apex. In the baseline model penetration occurs through 
premature through-thickness shear failure around the 
projectile rather than in-plane tension (membrane) which 
would allow the formation of a pyramidal bulge as the 
composite is carried along with the projectile. Furthermore, 
in the baseline model the extremely small through thickness 
tensile strength (1.07 MPa) in the bulk material leads to 
early spallation/delamination of the back face. This allows 
the material on the target back face to fail and be accelerated 
ahead of the projectile. In the sub-laminate model, these two 
artifacts are addressed, and so a more representative bulge is 
formed.   
C. Further Validations 
The material model developed in [9] and [10] has some 
shortcomings 
regarding 
the 
simulation 
of 
handgun 
projectiles (see Fig. 12). The ballistic limit was significantly 
under predicted. Evaluation of the result suggests that the 
failure mechanisms, which drive performance in the rear 
section of the target panel (i.e., membrane tension) were not 
adequately reproduced, suggesting an under-estimate of the 
material in-plane tensile performance. 
 
Figure 12.  Comparing experimantal results with the previous simulation 
models of Lässig [8] and Nguyen [9], 265 μs after impact (grey = plastic 
deformation, green = elastic deformation, orange = material failure); 
projectile velocity: 674 m/s; target thickness: 16.2 mm (60 layers of HB26). 
A major difficulty in the numerical simulation of fibre 
composites under impact is the detection of failure 
processes between fibre and matrix elements as well as 
between the individual laminate layers (delamination). One 
promising 
approach 
is 
the 
use 
of 
"artificial" 
inhomogeneities on the macroscale. Here, an alternative 
simulation model has been developed to overcome these 
difficulties. Using sub-laminates and inhomogeneities on 
the macroscale, the model does not match the real 
microstructure, but allows a more realistic description of the 
failure processes mentioned above. 
Approaches based on the continuum or macroscale 
present a more practical alternative to solve typical 
engineering problems. However, the complexity of the 
constitutive equations and characterization tests necessary to 
describe an anisotropic material at a macro or continuum 
level increases significantly. 
When considering the micromechanical properties of the 
orthotropic yield surface with a non-linear hardening 
description, a non-linear shock equation of state, and a 
three-dimensional failure criterion supplemented by a linear 
orthotropic softening description should be taken into 
account. It is important to consider all relevant mechanisms 
that occur during ballistic impact, as the quality of the 
numerical prediction capability strongly depends on a 
physically accurate description of contributing energy 
dissipation mechanisms. Therefore, a combination of 
ballistic experiments and numerical simulations is required. 
Predictive numerical tools can be extremely useful for 
enhancing our understanding of ballistic impact events. 
Models that are able to capture the key mechanical and 
thermodynamic processes can significantly improve our 
understanding of the phenomena by allowing time-resolved 
investigations of virtually every aspect of the impact event. 
Such high fidelity is immensely difficult, prohibitively 
expensive or near impossible to achieve with existing 
experimental measurement techniques. 
The thermodynamic response of a material and its ability 
to carry tensile and shear loads (strength) is typically treated 
separately within hydrocodes such that the stress tensor can 
be decomposed into volumetric and deviatoric components. 
Since the mechanical properties of fibre-reinforced 
composites are anisotropic (at least at the meso- and 
macroscale 
level), 
the 
deviatoric 
and 
hydrostatic 
components are coupled. That is deviatoric strains will 
produce a volumetric dilation and hydrostatic pressure leads 
to non-uniform strains in the three principal directions. 
The strength and failure model was investigated by 
modeling single elements under normal and shear stresses. It 
was found that under through-thickness shear stress, the 
element would fail prematurely below the specified through-
thickness shear failure stress. It was found that if the 
through-thickness tensile strength was increased, failure in 
through-thickness shear was delayed. This evaluation study 
shows the importance of the strength, failure and erosion 
models for predicting performance in the ballistic regime. 
72
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Previous material models for fiber-reinforced plastics 
were adjusted and the concept has been extended to 
different calibers and projectile velocities. Composite armor 
plates between 5.5 and 16.2 mm were tested in several 
ballistic trials and high-speed videos were used to analyze 
the characteristics of the projectile – before and after the 
impact. 
The simulation results with the modified model are 
shown in Fig. 13. The deformation of the projectile, e.g., 
7.62×39 mm, is in good agreement with the experimental 
observation. Both delamination and fragmentation can be 
seen in the numerical simulation.  
Compared to the homogeneous continuum model, 
fractures can be detected easily. Subsequently, the results of 
experiment and simulation in the case of perforation were 
compared with reference to the projectile residual velocity. 
Here, only minor differences were observed. 
It should be noted that an explicit modeling of the 
individual fibres is not an option, since the computational 
effort would go beyond the scope of modern server systems 
(see Fig. 14 and Fig. 15). 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Coming back to the task of designing structures for 
vehicles or buildings under dynamic loading conditions like 
crash, impact or blast, we realize that virtually all fields of 
application are nowadays supported if not driven by 
numerical simulation. Along with the rapid development of 
computer power, utilization of numerical methods as a tool 
to design structures for all kinds of loading conditions 
evolved. Simulation of the expected structural response to 
certain loadings is motivated by the wish 
• 
to optimize the design 
• 
and to better understand the physical processes. 
For both intentions the predictive capability of the 
codes is an indispensable quality. In fact, the predictive 
capability separates numerical tools from graphical 
visualization. It means nothing less than the ability to 
calculate physical processes without experimental results at 
hand to a sufficient degree of precision. 
This work demonstrated how a small number of well-
defined experiments can be used to develop, calibrate, and 
validate solver technologies used for simulating the impact 
of projectiles on complex armor systems and composite 
laminate structures.  
Existing material models were optimized to reproduce 
ballistic tests. High-speed videos were used to analyze the 
characteristics of the projectile – before and after the 
impact. The simulation results demonstrate the successful 
use of the coupled multi-solver approach and new modeling 
techniques. The high level of correlation between the 
numerical results and the available experimental or observed 
data demonstrates that the coupled multi-solver approach is 
an accurate and effective analysis method.  
 
 
Figure 13.  Effect of a 5.5 mm target impact by a 7.62×39 mm bullet at 686 
m/s, 47 µs and 88 µs after the initial impact. 
 
Figure 14.  Cross section of a Dyneema® HB26 panel. 
 
Figure 15.  Setup / structure of a Dyneema® HB26 prepreg. 
73
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A 
non-linear 
orthotropic 
continuum 
model 
was 
evaluated for UHMW-PE composite across a wide range of 
impact velocities. Although previously found to provide 
accurate results for hypervelocity impact of aluminum 
spheres, the existing model and dataset revealed a 
significant underestimation of the composite performance 
under impact conditions driven by through-thickness shear 
performance (ballistic impact of fragment simulating 
projectiles). The model was found to exhibit premature 
through thickness shear failure as a result of directional 
coupling in the modified Hashin-Tsai failure criterion and 
the large discrepancy between through-thickness tensile and 
shear strength of UHME-PE composite. As a result, 
premature damage and failure was initiated in the through-
thickness shear direction leading to decreased ballistic 
performance. By de-coupling through-thickness tensile 
failure from the failure criteria and discretizing the laminate 
into a nominal number of kinematically joined sub-
laminates through the thickness, progresses in modelling the 
ballistic response of the panels was improved. 
New concepts and models can be developed and easily 
tested with the help of modern hydrocodes. The initial 
design approach of the units and systems has to be as safe 
and optimal as possible. Therefore, most design concepts 
are analyzed on the computer. 
FEM-based simulations are well-suited for this purpose. 
Here, a numerical model has been developed, which is 
capable of predicting the ballistic performance of UHMW-
PE armor systems. Thus, estimates based on experience are 
being more and more replaced by software.  
The gained experience is of prime importance for the 
development of modern armor. By applying the numerical 
model a large number of potential armor schemes can be 
evaluated and the understanding of the interaction between 
laminate components under ballistic impact can be 
improved. 
The most important steps during an FE analysis are the 
evaluation and interpretation of the outcomes followed by 
suitable modifications of the model. For that reason, 
ballistic trials are necessary to validate the simulation 
results. They are designed to obtain information about 
• 
the velocity and trajectory of the projectile prior to 
impact, 
• 
changes in configuration of projectile and target 
due to impact, 
• 
masses, velocities, and trajectories of fragments 
generated by the impact process. 
Ballistic trials can be used as the basis of an iterative 
optimization process. Numerical simulations are a valuable 
adjunct to the study of the behavior of metals subjected to 
high-velocity impact or intense impulsive loading. The 
combined use of computations, experiments and high-strain-
rate 
material characterization has, in many cases, 
supplemented the data achievable by experiments alone at 
considerable savings in both cost and engineering man-
hours. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Ramezani and H. Rothe, “Numerical Simulation and 
Experimental Model-Validation for Fiber-Reinforced Plastics 
Under Impact Loading - Using the Example of Ultra-High 
Molecular Weight Polyethylene,” The Eighth International 
Conference on Advances in System Simulation (SIMUL 
2016) IARIA, Aug. 2016, pp. 17-25, ISBN 978-1-61208-442-
8. 
[2] 
D. B. Segala and P. V. Cavallaro, “Numerical investigation of 
energy absorption mechanisms in unidirectional composites 
subjected to dynamic loading events,” in Computational 
Materials Science 81, pp. 303–312, 2014. 
[3] 
S. Chocron et al., “Modeling unidirectional composites by 
bundling fibers into strips with experimental determination of 
shear and compression properties at high pressures,” in 
Composites Science and Technology 101, pp. 32–40, 2014. 
[4] C. J. Hayhurst, S. J. Hiermaier, R. A. Clegg, W. Riedel, and 
M. Lambert, “Development of material models for nextel and 
kevlar-expoxy for high pressures and strain rates,” in 
International Journal of Impact Engineering 23, pp. 365–376, 
1999. 
[5] R. A. Clegg, D. M. White, W. Riedel, and W. Harwick, 
“Hypervelocity impact damage prediction in composites: Part 
I—material model and characterisation,” in International 
Journal of Impact Engineering 33, pp. 190–200, 2006. 
[6] W. Riedel, H. Nahme, D. M. White, and R. A. Clegg, 
“Hypervelocity impact damage prediction in composites: Part 
II—experimental 
investigations 
and 
simulations,” 
in 
International Journal of Impact Engineering 33, pp. 670–80, 
2006. 
[7] M. Wicklein, S. Ryan, D. M. White, and R. A. Clegg, 
“Hypervelocity impact on CFRP: Testing, material modelling, 
and numerical simulation,” in International Journal of Impact 
Engineering 35, pp.1861–1869, 2008. 
[8] ANSYS. AUTODYN Composite Modelling Release 15.0. 
[Online]. Available from: http://ansys.com/ 2016.07.08. 
[9] T. Lässig et al., “A non-linear orthotropic hydrocode model 
for ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene in impact 
simulations,” in International Journal of Impact Engineering 
75, pp. 110–122, 2015. 
[10] L. H. Nguyen et al., “Numerical Modelling of Ultra-High 
Molecular Weight Polyethylene Composite Under Impact 
Loading,” in Procedia Engineering 103, pp. 436–443, 2015. 
[11] J. Zukas, Introduction to hydrocodes. Elsevier Science, 2004. 
[12] R. F. Stellingwerf and C. A. Wingate, “Impact Modeling with 
Smooth Particle Hydrodynamics,” International Journal of 
Impact Engineering, vol. 14, pp. 707–718, Sep. 1993. 
[13] X. Quan, N. K. Birnbaum, M. S. Cowler, and B. I. Gerber, 
“Numerical Simulations of Structural Deformation under 
Shock and Impact Loads using a Coupled Multi-Solver 
Approach,” 5th Asia-Pacific Conference on Shock and Impact 
Loads on Structures, Hunan, China, Nov. 2003, pp. 152-161. 
[14] ANSYS Inc. Available Solution Methods. [Online]. Available 
from: 
http://www.ansys.com/Products/Simulation+Technology/Stru
ctural+Analysis/Explicit+Dynamics/Features/Available+Solut
ion+Methods [retrieved: April, 2014] 
[15] P. Fröhlich, “FEM Application Basics,” Vieweg Verlag, 
September 2005. 
[16] G.-S. 
Collins, 
An 
Introduction 
to 
Hydrocode 
Modeling. Applied Modelling and Computation Group, 
Imperial College London, 2002. 
[17] J. Sarkar, “Computer Aided Design: A Conceptual 
Approach,” CRC Press, December 2014. 
[18] H.-B. Woyand, FEM with CATIA V5. J. Schlembach 
Fachverlag, 2007. 
74
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[19] R. Frieß, “General basis for ballistic material, construction 
and product testing,” presented at the Ballistic Day in Ulm, 
2008. 
[20] D. E. Carlucci and S. S. Jacobson, Ballistics: Theory and 
Design of guns and ammunition. CRC Press, 2008. 
[21] OEG Gesellschaft für Optik, Elektronik & Gerätetechnik 
mbH. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.oeg-
messtechnik.de/?p=5&l=1 [retrieved: March, 2015] 
[22] G. Johnson and W. Cook, “A constitutive model and data for 
metals subjected to large strains, high strain rates and high 
temperatures,” in 7th International Symposium on Ballistics, 
pp. 541–547, 1983. 
[23] D. Steinberg, Equation of state and strength properties of 
selected materials. California, 1996. 
75
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

