125
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Management Guidelines for Better Application of  
Business Process Management in SAP ERP Projects
 
Markus Grube 
 
VOQUZ IT Solutions GmbH 
Hamburg, Germany 
e-mail: markus.grube@voquz.com  
 
Martin Wynn 
School of Business and Technology 
University of Gloucestershire 
Gloucester, UK 
e-mail: mwynn@glos.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract — The SAP Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) 
system is a leading software solution for corporate business 
functions and processes. Business Process Management (BPM) 
is a management approach designed to create and manage 
organizations’ 
business 
processes. 
Both 
promise 
an 
improvement of business processes in companies and can be 
used together in organizations. In conjunction with the SAP 
ERP system and BPM approach, BPM maturity models can be 
used as diagnostic tools that allow an organization to assess and 
monitor the maturity of its business processes. The aim is to 
investigate and analyse the interaction between the use of the 
SAP ERP software package and the utilization of BPM. 
Findings derive from an analysis of eleven semi-structured 
expert interviews and a validation of the guidelines via an online 
survey with 151 participants that use SAP, BPM and/or BPM 
maturity models. This research analyses the complex 
relationships between SAP, BPM and BPM maturity models 
and develops management guidelines for improved use of BPM 
in SAP ERP projects. 
Keywords 
— 
SAP; 
ERP; 
BPM; 
Business 
Process 
Management; Maturity Models; BPM Maturity Models; 
Management Guidelines. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This article builds upon previously published research [1] 
to provide a more detailed presentation and assessment of a 
set of management guidelines for the utilization of BPM in 
SAP ERP projects. SAP (Systeme, Anwendungen und 
Produkte) is a German company created in 1972 and the 
world's largest provider of enterprise software that, in 2019, 
had more than 437,000 customers in over 180 countries [2]. 
The SAP ERP package provides software solutions for the full 
range of business functions in companies – from human 
resource management, back office finance processes, the full 
sales order processing cycle and manufacturing, supply chain 
and distribution functions [3]. SAP ERP is usually installed on 
a database platform that handles several different business 
functions supported by the range of software modules that 
make up the SAP product suite. The implementation of an 
ERP system is often seen as a major strategic investment that 
may encompass innovative change, which may enhance a 
company’s core capabilities [4]. 
BPM is a methodology for the definition and operation of 
company business processes, and can be used without any 
information technology (IT) systems or infrastructure [5]. In 
practice, however, companies often use IT software tools to 
administer the BPM of an organisation. Additionally, software 
such as SAP ERP can assist a company in standardizing and 
automating processes to make them as efficient as possible 
[6]. BPM will usually start with a process analysis of the 
actual business processes [7] by the application of specific 
methods, techniques and tools [8]. The following definition is 
assumed in this research: BPM is a process-oriented 
management approach to create, support and analyse an 
organisation’s business processes. It is also worth noting that, 
for an optimum BPM outcome, an IT tool - to analyse and 
support BPM behaviour – may be usefully deployed. 
BPM maturity models can be used to support the 
application of BPM. A maturity model is described by Saco 
[9] as a diagnostic tool for an organization, which provides a 
framework to test, analyse and improve business quality [10]. 
A BPM maturity model analyses the quality of a company 
process and classifies business quality into different levels 
such as ‘Initial’, ‘Repeatable’, ‘Defined’, ‘Managed’ and 
‘Optimizing’ [11]. Each maturity model has formal 
descriptions to guide the use regarding how to reach the next 
level of a maturity. The purpose of such models is to reach the 
highest maturity level for all organisation processes [12]. 
Fig. 1 illustrates some of the concepts that are shared by 
the SAP ERP system, BPM and BPM maturity models. The 
SAP ERP system includes its own business process models; 
BPM has the objective of improving business processes in an 
organisation; both have the same aim of optimizing an 
organisation’s processes.  
 
Figure 1. SAP ERP, BPM and BPM maturity models: overview 
 

126
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Diagnostic tools like BPM maturity models can be used 
alongside SAP ERP and BPM to measure the effectiveness of 
processes in organisations. Van Looy [13] states that most 
BPM maturity models favour the use of an IT system (such as 
SAP ERP) to improve the BPM approach of an organisation 
[14]. This study examines the relationship between these 
concepts and derives management guidelines for their use. 
These guidelines are based on views expressed in one-to-one 
interviews combined with feedback from online surveys and 
are geared to supporting to business managers. 
Following this introductory Section, Section II discusses 
relevant literature. In Section III, the research methodology is 
outlined, and this is followed in Section IV by a summary of 
findings. Section V presents a further analysis of findings 
leading to the development of a number of management 
guidelines to support the use of BPM maturity models within 
an SAP systems environment. Section VI then details how 
these guidelines have been validated through an online survey 
and finally, in Section VII, the main themes of the paper are 
drawn together to provide overall conclusions regarding the 
research project. 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
BPM and process integration have been discussed for over 
25 years [15], but existing literature is largely confined to 
general findings about the relationship between IT and the use 
of business processes, or about the relationship between ERP 
systems and business processes. For example, vom Brocke et 
al. [16] explain that the selection, acceptance and use of IT are 
a fundamental part of BPM, and Wynn [17] highlights the 
importance of a range of process issues in achieving 
successful ERP project implementation. Business and IT need 
to connect with each other in order to realize better business 
value. Neubauer [18] also notes that ERP systems generally 
influence a company’s business processes.  
Saco [9] explains that a maturity model is a diagnostic tool 
for an organisation to improve its processes. Such assessment 
can be used in conjunction with SAP ERP and BPM. Most 
authors view the use of an ERP system as a means of 
integrating business processes within one system, which is, 
used company-wide [18]. For example, an ERP system can 
hold all documents in relation to an invoice number or 
purchase order, and can show the document flow or action log 
for data changes that directly belong to a business transaction. 
Through the use of ERP systems, companies are expected to 
reduce costs by improving efficiencies and widening the 
availability of accurate and up to date business information, 
thereby enhancing overall company performance [19]. 
Antonucci et al. [20] indicate that ERP systems produce the 
data and information that are the basis for business decisions 
and strategies.  
The extant literature demonstrates that an IT application 
like SAP ERP can enable higher process maturity [13]; but 
these studies focus on the general company level and IT 
systems as a whole. Van Looy [13] suggests the deployment 
of IT for business process maturity, concluding that most 
maturity models recommend IT to improve process modelling 
and optimization. She emphasises that, in general, IT 
deployment enables higher process maturity. Other literature 
illustrates that BPM maturity models measure and aggregate 
capabilities that can culminate in a road map for better 
business process management [21].  
The literature research confirms that companies often 
simply apply maturity models blindly instead of addressing 
organizational needs [22]. Additionally, maturity models do 
not usually consider any link between, for example, an SAP 
system and the BPM approach. This research develops a set 
of guidelines embodied in management guidelines for the 
better collaboration of BPM in SAP ERP projects – this being 
in addition to, or instead of, the use of a BPM maturity model. 
III. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
Fig. 2 depicts the main elements of the research 
methodology used in this project, selected from a body of 
methods that can be used to gather and process data [23] [24].  
 
 
Figure 2. Research Methodology Layers [22] [23] 
The research philosophy adopted here is post-positivist, 
based on the perspectives of Ryan [25] and Guba [26]. The 
goal of post-positivist research is the generation of “new 
knowledge that other people can learn from and even base 
decisions on” [27]. The development of management 
guidelines emanates from this research and aims to support a 
company for informed decisions in the context of SAP and the 
BPM approach. The post-positivist position takes the view 
that the world is much more complex than when the project 
was embarked upon, and that it is quite possible that, for 
example, the inclusion of other experts in the interview 
process would have led to different results. This research starts 
with some cases on organisations that use BPM maturity 
models, and concludes with generalised guidelines about the 
application of BPM and SAP ERP. As described by Thomas 
[28], this exploration uses the abductive approach to collect 
facts from the interviewees, followed by judgment about the 
best explanation of these, before producing a generalized 
output in the form of guidelines and management guidelines. 
As an explanatory study [29], this research investigates the 
relationship between SAP, BPM, and BPM maturity models 
in ERP projects. Based on semi-structured expert interviews, 
a small number of organisations are examined in depth. In line 
with the use of documentation of BPM maturity models, a 
qualitative research approach was pursued. According to 
Saunders et al. [24], the use of different data sources in 
combination with secondary data collection techniques allows 
a form of triangulation to confirm the obtained data from the 

127
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
interviews. The aim of this work is to evaluate whether SAP 
can affect the use of BPM in companies.  
Through the use of semi-structured interviews with 
experts in their field, and the analysis of secondary literature 
such as user manuals of BPM maturity models, this research 
used mixed-methods to address the research objectives, 
thereby providing greater depth in a complex environment 
[30]. The time horizon for this research was a cross-sectional 
snapshot study [24]. The research analyses the current SAP 
impact on BPM and BPM maturity models in practice, and 
evaluates the picture at the time of the study [31]. 
The interviewees were selected with the objective of 
gleaning the greatest amount of expert knowledge possible 
from practice. The semi-structured interviews allowed a 
degree of flexibility that engendered an understanding and 
explanation of the experts’ opinions regarding important 
issues, events and patterns in the complex interaction of SAP, 
BPM, and BPM maturity models in ERP projects [32]. The 
software tool MAXQDA was used for the qualitative data 
analysis and comparison of the interviews, and in arranging, 
organising and analysing all transcribed interviews, and also 
for analysing secondary literature sources. This allowed a 
special type of methodological triangulation through the use 
of more than one method to collect and analyse the data. A 
thematic analysis was used for the identification of topics. For 
this purpose, statements from the interviews were manually 
coded in order to recognize and interpret connections [32].  
 The final step of the data triangulation of this study 
examines, through an online survey, the guidelines that were 
previously developed. The online survey was created to 
consider questions about the developed guidelines and to 
confirm their acceptance. Potential participants for this online 
survey were users, process managers, researchers and 
consultants with a business background encompassing SAP, 
BPM and/or BPM maturity models in different industry 
sectors.  
Fig. 3 depicts the research strategy and the different data 
sources for this research. 
 
 
Figure 3. Research Strategy and Data Sources 
IV. FINDINGS  
The search for potential interview partners was a difficult 
process and resulted in many rejections. The search utilised 
existing networks of business and personal contacts, resulting 
in 64 people in Germany, Austria and Switzerland being 
identified as potential experts, who were then invited for an 
interview. From this initial pool, eleven people confirmed that 
they were willing to be interviewed for this research project. 
Most refusals were based on the fact that the experts did not 
have the necessary practical experience of the use of a BPM 
maturity model. Nevertheless, three of the experts interviewed 
are currently using no BPM maturity model, but perform some 
form of quality process assessment already at their company, 
or would like to apply a BPM maturity model in the future.  
Baker and Edwards [33] explain that, within qualitative 
research, the attainment of a sufficient quantity of interviews 
cannot be set at a certain number. It is crucial to achieve 
saturation and try to gain new knowledge through additional 
interviews. In this research, there appeared to be a degree of 
saturation with the tenth interview, as no new knowledge 
surfaced. Interview findings are discussed in more detail 
below.  
A. Management 
Almost every interviewee recommends that senior 
management should be involved in driving forward the 
introduction of BPM, BPM maturity models and even SAP 
ERP. The introduction of these technologies and techniques 
can only be successful if the management proactively supports 
their introduction and operation. The motivation to increase 
the degree of process maturity has more influence if the top 
management is involved. It is important for employees as a 
whole to support their implementation, but they must also 
know that the management supports these initiatives and will 
provide the budget, time and resources for these projects. 
Management must actively support initiatives such as the 
introduction of BPM and SAP software implementation if 
they are to be successful. 
B. Standard SAP processes 
The introduction of an SAP system can be used 
strategically to remodel business processes. Each company 
should consider whether a standardisation of business 
processes is an important thing for their organisation. The 
application of standard processes and especially SAP standard 
processes could be helpful. The use of SAP does not generally 
lead to improved process maturity levels, but this depends on 
how intensively and professionally SAP is deployed as a 
corporate-wide business system. The practical experience of 
the interviewees shows that the use of standard processes can 
be very beneficial, reducing time, costs, resources and other 
expenses. Many processes are similar across different 
industries and therefore many experts recommend the use of 
the standard processes which are provided by an SAP ERP 
system. 
However, the use of standard processes never releases a 
company from the obligation to precisely analyse these 
processes and test them against their own requirements. Each 
company must agree a procedure and determine how far a 

128
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
company should adapt to a standard process or whether the 
process must modified to accommodate the company’s 
requirements. With sufficient time and money, an SAP system 
can be customized to meet the process requirements of a 
company. In practice, however, the budget is often quite 
limited and a company must determine whether standard 
processes should be adopted or not.  
C. Process analysis and documentation 
The introduction of any significant process change should 
always be analysed, documented and understood, whether it 
is an SAP standard solution or a customer driven solution. In 
addition, a well-documented interface description (of both the 
software modules and the processes themselves) can provide 
a solid basis for the development of process improvements. 
Frequently used processes should be analysed more 
thoroughly, and standard processes should be analysed 
carefully because these processes can be used in an incorrect 
manner.  
Some interviewees suggested that some of the more 
traditional and well-established business processes, such as 
those supporting finance or human resource management, can 
be represented very well by using standard SAP software. 
This is because they are core company functions, and the 
software has been implemented in many different industry 
sectors.  
D. Interfaces 
The interviewees were of the view that it is useful to 
consider the interfaces to and from an SAP system in more 
detail. They suggested that a process that is supported by one 
system is likely to have a higher maturity than processes that 
run over several systems boundaries. Frequently, in this case, 
not only different systems but also different employees are 
affected by process deficiencies, in part caused by the need to 
understand and handle several systems that may not be well 
integrated.  
Processes should always be considered as a set of end-to-
end activities. The more IT systems that are affected, the more 
employees are usually involved. These employees must then 
find a way to identify and analyse which data are necessary to 
support process improvements. All systems interfaces need to 
be assessed, and a well-documented interface description can 
provide a solid basis for the development of process 
optimisation. Even with standard interfaces or online services 
which are provided by SAP, a successful BPM project will 
still need to analyse and document these interfaces. 
E. Process maps 
All significant business processes should be described and 
depicted within an overall top-level company process map. 
Regardless of whether processes are supported by an IT 
system or not, they should be recorded and drawn in order to 
better understand the process flow and to store knowledge 
about the process. The modeling of a process map should be a 
basic requirement to introduce efficient BPM in a company. 
Of course, this is alone not enough and more activities will be 
required which deal with the establishment of process 
management in the company.  
A significant risk - that must be avoided - is that a BPM 
team design a process map, which differs from the process 
map owned by the SAP project team operating within the 
same company. This can sometimes happen when different 
initiatives are introduced in different management areas. This 
may result, for example, in the purchasing process being 
designed both within the BPM project team and in the SAP 
team. This means that two teams will have independently 
developed this process with their own experts, with a knock-
on effect on subsequent remodeling and overall costs. The 
BPM team should know what knowledge is already present in 
the company and be ready to build on it. 
F. Measurement of key performance indicators (KPIs) 
It is generally worth considering whether it is more 
effective in the long term to measure results generated directly 
from SAP reporting tools rather than via specialist standalone 
business intelligence software. It is even quite possible to 
effectively use an Excel spreadsheet or Access database for 
data analysis. In many cases, such a solution is only intended 
for the short term. But if data has to be specially prepared and 
processed for export to an Excel file, for example, it is likely 
to be more effective to analyze it immediately in the source 
system (such as SAP). This raises the issue of end-user access 
to SAP data and its reporting tools, which needs to be 
proactively and sensitively managed.  
The experts reported that financial transactions usually 
constitute key information that is well supported within a 
company deploying the SAP system. This means that, for 
many companies, SAP is an important strategic IT 
component. Consistent business intelligence reporting and 
associated analytics is another benefit from using SAP as the 
core company IT system.  
V. ANALYSIS 
For this research, the BPM approach encompassed a 
strong focus on IT systems and infrastructure. Even though, in 
theory, IT should play only a subordinate role, the expert 
interviews conveyed a contradictory opinion. All the 
interviews, which involved practitioners, confirmed that the 
SAP and BPM concepts are closely related. Theoretically, 
there is often no such link found in the documentation, but in 
practice the SAP system is the leading ERP system in many 
companies and therefore there is a practical connection.  
Maturity models are already very complex, but companies 
are often interested in guidelines that are less complex and 
require a smaller budget. The guidelines developed in this 
research project will help companies to analyse and 
understand the interconnection of the SAP ERP system with 
the BPM approach. The goal is not to develop a more complex 
and comprehensive maturity model; indeed the success of 
easy to use maturity models is due to the fact that those models 
has less criteria and are easy to handle. The experts explained 
within the interviews that many companies prefer a checklist 
instead of a complex maturity model. For these reasons, it is 
not necessary to develop a separate and new BPM maturity 
model to understand and show possible dependencies. 
On the basis of the interview analysis, the following SAP-
specific guidelines have been developed to enable company 

129
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
management and all relevant stakeholders to determine and 
understand possible connections between an SAP system and 
a BPM approach. These guidelines can be used to maximise 
the benefits of both the SAP system and BPM methods and 
techniques. They are not meant to be comprehensive, but are 
rather intended to allow the practitioner to start to think about 
the connections and to develop them later on for specific 
environments as appropriate.  
 
Guideline 1: Ensure that management fully support the 
optimal deployment of SAP in the organisation. 
 
The use of SAP ERP as the central IT software system 
within a company is usually a strategic decision. In this case, 
the company should decide how to integrate the system with 
the adopted BPM approach of the company. What does the 
SAP specification imply? Does that mean that only key 
figures have to be generated from the SAP system? Could 
there be other systems besides the SAP system? Should a 
company use as many standard SAP processes as possible? 
The company must determine who decides possible solutions 
or any adaptations of the SAP system. The successful 
implementation of an SAP system is only possible if the senior 
management are aware of and confront these issues. 
 
Guideline 2: Establish as many SAP ERP standard processes 
as possible at the company in order to minimize the complexity 
of system upgrades or enhancements.  
 
If the company wants to use SAP, and the management 
supports this, then companies should also decide whether, and 
to what extent, standard SAP processes should be used. The 
use of standard SAP processes reduces the time, cost, 
resources and other operational constraints, and supports the 
introduction of new SAP enhancement packages or release 
changes. Each change or upgrade makes it necessary to test 
customised solutions and adjust the customer-specific 
programming to the new version of the SAP system. It is 
important to prioritize when the standard SAP processes 
should be used, and when it is better to use self-defined 
solutions. A BPM team should not accept processes as given 
and must analyse which approach is best suited to a specific 
company environment. Not all standard processes are the 
optimal solutions for every company, and a company should 
not necessarily submit to the dictates of a rule-based IT 
system. However, the use of standard process solutions could 
also be very helpful and reduce the budget required to operate 
an IT system. Regular consideration should be given to 
whether IT innovations in the system could lead to process 
improvements. For example, mobile device applications can 
now operate in conjunction with SAP modules, and such 
mobile functionality is now integrated into the standard SAP 
system. 
 
Guideline 3: Ensure that all processes have been documented, 
analysed and understood, even if they are pre-defined by the 
SAP system. 
 
The use of SAP standard processes does not absolve a 
company from the duty to document, analyse and understand 
each process. It can be the case that standard processes, which 
run in a single system like SAP, run with an optimised 
composition, and are better coordinated than other processes; 
but each process should be analysed. Unfortunately, it is not 
always obvious which data is being stored and used within an 
SAP process. Technically, it is currently not possible to get a 
fast and actual process flowchart from an existing SAP 
system, and see how customizing settings within an SAP 
system may change a process flow. Therefore, it is very 
important to understand and analyse these SAP processes in 
detail. This is the only way to avoid incorrect or error-prone 
process operations. A company should know exactly how its 
processes are running, and therefore a company should not be 
dictated to by an IT system or by the opinion of an ERP system 
provider. An analysis of each pre-defined process should 
enable a company to decide whether these standard processes 
are usable, or whether an individual process should be 
developed for their specific company environment. 
 
Guideline 4: Establish a procedure that ensures that all 
interfaces are analysed for their BPM relevance, including 
those between non-SAP systems and interfaces between those 
systems and the SAP system itself.  
 
Interfaces between different systems often offer 
opportunities 
for 
systems 
optimization 
and 
process 
improvement. Many experts recommend considering the 
processes from an end-to-end perspective. They have learned 
from their practical experience that, especially when there are 
different systems with bespoke interfaces, data are often 
transmitted in formats that differ from that which is required. 
It is important to analyse the standard interfaces provided by 
the software provider, which may not be the best and optimal 
for the user organisation. 
 
Guideline 5: Ensure that all teams within a company, 
especially the BPM team and the SAP team, contribute to the 
development of the same processes and process maps, and 
that only one process map exists within the organisation.  
 
SAP is a very powerful tool that communicates with many 
different sub-modules and other systems. The early versions 
of SAP had a functional structure but with the application of 
BPM, the package is now more process-oriented in design. It 
is important to avoid different teams working in isolation and 
developing different process configurations within a 
company. The BPM team should consist of a variety of 
different stakeholders, to represent different requirements and 
knowledge inputs. 
 
Guideline 6: Ensure that all key information is generated 
directly from the SAP system. 
 
SAP provides many instruments for the generation and 
monitoring of KPIs and most BPM maturity models 
encompass the analysis of KPIs. For many experts in this 
study, the SAP system was often the leading financial system 

130
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
in their company contexts. This offers many advantages for 
the analysis of KPIs. Much financial information is already 
stored in the SAP system, which can be used to support the 
BPM approach. Some companies, when trying to implement 
quick solutions or consultancy generated analysis, may turn to 
creating Excel spreadsheets rather than using the “one view of 
the truth” available in the SAP system. SAP provides many 
predefined reports, and can employ business intelligence tools 
to provide customised reports from the SAP database. It may 
take longer to determine the required fields for an analysis 
within the SAP system, but for frequent use, it is much faster 
to retrieve the numbers directly from the SAP system. 
VI. VALIDATION 
The guidelines discussed above provide a basis on which 
companies can make some judgements about the use of their 
SAP system when combined with a BPM approach. For 
further practical confirmation of the guidelines, an online 
survey was used to validate the general applicability of the 
developed guidelines and the general feasibility of the 
findings of the interviews. A questionnaire was presented as 
an online survey on the internet, allowing the collection of a 
larger amount of data from more participants in a shorter time 
and in a more flexible manner than the personal face-to-face 
interviews [24].  
Potential participants for this online survey were those 
such as users, process managers, researchers and consultants 
with a business background in SAP process management or 
BPM in general. Respondents had to have several years of 
practical experience in at least two of the three investigated 
subject areas of SAP, BPM and BPM maturity models. In 
general, the online survey was created in a way that allowed 
each participant to answer the questions themselves in the 
form of a self-completion survey. Every question about the 
evaluation of the guidelines was followed by an open question 
in which the participant had the opportunity to make a 
comment about the established guideline or to list possible 
improvements about that guideline. 
To facilitate a general classification of the participants, the 
first questions in the web survey asked about the personal 
background of the participant. This revealed that the 
participants have many years of experience in the field of SAP 
and BPM and come from different industries. 
Table I shows the average experience of all participants in 
the three areas of expertise, and Table II illustrates the 
different industry sectors in which the participants work. This 
indicates that the participants represent the opinions of a 
variety of different industry sectors. 
 . 
Table I. Years of experience 
Area 
 
 Average years of experience 
SAP 
12.41 years 
BPM 
9.37 years 
BPM maturity models 
4.35 years 
 
Table II. Industry sector 
Industry sector 
No. of Persons
Automation 
1 
Automotive 
3 
Aviation 
18 
Construction 
1 
Engineering 
9 
Finance 
7 
Food 
1 
Health Service 
2 
Insurance 
1 
IT 
42 
Logistics 
2 
Management Consulting 
42 
Medical engineering 
2 
Pharma 
2 
Power 
2 
Production 
9 
Telecommunications 
2 
University 
5 
 
The online survey was intended to be answered by 
business professionals, and so participants were asked to 
assign themselves to a given professional position. Table III 
reveals that over 82 percent of all respondents claimed that 
they work as users, (process) managers, researchers or 
consultants within an organisation. 
 
Table III. Current position of respondents 
Current Position 
 
No. of Persons 
Consultants 
68 
(Process-) Managers 
44 
(System-) Users 
8 
Researchers 
5  
Others 
26 
 
The main purpose of the online survey was to achieve a 
degree of validation of the guidelines, and to ascertain whether 
these guidelines were considered practicable by the business 
community. All guidelines were evaluated using a Likert 
Scale approach [34], establishing whether the participant 
agreed to the guideline or not by using the following 
classification.  

131
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Table IV. Classification 
Classification 
Agree Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Disagree Strongly 
Don’t know 
 
This form of classification provides a simple validation 
method that has been applied to each of the six guidelines. The 
questions regarding the evaluations of the guideline also 
offered the answer ‘don’t know’ to show that an answer did 
not have to be given. The literature illustrates that closed 
questions exhibit certain disadvantages if, for example, the 
question irritates the respondent or they want to explain their 
answer [32]. For this reason, every question about the 
evaluation of the guideline was followed by an open question 
in which the participant had the opportunity to make a 
comment about the established guideline or to list possible 
improvements regarding that guideline.  
 
 
Figure 4. Guideline 1: Ensure that management fully support the optimal 
deployment of SAP in the organization - online responses 
 
More than 81 percent agreed with the first guideline by 
selecting 'Agree Strongly' or 'Agree' and confirmed that the 
management should support the use of SAP in the 
organisation to the full extent. (Fig. 4) Some comments 
suggested that management could more effectively set out 
‘framework conditions’, e.g., a basic systems or requirements 
specification. However, when it comes to the financial 
parameters of a system implementation, respondents were 
clear that the management must determine this scope. 
Similarly, over 85 percent agreed with the second guideline: 
establish as many SAP ERP standard processes as possible at 
the company in order to minimise the complexity of system 
upgrades or enhancements (Fig. 5). Participants noted that it 
is not easy, in some circumstances, to decide between a 
standard process or a process designed and customised to suite 
a company’s specific requirements. The guideline does not 
indicate that standard processes must be used, but rather that 
as many as makes overall sense should be used. The decision 
on what to use must still be made by the user. Respondents 
noted that experience and knowledge play an important role 
in the implementation of processes. 
 
Figure 5. Guideline 2: Establish as many SAP ERP standard processes as 
possible to minimize the complexity of system upgrades - online responses. 
The third guideline had one of the highest approval ratings 
in the survey (Fig. 6). Participants considered that it is 
important to analyse processes and that there exist different 
methods to support process descriptions or process depictions. 
 
Figure 6. Guideline 3: Ensure that all processes have been documented, 
analysed and understood - online responses 
 
It is very difficult to find the right level of detail for the 
process documentation and every company has to find its own 
way. It was very important for the respondents that the 
processes were regularly analysed. 
 

132
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 7. Guideline 4: Establish a procedure that ensures that all interfaces 
are analysed for their BPM relevance - online responses 
In the context of the fourth guideline, the survey responses 
confirmed that additional systems and interfaces are likely to 
be necessary and need to be analysed for their BPM relevance 
(Fig. 7). An interface can be very maintenance intensive and 
should therefore be regularly analysed and tested. The 
participants referred to the use of standard processes in 
connection with this guideline, but this is already evidenced 
in guideline 2: a regular assessment and analysis of systems 
interfaces is important. 
 
 
Figure 8. Guideline 5: Ensure that all teams within a company contribute to 
the development of the same processes and process maps - online responses 
 
The fifth guideline also received a high approval of over 
95% (Fig. 8). Participants agreed that an attempt should be 
made to adhere to this guideline, although this is not always 
possible in practice. For example, there may be more than one 
BPM team in a company, and inter-team communication and 
interaction are of the utmost importance. Political factors may 
also impede the pursuit of this guideline, and the survey 
results suggest that, contrary to the interview evidence, it can 
- in certain circumstances - make sense to have more than one 
process map for a short time. In in the end, however, these 
process maps should be combined and any contradictions 
resolved. 
 
 
Figure 9. Guideline 6: Ensure that all key information is generated directly 
from the SAP system - online responses 
 
The sixth guideline had marginally the lowest overall 
support, but 75% were still in agreement (Fig. 9). This 
guideline assumes that SAP is the main system in the 
company, but some survey respondents pointed out that SAP 
is sometimes just a financial management system and that key 
data is often created in other systems, and they thus did not 
share this assumption. They also suggest that only the KPIs 
that are really needed should be reported on, and that this is 
often fewer than initially thought. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
One view evident in the existing literature is that no 
specific IT system should determine the design and 
deployment of BPM tools and techniques, but should simply 
support the business transactions of a company [35]. 
However, the practical experience of the experts interviewed 
in this research provides a different perspective. Neubauer 
[18] asserts that ERP systems can influence a company’s 
business processes and this is confirmed by this research as 
regards the SAP ERP system. All the interviews, which 
involved many practitioners, confirmed that the SAP and 
BPM concepts are closely related. Theoretically, there is often 
no such link found in the documentation, but in practice the 
SAP system is the leading ERP system in many companies, 
and therefore there is a practical connection. An IT system 
such as SAP ERP can influence a company and its processes. 
In many companies, SAP is the dominant system, and a BPM 
maturity model needs to accommodate this reality.  
The interviewees confirmed that, from their practical 
experience, a deployed SAP system is usually well in-bedded 
in the culture and operations of a company. On the one hand, 
employees often think about their personal SAP process 
experience and how SAP handles processes in general. One 
reason for this is that companies have used an SAP ERP 
system for many years. On the other hand, financial 
information is also stored within an SAP system, which 
provides a sound basis for the analysis of key metrics within 
business processes. 

133
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Some BPM maturity models are very complex and not 
easy to use. To help address this issue, this research has 
developed a set of guidelines, which can be used by practising 
managers and other relevant stakeholders. They provide 
practical guidance for companies using SAP and BPM, and 
can lead to an improvement in business performance to the 
benefit of many stakeholders. The online survey demonstrated 
considerable support for the validity of these, but every 
organisation is different and guidelines should always be 
evaluated and applied, according to the particular 
requirements of the organisation concerned. In a wider 
context, this research underscores the value of a process 
management approach to analysing and assessing technology 
issues, and suggests that this may usefully be adapted and 
applied to look at other key change issues in the business-IT 
environment. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Grube and M. G. Wynn, “The Impact of SAP on the 
Utilisation of Business Process Management (BPM) Maturity 
Models in ERP projects,” The Tenth International Conference 
on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management 
(eKNOW2018) IARIA, Rome, Italy 2018.  
[2] 
SAP SE: SAP Corporate Fact Sheet [retrieved: May. 2019]. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.sap.com/documents/2017/04/4666ecdd-b67c-
0010-82c7-eda71af511fa.html 
[3] 
SAP, “ERP System | Enterprise Resource Planning | SAP,” 
[retrieved: 
May. 
2019]. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.sap.com/products/enterprise-management-
erp.html 
[4] 
M. Rezaeian and M. Wynn, “The implementation of ERP 
systems in Iranian manufacturing SMEs”, International Journal 
On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol. 9, nos. 3&4, pp.600 
– 614, 2016. Available from: http://eprints.glos.ac.uk/4264/ 
[5] 
H. Tscherwitschke, “What you need to know about business 
process management,” Computerwoche. from FAQ zu BPM: 
Was Sie über Business-Process-Management wissen müssen. 
[retrieved: 
May. 
2019]. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.computerwoche.de/software/soa-bpm/1906638/, 
2011. 
[6] 
B. Heilig and M. Möller, “Business Process Management with 
SAP NetWeaver BPM,” Bonn: SAP PRESS, 2014. 
[7] 
P. Busch and P. Fettke, “Business Process Management under 
the Microscope: The Potential of Social Network Analysis,” 
44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 
(HICSS), 2011. 
[8] 
T. M. Bekele and Z. Weihua, “Towards collaborative business 
process management development current and future 
approaches,” 
IEEE 
3rd 
International 
Conference 
on 
Communication Software and Networks (ICCSN), 2011. 
[9] 
R. M. Saco, “Maturity Models,” Industrial Management, vol. 
50, no. 4, pp. 11-15, 2008. 
[10] E. Ericsson, P. Gustafsson, D. Höök, L. Marcks von 
Würtemberg, and W. Rocha Flores, “Process improvement 
framework 
evaluation,” 
International 
Conference 
on 
Management Science and Engineering (ICMSE), 2010. 
[11] W. S. Humphrey, “Characterizing the Software Process: A 
Maturity Framework,”  IEEE Software, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 73-
79, 1988. 
[12] N. Markovic, Business Performance Measurement and 
Information Evolution Model. Proceedings of the European 
Conference on Information Management & Evaluation, pp. 
257-264, 2010. 
[13] A. Van Looy, “Does IT matter for business process maturity? 
A comparative study on business process maturity models,” 
Proceedings of the 2010 international conference on the move 
to meaningful internet systems, Hersonissos, Crete, Greece, 
2010. 
[14] S. Aeppli, “When SAP BPM calculates,“ Computerwoche. 
from Selbsttest für CW-Leser: Wann sich SAP BPM rechnet. 
[retrieved: May. 2019]. [Online]. Available from: http:// 
www.computerwoche.de/2503123, Jan 2012. 
[15] A. Corallo, A. Margherita, M. Scalvenzi, and D. Storelli, 
“Building a process-based organization: The design roadmap 
at 
Superjet,” 
International. 
Knowledge 
& 
Process 
Management, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 49-61, 2010, doi: 
10.1002/kpm.340. 
[16] J. vom Brocke, J. et al., “Ten guidelines of good business 
process management,” Business Process Management Journal, 
vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 530-548, 2014, doi: 10.1108/bpmj-06-2013-
0074. 
[17] M. Wynn, University-Industry Technology Transfer in the UK: 
Emerging 
Research 
and 
Opportunities. 
Chapter 
6 
Manufacturing Companies. IGI-Global, 2018. Available from: 
http://eprints.glos.ac.uk/5915/2/5915%20Wynn%20Chapter%
206.pdf 
[18] T. Neubauer, “An empirical study about the status of business 
process management,” Business Process Management Journal, 
vol. 
15, 
no. 
2, 
pp. 
166 
– 
183, 
2009, 
doi: 
10.1108/14637150910949434. 
[19] R. Poston and S. Grabski, “Financial impacts of enterprise 
resource planning implementations,” International Journal of 
Accounting Information Systems, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 271-294, 
2001, doi: 10.1016/S1467-0895(01)00024-0. 
[20] Y. L. Antonucci, G. Corbitt, G. Stewart, and A. L. Harris, 
“Enterprise Systems Education: Where Are We? Where Are 
We Going?” Journal of Information Systems Education, vol. 
15, no. 3, pp. 227-234, 2004. 
[21] A. Van Looy, M. De Backer, G. Poels, and M. Snoeck, 
“Choosing the right business process maturity model,” 
Information & Management, vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 466-488, 2013, 
doi: 10.1016/j.im.2013.06.002. 
[22]  A. Shaikh, A. Ahmed, N. Memon, and M. Memon, “Strengths 
and Weaknesses of Maturity Driven Process Improvement 
Effort,” in International Conference on Complex, Intelligent 
and Software Intensive Systems, 2009. CISIS ’09, pp. 481–
486, 2009. doi: 10.1109/CISIS.2009.182. 
[23] P. Cryer, “The research student's guide to success,” 3rd ed., 
Maidenhead: Open University Press, 2006. 
[24] M. Saunders, P. Lewis, and A. Thornhill, “Research methods 
for business students,” New York: Prentice Hall, 2009. 
[25] A. B. Ryan, “Post-Positivist Approaches to Research 
Researching and Writing your thesis: a guide for postgraduate 
students,” pp. 12-26, MACE: Maynooth Adult and Community 
Education, 2006. 
[26] E. G. Guba, “The Paradigm dialog,” Newbury Park, Calif.: 
Sage Publications, 1990. 
[27] Z. O'Leary, “The Social Science Jargon Buster,” London, UK: 
SAGE Publications Ltd, 2007. 
[28] G. Thomas, “How to Do Your Case Study: A Guide for 
Students and Researchers,” SAGE Publications, 2011. 
[29] J. Collis and R. Hussey, “Business research: a practical guide 
for undergraduate & postgraduate students,” Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2009. 
[30] R. K. Yin, “Case Study Research: Design and Methods,” 
SAGE Publications, 2009. 

134
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[31] R. Kumar, “Research Methodology: A Step-by-Step Guide for 
Beginners,” SAGE Publications, 2011. 
[32] A. Bryman and E. Bell, “Business research methods,” Oxford 
University Press, 2007. 
[33] S. E. Baker and R. Edwards, “How many qualitative interviews 
is enough? Expert voices and early career reflections on 
sampling and cases in qualitative research,” Southampton: 
ESRC National Centre for Research Methods, University of 
Southampton, 2012, [retrieved: May. 2019]. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://eprints.ncrm.ac.uk/2273/4/how_many_interviews.pdf 
[34] R., L. Armstrong, “The Midpoint on a Five-Point Likert-Type 
Scale. Perceptual and Motor Skills,” vol. 64 no. 2, pp. 359-362, 
1987. 
[35] C. Li, “Improving Business - IT Alignment through Business 
Architecture,” (Doctorate Doctoral Dissertations), Lawrence 
Technological University, Southfield, MI, 2010, [retrieved: 
May, 
2019], 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://search.proquest.com/docview/858204513 
 
 
 
 

