142
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Novel Thermoelectric Energy Harvesting Circuit for Exploiting Small Variable 
Temperature Gradients Based on a Commercially Available Integrated Circuit 
 
Martin Lenzhofer  
Sensor Systems 
Silicon Austria Labs GmbH 
9524 Villach, Austria 
martin.lenzhofer@silicon-austria.com 
 
 
Abstract—Nowadays there is an increasing demand in 
generating electrical power out of ambient sources, such as 
light, wireless power, vibrations or heat, to supply low power 
electronics of self-sustaining sensor nodes. The main problem 
is that if dealing in harsh environments, or at places with very 
little energy budgets and additional varying environmental 
conditions, sophisticated harvesting circuits are necessary. In 
this work a novel approach for such a circuit is described that 
deals with thermal gradients. It bases on a commercially 
available integrated circuit, but with an external wiring 
scheme, according to the presented modified block diagram of 
a general harvesting system. A detailed description is given 
how to analyze the energy requirements. Additionally, the 
importance of adequate matching of the thermo-electric 
generator to the input impedance of the circuit is pointed out 
and at last the wiring of external components to override the 
internally fixed switching scheme of the build in blocks of the 
integrated circuit is described. Measurements verify the 
function of the low power thermal energy harvesting unit and 
demonstrate in detail the solutions to the key challenges to 
exploit maximal power out of thermal gradients and to supply 
a sensor node electronics over a certain time.  
Keywords-Harvesting circuit; thermal gradient; low power 
electronics; 
thermo-electric 
generator; 
thermal 
harvester; 
LTC3108. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Recent developments in the field of wireless sensor 
technology and low power electronics enable an increase of 
the scope of applications in direction of self-sustaining 
sensor systems, even in harsh environments. Nowadays, 
most of the devices are generally powered by battery, but 
their drawbacks are that they increase the size of the devices 
and sometimes also their costs and pose an additional burden 
of replacement or recharging. Thus, there is an increasing 
effort in using other energy sources to supply the electronic 
circuits. The concept of energy harvesting describes the 
mechanism of exploiting energy from present sources in the 
environment of the sensor node. There are many ambient 
energy sources to exploit electrical power, but sophisticated 
circuits have to be developed to convert the small quantities 
of light emissions, wireless power transmitted by different 
devices, small vibrations or thermal energy into useful 
quantities that are sufficient to supply an electronic 
circuit [1]. A rough order of magnitude for the expected 
energy value for each energy source is given below.  
Light energy is available almost everywhere and can be 
captured by photovoltaic (PV) cells, but it has to be 
considered that in average, levels between 10µW/cm² or just 
10mW/cm² can be achieved indoor, depending on the 
location where the sensor node is used, meaning somewhere 
in the room or right beside a window, where the power levels 
are of course much higher, due to the fact of the sunlight 
influence. Of course, even higher values are achieved 
outdoor, if directly lightning the cell or photovoltaic module 
right adjusted to the sun, where values of up to 1.353W/m² 
[2] can be achieved, but these applications are not in the 
focus of the presented study dealing with energy harvesting 
solutions used in autonomous sensor nodes in a building or 
machine. To maximize the output power of the cell 
maximum power point tracking (MPPT) techniques must be 
applied. There are already commercial integrated circuits 
(IC) on the market with an implemented algorithm to 
continuously 
track 
the 
supply 
conditions 
and 
the 
corresponding load to maximize the transferred power, 
determined from the I-V curve of the solar cell. 
Another omnipresent energy source is the radio 
frequency (RF) energy, due to the high number of mobile 
phones, WLAN networks, cell phone towers and every other 
kind of communication network. Beside the fact that the 
quantity of available power density level is very low, in the 
range of 0.1µW/cm² to 1µW/cm² [3], the energy levels 
additionally vary due to factors like terrain, number of users 
and many others.  To achieve useful power levels also high 
gain and therefore big antenna systems are required and thus, 
often depict a limiting factor in being used in autonomous 
sensor nodes.     
Also, the vibration energy source offers a great 
possibility to be converted into electrical power. There are 
many various forms - steady-state source, intermitted source 
and vibration source, where the last one is the commonly 
most often exploited one and being used to generate power, 
while for example human activity such as walking. While 
vibration amplitude can be quite large, like in the case of 
being exploited in civil structures ore railways, the expected 
levels, if being used under normal conditions, range between 
4µW/cm² to 100µW/cm².   
 

143
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
At last, thermal energy can be obtained either present in 
the ambient or generated during several processes. The most 
common way to generate electrical power to supply an 
electronic circuit of the available source is to use the Seebeck 
effect [2]. To extract energy from a thermal source a thermal 
gradient is required, where the conversion efficiency is 
directly related to the achieved temperature difference (hot 
and cold side) of the Peltier element or thermo-electrical 
generator (TEG). As it is described later in this paper, 
dependent on the application it is not always possible to 
achieve big gradients, leading in investigating novel design 
approaches however, to ensure the possibility of suppling an 
electronic circuit [3]-[5]. The expected energy output by 
exploiting thermal variations ranges between 10µW/cm² to 
about 60W/cm² [6]. As the temperature gradients are usually 
low, also the conversion efficiency and the output voltages of 
the systems are low, which afford special converter circuits. 
There are many applications, which focus on the usage of 
thermoelectric devices exploiting stable and continuous 
temperature differences, but there are rarely any of them 
dealing with harvesting energy from temperature gradients 
[7]-[10]. There are two main reasons for that: on one hand, 
the little energy potential within a gradient does not seem to 
be very attractive and, on the other hand, it is a reliability 
issue for stable operations of autonomous systems. 
Nevertheless, there are a plenty of applications that show 
small temperature gradients, for example, in wearable 
systems and in systems for environmental and infrastructure 
monitoring. 
Referring to [1], the presented paper describes the 
functionality of the developed thermal harvesting circuit in 
more detail and additionally, demonstrates the possibility of 
exploiting energy from just a thermal gradient with a start-up 
procedure for an electronic circuit. Furthermore, the 
theoretical investigations point out the importance of 
matching the generator to the load impedance, as well as 
quantify the theoretical potential of a temperature gradient. 
Section I describes the building blocks of a common 
energy harvesting system and the modified one. Section II 
deals with the development of the harvester circuit, based on 
the extended block diagram and Section III presents real 
measurements, verifying the functionality of this novel 
approach. 
 
II. 
BUILDING BLOCKS OF AN ENERGY  HARVESTING 
SYSTEM 
Referring to the literature [11], commonly a conventional 
energy harvesting system is built up by several blocks, 
shown in Figure 1.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Block diagram of a conventional energy harvesting system. 
At the input of the system the residual energy from the 
ambient environmental source is captured by the detector. 
There it is converted into the electrical domain and 
afterwards stored to supply different loads (circuit blocks). 
Optionally, as it was already mentioned in the introduction, 
some conditioning circuits can be developed to achieve a 
higher efficiency and output power. The storage module 
ensures continuous energy supply even under varying 
environmental conditions or also in the case, if the source is 
not available anymore. 
This simple block diagram, shown in Figure 1, of an 
energy harvesting system is in general valid, but must be 
modified and extended, if dealing with not stable 
environmental conditions. Also, if working in the RF 
domain, where accumulation of energy is necessary, a more 
sophisticated system is needed. Referring to the described 
challenge of extracting energy from varying temperatures or 
its gradients, a similar approach to RF systems must be 
realized, to even have the ability of supplying any 
electronics. Figure 2 illustrates the modified block diagram 
for a system that is even able to address the previously 
mentioned challenges. Just a single reference could be found 
that describes this modified block diagram [12]. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Modified block diagram for a general valid harvester system 
that is also able to deal with RF sources and thermal gradients. 
 
Similar to Figure 1 the system includes a detector, 
represented by the TEG in this dedicated case, the voltage 
regulator working as energy converter, the charge 
management circuit to realize the energy storage block and 
additionally before connecting to the load the so important 
load management circuit. This last-mentioned block contains 
the key function for the developed harvester approach.  
As most of the electronics require more than 1.8 V to 
operate adequately and often the input voltages are far 
smaller than that, a boost converter block is implemented. If 
connecting a TEG to the input, additionally variation in the 
temperature of the heat source can lead to an unstable output, 
which requires a regulation. The charge management block 
handles the different types of energy storage devices, which 
can either be an electrochemical cell (battery), or any kind of 
capacitor. Batteries offer a high energy storage density and 
less leakage current compared to capacitors, but therefore 
cannot provide high current bursts for a short period of time. 

144
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The load management circuit is used to automatically switch 
the load between the regulated voltage and the storage 
device, depending on the environmental conditions and the 
status of the regulator output. In case of using a battery, also 
a protection block to prevent overcharging or over 
discharging is implemented in the block diagram. 
III. 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE HARVESTER CIRCUIT 
If dealing with very little energy, as it is contained in 
thermal gradients, one of the most important points is an 
adequate impedance matching for maximal power transfer. 
Additionally, an energy storage system must be considered, 
to accumulate enough energy before powering-up the 
connected sensor node electronics based on an intelligent 
start-up sequence switching scheme. 
 
A. Impedance Matching for Maximal Power Transfer 
Thermal energy harvesting systems require specific 
optimizations, either on the thermal level and on the other 
hand on the electrical circuit level. In particular, the 
thermoelectric device must be sized appropriately for the 
available heat and the electrical load. The presented work 
bases on the already optimized thermal setup and therefore 
just focus on the electrical domain of building up a 
harvesting circuit to supply a sensor node electronic circuit. 
Through the thermoelectric coupling equations, the open 
circuit output voltage of the TEG, described as UTEG is given 
by [13], 
 
                           (1) 
 
with the Seebeck coefficient α and the heat difference ∆TTEG 
between the hot and the cold side of the TEG, including of 
course the contact and thermal interface resistances of the 
build-up mechanical system. The unloaded TEG output 
voltage UTEG varies linearly with the temperature difference. 
Figure 3 shows the measurement result UTEG (without load) 
over time of the TEG system during the heating up process, 
when the electronic circuit should work, and the converter 
circuit is designed for. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Open loop voltage UTEG of the TEG versus the temperature raise 
in the oven over time. After about 260s the thermal mass of the sensor node 
is heated up, leading to a further decrease in voltage again. 
The resulting current flow through a fictive resistive load 
RL can be described as [14], 
 
                                   (2) 
 
with, 
 
                                       (3) 
 
where RTEG is the electrical resistance of the TEG and u the 
ratio between the TEG impedance and the load impedance 
RL. If applying formula (1) and (3), the resulting current IL, 
expressed by (2), through the circuit becomes as, 
 
                                  (4) 
 
As the current IL flows through the internal impedance 
RTEG and through RL, the maximal voltage drop is achieved 
if both values are of the same value, or the ratio u = 1. In this 
case the maximum amount of energy can be transferred, and 
appropriate power matching is performed, which represents 
the aimed condition.  
In this development, the situation is more complicated, 
because several aspects must be considered. First, Figure 3 
just illustrates the voltage of the TEG generated during a heat 
up ramp without any load. Before applying this result to (4) 
also the real impedance of the TEG is measured with an LCR 
bridge, at a frequency of 100 kHz, which value is equal to 
the switching frequency of the connected DC-DC converter 
circuit. It turns out that the internal resistance of the TEG is 
about 5.4 Ω and additionally there is a small inductance, 
caused by the wires and the internal cabling of about 2 µH. 
Furthermore, also the input impedance of the DC-DC 
converter unit is analyzed with a source meter according to 
the input voltage level, shown in Figure 4.  The discontinuity 
in the curve at about 25 mV represents the level of start-up of 
the circuit. From the harvesting point of view this means that 
for about 230 s the voltage just increases to that level, which 
represents the moment of reaching twice the value of the 
unloaded result in Figure 3 performed at the state of perfect 
power matching. After that, energy is transferred to a storage 
element, which is just possible for a certain time, in this 
particular case just as long as the system does not reach 
+85°C, which occurs after approximately 330 s. Higher 
temperatures are not allowed, due to the fact of proper 
reliable functionality of the circuit. Figure 5 illustrates the 
temperature raise of the oven versus the achieved 
temperature difference over the TEG, which represents a 
linear correlation of the generated voltage UTEG in Figure 3. 
Due to the fact of still increasing temperatures in the oven, 
the whole sustainable sensor setup will heat up, resulting in a 
decreasing voltage difference over the implemented TEG. 
So, there is just a limited time-window to supply the 
electronics and perform the processing ability of the sensor 

145
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
node. In the timeframe from the start-up of the converter to 
the maximal allowable temperature, enough energy to 
perform all the processing for the controller unit must be 
collected. Also, all the losses and the conversion efficiency 
of the converter unit must be considered. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Measurement of the input impedance of the DC-DC converter 
circuit, dependent on the voltage level on its input. The discontinuity in the 
impedance chart around 25 mV represents the start-up condition of the 
electronic circuit. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Temperature raise of the oven (blue curve) and temperature 
difference between the hot and the cold side of the TEG in the setup 
(orange curve). 
 
Putting all these dependencies together and additionally 
applying formula (4) the maximal available electrical power 
at the input of the DC-DC converter can be expressed by, 
 
 
 
     (5) 
 
Figure 6 shows the result of equation (5) (blue signal) 
and additionally the respective integral of the signal 
(orange), which leads to the available energy value at the 
circuit input to supply the sensor node electronic circuit. Still 
it must be considered that this power is available at the input, 
and additional conversion losses of the circuit itself must be 
added and determined. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Blue signal represents the available input power and the orange 
signal represents the integral and therefore the energy over time at the 
circuit input. 
 
There are just a few vendors of integrated ultra-low 
power converter and management IC on the market, where 
the LTC3108 [14] from Linear Technology Inc. seems to be 
the best fitting one for the present use case. This circuit is 
intended to provide a highly integrated DC-DC converter for 
harvesting and managing surplus energy from extremely low 
input voltage sources, such as the described TEG system. 
Referring to the datasheet [14], the implemented step-up 
technology operates from input voltages as low as 20 mV. 
This minimum input voltage depends on the transformer 
turns ratio, the load power required and the internal DC 
resistance (ESR) of the supplying source. A lower ESR 
allows the use of lower voltages and provides higher output 
power capability, but in the described use-case, the limitation 
is given by the TEG’s resistance of 5.4 Ω resulting in a 
circuit start-up voltage level around 25 mV, shown in 
Figure 4. 
 
 
B. Wiring scheme of the DC-DC Converter according to 
the modified block diagram 
The recommended wiring scheme for a wireless remote 
application is given in the datasheet [15], shown in Figure 7. 
Since this is just working for continuous applied input 
voltage levels, some modifications must be applied, to 
realize the suggested wiring scheme according to the 
extended block diagram shown in Figure 2.  
 
 
 

146
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 7.  Wireless remote sensor application powered from a Peltier cell, 
according to the datasheet suggestion. This wiring scheme represents a 
solution according to the typical block diagram, shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
Before thinking of how to change and modify the 
connection scheme of all the implemented blocks within the 
LTC3108 it is necessary to have a deeper look into the 
sequencing of the chip, refer to Figure 8, considering  that 
this is always, just valid for stable and constant input 
conditions.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Start-up sequencing diagram of the management unit of the 
LTC3108 from Linear Technology Inc.. 
 
If a voltage is applied to the input of the circuit the level 
at VAUX starts to increase. The precision internal 
micropower voltage reference to accurately control the 
output voltage level Vout becomes active, after exceeding a 
level of 2 V. At this point, the synchronous rectifiers, which 
are switched in parallel to each diode, take over leading to an 
improvement in the conversion efficiency. After reaching a 
VAUX level of 2 V the VLDO supply starts-up, which 
provides 2.2 V output for powering low power processors or 
other low power ICs, if dealing with constant input 
conditions. Afterwards the level at Vout starts to increase till 
the output level is reached, which is programmed via the 
configuration pins VS1 and VS2 and set to 2.35 V in this 
dedicated case. If the level is valid the power good PGD 
indicator pin is activated and the internal charge control unit 
switches to another output to store the energy into an 
external capacitor connected to the pin VSTORE. The level 
will still increase up to 5.5 V and will remain at this level 
during the time where the Vin level is present. The whole 
routine will be processed within a few milliseconds at stable 
input conditions. 
If using the implemented blocks of the semiconductor 
device to exploit temperature gradients, the switching 
scheme of the charge control circuit must be influenced from 
outside, to affect the hardware implemented start-up 
sequence. One major problem if working with thermal, time 
and slope varying gradients is the very limited contained 
energy. In the case of constant heat transfer of the TEG, load 
matching is targeted and enough to guarantee maximal 
power transfer. If dealing with that small temperature 
gradients this configuration is not enough, due to the fact that 
already a low-power load like a Microcontroller Unit (MCU) 
core connected to the Low-Dropout Regulator (LDO) output 
of the chip, the current flow leads to a decrease in voltage at 
the input. Tests showed that even for very low power MCUs, 
a valid start-up of the controller core is impossible. 
Therefore, another strategy must be implemented; meaning, 
first to harvest all available energy within the thermal 
gradient and just activate the controller circuit at the state of 
enough available power. 
Figure 9 shows the adopted schematic scheme to deal 
with positive variable temperature gradients that result in a 
positive voltage level at the TEG system, which is suitable if 
using the sensor in an oven within the start-up procedure. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Developed circuit of the thermal harvester unit with improved 
power-up sequence influenced by external components. 
 
 
If an input level of around 20 mV is reached, the DC-DC 
converter of the LTC3108 starts-up, leading to a raising 
voltage level at the pin VOUT. To avoid a constant current 
flow and perform adequate matching, just a capacitor as load 
is connected to this pin. This leads to a slowly charging of 
the energy storage device and capturing all available power 
from the input. The capacitance value must be matched to 
the slope of the thermal gradient, because a continuously 
heating up system, will result in a decrease of level over the 
TEG after a certain time.  

147
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
If remaining heating-up of the whole self-sustaining 
sensor node, the DC-DC converter will be deactivated again, 
if turning back below the approximately 20 mV. In the case 
of a too large capacitance value, the expected output voltage 
level at VOUT will not be reached and therefore PGD is not 
set. The stored energy in this capacitor can be used to supply 
the sensor electronics afterwards. The IC internally generates 
a PGD signal, if the programmed output level at VOUT 
reaches 2.35 V. In the presented application, the load formed 
by an MCU is connected to the pin VOUT2. The reason is 
that this pin is switchable by an internal low leakage 
transistor. For enabling this VOUT2 pin, the PGD signal is 
now used and connected to the respective input pin with a 
low voltage Schottky diode D1.  
This diode D1 represents another key aspect of the 
presented circuit, because it forms together with the second 
one an OR-gate, controlled by an output pin of the external 
MCU. This method is necessary due to the load case at 
output VOUT2. The start-up current of the MCU, refer to 
Figure 10 a.) (state A), leads to a voltage drop at VOUT 
(state B), where the energy flows from the capacitor C7 over 
the internal transistor of IC1 to the MCU. The PGD 
condition of the LTC3108 is tied to an internal not access- 
and adjustable hysteresis setting, which leads to switch off 
again, if the voltage level decreases by 7.5% of the nominal 
set value (state B). This happens quite rapidly, because the 
start-up current even of a low power MCU is quite high in 
the range of a few mA, or approximately 1.7 mA in the 
presented application. If the supplying voltage VOUT2 is 
switched off by the PGD signal again, the electronics would 
never reach the properly run mode of the circuit electronics. 
After switching off again (state B), the load current is almost 
zero again, causing an increase in voltage at VOUT again 
and switching on the voltage regulator once more (state C). 
So, this effect of switching on and off the load leads to a 
ringing phenomenon, refer to Figure 10 a.), which must be 
prohibited.  
Therefore, the energy stored in the capacitor C7 must be 
high enough to hold the voltage level during the start-up of 
the MCU, configuration and controlling the diode D1 above 
the rated voltage (set voltage level reduced by 7.5% 
representing the internally fixed hysteresis value). After that, 
a further decrease in voltage level is not critical anymore, 
due to the locking function of the high level of the MCU pin 
that deactivates the hysteresis because of the OR gate 
mechanism, resulting to the diagram shown in Figure 10 b.).  
In the presented application, the output level Vout is set to 
2.35 V, so the start-up procedure including the activation of 
the output pin is not allowed to decrease beyond 2.174 V. As 
an MCU with a supply rating of 1.8 V is used, still a margin 
for a further approximately 0.4 V voltage drop is guaranteed 
for valid operation. Depending on the stored energy, the 
permitted maximal voltage drop and the current demand, 
which is of course mainly influenced by the software control 
algorithms and its necessary internal hardware blocks of the 
controller, the active operation time of the system, can be 
evaluated. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.  a.) Ringing phenomena due to different load conditions at 
VOUT, b.) Avoidance of the effect through self-locking circuitry via the 
MCU controlled OR gate configuration. 
IV. 
MEASUREMENTS AND VALIDATION 
In this section, the developed circuit is evaluated. 
Compared to the measurement result of the open-loop 
voltage of the TEG, shown in Figure 3, it turns out that 
almost perfect maximal power matching is achieved, due to 
the fact of reaching nearly half of the voltage level. The 
measurement is shown in Figure 11 and it turns out that the 
harvesting part of the circuit starts-up at 21 mV, leading to 
an increase in the voltage level at VOUT. After the set output 
voltage level of 2.35 V is reached, the circuit tries to hold the 
level. Because the input voltage starts decreasing again the 
bursts in the signal at VIN becomes higher and the frequency 
decreases. At approximately 320 s the DC-DC converter 
stops working. Since there is still energy stored in the 
capacitor connected to VOUT, the level remains stable for a 
time. Referring to the measurement in Figure 3, at this time 
also a temperature of about +85°C is reached, meaning that 
the circuit will not work much longer. Because of the 
thermal mass of the sensor node, the inner temperature is 
slightly lower, leading the circuit to extend the working time. 
 
 
Figure 11.  Blue signal: Input voltage level at the DC-DC converter input 
under load matching condition; Orange signal: Output voltage slope at pin 
VOUT achieved during heat-up process based on input level of the circuit. 

148
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 12.  Circuit behavior without self-locking mechanism. If PGD (blue 
signal) is switched on, the circuit is supplied, leading to a voltage drop at 
VOUT (orange signal) caused by the current flow of the MCU and PGD is 
switched off again, if the value is lower than the internal hysteresis value. 
Due to the no-load condition after switching off, the capacitor charges up 
again and the voltage level increases. 
 
Because the start-up current of the electronics is quite 
high, the voltage drops rapidly under the internal hysteresis 
value leading the LTC3805 to switch off again the PGD pin. 
Therefore, the circuitry does not have enough time to start-up 
properly. The active ON time is limited to the burst length, 
which is just 34 ms in this dedicated case. After switching 
off PGD, the current supply of the connected electronics 
stops, leading capacitor C7 at pin VOUT to charge up again. 
The desired and programmed output voltage is reached again 
after approximately 660 ms, refer to Figure 12. Now PGD is 
switched on again leading to repeat this sequence. Since the 
input voltage decreases, also the charge-up time of the 
capacitor is influenced, leading to longer charging times after 
a while. This kind of ringing phenomena makes it necessary 
to evaluate the function of the developed self-locking 
circuitry.   
 
 
Figure 13.  Working principle of the self-locking mechanism. Because the 
MCU switches on a pin to activate the OR gate leading to keep supplying 
the circuit, the PGD switches on after reaching the valid VOUT level again. 
 
Comparing the time between the first and the second 
activation of PGD, shown in Figure 13, the time duration is 
longer than the one measured without the self-locking 
mechanism in Figure 12, which is approximately 660 ms 
long. The capacitor C7 needs approximately 1.5 s to charge 
up at the given input conditions and to reach the valid output 
level. This is the reason for implementing the self-locking 
mechanism, because the MCU already activates the pin to 
switch the OR gate configuration right after initialization, 
which is manageable to be done within a few milli seconds. 
The pulse time of the PGD signal is about 34 ms long, as 
pointed out in Figure 12. Within this time the MCU must 
take over the function of holding the level at the enable pin 
that switches on the supply of the electronics at VOUT2.  
Nevertheless, there is a trade off in dimensioning the 
capacitor C7 connected to VOUT. On one hand, it must 
provide enough energy to start-up the MCU and, on the other 
hand, it must not be too large, because then a charging up to 
the desired level, of 2.35 V in this case, is not possible 
anymore. So, the value of capacitance must be optimized 
according to the power consumption of the MCU or sensor 
node electronics and the input voltage VIN provided by the 
TEG matched to the input impedance of the DC-DC 
converter circuit. Additionally, the internal series resistance 
of the capacitor C7 should be as low as possible to provide 
high current pulses when switching on the MCU. 
To sum up, if designing a harvesting unit for an 
electronic circuit that must deal with variable input 
conditions as it is given in the RF domain or even if dealing 
with thermal gradients, it is necessary, first to analyze the 
electrical energy needed, to measure the current afford 
necessary to start up the circuit and to investigate into the 
available energy source. Next, it must be tried to dimension 
the detector element, the TEG in this presented use case, 
according to the desired power budget and to perform best 
possible input matching. In a next step, the introduced 
modified block diagram must be applied to develop the 
circuit and finally the energy storage element must be 
matched, in respect to capacitance and technology, as 
described before. If all these stated items are considered it is 
possible to develop a harvesting circuit that is even possible 
to supply an electronic circuit for a certain time span under 
varying environmental conditions and in situations when 
very 
little 
energy 
is 
available, even under 
harsh 
environments. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper briefly introduces an overview of possible 
power sources, specially focusing on thermal sources that 
can be used to generate energy for a self-sustaining 
autonomous sensor node. Specially in harsh environments 
and closed compartments, like ovens, battery-based systems 
cannot be used. Therefore, thermal harvesting units that 
exploit the energy from the heating-up process in the oven 
are necessary. Since the contained energy potential is very 
limited, as it turns out of the theoretical analytics, as well as 
compared to the carried-out measurements, the presented 

149
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
novel approach deals with an optimized circuitry based on a 
commercially available harvesting IC. Externally applied 
components influence the implemented switching sequence 
and therefore realize a circuit based on the presented 
modified harvesting block diagram. Beside adequate power 
matching of the energy converter, or thermal electric 
generator in the presented use case, and the input impedance 
of the connected step-up converter, also an intelligent load 
management is necessary that guarantees in a first step to 
accumulate all the available energy and just after a certain 
time, to activate the processing unit or sensor node 
electronics. Without such switching mechanism, already a 
low power MCU that is instantaneously supplied, would 
cause a current flow that would not allow the electronics to 
start-up adequately, or even reach a proper and stable voltage 
level. Therefore, this paper presents a solution to solve these 
challenges, of harvesting little power from a thermal 
gradient, but also enabling a proper operation of a sensor 
node electronics over a certain time. Finally, measurement 
results prove the proper functionality of such a low power 
thermal energy harvesting unit electronics.   
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was performed within the COMET Centre 
ASSIC Austrian Smart Systems Integration Research Center, 
which is funded by BMK, BMDW, and the Austrian 
provinces of Carinthia and Styria, within the framework of 
COMET - Competence Centres for Excellent Technologies. 
The COMET programme is run by FFG. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Lenzhofer, “Thermoelectric Energy Harvesting Circuit for 
Small Variable Temperature Gradients”, IARIA Proceedings 
of 
SENSORDEVICES 
2019, 
The 
10th 
International 
Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications, 
27.-31.10.2019 Nice, France; ISBN: 978-1-61208-745-0, 
pp. 61-62, 2019. 
[2] F. Yildiz and K. L. Coogler, "Low Power Energy Harvesting 
with a Thermoelectric Generator through an Air Conditioning 
Condenser", 121st ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition, 
Indianapolis, vol. 10552, 2014. 
[3] D. Zabek and F. Morini, “Solid state generators and energy 
harvesters for waste heat recovery and thermal energy 
harvesting”, Thermal Science and Engineering Progress, 
vol. 9, 
pp. 
235-247, 
ISSN 
2451-9049, 
2019, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tsep.2018.11.011.  
[4] A. M. Abdal-Kadhim and K. S. Leong, "Application of 
thermal energy harvesting from low-level heat sources in 
powering up WSN node”, 2nd International Conference on 
Frontiers of Sensors Technologies (ICFST), Shenzhen, 2017, 
pp. 131-135, doi: 10.1109/ICFST.2017.8210489. 
[5] P. Mullen, J. Siviter, A. Montecucco and A. R. Knox, “A 
thermoelectric energy harvester with a cold start of 0.6 °C”, 
12th European Conference on Thermoelectrics, Materials  
Today:  Proc. 2, pp. 823–832, 2015. 
[6] F. Yildiz, “Potential Ambient Energy-Harvesting Sources and 
Techniques”, Journal of technology studies, vol. 35, no. 1.  
[7] V. Leonov, P. Fiorini, S. Sedky, T. Torfs and C. Van Hoof, 
“Thermoelectric MEMS generators as a power supply for a 
body area network”, Proc. IEEE Transducers 2005, pp. 291-
295, 2005. 
[8] Y. Meydbray, R. Singh, and A. Shakouri, “Thermoelectric 
module construction for low temperature gradient power 
generation”, Proc. 24th Int. Conference on Thermolectrics, 
pp. 348-351, 2005. 
[9] P. Woias, “Thermoelectric Energy Harvesting from small 
variable Temperature Gradients”, Proc. 12., Dresdener 
Sensor-Symosium, pp. 83-88, DOI 10.5162/12dss2015/5.6, 
2015. 
[10] A. Moser, M. Erd, M. Kostic and K. Cobry, „Thermoelectric 
Energy Harvesting from Transient Ambient Temperature 
Gradients”, Journal of Electric Material, vol. 41, pp. 1653–
1661, 2012, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-011-1894-4. 
[11] S. Sojan, “A Comprehensive Review of Energy Harvesting 
Techniques and its Potential Applications”, International 
Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887), vol. 139, 
No. 3, April 2016. 
[12] D. Koester, “Thermal energy harvesting for distributed 
sensors”, 53, December 2011. 
[13] D. M. Rowe, CRC Handbook of Thermoelectrics (Boca 
Raton, CRC Press), 1995. 
[14] “Generic Energy Harvesting Adapter Module for TEG”, App. 
Note TIDU808, Texas instruments, March 2015. 
[15] Linear Technology Corp., datasheet LTC3108. [Online]. 
Available from: https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-
documentation/data-sheets/LTC3108.pdf , [accessed May 
2020]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

