161
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Real-time Evaluation of Failure and Reliability in Agricultural Sprayers Using 
Embedded Sensors and Controller Area Bus Protocol 
  
 
Paulo E. Cruvinel1,2, Heitor V. Mercaldi1,3, Pedro B. Andrade1, Elmer A. G. Penãloza 1,4 
 1Embrapa Instrumentation Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation, São Carlos, SP, Brazil  
2 Post-Graduation Programs in Computer Science - Federal University of São Carlos, SP, Brazil 
3Department of Electrical Engineering – Federal University of São Carlos, SP, Brazil 
4Engineering Center - Federal University of Pelotas, RS, Brazil 
Emails: paulo.cruvinel@embrapa.br, heitor@ufscar.br, pedro_borghi@hotmail.com, eagpenaloza@ufpel.edu.br
  
 
Abstract—This paper presents a method for the operational 
analysis of agricultural sprayers based on their smart sensor 
devices. It is becoming increasingly necessary to study a 
sprayer’s reliability, which is one of the major concerns in 
real-world agricultural machinery during field operation. A 
method is thus presented in this study for the verification of 
the reliability and indication of the failure of an agricultural 
spraying system using smart sensors, a microcontroller, and a 
controller area network protocol for communication and data 
analysis. Smart sensors were used for sensing the pressure, 
flow of pesticides, and temperature for the spray quality 
control evaluation. These smart sensors play an important role 
in supporting variable control, and they should not only be 
operating correctly but should also ensure the verification of 
application quality, which depends on the correct rate of 
pesticide application for pest control. Furthermore, these 
smart sensors were embedded in the main parts of the sprayer 
machine. Such a system facilitates the real-time and low-cost 
periodic verification of the sensors’ calibration as well as the 
evaluation of the entire operation, in addition to indicating 
necessary corrections and sensor replacements. Such an 
innovative system would play a strategic role in allowing users 
to appropriate such knowledge and decrease the measurement 
errors in variables that are directly related to pest-control 
efficiency as well as reduce the resulting impact on the 
environment. 
Keywords—Real-time processing; Failure and reliability; 
Calibration of sensors; Agricultural sprayers; Decision-making 
support; CAN bus; Precision farming. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Embedded sensor systems are computer-based systems 
that can be part of larger systems. The former perform some 
of the requirements of these larger systems. The majority of 
such embedded systems are also characterized as real-time 
systems. These systems, especially in agriculture, are 
required to meet stringent specifications for safety, 
reliability, availability, and other attributes of dependability 
[1]-[3].  
The high complexity of embedded real-time systems 
results in increasing demands with respect to engineering 
requirements, high-level design, early error detection, 
productivity, integration, verification, and maintenance, 
which increases the importance of the efficient management 
of its life-cycle properties, such as maintainability, 
portability, and adaptability [4]. 
The constructive design of dependable distributed real-
time systems using pre-validated components requires 
precise interface specifications of the components in the 
temporal and value domains [5]. The digital transformation 
and its impacts on agricultural automation have been 
providing, from the technological point of view, tools for 
risk-management development based on the use of the 
agriculture 4.0 concepts [6]–[9]. Such an approach facilitates 
the rational use of agricultural inputs and the promotion of 
paths for realizing improved productivity and sustainability 
gains. 
Today, not only in scientific research areas but also in the 
agricultural industry, it has become possible to use scalable 
computational 
architectures, 
mainly 
those 
based 
on 
embedded and smart ones [10]. Such architectures have the 
potential to comprise multiple processor nodes with the use 
of language to allow the implementation of new integrated 
risk models. Without agricultural mechanization and its 
advanced automation, it will be practically impossible to 
meet such needs and provide solutions for realizing food and 
nutrition safety [11]-[15]. 
The automation of agricultural machinery is an intensive 
area of research and development with an emphasis on the 
enhancement of food quality, preservation of operator 
comfort and safety, precision application of agrochemicals, 
energy conservation, and environmental control. Current 
automation applications are oriented towards and assist in the 
attainment of environment friendly and more sustainable 
systems of agricultural and food production [16][17]. The 
global mechanization of farming practices has revolutionized 
food production, thus enabling it to keep pace with the global 
population growth [18][19].  
In terms of the current technology development for 
agriculture, there is a need for more investments, system 
innovation, and a better understanding of how people and 
machines can interact to each other. In addition, almost every 
piece of agricultural equipment comprises sensors and 
controls these days, and a number of sensing technologies 
are used in agriculture for providing data that help farmers 
monitor and optimize crop cultivation. In such a context, the 
assessment of sensor failure and reliability is important for 
machinery design engineers and researchers. 

162
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The methodology for assessing sensor reliability has 
adaptive aspects and should be customized as a function of 
the sensor application. In agriculture, for instance, the design 
of embedded electronic-sensor-based systems in machinery 
for field operation has been shown to require the inclusion of 
failure and reliability evaluations. Thus, three general 
approaches for designing such sensor-based systems can be 
considered: system failure owing to uncalibrated sensors, 
system-failure 
rate 
prediction, 
and 
physics-of-failure 
reliability assessment [20]-[23]. 
In general, the sensors in an agricultural sprayer are 
organized in sensor networks. If using the concept of 
redundancy, the failure of a single device may not be critical 
to the pesticides application. However, when failures occur 
in sensors, the consequences are likely to be disastrous, 
particularly in the case of critical applications, such as the 
application of pesticides for pest control. The impact of an 
incorrect application of pesticides is well known, not only in 
terms of the related economic aspects and the plant’s health, 
but also its effect on the environment. The cause of such a 
failure must be determined as soon as possible; otherwise, 
the negative consequences could become more widespread 
[24]. 
The droplets sprayed during a pest control process are of 
different sized, and a percentage of the liquid volume is 
sprayed as fine droplets, regardless of the nozzle model used. 
However, the droplets should be of uniform size in order to 
realize the necessary efficiency for pest control. Similarly, 
some parameters are used to analyze the spectrum of the 
droplet size of sprays, such as the Volume Median Diameter 
(VMD) and the Coefficient of Variation (CV). The analysis 
of the spectrum uniformity comprise the use of the values of 
terms presented in DV0.1, DV0.5, and DV0.9, which represent 
the droplet diameters such as the percentage of cumulative 
spray volume, which means, equal to 10%, 50% and 90% 
respectively. The diameter of 50% of the cumulative volume 
(DV0.5) represents the VMD of a pesticide spray’s 
application. 
The uniformity of the droplet distribution is not only 
dependent on internal machinery parameters but also on 
external factors. The internal parameters are related to the 
sprayer machinery, i.e., the temperature and pressure of the 
syrup in the sprayer’s boom, as well its flow in the nozzles 
[25]. The external factors are mainly related to the strength 
of the wind and its direction as well as the ambient humidity 
and temperature [26]. Although the internal factors can be 
controlled, the external ones cannot be controlled, and the 
latter contribute to the drift effect, which is undesirable. 
Nevertheless, such an effect can be minimized by selecting 
the type of nozzle based on the type of application required 
for the pest control management of an agricultural crop [27]. 
However, it should be noted that the internal sprayer’s 
variables play an important role for the efficiency of the pest 
control process and should be correctly adjusted and 
controlled. Two terms that serve to express uniformity are 
the Extension (Ex) and Relative Amplitude (RA), which 
quantifies the range that covers 80% of the spray volume, 
and a comparative index respectively. The higher the value 
of the RA, the more heterogeneous is the spray spectrum, 
which implies a lower distribution uniformity.  
Figure 1 presents three different results of pesticide 
applications for pest control that have the same VMD but 
different uniformities and RA values [28][29]. It can be 
observed in Figure 1(a) that the application has good 
homogeneity as the sizes of the drops applied are very 
similar, thus indicating a low variation in the size of the 
drops. This indicates that this pesticide’s application process 
is more effective in contrast to that presented in Figure 1(c), 
which shows very small drops and very large drops, which 
can affect the quality of the pesticide’s application process. 
In Figure 1(b), an intermediate result is presented, which can 
also occur during the pesticide’s application on a real 
agricultural field. 
According to the records, isolated component evaluations 
of sprayers have been performed since the 1940s, but only in 
the 1970s did technical inspection programs emerge [30]. 
Around 1960, the implementation of the first Sprayer 
Inspection Project began in Germany. In 1969, other 
countries, such as Italy, began to perform inspections and, 
since then, the improvement of quality and the reduction of 
the negative impacts of these applications were observed 
[31]. There exist reports that state that agricultural sprayers 
have been inspected since 1991 in Norway [32]. The 
periodic inspection of sprayers implemented in Europe, in 
addition to the verification of reliability demonstrate the 
importance of the educational process [33]. In Belgium, 
obligatory inspections have been performed on agricultural 
sprayers in use since 1995, with the main objectives set as 
the maintenance of the equipment and the education of 
applicators [34][35]. In a project executed in Spain’s 
Valencia region, the inspected sprayers were divided into 
operative or non-operative as a function of their condition of 
use [36]. In Argentina, a survey conducted in the 1990s 
indicated the need for the technical maintenance of spraying 
machines because the majority of them were malfunctioning 
[37]. 
In Brazil, the first sprayer inspection was performed in 
1998, where an evaluation was performed in the State of 
Paraná, and inadequate working conditions of the pressure 
gauges of some of the sprayers were observed [38]. Today, 
in several countries, periodic sprayer inspections are 
performed, and various groups of researchers have reported 
that the best conditions for the use of sprayers are closely 
related to their constant maintenance. In such a context, the 
uniformity of the spray distribution realized by the sprayer 
boom, working pressure, temperature of the mixture, and 
volume of the pesticide, which should be adjusted for 
effective pest control [39]-[43], play important roles in 
realizing the best conditions for the use of sprayers. 
Currently, agricultural spraying is used with a focus on 
precision agriculture, wherein control, supervision, and the 
highest quality of the application process are sought, to 
increase the safety and efficiency of the application 
processes. These aspects are also related to the minimization 
of the environmental impacts resulting from these 
agrochemical application processes. In work focused on the 
quantification of the economics of the localized application 

163
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(variable rate), it is common to observe improvements in the 
cost/benefit relation [44][45]. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Examples of different uniformities observed for the pesticide’s 
applications, with them all having the same VMD but with differences in the 
distribution and RA values. The values of DV0.1, VMD, and DV0.9 should be 
observed (adapted from [28] and [29]). 
 
Variables, such as the temperature, flow, and pressure of 
the pesticide in a sprayer, have a direct influence on these 
results, thus affecting the volume and distribution of the 
drops in the plantation, which directly influence the 
efficiency of the application. If there is no control over 
volume and distribution of the pesticide drops, wastage of 
the pesticide can occur. Extremely fine drops can be carried 
by the wind, thus spreading and contaminating the 
environment, which characterizes the drift phenomenon. 
Extremely large droplets—although they reduce the 
occurrence of drift—provide less coverage of the application 
target because the pesticide volume that the leaves of crops 
can hold is limited by their size [46][47]. Therefore, it is 
important to know the precise values of the variables of 
temperature, pressure, and flow to have greater control over 
the application of these agricultural products. For the 
automation of those sprayers processes, embedded computer 
systems are currently being used.  
The innovation presented in this report is based on the 
concept of on-the-go periodic measurements for operational 
surveillance based on the monitoring of the flow, pressure, 
and temperature of the mixture (pesticides plus water) to not 
only obtain, in real time, the information regarding the 
operational failure, but also the sprayer reliability analysis. 
When performed properly, a periodic evaluation of the 
sensors’ calibration or even a verification of the electronics 
used for signal processing can rectify mistakes, and network 
robustness can be established. In addition, the selection of a 
reliability assessment approach is of fundamental importance 
because it is related to the effective design of strategies for 
the operation of reliable sensors.  
Furthermore, research on sensors and their effects on the 
reliability and response characteristics of agricultural sprayer 
devices during their operation are presented herein. The 
presented concept and the obtained results can be used in 
various sprayers’ modalities and can make improving their 
reliability possible in relation to the sensor calibration, which 
defines the quality of the application of pesticides. As the 
control circuits rely on the feedback from voltage/current 
sensors, the performance of the whole system used for the 
pesticide application is likely to be affected by the sensors’ 
failure rates, dynamic characteristics, and signal-processing 
circuits. This approach proactively incorporates reliability 
into the process by establishing a method of verifying the 
calibration of the sensors, i.e., including verification modules 
for important variables of the spraying process in an 
unsupervised and automated interface.  
This work has been focused on the temporal specification 
of interfaces in composable distributed real-time systems, 
and four principles of composability have been established, 
which include the independent development of nodes, 
stability 
of 
prior 
services, 
performability 
of 
the 
communication 
system, 
and 
reduplication 
of 
the 
determinism.  
This system presents the temporal firewall interface that 
forms a fully specified operational interface for failure and 
reliability evaluation in agricultural sprayers. This paper 
explains how the temporal firewall interface supports the 
four principles of composability. The interfaces are then 
classified from the point of view of composability, and how 
these interfaces correspond to the time-triggered and event-
triggered communication paradigms is demonstrated. 
After this introduction, there is Section II, which 
describes the materials and methods used in this study. In 
Section III, the results obtained are discussed, and the 
conclusions are presented in Section IV. 
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
To design the module to be developed for the virtual 
verification of the calibration of the sensors in a spraying 
system, the use of a low-cost Arduino architecture was 
considered. For the validation of the developed module, the 
platform developed at the Brazilian Agricultural Research 
Corporation (Embrapa Instrumentation) in partnership with 
the School of Engineering of São Carlos University of São 
Paulo (EESC-USP) was used [48]. This platform is used for 
sprayer development and performs analyses and operates as 
an agricultural sprayer development system (ASDS). It uses 
a National Instruments embedded controller, NI-cRIO, 
which works on the platform LabVIEW. The NI-cRIO 
architecture integrates four components: a real-time 
processor, a user-programmable field-programmable gate 
array, a modular input/output system and a complete 
software tool chain for programming applications. This 
ASDS is an advanced development system that makes 

164
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
possible 
the 
design 
of 
architectures 
involving 
the 
connections 
of 
hydraulic 
components 
and 
devices, 
mechanical pumps, and electronic and computer algorithms. 
Such a system also comprises hydraulic devices used to 
develop any configuration of commercial agricultural sprays 
and new prototypes of sprayers, a user interface for system 
monitoring and control, and an electromechanical structure 
that emulates the movement of the agricultural sprayer in the 
field (Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2. ASDS dedicated to the application of liquid agricultural inputs. 
 
The 
ASDS 
platform 
comprises 
the 
following 
components: (1) spray nozzle, (2) system that emulates the 
movement of the sprayer, (3) pesticide disposal tank, (4) user 
interface for the development system, and (5) spray booms. 
In such a platform, the data are presented via a graphical user 
interface (GUI), where the user can interact with the digital 
devices via graphical elements with icons and visual 
indicators, thereby allowing them to select and manipulate 
symbols to obtain a practical result. 
For the organization of a reference database comprising 
accurate 
reference 
values 
for 
flow, 
pressure, 
and 
temperature, calibrated and high-precision sensors were 
used. The sensors were subjected to known temperature, 
pressure, and flow conditions to obtain voltage values related 
to these conditions. In such a context, it was important to 
observe the droplet size (Table I), which influences the 
effectiveness of the spraying in covering the target and 
penetrating the leaves into a plant. Smaller droplets have a 
better coverage capacity, i.e., they offer a greater drops/cm2 
value). Furthermore, smaller droplets provide greater 
penetration capability and are recommended when good 
coverage and penetration are required. However, smaller 
droplets can be more sensitive to evaporation and drift 
processes. In productive agricultural systems, in general, 
large drops are preferred for the application of herbicides, 
such as glyphosate, while fine droplets are preferred in the 
case of insecticides, fungicides, and other products of less 
systemicity.  
The extant technical literature comprises broad-nozzle 
descriptions, their recommended use, the selection of the 
proper nozzle type, and calibration method. However, any 
modification in the values of the temperature and pressure on 
the boom will change the drop characteristics, i.e., the 
sprayer´s operation. 
Although the appropriate selection of the nozzle type is 
relevant, is also very important to take into consideration the 
technology for pesticides application. Therefore, the whole 
sprayer system is involved in the application process, not 
only in determining the amount of spray applied to an area, 
the uniformity, and the coverage, but also the target and the 
potential amount of drift. Furthermore, during operation, the 
nozzles facilitate the breaking of the mixture into droplets 
and also propel the droplets in the appropriate direction. Drift 
can be minimized by selecting the response time of the 
sprayers, the best time for applications with respect to 
climatic conditions, the controllers, which are used to obtain 
the optimal pressure or even the optimal volume, as well as 
the nozzle that produces the required droplet size while 
providing adequate coverage at the intended application rate.  
 
TABLE I. SPRAY TIP CLASSIFICATION BY DROPLET SIZE (BASED 
ON THE STANDARD ASAE S-572) 
Classification 
category 
Symbol 
Color 
code 
Approximate 
VMD ( m) 
Very Fine 
VF 
Red 
<100 
Fine 
F 
Orange 
100-175 
Medium 
M 
Yellow 
175-250 
Coarse 
C 
Blue 
250-375 
Very Coarse 
VC 
Green 
375-450 
Extremely Coarse 
XC 
White 
>450 
 
It is still important to observe and take into consideration 
that even when a tip predominantly produces large drops, 
there exists a small portion of fine droplets in the applied 
volume. 
The controller area network (CAN) bus was also used. It 
is a synchronous serial communication protocol. Modules 
connected to a network send messages to the bus at known 
time intervals in order to realize the synchronization. The 
CAN bus was developed by Bosch [49] as a multimaster, 
message broadcast system that specifies a maximum 
signaling rate of 1 Mbps and wherein the modules can act as 
masters and slaves depending on their use [50]. This protocol 
works with multicast messages, wherein all the modules 
connected to a network receive all the sent messages. The 
connected modules check the status of the bus and determine 
whether another module of a higher priority is not sending 
messages; if this is observed, the module whose message has 
the lowest priority interrupts the transmission and allows the 
highest-priority message to be sent.  
Communication in a CAN network, in version 2.0A, 
occurs through messages or frames, which can be of the 
following types: data frame, remote frame, error frame, or 
overload frame. Each type of frame has specific internal 
fields, which are relevant to the information to be sent. The 
data frame in a CAN 2.0A network (Figure 3), which is of 
interest in this work, consists of five main fields: 
 
(1) The arbitration field includes the identifier (ID;  11 
bits) used to identify the message and solve 
problems related to message collisions; in such a 
context the remote transmission request (RTR;  1 
bit) indicates whether it is a data or remote frame. 
 

165
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(2) The control field includes the extended ID (IDE; 1 
bit), which indicates whether the frame has an ID of 
11 bits (standard) or and 29 bits (extended). 
Furthermore, it comprises the r0 (1 bit), which is 
reserved for future modifications, and the data length 
code (DLC; 4 bits), which is used to convey the 
number of bytes of the data frame. 
 
(3) The data field is named Data (0–8 bytes) for the 
transmitted message. 
 
(4) The cyclic redundancy check (CRC; 15 bits) field is 
used to detect transmission errors. 
 
(5) The fields acknowledge slot (ACK; 1 bit) has the 
function of indicating the time for which the 
transmitter waits for the indication that some node in 
the network has received the frame successfully. 
 
It should be noted that the message or frame also has 
signals for start of frame (SOF; 1 bit), which indicates the 
beginning of a transmission, and end of frame (EOF; 7 bits), 
which is used to convey the end of a transmission. In 
addition, two more delimiters are also available: one for the 
CRC and the other for the ACK, both having 1 bit each. 
 
 
Figure 3. CAN 2.0A data frame for standard message identifier (11 bits). 
Both the ID and IDE bits are always 0. 
 
The anti-collision mechanism based on the arbitration 
field, which allows the efficient exchange of messages in the 
CAN, implies additional attention for the network design. 
Such a requirement is to allow all “nodes” to transmit their 
messages at the desired time. Therefore, during the network 
design, it is necessary to consider the time for which each 
frame uses the CAN bus as well as the priority of each 
message or frame in order to avoid overloading the bus. In 
addition, with the increase in the network complexity and 
data traffic, it is necessary to analyze the Worst Case related 
to the Transmission Time (WCTT), which is the longest time 
gap between the queuing of a message and the arrival at the 
destination [51][52]. 
One of the main contributions of this work is a 
methodology for guaranteeing the validity of the variables 
measured using a calibration module. For such a purpose, a 
CAN network was implemented at a laboratory scale, 
wherein the traffic time in the network can be neglected in 
relation to the sample rates of the variables, thus ensuring the 
exchange of messages in real time. For this, the network bit 
rate was adjusted to 500 kbps and both the bus load and 
traffic time variation of each message in the bus were 
analyzed using the NI-CAN USB 8473 from National 
Instruments. 
In networks of greater complexity, it is necessary to use 
other methodologies such as intelligent scheduling or 
dynamic ID allocation, and in the case of a control system, it 
may be necessary to compensate for the delay times [53]. 
The method used to obtain and approximate the model 
was based on the use of polynomial regression. In addition, 
such a concept can be used to estimate the expected value of 
a variable (y) given the value of another variable (x). This 
type of regression is used in models that obey polynomial 
and nonlinear behavior, as in the previous case. For these 
types of model, it is necessary to adjust for a higher-degree 
polynomial function [54]. This technique follows the same 
steps as those of linear regression but comprises the use of a 
concept based on Eq. (1). 
 
 
(1) 
 
where (y) is a polynomial function in which a represents real 
numbers (sometimes called the coefficients of the 
polynomial), m is the degree, and (e) represents an error. In 
this case, the mathematical procedure is the same as that 
used in the least-squares method, but the error is now 
represented by a function of degree greater than 1, as shown 
in Eq. (2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
 
 
Thus, Eq. (2) must be derived in parts from the terms that 
accompany xi and be equated to zero in order to obtain a 
system of equations, which makes it possible to calculate its 
values.  
Subsequent to the construction of a database comprising 
precalibrated values along with a mathematical model 
obtained, as mentioned earlier, an intelligent calibration and 
correction system can be applied using such a dataset as a 
reference to compare the results obtained from the sensors 
operating in real time. Such sensors have their calibrations 
checked periodically using the results obtained from the use 
of the models. Thus, using this comparison method, the 
system can determine whether a sensor is calibrated, i.e., the 
same concept can be replicated for each monitored variable. 
Furthermore, either a real-time recalibration can be 
performed or the sensor can be replaced, if necessary. 
The methods of comparison comprise the use of the 
relative change, Euclidean distance (ED), Root Mean Square 
Error (RMSE), and percent error [55]. The ED and RMSE 
methods were used in the developed solution. For the 
comparison of the measured values of the variables, the ED 
takes into consideration the distance between two points that 
can be calculated via the application of the Pythagorean 
Theorem. In the algorithm, the ED is primarily calculated as 

166
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the square root of the sum of the squares of the arithmetic 
difference between the corresponding coordinates of two 
points, as shown in Eq. (3).  
 
 
 
(3) 
 
where d(x, y) is the ED, (x) is the measured point, (xref) is the 
measured variable at the reference point, (y) is the variable at 
the measured point, and (yref) is the variable obtained at the 
reference point. In addition, as a second verification, the 
RMSE is used. It represents the standard deviation of the 
residuals (prediction errors). The residuals are a measure of 
how far the data points are from the regression line, and 
based on such a concept the RMSE represents the standard 
deviation of the residuals (prediction errors). Thus, it 
indicates how concentrated the data are around the line of 
best fit and is given by Eq. (4).  
 
 
 
(4) 
 
where (xref) is the reference variable, and (x) is the 
measurement variable. 
In addition, an accurate power supply is used because 
such a system will be used not only for the verification of the 
sensors’ calibration, but also their possible failure and 
reliability. For the calibration, it is necessary to consider one 
power supply that generates a precise and high-stability 
reference voltage. Such a voltage serves as a parameter for 
the intelligent calibration and correction system, and it is also 
responsible for feeding each of the electronic devices used.  
The majority of analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog 
converters internally have voltage references that are used in 
the process of converting the signal, either to quantize its 
analog signal or to convert its digital signal to analog [56]. 
At this point, the accuracy and stability of the reference 
directly influences the conversion performance.  
In agricultural spraying systems, the most commonly 
used sensors are as follows: (1) temperature sensors used to 
measure the temperature of the syrup, which is formed by the 
addition of the pesticides to water, as well as the temperature 
of the environment in which the spraying occurs; (2) 
pressure sensors used to measure the pressure in the spray 
bar near the spray nozzles; and (3) flow sensors, which 
measure the flow in the tubes and spray bar, and are used to 
measure and feed these values back to the spray quality 
control system.  
The 
CAN 
controller 
comprises 
a 
hardware 
implementation of the CAN’s protocol, and it is responsible 
for all the access control to the bus and for controlling not 
only the message arbitration but also the transmission rate. In 
this manner, the users are required to define the types of 
messages that will be sent and program the recorders. 
The transceiver used was manufactured by NXP-Philips 
Semiconductors. It was used because it is fully ISO11898 
compatible and supports high-speed CAN. It can also act as 
the entire interface between the network and the physical bus 
[57]. The inputs/outputs (pins 6 and 7) for the transceiver can 
be directly connected to the CAN L and CAN H lines of the 
CAN bus used. A 5-V power supply is applied at pin 2, and 
the ground potential (GND) is connected to pin 3. Pin 8 of 
the transceiver is called the “silent mode,” and, if a 5-V 
voltage is applied at this pin, the mode is activated, thus 
preventing the component from sending CAN messages to 
the bus. 
If no voltage is applied at this pin, the transceiver 
operates normally. Pin 5, named Voltage-Reference (VREF), 
provides the average CAN bus voltage, and pins 1 and 4, 
named TXD and RXD, respectively, are responsible for 
receiving or sending the serial signal that is used by the CAN 
controller to decode the CAN messages. At each decoded 
dominant bit, the transceiver sends a 1-bit serial via the TXD 
pin, and, at each recessive bit, the transceiver sends a 0 bit. 
In this manner, the messages are transferred bit-by-bit from 
the transceiver to the MCP2515 CAN controller, which 
decodes the sequence according to the CAN protocol.  
Figure 4 presents both the CAN arrangement and how 
the communication between the transceiver and the 
microcontroller is performed. 
The transceiver RXD pin receives the CAN message sent 
by the microcontroller. In addition, when a full message is 
received, it is passed to the CAN bus via the CAN H and 
CAN L pins. 
The MCP2515, manufactured by Microchip, is a stand-
alone 
CAN 
controller 
that 
implements 
the 
CAN 
specification, Version 2.0B. However, it is able to transmit 
messages in the CAN2.0A and B standards, that is, it can 
transmit and receive standard and extended data frames with 
11 or 29 bits as message identifiers (frame IDs), respectively. 
The MCP 2515 was used because it makes the serial 
peripheral interface 
bus 
communication 
with 
another 
microcontroller possible, and its manufacturer, Microchip, 
provides the necessary instructions for writing and reading 
the registers. Each register has a byte for address that is used 
via some instructions to make the necessary settings. The 
addressing of each register is different from its content, that 
is, the initial setting of the bits for a register is not equal to 
the numerical value of its address  
Figure 5 presents the integration of the Arduino-based 
architecture and a CAN with the sensors (temperature, 
pressure, and flow) in the sprayer system. The module that 
comprises the Arduino platform is a low-cost, functional, 
and easily programmable device. The Arduino Uno is a 
board consisting of an ATMEL ATMEG328 microcontroller 
and input and output circuits, and it can be easily connected 
to a computer via a universal serial bus cable and is 
programmed using free software called Arduino IDE 
(integrated development environment) and a language based 
on C/C++. The Analog-to-Digital (A/D) converter inputs, 
having a 10-bit resolution for a considered voltage range 
from 0–5 V, were used to read the signals related to the 
pressure and temperature sensors, which were obtained after 
the signals were correctly conditioned. The flow sensor used 
already has a digital output and its reading was obtained via 
timer 1 of the Arduino, which has a resolution of 16 bits. 

167
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Furthermore, it was configured as a counter, and in this 
manner, a reading was obtained at intervals of 50 ms. 
 Figure 6 depicts the software structure for the sensors’ 
monitoring as well as the spraying process for the failure and 
reliability analysis. First, all sensors are tested in relation to 
failure. The process of monitoring the operation of the 
agricultural sprayer in real time is then started and is 
periodically repeated.  
The flags are used to alert the operator of the operational 
status. Either the group of sensors or one of them can fail 
during an operation. For this reason and because of the 
probability of its occurrence, a previous routine is used to 
verify the operation based on the use of previously calibrated 
values and references of electrical voltage.  
The reference modules receive an electrical signal from 
the Arduino architectures using the controller area bus 
protocol and determine whether they are calibrated or must 
be replaced.  
As a function of the measured values of the variables, 
such as the flow, pressure, and temperature, a verification is 
performed periodically to determine whether the sprayer is 
operating adequately or if there is need for the adjustments of 
these variables. Such a verification can also indicate whether 
parts of the circuits related to each variable must be replaced 
when the correction of a failure cannot be made via the 
software. To obtain information regarding the operational 
conditions, a set of flags is used for signaling by the GUI. In 
addition, if a sensor is required to be recalibrated, the system 
performs the necessary correction to deliver the appropriate 
information to a CAN bus, where the control and processing 
unit collects the sensors’ information of all the modules. 
Furthermore, the CAN protocol has been used because its 
advantages involve data communication and the use of only 
two wires, which reduces its cost and facilitates its physical 
implementation.  
To communicate between the Arduino and the CAN bus, 
two important elements that are not directly found in the 
standard Arduino Uno were used. For this, a CAN 
transceiver (TJA1050) and CAN controller (MCP2515) 
dedicated to translating the signals made available serially by 
the transceiver were used [58].  
 
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
The sensors that generate analog signals were connected 
directly to the calibration module, which analyzed and 
corrected the data obtained through the algorithms. The data 
were then sent to the CAN network, which used the control 
and processing unit for presenting the information with the 
values calibrated by the supervision software. The 
implementation of the intelligent calibration and correction 
was performed using the Arduino-based architecture and the 
algorithms with the use of mathematical models. When the 
algorithm was started, it received the values of the sensor 
with the parameter to be analyzed, or temperature, pressure, 
or flow, and then this value was compared with those of the 
reference model constructed using the database. If the result 
of the comparison was satisfactory, this value was sent to the 
CAN bus; otherwise, this value was corrected by the 
software through emulation, and only then was the value sent 
to the bus. When the read values were outside the typical 
range of the sensors, there was an indication for sensor 
replacement, and the user was informed via a flag. There was 
a specific flag for each type of sensor, i.e., FLAG#1, 
FLAG#2, and FLAG#3, respectively, for the sensors used for 
the flow, pressure, and temperature measurements.  
Reliability is an important performance index of 
agricultural sprayers. A paradigm shift in the reliability 
research of agricultural sprayers has resulted in the 
publication of a simple handbook based on a constant failure 
rate for the smart-system sensor-based and the support real-
time decision-making approaches. Based on this, for each 
flag, the structure was considered to be that presented in 
Figure 7. 
 
 
(a) 
 
Calibration Module
Arduino͛s based Node 
Controller
MCP2515
TJA1050
CAN H
CAN L
SPI
RXD
TXD
 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
 
Figure 4. (a) Arduino CAN bus shield (MCP 2515); (b) block diagram of the 
structural architecture for the operation; and (c) input and output diagram of 
the TJA1050 transceiver. 

168
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Block diagram of the sprayer system, in which the electrohydraulic configuration and the CAN network can be seen: in the red blocks are the 
modules based on the Arduino architecture, one for each sensor’s modalities, for measurements of flow, pressure, and temperature. 
 

169
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 6. Software structure for monitoring the sensors used for measurements as well as the process used for spraying for the  
failure and reliability analyses.

170
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
For the flag structure, the context of sensitivity and 
specificity was used to summarize the performance of a 
diagnostic test with outcomes that determined the level of 
a standard for operation. When the test was quantitative, 
the receiver operating characteristic curves were used to 
display the performance of all the possible cut points of 
the quantitative diagnostic marker. Attention was focused 
on determining an optimal decision rule, which is also 
called the optimal operating point. Such a point provides a 
graphical interpretation for decision making. The 
construction of the databases for the three different 
sensors, which were related to the calibration and correct 
operation of the agricultural sprayer in a specific range of 
use, was organized in advance.  
Table II lists the results as evidence of the successful 
operation of the algorithms applied for a commercially 
available sprayer’s inspection based on the system for real-
time failure and reliability analysis. 
Safety and approval tests are used to find and 
guarantee that an approved safety element of an 
agricultural sprayer reliably or consistently functions in 
accordance 
with 
the 
manufacturer 
specifications. 
Furthermore, the robustness margin is based on the 
formulation of the robustness requirements in the 
agricultural industry. These tests do not require specific, 
detailed uncertainty models, and, hence, these margins can 
be evaluated based on the interpretation of the analyzed 
results. They are, in general, evaluated in the frequency 
domain, or even by using the information related to the 
safety margin of a machine’s operation, without the loss of 
its hydraulic characteristics and purpose. Similarly, the 
design specifications and performance tests are typically 
related to the performance specifications. Besides, the 
specifications are written in projects and should be 
observed when implemented. The design specifications for 
a piece of machinery are straightforward in relation to its 
purpose and application.  
 
 
 
 
 
Destruction level 
Design Specification 
(Performance tests) 
Robustness margin 
Safety   
(Approval tests) 
Optimal operating 
point 
 
Figure 7. Structure of the flags, in which the operational conditions of the sprayers based on the flow, pressure, and temperature  
as well as the constraints can be observed. 
 
 
 
TABLE II. RESULTS FOR A REAL-TIME FAILURE AND 
 RELIABILITY ANALYSIS. 
FLAG 
 # 1 
Destruction level 
(Q6 and Q7) 
Design 
 Specification/ 
Performance 
 tests 
(Q4 and Q5) 
Robustness margin 
(Q2 and Q3) 
Safety and approval 
 tests 
(Q1) 
Optimal 
operating 
point 
(Q0) 
[l/m] 
3.00 F6  6.00 
19.00 F7  21.50 
6.00 F4  8.25 
16.90 F5  19.00 
8.25 F2  10.25 
14.00 F3  16.90 
10.25 F1  14.00 
12.25 
FLAG 
 #2 
Destruction level 
(P6 and P7) 
Design 
 Specification/ 
Performance 
 tests 
(P4 and P5) 
Robustness margin 
(P2 and P3) 
Safety and approval  
tests 
(P1) 
Optimal 
operating 
point 
(P0) 
[bar] 
0.00 P6  0.38 
2.12 P7  2.49 
0.38 P4  0.63 
1.81 P5  2.12 
0.63 P2  1.00 
1.50 P3  1.81 
1.00 P1  1.50 
1.25 
FLAG 
 #3 
Destruction level 
(T6 and T7) 
Design 
 Specification/ 
Performance 
 tests 
(T4 and T5) 
Robustness margin 
(T2 and T3) 
Safety and approval 
 tests 
(T1) 
Optimal 
operating 
point 
(T0) 
[°C] 
0.00 P2  10.00 
75.00 P3  87.50 
10.00 T4  22.50 
65.00 T5  75.00 
22.50 T2  31.25 
55.00 T3  65.00 
31.25 T1  55.00 
42.50 
 
 
 

171
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Therefore, information contained in the structures of 
the flags are used to evaluate the range of the feedback 
variables used in the control of the agricultural machines 
to support the decision making for realizing an accurate 
and adequate operation. In the same manner, the concept 
of the destruction level is related to the region wherein one 
can identify risks to the machinery’s lifetime that must be 
avoided. 
For the acquisition of a reference curve for the flow 
sensor, an ORION electromagnetic flowmeter, model 
Orion 4621A300000, installed at the outlet of the water 
pump of the ASDS was used [59]. The electromagnetic 
flowmeter had a measuring range of 5–100 l/min for 
pressures up to 4000 kPa. The calibration constant of this 
flowmeter, according to the manufacturer, was 600 pulses 
per liter, and the flow rate in liters per minute was 
obtained from a reading at a related frequency in Hertz. 
With the aid of the Arduino and the developed software, a 
group of reference flows in liters per minute was sent to 
the sensor, and a set of values was obtained from the 
sensor flow (Figure 8).  
For the acquisition of a reference database with 
pressure values, a WIKA model A-10 pressure sensor was 
used. The voltage signals of the A-10 sensor varied from 0 
to 10 V, proportional to their pressure measurement ranges 
from 0 to 16 bar, and this sensor had a reading error and a 
maximum linearity of 0.016 bar. With the aid of the 
Arduino and the developed software, considering intervals 
of 0.15 bar for a useful operating range of 0.5 to 3.0 bar, 
reference pressure values were sent to the pressure sensor, 
and the values obtained were recorded (Figure 9). In 
addition, to obtain a reference database with accurate 
temperature values, a calibrated sensor, type PT 100 of the 
Mit-Exact brand, was used, which was initially dipped in a 
beaker of water and ice. This water was heated with the 
aid of a mixer to 95 °C. As the temperature values 
increased, the internal resistance of the sensor also 
increased. For a better perception of the variation of the 
values of the sensor’s resistance, a Wheatstone bridge was 
used. In this manner, it was possible to measure the 
unknown resistance of the sensor. The values were 
recorded at intervals of 5 °C, i.e., while taking into 
consideration an experimental range for the evaluation of 
different levels of the sprayer operation (Figure 10).  
According to the flag structure for each variable, it is 
possible to perform, in real time, the agricultural sprayer’s 
diagnosis, as well as, if actions are required, to find its 
prognostic and corrections based on the actuation by its 
control circuit, or even provide a recommendation for a 
sensor’s replacement.  
The prognostics and fault-tolerant strategies for 
reliable field operation can thus be obtained.  
However, the transdisciplinary joint efforts of 
engineers and researchers are still required to fulfill the 
demands of such a field of knowledge and to promote the 
new paradigm shift in the reliability of agricultural 
machinery. 
To illustrate the flexibility of the network used, Table 
III shows how the CAN messages were assembled. 
TABLE III. CAN MESSAGES STRUCTURE AND  
TRANSMISSION INTERVAL 
Sensor 
CAN 
ID 
DLC 
Data 
(number of bits) 
Transmission 
interval 
Flow 
100 
3 
LOW 
(8) 
HI 
(8) 
FLAG 
(2) 
50ms 
Pressure 
near 
flowmeter 
101 
3 
LOW 
(8) 
HI 
(2) 
FLAG 
(2) 
10ms 
Pressure at 
boom 
102 
3 
LOW 
(8) 
HI 
(2) 
FLAG 
(2) 
10ms 
Temperature 
103 
3 
LOW 
(8) 
HI 
(2) 
FLAG 
(2) 
10ms 
 
 
As observed in Table III, the number of messages on 
the organized network is reduced. However, it is necessary 
to define a set of unique identifiers for each node. 
According to the resolution required for each variable, a 
number of bytes is allocated in the data frame, that is, as 
identified in the DLC field.  
For example, the temperature and pressure variables 
are obtained via a 10-bit A/D converter, and, to maintain 
such a resolution, the data can be divided into two parts, 
LOW and HI, comprising 8 and 2 bits, respectively. 
However, the CAN controller does not transmit only the 2 
bits that refer to the HI part of the data of interest. It 
transmits the total bytes, and this form of operation is 
indicated in the DLC field.  
The transmissions of the flags along with the data 
facilitate the identification of the status of each sensor. In 
this context, it is important to note that, for each new node 
inserted, which implies a higher load on the bus, attention 
will be required to be focused to avoid instability in the 
CAN network, i.e., such a situation could result in a 
variable transmission time. Therefore, the WCTT must be 
kept in mind during the design of the control loop strategy 
in order to avoid destabilizing the control loop of a larger 
distributed architecture. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Reference curve for the flow sensor (electromagnetic 
flowmeter, model Orion 4621A300000) installed at the outlet of the water 
pump, and the experimental range results obtained for an agricultural 
sprayer’s operation. 

172
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Reference curve for the pressure sensor (WIKA model A-10) 
installed at the boom, and the experimental range results obtained 
 for an agricultural sprayer’s operation. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Reference curve for the temperature sensor (PT 100 of Mit-
Exact) used to measure the temperature of the syrup, which is formed by 
adding the pesticides to water, and the experimental range results 
obtained for an agricultural sprayer’s operation. 
 
 
It is worth noting that, with the increase in the network 
complexity, it may be interesting to migrate to the latest 
version of CAN, known as CAN-FD (flexible data-rate), 
which allows a greater amount of data traffic than CAN 
2.0, thus significantly reducing the load on the bus in 
terms of the utilization rate [60]. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
An intelligent system for the evaluation of the failure 
and reliability of agricultural sprayers based on the 
sensors’ information and a smart support decision-making 
architecture was presented. The obtained results showed 
that it is possible to observe real-time prognostics as well 
as to help with robustness to ensure quality aggregation in 
pest control processes based on agricultural spraying 
systems.  
In addition, such a system enabled the configuration of 
a sensor’s recalibration using an unsupervised algorithm 
while considering the use of a CAN bus protocol operating 
with the measurements of the flow rate, pressure, and 
temperature in the controlled circuit process of an 
agricultural sprayer. The proposed topology demonstrated 
feasibility for the implementation of the calibration 
modules, i.e., it benefited from the CAN networks, which 
are becoming widely used in agricultural machinery, based 
on the SAE J1939 standards collection. Furthermore, there 
are opportunities for the realization of real-time 
monitoring and fault-tolerant design hat can facilitate an 
extended lifetime and reduced failure rate as well as a 
better understanding of the failure mechanisms because 
more failure-mechanism-specific accelerated testing can 
be designed, which can result in improved reliability 
predictions for sensor-based agricultural machinery and its 
applications.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the Brazilian 
Corporation for Agricultural Research (Embrapa), Process 
No. 11.14.09.001.05.06, and the São Paulo Research 
Foundation (Fapesp), Process No. 17/19350-21. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. E. Cruvinel, E. A. G. Penãloza, P. B. Andrade1, and H. 
V. Mercaldi, “Real-Time Failure and Reliability Analysis 
of Agricultural Sprayers Based on Sensors, Arduino 
Architecture, 
and 
Controller 
Area 
Bus 
Protocol”, 
Proceedings of the IARIA, SENSORDEVICES 2019: The 
Tenth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Sensor 
Device 
Technologies and Applications, Nice, France, 2019, pp. 38-
48. 
[2] N. Wang, N. Zhang, and M. Wang “Wireless sensors in 
agriculture and food industry-recent development and 
future perspective”, Science directs, Computers and 
Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 50, pp. 1-14, 2006.. 
[3] O. Elijah, T. A. Rahman, I. Orikumhi, C. Y. Leow and M. 
N. Hindia, "An Overview of Internet of Things (IoT) and 
Data Analytics in Agriculture: Benefits and Challenges", 
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 3758-
3773, 2018. 
[4] Q. Li and C. Yao, Real-Time Concepts for Embedded 
Systems, CRC Press, pp. 287, 2017. 
[5] J. Lin et al., "A Survey on Internet of Things: Architecture, 
Enabling 
Technologies, 
Security 
and Privacy, 
and 
Applications", IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 4, no. 
5, pp. 1125-1142, 2017. 
[6] J. M. Antle, J. W. Jones, and C. E. Rosenzweig, “Next 
generation agricultural system data, models and knowledge 
products: introduction”, Agricultural Systems, vol. 155, pp. 
186-190, 2017. 
[7] VDMA Verlag, Guideline Industrie 4.0, 2016. [retrieved: 
June, 
2020]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.vdma-
verlag.com/home/artikel_72.html.  

173
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[8] L. Klerkx, E. Jakku, and P. Labarthe, “A review of social 
science on digital agriculture, smart farming and agriculture 
4.0: New contributions and a future research agenda”, 
NJAS - Wageningen Journal of Life Sciences, vol. 90–91, 
pp. 16, 2019. [retrieved: June, 2020]. Available from:  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2019.100315. 
[9] D. C. Rose and J. Chilvers, “Agriculture 4.0: Broadenings 
Responsible Innovation in an era of smart”, Farming 
Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems, vol. 2, Issue 87, pp. 
23, 2018. [retrieved: June, 2020]. Available from:   
https://doi.org/10.3389/fsufs.2018.00087. 
[10] K. Pohl et al., Model-Based Engineering of Embedded 
Systems: The SPES 2020 Methodology, Springer Verlag, 
pp. 300, 2012.  
[11] Food Security Information Network (FSIN): Global Report 
on Food Crises (GRFC 2019), pp. 202, 2019. [retrieved: 
June, 2020]. Available from: http://www.fsinplatform 
.org/sites/default/files/resources/files/GRFC2019FullReport
.pdf. 
[12] Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations: 
“Global agriculture towards 2050”, FAO, Rome, 2009.   
[13] J. K. Schueller, “Automation and control”. In: CIGR 
Handbook 
of 
Agricultural 
Engineering, 
Information 
Technology, vol. VI, ed. by A. Munack (CIGR, Tzukuba) 
pp. 184–195, Chap. 4, 2006. 
[14] T. Stombaugh, E. Benson, and J. W. Hummel, “Automatic 
guidance of agricultural vehicles at high field speeds”, 
ASAE Paper No. 983110 (ASAE, St. Joseph), 1998.  
[15] M. Yitayew, K. Didan, and C. Reynolds, “Microcomputer 
based low-head gravity-flow bubbler irrigation system 
design”, Computer and. Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 22, 
pp. 29–39, 1999.  
[16] F. R. Miranda, R. E. Yoder, J. B. Wilkerson, and L. O. 
Odhiambo, “An autonomous controller for site-specific 
management of fixed irrigation systems, Computer and 
Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 468, pp. 183–197, 2005. 
[17] S. Fountas et al., “Farm management information systems: 
current situation and future perspectives”, Computer and. 
Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 115, pp. 40-50, 2015. 
[18] C. G. Sørensen et al., “Conceptual model of a future farm 
management 
information 
system”, 
Computer 
and 
Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 72, Issue 1, pp. 37-47, 
2010. 
[19] A. Kaloxylos et al., “Farm management systems and the 
future internet era”, Computer and Electronics in 
Agriculture, vol. 89, pp. 130-144, 2012. 
[20] M. Pecht and V. Ramappan, “Are components still the 
major problem: a review of electronic system and device 
field failure returns”, IEEE Transaction on Components, 
Hybrids, Manufacturing Technology, vol, 15, pp. 1160-
1164, 1992. 
[21] C. T. Leonard, “Mechanical engineering issues and 
electronic equipment reliability: Incurred costs without 
compensating benefits”, Journal of Electronic Packaging, 
vol. 113, pp. 1-7, 1991. 
[22] A. 
Bar-Cohen, 
“Reliability 
physics 
vs 
reliability 
prediction”, IEEE Transaction on Reliability, vol. 37, pp. 
452, 1988.  
[23] P. D. T. O’Connor, “Reliability prediction: Help or hoax?”, 
Solid State Technology, vol. 33, pp. 59-61, 1990. 
[24] H. V. Mercaldi, E. A. G. Peñaloza, R. A. Mariano, V. A. 
Oliveira, and P. E. Cruvinel, “Flow and Pressure 
Regulation for Agricultural Sprayers Using Solenoid 
Valves”, In: International Federation of Automatic Control 
(IFAC), Elsevier, vol. 50, Issue 1, 2017, pp. 6607-6612, 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2017.08.693.  
[25] A. Marangoni Junior and M. C. Ferreira, “Influence of 
working pressure and spray nozzle on the distribution of 
spray liquid in manual backpack sprayers”, Arquivos do 
Instituto Biológico, vol.86, 2019. [retrieved: June, 2020]. 
Available from: https://doi.org/10.1590/1808-1657000442018. 
[26] T. Arvidsson, L. Bergström, and J. Kreuger, “Spray drift as 
influenced by meteorological and technical factors”, Pest 
Management Science, vol. 67, Issue 5, pp. 586-598, 2011. 
[27] ASAE S572. Spray nozzle classification by droplet spectra. 
In: ASAE Standards, St. Joseph, pp. 389-391, 2000. 
[28] J. C. Christofoletti, Shell manual of machinery and 
techniques for the application of pesticides, (original in 
Portuguese Language: Manual Shell de máquinas e técnicas 
de aplicação de defensivos agrícolas), São Paulo, Shell, 
pp.124, 1992. 
[29] D. L. Reichard, H. E. Ozkan, and R.D. Fox, “Nozzle wear 
rates and test procedure”, Transaction of the ASAE, vol. 
34, no. 6, pp. 2309-2316, 1991. 
[30] ISO 16122-2, Agricultural and forestry machinery – 
Inspection of sprayers in use – Part 2: Horizontal boom 
sprayers, ISO Publication, pp. 18, 2015. 
[31] H. Ganzelmeier and S. Rietz, “Inspection of plant 
protection in Europe”. In: International Conference on 
Agricultural Engineering. Part II, Oslo. Proceedings, 
Eurageng, pp. 597-598, 1998. 
[32] N. Bjugstad, Controlo of crop sprayers in Norway, Oslo: 
Ageng, Eurageng, 1998. 
[33] M. A. Gandolfo, “Periodic inspection of agricultural 
sprayers” (original title: Inspeção periódica de pulverizados 
agrícolas). Doctoral Thesis, Faculty of Agronomic 
Sciences,  São Paulo State University (UNESP), SP, Brazil, 
pp. 92, 2002. 
[34] B. Huyghebaert et al., “Compulsory inspection of crop 
sprayers already in use Belgium”, Selection of control 
method, Madrid: Ageng, CD-ROM, 1996. 
[35] P. Braekman et al., “Organisation and results of the 
mandatory inspection of crop sprayers in Belgium”, 
Belgium: Ministry of Small Enterprises, Traders and 
Agriculture, pp. 9, 2005. 
[36] L. M. Val, “Programs for the formation of the applicators 
and equipment’s maintenance” (original title: Programas de 
formación de aplicadores y programa de revisión de 
equipos. In: Jornada Internacional en Tecnologia de 
Aplicacion, 2007, Proceedings, Montevidéo: Republic 
University, CD-ROM, 2007. 
[37] J. C. Magdalena and A. P. Di Prinzio, “Calibration service 
for fruit growing sprayers in Black River and  Neuquén” 
(original title: Servicio de calibración de pulverizadoras 
frutícolas en Río Negro y Neuquén), In: Congreso 
Argentino de Ingenieria Rural, Córdoba. Proceedings.... 
Argentina: National Cordoba University, vol. 2, pp. 137-
148, 1992. 
[38] E. Fey, “State of the art in relation to the spray process of 
the associates from the COOPERVALE” (original title: 
Estado de arte do processo de pulverização junto a 
associados da COOPERVALE), Supervised Internship 
Report Ponta Grossa State University, Maripá – PR, Brazil, 
pp. 26, 1998. 
[39] J. Langenakens and M. Pieters, “The organization and first 
results of the mandatory inspection of crop sprayers in 
Belgium”, In: Aspects of applied Biology - Optimizing 
pesticide application, Agricultural Research Centre Ghent, 
pp. 233-240, 1997. 
[40] S. Sartori, “Sprayers for tractor ground application” 
(original title: Pulverizadores para aplicação terrestre 
tratorizada), In: Simpósio Brasileiro sobre Tecnologia de 

174
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Aplicação de Defensivos Agrícolas, Jaboticabal, SP, Brazil, 
Proceedings... FUNEP, vol. 1, pp. 46-79, 1985. 
[41] G. F. Dedordi et al., “Technical-operational evaluation of 
bar sprayers in Pato Branco region” (original title: 
Avaliação técnica-operacional de pulverizadores de barras 
na região de Pato Branco), Acta Iguazu, Cascavel, PR, 
Brazil, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 144-155, 2014. 
[42] J. F. Schlosser, “Application technology and machine use: 
use of agrochemicals” (original title: Tecnologia de 
aplicação e uso de máquinas: uso de agroquímicos), 
Federal University of Santa Maria, Textbook - Technical 
Series, Module 5, 2002. 
[43] F. Olivi and A. Simão, “In order to speed up the 
maintenance of sprayers, the diagnostic case provides 
technical support and spare parts” (original title: Com o 
objetivo de agilizar a manutenção dos pulverizadores, a 
maleta de diagnóstico dá suporte técnico e na reposição de 
peças). Agricultural News. [retrieved: February, 2020]. 
Available from: https://noticiasagricolas.com.br/videos/ma- 
quinas-e-tecnologias/. 
 
[44] K. R. Felizardo, H. V. Mercaldi, P. E. Cruvinel, V. A. 
Oliveira, and B. L. Steward, “Modeling and model 
validation of a chemical injection sprayer system”, Applied 
Engineering in Agriculture, vol. 32, Issue 3, pp. 285-297, 
2016. 
[45] X. Wei, S. Jian, and H. Sun, “Design and Test of Variable 
Rate Application Controller of Intermittent Spray Based on 
PWM”, Journal of agricultural machinery vol. 43, Issue 12, 
pp. 87-129, 2012.  
[46] H Liu, H Zhu, and Y Shen, “Development of digital flow 
control system for copy multi-channel variable-rate 
sprayers”, Journal Transactions of the ASAE, vol. 57, Issue 
1, pp. 273-281, 2014. 
[47] American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers 
(ASAE) Standards: S572 - Spray nozzle classification by 
droplet spectra, no. 99, St. Joseph USA, pp. 389-391, 2000. 
[48] P. E. Cruvinel et al., “An advanced sensors-based platform 
for the development of agricultural sprayers,” In: Sergey Y. 
Yurish (Ed.). Sensors and Applications in Measuring and 
Automation Control Systems. [S. l.]: IFSA, pp. 181-204. 
(Advances in Sensors: Reviews; vol. 4), 2016. 
[49] K. Etschberger, "Controller Area Network. Basics, 
Protocols, Chips and Applications", IXXAT, ISBN 3-00-
007376-0, 2001.  
[50] R. B. Gmb “CAN Specification, Version 2.0”, Postfach 50, 
D-7000 Stuuugart 1, 1991. Imported into Framemaker 4 by 
Chuck Powers, BOSCH, Motorola MCTG Multiplex 
Applications, April 3, 1995. 
[51] E. Godoy et al., “Design of CAN-based distributed control 
systems with optimized configuration”, Journal of the 
Brazilian Society of Mechanical Sciences and Engineering, 
vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 420-426, 2010. 
[52] B. Woonhyuk, J. Seyong, S. Hoin, K. Soontae, S. Bongsob, 
C. Dongkyoung, “A CAN-based Distributed Control 
System for Autonomous All-Terrain Vehicle (ATV)”, 17th 
World Congress of The International Federation of 
Automatic Control,  IFAC Proceedings, Seoul, Korea, vol. 
41, Issue 2, pp. 9505-9510, 2008. 
[53]  J. R. Edwards, “Polynomial regression and response 
surface methodology,” In: C. Ostroff & T. A. Judge (Eds.), 
Perspectives on organizational fit, pp. 361–372. San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2007. 
[54] L. Tornqvist, P. Vartia, and Y. Vartia, “How should 
relative changes be measured?” The American Statistician, 
vol. 39, Issue 1, pp. 43–46, 1985. 
[55] P. E. Danielsson, “Euclidean distance mapping,” Computer 
Graphics Image Processing, vol. 14, pp. 227-248, 1980. 
[56] T. Chai and R. R. Draxler, “Root mean square error 
(RMSE) or mean absolute error (MAE)? - arguments 
against avoiding RMSE in the literature,” Geoscience 
Model Development, vol. 7, pp. 1247–1250, 2014. 
[57] R. H. Walden, “Analog-to-digital converter survey and 
analysis”, 
 
IEEE 
Journal 
on 
Selected 
Areas 
in 
Communication, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 539–550, 1999. 
[58] TJA 1050 Data Sheet – High speed CAN transceiver. 
Product 
specification, 
Integrated 
Circuits, 
Philips 
Semiconductors, pp. 18, 2003. 
[59] ORION Electro-Magnetic Flow Meter. [retrieved: June, 
2020]. Available from: mcpheeenterprises .com/orion-
electromagnetic-flowmeter/.   
[60]  R. de Andrade et al., “Analytical and Experimental 
Performance Evaluations of CAN-FD Bus”, IEEE Access. 
10pp., 2017. [retrieved: June, 2020]. Available from: 
file:///C:/Users/HP/Downloads/v38-CAN-FD-Performance-
10APR2018-Max2_Publicada.pdf. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

