230
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
E-business Adoption in Nigerian Small Business Enterprises
Olakunle Olayinka, Martin George Wynn, Kamal Bechkoum 
School of Computing and Technology 
University of Gloucestershire 
Cheltenham, United Kingdom 
e-mail: kunle@kunleolayinka.com, MWynn@glos.ac.uk, KBechkoum@glos.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— Within the last decade, there has been a global 
increase in the use of e-business by both large and small 
companies. Today, it is generally acknowledged that e-
business provides a range of opportunities for small 
businesses to operate and compete effectively; however, in 
developing countries such as Nigeria, there is very limited 
research on e-business adoption in the small business sector. 
This paper reviews existing literature on e-business adoption 
in developing countries, identifies key issues impacting upon 
e-business adoption and examines the use of e-business in four 
Nigerian small businesses using existing analytical models. 
The results indicate that Small Business Enterprises in 
Nigeria are indeed benefitting from e-business deployment, 
and key influencing factors affecting e-business adoption are 
identified. The study also concludes that different processes 
in different companies are affected by e-business, but that it 
is the customer facing processes in the main that have gained 
most from the adoption of e-business. 
Keywords- 
e-business; 
Nigeria; 
Small 
Business 
Enterprises; SBEs; process mapping; e-business models; 
critical influencing factors. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Within the last decade, there has been a general increase 
in the use of e-business by both large and small corporations 
across the globe, and recent research suggests there has 
been an increase in the use of e-business technologies in 
Nigerian businesses [1]. In developing countries such as 
Nigeria, as a result of the increased use of the internet [2], 
and mobile networks penetration [3], current and potential 
customers of both large and small companies are not only 
equipped with desktop computers and laptops, but also with 
mobile devices such as iPads, smart phones and tablets. The 
demand for e-business capabilities in developing countries 
is on the increase, but very little research has explored the 
impact on smaller companies. 
In developed countries, research has shown that both 
large enterprises and small businesses have successfully 
adopted e-business technologies and processes to gain 
competitive advantage [4], transform business models [5], 
and improve relationships with customers and suppliers [6] 
[7]. Various researchers have also pointed out that the 
motivation for e-business adoption varies from organization 
to organization, though it often encompasses reducing 
transaction costs [8], improved access to national or global 
markets [9], or increasing bottom-line profit performance 
[10]. 
Research conducted by the Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD) found that over 
95% of companies in two thirds of OECD countries use the 
internet for various business activities [11]. The 
commercialization of the internet has brought about an 
increased use of information technology in businesses [12] 
and today, an increasing number of multinationals and large 
companies have automated all their business processes; 
even simple activities such as leave booking and room 
reservation have now been moved to online portals [13]. 
Empirical evidence has also shown that e-business adoption 
could be regarded as a strategy for organizations to compete 
and outperform competition [4] [5]. However, since 
developing countries often suffer from infrastructure and 
internet penetration issues [14], understanding the extent of 
e-business usage in smaller companies in developing 
countries has not been of research interest up until now. For 
the purposes of this research, we use the term Small 
Business Enterprises (SBEs), being defined as enterprises 
which employ fewer than 50 persons, while Small to 
Medium Enterprises (SMEs) are defined as enterprises 
which employ fewer than 250 persons [15] [16]. The 
significance of SBEs in many economies of the world is 
considerable. In Nigeria, SMEs contribute about 46.5% to 
Nigeria’s GDP with SBEs making up 99% of these SMEs.  
Using case studies of four Nigerian SBEs, this research 
investigates e-business adoption in a developing country 
context. The research utilizes process mapping and other 
existing frameworks to analyze the current situation in these 
companies. Following this introduction, Section II reviews 
relevant literature on e-business in developing countries and 
e-business frameworks, and positions two research 
questions for the study. Section III then describes the 
methodology employed in this study and Section IV 
presents and discusses the findings to date. Section V 
provides an analysis of these findings, and Section VI 
summarises results to date and addresses the two research 
questions. The final concluding section briefly outlines 
some future research directions. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW  
In 1997, IBM first used the term “e-business” to mean 
“the transformation of key business processes through the 
use of internet technologies” [17]. E-business can be viewed 
as the integration of web technologies with business 
processes and management practices to increase efficiency 
and lower costs [18]. The adoption of e-business has been 
of interest to researchers for several years. In developed 

231
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
countries, numerous researchers [5] [7] [19]–[23] have 
explored various aspects of e-business, including factors 
affecting e-business adoption, challenges of adopting e-
business, the development of e-business models, and 
critical factors in successful e-business adoption.    
SMEs can contribute in various ways to a nation’s 
economy, offering flexible employment opportunities [9], 
poverty alleviation [24], and supply chain flexibility [25]. 
Overall, their contribution to a country’s overall  GDP 
growth is significant [26], and e-business adoption in SMEs 
has been the focus of a number of studies in developed 
countries, including the UK [10] [27], the USA [28], 
Australia [19] and in Canada [29]. However, there is still 
considerable debate in the existing literature on the value 
and productivity gain e-business has to offer to SBEs [11] 
[13].  
The following two sub-sections critically review, first, 
relevant literature regarding e-business adoption in 
developing countries, and, second, existing e-business 
models and frameworks. 
A. E-business Adoption in Developing Countries 
 Research conducted on e-business in developing 
countries has identified factors responsible for adoption 
[30] [31], challenges and barriers to e-commerce adoption 
[32] [33] [34], the benefits of e-business and consumer 
attitudes to e-business adoption [35]. While several studies 
have been carried out in developed countries to investigate 
some of these topics, when results of such studies are 
compared with studies in developing countries, it becomes 
evident that the different environmental, infrastructural and 
cultural issues predominant in developing countries do not 
allow for all-encompassing generalizations, hence the need 
for country specific studies. 
Kapurubandara and Lawson [34] investigated the 
barriers to ICT and e-commerce adoption in Sri-Lanka. 
Their research indicated that SMEs lag behind and are often 
skeptical about the uptake of e-business technologies. Their 
study also suggests that SMEs face unique and significant 
challenges in the uptake of e-commerce and these 
challenges could be broadly classified as internal and 
external barriers. Using data from exploratory pilot studies, 
surveys and existing literature, they identified nine barriers 
to the adoption of ICT and e-commerce in Sri-Lanka which 
include lack of skills, security, cultural and political 
barriers. Their research also proposed relevant support 
measures needed by SMEs in developing countries to 
overcome such barriers. 
Quite similarly, Janita and Chong [33] also researched 
the barriers to B2B e-business adoption in SMEs in 
Indonesia, a country with the largest proportion of SMEs in 
South East 
Asia. Their 
research 
identified poor 
infrastructure, lack of owner or manager motivation, lack of 
power to influence partners and lack of online policies, as 
some of the key barriers to e-business adoption by SMEs. 
They proposed a conceptual framework which consists of 
six key indicators (Individual, Organisational, Technology, 
Market & Industry, External Support and Government 
Support) for analyzing the barriers of B2B e-business 
adoption in Indonesian SMEs. 
More recently, Rahayua and Day [31] conducted a study 
on Indonesian SMEs to determine factors that affect e-
commerce adoption. Their research, which was based on the 
Technological, 
Organisational 
and 
Environmental 
theoretical framework (TOE), surveyed 292 Indonesian 
SMEs and identified 11 variables as important factors that 
influence adoption of e-commerce in SMEs. These 
variables are further grouped into four, - technological 
factors, organizational factors, environmental factors and 
individual factors. 
Hitherto, most relevant studies on Nigerian small 
businesses have focused primarily on e-commerce, i.e., the 
buying and selling of good and services online, neglecting 
the potential of e-business in transforming business 
processes and core operations in the more traditional 
“bricks and mortar” companies [8] [24]. In 2011, Olatokun 
and Bankole [36] investigated the factors influencing e-
business technology adoption by SMEs in Ibadan, a city in 
south western Nigeria. Data was collected by structured 
questionnaires administered to key personnel in 60 SMEs 
(30 adopters and 30 non-adopters of e-business), and the 
results revealed that the age of SMEs was a significant 
influencing factor on whether e-business was used or not, 
while company size was of very little significance. It was 
the younger companies that constituted the majority of e-
business users. 
Agwu [30] also conducted an investigative analysis of 
factors affecting e-business adoption and website 
maintenance of commercial organisations in Nigeria. This 
case study research gathered information from six 
organisations based in three geopolitical zones of the 
country – North, West and East. Overall, 9 managers were 
interviewed and the results of the study indicated that 
consumer readiness, IT Skills shortage and internet 
connectivity are vital to e-business adoption and website 
maintenance in Nigerian businesses. 
As a follow on to previous research, in 2015, Agwu and 
Murray [37] also researched the barriers to e-commerce 
adoption by SMEs in Nigeria. The research which was 
conducted in three states in Nigeria – Lagos, Abuja and 
Enugu - made use of interviews to gather information from 
SME owners, and their findings indicated that lack of an e-
commerce regulatory security framework, technical skills 
and basic infrastructures are some of the main factors that 
hamper e-commerce adoption in Nigeria. 
 Recently, Erumi-Esin and Heeks [38] researched e-
business adoption and use among African Women-Owned 
SMEs. Their study, which made use of both qualitative and 
quantitate methods of research, surveyed 140 SMEs in 
Warri - a commercial city in southern Nigeria. Using 
questions informed by the Unified Theory of Acceptance 
and Use of Technology Model (UTAUT), they examined 
factors that influence adoption in women-owned SMEs in 
sub-Sharan Africa. Their results indicated that perceived 
usefulness plays an important role in e-business adoption, 
market forces serve as drivers, while lack of infrastructure 
and resources serve as impediments to adoption. 

232
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
These research initiatives indicate both the current use 
and potential that e-business has in developing countries 
such as Nigeria, but no study has focused on Nigerian SBEs. 
This study aims to fill this research gap and provide insights 
into the key issues impacting upon e-business adoption in 
Nigerian SBEs. Rather than look at barriers, success factors 
or indicators, the research at this stage will attempt to 
identify the key influencing factors that are impacting the 
take-up and deployment of e-business in the Nigerian SBE 
sector. 
 
B. E-business Models and Frameworks 
To understand and extend the deployment of e-business 
in companies, researchers, governments and e-business 
consultants have developed several analytical and 
operational frameworks [39] [40]. Analytical tools such as 
process mapping and systems profiling have also been used 
in previous studies [10] [41]. 
The DTI Adoption Ladder constitutes one of the earliest 
e-business frameworks. It breaks down e-business adoption 
into five stages and suggests that organisations move 
through these stages in a sequential order [9] [42]. Levy and 
Powell [43] proposed the “transporter model” as an 
alternative non-linear e-business adoption model for SMEs. 
This model suggests that different types of SMEs will view 
e-business adoption in different ways and identifies four 
dimensions of e-business deployment in an SME - 
brochureware, business opportunity, business network and 
business support. 
In order to determine e-business adoption at individual 
process level – rather than at overall company level - the 
Connect, Publish, Interact, Transform (CPIT) model was 
developed by the UK Department of Trade and Industry 
[44]. This model offers a 2-dimensional matrix to evaluate 
the impact of e-business technologies across an 
organisation’s main business processes. When compared 
with the Adoption Ladder, the CPIT model offers a more 
in-depth assessment of the impact of e-business on SME 
operations [9]. The Stages of Growth for e-business (SOG-
e) model [45] is the combination of a six stage IT maturity 
model with a six stage Internet Commerce maturity model. 
However, somewhat akin to the CPIT model, the SOG-e 
model recognises that it is possible for an organisation to 
have different levels of e-business maturity in different 
areas of a business. A related model is that of Willcocks and 
Sauer [46], who identified 4 main stages through which 
organisations will pass as they develop and apply the skills 
needed for successful e-business deployment. The 
organization gains increased business value from e-business 
as it attains the new capabilities required to advance to the 
next stage. 
Research studies in developed countries have applied 
some of these methods and frameworks to evaluate e-
business technology and process adoption in SMEs. 
However, in the context of Nigeria, no study has to date 
applied similar methods in the analysis of e-business 
adoption in SBEs. This research will attempt to apply some 
of these models to Nigerian SBEs, using, as a starting point, 
a simple top level process mapping technique that has been 
applied in similar studies [10] [47]. More specifically, it will 
address the following research questions (RQs): 
RQ1. Can these mapping techniques and models of e-
business adoption be usefully applied to SBEs in a 
developing world context? 
RQ2. What are the critical influencing factors impacting 
upon e-business adoption in Nigerian SBEs? 
  
III. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
Research 
projects 
usually 
adopt 
a 
particular 
philosophical stance based on a research paradigm, for 
example post-positivism, pragmatism, interpretivism or 
constructivism [48]. This philosophical stance has a major 
influence on the choice of research methods and approaches 
to be used in order to obtain relevant findings [49]. For the 
purposes of this research, an interpretivist paradigm is 
adopted, and the research approach is qualitative, using 
multiple case studies. 
The case study method of research has been selected 
because it is well suited for observations where the 
researcher aims to probe deeply and analyse with a view to 
making generalisations about the wider population in which 
the unit being studied belongs [50] [51]. Furthermore, the 
use of e-business is quite complex and will often vary from 
one company to another. According to Yin [52], the case 
study method of research is well suited for exploratory 
studies that aim to understand a phenomenon which will 
often result in the use and review of multiple evidences.   
The four case studies (Table I) were selected from a 
cross-section of SBE industry sectors in Lagos – Nigeria’s 
most populous city and its economic capital. The use of 
multiple case studies adds greater weight to the research and 
makes research findings more convincing [52]. Qualitative 
data was gathered through questionnaires and semi-
structured interviews with key personnel in the company 
case studies. The case studies were identified through 
existing contacts with company owners and IT managers, 
and all organisations selected for the study had already 
attempted to apply e-business within their organisations. 
The interview data was used to build a process map of 
each company, employing a simple technique used in 
similar studies [41].  Interviewees were also questioned 
 
 
Company  
Date 
Founded 
No. 
of 
Staff 
Turnover 
2014/15 
ABC Laundries 
2010 
7 
£14,000 
GPY Properties 
2012 
23 
£76,000 
KDE Energy 
2012 
10 
£235,000 
LTE Consulting 
2007 
7 
£24,000 
 
TABLE I. THE FOUR CASE STUDY COMPANIES 

233
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
about the functioning and capabilities of existing systems 
and technologies in each process area of the company 
concerned, providing the basis for a profiling of existing 
technology as either worthy of retention, in need of 
replacement or between the two, pending further evaluation 
(Fig. 1 to Fig. 4). This again builds on similar studies 
undertaken in small companies in the UK [54]. 
While this research is qualitative, exploratory and 
inductive in nature, some quantitative assessment of 
company turnover, number of staff and period of e-business 
usage was done. Necessary approval and consent from 
participatory organisations were sought and aliases have 
been used for company and individuals’ names. Empirical 
evidence gathered from these organisations was developed 
and assessment made against selected models. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Main business processes and systems profiling at ABC 
Laundries 
IV. 
FINDINGS 
ABC Laundries is a family business founded in 2010. It 
originated as a home based operation, but has now 
expanded to become a budget laundry and dry cleaning 
service for people living in Lagos. The company provides a 
wide range of laundry and dry cleaning services to people 
living in the Lagos Metropolis from its locations in Yaba 
and Surulere (urban areas within Lagos). With its main 
operations office in Surulere strategically located within the 
Lagos University Teaching Hospital, ABC Laundries is 
able to offer its laundry services to students and staff at the 
hospital, as well as pickup and delivery services to 
companies, corporate services, and guest houses across 
Lagos State. Currently, the company turns over circa 6 
million Naira (£14,000) per annum, and employs 7 staff. 
(Staff wages are very low in comparison with developed 
world norms, averaging less than £1000 a year for these 
staff). The current business plan is to further increase 
revenue by expanding the company’s customer base and 
increasing market share. 
The management of ABC Laundries view e-business as 
a key enabler of corporate growth and, to this end, invested 
in a bespoke web-based system in 2013, to handle its key 
Sales & Marketing and financial management processes. 
Prior to this, most business processes were handled by a 
combination of paper based receipts, Excel spreadsheets 
and open source accounting tools. However, this became 
difficult to manage with the opening of a new branch in 
2012, and this was the catalyst for investment in a new web 
portal. The key objectives of this investment were: 
1. 
To provide a system where orders can be captured 
in real time at both locations. 
2. 
To provide a mechanism to allow staff and 
customers to track the status of a laundry order 
from pickup to delivery. 
3. 
To enable top-level financial reporting in real-
time. 
4. 
To maintain a database of customers and contact 
details. 
The web portal was implemented in phases, adding new 
functionality as the old support systems were phased out. 
The key objectives have been met, with the addition of a 
few functionality enhancements. The web portal was built 
using PHP and the MYSQL database. Integration with 
email servers as well as SMS gateways has enabled emails 
and SMS notifications to be sent to customers. 
GPY Properties is a property development and 
marketing company founded in 2012. Given Nigeria’s 
housing deficit and the acute absence of quality housing in 
the country, the company aims to help redress this 
imbalance through the provision of innovative, high quality 
and affordable homes. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Main business processes and systems profiling at GPY 
Properties 
 
The company originated as the property sales division 
of a larger consulting company called PYI Consulting 
Limited. However, as sales of developed properties 
increased, the owner decided to hive off the division into a 
separate corporate entity to focus on property development 

234
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Sales & Marketing as its core business. In 2015, the 
company turned over about 32 million Naira (£76,000) and 
the forecast for 2016 is even greater, although considering 
the recent recession in the country, this might be quite 
ambitious. 
GPY Properties maintains a website mainly for 
marketing properties and showcasing its ongoing projects 
to customers and potential customers. The company also 
maintains 
a 
cloud 
based 
Customer 
Relationship 
Management (CRM) system for maintaining and analyzing 
customer contact details. From time to time, the company 
also advertises on Facebook and various other property 
aggregator websites. Invoice generation and other 
accounting activities are currently managed by Excel 
spreadsheets, but plans are in place to subscribe to a cloud 
based accounting solution; the Wave Accounting and Xero 
Accounting packages are being considered as possible 
solutions. With three full time staff and twenty contract 
staff, the company has been able to automate most of its 
daily business activities concerning customer engagement, 
internal communication and product marketing. 
KDE Energy is an energy solutions company 
established to meet the energy demands of Nigerians. By 
offering 
alternative 
energy 
solutions 
using 
solar 
technologies, the company has been able to provide cost 
effective solutions to both residential and commercial 
customers. Upon completion of a degree in Electronics in 
the UK in 2012, the founder returned to Nigeria and 
subsequently identified an opportunity in the energy sector 
in Nigeria. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Main business processes and systems profiling at KDE Energy 
 
Today, with only two full-time staff and about eight 
temporary staff, the company turns over 100 million Naira 
(£235,000) and has plans to increase this in the coming year. 
In 2014, KDE Energy invested in a website to provide 
information about its products and services to potential 
customers. This investment was part of the company’s 
growth strategy as it intended to take on more commercial 
projects and having a website made the company look more 
professional. The company makes use of a cloud based 
accounting tool for its quarterly accounting and most of the 
day to day expenses are handled with Microsoft Excel. 
According the founder, the company is very aware of how 
e-business positively affects its operations, particularly with 
the sourcing of goods. However, they do not have a plan in 
place yet to take orders online or become very active on 
social media. 
LTE Consulting is a training and consulting SBE based 
in Lagos, Nigeria. The owner founded the company in 2007 
after a successful career in the civil service. The company 
turns over 10 million Naira (£24,000) and principally 
focuses on training and consulting in West Africa, but with 
Nigeria as its main focus point. The company offers 
standard or tailored in-house training, as well as open 
courses, particularly to the Nigerian financial sector. With 
staff numbering 4 full-time staff and 3 contractors, the 
company prides itself on offering quality training courses in 
customer service, agency marketing, life insurance and 
management. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Main business processes and systems profiling at LTE 
Consulting 
 
The company maintains a website that helps to keep its 
customers aware of upcoming courses and training. The 
company also allows bookings to be made on the website 
but the actual payment/sale is done offline. Furthermore, the 
company maintains a custom built customer relationship 
management (CRM) tool that it uses to keep in touch with 
its customers as well as previous course attendees. After a 
newsletter is sent out informing previous customers in the 
database of new course offerings, it is the norm that the 
company would receive at least 20 related inbound calls 
within a week.  While LTE Consulting still sends out fliers 
via dispatch riders, the management considers that using the 
CRM system is cost effective and if their customer base was 
more IT enabled, they would consider halting their flyer 
distribution. 

235
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
V. 
ANALYSIS 
Analysis of e-business deployment in the case study 
companies was undertaken through the combination of two 
techniques - process mapping and systems profiling (briefly 
noted in Section III), and two models - CPIT (a process 
based e-business model) and the Willcocks and Sauer e-
business stage model. Previous research [5] [30] indicates 
that the use of simple stage based models alone to determine 
the level of e-business use in an organisation is not 
sufficient, as different processes may be at different levels. 
However, even with models that examine technology 
deployment at process level, such as the CPIT model, there 
is still the need to adapt these to a small business 
environment, as the process definitions may not be 
appropriate to newly-created SBEs. This combination of 
pre-existing techniques and models, derived and adapted 
from previous research [10], is used as the framework for 
analysis of the case studies. 
Using data from the questionnaire responses and semi- 
structured interviews, seven core processes were identified 
in ABC Laundries (Fig. 1) - Laundry Operations, Financial 
Management, Sales & Marketing, Collection & Delivery 
Management, Stock & Procurement Management, Payroll 
& HR Management and Customer Services. At GPY 
Properties, there were six core processes (Fig. 2) that the 
organisation 
performs 
– 
Financial 
Management, 
Constructor Liaison & Management, Customer Services, 
Property Sales & Marketing, Logistics & Procurement and 
Payroll & HR Management. At KDE Energy, six processes 
(Fig. 3) were identified - Financial Management, Customer 
Services, Procurement & Logistics, Installation & Repair, 
Payroll & HR Management and Sales & Marketing; while 
at LTE Consulting, five processes were identified (Fig. 4) – 
Invoicing & Financial Management, Sales & Marketing, 
Customer Services, Curriculum & Training and Payroll & 
HR. 
Systems profiling was applied to identify e-business 
systems currently in place in each process area. By 
employing a simple Red-Amber-Green assessment (Fig. 1 
to Fig. 4), systems were assessed to indicate those in need 
of replacement, those that could possibly be retained and 
those that were deemed strategically and/or operationally 
sound. This procedure initiated the analysis of e-business 
systems at individual process level as well as indicating 
which processes are automated, semi-automated or non-
automated. 
A CPIT analysis of ABC Laundries (Fig. 5) provides a 
more detailed view of the impact of e-business systems at 
process level. This revealed that e-business systems have 
made significant impact in the financial management and 
customer facing processes. Decision-makers within the 
organisation are easily able to keep track of daily, weekly 
and monthly revenue from any of the two premises, or 
remotely, thus helping the organisation to plan effectively 
and take appropriate action when needed. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. CPIT model applied to ABC Laundries
 
 

236
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The Sales & Marketing process has also been made 
more efficient with the ability to automate and notify 
selected groups of customer via SMS or emails. There 
remain further benefits to be gained by automating the 
communication of marketing information to customers and 
by making relevant information available across processes. 
This may allow, for example, special offers to be made to 
customers in specific geographic locations, with high 
frequency of delivery, with a mind to keep delivery cost 
constant and increase orders to be delivered. This type of 
further development, which is akin to what, in a larger 
organization, would be termed Business Intelligence, 
would arguably move the company into the transformation 
stage on the CPIT model. 
GPY Properties has been able to adopt e-business 
technologies without the need to use in-house IT staff, as it 
has been able to utilise a cloud based CRM tool. The CPIT 
model for GPY Properties shows that its Sales & Marketing 
process is well supported by e-business technology. 
According to the company’s managing director, the strategy 
to advertise online has helped the company gather new leads 
- often people with very busy schedules, who would not 
normally have time to visit the company’s office - as well 
as reach different geographical locations with its 
advertisements. This year, without doing any advert 
campaign specifically targeted at the northern part of 
Nigeria, the company has been able to make two property 
sales to individuals who live in this location, and a number 
of further sales in this region are currently in the final stages  
 
of completion. One of the current subscribers to its flagship 
residential estate is a Nigerian who resides in Canada and 
who saw the advert on the company’s Facebook page. 
Nevertheless, Fig. 6 shows us that as of now, the 
deployment of e-business technologies at GPY Properties is 
restricted to the Sales, Marketing and Customer Service 
processes. The managing director has affirmed that the 
volume of data generated by the various departments in the 
other process areas does not justify further investment in e-
business systems at present, although this may change as the 
organisation expands and takes up more construction 
projects. 
KDE Energy makes use of QuickBooks to maintain its 
company accounts while day-to-day expenses are tracked 
using Excel. As can be seen from Fig. 3, the Financial 
Management, Payroll & HR Management and Procurement 
& Logistics processes are automated to some degree, while 
the other three processes are largely manual. The CPIT 
analysis of KDE Energy (Fig. 7) emphasizes this and clearly 
indicates that only the Financial Management and 
Procurement & Logistics processes are adequately 
supported by e-business technology. However, as indicated 
by the founder of the company, most of their income is 
made from transactions with other companies, and this 
normally emanates from discussions at management level, 
and therefore there is very little justification for 
implementing an e-ordering site as there is no demand for it 
at present. The company’s customers do not require it and 
their competitors are not using it. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. CPIT model applied to GPY Properties 

237
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
From the system profiling of LTE Consulting (Fig. 4), 
it can be seen that most processes are automated. The CPIT 
analysis (Fig. 8) of this company indicates that the business 
has gained significant value from their e-business 
deployment, notably in the Sales & Marketing process.  The 
company is very focused on increasing sales, and since the 
company deals with individuals as well as corporate 
customers, they are required to constantly keep in touch 
with customers in order to get new businesses. Email 
newsletter automation has been cost effective so far. 
If we now look at these four companies against 
Willcocks and Sauer’s model [46], the analysis suggests 
they are all on or between stages 2 and 3 (Fig. 9), whereas 
other authors [54] have suggested that many small 
companies do not progress past stage 1 because they often 
do not see the benefit in investing in capital intensive e-
business projects. This apparent contradiction is partly 
explained by the reduction in cost of e-business 
infrastructure in recent years, and, partly because of this, it 
has become a de facto norm to use e-business in the Sales 
& Marketing processes in many organisations, including 
SBEs. Moreover, in the case study companies investigated 
here, the management sees e-business as a key enabler to 
growth. 
In ABC Laundries, in particular, their success with e-
business to date can be attributed to the phased introduction 
of new e-business features which has helped the 
organisation derive value from relatively small scale, 
staged, expenditure. This has also allowed a phased upgrade 
in technology, accompanied by appropriate process 
improvement and staff training, before moving on to focus 
on another process. Similarly, at GPY Properties, the 
company has used cloud based systems that offer very low 
entry costs. 
VI. 
RESULTS  
In answer to RQ1 noted earlier in this paper, this 
research suggests that the e-business adoption models, 
developed to gauge the impact of e-business in the 
developed world over a decade ago, are of value today in a 
developing world context. Although the definition of e-
business has evolved, the process mapping technique and 
the application of models like CPIT can give a clear 
framework and point of departure for the assessment of e-
business in countries like Nigeria; and they clearly show 
that e-business technologies are bringing value to the 
studied SBEs, notably in the customer facing processes, 
which mirrors the early deployment of e-business in the 
developed world. 
As regards RQ2, the analysis of data retrieved from 
interviews and questionnaires from these four SBEs in the 
Lagos Metropolis indicates eight critical influencing factors 
(CIFs) impacting e-business adoption in Nigerian SBEs. 
 
A. Owner Perspective 
Most SBEs in Nigeria are run by one individual or at 
most a partnership of two people. Most business decisions 
are by the owner and his/her perspective is thus critical. In 
the case of ABC Laundries and LTE Consulting, the 
company owners were very much in favour of IT and had a 
general belief that the careful introduction of new systems 
would make them more productive and profitable. For 
example, the owner of ABC Laundries made it explicit that 
he made most of the decisions in the organisation, and that 
if he had not promoted the use of e-business in his 
organisation, it would have been difficult for the company 
to fund the necessary investment, let alone overcome the 
various challenges the staff encountered as a result of e-
business implementation. 
 
 
Figure 7. CPIT model applied to KDE Energy
 
 

238
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. Customer/Consumer Perspective 
Customer and consumer perspectives are important to 
most aspects of an SBE operation. Consumers often drive 
e-business usage in SBEs in Nigeria. In some industry 
sectors, notably those focused on retail sales, consumers are 
increasingly expecting a range of web-based services. But 
in other companies, for example, KDE Energy, the primary 
customers are other companies that are often not well 
advanced in the use of e-business themselves, and as such 
there is no great pressure from the customer side to 
introduce e-business into customer service processes. 
 
C. Internet Penetration, Cost & Availability 
For the purposes of this research, e-business is defined 
as the use of internet technologies in business processes. 
Thus, for SBEs in Nigeria to effectively take up e-business, 
the internet needs to be suitably available at their office and 
works locations, at acceptable cost. All four companies in 
this study attested to the importance of internet penetration 
in their areas. Although this is on the increase in Nigeria 
generally, it still remains one of the key issues affecting e-
business adoption in Nigerian businesses; and with tight 
cost control often of paramount importance, internet costs 
are particularly relevant in an SBE environment. 
 
D. Trust 
Another key issue affecting e-business adoption in 
Nigerian SBEs is trust. Trust can be seen as a multifaceted 
factor as it relates to both staff trust and confidence in the e-
business 
systems 
and 
processes, 
and 
also 
customer/consumer trust in online purchases in the Nigerian 
technology and regulatory environment. Lack of trust has 
impeded the progression of on-line order capture, as 
evidenced in these case studies. 
 
E. Government Policies & Regulations 
Currently in Nigeria, there are no government policies 
or incentives regarding the adoption of e-business by SBEs. 
As already identified in the literature review, this has been 
a key enabler in the adoption of e-business in the UK and 
Australia. The move to e-business in Nigeria could be 
promoted and progressed by Government subsidies for 
relevant investment, support for skills development and also 
by acting as an exemplar in using e-business in parastatal 
authorities and government ministries – for example, for 
online bidding for government contracts. 
 
F. Investment Costs 
As with any infrastructure project in an organisation, 
there is an initial cost associated with the uptake of e-
business -cost of software, cost of hardware devices and 
general operational and maintenance costs. The average 
setup cost amongst the four SBEs studied was about 
500,000 naira (£1,200). This may seem a relatively small 
amount, but when compared to the revenue of each of the 
company, it is a sizeable investment. SBEs also need to be 
confident regarding payback and benefits. Government 
incentives to invest in such technology would be of benefit, 
as would the encouragement of in-country production of 
appropriate hardware and software systems.  
 
 
 
Figure 8. CPIT model applied to LTE Consulting 

239
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 9. The Four Nigerian SBEs on the E-business Stage Model 
 
Stage 1- Web Presence 
 
Develop presence 
 
Develop technology capability 
Stage 2- Access Information and Transact Business 
 
Re-orientate business/technology thinking skills 
 
Build integrated approach with the web and business systems 
Stage 3- Further Integration of Skills, Processes and Technologies 
 
Reorganise people/structures 
 
Reengineer processes 
 
Remodel technology infrastructure 
Stage 4- Capability, Leveraging, Experience and Know-How to Maximise Value 
 
Customer-focused organisation 
 
G. Power availability 
Power availability is paramount amongst the key issues 
influencing e-business adoption in Nigerian SBEs. All the 
SBEs studied identified power availability as one of the 
main issues affecting e-business adoption. 
On average, Nigerian businesses loose about 10 hours a 
week to power cuts. This has a major impact on businesses 
reliant on e-business and other IT systems, making it very 
difficult to work productively in these periods.  Many 
companies have sought to source alternative sources of 
power, such as the use of generators, solar panels and 
inverters. All the companies studied have backup 
generators, but in two of the companies studied, they have 
resorted to the use of mobile apps and tablets with long 
lasting battery power. This can act as a more cost-effective 
backup than the use of generators in the event of power cuts, 
as was the case at ABC Laundries.  
 
H.  ICT Skills 
For any SBE to effectively implement e-business, it will 
likely need access to third party IT professionals, whilst at 
the same time, some of its staff need to be proficient in the 
use of IT.  This is problematic in many Nigerian SBEs, 
where 90% of staff are semi-skilled and have little or no ICT 
skills or experience. In the case of PYI properties, the 
company makes good knowledge of IT a pre-requisite for 
recruitment of most employees. ABC Laundries has a 
‘buddy’ system whereby the more computer literate staff 
members train other staff for a couple of hours in a week. 
ICT skills remains a key influencing factor in the uptake of 
e-business in the SBE sector. 
VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS  
The study clearly shows that e-business technology 
adoption varies in focus and nature from business to 
business in Nigerian SBEs. The property and training 
companies focused on the Customer Services and Sales & 
Marketing processes, while KDE Energy focused more on  
  
 
 
Figure 10. Critical Influencing Factors for the Four Nigerian SBEs 
 
Financial Management and Logistics processes; and ABC 
Laundries’ e-business activity spans the Customer Services, 
Sales & Marketing and Financial Management processes. 
Future research will now build upon existing models to 
provide 
an 
enhanced 
analytical 
framework 
for 
understanding and progressing e-business deployment in 
Nigerian SBEs. In particular, the three dimensions of 
change - technology deployment, process improvement, 
and people skills enhancement – will be more closely 
examined to develop a new combined model of e-business 
implementation. The CIFs in the four case studies (Fig. 10) 
reinforce the importance of maintaining a balance between 
these three dimensions of change. These eight CIFs were 
assessed on a scale of 1-5 (from 1 = low/unacceptable to 5 
= high/cost-efficient). Above all, this initial analysis points 
up the significance of power supply and internet availability 
problems in a developing country like Nigeria. In the 
western world, these are often taken for granted, and focus 
has thus shifted to process change and people skills issues, 
rather than being on the technology itself. But these case 
studies suggest that it was the commitment and 
determination of company owners and the aptitude and 
skills of the workforce that underpinned successful e-
business developments in spite of major problems with 
basic technology support and enabling services. This puts a 
different perspective on e-business adoption, which has 
significant implications for the development of the 
implementation 
model 
and 
associated 
operational 
guidelines. 
The 
generally 
negative 
perception 
of 
government regulation and policy is another important 
finding. These critical influencing factors will be further 
researched as an integral component of a new 
implementation framework for e-business projects in a 
developing world context.  
REFERENCES 
[1] O. Olayinka, M. G. Wynn, and K. Bechkoum, “Process 
Analysis and e-Business Adoption in Nigerian SBEs: A 
Report on Case Study Research,” in eKNOW 2016, The 

240
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, 
and Knowledge Management, pp. 57–63, 2016. 
[2] Vanguard Nigeria, “Nigeria has 48m active internet users – 
NITDA,” 
2014. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.vanguardngr.com/2014/10/nigeria-48m-active-
internet-users-nitda/. [Accessed: 24-Nov-2016]. 
[3] Paul Budde Communication Pty Ltd, “Nigeria - Mobile 
Market - Insights, Statistics and Forecasts,” Paul Budde 
Communication Pty Ltd, 2015. 
[4] B. A. Wagner, I. Fillis, and U. Johansson, “E-business and 
e-supply strategy in small and medium sized businesses 
(SMEs),” Supply Chain Manag. An Int. J., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 
343–354, 2003. 
[5] T. Oliveira and M. F. Martins, “Understanding e-business 
adoption across industries in European countries,” Ind. 
Manag. Data Syst., vol. 110, no. 9, pp. 1337–1354, 2010. 
[6] D. Sharma and M. Ranga, “Mobile customer relationship 
management - A competitive tool,” Excel Int. J. Multidiscip. 
Manag. Stud., vol. 4, no. 7, pp. 37–42, 2014. 
[7] T. Oliveira and M. F. Martins, “Firms Patterns of e-Business 
Adoption: Evidence for the European Union-27,” Electron. 
J. Inf. Syst., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 47–56, 2010. 
[8] W. Olatokun and B. Bankole, “Factors influencing 
electronic business technologies adoption and use by small 
and medium scale enterprises (SMEs) in a Nigerian 
municipality,” J. Internet Bank. Commer., vol. 16, no. 3, 
2011. 
[9] M. Taylor and A. Murphy, “SMEs and e-business,” J. Small 
Bus. Enterp. Dev., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 280–289, 2004. 
[10] M. G. Wynn, P. Turner, and E. Lau, “E-business and process 
change: two case studies (towards an assessment 
framework),” Journal of Small Business and Enterprise 
Development, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 913–933, 2013. 
[11] OECD, “Internet adoption and use: Businesses,” OECD 
Internet Econ. Outlook 2012, 2012. 
[12] L. Chen and C. W. Holsapple, “E-Business Adoption 
Research: State of the Art,” J. Electron. Commer. Res., vol. 
14, no. 3, pp. 261–286, 2013. 
[13] P. 
Taylor, 
“The 
Importance 
of 
Information 
and 
Communication Technologies (ICTs): An Integration of the 
Extant Literature on ICT Adoption in Small and Medium 
Enterprises,” Int. J. Econ. Commer. Manag., vol. 3, no. 5, 
2015. 
[14] M. Kapurubandara, “A model to etransform SMEs in 
developing countries,” Proc. 2008 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Autom. 
Sustain. ICIAFS 2008, pp. 401–406, 2008. 
[15] European Commission, The new SME definition: user guide 
and model declaration. Office for Official Publications of the 
European Communities, 2005. 
[16] Small and Medium Enterprises Development Agency of 
Nigeria, “National Policy on Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises,” 2014. 
[17] D. Chaffey, E-business and E-commerce Management: 
Strategy, Implementation and Practice. Financial Times 
Prentice Hall, 2007. 
[18] V. Bordonaba-Juste, L. Lucia-Palacios, and Y. Polo-
Redondo, “Antecedents and consequences of e-business 
adoption for European retailers,” Internet Res., vol. 22, no. 
5, pp. 532–550, 2012. 
[19] A. Prananto, J. McKay, and P. Marshall, “Lessons learned 
from analysing e-business progression using a stage model 
in Australian Small Medium Enterprises (SMEs),” ACIS 
2004 Proc., no. 1969, pp. 75-86, 2004. 
[20] D. Chaffey, E-Business and E-Commerce Management - 
Strategy, Implementation and Practice. 2009. 
[21] A. Prananto, J. McKay, and P. Marshall, “A study of the 
progression of e-business maturity in Australian SMEs: 
some evidence of the applicability of the stages of growth 
for e-business model,” Proc. PACIS, Adelaide, July, pp. 68–
80, 2003. 
[22] A. Basu and S. Muylle, “How to plan e-business initiatives 
in established companies,” MIT Sloan Manag. Rev., vol. 49, 
no. 1, pp. 28-36, 2007. 
[23] F. Wu, V. Mahajan, and S. Balasubramanian, “An Analysis 
of E-Business Adoption and its Impact on Business 
Performance,” J. Acad. Mark. Sci., vol. 31, April, pp. 425–
447, 2003. 
[24] D. O. Faloye, “The adoption of e-commerce in small 
businesses: an empirical evidence from retail sector in 
Nigeria.,” J. Bus. Retail Manag. Res., vol. 8, no. 2, 2014. 
[25] A. Afolayan, E. Plant, G. R. T. White, P. Jones, and P. 
Beynon-Davies, “Information Technology Usage in SMEs 
in a Developing Economy,” Strateg. Chang., vol. 24, no. 5, 
pp. 483–498, 2015. 
[26] Bloomberg Business, “Nigerian Economy Overtakes South 
Africa’s on Rebased GDP,” Bloomberg Business, 2014. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-04-
06/nigerian-economy-overtakes-south-africa-s-on-rebased-
gdp. [Accessed: 24-Nov-2016]. 
[27] C. Parker and T. Castleman, “New directions for research on 
SME-eBusiness: insights from an analysis of journal articles 
from 2003-2006,” J. Inf. Syst. Small Bus., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 
21–40, 2007. 
[28] H. D. Kim, I. Lee, and C. K. Lee, “Building Web 2.0 
enterprises: A study of small and medium enterprises in the 
United States,” Int. Small Bus. J., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 156–
174, 2013. 
[29] P. Ifinedo, “Internet/e-business technologies acceptance in 
Canada’s SMEs: an exploratory investigation,” Internet 
Res., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 255–281, 2011. 
[30] E. M. Agwu, “An investigative analysis of factors 
influencing E-business adoption and maintenance of 
commercial websites in Nigeria,” Basic Res. J. Bus. Manag. 
Accounts ISSN 2315-6899 vol. 3, pp. 5–16, 2014. 
[31] R. Rahayu and J. Day, “Determinant Factors of E-commerce 
Adoption by SMEs in Developing Country: Evidence from 
Indonesia,” Procedia - Soc. Behav. Sci., vol. 195, pp. 142–
150, 2015. 
[32] D. K. Agboh, “Drivers and challenges of ICT adoption by 
SMES in Accra metropolis , Ghana,” J. Technol. Res., vol. 
6, pp. 1–16, 2015. 
[33] I. Janita and W. K. Chong, “Barriers of b2b e-business 
adoption in Indonesian SMEs: A Literature Analysis,” 
Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 17, pp. 571–578, 2013. 
[34] M. Kapurubandara and R. Lawson, “Barriers to Adopting 
ICT and e-commerce with SMEs in Developing Countries : 
An Exploratory study in Sri Lanka,” Univ. West. Sydney, 
Aust., May, pp. 1–12, 2006. 
[35] C. I. Emeti and O. Onyeaghala, “E-Business Adoption and 
Consumer Attitude in Nigeria,” Eur. J. Bus. Manag., vol. 7, 
no. 21, pp. 76–87, 2015. 
[36] W. Olatokun and B. Bankole, “Factors Influencing 
Electronic Business Technologies Adoption and Use by 
Small and Medium Scale Enterprises (SMEs) in a Nigerian 
Municipality,” J. Internet Bank. Commer., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 
1–26, 2011. 
[37] E. M. Agwu and P. J. Murray, “Empirical Study of Barriers 
to Electronic Commerce Adoption by Small and Medium 
Scale Businesses in Nigeria,” Int. J. Innov. Digit. Econ., vol. 
6, no. 2, pp. 1–19, 2015. 

241
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[38] R. Erumi-Esin and R. Heeks, “e-Business Adoption and Use 
Among African Women-Owned SMEs: An Analytical 
Study in Nigeria,” ICTD 2015 Proc. Seventh Int. Conf. Inf. 
Commun. Technol. Dev., pp. 11-21, 2015. 
[39] P. Jones, E. Muir, and P. B. Davies, “The proposal of a 
comparative framework to evaluate e-business stages of 
growth models,” Int. J. Inf. Technol. Manag., vol. 5, no. 4, 
pp. 249-267, 2006. 
[40] R. Gatautis and E. Vitkauskaite, “eBusiness Policy Support 
Framework,” no. 5, pp. 35–48, 2009. 
[41] M. Wynn, P. Turner, A. Banik, and A. G. Duckworth, “The 
impact of customer relationship management systems in 
small businesses,” Strategic Change, vol. 25, Issue 6, pp. 
655–670, 2016. Published online in Wiley Online Library 
(wileyonlinelibrary.com) DOI: 10.1002/jsc.2100. 
[42] A. Gunasekaran, Modelling and Analysis of Enterprise 
Information Systems. IGI Pub., 2007. 
[43] M. Levy and P. Powell, “Exploring SME internet adoption: 
towards a contingent model,” Electron. Mark., vol. 13, no. 2, 
pp. 173–181, 2003. 
[44] Department of Trade and Industry, Business in the 
Information Age: International Benchmarking Study 2003. 
Booz Allen Hamilton, London, 2003. 
[45] J. McKay, A. Prananto, and P. Marshall, “E-business 
maturity: The SOG-e model,” in Proceedings of the 11th 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems (ACIS), 
pp. 6–8, 2000. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[46] C. Sauer and L. P. Willcocks, Moving to e-business. 
Random House Business Books, 2000. 
[47] M. Wynn and O. Olubanjo, “Demand-supply chain 
management: systems implications in an SME packaging 
business in the UK,” Int. J. Manuf. Res., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 
198–212, 2012. 
[48] J. W. Creswell, Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, 
and Mixed Methods Approaches, Fourth edi. SAGE 
Publications, 2013. 
[49] M. B. Davies, Doing a Successful Research Project: Using 
Qualitative or Quantitative Methods. Palgrave Macmillan, 
2007. 
[50] R. B. Burns, Introduction to Research Methods. SAGE 
Publications, 2000. 
[51] D. Silverman, Interpreting Qualitative Data. SAGE 
Publications, 2015. 
[52] R. K. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods. 
SAGE Publications, 2003. 
[53] M. Wynn, P. Turner, H. Abbas, and R. Shen, "Employing 
Knowledge Transfer to support IS implementation in 
SMEs," Journal of Industry and Higher Education,  vol. 23, 
no. 2, April, pp. 111-125, 2009. 
[54] M. Levy, P. Powell, and P. Yetton, “SMEs: aligning IS and 
the strategic context,” J. Inf. Technol., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 
133–144, 2001. 
 

