Maturity Level Continuum Paradigm of Internal Audit Function 
Based on pilots performed during the period 2008 - 2022 
 
Ed Curfs 
Future-Proof Auditor 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Sittard, the Netherlands 
ed.curfs@zuyd.nl  
Eric Mantelaers 
Future-Proof Auditor 
Zuyd University of Applied Services 
Sittard, the Netherlands 
eric.mantelaers@zuyd.nl 
Martijn Zoet 
Future-Proof Financial 
Zuyd University of Applied Services 
Sittard, the Netherlands 
martijn.zoet@zuyd.nl  
 
Abstract— 
Continuous 
(control) 
monitoring, 
continuous 
auditing, continuous assurance, continuous reporting and the 
Continuum Paradigm are topics in which research has been 
performed for more than 30 years. The possibilities and 
challenges of these elements have been researched frequently. 
However, there are limited studies focused on the holistic view.  
Several pilots, financial as well as non-financial data, in 
relationship with the Audit Maturity Model have been 
performed. Based on the existing studies, we defined the 
following research question: What is the actual status 
regarding the Continuum Paradigm? Based on a review of 
pilots and plotting the results of the pilots on the Audit 
Maturity Model by a focus group, further insight is provided 
regarding the actual status. In this paper, we re-address and - 
present our earlier work, yet we extended the previous 
research with additional research by adding one pilot and 
extended the participants to plot the pilots with 13 members of 
the following three professions (1) internal audit, (2) external 
audit and (3) business. In addition, we provide a more detailed 
description of the related literature, findings, and results. The 
overall conclusion is that the average maturity level for 
Continuous Monitoring and Continuous Assurance reaches 
nearly stage 3: ‘Maturing and no research has been performed 
based on a holistic and fully integrated continuous process’. 
Keywords – Audit Maturity Model; Continuous (Control) 
Monitoring; Continuous Auditing; Continuous Assurance; 
Continuous Reporting; Continuum Paradigm; Financial and 
Non-financial Data; Sustainability Reporting. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Scientific papers in the context of the Continuum 
Paradigm in nature have often been descriptive in recent 
years. Common concepts within this research area are 
Continuous Auditing (CA), Continuous Assurance (CAss), 
Continuous 
Monitoring 
(CM), 
Continuous 
Control 
Monitoring (CCM) and Continuous Reporting (CRe). This 
whole is now referred to as the Continuum Paradigm [1] [2]. 
The definition of the Continuum Paradigm is a holistic and 
pragmatical CA maturity model, which facilitates the 
assessment of CA capabilities [1] [2]. 
Only a few studies have been conducted in practice 
within Continuum Paradigm, combined with results of pilots. 
What is the actual status regarding the Continuum Paradigm? 
Based on earlier research, the aim is to provide insight in the 
actual status. 
Maturity models [1] [2] [3] can be helpful to provide 
insight in the actual status. Maturity models enable 
organizations to assess their current situation and provide 
handholds for improving and future research. An example of 
the maturity model is the Audit Maturity Model (AMM) 
proposed by, Vasarhelyi, Alles, Kuenkaikaew and Littley 
[3]. For the purpose of our research, we assessed and plotted 
the outcomes of a number of selected pilots on a maturity 
model. Two pilots of 2008 have been selected, research of 
2015 has been used as reference and one description of an 
Internal Audit Function of 2022 has been prepared and added 
to perform research to identify trends within the Continuum 
Paradigm. 
The current study extends previous research by adding 
the results from three pilots instead two.  The background of 
the participants has been extended with experts in the area 
of internal audit, external audit and business. The number of 
participants has been extended from three to fifteen.  
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. 
Section two summarizes the results of the literature review. 
The research method is described in section three. In section 
four, the data collection is described. The results are 
described in section five. Section six describes areas for 
future research.  Finally, the paper concludes in section 
seven with the conclusion. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
The need for ongoing, timely assurance of data and 
information utilizing CA, CAss, CM, CCM and CRe is 
becoming more apparent.  
72
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In the last decades, Vasarhelyi, Kuenkaikaew, Alles and 
Willems [3] performed research in the area of CA, CAss, 
CM, CCM and CRe. However, this research was mainly 
related to financial data. Nowadays management needs 
additional data to provide assurance of non-financial data, 
driven by regulation, e.g., regarding climate change and the 
appetite of stakeholders to be timely informed. 
Due to these developments the interests for CA, CAss, 
CM, CCM and CRe grow. When assessing the reliability of 
data produced by the system, the auditor will review 
confidentiality, integrity, and availability and how the data is 
ensured by the system of internal controls. IT and the AMM 
can be used to allocate the current status of CA, CAss, CM, 
CCM and CRe. The allocation provides insight in the actual 
level of auditing. This is relevant information to guide 
research and further developments of these elements. 
There are several ideas of what continuous concepts and 
systems are, and how they work. Each of the concepts has 
their own definition. CM is “the process and technology used 
to detect compliance and risk issues associated with an 
organization's financial and operational environment” [5]. 
The financial and operational environment consists of 
people, processes, and systems, working together to support 
efficient and effective operations. Controls are put in place to 
address risks within these components. Through CM of the 
operations and controls, weak or poorly designed or 
implemented controls can be corrected or replaced – thus 
enhancing the organization's operational risk profile. 
Investors, governments, the public and other stakeholders 
continue to increase their demands for additional effective 
corporate governance and business transparency. 
The most widely accepted definition for CA is the one 
released in 1999 by CICA/AICPA and reads as follows: “a 
methodology for issuing audit reports simultaneously with, 
or a short period of time after, the occurrence of the relevant 
events” [6]. The definition for CAss released by Vasarhelyi 
is therefore “an aggregate of objectively provided assurance 
services, derived from continuous online management 
information structures—the objective of which is to improve 
the accuracy of corporate information processes. These same 
services may also provide different forms of attestation 
including point-in-time, evergreen, and continuous” [7]. 
CAss and CRe are closely linked. There is no CAss without 
monitoring and intense measuring of the data and data 
sources. 
The AMM classifies the audit evolution into four stages, 
which are traditional audit, emerging, maturing, and 
continuous audit. Per stage seven domains have been 
considered: objective, approach, IT / data access, audit 
automation, audit and management sharing, management of 
audit functions, and analytical methods [8].  
The first domain is related to a “level of internal audit 
organization providing financial reports and monitoring 
internal controls including the task that is undertaken by CA 
systems”. The second domain is related to a “method of audit 
review, frequency and technique including the extent to 
which audit outputs shift from being periodic to being 
undertaken continuously”. The third “domain IT / data 
access” is related to the level and frequency of access to the 
information system, firm’s data systems and general data. 
The fourth domain “audit automation” is related to the 
automated level of auditing, usage of technology to assist the 
audit review cycle. The fifth domain “audit and 
management” sharing is related to an internal audit 
department shares systems and resources with management 
and between the different functions, e.g., finance, legal, tax, 
compliance, sourcing, production, research and development, 
sales, distribution and supply chain. There is access to the 
data and the system is utilized together. The sixth domain 
“management and audit function” is related to the degree of 
cooperation between 
financial audit 
and IT audit, 
collaboration with other compliance departments. The 
seventh domain “analytic methods” is related to the level of 
technical sophistication of analytical procedure that an 
internal auditor performs, techniques, and details. The 
general purpose of maturity model is to provide guidance for 
a sustainable implementation and growth for organizations 
[9]. See Table XI: Audit Maturity Model. To improve the 
readiness of the article, all relevant abbreviations are 
presented in Table I below. 
TABLE I.  OVERVIEW RELEVANT ABBREVIATIONS 
Abbreviation 
Description 
AMM 
Audit Maturity Model 
CA 
Continuous Auditing 
CAss 
Continuous Assurance 
CM 
Continuous Monitoring 
CCM 
Continuous Control Monitoring 
CRe 
Continuous Reporting 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
The goal of this study is to create an overview of the 
actual status of the separate elements of the Continuum 
Paradigm. Maturity models are a well-known instrument to 
support the improvement of functional domains. 
A focus group is a group interview involving a small 
number of participants who have other common experiences. 
The focus group should be based on the group of individuals 
that best represents the phenomenon studied. A focus group 
existing three professions of (1) internal auditors, with a 
broad experience in internal auditing, (2) external auditors, 
with a broad experience in external auditing and  (3) business 
and senior managers with background in auditing and with a 
broad experience on business rules has been established. For 
each profession 5 members have been selected and were 
invited to participate in this research.  
The focus group exists of 15 members. Response has 
been received by 13 members.  Only one member was a 
female. The average years of working experience of the 
focus group was 24 years.  The average years of experience 
in auditing was 16.9, of which 9.17 in external audit and 7.75 
in internal audit. 
Before a focus group is conducted, a number of topics 
need to be addressed: (1) the purpose of the exercise, (2) the 
selection of the participants, (3) the number of participants, 
(4) the protocol of the focus group, (5) the AMM model, (6) 
73
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the protocol for plotting the pilots on the AMM model and 
(7) useful pilots for research.  These have been addressed by 
a core team of three researchers. 
Based on the research performed in the past, there are 
different AMM models available. First, we needed to select 
which AMM model could be used as reference model for 
this study. The AMM as described by Mantelaers & Zoet [2] 
and the AMM as described by Vasarhelyi [3] have been 
selected as starting point. Both AMM’s have been compared. 
The AMM of Vasarhelyi has been used intensively in 
research articles since 1990. This AMM has also been used 
as reference for one other similar study (Metcash’s). For that 
reason, it has been decided to use the AMM of Vasarhelyi.  
The next step was to define what pilots could be used to 
perform this study. Research articles during the period 1990 
until 2021 have been selected by the core research team 
using the following separate and combinations of the key 
words: audit, auditing, assurance, combined, control, 
continuous, data, external, financial, integrated, internal, 
maturity, model, monitoring, non-financial, pilot(s) and 
studies. The results have been reviewed by the core research 
team resulting in seven useful articles. Based on the review 
of the articles there are limited articles published containing 
sufficient detailed data and information to make it possible to 
rank and plot the results in the AMM of Vasarhelyi. The 
content of the selected articles, the level of detail of the data, 
level of detail of description of the data collection have been 
investigated. Based on the defined seven sections of the 
AMM and the data in the articles, we searched for 
relationships and references. In case that there were 
sufficient relationships and reference these articles were 
selected to rank and plot the results in the AMM. 
The core team of three researchers requested a Head of 
Internal Audit of a South African listed firm to describe the 
current status of the Internal Audit Function. Adding the 
current situation of a listed firm provides the option to 
identify trends regarding the Continuum Paradigm over the 
period of nearly 15 years. 
In the article of Hardy and Laslett, the results of the study 
have been plotted in the AMM [9]. The aim of this paper is 
to report on the implementation of CA and CM at Metcash 
Limited, an Australian wholesale distribution and marketing 
company (hereafter, Metcash). The results for this 
organization are so far notable: over 100 fully automated 
tests performed daily, a fully integrated exception 
management system, advancement from data to predictive 
analytics, and the use of visualization technologies for 
enhanced reporting. The results of this study have been used 
as reference to compare the results. 
Every participant followed the same protocol, each 
starting with an introduction and explanation of the purpose 
and procedure of the meeting. After the introduction, ideas 
were generated, shared, discussed, and refined by the 
participants. Furthermore, the participants were invited to 
submit secondary data regarding CA, CAss, CM, CCM and 
CRe in the AMM.  
Based on the pre-work, two pilots and the actual 
description of the Internal Audit Function of a South African 
listed firm have been identified by the researchers useful for 
plotting the results on the AMM. Each participant plotted the 
pilots individually. The results have been collected and the 
average results have been calculated for all three pilots. The 
average results of the three pilots have been compared with 
the reference pilot of Metcash’s. The results have been 
shared and discussed with the focus group and the core team 
of three researchers. During this meeting conclusions have 
been defined and agreed.  
The applicable corporate governance code for South 
African Listed Firms is King IV [12]. In this code the 
Combined assurance model has been introduced. A 
combined assurance model incorporates and optimizes all 
assurance services and functions so that, taken as a whole, 
these enable an effective control environment, support the 
integrity of information used for internal decision-making by 
management, the governing body and its committees, and 
support the integrity of the organization’s external reports. 
This model has no impact on the internal control system of 
an organization, as this should be risk based. For that reason, 
there is no major difference between an internal audit 
function for a South African listed firm versus a non-South 
African listed firm. 
IV. 
DATA COLLECTION 
Per pilot further information will be provided as well as 
the reason why the data has (not) been used for further 
research.  
A. Reference Pilot: Metcash’s 
The goal of the Metcash pilot (the subject) was to 
provide key lessons relating to the adoption and 
implementation of CA and CM because of its advanced 
maturity. A maturity assessment of Metcash’s CA/CM 
activities was conducted [3]. The results are mapped onto the 
four stages and seven dimensions.  
This research has been performed during 2015 and the 
articles provided detailed information how to plot the results 
of a pilot or study [9]. For that reason, the outcome of this 
study has been used as reference to provide insight in the gap 
and deviations with other pilots or studies. 
Reference research three Pilots: SAPSECURE, CAMAP 
and BAGHEERA-S™. 
The goal of this study of the three studies (1) 
SAPSECURE. (2) CAMAP and (2) Bagheera-S™ is to 
collect evidence from actual implementations for the need of 
CA and CM [9]. SAPSECURE was developed to permit 
auditors to review SAP security settings on a regular basis. It 
may also be used to provide answers to questions such as, 
‘‘Who can create a vendor, enter an invoice, and pay it?’’ 
SAPSECURE was implemented and tested in a large public-
sector organization. The design of CAMAP is based on 
surveillance of financial transaction data with the intention of 
profiling and identifying users that violate Segregation of 
Duties. This CA/CM solution provides an automated, 
independent mechanism for monitoring key business 
processes within an organization. Bagheera-S™ has the 
capability to report on three key business processes: (1) 
Payroll / Human Resources, (2) Procurement and (3) 
Finance. The outcome of the three studies SAPSECURE, 
74
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

CAMAP and BAHEERA-S™ could not be used to plot the 
results on the AMM as data was missing with regard to 
approach, IT/Data Access, audit and management sharing 
and management of the audit function.  
B. Pilot: VODAFONE 
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 
(AICAP) published a booklet Audit Analytics and 
Continuous Audit. In this booklet reference is made to the 
Vodafone 
Iceland 
pilot: 
Implementing 
Continuous 
Monitoring [6]. The scope of the project was to implement 
an IT application called, ‘exMon’, for revenue assurance as 
revenue leakage is a known issue in the telecom industry, to 
decrease the time required to process the financial closing 
month-end, fraud detection and to enhance the quality of the 
Customer Relationship Management. The data of the 
Vodafone Iceland project was limited and for that reason this 
could not be used to prepare an AMM rating.  
C. Pilot: Siemens 
One of the main advantages of this pilot was to test how 
CA would move from concept to implementation. Vasarhelyi 
predicted both that ERP-enabled firms are the environments 
most suited to first deploy CA, and that the course of the 
implementation would begin with automation of existing 
audit procedures and then, once the feasibility and value 
added has been demonstrated, move on to re-engineering the 
audit to make it extra CA ready [4].  
At Siemens several hundred procedures regarding Audit 
Action Sheets are created (these sheets are detailed 
descriptions of internal audit working papers), which 
describe in considerable detail what the internal auditor is 
supposed to test for in each SAP system environment. After 
examination of 25-30 Audit Action Sheets, twelve were 
chosen as representative of the challenges on automating and 
reengineering. The Audit Action Sheets are related to 
inadequate protection for SAP access. Testing one of the 
major general IT controls, logical access, which is non-
financial data. In Visual Basic a prototype has been 
developed. The Siemens experience indicates that in 
environments characterized by highly automated business 
processes, CA can be defined as a process that continually 
tests controls based upon criteria prescribed by the internal 
auditor and identifies exceptions for the internal auditor to 
perform additional procedures. During this project the CM of 
internal control settings into the CA concepted model have 
been achieved. This included the treatment of transactional 
level data (non-financial).  
The adoption of CM of automated business process 
control settings at the mode of CCM was a novel 
contribution to the project.  This approach could not be 
utilized systematically in the past because of the extent of 
automation of business process controls was extremely 
limited.  The current high level of business process 
automation and specific Robotic Process Automation (RPA) 
in leading companies such as Siemens makes this feasible 
and attractive [10].  The ongoing broad advances of business 
solutions across many industries will support the process as 
well as the implementation of the Continuum Paradigm.  
D. Pilot: HSP 
The HSP project is based on modeling processes required 
data at a highly disaggregate level, far below the level of 
account balances that are used in the standard audit 
analytical procedures. Due to fact that there was access to the 
full richness of the dataset, it was feasible to create the 
process-based audit models using as benchmarks. Continuity 
Equations (CE) has been defined by Rogers as stable 
probabilistic models of highly disaggregated business 
processes [11]. The CE defined is related to the following 
strictly enforced business rule of the procurement process: no 
deliveries are to be accepted without a cross reference to a 
purchase order. The existence of a deterministic relationship 
between the counts of purchase orders sent and of the 
shipments received can be tested. The HSP experience 
indicates that for CE systems of this level of complexity 
require powerful statistical techniques, which allow for 
dynamic set of CEs with multiple time lags and feedback 
loops. The experience also made clear that CEs to become an 
essential component in the future CA systems, they will have 
to be sufficiently easy to implement. This means that generic 
CE models developed in the laboratory must be generally 
applicable to different firms and processes.  
E. Pilot: South African Listed Firm 
The Head of Internal Audit of a South African Listed 
Firm and three Internal Auditors have been interviewed.  
Based on these interviews a description has been made of the 
actual status of the Internal Audit Function by the core team.   
The description and data collected has been reviewed by 
an independent researcher to verify the correctness and 
completeness of the description.   
New IT developments such as RPA, Data Analytics, 
Process Mining have been taken into account.  This provides 
the option to extend the research and align with the actual 
status of the Internal Audit Function. 
Based on the results provided by the independent 
researcher the core team of three researchers decided to add 
this pilot and requested the participants to plot in addition the 
South African Listed Firm. 
The South Africa Listed Firm was founded in 1936. The 
firm operates globally. There are an Internal Audit Function 
and an Audit and Risk Committee established. 
The combined assurance approach as described in the 
KING IV corporate governance code [12] has been adopted.  
At the Internal Audit department 17 FTEs are employed. 
The main part of the auditors is based in South Africa.  
Several auditors are based in Europe and in the United 
States.  The average years of experience of the internal 
auditor is more than 15 years.  There are several specialists, 
two IT auditors, one sustainability auditor and one forensic 
auditor member of the Internal Audit team.  The other are 
operational auditors with a background in at least two areas, 
e.g., finance and IT, production and technical, technics and 
supply chain, compliance and legal, etc. 
IT Controls have been defined for the areas: Business 
Development, Entity-level Controls, Legal Compliance, Risk 
Management, Expenditure, Financial Reporting, Fixed 
75
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Assets, HR and Payroll, Inventory, Revenue, IT Cobit, IT 
SAP Basis (around 60 in total), IT ICS Security, IT Cloud 
Computing, IT Network, IT Local Applications, IT RPA, 
Treasury, Taxation, Internal Audit Professional Standards, 
Sustainability People and Sustainability Planet.  
In total around 800 internal controls are defined, 
implemented, and reviewed.  These Internal Controls have 
been appointed to process owners of each operational unit. 
With regard to logical access there are several standard 
SAP reports prepared monthly. These reports are reviewed 
by management and Internal Audit reviews these reports.  
Continuous Auditing has not been implemented, however 
several internal controls are automated monitored (via 
exception reporting and RPA).   
In addition, for each audit engagement is defined what 
SAP transactions and the related data can be used for data 
analytics. The Internal Controls to be tested and audited are 
defined for each audit engagement. Based on the audit 
charter of Sappi IAD reasonable assurance is provided and 
stated in the management reports (used for the annual 
financial statements as well as the integrated reporting and 
sustainability reporting – global and regional level).  
RPA started during 2018.  In the main time there are 
around 20 RPAs designed and implemented.  For example, 
RPA for (1) travel age analysis, (2) exception identification 
for payroll, (3) exception identification for procurement, e.g., 
recorded purchase invoices without adequate three-way 
match.  
Based on the experiences RPA is a very powerful tool 
and improves the quality of the processes.  Specific 
exception reports as these are created on a daily base and 
followed up by the staff members.  
For each Internal Audit engagement, a scope letter and 
final report is prepared. In the scope letter the operational 
risks and related internal controls are recorded (and these are 
to be audited). The financial performance of the entity (mill, 
sales office) is audited and standard part of the engagement. 
Every quarter the results are presented to the Audit and Risk 
Committee (e.g., planning of engagements versus budget, 
number of audits finding total and per process, audit 
coverage, costs, education, staffing and special topics).  
F. Plotting Pilots Results on AMM 
The focus group used the data of the Siemens Project, 
HSP project and the South African Listed Firm to complete 
the AMM as the provided data was sufficient to make 
plotting possible. Three of the five selected internal auditors, 
five selected external auditors (two are working for the Big-4 
audit firm and three for non-Big-4 audit firm) and five 
selected senior managers provided their results on time,  
resulting in a response rate of nearly 87 %.  The outcome is 
presented in the Table II, which contains an overview of the 
results per pilot, the reference pilot and average for the seven 
sections of the AMM.  
One internal auditor was not able to plot the domain 7, 
analytical methods, for Siemens, and the domains 5 and 6, 
audit and management sharing and management of the audit 
function of HSP. Based on the guidance the maturity level 1 
has been plotted. 
Three external auditors were not able to plot some 
domains. The domains that could not be plotted per 
participant were audit automation (domain number 4) for 
Siemens, objective, approach, IT / data access and audit 
automation (domain number 1, 2, 3, and 4) for HSP and 
audit and management sharing and analytical methods for 
the South African listed firm. 
The participants of the business were able to plot all 
values of the 3 pilots based on the data provided. 
Based on the analysis of the description of the pilots and 
the results plotted, it can be concluded that there is a 
tendency that the Continuum Paradigm is slightly embedded. 
Some improvements have been achieved since 2008 in the 
domains of objectives, management of the audit function and 
analytical methods. 
Siemens is one of the global Leading Internal Audit 
Departments and is seen within global Internal Audit 
community as an example how to establish a best-in-class 
Internal Audit Function. This could be an explanation for the 
rating deviations between Siemens and HSP. 
Table II shows the overall results of the 13 participants 
per pilot and per domain and the case Metcash of 2015 as 
reference. Table III represents the results of the internal 
auditors. The results of the external auditors are presented in 
Table IV. Table V provides the outcome of the business. 
TABLE II.  RESULTS PILOTS AND AVERAGE AMM 
 
TABLE III.  RESULTS PILOTS INTERNAL AUDITORS 
 
76
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE IV.  RESULTS PILOTS EXTERNAL AUDITORS 
 
TABLE V.  RESULTS PILOTS BUSINESS 
 
 
The core team of researchers was also interested if there 
were major deviations between the three professions internal 
auditors, external auditors and business.  The expectation of 
the core team of researchers was that the results of the 
internal auditors will be higher than the rating of external 
auditors and business. Based on the results and the analysis 
this seems to be indeed the case.  
The results of each category have been collected and the 
average results per category have been calculated.  The 
results are presented in Table VI. About HSP there is a small 
gap between the rating of internal auditors versus the 
external auditors and business. 
Tables VII, VIII and IX present a table of the results of 
the three pilots Siemens, HSP and the South African Listed 
Firm as plotted per profession and per domain.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE VI.  RESULTS 3 PILOTS INTERNAL EXTERNAL BUSINESS 
 
TABLE VII.  RESULTS OF SIEMENS 2008 
 
TABLE VIII.  
RESULTS OF HSP 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
77
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE IX.  RESULTS OF SOUTH AFRICAN LISTED FIRM 2022 
 
Table X provides insight in the elements that have been 
in scope of the pilot. The first column of Table III refers to 
the main scope of the pilot, Assurance, Audit or Monitoring.  
The second column of Table III relates to the part of the 
Continuum Paradigm in scope of the pilot, e.g., CA, CAss, 
CM, CCM and CRe and in addition related elements such as 
process data, general IT controls, Internal Control System 
and Enterprise Risk Management system. The elements 
process data, general IT controls, Internal Control System 
and Enterprise Risk Management system are added as these 
are relevant for the external audit to decide the final level of 
assurance of the audit. The elements process data and general 
IT controls are defined further in detail. In case ‘In scope’ is 
mentioned the related element was part of the pilot. All the 
other elements were not part of the pilot and for that reason 
no research has been performed to the Continuum Paradigm 
based on a holistic view.  
TABLE X.  SCOPING PILOTS ELEMENTS CONTINUOUS 
 
V. 
RESULTS 
The overall outcome of plotting three pilots including the 
reference pilot is that the overall average maturity level is 
nearly stage 3: Monitoring. The level of stage 4: Continuous 
Audit has still not been achieved yet.  
In total 15 participants have been invited to plot the three 
pilots in the AMM.  Participants from internal audit 
profession, external audit profession and business with a 
previous background in auditing have been invited. For each 
profession 5 participants have been selected. The response 
rate of the participants was nearly 87 %.  
The first conclusion is that the rating of the internal 
auditors, external auditors and business are close, however in 
general, the rating of the internal auditors is higher than the 
one of the external auditors and business. A possible 
explanation could be that the own profession is less critical 
and more positive of its own performance and results.  The 
second conclusion is there is tendency that the maturity level 
of the Internal Audit function improved.  This could be 
explained by the fact that the profession of auditing further 
developed, further precise and detailed guidance has been 
implemented and that the IT developments and IT solutions 
available at the market support the Internal Audit function to 
implement CM, CCM and CRe.  
Regarding the Pilot HSP there is a small gap between the 
outcome from the internal auditors versus the outcome 
external auditors and business. The AAM overall results of 
the pilots Siemens and South African Listed Firm are per 
domain closer.  
As the description of the South African Listed Firm is the 
most recent one, it includes new IT technology like RPA, 
data analytics and process mining. This results in a higher 
rating, however, it seems that CA, CAss, CM, CCM and 
CRe are still not fully embedded in the Internal Audit 
function of the South African Listed Firm.  
There are limited pilots and studies with sufficient 
detailed data and information available to plot the results and 
outcome on the AMM. The analysis of the three projects 
makes clear that the research on CM and CA is still scarce 
and in maturation and mainly related to non-financial data.  
All pilots used for this experiment are related mainly to 
CM of non-financial data. CAss and CRe are not part of the 
selected pilots. No pilots or studies based on actual 
implementations have been set up to perform research in the 
fields of CA, CAss, CM, CCM,  and CRe as one holistic and 
fully 
integrated 
process. 
To 
achieve 
a 
successful 
implementation of the continuous concept it requires an 
integrations and alignment of all elements of the chain from 
the start of selection of the data until providing CAss and 
deliver CRe.  
VI. 
FUTURE RESEARCH 
There is an increased need and growing pressure from 
stakeholders for receiving a continuous flow of assured data 
and information, specific non-financial data will become 
relevant. Compliance, new laws and regulations will become 
applicable requesting assurance services of financial and 
non-financial data. Some examples are: (1) the development 
of Corporate Sustainability Reporting, the EU regulation 
applicable as of 2025 regarding Environmental Social and 
Governance (ESG), (2) the monitoring of General Data 
Protection Regulation and current (3) IT developments, e.g., 
RPA, data mining, data analytics. All these new 
78
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

developments included reporting reliability of financial data 
as well as non-financial data. 
CCM can be applied to achieve insight in the existing 
level of assurance, to make the internal audit function  
efficient and possibly, even more effective. Auditors are 
skeptical about reliability of automated controls. There is a 
need for general audit and assurance models which fit 
system-based auditing approaches and a Continuous 
Integrated Assurance Concept for financial as well as non-
financial data.  
Further 
research 
is 
needed 
regarding 
new 
IT 
developments, e.g., blockchain solution, data analytics, RPA, 
etc. to increase the reliability of the data, financial as well as 
non-financial data, and the overall level of trust. The 
outcome could be used to fine-tune the AMM and provide 
guidance for further development of the Internal Audit 
function.  
New guidance and auditing standards should be defined 
and implemented in close cooperation and partnership with 
the developers, producers, users and end users of CA, CAss, 
CM, CCM and CRe to control and manage the levels of 
expectation. Further research is needed to get insight in the 
bottlenecks of why CA, CAss, CM, CCM and CRe has yet 
not as a fully holistic process been implemented. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The overall outcome was that the average maturity level 
for CM and CA reaches nearly stage 3: Maturing. The 
overall average maturity level for CAM and CA increased 
slightly during the period 2008 and 2022. 
No research was performed based on a holistic and fully 
integrated process including the status and maturity level of 
the Line of Assurance at the client. 
Limited research has been performed on CCM, CM, CA, 
CAss and CRe of financial data.  
A certain minimum level of the Line of Assurance at the 
client will be required to implement CCM, CM, CA, CAss 
and CRe. Combined Assurance has not a major impact on 
the way or level of implementation CCM, CM, CA, CAss 
and CRe.  
The holistic and fully integrated process could be very 
helpful for organizations accountable for reporting of 
sustainability, non-financial data across the organizations, 
e.g., usage of CO² in the supply chain process or energy 
process, wastewater management, employees (own) and 
contractors Lost Time Injury Frequency Rate (LTIFR). 
Research could be performed in combination with automated 
audit standards and assurance standards to achieve CAss. 
To meet the upcoming requirements of CCM, CM, CA, 
CAss and CRe a comprehensive holistic and fully integrated 
approach would need to address Line of Assurance testing, 
CCM testing, continuous internal control testing, continuous 
data testing, continuous transaction testing and continuous 
assurance testing.  
The AMM could support academics by research and the 
business by further development of new IT concepts and IT 
solutions. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Curfs, E. Mantelears, and M. Zoet,  "How to Plot Current 
Pilots on the Audit Maturity Model? The Continuum 
Paradigm," in Proc. eKNOW 2022, pp. 12-17. 
[2] E. Mantelaers and M. Zoet, “Association for Information 
Systems AIS Electronic Library (AISeL) Continuous 
Auditing: A Practical Maturity Model,” 2018. [Online]. 
Available: https://aisel.aisnet.org/mcis2018/40 
[3] M. A. Vasarhelyi, M. Alles, S. Kuenkaikaew, and J. Littley, 
“The acceptance and adoption of continuous auditing by 
internal auditors: A micro analysis,” International Journal of 
Accounting Information Systems, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 267–281, 
Sep. 2012, doi: 10.1016/j.accinf.2012.06.011. 
[4] M. A. Vasarhelyi, S. Kuenkaikaew, J. Littley, and K. Katie 
Williams, “Continuous Auditing technology adoption in 
leading internal audit organizations,” 2008. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/229004600 
[5] G. Locke and P. D. Gallagher, “Guide for Applying the Risk 
Management Framework to Federal Information Systems,” 
2010. [Online]. Available: http://csrc.nist.gov/publications. 
[6] AICPA, Audit Analytics and Continuous Audit: Looking 
Toward the Future. 2015. 
[7] M. A. Vasarhelyi, “Chapter 12 Concepts in continuous 
assurance.”  
[8] M. G. Alles, A. Kogan, and M. A. Vasarhelyi, “Putting 
Continuous Auditing Theory into Practice: Lessons from Two 
Pilot 
Implementations,” 
2008. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
www.businessfinancemag.com 
[9] C. A. Hardy and G. Laslett, “Continuous auditing and 
monitoring in practice: Lessons from Metcash’s business 
assurance group,” Journal of Information Systems, vol. 29, 
no. 2, pp. 183–194, Jun. 2015, doi: 10.2308/isys-50969. 
[10] K. Singh, P. J. Best, M. Bojilov, and C. Blunt, “Continuous 
auditing and continuous monitoring in ERP environments: 
Case studies of application implementations,” Journal of 
Information Systems, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 287–310, 2014, doi: 
10.2308/isys-50679. 
[11] C. Rogers, “Continuous monitoring of business controls: A 
pilot implementation of a continuous auditing system at 
Siemens Discussant’s comments,” International Journal of 
Accounting Information Systems, vol. 7, no. 2. Elsevier Inc., 
pp. 167–169, 2006. doi: 10.1016/j.accinf.2006.03.006. 
[12] M.E. King, KING IV, Report on Corporate Governance for 
South Africa 2016, Available: King IV Report on Coproate 
Governance for South Africa (ymaws.com) 
 
 
 
 
79
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE XI.  
AUDIT MATURITY MODEL 
Satge
1
2
3
4
Domain
Traditional audit
Emerging
Maturing
Continuous audit
(1) Objectives
-  Assurance on the 
financial reports 
presented by 
management
- Effective control 
monitoring
- Verification of the 
quality of controls and 
operational results
-  Improvements in the 
quality of data 
- Creation of a critical 
meta-control structure
(2) Approach
- Traditional interim, 
and year-end audits
- Traditional approach 
with some key 
monitoring processes
- Usage of alarms as 
evidence
- Continuous control 
monitoring
-  Audit by exception
(3) IT/Data 
access
- Case by case basis
- Data is captures during 
the audit process
- Repeating key 
extractions on cycles
- Systematic monitoring 
of processes with data 
capture
-  Complete data access
- Audit data warehouse. 
Production, finance, 
benchmarking and error 
history
(4) Audit 
automation
- Manual processes & 
separate IT audit
- Audit management 
software
- Work paper 
preparation software
- Automated monitoring 
module
- Alarm and follow up 
process
- Continuous monitoring 
and immediate 
response
- Most of audit 
automated
(5) Audit and 
management 
sharing
- Independent and 
adversarial
- Independent with 
some core monitoring 
shared
- Shared systems and 
resources with natural 
process synergies
- Purposeful parallel 
systems and common 
infrastructures
(6) Management 
of the audit 
function
- Financial organization 
supervises audit and 
Matrix to Board of 
Directors
- Some degree of 
coordination between 
the areas of risk, 
auditing and compliance 
- IT audit works 
independently
-  Internal Audit and IT 
audit coordinate risk 
management and share 
automatic audit 
processes
- Auditing links financial 
data to operational 
processes
-  Centralized and 
integrated with risk 
management, 
compliance and SOX / 
layer with external 
audit
(7) Analytical 
methods
- Financial ratios
-Financial ratios at 
sector level / account 
level
- KPI level monitoring
- Structural continuity 
equations
-Monitoring at 
transaction level
- Corporate models of 
the main sectors of the 
business
- Early warning  system
 
 
 
 
80
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

