Retrieving Information from Hybrid Spaces Using
Handhelds
Spyros Veronikis1, Dimitris Gavrilis2,3, Kyriaki Zoutsou1,4, and Christos Papatheodorou1,2
1Department of Archives and Library Sciences, Ionian University
72, I. Theotoki, GR-49100
Corfu, Greece
2Digital Curation Unit, Athena Research Centre
6, Artemidos & Epidavrou, GR-15125
Athens, Greece
3Library and Information Service, Panteion University
136, Syggrou Av., GR-17671
Athens, Greece
4Library and Information Service, University of Patras
University Campus, Rio, GR-26504
Patras, Greece
Abstract—Hybrid spaces consist of information resources of
both physical and electronic form. With the advent of electronic
publishing and WWW hybrid libraries became popular and
widely acknowledged for their high informative quality and any-
time availability. On the other hand, modern computing handheld
devices and wireless communication networks can support their
users in accessing and using these information volumes wherever
a need arises. Therefore, the user can query an information
system about the electronic resources and simultaneously explore
the nearby physical resources, in a way that enhances awareness
of available information collections and relations among them,
and also create a new experience while seeking in a hybrid space.
In this paper we present the design methodology of creating such
a service in an academic library, as well as the evaluation model,
the procedure and the results from assessing satisfaction for the
use of that service. Our ﬁndings imply that users believe that
the uniﬁed search for physical and electronic resources is an
important feature when seeking information in big physical and
electronic collections.
Index Terms— evaluation; library service; mobile and ubiqui-
tous computing; personal digital assistant (PDA)
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper extends our previous work on creating and eval-
uating new services for hybrid libraries, which are supported
by mobile computing devices, presented in UBICOMM 2008
conference [1]. During the last two decades technological
advancements in the ﬁelds of computer technology, commu-
nication networks and electronic authoring and publishing
resulted in a tremendous growth of data and information
available to the public. The Internet and the World Wide Web
successfully accommodated the majority of available computer
networks, thus enabling data exchange and information sharing
in a much faster way. During the 1990s, it was estimated that
the Internet grew by 100% per year, with a brief period of
explosive growth in 1996 and 1997 and nowadays the access
and growth of available data is constantly increasing by orders
of magnitude every year [2]. The information content created,
disseminated and used has changed from static text to live and
static multimedia, including plain and hyperlinked texts, raw
data, audio/video ﬁles, images, and documents with spatio-
temporal attributes. As of March 31, 2009 1.59 billion people
use the Internet according to Internet World Stats [3].
To beneﬁt from the wealth of information available libraries
enrich their print collections with supervised digital sources,
held either locally or in remote information organizations, such
as digital libraries. Digital Libraries are information systems
capable of keeping information content in collections of digital
format and accessible by computers. Some of the best-known
digital libraries are Project Perseus [4], Project Gutenberg [5],
and ibiblio [6].
With the electronic information available evolving from
structured (e.g., database tables), to semi-structured (e.g.,
metadata for texts and multimedia ﬁles), and unstructured
(WWW pages), organization of the content had been in-
effective and therefore new powerful information retrieval
techniques should be implemented. Since the goal is not to
just produce more data but actually to use them towards
some purpose, information retrieval techniques needed to be
adapted to the content evolution in order to provide valuable
information to the users.
Unlike book collections, which are well structured and
organized and a certain book can be easily located using
author and title indexes, electronic semi-structured data follow
organization principles and rules that are not very strict. As a
result, indexes and logic-based query languages do not have
adequate power to retrieve precisely information from the new
collections. In addition, a great portion of the content provided
from electronic collections is stored in distributed repositories,
with different organization and metadata schemes. Due to the
nature and organization of the new collections made available,
new approaches based on different principles evolved, such as
interoperability protocols and data integration methods.
84
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

Besides the wealth of information available, people are also
interested in insights, i.e., in relationships among different
data items to understand the true nature of things. Databases
and search engines are not capable of pointing out these
relations and therefore these technologies were supplemented
using visualization and similar approaches, often called On-
Line Analytical Processing (OLAP) tools [7]. These tools are
well suited to gain insight from a structured source. However,
they cannot provide further exploration leading to insights.
Dr. Ramesh Jain [8] proposes the utilization of new systems,
suitable to explore unstructured data and capable of providing
to the user some insight to the information delivered. He
calls them experiential environments. These environments can
provide insight, by immersing the user to the data, allowing
him to explore, experience and interact with it. In other words,
they are used to bring the user into the information space
available and assign him an active role in the information
retrieval process, where relevancy of retrieved items is con-
stantly evaluated and compared to nearby, related sources until
the user gathers a list of data items to satisfy his information
needs.
Access requirements also evolved in accordance to content
and retrieval techniques evolution. It started with physical
collections and local access, where the user needed to visit
an information organization like a library to gain access
to data items during ofﬁce hours, and evolved with digital
libraries and the World Wide Web to anytime access to remote
systems, where the user can beneﬁt from round-the-clock
access services to digital and digitized information content.
During the last years, we see one more evolution step; any-
where access to information content, i.e., the user is equipped
with a mobile terminal which wirelessly communicates with
computer networks and the Internet to access information
content on demand, whether in an ofﬁce, a teaching class,
a park, or while traveling. Users are not concerned about the
location of the data source as long as its quality and credibility
is assured. They are interested in the result of data assimilation.
Laptops, Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs), smartphones and
Ultra Mobile Personal Computers (UMPCs) are some typical
examples of popular mobile computing terminals to gain
access to electronic information services. Using these devices,
users can access traditional searching tools like library catalogs
(On line Public Access Catalogs, OPACs) and indexes, as well
as powerful search engines like Google and more sophisticated
information retrieval tools, such as recommendation wizards,
often used in large scale electronic stores.
In large public and academic libraries, such as the Library
of Congress, the New York Public Library, and the Harvard
Libraries, the two collections (physical and digital) are kept
separately and as a result users can seek for information
either by searching in the electronic catalogs from a PC or by
walking to and browsing through the stacks. To avoid moving
between the two spaces and overcome the discontinuity of
searching in two different areas these spaces need to be
brought close. The recent advancements in handheld com-
puting devices like PDAs enable them with high resolution,
colorful graphic displays, and wireless communication fea-
tures. For instance, the device can wirelessly connect to a local
computer network and the library’s electronic services, and
due to its inherent mobility its user can walk into the physical
information space with an open window to the digital space,
right on his palm. This allows for a uniform seeking procedure
that integrates physical and electronic information collections
into one, namely a hybrid information space that resembles
the vision of Dr. R. Jain about experiential environments,
where exploration and not querying is the predominant seeking
interaction mode.
In this work we present the design procedure of creating
a new library service that supports library patrons in seeking
information within hybrid spaces using handheld devices, such
as PDAs and smartphones. We also describe the evaluation
phase of the design cycle, which aims at assessing the user
satisfaction for the new service and present the derived re-
sults. Section II discusses related work in mobile computing
for information services. The design procedure and service
functionalities supported are presented in Section III. The
evaluation method is described in Section IV and the results
are presented in Section V. Section VI concludes this article
with a discussion on the ﬁndings, limitations, and a brief
description of future work.
II. RELATED WORK
The potential raised by mobile devices in providing any-
where/anytime access to reference material and storing infor-
mation locally, was quickly acknowledged by ﬁeld practition-
ers, especially in healthcare environments [9]. In the beginning
of the current decade several Health Sciences libraries, such
as Libraries at Virginia Commonwealth Universities (VCU),
were among the ﬁrst to explore the PDA supporting services
for medical doctors and paramedic personnel [10] [11] [12].
These mostly involved PDAs which were used for accessing
reference content stored locally, such as the ePocrates clinical
drug database and medical records, dictionaries and textbooks
as well as writing and beaming prescribing aids.
Soon after these paradigms, devices where equipped with
increased memory capacity, more efﬁcient batteries, and higher
resolution screens, making them all-around, valuable assistants
for information advising. As a result there was a need for faster
data exchange protocols, either wireline (Universal Serial Bus,
USB) or wireless (Bluetooth and WiFi). Wireless communi-
cation features were a key factor in the usage and adoption
of these portable-computing devices from a wide audience,
since their users could also access and retrieve content not
only locally stored on their device but also located in remote
information management systems, such as digital libraries.
Buchanan, Jones, and Marsden [13] present an evaluation
study on the usage of PDAs to access a remote Greenstone-
based Digital Library. Their study focus mainly on the presen-
tation issues occurring when searching and delivering content
in small screen devices. However, no focus has been given to
the usage of the PDAs in conventional libraries.
85
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

SmartLibrary [14] was a PDA-driven project started at
Oulu University in Finland, where handheld devices were
used to enable map-based guidance for book ﬁnding. A
small search interface was used to submit a query to the
library’s OPAC and get a list of books that matched the
searching criteria. Upon selection of a record from the list,
the user could see its metadata and a small image of the
library’s ﬂoorplan, indicating the position of the book. Jones
et al. [15] at Cornell University studied several application
scenarios of wireless mobile devices in a library setting; these
included query submitting to the OPAC from anyplace within
the library, collaborative searching by leaving notes, sending
emails, and communicating in real-time with group members
while browsing the stacks in the library. In addition, the device
could be used to capture some data from the books (e.g., by
scanning or photographing part of it) and then moving the data
to a laptop or desktop computer. However, neither in Oulu nor
at Cornell universities access was provided to an information
management system with structured and semi-structured data
of electronic form, such as a digital library.
A closer approach to the usage of mobile computing devices
to enrich information from the physical space with unstruc-
tured information (social tags and annotations) is the MoTag
system [16], which uses PDAs to access G-Portal. G-Portal is a
digital library of geospatial and geo-referenced resources that
holds also social tags concerning the accessibility of public
buildings and other similar structures. During their visit in
a certain place, PDA users can search the G-Portal for any
tags left by previous visitors, submit a photo of a location,
create new tags, and also add comments and time-stamps.
Similar examples come from the tourist industry and the
museums. Many researchers have studied the use of PDAs in
the context of city and museum guides [17] [18] for navigation
and brief personalized information presentation [19] [20]. In
these systems handhelds are used to display a ﬂoor plan of
the current area. The map indicates nearby objects or exhibits
which are available for the user to interact with in order to
retrieve short descriptions about the objects and navigate in
the area.
Most of the current research efforts focus on the develop-
ment of applications that either facilitate mobile searching in
the digital space or use the handhelds to provide navigation
instructions in the physical space. Even though many libraries
keep a wealth of recorded knowledge in both physical and
digital form, to the authors’ knowledge no studies have been
made to assess the impact of a new mobile service that
supports library patrons in seeking information in hybrid
collections.
III. DEVELOPING THE PROTOTYPE
This paper presents the design, implementation and evalua-
tion of a service that uses handheld computing devices capable
of accessing the Web to support students in searching and
browsing large information environments, such as an academic
library that holds data records in both physical and electronic
Fig. 1: Flowgram of the methodology adopted
form. In this section we describe the ﬁrst stages of the design
and implementation procedure, shown in Figure 1.
A. The Methodology Outline
We started by conducting a focus group with 9 experts in
the ﬁelds of computer science and librarianship to gain some
insight of the typical library users, their needs, and seeking
strategies. With this information at hand, the next step was to
deﬁne the functionalities to be supported by the new service
and create the necessary tools for these functionalities. Once
the service functionalities were determined, we could create
some typical usage scenarios to be used in our evaluation
study.
The insight and data obtained from the focus group was
used to inform the prototype design procedure, by providing
guidelines on the interface design, set the requirements, and
describe the service goals. We also had to extend the current
infrastructure at the Library of Panteion University (Athens,
Greece) to support wireless communication with the mobile
terminals.
The next step was the design of the evaluation phase. We
decided to follow a multi-strategy research, a term borrowed
86
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

from Layder [21], i.e., combine qualitative and quantitative
research. More information on this kind of strategy can be
found in [22]. During this phase we had to determine the
research goals, determine the evaluation criteria and metrics
to be used, construct a research model that visualizes the
relationships among criteria, choose and create appropriate
data collection instruments, such as interview guides and
questionnaires, conduct a user study to collect the necessary
data, analyze it, and ﬁnally report ﬁndings of our research.
These results would be used to start a redesign cycle,
where prototype, scenarios, and evaluation procedure would
be properly modiﬁed to improve the new service and gain
some better insight to the extent that students accept it and
embrace it.
B. Determining the Service Functionalities
The goal of this work was to create a new service that sup-
ports library patrons with handheld computing devices while
seeking in both physical and digital information collections,
in a uniﬁed way, by means of a user-centric approach, i.e.,
keeping the user active during the whole seeking procedure.
Therefore, ﬁrst we had to understand how students use the
library’s resources (catalogs, indexes, classiﬁcation scheme,
etc.) and identify any patterns in their seeking strategies and
information needs. In addition, we had to explore the technical
aspects rising from transferring the user-system interaction in
a mobile context.
We chose to conduct a focus group in order to explore in
depth these issues, both in terms of service functionalities and
technical opportunities and constraints. We were particularly
interested in how participants in the focus group discussion
respond to each other’s views and build up a view out of the
interaction that takes place during the focus group discussion.
Blackburn and Stokes [23] found that discussion in groups
of more than eight participants were difﬁcult to manage.
Therefore, our group consisted of 1 moderator, 2 observers, 5
librarian experts, and 4 experts from computer science. Four
librarian experts were working in large academic libraries and
one in a hospital library, and had a clear understanding of their
library patrons and interactions with the library’s resources.
Two of the computer experts were working in ICT companies
and the other two were working in universities in Athens,
Greece. All participants joined the focus group after prior
invitation. In general, invitations to group members were sent
to people from the two ﬁelds that know each other, in order
to explore collective understanding or shared meanings held
within a work group, such as library employees.
Prior to the discussion, the participants were informed on
the topics and procedure, as well as our intention to record
the discussion in audio/video format. The participants received
a list of scenarios making use of the functionalities for a
proposed mobile service. These scenarios were derived from
the literature and the participants were asked to provide their
viewpoints for similar applications in a library. During the
meeting they were encouraged to express their views on
the proposed service functionalities so that we could study
not only what they say but also how they say it, and how
meaning is collectively constructed. The moderator would
bring attention to speciﬁc points that are of potential interest
to the focus group goals that they are not picked-up, and
refocus the participants’ attention to the topics of interest, in
case the discussion goes off. The video recordings and the
observer notes would later enable us to study and analyze the
discussion.
Compared to individual interviews, focus group discussions
many times appear to be less efﬁcient due to several limi-
tations. The following are some typical examples of these
limitations; the extent to which it is appropriate to control
the interaction between participants in order to have an in-
depth discussion with multiple viewpoints and stay focused
on the speciﬁc topics of interest; group effects such as dealing
with reticent speakers and those who dominate the discussion.
Asch’s experiments [24] revealed that an emerging group view
might mean that a perfectly legitimate perspective held by
a minority of speakers may be suppressed. Therefore the
moderator had to control the discussion and make clear that
other peoples’ viewpoints are deﬁnitely required.
To ensure that at the end of discussion we would have
a clear viewpoint of each speaker on the topics and the
proposed service functionalities discussed, we asked them to
ﬁll a short questionnaire used to express their attitude on a
5 -point Likert scale towards adopting (or not) the proposed
information seeking aids.
To transcribe the focus group discussion we had to analyze
data captured from two video cameras, a microphone, the
observers’ notes, and the questionnaires. We created a table in
which each row represented a discussion topic, each column
represented a speaker, and each cell included the correspond-
ing time-stamped user comments, any observer notes, and the
questionnaire score. These procedures allowed us to easily
summarize the discussion, compare participants’ viewpoints,
and study the procedure of forming a group view.
To select the functionalities to be implemented for the
new service we set an acceptance threshold, proposed by
Nielsen [25], based on the emphasis given during the discus-
sion; for a functionality to be selected it should (a) have an
average score over 4, (b) at least 7 participants (80%) should
have given it the top rates (4 or 5), and (c) no more than 1
participant (10%) should have given it the lowest rate (1).
The average values (AVGs) and the standard deviations
(SDs) of the functionalities that survived the selection criteria
were: (a) the wireless access to the OPAC and the e-resources
of the library (AVG= 4.63, SD= 0.52), (b) the use of a
map indicating a book’s location in the stacks (AVG= 4.25,
SD= 0.70), (c) the ability to communicate with the mobile
device directly with other on-line users or send a short
message/email to be received later (AVG= 4.13, SD= 0.99), (d)
the ability to download/ save/disseminate electronic ﬁles re-
trieved, such as journal articles and lecture notes (AVG= 4.38,
SD= 0.52), and (e) the ability of taking some quick notes either
written or verbal (AVG= 4.0, SD= 0.75).
Service functionalities that did not survive the selection
87
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

criteria were mostly due to two reasons; privacy violation
concerns and reduced utility value. These functionalities were:
on-line user tracking to provide navigation instructions within
a library setting (AVG= 3.5, SD= 1.20); storing user navigation
routes to extract information about subject areas of interest and
other preferences (AVG= 2.63, SD= 1.06); creating a patron
proﬁle to keep personal information (AVG= 3.50, SD= 1.20)
that would be stored in the library’s servers and updated
from the student-system-content interaction in order to create
content for personalized information services (e.g., alerts, noti-
ﬁcations, recommendations, interfaces, etc.); wireless printing
(AVG= 3.75, SD= 0.89) so that the students could immediately
send a note or article for printing from anyplace within the
library setting; route recommendation to collect books of
interest (AVG= 3.00, SD= 1.20), which was shown not to be
of particular interest to the students due to familiarity with
the small size of academic libraries and the small number of
books usually borrowed.
In addition, automatic metadata retrieval of books by de-
tecting a Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) tag placed
in the book (similar to scanning a barcode) was considered
an attractive feature for the service (AVG= 4.13, SD= 0.64),
especially when trying to detect and retrieve certain book or
content within a stack. However, this feature was not imple-
mented during the ﬁrst design cycle due to extra equipment
cost and time constraints.
With the service functionalities and corresponding tools
determined, we could proceed to scenario descriptions, design
requirements and guidelines, and prototype implementation. In
a typical usage scenario a student uses the device to submit
a query to the mobile OPAC. From the results list she sees
the desired book and other related print works. Using the
stylus she taps on the desired book to retrieve its metadata
and sees that there are a few copies available on the shelf
and a map indicating the location of the book in the stacks.
While walking to the stacks to locate the book she activates her
instant messaging (IM) account. Having found the book, she
takes a quick note for the other related books of the author and
sends a short question to the on-line librarian asking to inform
her on due dates for previously borrowed books. Without
needing to head for the computer room, she now searches the
library’s electronic resources for relevant entries. The results
list shows a couple of records that seem relevant. She decides
to download an article and send an email with its metadata,
including a download link, to a colleague.
C. Designing and Implementing the Prototype
The focus group discussion revealed the need to design for
users with diverse experiences, skills and knowledge concern-
ing the information technology and collection usage, and cater
for both novice and experienced users. In addition, we had
to make the user-device interaction simple so that users could
keep interacting with the physical environment and collections
as much as possible, and spend their time effectively towards
fulﬁlling their seeking goals. In other words, we had to keep
their mental effort workload at low levels, so that they could
keep touch with both information domains while seeking,
despite frequent interactions.
Yet, the biggest challenge for the design phase was to
create an interactive information service that would provide
information on the spot, in the desired level, with ﬂexible
search options, via a device with constrained computing and
interaction resources (e.g., processing power, screen size, and
lack of keyboard). Whenever possible, interaction with physi-
cal objects, e.g., via metadata codes as information containers
or pointers to other resources (Barcodes, Quick Response (QR)
codes, RFID tags) should be exploited in order to speed-up
the seeking process. That way, we can avoid unnecessary
steps in searching, and further enhance experiential seeking
and integration of the two information spaces (physical and
digital) [26].
Regarding access to the service, it was decided that it would
be implemented using a client-server architecture to reduce
computing demands on resources to the mobile device, and
that service should be web-based so that it can be accessed by
any computing device capable of web browsing. Furthermore,
we had to install a wireless computing network (WiFi Local
Area Network) to make the service available from any place
within the library setting.
In addition, the architecture should be modular to be easily
upgradeable, i.e., each component in the architecture should
be easily removed in the future and replaced by an improved
version of it with better performance characteristics. The
new service should also be designed for at least comparative
usability to the currently available seeking service, i.e., catalog
searching from a desktop terminal.
To create the new service, we consulted some of the most
representative interface guidelines available; Shneiderman’s
and Plaisant’s “Golden Rules for Interface Design” [27] and
the “Ten Usability Heuristics” by Nielsen [28] apply to
handheld design, since they are independent of speciﬁc tech-
nologies and device form factors. In addition, we considered
basic design principles from “Apple Human Interface Guide-
lines” [29] and “Gnome Human Interface Guidelines” [30].
These guidelines typically include principles such as design
for a variety of people proﬁles, using meaningful metaphors
between application service and real world working cases,
keep the application interfaces consistent, keep the user in-
formed during processing and idle times, keep the interaction
simple and pleasant, put the user in control of the interaction
with the system, cater for simple and intuitive interaction, de-
sign well-deﬁned dialogues, provide simple and unambiguous
navigation, forgive the user when making mistakes, provide
adequate help and examples for complex tasks, and provide
feedback and communication on users’ actions.
In addition, we studied three of the most comprehensive
interface guidelines available for mobile devices; the PalmOS
User Interface Guidelines by PalmSource Inc (now owned
by Access Systems Americas, Inc.) [31]; Windows Mobile
6.0 - Design Guidelines by Microsoft Corp. [32]; and iPhone
Human Interface Guidelines by Apple Corp. [33].
Palm presents some basic design principles and guidelines
88
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

Fig. 2: The search interface for the mobile device
for the design process and concludes with recommendations
and descriptions for getting feedback from the user and
giving output back to him. Microsoft instead of giving some
basic design principles, provides some application speciﬁc
guidelines regarding home screen, web site design for mobile
devices, navigation, screen rotation, soft-keys and menu oper-
ation, usability and interfaces for user-device interaction (e.g.,
screen layout and text input). Apple starts by covering the
fundamental human interface design principles, describes how
to apply them in designs for mobile applications, and moves
on to description of the various views and controls that are
available to the designer, along with guidance on using them
effectively. Some of these guidelines are summarized here;
design with pocket size in mind, i.e., limit data entry, hide
unnecessary menus, do not use toolbars, provide only options
that are usually needed to save screen space; keep interaction
fast and simple by increasing speed and minimizing required
steps to issue a command, and optimize frequent tasks; provide
seamless connection with desktop computers since handhelds
are used to extend desktop capabilities with the mobility
feature rather than replace them; whenever possible choose
“low-absorbing” interaction techniques and reduce short-term
memory load to prevent user from loosing contact with the
two information domains as a result of dealing with interaction
issues; design for short, frequently interrupted tasks since the
users will be moving in the library, thus constantly changing
their working environment; ensure easy and permanent access
to all library resources and areas where the user is expected to
move; cater for effective and usable content delivery; design
Fig. 3: Metadata for a record in the library’s catalog (OPAC)
for familiarity with existing tools, i.e., use desktop-similar
interfaces to beneﬁt from usage familiarity.
To implement the prototype system we ﬁrst had to create
a mobile version of the search interface for the library’s
sources, suitable for small-screen devices. Two snapshots of
the interface are shown in Figure 2 and Figure 3. The service is
available from Panteion Library’s website [34]. That interface
would be used to build a searching query by submitting the
searching term(s), the searching ﬁeld (author or title), and
the searching collection (either library’s book catalog or the
electronic resources). Upon a query submission a results list
is sent back to the handheld and the user can tap on the record
of interest to see its metadata. Each record from the physical
collection is associated with a map indicating the correspond-
ing item’s location. For records in the electronic sources of
the library, the user has the option of sending its metadata to
an email account. These will typically include a downloading
Uniform Resource Locator (URL). However, users are also
allowed to download any available full-text material on the
mobile devices. Furthermore, the instant messaging tool allows
for short dialogs with other on-line users and library staff.
IV. EVALUATION DESIGN
Having developed the prototype, the next phase as shown in
Figure 1 was its evaluation. The prototype described above was
our ﬁrst attempt to implement the new service and therefore a
descriptive evaluation design (also called observational design)
was adapted, i.e., an approach that would collect data of
diverse nature (unstructured data from qualitative research
89
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

and structured from quantitative research). This is sometimes
called a multi-strategy approach as mentioned earlier. The
advantage of this approach is that it produces rich information
content and insight from the data collected, which could not
be reached by choosing either a qualitative or a quantitative
approach alone. Many researchers argue that this triangula-
tion can provide conﬁdence in ﬁndings deriving from the
study [35] [36], whereas not all researchers agree that a multi-
strategy approach is always desirable or feasible [37] [38]. On
the other hand, the amount of combined research in the social
sciences has been increasing since 1980 [22].
Our evaluation objective was to study the usage of a new
service in a library setting containing information in both phys-
ical and electronic format, and study the students’ satisfaction
and intention to use it. Particularly, we were interested in
whether the mobility offered would be a valuable feature to
the users while seeking in diverse information domains, and
identify which factors and service capabilities mostly affected
their interaction with the mobile device.
A. Evaluation Criteria and Model
Several researchers agree that usefulness and usability are
the most signiﬁcant concepts for the user-centered evaluation
of information services [39] [40]. Therefore, in a user-centered
model that evaluates the impact of the new service to its users
we need to examine the users’ Satisfaction (Sat), Usefulness
(U), and Ease of Use (EoU) towards that service and the
effects between them. Usefulness is deﬁned as “the degree
to which a person ﬁnds that using a particular system or
service will enhance his/her job performance”. Ease of Use
is deﬁned as “the degree to which a person ﬁnds that using
a particular system will be free of effort”. We hypothesize
satisfaction to be expressed in terms of usefulness and ease
of use and positively related to both of them, i.e., the bigger
the usefulness of the service, the bigger the user satisfaction.
On the other hand, Usefulness and Ease of Use are complex
constructs and therefore they can be broken down to simpler
indicators that are easier to measure.
To assess the usefulness of the new service in ﬁnding and
collecting the records of interest in hybrid collections, we
use the following indicators (criteria): utilitarian value (UL),
which refers to the value the new service has in supporting
the users to achieve their goals [41]; time (T), which refers to
the time earned from the usage of the service; relevance (R),
which refers to the relations among retrieved records from di-
TABLE I: Evaluation criteria
Construct
Criteria
Ease of Use
a) Learnability, b) Task transition,
c) Information presentation & layout
d) Ease of task execution, e) Clarity, f) Help
g) Remote support
Usefulness
a) Utilitarian value, b) Time saving, c) Relevance,
d) Completeness
Fig. 4: Criteria and path relations of the evaluation model
verse information domains; perceived completeness (C), which
refers to the user’s information needs obtained by the usage
of the new service [42] [43]. Time saving and utilitarian value
were addressed towards speciﬁc actions that were described in
the scenario of Section III-B, such as information searching,
ﬁle download and storage, communication, etc.
On the other side, ease of use is assessed by taking into
account several interface attributes [41] [25], such as learn-
ability (L), easiness of transition between seeking tasks when
following a non-linear (NL) seeking strategy, organization and
presentation (P) of information delivered, easiness of execut-
ing and completing (Ex) the various seeking tasks, clarity (CL)
and understandability of interaction with the service, on-line
help (H) adequacy, and easiness in getting remote support (S)
while seeking.
Table I summarizes the criteria referred in the bibliography
and adopted in the present study whereas Figure 4 shows
the relationships among them along with the corresponding
error (ε) estimators. Relationships in the model described
above can be moderated by various user-related factors; for
example, users of different background, e.g., different level of
computing experience, may perceive differently the ease of use
of the new service. In addition, many usability studies have
shown that user interfaces have a strong impact on Ease of
Use. The current study describes our ﬁrst evaluation approach
in exploring users’ attitudes towards the new service, and
therefore its nature is rather exploratory than conﬁrmative.
For this reason, we do not pose and validate any testing
hypotheses.
B. Experimental Setup
The next phase was to setup an experiment to collect data
from users of the service. To recruit users we planned to
have the evaluation conducted at an academic library (Panteion
University, Greece), where students and academic stuff would
90
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

be typical users of the library. Since this was the ﬁrst eval-
uation of the service we were mostly interested in collecting
data and insight from a wide variety of users rather than a
particular group (e.g., freshmen). Therefore all typical library
patrons were eligible for participation in our data collection
experiment. To increase the number of participants and reduce
the experiment costs in terms of time and human resources, we
asked for the contribution of teachers in 3 academic classes at
Ionian and Panteion universities. Graduate and post-graduate
students were motivated by their teachers to participate in
the evaluation. They were encouraged to use the new service
in order to collect bibliography records for their semester
projects, resulting in 77 participants.
Prior to the experiment, participants were invited into a 30
minute brieﬁng session where they were informed about the
goal and the procedure of the experiment and also had a hands-
on experience with the PDAs. According to the procedure,
each student would borrow the PDA from the library’s help-
desk and would also be given a usage scenario similar to that
described in Section III-B. Students were allowed to change
the order of tasks described in the scenario, but they had to
complete all the tasks. While participants were interacting with
the mobile device and the service interfaces, their sessions
were recorded (screen-captured) and transmitted in real-time
to a remote PC. Two observers were also present to watch
the interaction and guide the users through the procedure. The
remote recording technique produced valuable content for the
qualitative analysis of the next phase, in a way that is less
intrusive to the experiment subjects. Upon completion of the
tasks students either participated in an in-person interview or
were asked to ﬁll a questionnaire, describing some of their pro-
ﬁle characteristics such as age, academic level and computing
experience, as well as their experience from the interaction
with the new service. Ten students were randomly chosen to
be interviewed, resulting in 10 in-person interviews and 67
questionnaires (http://dlib.ionio.gr/hls/texts/evals/ev1/qsts).
V. ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
In the following paragraphs we describe the analysis pro-
cedure and ﬁndings occurring from both quantitative and
qualitative data collected from the evaluation phase.
A. Collecting and Analyzing Qualitative Data
The interview method was chosen in order to accumulate
the users’ comments aiming at a straight and representative
qualitative evaluation of the validity of our research assump-
tions. The 10 interviews conducted where strictly personal in
order to avoid any effect between the participants.
Semi-structured interviews were conducted based on both
open-ended and closed questions to compensate for the draw-
backs of each form. Two were the reasons for following the
speciﬁc type of interview; the researchers intended to assure
the aggregation of a minimum set of data and, on the other
hand, to give the opportunity to the users to express their
opinion freely without the interviewer losing control of the
discussion.
Fig. 5: Activity Lens: hierarchical view of multilevel analysis
Each interview lasted nearly 20 minutes and was recorded
on video with the acceptance of the interviewees. Their
opinions on usefulness, usability, and satisfaction for the new
service were assessed using a 5 -point Likert scale (ranging
from strongly disagree to strongly agree) against certain state-
ments that the interviewer posed.
A remarkable amount of data was collected by the end
of the interviews requiring an in depth analysis. For that
purpose we used ActivityLens (AL) software [44], which is
a tool especially designed to support ethnographic research
studies and facilitates the analysis of data from multiple
sources. These data can be audio/video recordings, log ﬁles,
images, and text ﬁles (even hand-taken observation notes). AL
permits integration and synchronization of the heterogeneous
collected data. The AL environment was developed by the
Human−Computer Interaction Research Group (HCI Group),
of the Electrical & Computer Engineering Department, at Uni-
versity of Patras. AL was chosen among equivalent software,
e.g., NVivo, Observer, and Transana because of its strength
as a tool for qualitative analysis, its ease of use, the structural
composition of data, and the full support that the creative team
committed to offer.
ActivityLens supports hierarchical task analysis and there-
fore the recorded interaction of each user was classiﬁed in
three levels of abstraction. We inserted coarse features of the
collected data on the ﬁrst level and extracted more qualitative
results using the ﬁlters that the software offers on higher
levels. At the lowest level (Operations or Events Level) the
events for a task completion were annotated, according to a
set of typologies; for instance an event could be annotated as
“successful search to OPAC”, “unsuccessful copy of metadata
to the notepad”, etc. In the middle level (Action or Tasks
Level) the events of a user were grouped into tasks, according
to the usage scenario, e.g., searching, typing, chatting, email-
ing, etc., with new typologies used to annotate the successful
completeness (or not) of a task. Finally, at the third level
(Activity or Goals Level) tasks were outlined as goals (seeking,
communicating, etc.), while new typologies denote if the user
achieved a goal. The hierarchical view of multilevel analysis
is shown in Figure 5.
Regarding the users’ proﬁle it was found that more than
half of the interviewees were visiting the library frequently
91
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

and were familiar with its physical space. In addition, 9 of
them also use its electronic resources and 6 use web search
engines in a daily basis. However, only 3 had previously used
a mobile computing device, such as a PDA for an extended
period of time.
The interviews revealed that users were very enthusiastic
for the option of quickly searching in both information spaces
from anyplace within the library, right when the need arises.
This ﬁnding indicates the usefulness of the new service, which
is also veriﬁed by the interviewees’ Likert rates.
With most usability scores for the service interfaces above
4 (in scales ranging from 1 to 5), we conclude that the users
found it easy to interact with the device. This was due to
design resemblance of the mobile interfaces to their desktop
counterparts. The most useful functionality was the capability
of emailing the retrieved information (AVG= 4.44, SD= 0.73),
followed by information storage in mobile disks, such as a
memory card (AVG= 4.33, SD= 0.71). One of our participants
emphasised on the usefulness of these functionalities by saying
“it is really important for me to store and send via mail
anything that interests me the exact time that I ﬁnd it, as simple
as the pressing of a button”.
Similarly the average usefulness of searching in the
OPAC using the device was 4.33 (SD= 0.71), while it was
found very convenient and easy to use it anytime/anywhere
(AVG= 4.67, SD= 0.50), in contrast to the library’s terminals.
The usefulness of searching e-resources with a handheld was
mostly affected by the relevance of the retrieved information
(AVG= 4.11, SD= 1.05). This functionality also received a
high usability score (AVG= 4.33, SD= 1.12). It is worth not-
ing that those participants who quickly retrieved information
records highly relevant to their interests, tended to perceive
the functionality of searching in the electronic resources as
the most useful. In addition, participants asked for the option
of simultaneously choosing both collections (OPAC and e-
resources) as searching targets.
Concerning the ability of taking quick notes, only three of
the interviewees found it useful (AVG= 3.56, SD= 1.42) and
reported that it was easy to copy/paste metadata (AVG= 4.22,
SD= 0.97). The majority of our sample is used in keeping
hand-written notes. In fact one of them mentioned: “I always
carry my own notebook and I am used in working that way. I
can hardly change this habit even though I overcame all the
usability problems that I came accross”. On the other hand,
30% of our sample underlined the usefulness of taking notes
on a handheld device because they considered it as a time
saving procedure due to copy and paste commands available.
The video recordings revealed difﬁculties in text input using
the virtual keyboard, which was a totally new experience for
seven of the participants and gathered 45% of the complaints
regarding the user-device interaction. The small screen size
and stylus followed at 14% each, and the remaining 23%
regarded navigation instructions, presentation style, device
dimensions, and interfaces. However participants stated that
after some training period these difﬁculties would not be strong
enough to obscure the usefulness of the new service.
Some tasks gathered negative comments regarding their util-
itarian value. At the bottom of the rank participants placed the
use of the navigation map into the physical area (AVG= 2.33,
SD= 1.66). Moreover the usability of this functionality was
characterized indifferent (AVG= 3.0, SD= 1.22) and that was
partly due to its reduced usefulness. Participants considered
the service useful for new visitors, like freshmen, and for
larger buildings. Surprisingly, one of the interviewees justiﬁed
the lack of usefulness of the navigation map by saying “It is
boring to look for a book in the library. I prefer to ask directly
the librarian instead of wandering through the stacks”.
Furthermore, participants would prefer more vivid identiﬁ-
cation patterns, such as the existence of an indicator of the
user’s position in real-time. For similar reasons participants
rated low the usefulness of the synchronous communication
with the reference librarian (AVG= 3.22, SD= 1.39). Concern-
ing the information completeness, they would like to have an
indication of the number of hits in the search results as well
as a relevance indicator next to each record.
Overall, the majority of the participants (nine out of ten)
declared satisﬁed with the new service and they described it
as innovative, interesting, and interactive. Anywhere/anytime
access to the library’s content and services is time saving and
enables the users to easily swap the seeking target collection in
an iterative fashion until they are satisﬁed with the resulting
list. The meaning and the usefulness of the new service is
reﬂected on the statement of one participant: “The handheld
device allowed me to implement a combined search to the
hybrid information space, namely I can search and retrieve
both books and electronic sources at the same time achieving
more complete results”.
Regarding the interaction with the mobile devices, users do
not ﬁnd the device’s constraining resources (screen-size, lack
of keyboard, low memory, etc.) to be a good reason to reject
the new service. All of the interviewees intended to reuse the
new service and recommend it to a friend or colleague.
B. Quantitative Analysis
All data for the quantitative analysis came from question-
naires that the participants used, in order to extract information
about their proﬁle and assess the evaluation criteria to be used.
We used open-ended and multiple choice questions to collect
these data. Questions regarding their user proﬁle were coded
using nominal variables (such as gender). Table II shows the
frequency of their responses for their proﬁle. We see that the
majority of the participants in our study were female, active
information searchers through the Internet channels and e-
resources, and holding a bachelor degree.
Likert scales were chosen to express the extent to which
participants agree (or disagree) to several statements, related
to the evaluation criteria, such as “It is easy for me to learn
how to use the mobile device”. Satisfaction (Sat) and perceived
completeness (C) where assessed in 10-point Likert scales
so that subjects could easier assess their attitudes towards
these criteria. The rest of the criteria were assessed on 7-point
scales. To proceed to the analysis stage, participants’ responses
92
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

TABLE II: Frequency table showing the users’ proﬁle
Category
n
Percentage (%)
Male
18
26.8
Female
48
71.6
E-source usage
49
73.1
BSc level
53
79.1
MSc level
9
13.4
PhD level
5
7.5
were assigned to ordinal variables, i.e., besides recording an
attitude/belief towards a statement we also recorded the order
in which these attitudes occur. Like ordinal variables, interval
(or scale) variables are used when the intervals between data
points are equal for the whole measurement scale, so that
there is a meaningful interpretation of the differences between
data points. However, J¨oreskog and S¨orbom [45] suggest that
an interval variable should be used only when data can be
measured on at least a 15-point scale.
The statistical analysis is sensitive to missing data and
there are several approaches available in statistical packages to
handle such a situation [46]. For our analysis, missing values
in the questionnaires were excluded pairwise, which means
that if a person had a missing value for a particular variable,
then his/her data were excluded from calculations involving
only this variable.
For the current study we chose to use multiple regression
analysis as a method of describing the relations and effects
among the recorded variables, rather than predicting an out-
come from recorded indicators. Having our model speciﬁed
in Section IV-A the next step was to check whether the
model can be identiﬁed. Model identiﬁcation refers to deciding
whether a set of unique parameter estimates can be computed
for the regression equations. In other words, whether the
number of parameters to be estimated equals the number of
available equations. This occurs when the number of distinct
values in the variance-covariance matrix (Table IV) of the
indicators recorded, equals or exceeds the parameters to be
estimated. Multiple regression models are always considered
just-identiﬁed [47], i.e., all of the model parameters (beta
weights or path coefﬁcients) can be uniquely determined
because there is enough information available in the variance-
covariance matrix.
With our evaluation model identiﬁed, we can proceed
to model estimation, that is compute the sample regression
weights for the independent predictor variables. For these
calculations we used the SPSS statistical package [48]. Step-
wise regression analysis was performed twice, with the criteria
presented in Table I used as independent variables, and Ease
of Use and Usefulness as predicted outcomes. This analysis
reveals which set of predictors is most important in explaining
the variance in the predicted outcome, thus paying particular
attention to them during development stages.
In the construct of Usefulness two independent variables
were found to be the dominant predictors; time earned
TABLE III: Dominant predictors of user satisfaction
B
SE B
β
Constant
0.35
10.95
Time earned
5.08
1.28
.44*
Learnability
5.65
2.10
.31**
Completeness
0.20
0.80
.27***
Note: R2= .57, *p≤.001, **p≤.01, ***p≤.05
(t(57)= 5.190, p≤ .001) and utilitarian value of accessing the
seeking service from anyplace within the library (t(57)= 2.267,
p≤ .05). These criteria were found to account for 53% of
variance in usefulness (R2 = .532, F = 32.346, p≤ .05) and
highlighted the fact that the participants perceive usefulness as
the efﬁcient access to resources from anywhere, in a ubiquitous
fashion. As in the qualitative study, the navigation map aid and
the assistance for locating books had no signiﬁcant effect in
usefulness and satisfaction, probably due to familiarity with
the library environment and collections.
In the construct of Ease of Use ﬁve variables were found
to account for 59% of its variance (R2= .596, F = 12.385,
p≤ .001): information presentation (t(42)= 2.826, p=≤ .01),
clarity (t(42)= 2.763, p≤ .01), easiness to execute com-
munication tasks (t(42)= 3.216, p≤ .01), easiness to exe-
cute moving/storage tasks (t(42)= -2.518, p≤ .05), and help
(t(42)= 2.756, p= .01). The results of this analysis demonstrate
the importance of interface characteristics and help function-
alities in the perceived ease of use, as well as the easiness of
executing crucial tasks that handhelds support.
Stepwise regression was performed to deﬁne which criteria
from both categories are signiﬁcant predictors of Satisfac-
tion. In general the Ease of Use criteria account for 50.4%
(R2= .504, F =
15.221, p= .01), while the Usefulness
criteria account for 48% (R2= .483, F =
26.679, p= .01)
in Satisfaction variance.
As shown in Table III three criteria were found to account
for 57% in Satisfaction variance (R2= .572, F =
19, 178,
p= .01). These are time earned, learnability, and completeness
of the retrieved content. Figure 6 shows how this regression
model of Satisfaction matches the recorded values for Satis-
faction from the use of the new service. The three indicators
reveal why participants are willing to use mobile computing
devices in the library; it helps them in retrieving information
content from multiple and diverse sources in a way that is
quick and easy to learn.
The signiﬁcance of the test statistics in our latest regression
model does not mean by itself that there is a strong effect
(relationship) between predictor variables and the recorded
Satisfaction (recall that standardized β values indicate the
relative importance of indicators in predicting an outcome).
The importance of the chosen predictors is obtained by the
effect size (ES), which is an objective and standardized
measure of the magnitude of the recorded effect. The effect
size is computed as ES= R2 − [p/(N − 1)], where R2= .572,
p= 3 predictor variables and N= 64 observations (we used 64
93
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

Fig. 6: Predicted satisfaction versus recorded satisfaction
measurements instead of 67 due to missing values). Therefore,
ES = .572 − [3/(64 − 1)] = .524, which indicates a large
effect size according to Cohen [49]. Miles and Shevlin [50]
produced several graphs that illustrate the sample size needed
to achieve different levels of predictive power, for different
effect sizes, as the number of indicators (predictors) increases.
From one of these diagrams we can see that for a large effect
to be recorded and 3 predictors to be used, the required sample
size should be approximately 40 participants. Therefore, with a
sample of 64 subjects we can have conﬁdence on the reliability
of our regression model.
VI. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
This paper presents the design and evaluation procedure of a
new library service that supports its users with handheld com-
puting devices while seeking in hybrid information spaces. We
described the stages of identifying the users’ needs and service
functionalities to implement, as well as the evaluation design,
criteria, model, and methodology to assess their satisfaction
for the new service.
We used a triangulation evaluation approach to assess the
impact of the new service in the users’ natural environment,
i.e., a library setting. This approach included data from semi-
structured interviews with the users, observation notes, video
recordings from their interaction, and questionnaires adminis-
tered to the users. This multi-strategy approach allowed us to
gain better insights about the effect of the new service on the
users and their needs. Besides studying how the service was
used we were able to see and understand why was it used that
way, i.e., study and analyze the non-linear seeking behavior
of our experiment participants. In addition, qualitative ﬁndings
helped us in better explaining relations among measurements
and effects captured by the quantitative recordings. For in-
stance besides describing the relation among measurement
variables we could also explain and verify causality among
them, which was used in our evaluation model speciﬁcation.
In general, the qualitative and quantitative ﬁndings provide
valuable information, such as the fact that users envisage the
proliferation of digital libraries by means of mobile devices,
in order to raise space barriers, speed-up the seeking process
and better experience the current information landscape that
surrounds them. Furthermore users believe that the uniﬁed
search for physical and electronic resources is an important
feature with the interfaces kept as simple as possible, which
was in agreement with the recommendation of experts.
The insight gained from this study provides valuable knowl-
edge and data to proceed to inform decisions about the next
phases of the service development. However, there are certain
limitations in generalizing our ﬁndings to a bigger population.
Our data come from a small sample size (N= 77), with
participants from only 3 academic departments, i.e., social and
humanitarian sciences. We can clearly see from Table II that
their frequency distributions are far from uniform. In addition,
all data recorded in the questionnaire are subjective measure-
ments, i.e., they describe the users’ attitudes towards various
aspects of our evaluation criteria. Subjective measurements are
always subject to bigger error levels and therefore reduce the
explanatory power of our ﬁndings. To overcome this limitation
we need to further explore the relationships and effects among
recorded variables and use advanced statistical analysis tech-
niques, such as exploratory and conﬁrmatory factor analysis,
which requires a much bigger sample of participants [51]. We
also note that our model’s ﬁt index, to the data recorded, is
R2= .572, i.e., our model accounts for 57% of the variance
in recorded satisfaction. In other words, more than 40% of
variance is unexplained, indicating that we need to extent our
evaluation model to include other factors that can have an
effect in recorded satisfaction.
Therefore, based on the evaluation ﬁndings future work
includes the extension of the prototype features in order to
simultaneously submit queries in multiple sources and the
resolution of interface problems that impede interaction. In
addition, with the insight gained from the current study about
the users’ interaction with the service we plan to further
continue our analysis with an experimental evaluation design,
i.e., a design in which participants will be divided into two
groups; test and control. This method enables us to investigate
and better understand any effects and factors that signiﬁcantly
affect the users’ efﬁciency while using a mobile device to
seek in hybrid collections and therefore the new service’s
acceptance and usage.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This
work
is
part
of
the
PENED’03/791
project
(http://dlib.ionio.gr/hls/), funded by the Reinforcement Pro-
gramme of Human Research Manpower, under the Operational
Programme “Competitiveness (2000-2006)”. The authors wish
to acknowledge Giannis Tsakonas and personnel at the Pan-
teion Library Administration Ofﬁce for their organization and
technical support in conducting this study.
94
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

REFERENCES
[1] S. Veronikis, D. Gavrilis, K. Zoutsou, and C. Papatheodorou, “Using
Handhelds to Search in Physical and Digital Information Spaces”,
in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Mobile and Ubiquitous Computing, Systems,
Services, and Technologies (UBICOMM), Valencia, Spain, pp. 225-230,
2008.
[2] K. G. Coffman and A. M. Odlyzko, “The Size and Growth Rate of
the Internet”, Center for Discrete Mathematics & Theoretical Computer
Science, AT&T Labs, Austin, TX, Tech. Rep. 99-11, Oct. 1998.
[3] World Internet Usage Statistics News and World Population Stats
[Online]. Available: http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm (2009,
May 12)
[4] The
Perseus
Digital
Library
Project
[Online].
Available:
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/ (2009, May 12).
[5] Project
Gutenberg
[Online].
Available:
http://www.gutenberg.org/wiki/Main Page (2009, May 12).
[6] ibiblio [Online]. Available: http://www.ibiblio.org/ (2009, May 12).
[7] E.
F.
Codd
Associates
(1998)
Providing
OLAP
to
User
Analysts:
An
IT
Mandate
White
paper
[Online].
Available:
http://www.uniriotec.br/˜tanaka/SAIN/providing olap to user
analysts.pdf
[8] R. Jain, “Uniﬁed access to universal knowledge: next generation
search experience”, unpublished white paper [Online], Available:
http://ngs.ics.uci.edu, May 2009.
[9] M. Peterson, “Library service delivery via hand-held computers - the
right information at the point of care”, J. Health Information and
Libraries, 21(1), pp. 52-56, 2004.
[10] K. Sommers, J. Hesler, and J. Bostick, “Little guys make a big splash:
PDA projects at Virginia Commonwealth University”, in Proc. 29th
Annu. ACM SIGUCCS Conf. on User Services, Portland, Oregon, pp.
190-193, 2001.
[11] J. P. Shipman and A. C. Morton, “The new black bag: PDAs, health
care and library services”, J. of Reference Services Review, 29(3), pp.
229-238, 2001.
[12] P. Scollin, J. Callahan, A. Mehta, and E. Garcia, “The PDA as a
Reference Tool: The Libraries Role in Enhancing Nursing Education”,
J. Computer Informatics Nursing, 24(4), pp. 208-213, 2006.
[13] G. Buchanan, M. Jones, and G. Marsden, “Exploring Small Screen
Digital Library Access with the Greenstone Digital Library”, in Proc.
6th European Conf. Research and Advanced Technology for Digital
Libraries, pp. 583-596, 2002.
[14] M. Aittola, T. Ryh¨anen, and T. Ojala, “Smart Library: Location-Aware
Mobile Library Service”, in Proc. 5th Symposium on Human Computer
Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services, Udine, Italy, pp.411-416,
2003.
[15] M. L. Jones, R. H. Rieger, P. Treadwell, and G. K. Gay, “Live from the
stacks: user feedback on mobile computers and wireless tools for library
patrons”, in Proc. 5th ACM Conf. Digital Libraries, pp. 95-102, 2000.
[16] D. H. Goh, L. L. Sepoetro, M. Qi, R. Ramakrishnan, Y. L. Theng, F.
Puspitasari, and E. P. Lim, “Mobile tagging and accessibility information
sharing using a geospatial digital library”, in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Asian
Digital Libraries, Hanoi, Vietnam, pp. 287-296. , 2007.
[17] J. Baus and C. Kray, “A Survey of Mobile Guides”, in MGUIDES ’03
Workshop on Mobile Guides at Mobile HCI, Udine, Italy, 2003.
[18] F. Garzotto, P. Paolini, M. Speroni, B. Proll, W. Retschitzegger, and
W. Schwinger, “Ubiquitous Access to Cultural Tourism Portals”, in
Proc. Database and Expert Systems Applications, 15th Int. Workshop,
Washington, DC, pp. 67-72, 2004.
[19] R. Oppermann and M. Specht, “A Context-Sensitive Nomadic Exhibition
Guide”, in Proc. Handheld and Ubiquitous Computing: 2nd Int. HUC
Symp., pp. 127-142, 2000.
[20] M. Fleck, M. Frid, T. Kindberg, E. O’Brien-Strain, R. Rajani, and
M. Spasojevic, “From informing to remembering: ubiquitous systems
in interactive museums”, IEEE Pervasive Computing, 1(2), pp. 13-21,
2002.
[21] D. Layder, New Strategies in Social Research, Cambridge, UK: Polity
Press, 1992.
[22] A. Bryman and E. Bell, Business Research Methods, 2nd ed. Oxford
University Press, UK: 2006.
[23] R. Blackburn and D. Stokes, “Breaking Down the Barriers: Using
Focus Groups to Research Small Medium-Sized Enterprises”, in J.
International Small Business, 19(1), pp. 44-67, 2000.
[24] S. E. Asch, ”Effects of Group Pressure upon the Modiﬁcation and
Distortion of Judgements”, in H. Guetzkow, Ed., Groups, Leadership
and Men, Pittsburgh, Carnegie Press, 1951.
[25] J. Nielsen, Usability Engineering, Boston: Morgan Kaufmann, 1993.
[26] R. Blum, K. Khakzar, and W. Winzerling, ”Mobile Design Guidelines in
the Context of Retail Sales Support”, in K. Asai, Ed., Human Computer
Interaction: New Developments, Vienna, Austria: InTech Education and
Publishing, 2008.
[27] B. Shneiderman and C. Plaisant, Designing the User Interface Strate-
gies for Effective Human-Computer Interaction, 4th ed. Amsterdam:
Addison-Wesley, 2004.
[28] J. Nielsen, “Heuristic Evaluation”, in J. Nielsen and R. L. Mack, Eds.
Usability Inspection Methods, New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, pp.
25-62, 1994.
[29] Apple Human Interface Guidelines, Apple Computer Inc. [Online].
Available:
http://developer.apple.com/documentation/UserExperience/
(2009, January 12).
[30] Gnome
Human
Interface
Guidelines
[Online].
Available:
http://library.gnome.org/devel/hig-book/2.24/ (2009, January 12).
[31] Palm OS User Interface Guidelines, PalmSource Inc., 2003, [Online].
Available:
http://www.accessdevnet.com/docs/uiguidelines.pdf
(2009,
January 12).
[32] Microsoft Corp. Design Guidelines, Windows Mobile Version 6.0 [On-
line]. Available: http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb158602.aspx
(2009, January 12).
[33] iPhone
Human
Interface
Guidelines
User
Experi-
ence,
Apple
Computer
Inc,
2008
[Online].
Available:
http://developer.apple.com/iphone/library/documentation (2009, January
12).
[34] Mobile OPAC [Online]. Available: http://library.panteion.gr/mobile/opac
.php?sid=&lang=en (2009, May 12).
[35] E. J. Webb, D. T. Campbell, R. D. Schwartz, and L. Sechrest, Unobtru-
sive Measures: Noncreative Measures in the Social Sciences, Chicago:
Rand McNally, 1966.
[36] S. Zamanou and S. R. Glaser, “Moving toward Participation and
Involvement”, in J. Group and Organization Management, 19(4), pp.
475-502, 1994.
[37] Y. S. Lincoln and E. G. Guba, Naturalistic Inquiry, Newbury Park, CA:
Sage Publications, 1985.
[38] T. A. Schwandt, “Solutions to the paradigm conﬂict: Coping with
uncertainty”, in J. Contemporary Ethnography, 17(4), pp. 379-407,
1989.
[39] N. Fuhr, G. Tsakonas, T. Aalberg, M. Agosti, P. Hansen, S. Kapidakis,
C. P. Klas, L. Kov´acs, M. Landoni, A. Micsik, C. Papatheodorou, C.
Peters, and I. Sølvberg, “Evaluation of Digital Libraries”, in Int. J.
Digital Libraries, 8(1), pp. 21-38, 2007.
[40] G. Tsakonas and C. Papatheodorou, “Exploring usefulness and usability
in the evaluation of open access digital libraries”, in J. Information
Processing & Management, 44(3), pp. 1234-1250, 2007.
[41] J. Jeng, “What is usability in the context of digital library and how it
can be measured?”, in J. Information Technology and Libraries, 24(2),
pp. 47-56, 2005.
[42] G.
Tyburski.
Criteria
for
Quality
in
Information,
Ballard
Spahr
Andrews
&
Ingersoll,
LLP
[Internet].
Available:
http://www.virtualchase.com/quality/criteria print.html
(2009,
May
12).
[43] R. Fidel and M. Green, “The many faces of accessibility: engineers
perceptions of information sources”, in J. Information Processing &
Management, 40(3), pp. 563-581, 2004.
[44] A. Stoica, G. Fiotakis, D. Raptis, I. Papadimitriou, V. Komis, and N.
Avouris, “Field evaluation of collaborative mobile applications”, in J.
Lumsden, Ed., Handbook of Research on User Interface Design and
Evaluation for Mobile Technology, Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishers,
2007.
[45] K. J¨oreskog and D. S¨orbom, PRELIS2: User’s reference guide, Lincol-
nwood, IL: Scientiﬁc Software International, 1996.
[46] A. Field, Discovering Statistics Using SPSS, 2nd ed. London, UK: Sage
Publications Ltd., 2005.
[47] R. E. Schumacker and R. G. Lomax, A Beginner’s Guide to Structural
Equation Modeling, 2nd ed., Philadelphia, PA: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 2004.
[48] SPSS,
Inc.
SPSS
Statistical
Analysis
Software.
Available:
http://www.spss.com/statistics/
95
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

[49] J. Cohen, Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences, 2nd
ed. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc., 1988.
[50] J. Miles and M. Shevlin Applying Regression and Correlation: A Guide
for Students and Researchers, London, UK: Sage Publications, 2001.
[51] B. G. Tabachnick and L. S. Fidell, Using Multivariate Statistics, 4th ed.
Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 2001.
TABLE IV: The variance-covariance matrix for the recorded evaluation criteria
Sat
U
EoU
L
NL
P
Ex
CL
H
S
UL
T
R
C
Sat
315.33
U
7.70
0.65
EoU
8.57
0.36
1.08
L
6.94
0.33
0.30
0.94
NL
2.67
0.10
0.00
0.48
1.27
P
5.33
0.22
0.31
0.26
0.13
0.33
Ex
8.34
0.47
0.34
0.79
0.63
0.34
1.27
CL
4.08
0.13
0.26
0.16
0.10
0.11
0.13
0.42
H
9.66
0.51
0.50
0.60
0.28
0.26
0.68
0.17
1.07
S
1.62
0.04
0.40
0.07
0.51
0.24
0.17
0.01
0.03
2.12
UL
4.90
0.39
0.17
0.30
0.25
0.13
0.43
0.08
0.44
0.13
0.81
T
12.31
0.80
0.48
0.66
0.25
0.34
0.93
0.12
0.75
0.16
0.71
2.04
R
6.70
0.21
0.39
0.29
0.08
0.20
0.34
0.19
0.42
0.12
0.24
0.45
0.75
C
223.98
2.69
7.83
6.12
8.44
3.63
6.96
5.50
9.71
2.26
3.75
4.71
9.11
523.78
96
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

