COTS or Custom Made?
A Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis for Industrial Control Systems
Falk Salewski
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Muenster University of Applied Sciences
Germany
Email: falk.salewski@fh-muenster.de
Abstract—The choice between custom made electronics and the
use of commercial of the shelf (COTS) components is often not
trivial for industrial control systems. The selection is particularly
challenging, when required quantities or speciﬁc requirements
do not give a clear sign for the one or the other approach.
While a consideration of the resulting costs (development costs
and product costs) gives some indication, only a broader view
helps to perform a sound decision. In this work, a set of decision
criteria (targets to be reached by the control unit) and a decision
method based on multi-criteria decision analysis are presented for
industrial control systems. The presented approach is considering
COTS devices, custom made devices as well as a combination of
both. Moreover, a case study with three industrial control systems
is presented showing the application of the approach.
Keywords–commercial of the shelf; electronic design decisions;
industrial control units; MCDA
I.
INTRODUCTION
This article is extending previous work on design decisions
for industrial control units presented at CENICS 2015 [1].
The most important extensions are the inclusion of further
decision criteria, iterations in the speciﬁcation phase, as well
as a proposal for the selection procedure itself.
Commercial of the shelf (COTS) components as pro-
grammable logic controllers (PLCs) and industrial PCs (IPCs)
are widely used as control units in industrial automation (For
this article, we follow the following deﬁnition for COTS: A
COTS device can be bought from a catalog without modiﬁ-
cations [2]). In some applications, companies are faced with
the decision if a custom made (CM) design of a control unit
might be beneﬁcial for their products and systems. Such a CM
design includes the development of the control electronics,
the corresponding software as well as mechanical parts as
the housing and the user interface. In other applications,
a change from a custom made design of control units to
COTS components is discussed (mostly with the idea of cost
reduction in mind).
Both approaches have their speciﬁc advantages and dis-
advantages. A custom made device often comes with an
optimized functionality and an attractive price of the ﬁnal
product, but involves much more effort than the required
development activities. Especially in case of safety or mission
critical systems, it has to be assured that speciﬁc requirements
(temperature range, failure rate, electrical robustness, etc.) are
met over the complete product life cycle (and not only with a
prototype during development). While a custom made design
allows full control of the ﬁnal product, all relevant aspects
have to be veriﬁed. These activities are performed on basis of
prototypes and ﬁrst series devices, but also have to be recon-
sidered in case of all changes (e.g., if obsolete memory chips
require replacement, at least an impact analysis is required but
often several veriﬁcation, validation and certiﬁcation activities
have to be redone).
On the other hand, the use of COTS devices often requires
more than applying a plug and play procedure. Depending
on the application, the selection of a suitable device could
be challenging. And also systems based on COTS devices
have to undergo veriﬁcation, validation and certiﬁcation ac-
tivities. Moreover, it could be required to establish speciﬁc
relationships with the suppliers and/or to perform additional
tests on the COTS components if they are applied in critical
applications (examples can be found in [2]).
In both cases, the complete life cycle of the product has to
be considered for a sound selection. An approach for such a
selection is the so called Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) [3]
that aims to consider all cost factors of a product during
product life. To supplement existing approaches with the
required technical data, this article deals with the differences
of the following approaches for industrial control units:
1)
COTS - commercial of the shelf
2)
CM - custom made
3)
Combination of 1 and 2.
The main focus of this article is on electronic control units
(including their software), but not on pure software products
as discussed for example in [4].
As a basis for a systematic selection procedure, we collect
relevant selection criteria (targets) in the following Section II.
Next, the specialties of the three approaches are analyzed based
on their product life cycle in Section III. Based on these two
sections, a selection procedure is presented in Section IV,
followed by a case study in Section V. After a discussion in
Section VI, this article ends with a conclusion.
II.
TARGETS FOR SELECTION
For any selection procedure, it is necessary to deﬁne the
key targets to be fulﬁlled by the devices. Common targets often
cited are fast time to market, improved costs and competitive
advantages [5]. These competitive advantages describe product
properties beside the price and differ between application
domains. In previous work, we already identiﬁed a set of
122
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

impact factors for hardware platforms [6]. For this work, we
take a system view on the control units (electronics + soft-
ware + mechanical). Moreover, we assume that the functional
requirements are fulﬁlled for industrial environments in case
of all candidates. The resulting set of targets is presented in
Figure 1 and will be further described below.
A. Time to Market
A fast time to market is an obvious target. As soon as the
product is on the market, amortization of non-recurrent costs
can start. Moreover, a fast time to market can be a competitive
advantage to competitors.
B. Costs
As with time to market, it is an obvious target to keep
the costs low. However, several aspects have an impact on the
overall costs for a product.
In case of recurrent costs, it is the cost of purchasing
or manufacturing the product itself. In addition, license costs
for software (drivers, operating systems, etc.) and/or hardware
modules (e.g., inclusion of externally developed modules in
custom made products) as well as costs resulting from later
maintenance activities have to be considered.
The non-recurrent costs for a custom made control unit
include development costs (including costs for prototypes and
test activities during development) as well as costs for the
preparation of the series production (creation and test of
tooling, as soldering frames, adapters for automatic assembly,
programs for test equipment as automated optical inspection
(AOI), in circuit tester (ICT), and/or functional tester, test
adapters and speciﬁc test electronics). Further non-recurrent
costs that also appear for COTS systems are the costs of inte-
gration of the electronic control system into the target system
as well as those for veriﬁcation, validation and certiﬁcation
activities (performed before and/or after integration in target
system). Often, at least certiﬁcation activities are executed
on system level, but beneﬁt from pre-certiﬁed components.
Finally, costs resulting from required documentation activities
(product + development process) have to be considered.
C. Product Properties
While we assume that all candidates can fulﬁll the speci-
ﬁed functional requirements, further properties could make a
difference.
A ﬁrst important property is the availability of the product
(availability in this context is not the operational availability
but the possibility to purchase or manufacture the product).
For any application, it is important that the required control
electronics are available for new products and the replacement
of defect units.
As many industrial control electronics perform safety
and/or mission critical tasks, their reliability and functional
safety is another important factor. As evaluated in previous
work, the choice of the hardware platform has impacts on the
safety properties of the overall system [7]. The speciﬁc needs
have to be analyzed for each application individually.
Security is another important property. Especially the in-
creasing interconnection of industrial automation systems via
the internet requires corresponding measures [8], [9], [10].
Additionally, a protection of the intellectual property (IP:
ﬁrmware, electronics, design, etc.) is often desirable to protect
own products from plagiarizing. As with functional safety
and reliability, the requirements depend on the individual
application.
For applications that evolve during their life time (e.g., an
industrial plant undergoing modernization) or those in which
a control unit should be applied in several different target
applications (perhaps not all of them deﬁned today), it is
desirable to work with systems that can be adapted to different
or changing requirements. Examples are modular PLCs which
allow to add a variety of different plug-in modules (analog
and digital I/O, communication interfaces, special function
modules). Another approach is to deﬁne major parts of the
product via software or reconﬁgurable hardware (e.g., FPGAs).
While energy efﬁciency of control units was predominantly
an issue in mobile and battery powered devices in the past, it
is now also an issue in all industrial application (especially if
a high number of control units is applied). Additionally, size
and/or weight is an issue in several applications.
Sustainability in this context describes environmental as-
pects in the life cycle of the product. The increasing number
of electronics produced every day comes with an urge to think
about resources and recycling. In the area of resources, relevant
questions are for example the following: Is it feasible to reduce
the amount of energy needed for the creation of a product?
Is it possible to use sustainable resources (e.g., material of
natural origin, as described for example in [11]) and to avoid
critical materials (an example is the ROHS directive [12]).
Recycling on the other hand deals with options to reuse parts
and materials from old electronics at the end of their life-time.
D. Customer Perception
Another target that could be important is the customer
perception. While a decision could not be the optimum choice,
it still might be the optimum solution from the customers
perspective. As an example, the use of a COTS device with
a good reputation might increase customer’s conﬁdence in the
product although it does not differ from alternatives from a
technical point of view.
E. Legal and Regulatory Requirements
Finally, legal and regulatory requirements have to be con-
sidered for every product. These requirements have effects on
product properties (for example on safety properties) as well as
on the overall development and production process (e.g., safety
standards require certain development processes). To follow all
given requirements becomes especially critical if the product
should be sold in several different countries (e.g., Europe, US,
and India). There is strong effort to harmonize the different
standards and regulations present all over the world, but today
one still has to deal with differences between countries. Thus,
at least the selection of countries in which the product should
be sold later on has to be considered as a target in the selection
process.
III.
PRODUCT LIFE CYCLE
In this section, a typical product life cycle is presented for a
design based on COTS control units, a design with CM control
units and a combination of COTS and CM components.
Following accepted processes, the product life cycle starts
with a speciﬁcation. While the creation of a sound speciﬁcation
123
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Technical System
Electronic 
control unit
Product 
properties
Costs
Recurring Costs
-
Product costs 
(manufacturing or 
purchasing)
-
Licenses (e.g. SW)
-
Maintenance
Availability of product
Reliability, Safety
Security, IP-Protection
Adaptability
Energy efficiency
Size, Weight
Sustainability
Non-Recurring Costs
-
Development
-
Manufacturing setup
-
Integration
-
Verification & 
Validation
-
Certification
-
Documentation
customer 
perception
Figure 1. Targets for selection of electronic control units
is a major task, we assume it is already existent for the
next step. Nevertheless, it has to be noted that speciﬁcations
are often not ﬁxed in early phases. While a ﬁrst approach
typically includes the complete ”wish list”, ﬁrst concepts based
on the early speciﬁcation often show that targets (mostly
costs) cannot be reached. Therefore, typically several iterations
of speciﬁcations and corresponding concepts are required to
create a practicable speciﬁcation (see Figure 2), especially if
new and unfamiliar approaches and techniques are applied. It
is expected that also in this phase of creating the speciﬁcation,
differences between COTS and CM components are present
(for example, concepts for ﬁrst estimations are probably easier
to establish with COTS components than on basis of a CM de-
sign). While the impact on the speciﬁcation might be a further
interesting difference between COTS and CM approaches, it is
outside the scope of this article. Therefore, it is assumed that
a suitable speciﬁcation is present for the remaining article.
Based on the speciﬁcation, an implementation could be
realized in the three ways presented in Figure 3.
1)
For a CM approach, development activities are re-
quired followed by integration, veriﬁcation, validation
and certiﬁcation. In parallel, the manufacturing set-up
has to be established and veriﬁed.
2)
In case of a COTS approach, development activi-
ties are replaced by a selection and qualiﬁcation of
suitable COTS devices. In this case, no production
activities take place.
3)
A combination of COTS and CM devices includes
the elements of both life cycles, CM and COTS.
In all three cases, the aforementioned activities are fol-
lowed by operation, maintenance and repair activities.
Industrial control systems have a long useful life that
requires life cycle services (examples are maintenance, mod-
iﬁcations and retroﬁt). According to a publication by the
international society of automation, only 20-40% of the invest-
ment for an automation systems is spent on the purchasing of
Specification
Concept with 
first estimations
Feedback: expected costs, time to market, side
effects between different requirements, …
Required functionality and product properties,
Constraints on costs and time to market
Figure 2. Typical iterations during creation of the speciﬁcation
the system while the remaining 60-80% are required for life
cycle services [13]. Accordingly, these activities are of great
importance for industrial applications and should be kept in
mind during the selection process.
Finally, each product life cycle ends with some end of
life activities, typically decommissioning. As the impact of
this phase is considered low for the selection process, end of
life activities are not considered in this article. The following
subsections deal with the speciﬁc characteristics of the three
approaches.
A. COTS
In case of a COTS design, a suitable device has to be
selected. The aim is to identify an existing product that fulﬁlls
the requirements given in the speciﬁcation. Moreover, further
aspects as those presented above could be important for the
selection, although often not explicitly stated in the speciﬁ-
cation. Depending on the application, it might be useful to
reconsider the speciﬁcation, if no suitable COTS device could
124
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

COTS 
selection
Specification
Integration
Verification & 
Validation
Certification
Development incl.
Verification & Validation
Specification
Integration
Certification
Verification & 
Validation
Prototypes
Manufacturing 
Setup
COTS 
qualification
Iterations
CM
COTS
Electronic Control Unit
System under Control (e.g. single machine, part of factory, …)
Operation, 
Maintenance 
and Repair
Optimization Series Production incl. Test
Serial Production
Modifications and Retrofit
Development
COTS 
qualification
COTS 
selection
COTS
+ CM
Figure 3. Product life cycle for different approaches (length of phases does not necessarily reﬂect the effort required for this phase)
be identiﬁed. Moreover, the fulﬁllment of the requirements is
often not only determined by the product itself and related
aspects (e.g., documentation), but also by the relationship
to the supplier of this device (support during integration,
operation, maintenance, long time availability, insight into
veriﬁcation and validation activities, willingness to perform
further veriﬁcation and validation activities if needed, etc.).
Especially for critical applications, additional veriﬁcation ac-
tivities could be required to apply COTS devices (see
[2]
as an example for military applications). If these veriﬁcation
activities are required and cannot be performed by the supplier,
own veriﬁcation activities have to be performed with the COTS
device.
In the next phase, the selected COTS device has to be
integrated into the application (for this approach, we assume
that no modiﬁcations are required to integrate the COTS
device). In this phase, the knowledge of the COTS device’s
properties is of great importance. Gaining this knowledge
could be time consuming, but could be eased by support given
by the supplier (good documentation, qualiﬁed hotline support,
tools supporting integration, etc.).
While veriﬁcation and validation of the control unit itself
has already been targeted, it is the overall system that has to
fulﬁll the requirements. Thus, veriﬁcation and validation activ-
ities have to be performed also on system level. Based on the
application, also certiﬁcations are required or recommended
(e.g., functional safety applications). Several COTS devices
come with some pre-certiﬁcation for certain applications (as
the mentioned safety applications). These pre-certiﬁcations
typically ease the certiﬁcation activities on system level.
B. Custom Made
The CM approach requires development (including all
design, implementation and test activities to reach a suitable
prototype) and manufacturing activities. During development,
prototypes are implemented and veriﬁed on basis of the speci-
ﬁcation. Design decisions have to consider functional aspects,
as well as further impacts (see Figure 1). Some aspects for
COTS apply here for speciﬁc integrated circuits used in the
design. They can simplify design and veriﬁcation activities,
but also lead to the challenges listed in the COTS section
(e.g., availability). Especially in complex designs, often several
prototype stages are required until veriﬁcation and validation
activities are passed successfully.
Additionally, an ideal design is optimized for later manu-
facturing as these optimizations can signiﬁcantly reduce manu-
facturing times and tooling costs. Generally speaking, the aim
is to deal with the complexity in development and manufac-
turing [14]. For optimum time-to-market, the preparation for
manufacturing is started before the development activities are
ﬁnished. The required synchronization between development
and manufacturing activities are often challenging [15]. More-
over, to determine the start time of preparation activities, the
following tradeoff is necessary. On the one hand, the risk of
changes in the product that are relevant for production has to
be kept low (ideal: wait until everything is deﬁnitely working
as speciﬁed). On the other hand, a late start of preparation
activities is resulting in negative impacts on the time to market
and/or a reduced preparation time.
In the following steps, optimizations of the manufacturing
process take place, mostly to optimize manufacturing time and
125
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

quality. Integration, veriﬁcation and validation activities can
start with prototypes, but ﬁnal tests and certiﬁcation typically
require ﬁrst samples from the serial manufacturing process.
In case of a COTS product, analysis of defect products, ob-
solete components or changes in regulatory requirements (e.g.,
EMC requirements) are typically performed by the supplier.
Also in case of a CM design, this analysis has to be performed
periodically to check if changes in the product are required.
While these activities could be outsourced, the effort for these
activities has to be considered. Moreover, required changes
could result in costly redesign activities (new veriﬁcation,
validation and certiﬁcation activities might be needed), a risk
worn by the supplier in case of COTS components.
C. Combination
The process of combining COTS components with a CM
design follows a combination of both processes. Typically,
the product core is implemented with a COTS component
and the interfaces are custom made, but also other parts as
interfaces or power supplies can be implemented with COTS
parts. Thus, during development all aspect of a CM design
have to be followed in addition to a selection of suitable COTS
components (lower part of Figure 3, only the differences to the
CM process are displayed).
While the use of COTS components comes with some
challenges to be considered (see section above), it can simplify
the remaining development signiﬁcantly. An example is the
use of a COTS single board PC on a custom made printed
circuit board (PCB) populated with interface and power supply
circuits (and some application speciﬁc functions if needed, see
also Section V). This combination can simplify the manufac-
turing process if the main PCB is populated with comparatively
simple components only (e.g., easy assembly, no extra small
structures on PCB). Furthermore, PC parts as memory chips
tend to become easily obsolete, a problem now covered by
the supplier of the PC board. For the supplier of the PC board
this problem is less critical, as he typically beneﬁts from higher
production volumes (boards are sold to many customers). Thus,
the resulting price of buying the PC modules could be lower
than to manufacture low quantities in house.
IV.
SELECTION PROCEDURE
The combination of the targets presented in Section II and
the product life cycles presented in the preceding Section III
provide the basis for a systematic selection. The consideration
of the many factors presented above leads to a so called
multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA)
[16], [17]. MCDA
offers several different approaches for a systematic decision,
one will be described in the following. For all approaches, it
is necessary to establish an objective evaluation. Therefore,
it is recommended to evaluate each factor in a team (at
least technical and sales representatives) to consider different
viewpoint in the decision process.
An example for a decision procedure is displayed in
Figure 4. Each selection procedure should start with a sound
requirements analysis. As a result of this analysis, functional
requirements should be deﬁned as well as all required targets
(see Figure 1 for detailed targets). The following analysis of
design alternatives is then based on these requirements as well
as on the corresponding life cycles (see Figure 3).
In case a CM design might be the desired choice, experts
from the area of electronic development and manufacturing
should be consulted (internal or external partners). This way,
quantitative data can be achieved for costs and time-to-market
aspects. However, for reliable data, a sound speciﬁcation and
”trustworthy” experts are required.
Besides costs and time to market, the targets are of qualita-
tive nature. While a qualitative analysis is probably sufﬁcient
in many cases, a rating system can be applied in case of all
qualitative aspects (e.g., rating of products availability from 1
to 10) if needed, for example in form of a decision matrix.
Rating can be agreed on in the team or it can be build from
a set of individual ratings. An example for such a decision
matrix can be found in Figure 5. On the left, quantitative
aspects of three different devices are evaluated. On the right,
the qualitative aspects are rated based on the rating proposed
above. It is important that a consensus should be found within
the decision team for each result. In Figure 5, all targets are
considered as equally important and no weighting has been
applied. In the case that differences in the importance of the
targets exist, a weighting can be applied as presented in Figure
6. In this extended approach, the rating of each target is
multiplied with the weighting factor (with 1 for the lowest
importance and 9 for the highest importance) in the column
W·R. Obviously, this weighting can have a signiﬁcant effect
on the result (in the given example, the COTS approach now
outperforms the CM approach). The impact of the importance
of the different targets is further discussed in Section VI.
During the evaluation, it will become obvious that the
results within the targets have dependencies with the costs
(e.g., reliability can be typically approved by additional mea-
sures. However, these measures typically have an impact on the
costs). Thus, every change in the concept should be evaluated
concerning it’s impact on other factors (especially cost). If
a consensus is found on the results for all targets, a sound
decision is possible between design alternatives.
V.
CASE STUDY
In this section, three existing control units are evaluated
based on the criteria deﬁned before. The emphasis of the
following description is on the properties of the selected
system and not on the selection process (devices already exist).
A. Three Control Units
The following control units are considered for the presented
case study:
1)
A machine for sorting metal parts: The control unit
is required to switch electric motors and pneumatic
valves and read several position sensors and an ana-
logue input for measuring the metal parts. Moreover,
the status of the machine has to be displayed on a
screen. The expected volume required of this machine
is ≤ 50 units per year.
2)
A user terminal for an embroidery machine: The
control unit has to read the required embroidery
pattern from a USB stick and display it on the screen
of the terminal. Moreover, user commands have to
be read from the terminal. A set of commands is
computed and send to the embroidery machine via
a proprietary interface. The expected volume is 800
units per year.
126
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Requirements Analysis
Targets
Product 
properties
Costs
Time to 
market
Customer 
perception
Functional 
requirements
Objective evaluation of design alternatives 
•
Consideration of all relevant targets
•
Consideration of required life cycles
•
Consultation of experts (development, manufacturing, marketing, purchasing, …)
 Multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA)
Legal & 
regulatory 
requirements
Figure 4. Proposed selection procedure
 A
 B
 C
 A
 B
 C
CM
CM+COTS
COTS
CM
CM+COTS
COTS
Product
100
250
500
Availability of product
9
6
5
Licenses
0
0
0
Reliability & Safety
6
6
6
Maintenance
0
0
0
Security & IP-Protection
7
7
7
Development
150000
50000
0
Adaptability 
9
9
7
Manufacturing Setup
50000
30000
0
Energy efficiency
8
8
8
Integration
3000
4000
5000
Sustainability
8
7
7
V&V
10000
10000
5000
Size & Weight
8
7
7
Certification
7000
7000
4000
4
6
9
Documentation
2000
2000
1000
8
8
9
S
222000
103000
15000
8
8
7
S
100 units
232000
128000
65000
75
72
72
S
500 units
272000
228000
265000
S
1000 units
322000
353000
515000
S
Product
Properties
time to market
customer perception
Alternatives :
Type :
Targets ↓ 
legal & regulatory requirements
Alternatives :
Type :
Targets ↓ 
Costs
Recurring
Costs
Non-
Recurring
Figure 5. Example for MCDA based on decision tables
Weighting ↓
Rating
W ∙R
Rating
W ∙R
Rating
W ∙R
Availability of product
7
9
63
6
42
5
35
Reliability & Safety
8
6
48
6
48
6
48
Security & IP-Protection
7
7
49
7
49
7
49
Adaptability 
4
9
36
9
36
7
28
Energy efficiency
8
8
64
8
64
8
64
Sustainability
8
8
64
7
56
7
56
Size & Weight
1
8
8
7
7
7
7
9
4
36
6
54
9
81
9
8
72
8
72
9
81
4
8
32
8
32
7
28
75
472
72
460
72
477
S
time to market
legal & regulatory requirements
customer perception
Alternatives :
Type :
Product
Properties
Targets ↓ 
 A
CM
 B
CM+COTS
 C
COTS
Figure 6. Example decision table with weighting of targets
127
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

3)
A control unit for automatic domestic windows: This
electronic unit has to control a DC motor (PWM, en-
coders) based on sensor information and information
received via a proprietary bus interface. Moreover,
the available space for this device is limited to
100x40x18mm. The expected volume here is ≥ 1000
units per year.
B. Evaluation
An overview of the evaluation can be found in Figure 7
while details will be described below. The target sustainability
as well as legal and regulatory requirements were not formu-
lated at the time of this case study and are not considered
for this reason. Nevertheless, no changes in the results are
expected (no speciﬁc requirements for sustainability or legal
and regulatory requirements to be covered by the product are
given). A general discussion of potential impacts of these two
targets can be found in Section VI.
1) Case A: The low quantity of required products indicate
a COTS device as best choice. However, a conﬂict could
arise from the remaining targets which are evaluated in the
following.
The non recurrent costs, as well as the required time to
market clearly beneﬁt from the use of a COTS component.
The recurrent price is probably higher than a CM approach,
but a quantity of 50 units in most cases does not allow
to amortize non recurrent costs for a custom made design
including veriﬁcation.
In addition, product properties have to be considered. Size
and weight targets, which could be a tough challenge for COTS
approaches, are not critical in this application. The same is true
for the energy efﬁciency of the control unit.
For this application, a modular programmable logic con-
troller (PLC) has been chosen. This approach allows to adapt
the control units in case of later changes (e.g., by changing or
adding I/O modules or special function modules). Moreover,
this approach allows to use similar approaches in different
machines (same core unit but differences in modules used).
During the selection of the device, the availability of this
device or potential replacements is crucial. Well established
systems as well as individual contracts can mitigate the risks.
Additionally, the use of standardized components (including
the programming languages) ease the migration to alternative
systems when needed.
Finally, no speciﬁc safety, security or reliability require-
ments were given in this application. Nevertheless, speciﬁc
PLC systems targeting these requirements are available.
Based on this brief evaluation, a COTS approach is the
optimum solution for this application.
2) Case B: In this application, the need for a proprietary
interface requires at least some CM design. Moreover, the
visualization requirements for the terminal screen require a
certain amount of processing power.
In this application, a combination of a COTS processor
board was chosen in combination with a custom made main
board implementing the power supply and required interfaces.
The use of the COTS board was driven by the following
aspects:
•
This approach simpliﬁes the design and the manufac-
turing of the main board (no ﬁne pitch components
and less high speed design required o this board).
•
For the required quantities, the COTS board has an
attractive price compared to the CM approach.
•
Components as memory chips change frequently. In
the COTS approach, the qualiﬁcation of new chips is
done by supplier.
•
An approach of a complete COTS user terminal in
combination with an interface converter (required for
the proprietary interface to the machine) was resulting
in a signiﬁcantly higher product price.
Furthermore, the remaining cost related factors show no
disadvantage of this approach compared to a full custom
made design. With respect to time to market, this approach
beneﬁts from the COTS components in comparison to the CM
approach, as a major part of the design could be implemented
as a pretested module. The product properties are inﬂuenced
as follows:
As the COTS board has a major impact on the availability,
a long term contract was set up with the supplier. Nevertheless,
a migration to another processor board is possible (probably
involves redesign).
Reliability analysis is possible as the complete design
including all components is known. Optimizations in the archi-
tecture or the applied components could have been performed
if required, as well as the implementation of safety functions
on the main board.
A protection of the program memory is supported by the
processor, no further security or IP protection requirements
exist. Adaptability can be achieved by modiﬁcations of the
main board. However, this approach requires redesigns (incl.
veriﬁcation activities). In this application, it is expected to
handle all modiﬁcations via SW.
Customization allows optimization of energy, size and
weight properties. However, none of these are considered as
critical for this application.
Finally, a CM design allows signiﬁcant separation from
competitors (customers perception). In summary, the applica-
tion beneﬁts from the chosen combination of COTS and CM
components.
3) Case C: Size and product price restrictions are major
impacts for this application and could not be fulﬁlled with
available COTS components.
The non-recurring costs for the required design and manu-
facturing activities are signiﬁcantly higher than with a COTS
approach, but could be amortized by the expected quantity in
an acceptable period. Costs for veriﬁcation and certiﬁcation
activities could be held on a moderate level as the complete
system was already undergoing sufﬁcient procedures.
With full control of HW and SW design, speciﬁc
project properties (e.g., proprietary bus interface, protection of
ﬁrmware, emergency stop, life beat) could be fulﬁlled. Finally,
the time to market was (with almost a year) long compared to
a COTS approach, but not critical as the development of the
complete system took a similar amount of time.
128
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Case A
Case B
Case C
Machine for sorting metal parts
User terminal for embroidery machine
Window control unit
 ≤ 50
800
≥ 1000
COTS
COTS + CM
CM
Product
high, but according to low quantity best 
with COTS device (here PLC)
combination of a COTS processor board 
with a custom made main board allows a 
competitive product price
custom made design allows cost optimized 
approach (for given constraints)
Licenses
no licence for operation 
open source operating system
none
Maintenance
diagnosis features supported by PLC, 
modular PLC allows replacement/ repair of 
modules  
individual repair/replacement of processor 
and main board possible, maintenance 
features have to be custom made
diagnosis features implemented via bus 
interface
Development
HW: only selection & integration
SW: based on PLC operating system => 
application only
HW: only main board + selection processor 
board & integration
SW: operating system has to be adapted to 
custom design + application SW
full development of electronics and 
software
Manufacturing 
Setup
none
manufacturing of main board + integration 
processor board + test in manufacturing;
separate processor board, no fine pitch 
devices on main board => simplifies 
manufacturing process
full manufacturing setup incl. test required
Integration
HW setup with COTS IDE + wiring of sensors 
and actuators
1) main and processor board
2) operating system and HW
3) application
HW/SW integration in development,
integration with remaining system via bus 
interface
V&V
focus on SW + overall system
complete system 
complete system 
Certification
not required for control unit
EMC test for CE marking
EMC test for CE marking,
further tests with complete system 
Documentation
SW + wiring (hardware configuration saved 
in project data)
full documentation,
exisiting documentation for processor board 
and operating system can be included
full documentation
Availability of 
product
depends on PLC supplier,  long term 
industrial availability provided
depends on supplier of processor board 
(long term contract), processor board can 
be replaced (redesign main board + 
comparable alternative processor board)
depends only on components used, 
obsolences can be handeld with 2nd source 
components, if needed in combination with 
redesign (HW or HW+SW)
Reliability & Safety
no specific requirements, COTS HW is 
assumed to be well tested,
COTS devices typically = black box, but 
reliability and safety data is available for 
certain devices
complete reliability analysis possible for 
main board, data für processor board 
available from supplier.
No specific safety requirements. 
(implementation on main board could be an 
option if required)
complete reliability analysis possible for 
electronics.
Specific safety requirements could be 
implemented in SW and HW (emergency 
stop, life beat)
Security & IP-
Protection
supported, setting via COTS IDE
processor supports protection of program 
memory
processor supports protection of program 
memory
Adaptability 
modular PLC systems allows to add further 
modules (I/O, special function, …), other 
devices can be added via bus interface
full control of SW,
custom main board allows adaptations, but 
these changes require redesigns of the 
hardware (incl. verification and 
certification)
full control of SW,
full control of HW, but changes require 
redesign (incl. verification and certification)
Energy efficiency
COTS devices with acceptable energy 
efficiency are available
the custom made design and the selection 
of a suitable processor board allows an 
optimized design
stand by <0,4W => low power controller in 
combination with suitable HW and SW 
design (sleep modi)
Size & Weight
no specific requirements
size of PCB determined by 10" screen (not 
critical)
no specific weight requirements
critical => only achievable with custom 
design
fast (weeks)
medium (months),
with COTS processor board, the SW 
development can start before custom made 
HW is ready,
risk of design iterations
medium-high (months),
with evaluation board, the SW development 
can start before custom made HW is ready,
risk of design iterations
selected brand of COTS device supports 
image of high quality product
customized solution allows separation from 
competitors
customized solution allows to meet the 
targets for size and product price
customer perception
Targets ↓ Choice →
Case :
Description : 
Assumed annual quantity :
time to market
Costs
Recurring
Costs
Non-
Recurring
Product
Properties
Figure 7. Case Study
129
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

VI.
DISCUSSION
In the presented case study, the emphasis is on the dif-
ferences of the three approaches presented. However, even the
simpliﬁed description of the selection performed for these case
studies shows the advantages compared to an unsystematic
approach. The collection and evaluation of the proposed targets
in combination with the consideration of the complete product
life cycle prevent that important factors are neglected during
the decision process. In addition, quantitative approaches as
described in Section IV can be applied to further formalize
the selection.
Moreover, one could argue that the decision for or against
COTS devices is solely driven by the quantity of the required
units. For sure, in extreme cases (less than 10 units, more
than 100000 units) the decision is probably simple. However,
for medium numbers and depending on further targets to be
fulﬁlled by the control unit, the decision process differs. As an
example, a product with a quantity of 1000 units/year could
be better implemented with COTS (high volume product that
perfectly matches requirements) and a unit only needed a few
100 times a year might be better in CM (e.g., when other
targets do not allow a pure COTS approach).
Furthermore, it has to be noted that the importance of the
different targets could be rated very differently for different
applications (An example for a weighting of targets in the
decision process has been presented in Figure 6). As the result
of the overall analysis depends a lot on this rating, it has to
be performed precisely. If, for example, the following targets
are rated very high compared to other targets, this rating can
have a major impact on the decision:
•
availability of the product: if a CM design is possi-
ble with standard components (all with at least 2nd
source), a high independence from suppliers can be
achieved by a CM design. This independence could
result in a major advantage compared to a COTS
approach. However, it has to be noted that it is often
not possible to ﬁnd suitable 2nd sources for all compo-
nents of a product. Examples for critical components
are microcontrollers and all other speciﬁc integrated
circuits, displays and speciﬁc connectors. Neverthe-
less, an option to reduce the risk of unavailability for
the components without a suitable 2nd source is to
set up delivery contracts with the suppliers of these
components.
•
safety and adaptability: if a control unit including
safety functions should be open to later adaptations,
the effort for later changes (concept, implementation,
veriﬁcation, validation and certiﬁcation) could be sig-
niﬁcantly lower in case of a well supported COTS
device.
•
legal and regulatory requirements - device should
be sold worldwide: Depending on the product, this
requirement could result in a high effort, especially
in case of certiﬁcation activities. If COTS devices
with the required certiﬁcations are available (or can
be made available by the COTS supplier), this target
can be met easily by choosing the COTS approach.
•
sustainability: If speciﬁc sustainability requirements
are given (e.g., high percentage of the material used in
a control system should be recycled at the end of prod-
uct life, overall energy footprint of the manufacturing
of the device should be below a certain threshold), the
set up and implementation of the recycling concept
can be challenging. As with the requirement above, a
COTS approach can simplify the effort to reach this
target IF a COTS device with the required properties
is available.
VII.
CONCLUSION
The comparison of COTS and CM approaches (or combi-
nations of both) requires more than just an analysis of cost
and time to market. In addition, the overall costs (recurring
and non-recurring) are compiled from several aspects and
not only the cost of the control system itself. Therefore,
a set of important targets to be considered in the decision
process has been presented in this work. These targets include
different types of costs, time to market, legal and regulatory
requirements, customer perception as well as large set of
product properties. The considered costs are compiled from
recurring costs (for product, licenses and maintenance) and
non-recurring costs (for development, manufacturing setup,
integration, veriﬁcation, validation, certiﬁcation and documen-
tation). The presented product properties include availability,
reliability, safety, security, IP-protection, adaptability, energy
efﬁciency, sustainability, size and weight. Moreover, impacts
on the product life cycles of the different approaches have been
discussed. Based on these two aspects (targets and impacts on
life cycles), a systematic selection process for industrial control
systems has been proposed. The proposed process includes
MCDA and allows to apply quantitative approaches to further
formalize the selection. Finally, the selection process has been
demonstrated in a case study with three industrial control units.
REFERENCES
[1]
F. Salewski, “COTS or custom made? Design decisions for industrial
control systems,” in Proc. of the Eighth International Conference
on Advances in Circuits, Electronics and Micro-electronics (CENICS
2015).
IARIA, 2015, pp. 7–12.
[2]
J. Hall and R. Naff, “The cost of cots,” in Proceedings of the Digital
Avionics Systems Conference.
IEEE, 2000, pp. 20–24.
[3]
F. Wynstra and K. Hurkens, “Total cost and total value of ownership,”
in Perspektiven des Supply Management, M. Eig, Ed.
Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 463–482.
[4]
K. Megas, G. Belli, W. B. Frakes, J. Urbano, and R. Anguswamy, “A
study of cots integration projects: Product characteristics, organization,
and life cycle models,” in Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM
Symposium on Applied Computing, ser. SAC ’13.
New York, NY,
USA: ACM, 2013, pp. 1025–1030.
[5]
E. R. Hnatek, Practical Reliability Of Electronic Equipment And
Products.
Marcel Decker, 2003.
[6]
F. Salewski and S. Kowalewski, “Hardware platform design decisions in
embedded systems - a systematic teaching approach,” in Special Issue
on the Second Workshop on Embedded System Education (WESE),
vol. 4, no. 1, SIGBED Review.
ACM, Jan. 2007, pp. 27–35.
[7]
——, “The effect of hardware platform selection on safety-critical soft-
ware in embedded systems: Empirical evaluations,” in IEEE Symposium
on Industrial Embedded Systems (SIES’07).
IEEE, July 2007, pp. 78–
85.
[8]
E. Byres and J. Lowe, “The myths and facts behind cyber security risks
for industrial control systems,” in Proceedings of the VDE Kongress,
vol. 116, 2004, pp. 213–218.
[9]
K. Stouffer, J. Falco, and K. Scarfone, Guide to industrial control
systems (ICS) security. National Institute of Standards and Technology,
2011, Special Publication 800-82.
130
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[10]
C. Alcaraz, R. Roman, P. Najera, and J. Lopez, “Security of industrial
sensor network-based remote substations in the context of the internet
of things,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 11, no. 3, 2013, pp. 1091–1104.
[11]
M. Irimia-Vladu, “green electronics: biodegradable and biocompatible
materials and devices for sustainable future,” Chemical Society Re-
views, vol. 43, no. 2, 2013, pp. 489–736.
[12]
EU, “2011/65/EU ROHS (restriction of certain hazardous substances),”
Directive of the European Parliament and the Council, June 2011.
[13]
L.Poulsen, “Life-cycle and long-term migration planning,” InTech
(isa.org), January/February 2014, pp. 12–17.
[14]
W. ElMaraghya, H. ElMaraghy, T. Tomiyamac, and L. Monostorid,
“Complexity in engineering design and manufacturing,” CIRP Annals
- Manufacturing Technology, vol. 61, no. 2, 2012, pp. 793 – 814.
[15]
E. Puik, P. Gielen, D. Telgen, L. van Moergestel, and D. Ceglarek,
“A generic systems engineering method for concurrent development
of products and manufacturing equipment,” in Precision Assembly
Technologies and Systems, ser. IFIP Advances in Information and Com-
munication Technology, S. Ratchev, Ed.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2014, vol. 435, pp. 139–146.
[16]
E. Triantaphyllou, “Multi-criteria decision making methods: A compar-
ative study,” Applied Optimization, vol. 44, 2000.
[17]
E. Jacquet-Lagrze and Y. Siskos, “Preference disaggregation: 20
years of {MCDA} experience,” European Journal of Operational
Research, vol. 130, no. 2, 2001, pp. 233 – 245. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0377221700000357
131
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

