113
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
An Analysis of the Extent to which Standard Management Models Encourage the
Adoption of Green IT
William M. Campbell
School of Computing and Digital Technology
Birmingham City University
Birmingham, UK
B4 7XG
Email: william.campbell@bcu.ac.uk
Jagdev K. Bhogal
School of Computing and Digital Technology
Birmingham City University
Birmingham, UK
B4 7XG
Email: jagdev.bhogal@bcu.ac.uk
Abstract—This paper explores the extent to which senior man-
agers using standard management models as tools for develop-
ing corporate strategy, structures and culture are likely to be
encouraged to adopt green IT. A range of standard manage-
ment models are considered: strategic, tactical and operational.
Analysis reveals that many standard models, in particular older
ones that rely heavily on numbers and take a narrow view of
corporate responsibility, are not favourable to the adoption of
green IT. Accordingly, managers need to avoid excessive reliance
on such models and should consider using models which take
account of softer issues, in particular those models which address
sustainability directly. There is a need for the development
of new management models, which more explicitly integrate
traditional bottom line considerations with the wider ethical
responsibilities of companies, including sustainability. Cameron
and Quinn’s “Competing Values Framework” is used as a tool to
explore organizational culture. A statistical analysis of a survey of
organizational culture and greenness is presented. It is concluded
that organizational culture has a major impact on the adoption of
green IT and consideration must be taken of it when introducing
green IT initiatives.
Keywords–Green; Sustainability; Green IT; Information Tech-
nology; Organizational Culture; Management Models; Statistics.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This paper extends [1]. It also builds on [2] and [3], by
undertaking a survey on organizational culture and green IT
level, using the “Competing Values Framework” and seeking
to identify signiﬁcant statistical correlations.
The sustainable use of resources is a key issue facing
the human race. It is widely accepted that the emission of
Greenhouse gases has affected the climate. Other issues in-
clude pollution and the careless disposal of waste. Belkhir and
Elmeligi [4] estimate that the carbon footprint of Information
and Communication Technology (ICT) will rise from between
1 and 1.6% in 2007 to around 14% in 2040. The global
greenhouse gas emissions (GHGE) resulting from ICT will
exceed that of the agricultural sector. The sustainable use of
resources in a way that does not damage the environment, the
so-called “green” agenda, is one of the key issues facing the
human race in the early 21st Century. The role of ICT is clearly
signiﬁcant.
However, while ICT signiﬁcantly contributes to GHGE, it
can also contribute to reducing pollution through technologies
such as “intelligent buildings”, cloud computing and smart
logistics.
There has been pressure on individual companies to take
note of environmental issues [5]. This has come not only from
the need to comply with environmental legislation, but also
from consumer pressure and concern about reputation. Many
companies now accept that economic performance is not the
only measure of success and have adopted a “Triple Bottom
Line” of environment, society and economic performance [6]
[7].
In determining corporate strategy and organizational struc-
tures senior managers often seek guidance from the standard
management models taught in business schools. The extent
to which these models encourage the adoption of green IT
will, therefore, have an effect on the extent to which managers
regard green IT as a serious, mainstream issue.
Organizational Culture has long been recognized as an
issue of great importance within the business literature and,
in recent years, substantial attention has been devoted to
its impact on the adoption of green initiatives. It has been
argued that for companies systematically to incorporate en-
vironmental concerns into their activities requires a major
change of corporate culture [8][9]. However, there has been
limited consideration of the impact of organizational culture
on the adoption of green IT. A key theme of this paper is to
explore the role of culture within IT, and the extent to which
particular types of culture facilitate green initiatives. Cameron
and Quinn’s “Competing Values Framework” is used as a tool
to explore organizational culture.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section
II looks at the green agenda, focusing in particular on green IT.
Section III explores management and organizational models,
which speciﬁcally address green IT. Section IV investigates
the extent to which standard management models focusing on
strategy are favourable to green IT. Section V investigates
the extent to which standard management models focusing
on tactics are favourable to green IT. Section VI investigates
the extent to which standard management models focusing on
operational management are favourable to green IT. Section
VII presents some general conclusions about management
models.
The following sections present the survey on organizational
culture and green IT level. Section VIII considers statistical
applications of the Competing Values Framework. Section IX
describes the survey and the research methodology. Section X
presents the results of the study, along with analysis. Section
XI has some discussion of the results, in particular reﬂecting on

114
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
issues which arise when statistically analysing culture surveys.
Finally, the Conclusion summarises the key points of the paper,
makes some recommendations and looks at possible future
research directions.
II.
THE GREEN AGENDA
The deﬁnition of sustainability provided by the Brundtland
Commission has gained widespread acceptance: “Development
that meets the needs of the present without compromising the
ability of future generations to meet their needs”[10]. There
has been a number of agreements, most recently the Paris
Agreement in 2016. Its central aim was to strengthen the global
response to the threat of climate change, by keeping the global
temperature rise this century well below 2 degrees Celsius
above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the
temperature increase even further to 1.5 degrees Celsius [11].
The terms “IT” and “ICT” are not clearly distinguished
in the literature or in general usage, although “ICT” more
explicitly includes the use of communication networks. Jenkin
et al. [12] distinguish between “Green IT” and “Green IS” .
They deﬁne “Green IT” as the attempt to reduce energy con-
sumption and waste associated with the use of both hardware
and software. “Green IS” they deﬁne as the use of information
systems to support environmental sustainability initiatives. In
this paper we use “Green IT” as a generic term, covering all
efforts to reduce the environmental damage caused by the use
of IT (including networks), or to use IT in a positive way to
improve the environment.
IT has played an increasingly important role in industry
and commerce and makes a substantial contribution to the
environmental footprints of companies, through both the use
of IT and the construction and disposal of IT equipment. IT
data centres make a major contribution to the carbon footprint
of many corporations. Data centres worldwide are projected to
produce around 495 million tonnes of carbon annually by 2020
[4]. The Internet of Things, smartphones and cryptocurrencies
are growing sources of GHGE.
However, the application of IT can make a positive contri-
bution to sustainability in various ways. Software as a Service
(SAAS) and Cloud Computing offer ways for using IT re-
sources more efﬁciently. Companies purchase data storage and
rent software, as required, from external providers. These can
be accessed using “thin client” computers. Server virtualization
has provided the opportunity for servers to be used more
efﬁciently; this allows several servers to be consolidated as
virtual servers on one physical server, enabling sharing of
resources and economies of scale.
Environmental information systems and “intelligent build-
ings” help to reduce energy wastage; supply chain information
systems optimize routing and transportation [13]. Dao et al.
[14] argue for combining IT resources with supply chain man-
agement and human resource management within an integrated
sustainability framework.
Green IT must ultimately, in large part, be delivered by
companies. In recent years, companies have started to recog-
nise that having a “triple bottom line” of People, Proﬁt and
Planet is actually good for proﬁtability. It enhances reputation
and encourages the development of valuable capabilities relat-
ing to sustainability [7]. Deutsche Bank, for example, has an
eight point Green IT policy [15].
III.
MANAGEMENT AND ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS FOR
GREEN IT
Bokolo et al. [16] provide a systematic and up-to-date
review of literature on green IT. This illustrates that much
effort, across a number of disciplines, has been put into
developing models and frameworks for analysing green IT.
Murugesan and Gangadharan [17] divide enterprise green
IT strategy into three approaches.
Tactical Incremental Approach. In this approach, the com-
pany retains the existing infrastructure and policies and intro-
duces simple measures such as switching off computers when
not in use.
Strategic Approach. In this approach, the company devel-
ops a comprehensive plan for making its deployment of IT
more energy-efﬁcient.
Companies following a Deep Green Approach go beyond
the Strategic Approach, adopting additional measures such as
a carbon offset policy to neutralize greenhouse gas emissions.
One of the mostly widely-cited models is Molla and
Cooper’s “Green IT Readiness” or “G-Readiness” framework
[18]. It divides IT into IT Managerial Capability, IT Human
Capability and IT Technical Capability. An organization’s
green IT maturity is assessed in terms of attitude, policy, prac-
tice, technology and governance. There is an accompanying
G-Readiness Survey instrument.
Deng and Ji undertook a review of the literature, seeking
to identify the motivating factors for companies to adopt green
IT [19]. They noted that the literature has “scattered theoret-
ical foundations”, but identiﬁed the following key underlying
theories.
The Diffusion of Innovation Theory investigates the process
by which innovations spread.
Institutional Theory analyses the pressures which inﬂuence
the development of organizations. A key institutional pressure
is “mimetic isomorphism”, the tendency of companies to
follow leading companies in their ﬁeld.
Organizational Culture views organizations as social struc-
tures and examines the way shared assumptions and norms
emerge. This is discussed later in the section on Cameron and
Quinn’s Competing Values Framework .
The Resource Based View (RBV) [20] takes the view that a
company’s competitive advantage resides in its ownership of a
set of resources that are not easily duplicated by a competitor.
These resources can be physical, organizational or social.
Hart [21] extends this to the Natural Resource Based View
(NRBV), by including resources and capabilities particularly
relating to sustainability.
Deng and Ji introduce a theoretical framework for “Orga-
nizational Green IT Adoption” (OGITA). This has the external
drivers of technological context and institutional pressures;
and internal drivers of senior management attitudes, corporate
strategy and organizational culture.
However, senior managers looking for guidance on chang-
ing company strategy, structures and culture are likely to refer
to standard management models. Almost a third (31%) of the
world’s largest 500 companies have a chief executive with
an MBA [22]. It is likely that the management models they

115
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 1. Ansoff Matrix
studied will have inﬂuenced them in their later careers. We
discuss this in the next section.
We use a standard, widely used and inﬂuential book on
management models [23]. We follow its separation of models
into strategic, tactical and operational. In each case, we explore
the extent to which managers employing these models are
likely to be encouraged to adopt green IT. The extent to which
these models “favour” green IT will, therefore, have a major
impact on its adoption.
IV.
STANDARD MANAGEMENT MODELS FOCUSING ON
STRATEGY
These models help a company to analyse its strategic
position and develop strategic plans for the future.
A. Ansoff’s Matrix
Ansoff’s Matrix is a widely used model for helping compa-
nies determine their strategy for developing new products and
entering new markets [24]. In terms of products, they would
have a choice of retaining existing products or developing new
products. In term of markets, they would have a choice of
focusing on existing markets or developing new markets. This
produces four top-level strategies, as illustrated in Figure 1.
The top left quadrant is the “conservative” strategy of focusing
on existing products and markets; the bottom right quadrant
is the “aggressive” strategy of developing new products and
seeking new markets.
The model has been extended to a cube, by introducing a
geographical dimension, where companies consider expanding
into new countries. This is illustrated in Figure 2.
We now consider each of the four quadrants from the per-
spective of green IT. Unless a company is already selling green
products, only the two right hand quadrants are relevant. The
Product Development quadrant would require the promotion of
Figure 2. Ansoff Cube [23]
new green products to existing customers. Managers are likely
to regard this as challenging, unless customers are dynamic,
entrepreneurial and open to change. It would probably be easier
to sell products which have undergone modest modiﬁcation to
be greener, rather than radical new green information systems
using technology with which customers may not be familiar,
such as the Internet of Things or “smart homes”. Selling radical
new green products such as environmental monitoring systems
would probably require the development of new markets and
therefore belongs in the Diversiﬁcation quadrant.
The Ansoff model advises companies to consider four
issues: competitive advantage, potential synergies across the
company’s core competencies, strategic ﬂexibility (the ability
easily to modify strategy to cope with unpredicted events), and
the potential for geographical growth.
We now use the OGITA model discussed above to evaluate
the extent to which use of the Ansoff Matrix would be likely
to encourage companies to adopt green IT. We ﬁrst consider
external pressures.
From a technology perspective, the questions would be:
•
Would going green give the company a relative tech-
nological advantage?
•
Would it be technically challenging?
•
Would it make use of core technical competencies
within the company?
In considering these issues, technological experts within the
company would be considering the challenges of developing
new products, against the backdrop of the possibility of just
going for greater market penetration in existing markets or
developing new markets. Unless there was a compelling reason
to suppose that the greener product would provide a competi-
tive technical advantage or the existing product would become
obsolete because of its poor green credentials, technology
experts would be likely to favour avoiding radical changes to
the existing product portfolio.
We noted above that there are essentially two types of
green IT: those which try to avoid negative environmental
impacts of IT-related products and those which use information
systems to promote sustainability in applications such as
environmental monitoring and smart cities. The latter are likely

116
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
to involve developing radically new products and be much
more challenging in technical terms. They are likely, therefore,
to be deemed unattractive.
From the perspective of external institutional pressures, the
questions would be:
•
Will the company be breaking the law, if it does not
make its products greener?
•
Will the company become out of step with the market
if it does not become greener?
•
Does the company face a risk of reputational damage?
Unless the company is driven by a powerful “mimetic
isomorphism” pressure, external pressures for greenness are
unlikely to be stronger than economic pressures.
Finally, we consider the internal motivations of the OSITA
framework. Senior managers tend to be driven by numbers
and veriﬁable evidence. It is likely to be easier to provide
clear evidence for the beneﬁts of taking existing products
into new markets than to demonstrate that a market will
exist for radical new green products. Many green products
are “disruptive technologies”, for which there is currently no
market. As Christensen argues in his inﬂuential work “The
Innovator’s Dilemma”, company culture is frequently hostile
to such technologies [25]. Unless there are a number of green
champions within the company at a senior level, top managers
are likely to favour developing existing markets and making
only incremental changes to existing products.
Bilgeri et al. [26] applied the Ansoff Framework to ten
companies which were working in the Internet of Things.
They found that the companies were most keen on the Product
Development strategy. Only one company had a strong focus
on Diversiﬁcation.
In summary, the Ansoff model is likely to discourage
companies from developing new greener products, because it
juxtaposes the challenge of developing radical new products
with the easier option of expanding the market for existing
products. Insofar as the use of Ansoff’s Matrix encourages
the adoption of green IT, it is likely to be of a “Tactical
Incremental” nature, within Murugesan’s taxonomy of green
initiatives discussed above.
Another strand in Ansoff’s research on strategic manage-
ment is presented in [24] and discussed in a modern context in
[27]. Ansoff argued that strategic planning was only reasonable
when historical trends were developing incrementally, and was
not useful when dealing with surprises in an unpredictable
environment. In such cases, managers had to respond to
“weak signals” in a context of limited information. Ansoff
argues that the rational response in such circumstances is to
have a ﬂexible strategy and determine which actions will be
appropriate when more information becomes available. The
signals coming from governments about the need for a more
green approach by companies are vague and changeable and
are probably perceived by senior managers as “weak”. In such
circumstances they are likely to postpone radical action.
B. Porter’s Five Forces
Porter’s Five Forces is one of the most established man-
agement models, and has been used for around forty years. It
is used by companies contemplating entering a new industry.
It identiﬁes ﬁve things that need to be considered:
•
New entrants
•
Substitutes (will it be easy to replace the proposed
product with something else?)
•
Buyers
•
Suppliers (companies which will be below you in the
supply chain)
•
Existing Competitors
The employment of Porter’s Five Forces is likely to dis-
courage companies from developing radical new green prod-
ucts and services, for the same reason as Ansoff’s Matrix.
As Christensen (discussed above) notes, you cannot analyse a
market that does not exist. In particular, companies are likely
to worry about ﬁnding buyers, where currently there are none.
They will also be worried about the difﬁculty of constructing
an efﬁcient supply chain.
C. The BCG Matrix
The Boston Consulting Group Matrix goes back to the
1970s [28] [23]. It is used by companies for planning their
product portfolio. It is similar to the Ansoff Matrix, having
two dimensions; in this case, the dimensions are the projected
Market Share and Market Growth. This again creates four main
types of market:
1)
high market share, high growth (best)
2)
high market share, low growth
3)
low market share, high growth
4)
low market share, low growth (worst)
What “advice” will this model give? The market for a new
green Cloud service is likely to be of the third type. The Cloud
market is highly competitive but is likely to grow. The market
for a new environmental monitoring system for reservoirs is
likely to be of the second type. The market is small and
unlikely to grow substantially, but a successful product could
have reasonable expectations of dominating it. Markets for new
IT products which are incrementally more energy efﬁcient are
likely to be of the fourth type. Few green markets are likely
to be of the ﬁrst type. It seems probable that senior decision
makers using the BCG will favour potential new markets of
the ﬁrst type rather than green markets.
D. The Blue Ocean Strategy
This model makes a distinction between a Red Ocean
Strategy, where a company seeks to beat the competition in an
existing market; and a Blue Ocean Strategy, where a company
seeks to develop a brand new market. It encourages companies
to focus on the big picture rather than the numbers [29] [23]. It
provides an antidote to the problems identiﬁed by Christensen,
discussed above, where managers tend to avoid disruptive
technologies. Two types of blue oceans can be created, either
by inventing a new industry or by expanding the strategic
boundaries of an existing industry.
Employment of the Blue Ocean model is likely to be posi-
tive for the development of new Green IT applications, which
potential users were unlikely to have imagined as a possibility,
such as the use of the Internet of Things in Western Africa
to forecast air quality [30] or the application of blockchain
technology in peer-to-peer transactions in photovoltaic power
generation [31].

117
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
E. Kay’s Distinctive Capabilities
The Kay’s Distinctive Capabilities (KDC) model originates
from the Resource Based View, discussed above, which regards
a company as a collection of skills and capacities, many
intangible, which cannot easily be imitated [32] [23]. KDC
separates these into three categories:
•
Architecture (features intrinsic to the company and its
relationships with customers and suppliers)
•
Reputation
•
Capacity to innovate
To some extent this model encourages green innovation.
It acknowledges the value of a company having a reputation
for being ethical. Furthermore, the extension of the RBV
discussed above, the Natural Resource Based View, explicitly
recognizes that green capabilities are likely to be important in
the future. But the model emphasises that it is very difﬁcult
to convert innovation into competitive advantage. The success
of a radical new and efﬁcient Cloud Computing model will
be greatly affected by whether competitors are developing a
similar product.
V.
STANDARD MANAGEMENT MODELS FOCUSING ON
TACTICS
These models help a company to organize its process,
resources and people. They address “how to” questions.
A. Cameron and Quinn’s Competing Values Framework
Anthropology takes the view that organizations are cul-
tures; sociology takes the view that organizations have cultures
[33]. Most organizational theory adopts the sociological per-
spective, regarding culture as an attribute of an organization
that can be measured and analysed. Schein [34] deﬁned orga-
nizational culture as: “A pattern of shared basic assumptions
that the group learned as it solved its problems of external
adaptation and internal integration that has worked well enough
to be considered valid and hence to be taught to new members
as the correct way to perceive, think and feel in relation to
those problems.”
Schein identiﬁed three levels of culture:
•
Artifacts, those aspects which are on the surface such
as dress and can be easily identiﬁed;
•
Espoused Values, that is conscious goals, strategies
and philosophies;
•
Basic Assumptions and Values. These exist at a largely
unconscious level, form the inner core of culture and
are hard to identify.
Basic Assumptions and Values have the deepest inﬂuence and
are the most difﬁcult to change. Many attempts at organiza-
tional change fail because of a failure to change the underlying
culture [35].
Many dimensions of organizational culture have been
proposed, for example, Hofstede [36]: power distance, un-
certainty avoidance, individualism, and masculinity. Cameron
and Quinn’s “Competing Values Framework” (CVF) originated
from a cluster analysis of these dimension schemes. It identi-
ﬁes two key dimensions: Internal Focus and Integration versus
External Focus and Differentiation; and Stability and Control
versus Flexibility and Discretion [37] [38]. The CVF has been
Figure 3. Cameron and Quinn [38]
used in many research studies and has been shown to have a
high degree of validity [39].
The four key culture types identiﬁed by the CVF are
illustrated in Figure 3 and may be summarized as follows
(Adapted from [38]):
•
Hierarchy. Such organizations tend to be bureaucratic.
Formal rules and policies hold the organization to-
gether. The long-term goals of the organization are sta-
bility, predictability and efﬁciency. Government agen-
cies and the military are typical hierarchical cultures.
•
Market. The workplace is results-oriented. Leaders
tend to be aggressive and demanding. The glue that
holds the organization together is an emphasis on
winning. Success is deﬁned in terms of beating the
competition and market share.
•
Clan. The organization is held together by loyalty,
tradition, and collaboration. It is a friendly place to
work, where people share a lot of themselves. Leaders
are thought of as mentors and coaches. Success is
deﬁned in terms of internal climate and concern for
people. The organization places a premium on team-
work, participation, and consensus.
•
Adhocracy The workplace is dynamic, creative, en-
trepreneurial and risk-oriented. The emphasis is on
being at the leading edge of new knowledge, products,
and/or services. The glue that holds the organiza-
tion together is commitment to experimentation and
innovation. Success is deﬁned as the production of
innovative and original products and services.
The CVF has an accompanying Organizational Culture
Assessment Tool (OCAI). It consists of a questionnaire requir-
ing employees to assess their organization, using an ipsative
scale, on six characteristics: Dominant Characteristics, Organi-
zational Leadership, Management of Employees, Organization

118
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Glue, Strategic Emphases and Criteria for Success. A culture
proﬁle diagram can then be produced.
There has been a considerable amount of research on
the relationship between types of organizational culture and
effectiveness. Richard et al. [40] conducted a survey of US
ﬁrms. They found that clan cultures resulted in higher earnings
and employee satisfaction.
In the US health industry, Gregory et al. [41] found a
positive link between group (clan) culture and patient and
physician satisfaction and also a slight link between balanced
cultures and satisfaction.
Linnenluecke and Grifﬁths [42] used the CVF as a frame-
work for investigating the likely emphases which will be
adopted by companies with different types of culture, in pursu-
ing corporate sustainability. They argued that companies would
favour initiatives that were congruent with their dominant
culture.
The successful adoption and diffusion of green IT sys-
tems will also be affected by the organizational culture of
companies. Green IT systems are likely to be “disruptive
technologies”, which are regarded as risky. For example,
attempts to reduce energy use associated with data storage
through the employment of “cloud computing” may raise fears
about security. Green IT systems are, therefore, more likely to
be favoured by companies with clan or adhocracy cultures,
which are non-hierarchical, entrepreneurial and can embrace
change.
The use of the Cameron and Quinn model as a framework
for discussing the impact of organizational culture on the
adoption of green IT is discussed in detail in [3] [2]. A
statistical analysis of a survey is presented in Sections VIII
to XI.
B. Beer and Nohria E and O Theories
Beer and Nohria is a modern management model, which
explicitly emphasises the value of soft skills and the impor-
tance of companies behaving ethically and taking account of
their corporate social responsibility [43] [23].
They have two main theories of change:
•
Theory E. This focuses on the creation of economic
value for shareholders. It involves formal systems and
structures. The decision making process is top-down.
Changes are carefully planned.
•
Theory O. This focuses on a culture that develops
employee commitment and takes note of a company’s
ethical responsibilities. Employees are encouraged to
change and evolve. Change is emergent.
To be successful, a company must embrace both Theory E
and Theory O and confront the tension between them.
The “Theory O” culture combines elements of the adhoc-
racy and clan cultures of the Competing Values Framework
which, it is argued above, are conducive to the adoption of
green IT.
The Beer and Nohria model is favourable to the adoption
of green IT, because it encourages managers and employees
to think of the bigger picture and not just focus on narrow
ﬁnancial considerations. In particular, it asks companies to take
account of their ethical responsibilities. But the model does
Figure 4. Strategic Alignment Model
not ignore the practical exigencies of operating a successful
business. For companies successfully to adopt green IT they
must both have a vision and have the operational capability to
realise it in the real world of business. The Beer and Nohria
model provides a framework for constructively reconciling the
conﬂicting pressures this creates.
C. Henderson and Venkatram’s Strategic Alignment Model
This model addresses IT strategy directly. It seeks to
promote alignment between business strategy and IT strategy
and also between the IT infrastructure and business operations.
Research on alignment between business strategy and IT
goes back to the late 1980s, when Venkatram and Henderson
developed the classic and still highly inﬂuential, “Strategic
Alignment Model”. It is presented in [44], [45] and, slightly
amended, in [46]. Coltman et al. [47] describe it as being
“on the list of seminal and transformative IS publications”.
A key feature of this model is that it provides for IT strategy
inﬂuencing business strategy. Venkatram and Henderson noted
that IT had shifted from a traditional back-ofﬁce, support role
towards being an integral part of the strategy of organizations
[44].
The model recognises four domains: Business strategy,
Organization infrastructure and processes, IT strategy, and
Information Systems infrastructure and processes. The model
is illustrated in Figure 4.
Strategic alignment has two elements: strategic ﬁt and
functional integration. Strategic ﬁt refers to alignment between
strategy and internal structure and processes, with regard both
to business and IT. Functional integration refers to alignment
between general business matters and IT matters, with regard
both to strategy and internal structures and processes.
An important part of the underlying rationale of the model
is that there should be cross-domain relationships between the
business and IT domains. Four key alignment perspectives are
identiﬁed. We consider each of them and their relevance to
encouraging the adoption of Green IT/Green IS. The alignment
perspectives correspond to the arrows in Figure 4.
Strategy Execution
This is visualized by the anti-clockwise arrow from top-
left to bottom right in Figure 4. This corresponds to the
traditional, hierarchical view of organizations, with business
strategy driving organizational infrastructure and information

119
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
systems infrastructure and processes. This leaves IT managers
in a subordinate role of Business Strategy Implementor. This
is unlikely to be favourable to the adoption of green IT, unless
the organizational strategy has a strong focus on sustainability.
Technology Transformation
This is visualized by the clockwise arrow from top-left
to bottom right. This involves implementing business strategy
through IT strategy and then the development of appropriate IT
infrastructure and processes. This puts IT managers in the role
of Technology Architects. They are in a more inﬂuential role
than in Strategy Execution, because they are not constrained
by the current organizational structure. This perspective will
be conducive to the adoption of green IT, if there is a green
organization strategy.
Competitive Potential
This is called Technology Exploitation in [44]. It is repre-
sented by the anti-clockwise arrow from top-right to bottom
left. This perspective provides for IT strategy inﬂuencing
organization strategy. A green IT strategy could then drive a
change in the organization strategy, which led to changes in
the organization infrastructure to reduce the carbon footprint of
the organization’s use of IT. It could also lead to changes, such
as the use of cloud computing services or the development of
environmental monitoring systems.
Service Level
This is called Technology Implementation in [44]. It is
represented by the clockwise arrow from top-right to bot-
tom left. Here the organizational infrastructure follows the
IT infrastructure, which is determined by IT strategy. This
could be conducive to limited changes to the organizational
processes, which reduced the energy consumption of IT within
the organization; but not to more fundamental changes such
as server virtualisation or the use of the Internet of Things to
support environmental sensors, which would need to be driven
by business managers at board level.
There is no “right” perspective. Effective strategy develop-
ment would use all the perspectives as lenses through which to
view strategy. Coltman et al. [47] observe that in recent years
digital business strategy has effectively become the strategy
of many companies, which makes the concept of IT-business
strategy alignment less meaningful.
Overall, Henderson and Venkatram’s Strategic Alignment
Model provides a framework which, if all the perspectives are
analysed, should be conducive to the adoption of Green IT.
Loeser et al. [48] extend Henderson and Venkatraman’s
Strategic Alignment Model to a Strategic Green IT Alignment
Framework (SGITAF), which explicitly incorporates Environ-
mental sustainability and Green IT domains. They argue that
SGITAF provides a framework which supports the leveraging
of Green IT’s full potential.
VI.
STANDARD MANAGEMENT MODELS FOCUSING ON
OPERATIONAL MANAGEMENT
These models help a company to optimize operational
process and activities.
The Change Quadrants model is a tool to assist companies
to effect a particular change [49] [23]. It analyses companies
on two dimensions: whether they are “warm” or “cold”; and
Figure 5. Change Quadrants
whether the key motivation for the proposed change is “warm”
or “cold”.
A warm organization is one where there is a shared sense
of values and employees do not have a merely transactional
relationship with the organization. It is rather like the “Clan
Culture” in the Cameron and Quinn Competing Values model.
A cold organization is one which is hierarchical and governed
by rules, systems and procedures.
A warm motivation for a proposed change is driven by a
shared sense of values across the company. A cold motivation
is a response to a crisis such as the emergence of a dangerous
competitor.
This produces the four quadrants in Figure 5. The change
strategy should be tailored to the quadrant. A “warm or-
ganization that is willing” (the bottom right quadrant) will
be open to change. It will be possible to develop a long-
term vision bottom-up. It would be possible to adopt a Deep
Green approach to Green IT, in Murugesan and Gangadharan’s
taxononmy. A “cold organization that is obligated” (the top left
quadrant) will have to drive change top-down; employees will
only have a say in the implementational details. It would only
be possible to adopt a Tactical Incremental approach. The key
message of the model is that real transformation, such as is
involved in the systematic adoption of green IT, requires a
warm organization and a warm motivation for change.
VII.
GENERAL CONCLUSIONS ABOUT MANAGEMENT
MODELS
Most of the older models are driven by relatively short-term
bottom line considerations. These are likely to be unfavourable
to green IT. More recent models, such as Beer and Nohria
and Change Quadrants, tend to adopt a wider perspective on
the responsibilities of companies and also take more note of
“softer” people and ethical issues. They are more likely to be
favourable towards green IT.
Managers need to be cautious about over-reliance on
standard models, especially those which take a narrow view
of corporate responsibilities. They should consider employing
models which take account of wider issues, in particular those
models which incorporate consideration of sustainability.
VIII.
STATISTICAL APPLICATIONS OF THE “COMPETING
VALUES FRAMEWORK”
Sections VIII to XI present a survey on organizational
culture and green IT level, using the “Competing Values

120
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 6. Average Culture Proﬁle [38]
Framework” and seeking to identify signiﬁcant statistical
correlations. It used the OCAI, mentioned above. For each
characteristic, people are required to distribute 100 points
between statements about company culture, corresponding to
the four culture types.
The results can be used for various purposes, e.g, to
calculate the average proﬁle of an organization and identify
the main culture types(s); to identify discrepancies between
current and preferred culture; and to ascertain the degree of
congruence between results produced by different groups of
employees. Cameron and Quinn averaged the results for over
one thousand companies; this resulted in the average proﬁle in
Figure 6.
This indicates that companies tend, on average, to be
dominated by market and hierarchy cultures. Cameron and
Quinn also found a tendency for companies to drift towards
a greater emphasis on market and hierarchy as they matured.
Both of these factors suggest a tendency for corporate culture
to be inimical to sustainability initiatives.
Some researchers use a Likert version of the OCAI. The
implications of this are discussed later.
All of the example uses of the CVF mentioned in earlier
sections use statistical analysis, with the exception of Lin-
nenluecke and Grifﬁths [42]. There have been many other
statistical applications of the OCAI to investigate the rela-
tionship between culture and various factors. Business Process
Management is considered in [50]; Knowledge Management
is considered in [51].
IX.
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
In this section, we state the research questions and outline
the design and execution of the survey which was undertaken.
A. Research Questions
The key research questions are:
•
Does organizational culture have an impact on the
adoption of green IT within companies?
•
Is the impact, if any, which organizational culture has
on the adoption of green IT, affected by the country
in which the company is located?
The following then are the research hypotheses:
H1Null The organizational culture type has no effect on the
adoption of green IT.
H1Positive The organizational culture type has a signiﬁcant
effect on the adoption of green IT.
H2Null The impact of organizational culture on the adoption
of green IT is not affected by the country in which a company
is located.
H2Positive The impact of organizational culture on the adop-
tion of green IT is signiﬁcantly affected by the country in
which a company is located.
B. Survey Design
A survey was used to evaluate the organizational culture of
companies and the extent to which they had adopted measures
to support the adoption of green IT.
Cameron and Quinn’s “Competing Values Framework”
provided the theoretical underpinnings of the culture test. The
associated OCAI tool was employed.
The level of greenness in the deployment of IT in the
respondent’s company was measured by eight questions, cov-
ering policy, strategy and practical issues, such as whether
the company purchased computers with silver or gold EPEAT
ratings. One question, on whether the company had a Green IT
Policy in place, had possible answers yes/no/don’t know. The
remaining questions required responses to statements about
greenness on a 5 point Likert scale, from “Strongly Agree”
to “Strongly Disagree”.
In addition, there were questions about demographics,
asking the respondent to identify the country in which they
were located, the industry sector of their company, the size of
the company and their primary role in the company.
C. Survey Execution
The survey was created using Qualtrics. It was distributed
electronically to contacts of the authors for onward distribution
and placed on a number of forums.
The preamble to the survey included the statement: “This
survey is intended to be completed by people, for whom IT
(widely deﬁned) forms a substantial part of their job function.”
X.
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
A. Demographics
There were 29 usable replies, from a range of countries as
shown in Figure 7.
The highest categories for Industry Sector were Education
(16) and IT. The remaining respondents came from a range of
areas, including government, banking and transport.
7 respondents identiﬁed their primary roles as IT Managers;
3 as Chief Information Ofﬁcers. Over one third of respondents
chose the “Other” box, giving a wide range of roles.

121
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Country
Freq
%
India
3
10.3
UK
9
31.0
US
1
3.4
France
12
41.4
China
3
10.3
Russia
1
3.4
Total
29
100.0
Figure 7. Location
Culture
Cronbach's  Alpha Based 
on Standardized Items
Clan
0.852
Market 
0.817
Adhocracy
0.773
Hierarchy 
0.829
Green IT Measure
0.888
Figure 8. Cronbach’s Alpha
Minimum
Maximum
Mean
Std. Deviation
ClanTotal
0.50
80.00
25.6609
17.28918
MarketTotal
0.00
55.00
26.8333
15.58948
AdhocTotal
0.00
33.33
17.5115
9.16125
HierTotal
6.67
75.00
29.9943
17.40630
Figure 9. Culture Statistics
B. Reliability
We used Cronbach’s Alpha measure, based on standardized
items, to test reliability. Each of the six questions in the OCAI
represents a test of culture, with the ﬁrst option of the questions
corresponding to clan culture, the second to adhocracy culture,
the third to market culture and the fourth to hierarchy culture.
We measured for consistency across these six questions.
Four of the questions used to measure the level of adoption
of green IT required respondents to score on a ﬁve point scale.
We tested for consistency across these questions.
The results are given in Figure 8. All variables met the
generally recognised benchmark of being at least 0.75. It is
noticeable that the score for adhocracy is signiﬁcantly lower
than the other culture types. This may be because this culture
type is more nebulous and harder to recognise and characterize.
C. The Impact of Organizational Culture
Figures 9 and 10 give the average culture proﬁle of the
sample. It is consistent with the research of Cameron and
Quinn mentioned above, with market and hierarchy being the
dominant cultures. However, in Cameron and Quinn’s research,
market culture takes ﬁrst place, whereas in the present study,
hierarchy takes ﬁrst place. The lower market value may reﬂect
the relatively high proportion of people working in education.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
ClanTotal
Market Total
Adhocracy Total
Hierarchy Total
Percentage
Average Culture Profile
Figure 10. Culture Proﬁle
Level of Green IT
Pearson Correlation
-.369*
Sig. (2-tailed)
0.049
N
29
Pearson Correlation
0.151
Sig. (2-tailed)
0.433
N
29
Pearson Correlation
-.431*
Sig. (2-tailed)
0.020
N
29
Pearson Correlation
.458*
Sig. (2-tailed)
0.012
N
29
HierTotal
**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).
*. Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).
Pearson Correlations
ClanTotal
MarketTotal
AdhocTotal
Figure 11
Figure 11 applies Pearson Correlation to the four culture
types with the level of Green IT in the organization. The Green
IT measure has 1 as the highest level of Green IT and 5 as
the lowest. Hence a negative value of the Pearson correlation
coefﬁcient indicates that a culture type is positively associated
with greenness. We do not know in advance whether particular
culture types will have a positive or negative inﬂuence, so we
used 2-tailed correlation.
Clan and adhocracy cultures are positively associated with
greenness and hierarchy culture is negatively associated. These
correlations are at the 0.05 level. The smallness of the sample
made it unlikely that an association at the 0.01 level would be
found. No signiﬁcant assocation was found for market culture.
We can therefore reject the H1Null hypothesis above and
conclude that culture has an effect on the adoption of green
IT.
D. The Impact of Location
Figure 12 gives the culture proﬁle for the UK and France,
which were the only countries to have a signiﬁcant number of

122
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Minimum
Maximum
Mean
Std. Deviation
ClanTotal
4.2
38.3
22.1
11.7
MarketTotal
0.0
48.3
23.9
14.3
AdhocTotal
4.2
33.3
19.5
10.3
HierTotal
18.3
75.0
34.4
23.1
ClanTotal
10.8
80.0
34.0
21.7
MarketTotal
5.8
50.0
26.3
17.8
AdhocTotal
4.0
25.0
15.1
6.2
HierTotal
6.7
48.3
24.7
14.0
France
UK
Figure 12. Culture Proﬁle by Country
Green IT Level
Pearson Correlation
-0.526
Sig. (2-tailed)
0.146
N
9
Pearson Correlation
-0.299
Sig. (2-tailed)
0.435
N
9
Pearson Correlation
-0.650
Sig. (2-tailed)
0.058
N
9
Pearson Correlation
.742*
Sig. (2-tailed)
0.022
N
9
Pearson Correlation
-0.094
Sig. (2-tailed)
0.771
N
12
Pearson Correlation
0.251
Sig. (2-tailed)
0.432
N
12
Pearson Correlation
0.135
Sig. (2-tailed)
0.676
N
12
Pearson Correlation
-0.233
Sig. (2-tailed)
0.465
N
12
France
ClanTotal
MarketTotal
AdhocTotal
HierTotal
UK
ClanTotal
MarketTotal
AdhocTotal
HierTotal
Figure 13. Pearson Correlation for France and the UK
respondents. It is noticeable that the UK has a substantially
lower clan and higher hierarchy score than France. This may
reﬂect the collegiate nature of French universities, but the
small number of the sample makes it impossible to draw ﬁrm
conclusions.
Figure 13 gives Pearson correlations for France and the
UK. The only statistically signiﬁcant correlation (at the 0.05
level), between culture and greenness, for either the UK or
France, was that for the UK, hierarchy culture has a negative
impact on greenness. We therefore cannot reach a conclusion
on the validity of the H2 hypotheses.
XI.
DISCUSSION
The literature generally indicates that clan and adhocracy
cultures are positively correlated and hierarchy cultures neg-
atively correlated, with characteristics that require openness
to new practices, such as concern for green issues. Examples
include [52], [53] and [50] (with regard to clan and hierarchy
culture). The present study is consistent with this.
The CVF has been used in many research studies and has
been shown to have a high degree of validity. Cameron and
Freeman [54] and Zammuuto and Krakower [55] applied it
in the ﬁeld of higher education and found that culture type
was a strong predictor of organizational effectiveness. These
studies found evidence for concurrent validity. Quinn and
Spreitzer [39] further found evidence for convergent validity
and discriminant validity. However, the ﬁndings of the meta-
analytic investigation of the CVF by Hartnell et al. [56], while
supporting the contention that culture has a major impact on
organizational effectiveness, provided only mixed support for
the CVF’s underlying suppositions.
There is a Likert version of the OCAI, which was used
in some of the studies using the CVF, for example [51], [53]
and [57]. The ipsative version forces people to make choices:
giving a high score to one culture type reduces the points
available for other types. With the Likert version by contrast,
it is possible to give a high score to all culture types. In [57], it
was found that all four culture types were positively correlated
with successful use of knowledge management practices. This
result would have been unlikely if the ipsative version of the
OCAI had been used.
Eijnatten et al. [58] provide an interesting and extremely
detailed analysis of the difference between ipsative and Likert
surveys, with particular reference to the CVF. They argue that
Likert surveys are norm-referenced, whereas ipsative studies
are criterion referenced. For example, in an ipsative survey,
a respondent might give a low score for adhocracy because
they had given a high score to other culture types. Another
respondent in a different company might allocate a higher
score to a company with the same adhocracy characteristics,
making it invalid to compare scores. Eijnatten et al. further
contend that with ipsative studies only “only intra-individual,
not inter-individual, comparisons are possible.” This would
make traditional correlation techniques invalid. Eijnatten et al.
propose alternative statistical analysis techniques, involving the
use of Fisher’s permutation test and Aitchison distances.
Eijnatten et al. note that completing ipsative questions is
more difﬁcult that completing Likert ones, resulting in lower
response rates.
It is noticeable that all the correlation coefﬁcients for
France are low, suggesting that the results of the survey
are somewhat random. This may reﬂect the fact that the
OCAI survey is linguistically quite challenging, especially for
speakers of English as a second language. Or it may reﬂect
the fact that the survey is rather rooted in the Anglo Saxon,
especially US world, with its references to concepts such as
“nurturing leadership”.
The key weakness of this study is the small sample size. It
is challenging to ensure that a survey is completed by a sample
that is sufﬁciently large and representative to permit statistical
analysis to be undertaken with a high degree of conﬁdence.
It may be worth exploring the use of web crawling to look
for indications of culture and assess level of consideration of
green issues.
There needs to be greater consideration of the international
dimension. However, using Cameron and Quinn’s Organiza-
tional Culture Assessment Instrument in an international set-

123
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
ting raises complex issues. The Competing Values Framework
is located within the Anglo-American business tradition and
there is a deep link between culture and language. Outside the
English-speaking world, the OCAI either has to be translated
or be completed by respondents using a second language. Both
approaches make transnational comparison difﬁcult.
XII.
CONCLUSION
This paper has considered the extent to which standard
management models are likely to support the adoption of green
IT. It explored strategic, tactical and operational management
models. It was concluded that many management models are
not favourable to the adoption of green IT, in particular many
of the older standard management models which do not take
a holistic view of corporate responsibilities. It is, therefore,
incumbent upon managers not to place excessive reliance on
such models.
There is a need for the development of new management
models, which more explicitly integrate traditional bottom
line considerations with the wider ethical responsibilities of
companies, in particular those relating to sustainability.
This paper has investigated the impact of culture, in
particular organizational culture, on the success of green IT
initiatives.
An international survey was undertaken on organizational
culture and green IT level. The key ﬁnding is that culture
has a major impact on the success of sustainability initiatives
within ICT, with clan and adhocracy cultures being positively
associated and hierarchy cultures negatively associated with
greenness. Managers introducing sustainability initiatives must
seek to understand the culture within their organization. They
could seek to encourage a clan culture, for example, by using
360 degree performance evaluation where, in addition to being
assessed by their managers, staff assess their managers and
peers.
An investigation was also undertaken into whether the
impact, if any, which organizational culture has on the adoption
of green IT, is affected by the country in which the company
is located. The results were inconclusive.
There was discussion of the complex technical issues which
arise from the statistical analysis of culture surveys.
Future research directions include further empirical anal-
ysis of the impact of the use of management models on a
sustainability culture within IT and consideration of the effect
of operating within different cultures. There is also a need for
development of more rigorous metrics for green IT.
REFERENCES
[1]
W. M. Campbell, “An exploration of the use of standard management
models on the adoption of Green IT,” in Proceedings of Green 2017:
The second International Conference on Green Communications Com-
puting and Technologies.
[2]
W. M. Campbell, M. Ratcliffe, and P. Moore, “An exploration of
the impact of organizational culture on the adoption of green IT,” in
Proceedings of the Green Computing and Communications Conference
(Green-com), 2013, pp. 68–76.
[3]
W. M. Campbell, M. Ratcliffe, P. Moore, and M. Sharma, “The
inﬂuence of culture on the adoption of green IT,” in Green Services
Engineering,Optimization and Modeling in the Information Age, X. Liu
and Y. Li, Eds.
Earthscan, London, 2015, pp. 25–60.
[4]
L. Belkhir and A. Elmeligi, “Assessing ICT global emissions foot-
print:trends to 2040 and recommendations,” Journal of Cleaner Pro-
duction, 2018.
[5]
M. Menguc and L. Ozanne, “Challenges of the green imperative: a
natural resource-based approach to the environmental-business perfor-
mance relationship,” Journal of Business Research, vol. 58, 2005, pp.
430–438.
[6]
J. Elkington, “Towards the sustainable corporation.” California Man-
agement Review, vol. Winter, 1994, pp. 90–100.
[7]
——, “Enter the triple bottom line,” in The Triple Bottom Line: Does It
All Add up?, A. Henriques and J. Richardson, Eds. Earthscan, London,
2004, pp. 1–16.
[8]
W. E. Stead and J. G. Stead, Management for a small planet: Strategic
decision making and the environment.
Newberry Park, CA: Sage,
1992.
[9]
J. E. Post and B. W. Altman, “Managing the environmental change
process: Barriers and opportunities,” Journal of Organizational Change
Management, vol. 7, no. 4, 1994, pp. 64–81.
[10]
G. H. Brundtland, “Our common future,” in Report of the World
Commission on Environment and Development.
Oxford University
Press, 1987.
[11]
U. Nations, “Paris agreement,” in Framework Convention on Climate
Change.
United Nations, 2016.
[12]
T. Jenkin, J. Webster, and L. McShane, “An agenda for ’green’ informa-
tion technology and systems research,” Information and Organization,
vol. 21, 2011, pp. 17–140.
[13]
R. T. Watson, M. C. Boudreau, A. Chen, and M. H. Huber, “Green
IS: Building sustainable business practices,” in Information Systems.
Athens, GA, USA: Global Text Project, 2008.
[14]
V. Dao, I. Langella, and J. Carbo, “From green to sustainability:
Information technology and an integrated sustainability framework,”
Journal of Strategic Information Systems, vol. 20, 2011, pp. 63–79.
[15]
DeutscheBank,
“Green
IT:
Energy
efﬁciency
at
work,”
https://www.db.com/cr/en/concrete-green-it.htm, Accessed 14 August
2018.
[16]
A. Bokolo, M. Majid, and A. Romli, “Organizational culture and lead-
ership: Preconditions for the development of a sustainable corporation,”
Sustainable and Applied Information Technology, vol. 95, no. 9, 2017,
pp. 1875–1915.
[17]
S. Murugesan and G. R. Gagadharan, Eds., Harnessing Green IT:
Principles and Practices.
Wiley, 2012.
[18]
A. Molla and V. Cooper, “Enterprise Green IT readiness,” in Harnessing
Green IT: Principles and Practices, S. Murugesan and G. R. Gagadharan,
Eds.
Wiley, 2012.
[19]
Q. Deng and S. Ji, “Organizational Green IT adoption: Concept and
evidence,” Sustainability, vol. 7, 2015.
[20]
B. Wernenfelt, “A resource based view of the ﬁrm,” Strategic Manage-
ment Journal, vol. 5, 1984, pp. 171–180.
[21]
S. L. Hart, “A natural-resource based view of the ﬁrm,” Academy of
Management Review, vol. 20, no. 4, 1995.
[22]
FinancialTimes, “Where did FT500 chief executives go to busi-
ness school?” https://www.ft.com/content/3a63c054-b885-11e5-b151-
8e15c9a029fb, Accessed 3 June 2019, Published January 2016.
[23]
M. VanAssen, Key Management Models: The 60+ models every man-
ager needs to know.
Prentice Hall, 2009.
[24]
H. I. Ansoff, Corporate Strategy.
Penguin Books, 1987.
[25]
C. Christensen, The Innovator’s Dilemma: Whe New Technologies
Cause Great Firms to Fail.
Harvard Business Review Press, 1997.
[26]
D. Bilgeri, E. Fleisch, and F. Wortmann, “How the IoT affects
multibusiness industrial companies: IoT organizational archetypes,” in
Proceedings of the Thirty Ninth Conference on Information Systems,
San Francisco 2018.
[27]
M. Holopainen and M. Toivonen, “Weak signals: Ansoff today,” Future,
Elsevier, vol. 44, 2012, pp. 198–205.
[28]
D. C. Hambrick, I. C. Macmillan, and D. L. Day, “Strategic attributes
and performance in the BCG matrix,” Academy of Management Journal,
vol. 25, 1982, pp. 510–531.

124
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[29]
W. C. Kim and R. Mauborgne, Blue Ocean Strategy. Harvard Business
School Press, 2005.
[30]
C. Dupont, M. Vecchio, C. Pham, B. Diop, C. Dupont, and S. Kofﬁ, “An
open IOT platform to promote eco-sustainable innovation in Western
Africa: Real urban and rural testbeds,” Wireless Communications and
Mobile Computing, 2018.
[31]
C. Gao, Y. Ji, J. Wang, and X. Sai, “Application of blockchain
technology in peer-to-peer transaction of photovotaic power generation,”
in 2nd IEEE Advanced Information Management, Communications,
Electronic and Automation Control Conference, 2018.
[32]
J. Kay, Foundations of Corporate Success: How business strategies add
value.
Oxford University Press, 1993.
[33]
K. Cameron and D. R. Ettington, “The conceptual foundations of
organizational culture,” in Higher Education: Handbook of Theory and
Research, J. C. Smart, Ed.
Norwell, Mass.: Kluwer, 1988, vol. 4.
[34]
E. Schein, Organizational Culture and Leadership.
Jossey-Bass, 1992.
[35]
K. Cameron, D. Bright, and A. Caza, “Exploring the relationship
between organizational virtuousness and performance,” American Be-
havioral Scientist, vol. 47, 2004, pp. 766–790.
[36]
G. Hofstede, Culture’s Consequences.
SAGE, 1980.
[37]
R. Quinn and J. Rohrbaugh, “A spatial model of effectiveness crite-
ria: Toward a competing values approach to organizational analysis,”
Management Science, vol. 29, 1983.
[38]
K. Cameron and R. Quinn, Diagnosing and Changing Organizational
Culture Based on the Competing Values Framework.
Wiley, 2011.
[39]
R. Quinn and G. Spreitzer, “The psychometrics of the competing values
culture instrument and an analysis of the impact of organizational
culture on quality of life,” in Research in Organizational Change and
Development, R. W. Woodman and W. A. Passmore, Eds.
Greenwich
Conn.: JAI Press, 1991, vol. 5.
[40]
O. Richard, A. McMillan-Capehart, S. N. Bhuian, and E. C. Taylor,
“Antecedents and consequences of psychological contracts: Does orga-
nizational culture really matter?” Journal of Business Research, vol. 62,
2009, pp. 818–825.
[41]
B. T. Gregory, S. G. Harris, A. A. Armenakis, and C. L. Shook,
“Organizational culture and effectiveness: A study of values, attitudes
and organizational outcomes,” Journal of Business Research, vol. 62,
2009, pp. 673–679.
[42]
M. Linnenluecke and A. Grifﬁths, “Corporate sustainability and organi-
zational culture,” Journal of World Business, vol. 45, 2010, pp. 357–366.
[43]
M. Beer and N. Nohria, Breaking the Code of Change.
Harvard
Business School Press, 2000.
[44]
J. C. Henderson and N. Venkatram, “Strategic alignment: A model for
organizational transformation via Information Technology,” Publication
of Centre for Information Research, Sloan School of Management
Massuchusetts Institute of Technology, 1990.
[45]
——, “Understanding strategic alignment,” Business Quarterly, vol. 55,
no. 3, 1991, pp. 12–89.
[46]
——, “Strategic alignment: Leveraging information technology for
transforming organizations,” IBM Systems Journal, vol. 32, no. 1, 1993,
pp. 4–16.
[47]
T. Coltman, P. Tallon, R. Sharma, and M. Queiroz, “Strategic alignment:
twenty-ﬁve years on,” Journal of Information Technology, vol. 30, 2015,
pp. 91–100.
[48]
F. Loeser, K. Erek, N.-H. Schmidt, R. Zarenkow, and L. M. Kolbe,
“Aligning Green IT with environmental strategies: Development of a
conceptual framework that leverages sustainability and ﬁrm competi-
tiveness,” in AMCIS 2011 Proceedings.
[49]
J. P. Cotter, Breaking the Code of Change.
A Force for Change: How
Leadership differs from Management, 1990.
[50]
B. Hribar and J. Mendling, “The correlation of organizational culture
and and success of BPM adoption,” in Proceedings of the Twenty
Second European Conference on Information Systems, Tel Aviv 2014.
[51]
C. Chin-Loy and B. G. Mujtaba, “The inﬂuence of organizational
culture on the success of knowledge management practice with North
American companies,” International Business and Economics Research
Journal, 2007.
[52]
¨Ulle ¨Ubius and R. Alas, “Organizational culture types as predictors
of corporate social responsibilty,” ISSN 1392-2785 Engineering Eco-
nomics, vol. 1, no. 61, 2009.
[53]
A. Akano and W. M. Campbell, “A Cross-cultural Survey of the Impact
of Organizational Culture on Adoption of Green IT,” in Proceedings
of the Eighth International Conference on Complex, Intelligent and
Software Intensive Systems 2014 (CISIS 2014). Birmingham UK, 2014.
[54]
K. Cameron and S. Freeman, “Cultural congruence, strength and
type: Relationships to effectiveness,” in Research in Organizational
Change and Development, R. W. Woodman and W. A. Passmore, Eds.
Greenwich Conn.: JAI Press, 1991, vol. 5.
[55]
R. F. Zammuto and J. Y. Krakower, “Quantitative and qualitative studies
of organizational culture,” in Research in Organizational Change and
Development, R. W. Woodman and W. A. Passmore, Eds.
Greenwich
Conn.: JAI Press, 1991, vol. 5.
[56]
C. A. Hartnell, A. Y. Ou, and A. Kinicki, “Organizational culture
and organizational effectiveness: A meta-analytic investigation of the
competing values framework’s theoretical suppositions,” Journal of
Applied Psychology, vol. 96, no. 4, 2011, pp. 677–694.
[57]
K. Chidambaranathan and S. BS, “Analysing the relationship between
organizational culture and knowledge management dimensions in higher
education libraries,” Journal of Librarianship and Information Science,
2017.
[58]
F. M. Eijnatten, L. van der Ark, and S. S. Holloway, “Ipsative measure-
ment and the analysis of organizational values: an alternative approach
for data analysis,” Quality and Quantity, vol. 49, 2015.

