Low-Cost Technology for the Integration of Micro- and Nanochips into Fluidic 
Systems on Printed Circuit Board: Fabrication Challenges 
 
Nuria Berenice Palacios-Aguilera, Jeroen 
Bastemeijer, Jeff R. Mollinger, Andre Bossche 
Electronic Instrumentation Laboratory 
Delft University of Technology 
Mekelweg 4,  
2628CD Delft, the Netherlands 
n.b.palaciosaguilera@tudelft.nl, j.bastemeijer@tudelft.nl, 
j.r.mollinger@tudelft.nl, a.bossche@tudelft.nl 
Venkata R. S. S. Mokkapati 
Nanosystems, Health and Environment Department 
Austrian Institute of Technology 
Donau city strasse 1 
1220 Vienna, Austria 
v.r.s.s.mokkapati.fl@ait.ac.at 
 
Hendrikus Antonius Visser, Remko Akkerman 
Production Technology Group 
University of Twente 
7500AE Enschede, the Netherlands 
h.a.visser@ctw.utwente.nl, r.akkerman@ctw.utwente.nl
 
 
Abstract—Nowadays, micro- and nanochips are usually 
fabricated with Silicon and/or glass. A simple, low-cost and 
reliable integration packaging method that provides flexibility 
to the incorporation of electronic and fluidic devices into a 
system has not been fully developed yet. The use of Printed 
Circuit Board material as substrate to create dry film resist 
microfluidic channels is the core technology to provide such an 
integration method. The feasibility and potential of the 
proposed packaging method is demonstrated in this work. 
Keywords - dry film resist, printed circuit board, inkjet 
printing, integration, low-cost. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper is an extension of the work presented in [1] 
where the use of the TMMF dry film resist (DFR) from 
Tokyo Ohka Kogyo Co., Ltd. to create microfluidic channels 
on top of printed circuit board (PCB) to facilitate the access 
to nanofluidic channels is treated. 
Microfluidic devices fabricated with dry film resist and 
Silicon (Si) and/or glass substrate have previously been 
reported [2] [3] [4]. Moreover, nanofluidic devices are 
usually fabricated with Silicon and/or glass [3] [5] [6] [7] 
[8]; even if nano-imprint technologies are used to fabricate 
them, a rigid substrate (usually glass) is required [9] [10]. 
What concerns the microelectronic chips; those are usually 
fabricated with Silicon. 
The use of Silicon and/or glass to build fluidic systems 
elevates their cost [11] and the reliable fluidic connection of 
nanofluidic devices to the outside world still needs to be 
optimized in order to reduce costs and simplify the 
fabrication process.  
Furthermore, a reliable method that combines great 
flexibility at integrating microelectronic devices in fluidic 
systems and low-costs are necessary to enable a broad use of 
microfluidic devices in quotidian life instead of expensive 
and voluminous equipment. 
A low-cost fabrication method for microfluidic channels 
on top of a substrate composed by a micro- or nanochip 
inlaid in PCB material is presented. Inkjet printed 
interconnections 
are 
proposed 
to 
provide 
electrical 
connection between the chip(s) and the PCB electronics.  
Following this approach, the chip(s) can be kept small in 
size and simple (standard) in technology thus decreasing 
costs. Furthermore, even if the silver ink and Rogers 
substrate have a relatively high cost, the overall cost is still 
lower than fabricating the devices with only Silicon and 
glass; even if some of the materials present relatively long 
curing times due to the low curing temperatures, still a 
device can be fabricated, with this technology, in less than 
seven days. 
In addition, the low-cost PCB facilitates the fluidic and 
electrical connections to the outside world allowing the 
integration of micro- and nanodevices in a simple, robust and 
fast way. 
In this work, the principle of the packaging integration 
technology is explained. In Section III, the physical 
properties of the materials used are presented. In Section IV, 
the fabrication process is detailed. Then, the challenges 
associated with the fabrication process are treated; first the 
challenges associated with the inlaying of the chip(s) in the 
PCB to form the substrate are described, followed by the 
fabrication of DFR fluidic channels on the substrate, and 
finally the challenges associated with the inkjet printing of 
electrical interconnections are discussed. The common factor 
to each challenge is the use of different materials as a 
substrate. Finally, the TMMF microfluidic interconnection is 
tested against leakage and the compatibility of the materials 
is studied by means of a thermal shock test in order to 
determine delamination. In addition, the suitability of the use 
11
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

of inkjet printing technology for the creation of the electrical 
interconnections is studied by determining its performance 
under drastic temperature changes. To finalize this work, 
conclusions and future work are presented. 
II. 
PRINCIPLE 
The key material enabling the integration of micro- and 
nanochips into fluidic systems based on the lamination of 
DFR on PCB is a non-conductive adhesive (NCA).  
The already fabricated chips are inlaid on the PCB 
material by means of a NCA. The chip(s) together with the 
PCB material compose the substrate for the fabrication of the 
microchannels that run over the chip. The microchannels are 
realized in dry film resist. 
Concerning the electric access to the chip(s), inkjet 
printed interconnection lines are created between the 
electrical contacts of the chip(s) and the pads on the PCB. 
Figure 1a shows a schematic of the concept when 
integrating a nanofluidic chip using the proposed technology; 
in this case the DFR microfluidic channels interconnect the 
nanofluidic channels in the chip to the macroworld. The 
microelectrodes in the nanofluidic device can be accessed via 
inkjet printed electrical interconnections. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Schematic of different applications of the proposed technology, 
(a) integration of a nanofluidic chip, (b) integration of a microelectronic 
chip. 
Figure 1b illustrates the concept when integrating a 
microelectronic chip using the proposed technology, for 
example an image sensor. In this case the dry film resist 
enables the construction of a microfluidic channel on top of 
the microchip and the inkjet printed conductive ink enables 
the possibility of accessing the functionality of the image 
sensor by the creation of electrical interconnection lines 
between the connection pads on the microchip and the pads 
on the PCB. 
 The challenges associated with the three aspects (NCA, 
DFR, inkjet printed ink) mentioned in this section are treated 
within the scope of this work. Quantitative as well as 
qualitative results are presented to evaluate the feasibility 
and robustness of the proposed integration method. 
III. 
MATERIALS 
TMMF dry film resist poses a unique stability when in 
contact with alkaline solutions and acids [3] [4] and provides 
high resolution and high aspect ratios [2] [4] making it the 
resist of choice for the fabrication of microfluidic channels. 
The DFR used to fabricate the microfluidic channels is 
TMMF S2030, a permanent photoresist with a thickness of 
30 µm for MEMS (microelectromechanical systems),  
manufactured by Tokyo Ohka Kogyo Co., Ltd. This negative 
photoresist is composed 5 % of antimony compound and 95 
% of epoxy resin [2] [3]. 
Furthermore, the PCB material used as mechanical 
support for the whole system is Rogers RO4003C, a glass 
reinforced hydrocarbon laminate with low roughness 
characteristics. 
Table I shows the physical characteristics of TMMF 
S2030 and Rogers RO4003C. 
TABLE I.  
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF TMMF S2030 AND ROGERS 
RO4003C [2] [12] 
Physical Properties of TMMF S2030 and Rogers RO4003C 
Physical Property 
TMMF 
S2030 
Rogers 
RO4003C 
Coefficient of thermal expansion 
(ppm/°C) 
65 
X 11 
Y 14 
Z 46 
Transition 
glass 
temperature 
(°C) 
230 
>280 
Moisture absorption (%) 
1.8 
0.06 
Dielectric constant 
3.8 
3.38±0.005 
Transparency (nm) 
400-600 
- 
Breaking strength (MPa) 
60.3 
- 
Young modulus (MPa) 
2100 
26.889 
 
The NCA used to glue the chips to the PCB material is a 
colorless two-parts epoxy-based adhesive with a glass 
transition temperature (Tg) of 45 °C and a coefficient of 
thermal expansion (CTE) of 56 ppm/°C when below the 
glass transition temperature, and 211 ppm/°C when above 
the glass transition temperature. 
The 
ink 
used 
for 
the 
inkjet 
printed 
electric  
interconnections is a heat-curable silver nano-particle ink 
with a metal content of 20 % and a curing temperature of 
12
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

125 °C. The thickness of one printed layer with such inks is 
in the range of 1-4 µm. 
The names and brands of the NCA and the silver ink 
have been consciously left out.  
IV. 
FABRICATION PROCESS 
The fabrication process is divided in three steps: 
 Inlaying of the chip in the PCB by using a NCA. The 
chip and the PCB together with the NCA form the 
substrate for the following steps. 
 Fabrication of the microfluidic channels on the substrate. 
 Fabrication of the inkjet printed interconnections between 
the chip and the PCB connection pads. 
A. Inlaying of the Chip(s) in the PCB 
The very first step to proceed to the fabrication of the 
TMMF microfluidic channels on top of PCB material is to 
form the substrate composed by the PCB and the chip(s). 
Figure 2 illustrates this process. 
 
 
Figure 2.  PCB material and nanofluidic chip leveling process flow chart. 
According to Figure 2, to align the PCB material and the 
chip, a double sided Kapton tape is rolled on a Silicon or 
glass wafer or any other extremely flat and rigid surface (a). 
The PCB and the chip are adhered on the Kapton tape (b). 
The specimens are placed under vacuum to improve the 
adhesion between the Kapton tape and the components to be 
aligned. An Oxygen (O2) plasma treatment at 50 W during 
10 sec is performed using the Europlasma NV equipment. 
The epoxy-based adhesive is dispensed in the space between 
the PCB material and the chip (c). The materials are placed 
in a vacuum chamber to remove trapped air in the glue. The 
materials are placed in an oven or on a hot plate at 80 °C for 
3 hours to cure the adhesive (d). When the adhesive is totally 
cured, the materials are cooled down to room temperature. 
The new substrate consisting of the chip inlaid in the PCB 
material is removed from the Kapton tape and turned 180 
degrees (e). 
To prepare the NCA, both parts from the adhesive are 
placed in a container and mixed with a Cat RM5 roller. The 
mix is placed in a vacuum chamber to remove possible 
trapped air. 
B. Fabrication of TMMF Microfluidic Channels 
The second stage of the fabrication process consists of 
laminating the TMMF microfluidic channels on top of the 
formed substrate. Figure 3 shows the flowchart for this 
process. 
 
 
Figure 3.  TMMF microfluidic channel lamination on top of the formed 
substrate. 
The formed substrate is cleaned with ethanol and dried 
on a hotplate for 2 hours at 120 °C (f) to remove any 
adsorbed moisture; this will avoid that the humidity absorbed 
by the PCB material affects the DFR lamination process. An 
Oxygen plasma treatment is performed to the substrate in 
order to improve the adhesion between the TMMF resist and 
the formed substrate. The TMMF is protected on both sides 
with polyethylene terephthalate (PET). 
The substrate is kept at 45 °C. One of the PET protective 
layers is removed from the DFR and the TMMF resist is 
13
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

laminated on the substrate (g). The other PET layer is 
removed after the sample has cooled down. A soft baking 
step is performed at 90 °C during 5 minutes. The exposure is 
performed once the sample reaches room temperature. A 
post exposure baking step is performed with the same 
temperature and time than the soft baking step. The TMMF 
is developed using PGMEA (propylene glycol monomethyl 
ether acetate) after the sample has cooled down to room 
temperature (i).   
Before closing the channels, the inkjet printed 
interconnections are printed. 
A second layer of TMMF is laminated at 45 °C to close 
the microfluidic channels. The second layer is flood exposed 
after lamination without removing the remaining PET layer. 
The sample is cured at room temperature during one day. 
The PET layer is removed and access holes to the channel 
are punched with the help of a needle (j).  
An alternative to create more stable and robust access 
holes instead of punching them in the TMMF is to use a 
through via in the PCB; in this case the access holes are 
accessed from the back side. 
The alignment of the channels and the chip is performed 
manually, with the required equipment, and thus the 
accuracy is less than that of automated units. 
C. Fabrication of the Inkjet Printed Interconnections 
Finally, the inkjet printed interconnection lines are 
created.  
The lines are printed with the drop-on-demand inkjet 
printer Jetlab 4 from Microfab Technologies, Inc., USA. The 
nozzle used is a piezo-actuated nozzle of 80 µm of diameter. 
The substrate holder is heated at 65 °C during the 
printing process to avoid spreading of the ink. 
The printed ink is cured in an oven during 16 hours at 
125 °C. 
With the 80 µm diameter nozzle, the smallest width line 
possible is 90 µm and the smallest space between lines 
possible is 70 µm. 
V. 
CHALLENGES ASSOCIATED WITH THE FABRICATION 
PROCESS 
Since the fabrication process is divided in three crucial 
tasks, the challenges associated with the fabrication process 
are grouped in three sections directly associated with each of 
the three crucial tasks. 
A. Challenges Associated with the Inlaying of the Chip(s) 
in the PCB 
The NCA used to keep together the chip(s) and the PCB 
material is an epoxy-based material. 
Epoxy-based adhesives are known to present shrinkage 
due to the evaporation of the curing agent during the curing 
process [13] [14]. It is important to understand the behavior 
of this phenomenon given the fact that for a successful inkjet 
printing process, a flat surface is desired. 
According to [15] a profile like the one in Figure 4 is 
expected after the NCA curing process. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Profile expected in the NCA due to the curing process. 
The effects of the glue shrinkage are studied into detail in 
Section VI Experiments. 
B. Challenges Associated with the Fabrication of TMMF 
Microfluidic Channels 
The challenges associated with the fabrication of TMMF 
microfluidic channels on the substrate are associated with the 
lamination of TMMF on PCB material and with the 
lamination of TMMF on the chip(s). 
a) Lamination of TMMF on Rogers material: The 
challenges associated with the processing of TMMF resist 
on Rogers materials are pinholes in the photoresist, trapped 
bubbles between the resist and the PCB material, cracks in 
the photoresist, and closed channels. 
Pinholes: TMMF might present pinholes after the soft 
baking step.  
Experiments were conducted, and up to some extent, the 
pinholes can be decreased by using a plasma treatment, 
nevertheless, the crucial factor determining their presence is 
the moisture absorbed by the PCB material. 
 
 
Figure 5.  PCB material immersed under water prior to TMMF lamination 
(left) and PCB material dried at 120 °C prior to TMMF lamination (right). 
The presence of pinholes on the TMMF resist after soft baking is 
influenced by the moisture absorbed by the PCB. 
Figure 5 shows two PCBs where TMMF was laminated 
and soft baked. In the specimen on the left side, the PCB 
material was immersed in water during 2 hours and its 
surface was dried with nitrogen prior to TMMF lamination. 
In the specimen on the right, the PCB material was placed on 
14
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

a hotplate during 2 hours at 120 °C in order to evaporate the 
absorbed moisture prior to TMMF lamination. 
Trapped bubbles and cracks: Experiments show that if 
the baking times are either higher or lower than the optimal 
time by at least one minute and the PCB material contains 
moisture absorbed from the atmosphere, trapped bubbles 
and cracks will form in the photoresist structures. The 
formation of trapped bubbles is directly related to the 
moisture absorbed by the PCB material and the use of 
inadequate baking times. The formation of cracks is related 
to the thermal stresses that result from a forced cooling 
down of  the specimens after the baking steps and improper 
baking times. Furthermore, the moisture absorbed by the 
PCB material promotes the formation of cracks. 
Figure 6 shows trapped bubbles between the TMMF and 
the PCB material as well as cracks in the dry film resist 
structures. The PCB material used for this experiment was 
not dried prior to TMMF lamination. Moreover, the baking 
times used in the processing were not optimal. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Trapped bubbles and cracks due to the humidity absorbed by the 
PCB material and the improper baking times used for processing of the 
TMMF. 
Figure 7 shows a crack in the photoresist structure, but 
no trapped bubbles. The PCB material used for this 
experiment was dried prior to TMMF lamination, 
nevertheless, the baking times were not optimal. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Cracks in the TMMF structures with angles close to 90 °. The 
circle in the image points the crack.The cracks are caused by the use of 
non-optimal baking times.  
Closed channels: The exposure time should be 
controlled accurately when working with Rogers’ materials. 
Scattering and diffraction of ultraviolet (UV) light during 
exposure is unavoidable when using a non-transparent 
material. Furthermore, the white color of the Rogers PCB 
material makes reflection of the waves a bigger problem.  
The effects of an underexposed resist, as Figure 8 shows, 
are well known. On the other hand, overexposure can result 
in partially or totally closed fluidic channels. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Effects of insufficient exposure time. The circle points an effect 
on the TMMF structure. 
15
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 9.  Closed channels on PCB material due to overexposure of the 
TMMF resist. The arrow in the left image points the effects of an 
overexposure of 2 seconds. The arrow in the right image points the effects 
of an overexposure of 6 seconds. 
The more a sample is overexposed, the more closed the 
channels will be. Figure 9 shows a sample overexposed by 2 
seconds (left) and a sample overexposed by 6 seconds 
(right).  
b) Lamination of TMMF on the chip(s): Micro- and 
nanofluidic chips are usually made of glass and/or Silicon 
(Si), microelectronic chips are usually made of Silicon. PCB 
material and Si poses different thermal characteristics.  
The thermal conductivity of the PCB material is 
approximately 0.71 W/m/°K [12] and the thermal 
conductivity of Si is around 140 W/m/°K [16].  Due to the 
thermal characteristics of the materials, heat transport at the 
baking steps is not a problem for the PCB material but it is 
for the Si chip(s). 
The most common problem associated with the 
lamination of TMMF on Silicon is cracks due to heat 
transport at the baking steps and the difference in CTE [3]. 
Figure 10 illustrates this problem. 
 
 
Figure 10.  Cracks in the TMMF resist due to the CTEs difference between 
Silicon and the TMMF resist. 
When the PCB material and the chip(s) are have the same 
thickness, as Figure 11a shows, the microfluidic chip will 
conduct heat around 25 times faster than the PCB material. 
Therefore, placing the substrate directly at 90 °C during the 
baking steps will originate cracks on the TMMF laminated 
over the chip. To solve this, the temperature needs to be 
ramped (2 °C/min) starting at 55 °C during the baking steps, 
when the temperature reaches 90 °C the samples are baked 5 
minutes. Afterwards the hot plate’s temperature is set to 25 
°C, the sample is removed once the hot plate indicates 25 °C. 
 
 
Figure 11.  Cross-section of the substrate with TMMF on the hotplate when 
(a) the chip is the same thickness as the PCB material and (b) the chip is 
thinner than the PCB material.. 
Furthermore, if the chip is considerably thinner than the 
PCB material, as Figure 11b shows, the substrate can be 
placed directly at 90 °C. In this case, the thermal 
conductivity of the air between the chip and the hot plate will 
limit the heat flux to the chip, avoiding the presence of 
cracks on the TMMF. 
This last method allows for less control thus the slow 
ramping of the temperatures is highly recommended. 
C. Challenges Associated with the Fabrication of the 
Inkjet Printed Interconnections 
The suitability of inkjet printed inks for their use in the 
proposed technology is studied. The main challenge and 
concern is the continuity of the interconnection lines, which 
can be affected by the step or curvature in the NCA due to its 
own shrinkage, especially if the step has a depth bigger than 
the thickness of the silver ink. 
 
 
Figure 12.  Possible step profiles, (a) steep step, (b) smooth step. 
If the height difference between the chip and the NCA or 
the PCB and the NCA is steep as the arrow in Figure 12a 
indicates, it is expected that the continuity of the ink 
interconnection is interrupted. If the step is smooth as the 
arrow in Figure 12b points, the ink is expected to be 
continuous. 
The adhesion of the ink is not expected to be a problem, 
since a plasma treatment is already performed prior to 
laminating the TMMF channels; however it is studied for 
confirmation. 
VI. 
EXPERIMENTS 
Each crucial aspect of the fabrication process is studied 
to test the feasibility of the proposed integration technology. 
16
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A. Inlaying of the Chip(s) in the PCB 
In the case of the NCA shrinkage phenomenon, samples 
with different distance between the chip and the PCB 
material were prepared. The specimens were prepared 
following the procedure in Section IV.A. 
The distance between the chip and the PCB is hardly 
controlled with precision. To control such gap, the chip(s) to 
be inlaid is measured and the desired distance between the 
chip and the PCB is added to the measurement; the hole in 
the PCB is created with these dimensions. The chip is placed 
carefully in the middle of the hole; this is the most difficult 
step since it is performed manually. 
The step profile is measured with Dektak profiler and the 
angle of the step profile is obtained using Matlab code.  
Figure 13 illustrates the measured step and the measured 
angle to avoid any misunderstanding. The step is measured 
from the deepest point in the NCA profile to the level of the 
PCB and/or chip. The angle of the NCA step with respect to 
a horizontal line is measured to determine the steepness of 
the step. 
 
 
Figure 13.  Sketch of where to locate the angle and step measured in each 
specimen. 
Furthermore, few specimens cured at room temperature 
are prepared to determine the effects of the heat during the 
curing process in the substrate. Keep in mind that the 
materials in the substrate have very different CTEs thus the 
curing process temperature could affect the alignment of the 
chip and the PCB. 
Since simulations of the curing process of an epoxy resin 
are complex and topic for a complete paper, it is not treated 
in this work and so the effect of the shrinkage in the substrate 
surface profile is determined in an experimental manner. 
B. Fabrication of TMMF Microfluidic Channels 
The TMMF microfluidic channels on the substrate are 
tested for leakage and exposed to sudden temperature 
changes. 
The leakage test consists of injecting a rodhamine + 
ethanol + di water solution in the TMMF channels in one of 
the inlets. A visual inspection follows to detect any leakage. 
Special attention is given to the interconnection area between 
the different materials.  Figure 14 shows the mentioned 
interconnection area before closing the TMMF channels. 
 
 
Figure 14.  Close up of the interface between the different materials that 
form the fluidic interconnections to the nanofluidic chips. 
The reliability test consists of a thermal shock test based 
on the military standard 883C. The purpose of this test is to 
accelerate the appearance of delamination and cracks.  
The test consists of 15 cycles where each cycle is 
composed by a high temperature step at 100 °C and a low 
temperature step at 0 °C. The liquid used is water. After 
completing the test, a visual inspection is performed at a 
magnification no greater than 3x [17]. For further details 
about the test please refer to [17] and [18]. 
C. Fabrication of the Inkjet Printed Interconnections 
The performance of the ink under sudden changes of 
temperature is studied to test the reliability of the inkjet 
printed interconnections. To do so, the resistivity of the ink is 
measured according to the Greek-cross method described in 
[18]. The resistivity is measured before and after the thermal 
shock test described in the previous subsection, with the 
exception that 20 cycles are performed during the test. The 
number of cycles has not considerably impact on the results; 
according to the standard, the cycles are increased during the 
test to compensate when there is less control on the 
temperatures and it is difficult to guarantee the variation 
limits specified by Option A [17]. Moreover, the adhesion of 
the ink is also studied before and after the reliability test 
using the Scotch-tape procedure described in [18]. The 
specimens used to perform the tests described in this 
paragraph are inkjet printed on Rogers. 
The thickness of the ink is measured with a Dektak 
profiler. The thickness is necessary to calculate the resistivity 
values. The thickness measured is around 1 µm thus the ink 
thickness used for the calculations is 1 µm. 
A resistivity change of maximal 20 % in the aged 
samples with respect to the fresh sample is considered a pass 
[19]. 
Furthermore, tests are performed printing on the whole 
substrate, that is to say, on the chip, NCA and the Rogers 
material, to test the continuity of the interconnection in the 
interface between the chip, the NCA and the PCB material. 
17
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Visual examination under a microscope is performed and the 
conductivity of the lines is tested with a multimeter. 
VII. RESULTS AND SOLUTIONS 
In this section the results are presented in three 
subsections.  
First the results concerning the step originated by the 
shrinkage of the NCA.  
Second, the results concerning the lamination of TMMF 
on PCB material and the chip(s) are presented. The leakage 
test results are exposed and the results concerning the 
compatibility of the TMMF and the different materials 
involved in the substrate. 
Third, the results concerning the performance of the ink 
under sudden temperature changes and its continuity when 
printing on the materials’ interface area are presented. 
A. Inlaying of the Chip(s) in the PCB 
Table II and Table III show the results of the step depth 
and angle measured for different spaces between the chip 
and the PCB material.  
Section VI Experiments explains how the distance 
between the chip and the PCB material is controlled. 
TABLE II.  
STEP DEPTH AND ANGLE 
Distance between 
PCB and chip 
(µm) 
Step depth 
(µm) 
Angle 
side 1 
(°) 
Angle 
side 2 
(°) 
160 
5.76 
25.29 
4.97 
200 
6.16 
17.69 
20.31 
300 
8.47 
29.01 
12.45 
TABLE III.  
STEP DEPTH AND ANGLE 
Distance between 
PCB and chip 
(µm) 
Step depth 
(µm) 
Angle 
side 1 
(°) 
Angle 
side 2 
(°) 
500 
19.79 
27.30 
16.54 
750 
24.92 
29.16 
2.90 
1000 
32.00 
3.40 
30.13 
 
The results in Table II are measured in a different 
specimen than those for Table III. According to Table II and 
Table III, the smaller the space between chip and PCB, the 
smaller the depth of the step is. 
Furthermore, Figure 15 shows the profile of a specimen 
from Table II and Figure 16 shows the profile of a specimen 
from Table III. 
According to the experiments, a NCA profile with the 
shape of Figure 16 can be obtained when the space between 
the chip and the PCB is at least 500 µm, if the space is less; a 
profile with peaks and irregular shape like in Figure 15 is 
obtained. 
 
 
Figure 15.  Profile of a specimen from Table II. 
 
Figure 16.  Profile of a specimen from Table III. 
 
Figure 17.  Profile of a specimen cured at room temperature. 
Figure 17 shows the profile of a specimen cured at room 
temperature. During the experiments, it was observed that 
the specimens cured at room temperature present high 
18
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

probabilities of keeping the PCB and the chip at the same 
level in the Z-axis, that is to say, horizontally aligned. Figure 
16 shows the profile of a specimen that is cured at 80 °C; in 
this case the chip and the PCB are misaligned in the Z-axis 
by 10 µm, which is a typical value at this curing temperature. 
B. Fabrication of TMMF Microfluidic Channels 
The results in this section are presented in three 
subsections. First, the results relevant to the TMMF resist 
channels on the substrate; second, the results of the leakage 
test and third, the results of the reliability test to detect 
delamination problems. 
a) TMMF resist channels on the substrate. Some factors 
should be kept in mind to obtain good results fabricating 
microfluidic channels on PCB materials.  The baking times 
provided by the companies are optimal, nevertheless, 
different materials conduct the heat in a different rate, and 
therefore, the material temperatures might deviate from the 
prescribed temperature, especially when using a hot plate. 
Furthermore, PCB materials are more reflective than Silicon 
or glass; because of this, the exposure time should be tuned 
accurately; if channels of less than 50 µm are desired, this 
parameter is critical.  
Figure 18 shows a TMMF structure on PCB material 
fabricated with optimal exposure and baking times.  
 
 
Figure 18.  Microfluidic channels on PCB material. The image shows the 
results of optimal processing parameters (exposure and baking times). 
 
Figure 19.  TMMF microfluidic channel walls on the Si chip, fabricated 
avoiding sudden temperature changes in the process. 
Figure 19 shows the TMMF microfluidic channel walls 
on the Silicon chip fabricated in a way that sudden 
temperature changes are avoided; the temperature is slowly 
ramped during the baking steps. It is possible to observe that 
there are no cracks present in the TMMF structure. 
b) Leakage test. Concerning the leakage test, Figure 20 
shows a device fabricated with the packaging technology 
presented in this work.  
 
 
Figure 20.  TMMF microfludic channels on PCB material as fluidic 
interconnections for nanofluidic chips. The small image in the lower left 
corner zooms in at the interface of the different materials that form the 
device; it shows no leakage of the rodhamine solution. 
The pink liquid flowing through the TMMF channel is a 
solution of rodhamine + ethanol + di water. It is observed 
that no leakage occurs. The small image at the lower corner 
in the left was obtained with a 1X71 Olympus inverted 
microscope equipped with a low noise self cooling CCD 
19
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

camera (color view II, Olympus); it shows, with 10x 
magnification, the area where the different materials 
interconnect. It is possible to observe the liquid solution 
flowing through the TMMF channel without leakage.  
c) Reliability test. Figure 21 shows a device without 
closed channels after the thermal shock test. 
 
 
Figure 21.  TMMF delamination on top of the Si chip after the thermal 
shock test. The circle points at the place where the delamination occurs. 
The circle makes emphasis on a failure result from the 
test. Delamination of TMMF occurs on top of the fluidic 
chip. From the 3 tested specimens, the failure was observed 
only in the specimen from Figure 21. 
C. Fabrication of the Inkjet Printed Interconnections 
Table IV shows the measured resistivity values in µΩ·cm 
before and after the ageing test. 
TABLE IV.  
RESISTIVITY OF THE INKJET PRINTED STRUCTURES 
BEFORE AND AFTER THE THERMAL SHOCK RELIABILITY TEST 
Specimen 
number 
Fresh 
specimen 
resistivity 
(µΩ·cm) 
Aged 
specimen 
resistivity 
(µΩ·cm) 
Increase 
(%) 
1 
38.75 
38.43 
 -0.82 
2 
42.51 
40.56 
 -4.58 
3 
26.79 
26.47 
 -1.18 
 
Even though the resistivity values can be considered high 
with respect to the values obtained in [18] and to the 
resistivity of bulk silver (1.59 µΩ·cm), the performance of 
the ink under sudden changes of temperature is good, in all 
the cases the resistivity decreased by a percentage of less 
than 5 %. 
The adhesion characteristics before and after the ageing 
test are also good. 
Scotch tape is used to test qualitatively the adhesion. The 
tape is rolled with pressure over the printed ink test structure, 
and then peeled off. The ink traces lifted with the tape when 
peeling it off are considered failures. There are no ink traces 
on the tape after peeling it off, which means that the ink was 
not peeled off from the Rogers material during the test. 
The silver ink presented thus no adhesion failures before 
and after the reliability test. 
Furthermore, 
Figure 
22 
shows 
the 
silver 
ink 
interconnection line printed on top of the components that 
form the substrate.  
 
 
Figure 22.  Interconnection silver ink line printed on the chip, the NCA and 
the Rogers material. 
The printed silver ink line follows the profile of the 
surface with step depths measured in the range of 3-20 µm 
presenting electrical conductivity between both extremes of 
the line.  
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK 
The experiments show that the step caused by the NCA 
cannot be completely eliminated. 
To reduce the depth of the step it is recommended to 
have the minimum space possible between the chip and the 
PCB material.  
Moreover, curing the NCA at room temperature is 
recommended in order to reduce the misalignment between 
the PCB and the chip in the Z-axis. 
The thermal shock reliability test showed that the use of 
high temperature conditions could cause delamination 
problems mainly at the interface TMMF-NCA-Si chip. This 
means that the strength of the TMMF microfluidic 
interconnections decreases thus the probability of leakage 
increases. 
Moreover, the experiments confirm the feasibility of the 
use of inkjet printed interconnection lines to create the 
electrical interconnection between the connection pads on 
the chip(s) and the connection pads on the PCB. 
The silver ink shows perfect adhesion properties under 
room temperature conditions as well as under sudden 
temperature changes.  
The electrical performance of the ink is not considerably 
affected by the rapid changes in temperatures. 
Finally, the inkjet printing process and the characteristics 
of the NCA step allow the ink interconnection line to follow 
perfectly the substrate’s profile, thus keeping the continuity 
in its conductivity and structure at all moments. 
20
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Further work includes the use of an image sensor 
available in the market to prove the feasibility of the 
proposed technology in a real life application. The PCB in 
turn can carry the necessary electronics for control and read-
out. This enables the PCB as the core for the integration of 
micro- and nanochips together with electronics into a 
complex system. 
Moreover, this work can be extended as assembly 
solutions for wider application areas as MEMS sensors and 
actuators. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank the Delft Institute of Microsystems 
and Nanoelectronics (Dimes) staff for their valuable help. 
Furthermore, the authors thank Rogers Corporation for 
providing low-roughness Rogers’ material free of cost and 
Tokyo Ohka Kogyo Co., Ltd. for providing TMMF S2030 
resist to develop this research. The authors also thank CMC 
Klebetechnik GmbH for providing double side Kapton tape. 
This work is supported by the Dutch Technology Foundation 
STW. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N.B. Palacios-Aguilera et al., “Dry film resist microfluidic 
channels on printed circuit board and its application as fluidic 
interconnection for nanofluidic chips: fabrication challenges”, 
International Conference on Quantum Nano and Micro 
Technologies (ICQNM), 2011, Saint Laurent du Var, France, 
pp. 71-76. 
[2] L. Zhang, Thesis: “Bioparticle separation in microfluidic 
devices for in-line application”, Delft University of 
Technology, Delft, the Netherlands, 2009, pp.112-113. 
[3] V. R. S. S. Mokkapati, “Micro and nanofluidic devices for 
single cell and DNA analysis”, Delft University of 
Technology, Delft, the Netherlands, 2011. 
[4] U. Stöhr, P. Vulto, P. Hoppe, G. Urban, and H. Reinecke, 
“High-resolution 
permanent 
photoresist 
laminate 
for 
microsystem 
applications”, 
J. 
Micro/Nanolith. 
MEMS 
MOEMS, vol. 7(3), Jul.-Sep. 2008, doi: 10.1117/1.2964217. 
[5] N. T. Nguten and S. T. Wereley., “Fundamentals and 
applications of microfluidics”, Artech House Publishers, 
2002, pp. 67-129. 
[6] K. Wang et al., “Nanofluidic channels fabrication and 
manipulation 
of 
DNA 
molecules”, 
IEE 
Proceedings 
Nanobiotechnology, 
Vol. 
153, 
No. 
1, 
Feb. 
2006, 
doi:10.1049/ip-nbt:20050044. 
[7] C. Song and P. Wang, “Fabrication of sub-10 nm planar 
nanofluidic channels through native oxide etch and anodic 
wafer bonding”,  IEEE Transactions on Nanotechnology, Vol 
9, No. 2, Mar. 2010, doi:10.1109/TNANO.2009.2038377. 
[8] C. Wu et al., “Design and fabrication of a nanofluidic channel 
by selective thermal oxidation and etching back of silicon 
dioxide 
made 
on 
a 
silicon 
substrate”, 
Journal 
of 
Micromechanics and Microengineering, Vol 17, 2007, 
doi:10.1088/0960-1317/17/12/001. 
[9] L. J. Guo, X. Cheng, and C. Chou, “ Fabrication of size-
controllable nanofluidic channels by nanoimprinting and its 
application for DNA stretching”, Nanoletters, Vol. 4, No. 1, 
2004. 
[10] R. Yang et al., “Fabrication of micro/nano fluidic channels by 
nanoimprint 
lithography 
and 
bonding 
using 
SU-8”, 
Microelectronic 
Engineering, 
2009, 
doi:10.1016/j.mee.2009.02.002, Article in Press. 
[11] K. Kalkandjiev et al., “Microfluidics in silicon/polymer 
technology as a cost-efficient alternative to silicon/glass”, 
Journal of micromechanics and microengineering, Vol. 21, 
2011, doi:10.1088/0960-1317/21/2/025008. 
[12] Rogers Corporation Avanced Circuit Materiaals, “RO4000® 
laminates – data sheet”, retrieved June 20, 2012 from 
http://rogerscorp.com/acm/products/16/RO4000-Series-High-
Frequency-Circuit-Materials-Woven-glass-reinforced-
ceramic-filled-thermoset.aspx. 
[13] K.F. Schoch et al., “Real-time measurement of resin 
shrinkage during cure”, Termochimica Acta 417, 2004, pp. 
115-118. 
[14] H. Yu et al., “Cure shrinkage measurement of nonconductive 
adhesives by means of a thermomechanical analyzer”, Journal 
of Electronic Materials, Vol. 34, No. 8, 2005, pp. 1177-1182. 
[15] B. Patham, “COMSOL implementation of a viscoelastic 
model 
with 
cure-temperature-time 
superposition 
for 
predicting cure stresses and springback in a thermoset resin”, 
Excerpt from the proceedings of the COMSOL conference, 
2009, Bangalore, India. 
[16] H. R. Shanks et al., “Thermal conductivity of silicon from 300 
to 1400 °K”, Phys. Rev. (USA), Vol. 130, No. 5, pp. 1743–
1748, 1963. 
[17] Military 
standard: 
test 
methods 
and procedures 
for 
microelectronics MIL-STD-883C notice 6, August 1987. 
[18] N.B. Palacios-Aguilera et al., “Shapeable Li-ion batteries as 
substrate: 
printed 
electronics 
reliability”, 
International 
Conference on Electronics Packaging proceedings, 2011, 
Nara, Japan, pp. 844-848. 
[19] Parlex 
Corporation, 
“Polymer 
thick 
film-material 
performance and reliability”, retrieved June 20, 2012 from 
http://www.parlex.com/tech_library/PTFWhitePaper.pdf.
 
21
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

