Simulation of the Emergency Department
Management during the Pandemic
1,2,4Ramona Galeano, 1Dolores Rexachs, 1Alvaro Wong, 5Eva Bruballa,
2Cynthia Villalba, 3Diego Galeano, 1Emilio Luque
1Computer Architecture and Operating Systems Department
Universitat Aut´onoma de Barcelona (UAB)
Barcelona, Spain
e-mail: RamonaElizabeth.Galeano@autonoma.cat, Dolores.Rexachs@uab.cat
alvaro.wong@uab.es, eva.bruballa@eug.es, emilio.luque@uab.es
2Facultad Polit´ecnica
3Facultad de Ingenier´ıa
4Facultad de Ciencias M´edicas
Universidad Nacional de Asunci´on
San Lorenzo, Paraguay
e-mail: cvillalba@pol.una.py, dgaleano@ing.una.py
5Escuela Universitaria de Inform´atica
Escuela Universitaria Gimbernat
Abstract—The COVID-19 pandemic has caused disasters
worldwide, overwhelming public health systems and generating
actions such as movement restrictions and containment orders.
It has strained public health systems and exposed the healthcare
needs and gaps for marginalized and vulnerable populations.
Modeling and simulation can help make a physical or logical
representation of a system to generate data and determine
decisions or predict a given system or problem. In this paper, we
present an adaptation of our previous work on a simulation of
an agent-based model to simulate an emergency department for
a different hospital in a pandemic situation; we compare some
of the results we obtained from the simulations with reality to
help the management of the emergency department.
Index Terms—simulation; agent-based model; COVID-19;
management
I. INTRODUCTION
Pandemics occur when a new virus emerges for which the
necessary natural defenses are not possessed, so it spreads
rapidly, sometimes with disastrous results. It is a disease
outbreak that spans several countries and continents, affects
many people, crosses many borders, exceeds the expected
cases, and persists over time. Pandemics are often caused by
viruses, such as COVID-19, which can be easily spread from
person to person.
The COVID-19 pandemic caused a severe economic, social,
and health crisis never seen before. They cause unemployment,
leading to an exponential increase in poverty, and their reper-
cussions on developing unprecedented famines.
It constitutes a disruptive situation that generates high
individual and collective stress levels. For many people, it
implies a tragic situation due to the losses they must face:
loss of loved ones, health, housing, property, or employment.
Many countries suffered many consequences from the cri-
sis, with overloaded health systems, unemployment, business
failures, and other problems. This is particularly true in the
poorest areas, where the pandemic has exposed deep-seated
inequalities.
The COVID-19 pandemic generated a shock wave that
affected the entire world economy and triggered the biggest
crisis in over a century. This led to a drastic increase in
inequality within and between countries.
The COVID-19 pandemic affected different aspects of life
and caused many collateral problems, such as biological
damage and mental health problems. It has also generated
unique ethical dilemmas stemming from the various demands
on society generated by many of the decisions made and the
existing health system.
Health professionals must make decisions about allocating
scarce resources that can eventually cause moral distress and
affect their mental health and patients.
Another edge has been the restrictions on freedom of
movement, which has forced the closure of entire economies
to flatten the epidemics’ curve. Even the recommendation of
good hygiene practices, proper hand washing, and physical
distancing, which seem easy to comply with, may be chal-
lenging in the poorest societies.
Finally, some will question the ethics behind the search for
effective treatments and the development of vaccines; research
carried out at a time of uncertainty and anguish.
Most countries have been affected, including developed
and developing countries. COVID-19 has caused death and
exposed the severe limitations of the countries’ health systems.
Emergency departments must be prepared to handle crises
80
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

and disasters such as the pandemic. During this time, they
required a quick solution to give a sustained response to the
problem that came ahead.
Simulation can be used effectively to create or improve
a system or process. It is beneficial to build hypothetical
scenarios; it is used in many areas and also for emergency
departments.
The main methods used for simulation in emergency de-
partments are agent-based simulation [1], [2], discrete events
[3], and system dynamics [4]. The advantage of simulation
is facilitating the automatic search for scenarios that can
provide the best solutions given a set of constraints and future
states. This automation of the search for improvements to an
emergency department can significantly help managers who
need answers to problems.
We have previously developed an agent-based model for
emergency departments; some of our works are: creating a
simulator using NetLogo [5], performance optimization of
these emergency systems [6], micro-level behavior of the
emergency department for the prediction of characteristics at
the macro level [7], contact transmission of MRSA between
hospitalized patients [8] among others. An agent-based model
is an approach to model systems where individual agents
interact. It offers ways to more easily model interactions of
individuals and also how these interactions affect other agents
in the system [9].
Our work presented here builds upon the work of Liu et al.
[10] that developed a simulator for planning and management
of the emergency department, which has the advantage of hav-
ing been verified and validated in several cycles or iterations,
taking into account a wide variety of data and configurations,
and with the participation of emergency department staff at
the Hospital of Sabadell (Spain).
This work adapted an agent-based model that allows mod-
eling the management of an emergency department during
a pandemic such as COVID-19. The emergency department
incorporated doctors and nurses from other specialties to
support the emergency area, manage more resources (adding
beds or boxes to increase the number of people who can be
treated), and the severity levels of the patients to a pandemic
situation (COVID-19), where the patients who attended were
the most serious.
To adapt the incorporation of more personnel to the emer-
gency department, our simulator was configured, which has
personal resources as a configurable parameter and also con-
siders two levels of junior and senior experience: juniors
(with limited knowledge or low experience) and seniors (with
experience); we use the two levels that the simulator already
has to map the two types of classification on them doctors used
during the pandemic. This is very important because during the
COVID-19 pandemic, in addition to the emergency intensivists
(seniors), health personnel from different specialties (juniors
versus intensivists) were incorporated into the emergency
department.
For the experimental part, we have prepared a set of
synthetic input data for the simulation, arrival distribution
of patients with COVID and NON-COVID with different
levels of severity, and general distribution by the age of the
simulated patients; with these input data, we have analyzed the
occupation time of the doctors and nurses, the waiting time of
the patients, the service time according to the level of severity.
Then we compared it with reality, obtaining very promising
results.
Our simulator describes the behavior of the emergency
department during the COVID-19 pandemic and can help
hospital personnel as a decision support system for emergency
department management.
The paper is organized as follows. In section II, we explain
related works. In section III, the adaptation of the emergency
department model. Section IV describes the simulation. Sec-
tion V presents the experiments and discussion, and section
VI presents the conclusions and future work.
II. RELATED WORKS
The simulation topics most frequently found in the literature
in the COVID-19 simulation area are studies for contact trac-
ing with COVID-19, transmission models of healthy patients
with an infectious spread in health systems [11], patient flow
improvement [12], how simulation modeling can help reduce
the impact of COVID-19 [13], among others.
Some simulation methods found that were used in the area
of COVID-19 simulations are discrete events [12] [14] [15], ar-
tificial intelligence [16] and agent-based simulation [17]. Some
countries used the simulation to predict scenarios, including
the behavior of the Delta variant to know the number of deaths,
infected, and vaccinated infected; others to see the evolution
of COVID-19; others to establish the infected, quarantined,
recovered, and dead, using the Susceptible Exposed Infected
Asymptomatic Quarantined Recovered (SEIAQR) model [18].
Other work presents an approach in health care in which
combined techniques of discrete event simulation, simulation-
based multi-objective optimization, and data mining are used
[19].
There is an evolution in the literature on applying agent-
based models to emergency department operations. The agent-
based model (ABM) has grown tremendously over the last
15 years and, more recently, in hospitals and healthcare. One
of the main applications of ABM in hospital environments is
that it examines the flow of patients in emergency departments
[20], [21].
The studies about the emergency department deal with the
practice of protocols or objects for medical procedures [22].
Another job in the emergency department involves managing
the resources in intensive care, intensive care beds, and their
devices [14]. Length of stay and patient waiting times, opti-
mizing resources [19].
Previous works in the emergency department area are:
Create a simulator for the emergency department with the
participation of the Sabadell Hospital emergency staft [5].
Active agents, passive agents, and the environment are iden-
tified, and an initial simulation is created using NetLogo
[5]. Another task is to optimize the emergency departments’
81
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

performance [6]. Extensive search optimization is used to
find the optimal configuration of emergency department staff,
a multi-dimensional, multi-objective problem [6]. An index
is proposed to minimize the patients’ length of stay in the
emergency department. The results obtained using alternative
Monte Carlo and Pipeline schemes are promising [6]. This
work presents a layer-based application framework for dis-
covering knowledge of an emergency department system by
simulating micro-level behaviors of its components [7]. This
work proposes using a simulation tool, the MRSA Simulator,
to design and conduct virtual clinical trials to study contact
transmission of MRSA among hospitalized patients [8].
The difference between our job and the others is that this
model of COVID-19 in the emergency department simulator
will allow the emergency department managers to analyze and
evaluate potential solutions for the beds and the management
of human resources such as nurses and doctors. And also has
been considered at two levels with experience and without
experience (juniors and seniors); when reinforcing, the health
personnel treating COVID have incorporated emergency inten-
sivists (seniors) and health personnel from different specialties
(juniors). And to evaluate the effectiveness of different combi-
nations of scenarios. Many countries have been experiencing
extreme stress with patients unable to access therapy beds,
dying in emergency department corridors while waiting for
beds to be released, and a lack of experienced doctors.
III. ADAPTATION OF THE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
MODEL
This section presents a model for the emergency department
during the COVID-19 pandemic. The general objective of this
research is to propose a model that allows to expand the
simulators’ functionality to adapt it to changes in the emer-
gency department operation when exceptional situations occur,
such as a health alert, or restrictions, and when extraordinary
temporary measures are adopted. As is the case of pandemics
spread by air, in such a way that it helps in the planning and
management of the service. First, our simulator was adapted
to another hospital, verifying its operation, and then it was
adapted to the pandemic.
The first step of the work consists in a description of a
conceptual model of the systems’ operation, from which the
computational model that will allow the system to be simulated
is elaborated. It is planned to use the simulation environment
and a high-level platform.
A. Active agents
The active agents are the individuals who act dynamically;
they are all human actors in the emergency department. They
are:
Patients: The essential individuals in the system.
Admissions staff: The person, the patient, goes to request
an appointment, update their data, and request the opening or
search of their medical record.
The triage nurse: Responsible of the assignment of the
acuity level to patients.
Doctor: They interact with patients to diagnose and treat
them.
Nurse: They provide and supervise treatment to the patient
and take and send tests to laboratories.
Laboratory Staff: These are the persons who perform the
tests and analyze the patient if necessary.
B. State variables
Fig. 1.
State transition when interacting with other agents or with time
elapsing
The agents move from one place to another by interacting
with other agents. During this time, each agent changes
its state due to the interactions. A state machine perfectly
represents this behavior, so they have chosen a state machine to
model all agents. Specifically, the agents are characterized by
a probabilistic Moore machine. An initial set of state variables
defined through the round of physician interviews is based on
the minimum amount of information needed to model each
patient and staff. An initial set of state variables is shown in
Figure 1 for the agent patient and the hospital staff (admissions
staff, doctor, triage nurse, laboratory staff, and nurse) [23].
Variables must be incorporated into each agent; the variables
included by the agents’ patient and hospital staff (admissions
staff, doctor, triage nurse, laboratory staff, nurse) are acuity
level, age, body condition, and location. And the new variables
are infected or not, symptomatic or not, vaccinated, viral load,
contact time, and PCR test.
The agents are divided by their state variables and their
behaviors. The values of the state variables of an agent at
a given time, t, define the agents’ situation at that time, t.
The behavior of each agent depends on the category to which
82
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

it belongs and is determined based on the rules previously
assigned to each. To represent the different states of the agents
during the attention process are used finite state machines.
The agents’ state transition from one state to another will
then be determined by (a) the current state and (b) the input
value it receives due to the interaction with another agent,
always considering that this value will be granted based on a
previously defined probability.
C. Output
Some of the outputs are the length of stay (LOS), the length
of waiting (LOWT) for each stage (e.g., waiting time for
service request: wtsr, time of admission: at, waiting time in
admission: wta, waiting time in nursing: wtn, time nursing
care: twnc, waiting time in doctors’ treatment: wtd, doctor
treatment care time: twmd and others), destination, acuity
level, infected, symptomatic, PCR test, vaccinated, viral load
and the occupations of hospital staff (admissions staff, doctor,
triage nurse, laboratory staff, and nurse).
IV. SIMULATION
An initial simulation is created to verify the proposed model
designed, using the NetLogo [24] agent-based simulation envi-
ronment, a high-level platform especially suited for modeling
complex systems that develop over time. NetLogo [24] allows
visualizations of actions and agent interactions, an essential
aspect considering that a primary use of the tool is gathering
feedback from the emergency department.
The emergency department is divided into different zones
where other agents can act, maintaining interactions that can
also be different. The input to our model is a group of patients
arriving in the emergency department. After the patients’ ar-
rival and the admission staff completes the registration, based
on the seriousness of their situation in the triage, the patients
are categorized, considering their acuity level. There are five
different values, level 1 is for the most critical condition,
and level 5 is not urgent [25]. The original simulator has the
following areas, as shown in Figure 2: admissions area, triage
area, diagnosis-treatment area, waiting rooms, etc. After triage,
patients with diagnosed acuity levels 1, 2, and 3 are treated
separately and assigned to Area A, and patients 4 and 5 are
treated in Area B. The adapted simulator has the same areas
but with different resources, for example, more boxes, doctors,
and nurses, as shown in Figure 3 has the same areas but with
different resources and added variables.
nscenarios =nadmissions ∗ ntimeadmissions ∗ ntriagenursing∗
ntimetriagenursing ∗ nnursing ∗ ntimenursing∗
ndoctor ∗ ntimedoctor
(1)
The scenario adopted for this initial stage is to simulate the
patients who move through the emergency department. The
areas and types of active agents represented in this simulation
are patients, admission staff, triage nurses, doctors, auxiliary
staff, laboratory tests, internal tests, external tests, ambulance,
and carebox. Each combination of values represents a different
scenario simulation. Wide varieties of values make up the
parameter space. The parameters can generate many different
scenarios (1).
There is many parameter value combinations, large enough
that there is no possibility of casting each one manually.
For this reason, parametric simulations are required, in which
the simulator launches a set of simulations with different
combinations of parameter values.
In general, the time to compute a time interval of a
simulation based on agents is the product of the time it
takes to simulate the actions of an agent within the world of
simulation in this step. In the model described, agents in the
simulation are the hospital staff and patients. The simulator
will be conducted by time. Time is divided into discrete,
identical intervals and periods at each time step of the agents’
operating system. Each time step is divided into two phases.
Assuming that the simulator this at time t, the phases are:
First, each agent processes the inputs of the last phase (It-1)
and, according to that input and the state, as it was during the
last step (St -1) and changes to its new state St. Second, each
agent emits its output to its current state, Ot. This output uses
receivers to switch to the next state. In time each agent changes
state. It may change to the same state it was previously, but
there is a change nonetheless. The metrics that are to be used
for each state input It and output Ot are: waiting time to request
service: twrs, time for register a required service: trs, time
admission: ta, waiting time in admission: twa, waiting time
in nursing: twn, time nursing care: te, waiting time in doctor:
Twmc, health care time: tm.
Pi = f(LOS, age, level)
(2)
n
X
i=1
Pi = 100
(3)
P ′ = f ′(TOT, age, level)
(4)
n
X
i=1
P ′
i = 100
(5)
To generalize the process of all patients, probability dis-
tribution during simulation will decide the following status.
The distribution model of the probability was based on the
statistical data from the emergency department. Figure 4
indicates the general process during the patient stay in the
emergency department; P1(%), P2(%), P3(%), and Pn (%)
represent the probability of the following state transition
separately, equation (2), (3), (4), (5) show the formulae [23].
All of the probabilities follow some probability distributions.
The distributions’ probability density function is decided by
several key parameters based on the statistical analysis of the
doctors’ decision and the patients’ behavior; a tuning process
estimates the value of these parameters from actual historical
83
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 2. Visualization of the original simulator in NetLogo before the adaptation
Fig. 3. Visualization of the simulator in NetLogo after the adaptation
84
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 4. Main processes in the emergency department
data of the specified emergency department. The uniform
forms of the density functions are:
LOS is the patients’ length of stay, and age is the patients’
age, which also influences the probability of status transition.
The level is the acuity level of the patient, and TOT is the
type of test service or diagnosis by a doctor. The functions
f and f’ are the probability density function. These functions
will be implemented by analyzing historical data in the tuning
process. Therefore, combined with (2) - (5), every patient will
show different behavior during the execution of the model
because of the probability distribution and their differences
in body condition. But the statistical property of agents will
reflect their typical behavior.
In the case of active agents for medical staff, two different
levels of experience are considered junior and senior. The
less experienced user will need more time to complete the
process than the most experienced. The simulator user can
easily define the number of each type of personnel and their
level of experience using the configuration console. The less
experienced will use more time to carry out their work because
they do not know; they could be a resident doctor who has
just finished. The more experienced will take less time. They
already know the process and treatment because they have
much experience and years of service. To make a preliminary
demonstration of how a simulation can be reproduced using
only a few parameters, a simplified set of patient attributes
and patient flow that is less complicated have been defined.
The time of the doctors’ attention changes according to each
patient and its severity level.
V. EXPERIMENTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Case Study: COVID-19 at the IPS Ingavi of Paraguay
The IPS Ingavi is a modern high-complexity hospital in
Paraguay, offering medical care and emergency department to
more than 2,000 insured persons per day, with approximately
1,500,000 insured persons. It is one of the reference hospitals
for caring for patients with COVID-19 in the country.
From March 2020 to September 2021, IPS Ingavi Hospital
treated approximately 15,000 COVID-19 patients, of whom
1,500 died despite medical efforts. In the most critical period
of the disease, up to 10 daily deaths were recorded, and there
were between 200 and 300 deaths per month. Table II shows
the human resources configuration of the IPS hospital after
hiring more personnel due to the high demand of patients due
TABLE I
CASE 1: LOW NUMBER OF HUMAN RESOURCES
Human resources configuration before the pandemic
Label
Interpretation
Number
JA
Junior Admission staff
3
SA
Senior Admission staff
3
JTN
Junior Triage Nurse
5
STN
Senior Triage Nurse
5
JNA
Junior Nurse area A
5
SNA
Senior Nurse area A
5
JNB
Junior Nurse area B
5
SNB
Junior Nurse area B
5
JLE
Junior Outside Laboratory
3
SLI
Senior Internal Laboratory
3
JDA
Junior Doctor area A
5
SDA
Senior Doctor area A
5
JDB
Junior Doctor area B
5
SDB
Senior Doctor area B
5
aHuman resources configuration before the pandemic
TABLE II
CASE 2: HIGH NUMBER OF HUMAN RESOURCES
Human resources during the pandemic
Label
Interpretation
Number
JA
Junior Admission staff
3
SA
Senior Admission staff
3
JTN
Junior Triage Nurse
5
STN
Senior Triage Nurse
5
JNA
Junior Nurse area A
35
SNA
Senior Nurse area A
20
JNB
Junior Nurse area B
35
SNB
Senior Nurse area B
20
JLE
Junior Outside Laboratory
3
SLI
Senior Internal Laboratory
3
JDA
Junior Doctor area A
10
SDA
Junior Nurse area A
10
JDB
Junior Nurse area B
10
SDB
Senior Doctor area B
10
aHuman resources during the pandemic
to COVID-19, and Table I shows the values of the human
resources configuration of the IPS hospital before hiring more
doctors and nurses.
The simulator developed with NetLogo [24] stores infor-
mation about everything that happens during their execution
and allows the creation of reports that can be exported and
processed with statistics. We did an initial simulation with
the data and got to analyze the simulators’ behavior against
the variables that influence the emergency department; several
85
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 1717218 19 20 21 22 23
Hour
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Percentage
Fig. 5. Arrival of patients per hour at the hospital
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95100
Patient age
0
2
4
6
8
10
Percentage of patients
class
Simulated
Real
Fig. 6. Comparison of patient age between actual and simulated data
1
2
3
4
5
Acuity level
0
10
20
30
40
50
Percentage of patients
class
Simulated
Real
Fig. 7. Acuity level of patients between actual and simulated data
1
2
3
4
5
Acuity Level
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Ratio
class
Simulated
Real
Fig. 8. Doctors’ service time for each level of patients
86
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

1
2
3
4
5
Acuity Level
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Ratio
class
Simulated
Real
Fig. 9. Nurses’ service time for each level of patients
simulations have been carried out with different values to
observe what results we could get.
Home
Transfer
Hospital
Type
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Percentage
class
Real
Simulated
Fig. 10. Destination patient
Patient arrival is the emergency department simulators’
input, directly influencing the systems’ behavior. A precision
model to reflect patient arrival is necessary to simulate and
predict the behavior of an emergency department; the patient
arrival model includes patients; Figure 5 shows the patient
arrival rates distribution due to hours of the day in the
hospital. This figure shows the arrival of patients at the hospital
according to the time and day of the week, and it can be
seen that the range of approximately 6 to 21 hours is the
range where patients go to the hospital the most. Figure 6
shows the age range of the actual patients compared to the
simulated ones, where you can see the age range of the patients
who attended the hospital the most, which shows a rise from
twenty-five to approximately ninety-five years.
TABLE III
UTILIZATION RESULTS ANALYSIS OF THE HUMAN RESOURCES
(SIMULATION RESULTS).
Utilization results analysis of the human resources (percentage)
Case
Human resources
Average
Maximum
Confidence int
Case 1
Doctor area A
70
100
(68, 70)
Case 2
Doctor area A
37
89
(37, 38)
aUtilization results analysis of the human resources
TABLE IV
MAXIMUM, THE AVERAGE SAMPLE SIZE TO ASSESS PATIENT STAY (LOS,
LOWT, RELATIVE ERROR: 10%, CONFIDENCE: 95%).
Maximum, average sample size to assess patient stay (hours)
Case
Type
Average
Maximum
Confidence int
Case 1
LOS
284
508
(282, 286)
Case 1
Lowt
282
433
(280, 284)
Case 2
LOS
256
497
(254, 258)
Case 2
Lowt
254
435
(252, 256)
aMaximum, average sample size to assess patient stay
The patient arrival model includes patients with severity L
(acuity level). To do quantitative verification and validation, we
built a patient arrival model according to the actual data from
our cooperative hospital. As seen in Figure 7, comparing the
simulated datas’ severity levels to the actual data shows that
levels 1, 2, and 3 are the levels of the patients who attended
the hospital the most. The patients with severity levels 1, 2,
and 3 are the most serious, and levels 4 and 5 are the mildest.
One of the simulator results is that the distribution of L
(acuity level) among arrival patients was obtained through
statistical analysis of the actual data and the overall patient
age distribution.
The results from the patients’ perspective are the LOS and
the Lowt; the results from the management point of view are
the occupations of the doctors, nurses, admission, and triage.
Patients with severity levels 1, 2, and 3 are the most serious
and therefore take longer to be treated due to the seriousness
of their situation. Figure 8 and Figure 9 show the comparison
between the actual and simulated values of the ratio attention
time of the doctors and nurses according to the severity level
of the patients, where it is observed that the most extended
attention times are between levels 1,2 and 3.
One of the outputs of the simulator is the destination of the
patient after entering the emergency department; in Figure 10,
you can see the comparison of the actual and simulated
values of the percentage of patients who went home after the
87
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
number
Junior Admission staff 
Senior Admission staff
Junior Triage Nurse
Senior Triage Nurse
Junior Nurse area A
Senior Nurse area A
Junior Nurse area B
Senior Nurse area B 
Junior Outside Laboratory
Senior Internal Laboratory
Junior Doctor area A
Senior Doctor area A
Junior Doctor area B
Senior Doctor area B
staff
case
case1
case2
Fig. 11. Value of the human resources configuration case 1 and 2
1
2
3
4
5
Acuity Level
10
1
10
2
LOS (Hours)
Type
case 1
case 2
Fig. 12. Length of stay according to acuity level (LOS).
emergency consultation, that is the case in which the patients
were not seriously ill, the rate of patients who remained in the
hospital to continue with their treatments and the percentage
of those transferred.
Figure 11 shows the human resources configuration for
cases 1 and 2 of the simulation; case 1 has a low number
of doctors and nurses before hiring more hospital staff; case
2 has a high number of nurses and doctors after hiring more
1
2
3
4
5
Acuity Level
10
1
10
0
10
1
10
2
Lowt (Hours)
Type
case 1
case 2
Fig. 13. Length of patient waiting time according to acuity level (Lowt).
staff. Regarding the length of stay (LOS) and (Lowt) with the
simulations carried out with cases 1 and 2, it can be observed
that patients with severity levels 1 and 2 are those who have
a longer waiting time to be treated in the hospital; this is seen
in Figure 12 and Figure 13. This is because severity levels 1
and 2 are the most serious currently in the hospital; his critical
condition requires further attention from hospital staff.
Regarding the percentage of occupation of doctors and staff,
88
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

doctor A
admission
triage nurse
Staff
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Occupancy (percentage)
case
case 1
case 2
Fig. 14. Staff occupation time
the calculation is essential to determine when the system
is about to be saturated, and it is necessary to hire more
personnel; Also, when doctors are very saturated, their perfor-
mance of patient care may decrease, and not care for patients
correctly, in case they are already fatigued.
Figure 14 shows the occupation range of doctors, triage
nurses and admission staff. It can be seen that the occupation
range of the doctors for case 1 goes to approximately seventy
percent; as the patients arrive, the occupation of the health
personnel increases, and with an occupation range of about
forty percent on average for case 2 by hiring more extra
doctors and nurses due to the number of patients that are
arriving due to the pandemic.
Table III shows the maximum value, the average (percent-
age), and the 95 percent confidence intervals of the doctors’
area A for cases 1 and 2. When more health personnel
are hired, the values of maximum and average occupations
decrease. And when more health personnel are not engaged
the occupations’ average and maximum value increase.
Table IV shows the maximum value, the average, and the
confidence intervals at 95 percent of the value of the LOS
and Lowt for cases 1 and 2. It can be distinguished that
when there is more health personnel hired, the values of the
mean, maximum, and confidence interval of the LOS and Lowt
(hours) waiting times of the patients are lower, and when
there are fewer personnel, values of the means, maximum and
confidence interval of the LOS and Lowt waiting times of the
patients are higher.
VI. CONCLUSION
As a result of our research, we present an adaptation of
an agent-based model for emergency department management.
We handle different scenarios to adapt the simulator to pan-
demic situations, for example, using combinations such as
hospital human resources and patient increases.
We used a set of synthetic input data for the input of
data to the simulator for the arrival of COVID and NON-
COVID patients with different ages, levels of severity, and the
distribution of the arrival of patients by hours of the day, with
these input data we have analyzed the occupation time of the
doctors, the length of waiting time of the patients, the service
time according to the level of severity and then we compare
with reality. One of the advantages of our work is that this
“COVID-19 in the emergency department” model/simulator
allows emergency department managers to analyze and evalu-
ate possible solutions to analyze the number of hospital staff,
boxes/beds.
Our future work is to add the airborne spread of COVID-19
in the emergency department to validate and add more detail to
the agent-based simulator to make it as consistent and close as
possible in a pandemic situation and build different scenarios
for decision-making. It will allow us to build virtual scenarios
to understand the transmission phenomenon of COVID-19 and
the potential impact of implementing different policies on viral
spread rates.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research has been supported by the Agencia Estatal
de Investigacion (AEI), Spain and the Fondo Europeo de
Desarrollo Regional (FEDER) UE, under contract PID2020-
112496GB-I00 and partially funded by the Fundacion Escuelas
Universitarias Gimbernat (EUG).
REFERENCES
[1] R. E. Galeano Galeano, D. I. Rexachs del Rosario, A. Wong Gonzalez,
E. Brugada, C. E. Villalba Cardozo, D. A. Galeano Galeano, and
E. Luque Fad´on, “An Agent-Based Model for the Management of
the Emergency Department During the COVID-19 Pandemic,” The
Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation
(SIMUL), pp. 54–62, Oct 2022.
[2] J. M. Adleberg, C. L. Catlett, R. E. Rothman, K. Lobner, and Y.-
H. Hsieh, “Novel applications of agent-based modeling in emergency
medicine research–a systematic literature review,” The American journal
of emergency medicine, vol. 35, no. 12, p. 1971, 2017.
[3] X. Zhang, “Application of discrete event simulation in health care: a
systematic review,” BMC health services research, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1–
11, 2018.
[4] M. R. Davahli, W. Karwowski, and R. Taiar, “A system dynamics
simulation applied to healthcare: A systematic review,” International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, vol. 17, no. 16,
p. 5741, 2020.
[5] M. Taboada, E. Cabrera, M. L. Iglesias, F. Epelde, and E. Luque, “An
agent-based decision support system for hospitals emergency depart-
ments,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 4, pp. 1870–1879, 2011.
[6] E. Cabrera, E. Luque, M. Taboada, F. Epelde, and M. L. Iglesias, “Abms
optimization for emergency departments,” in Proceedings of the 2012
winter simulation conference (WSC), pp. 1–12, IEEE, 2012.
[7] Z. Liu, D. Rexachs, E. Luque, F. Epelde, and E. Cabrera, “Simulating the
micro-level behavior of emergency department for macro-level features
prediction,” in 2015 Winter Simulation Conference (WSC), pp. 171–182,
IEEE, 2015.
[8] C. Jaramillo, D. Rexachs, F. Epelde, and E. Luque, “Virtual clinical
trials: A tool for the study of transmission of nosocomial infections,”
Procedia Computer Science, vol. 108, pp. 109–118, 2017.
89
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[9] C. Macal and M. North, “Introductory tutorial: Agent-based modeling
and simulation,” in Proceedings of the winter simulation conference
2014, pp. 6–20, IEEE, 2014.
[10] Z. Liu, E. Cabrera, M. Taboada, F. Epelde, D. Rexachs, and E. Luque,
“Quantitative evaluation of decision effects in the management of
emergency department problems,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 51,
pp. 433–442, 2015.
[11] R. Moss et al., “Coronavirus disease model to inform transmission-
reducing measures and health system preparedness, australia,” Emerging
infectious diseases, vol. 26, no. 12, p. 2844, 2020.
[12] M. Zeinalnezhad, A. G. Chofreh, F. A. Goni, J. J. Klemeˇs, and E. Sari,
“Simulation and improvement of patients’ workflow in heart clinics
during covid-19 pandemic using timed coloured petri nets,” International
journal of environmental research and public health, vol. 17, no. 22,
p. 8577, 2020.
[13] C. Currie et al., “How simulation modelling can help reduce the impact
of covid-19,” Journal of Simulation, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 83–97, 2020.
[14] J. Le Lay, V. Augusto, X. Xie, E. Alfonso-Lizarazo, B. Bongue, T. Celar-
ier, R. Gonthier, and M. Masmoudi, “Impact of covid-19 epidemics on
bed requirements in a healthcare center using data-driven discrete-event
simulation,” in 2020 Winter Simulation Conference (WSC), pp. 771–781,
IEEE, 2020.
[15] G. Fava, T. Giovannelli, M. Messedaglia, and M. Roma, “Effect of
different patient peak arrivals on an emergency department via discrete
event simulation: a case study,” Simulation, p. 00375497211038756,
2021.
[16] V. Ahuja and L. V. Nair, “Artificial intelligence and technology in
covid era: A narrative review,” Journal of Anaesthesiology, Clinical
Pharmacology, vol. 37, no. 1, p. 28, 2021.
[17] M. Laskowski, R. D. McLeod, M. R. Friesen, B. W. Podaima, and A. S.
Alfa, “Models of emergency departments for reducing patient waiting
times,” PloS one, vol. 4, no. 7, p. e6127, 2009.
[18] Z. Chen, Z. Shu, X. Huang, K. Peng, and J. Pan, “Modelling analysis
of COVID-19 transmission and the state of emergency in Japan,”
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health,
vol. 18, no. 13, p. 6858, 2021.
[19] A. G. Uriarte, E. R. Z´u˜niga, M. U. Moris, and A. H. Ng, “How can
decision makers be supported in the improvement of an emergency
department? a simulation, optimization and data mining approach,”
Operations Research for Health Care, vol. 15, pp. 102–122, 2017.
[20] S. S. Jones and R. S. Evans, “An agent based simulation tool for
scheduling emergency department physicians,” in AMIA Annual Sym-
posium Proceedings, vol. 2008, p. 338, American Medical Informatics
Association, 2008.
[21] M. R. Friesen and R. D. McLeod, “A survey of agent-based modeling
of hospital environments,” IEEE Access, vol. 2, pp. 227–233, 2014.
[22] S. Diebel and E. Boissonneault, “A pan-canadian narrative review
on the protocols for covid-19 and canadian emergency departments,”
International Journal of Medical Students, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 157–161,
2021.
[23] Z. Liu, E. Cabrera, D. Rexachs, and E. Luque, “A generalized agent-
based model to simulate emergency departments,” in Sixth Int Conf Adv
Syst Simul, pp. 65–70, 2014.
[24] U. Wilensky and W. Rand, An introduction to agent-based modeling:
modeling natural, social, and engineered complex systems with NetLogo.
Mit Press, 2015.
[25] E. Bruballa, A. Wong, D. Rexachs, E. Luque, and F. Epelde, “Evaluation
of response capacity to patient attention demand in an emergency
department,” Int. J. Adv. Syst. Meas, vol. 10, no. 1-2, pp. 11–22, 2017.
90
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

