139
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Hybrid WDM‒XDM PON Architectures for Future Proof Access Networks 
 
Rodolfo Alvizu, Alfredo Arcia, Maybemar 
Hernández, Mónica Huerta  
Departamento de Electrónica y Circuitos 
Universidad Simón Bolívar (USB) 
Sartenejas, Venezuela  
ralvizu@usb.ve, arcialfredo@hotmail.com, 
maybemarh@usb.ve, mhuerta@usb.ve 
Idelfonso Tafur Monroy 
Department of Photonics Engineering 
Technical University of Denmark (DTU) 
Lyngby, Denmark 
idtm@fotonik.dtu.dk 
 
Abstract— The design of future proof optical access networks 
is a challenging and hot research topic. In this work we 
summarized the requirements for future proof networks and 
the expected evolution of optical access networks. The current 
network infrastructure is composed by too many domains 
where the electronic processing bottleneck must be relieved. 
The evolution and penetration of Optical Access Networks 
threatens to create a higher electronic bottleneck at 
Metro‒Access interfaces. In this paper we evaluated an 
enhanced version of time‒wavelength access architecture with 
optical bypass and traffic self‒aggregation based on colorless 
customer terminals. The purpose of this hybrid Passive Optical 
Network with Wavelength Division Multiplexing and Time 
Division Multiplexing architecture is to allow for a transparent 
Metro‒Access interface with low latency and reduced power 
consumption. The time‒wavelength access architecture is 
based on the nonuniform traffic profile in networks to 
introduce optical bypass. For comparison a Passive Optical 
Network with Wavelength Division Multiplexing architecture 
was used as reference. Simulation results obtained by a 
developed model in OPNET Modeler showed that the Passive 
Optical Network with Wavelength Division Multiplexing tends 
to present electronic bottleneck issues, even though delays and 
loss rates were not very different in both architectures. These 
bottleneck issues can be avoided by the introduction of optical 
bypass and traffic self‒aggregation. Optical bypass allows 
nodes to avoid electronic processing; therefore, delay and 
power consumption can be reduced. The proposed architecture 
is an interesting useful approach for Metro‒Access integration 
and future access networks. This paper represents a baseline 
for future design of hybrid Passive Optical Network with 
Wavelength Division Multiplexing architectures and optical 
bypass for traffic self‒aggregation. Such hybrid schemes can 
be based on multiplexing technologies like Orthogonal 
Frequency Division Multiplexing. 
Keywords‒ 
Future 
access 
network; 
optical 
bypass; 
Self‒Aggregation; Hybrid WDM‒PON; Metro‒Access. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This paper, based on the work showed in [1], presents 
new results, current trends, and the general scenario for 
future proof optical access networks. The world has been 
witnessing an explosion of high bandwidth consuming 
applications, and an ever rising bandwidth demand by users. 
According to Cisco’s Visual Networking Index, global IP 
(Internet Protocol) traffic will grow fourfold from 2010 to 
2015 [2]. Globally, Internet video traffic is expected to grow 
from 40% of all consumer Internet traffic in 2010 to 61% in 
2015. New solutions must allow continuous growth of access 
networks. 
Currently implemented networks are composed by 
several domains like access, metro, and core. Within these 
layers there are too many IP routers and nodes that are costly 
in energy and packet delay due to the Optical‒ Electronic‒ 
Optical 
(O‒E‒O) 
conversions. 
Multilayer 
network 
compatible with Giga bits per second (Gbps) access rates are 
being aggressively developed, able to endure high scalability 
and flexibility, guaranteed end to end performance and 
survivability, energy efficiency and lower cost of ownership 
[3]. Due to the massive rollouts required at access networks, 
this domain presents additional technologic and economic 
challenges. Those additional challenges have increased the 
bottleneck at access networks to deliver enough bandwidth 
to end users. The introduction of optical fiber to the customer 
sites has been accepted as a solution to relieve the access 
bandwidth bottleneck and to cope with the ever increasing 
users’ bandwidth demand [3][4]. 
To successfully deliver enough bandwidth to end users, 
the bottleneck at access networks must be released. As 
consequence, the introduction of optical fiber to the home 
(FTTH) or fiber to the customer sites (FTTx; stands for fiber 
to the x, where x stands for Curb, Building, Premises, etc.) 
has been accepted as a solution to relieve the access 
bandwidth bottleneck and to cope with the ever increasing 
users’ bandwidth demand [5][6][7][8].  
The FTTH Council announced a continuous global 
growth of all fiber networks [9]. The average broadband 
access network speed grew 97% from 2009 to 2010 [2]. Such 
a growth has been allowed by deployments of PONs (Passive 
Optical Networks) based FTTx. The total number of FTTH 
subscribers was about 38 million at the end of 2011 and is 
expected to reach about 90 million at the end of 2015 [10]. 
PON is a point‒to‒multipoint optical network, which 
connects an optical line terminal (OLT) at the carrier’s 
Central Offices (COs) with several optical network units 
(ONUs) at the customer sites. This is done through one or 
more 1:N optical splitters. The success of PON relies on its 
high bandwidth, infrastructure cost sharing and its simple 
maintenance and operation, which results from the absence 
of electronic active components between the OLT and the 

140
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
ONUs. As a consequence of the point to multi‒point nature, 
PON’s upstream channel requires a multiple access 
technology. Today’s standards and deployments of FTTx are 
based on Time Division Multiple access PON (TDM‒PON). 
TDM‒PON uses a single wavelength for downstream (CO to 
users) and upstream (users to CO). Upstream and 
downstream channels are multiplexed in a single fiber 
through Coarse WDM (CWDM) technology standardized 
according to ITU (International Telecommunication Union) 
G.694.2 (CWDM spectral grid). TDM PON keeps the cost of 
access networks down, by sharing among all users the 
bandwidth available in a single wavelength. There are two 
main TDM‒PON standards used for mass rollouts [9][11]:  
 
Ethernet PON (EPON) technology: specified by the 
IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers) 
as the 802.3ah standard, which is widely deployed in 
United States of America and in Europe. 
 
Gigabit PON (GPON) technology: specified by the 
ITU‒T G.984 standard, which is broadly deployed in 
Japan and South Korea. 
However, TDM‒PON cannot cope with future access 
networks’ requirements regarding to aggregated bandwidth, 
reach and power budget [11]. To cope with this 
requirements, it has been widely accepted that the next step 
of evolution for PON architectures is the introduction of 
wavelength division multiple access in PON (WDM‒PON) 
[6][10][11][12]. The WDM‒PON approach assigns an 
individual wavelength to each ONU. This strategy allows the 
use of higher bandwidth for each ONU, longer reach, better 
scalability towards higher users’ concentration, and provides 
transparent bit rate channels [11][12]. 
Hybrid schemes of WDM‒PON are a current hot topic in 
the development of future proof networks.  A combination of 
TDM and WDM over PON turns out into a hybrid optical 
network known as TDM‒WDM‒PON. In this scheme, a set 
of wavelengths is shared over time by different ONUs 
instead 
of 
being 
dedicated 
as 
in 
WDM‒PON. 
TDM‒WDM‒PON 
improves 
the 
network 
resource’s 
efficiency usage [13][14][15].  
Another WDM‒PON hybrid scheme arises from the 
possibility of transmitting subcarriers over a dedicated 
wavelength; this is the principle of Orthogonal Frequency 
Division 
Multiplexing 
with 
WDM‒PON 
(OFDM 
‒WDM‒PON). This approach offers great capacity and 
applicability for the future passive optical networks [16].  
A Combination of the Time Orthogonal Code Division 
Multiplexing (OCDM) and WDM over passive optical 
networks turns out into a hybrid optical network known as 
OCDM‒WDM‒PON. With OCDMA each ONU have a code 
word to differentiate their optical transmissions. It provides 
data transparency and security to end users, and it’s an 
interesting access technique for future optical access 
networks [8][17]. 
The continuous growth of the users bandwidth demand is 
leading to more than 100 Gbps optical access systems [18]. 
This scenario implies that COs, supporting higher 
concentration of customers (with split ratio extended far 
beyond 1:64), will have to aggregate traffic in volumes 
reaching Tera bits per second (Tbps). Thus, there will be a 
higher congestion for management of the increasing 
bandwidth demand at the Metro‒Access interface, and 
higher requirements of future applications on bandwidth 
guarantee and low latency. 
In this paper, we present an accurate performance 
assessment of an hybrid WDM‒PON architecture originally 
proposed 
in 
[19]. 
This 
architecture 
introduces 
a 
time‒wavelength (t‒ ) routing for an on‒the‒fly (optical 
bypass) routed, self‒aggregating Metro‒Access interface. 
The t‒  routing architecture, based on nonuniform traffic 
distribution in access networks, introduces optical bypass 
toward the most requested destinations. Its goal is to relieve 
the electronic bottleneck and simplify the Metro‒Access 
interface. 
Wieckowski et al. [19] have outlined the advantages of 
the t‒  routing architecture over WDM‒PON. However, 
there is a situation in their simulation model that produces 
delay variations and packet reordering problems. The present 
enhanced version of t‒  routing architecture avoids those 
problems, thus allowing traffic to cope with the strict 
requirements of delay sensible traffic. 
Simulation results obtained show that by using this 
enhanced t‒   routing architecture, the COs become 
congestion‒free, a reduction of the network’s power 
consumption is achieved, and the network is able to address 
different requirements of the traffic. Therefore, the present 
work proves that the use of optical bypass and traffic 
self‒aggregation is a very attractive approach for future 
proof access networks. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section II describes 
current Network domains. Section III summarizes the 
requirements for future optical networks. Section IV explains 
the expected evolution of optical access networks. Section V 
describes 
the     routing 
optical 
access 
network 
architecture. Section VI presents the related work of this 
paper. Section VII describes the simulation model developed 
and presents the simulation results. Section VIII concludes 
the paper and exposes future works. 
II. 
TELECOM NETWORK DOMAINS 
In general, Telecom Networks are divided into three 
major networks domains: core, metro and access as depicted 
in Figure 1. Core networks represent the backbone 
infrastructure covering nationwide and global distances. It 
aggregates and distributes traffic from large cities (as 
network nodes), countries and even continents. The core 
domain is usually based on a mesh interconnection pattern 
and carries huge amounts of traffic collected through the 
interfaces with the metro networks. Links in the core 
network could have a reach of a few hundreds to a few 
thousands of kilometers. In the backbone network, optical 
technologies are widely deployed based on IP over SONET 
(Synchronous Optical Network) / SDH (Synchronous Digital 
Hierarchy), 
IP 
over 
SONET/SDH 
over 
WDM 
(Wavelength‒Division Multiplexing) and more recently IP 
over WDM [20]. 
The metro network domain is the part of a telecom 
infrastructure that covers metropolitan areas. This domain 
interconnects several  nodes for aggregation of  business  and  

141
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 1.  Telecom Network Domains [20]. 
residential subscribers’ traffic. The metro represent the 
connection between the core domain and the access domain, 
allowing for Internet connectivity. Links in the metro could 
have a reach of a few tens to a few hundreds of kilometers. 
Metro domain is mostly based on SONET/SDH optical ring 
networks. Other commonly used metro networks are Metro 
Ethernet [21] and Metro WDM ring networks [22]. 
The access network connects business and residential 
customers to the rest of the network through their service 
provider Metro network. It aggregates and distributes traffic 
from several end user localities, covering areas of few 
kilometers. The Access is still dominated by several versions 
of Digital Subscriber Line (xDSL), but there is an increasing 
deployment of FTTH or FTTx, based on different flavors of 
PONs. Optical access networks are usually based on treelike 
topologies [11]. 
A. Traffic Profile between network domains 
In 
general 
the 
Telecom 
network 
domains 
are 
interconnected by one or a few interfacing nodes (gateways), 
e.g., there is typically only one interconnection node between 
the Access and the Metro network, and between the Metro 
and the Core network. Due to our globalized society, it is 
well known by the academy that there is more traffic 
crossing through different network domains (remote or 
transit traffic), than traffic staying within the same network 
domain (local traffic) [23][24]. 
It has been observed that in a multiple interfacing 
scenario, traffic demands at IP routing nodes are not evenly 
distributed among all destinations. About four to five major 
destinations comprise the 80‒95% of the outgoing traffic in 
the routers, and 50‒70% of the traffic goes to one major 
destination [23]. This behavior can lead to insufficient 
capacity and traffic bottlenecks at specific points of the 
network. Thus, such traffic behavior must be considered in 
the design of new generation networks. 
B. Metro‒Access Interface 
The fast penetration and the evolution of optical access 
networks will produce higher congestion at COs and 
Metro‒Access interfacing nodes. Consequently, there will be 
a large pressure to deal with the increasing Quality of 
Service (QoS) demanded by future applications. Thus, 
future‒proof, cost and energy efficient Metro‒Access 
interfaces have been extensively investigated [19][25][26]. 
III. 
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE OPTICAL 
NETWORKS OF THE FUTURE 
On the nearest future, the optical networks should 
support a major number of users and better traffic 
aggregation while keeping low power consumption. In this 
section, general future optical network’s requirements are 
first presented. Later the specific requirements for access 
networks are highlighted. 
A. Future Optical Network’s Requirements 
Currently implemented networks are composed by too 
many domains like access, metro, backhaul, outer core and 
inner core [3]. Within these layers there are many IP routers 
and nodes that are costly in energy and packet delay due to 
the O‒E‒O conversions and interfacing tasks.  
It will soon be necessary the design of a multilayer 
network compatible with Gbps access rates, able to support 
high scalability and flexibility, guaranteed end to end 
performance and survivability, energy efficiency, and lower 
cost of ownership [3].  
At the nodes level the legacy of O‒E‒O conversions have 
been changed for the idea of all optical networks (AON). 
Thus networks may move more functions to the optical 
domain to take advantage of the scalability of optics as the 
bit rate increases.   
The Optical Network of the future should be remotely 
reconfigurable. It must be able to turn on and turn off 
wavelengths based on demand, and to change the optically 
routed paths without losing or delaying the traffic in the 
network. The solution to this requirement could be the 
introduction 
of 
Reconfigurable 
Optical 
Add 
Drop 
Multiplexer (ROADM), with All Optical Switches (AOS) 
[27]. Future optical network’s requirements are summarized 
below in terms of network capacity, digital transmitter and 
receiver and the fiber design. 
1) Network Capacity 
There are three approaches for increasing the network 
capacity: increase the number of wavelengths supported by 
the fiber, increase the bit rate of every wavelength (spectral 
efficiency), and reduce the amount of signal distortion 
accumulated per distance unit. These approaches will be 
necessary in the nearest future, and they all require advanced 
modulations formats [27].  Modulations schemes like 
Quadrature Amplitude Modulation (QAM), Polarization 
Multiplexing 
and 
Orthogonal 
Frequency 
Division 
Multiplexing (OFDM) are currently being investigated. 
Phase 
Modulation 
Quadrature 
Phase 
Shift 
Keying 
(PM‒QPSK) with coherent receivers is the main choice in 
the industry [28]. 
a) Increasing the bit Rate per Wavelength. 
One method to increase capacity is the use of larger 
signal constellations like Dual Polarization Quadrature 
Amplitude Modulation (DP‒MQAM) or DP‒MQPSK. 
Using a modulation format with low Optical Signal to Noise 
Ratio (OSNR) requirement increases the achievable capacity. 

142
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
However, data rate cannot be increased indefinitely by 
higher‒order modulation because of the nonlinear Shannon’s 
limit [29]. 
A challenge for increasing the bit rate of the wavelengths 
is the cost. As consequence of the development of high speed 
electronics, with each fourfold of the bit rate the cost of the 
associated transponder increments by a 2 or 2.5 factor [27]. 
b) Increasing the number of channels.   
Instead of increasing the bit rate, a successful approach is 
to increase the number of wavelengths, reducing the inter 
channel spacing and possibly the bit rate. 
 Optical Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing 
(O‒OFMD) is a multiplexing scheme for high speed 
transmission. The high data rates are accomplished by 
parallel transmission of partially overlapped subcarriers at a 
lower data rate. The principle of this method is based on the 
orthogonality of the subcarriers frequencies, which allows 
overlapping the spectrum in an efficient way and eliminating 
the guard frequencies that were used in Optical Frequency 
Division Multiplexing (O‒FDM) [30]. 
O‒OFDM has the best potential of all the transmission 
technologies currently being investigated. The highest 
spectral efficiency and highest capacity reported for a WDM 
system in a single‒core single‒mode fiber was achieved 
using O‒OFDM [16][31]. 
c) Nonlinearity Compensation. 
The fiber capacity is limited by the nonlinearities. In the 
absence of noise, a single‒channel signal is limited by 
self‒phase 
modulation 
(SPM). 
Whereas 
Wavelength 
Division Multiplexing (WDM) systems are limited by 
cross‒phase modulation (XPM) and four‒wave mixing 
(FWM) [29]. 
The Nonlinear Schrodinger Equation (NLSE) is 
deterministic; it means that SPM, XPM and FWM could be 
compensated with digital signal processors (DSPs). As the 
DSP’s capability improves, and systems seek to achieve 
highest capacity, nonlinearity compensation could become 
essential [29].  
For the optical networks of the future, increasing spectral 
efficiency is the most important step as long as the reach in 
not sacrificed to the point of increasing regeneration costs 
[32]. Adding amplifiers seems reasonable, assuming Raman 
amplification is needed anyway, as long as the ROADM 
functionality and line stability are not sacrificed [32]. 
Reducing channel spacing appears to be the best long 
term solution for scalability assuming coherent detection 
systems as long as the performance is not sacrificed [32]. 
2) Digital Transmitter and Receiver 
Next generation systems will continue with the trend that 
enabled the technologies of 100 Gbps. DSP will play an 
important role in the transmitter and receivers of the future 
optical networks, where advanced algorithms will be used to 
compensate fiber impairments [29]. 
a) Digital Coherent Receivers.  
The advantage of digital coherent receivers stems on the 
ability to manipulate the electric field in the two signal 
polarizations [29]. Coherent receivers in conjunction with 
analog to digital converters ADC above Nyquist Rate, permit 
to manipulate the information contained on the digitalized 
waveform. Therefore, any information manipulated by 
hardware in the analog domain could be achieved in the 
digital domain by advanced software. One of the many 
benefits of coherent receivers is the correction of Chromatic 
Dispersion (CD) [29]. 
An additional benefit of digital coherent receivers is that 
it facilitates the channel demultiplexing. In traditional WDM 
systems, the channel of interest is selected by optical filters. 
In consequence, guard bands are required in WDM reducing 
the spectral efficiency [29]. With a digital coherent receiver, 
digital filters could be used for increasing the spectral 
efficiency.   
Last but not least, a digital coherent receiver enables 
novel modulation formats e.g., OFDM [29].  
b) Digital Transmitters. 
DSP can also be used on the transmitter to generate the 
data above the Nyquist Rate, and Digital to Analog 
Converters (DAC) to acquire the signal to be sent to the 
receptor.  
A software‒defined optical system with DSP at both 
transmitter and receiver enables the most agile platform. It 
allows channel impairments to be compensated by powerful 
DSP algorithms, and enables new signal multiplexing and 
demultiplexing paradigms. In addition, the channel data rate, 
modulation format, and coding scheme can all be 
programmed by network management in response to channel 
conditions changes. Therefore, the network can become 
more flexible and tunable, allowing to route optical signals 
through several distances, fiber types, and different number 
of ROADMs in the path. Such flexibility is achieved by 
sensing the channel quality and adjusting the modulation 
format and coding scheme to provide reliable end‒to‒end 
connection at the highest data rate possible [29]. 
3) Fiber Design  
The primary interest in optical networks is to increase 
system capacity. Even without nonlinearity, achievable 
capacity scales only logarithmically with power. A 
power‒efficient method is to transmit information over 
parallel channels [29].  
Future systems could require space‒division multiplexing 
(SDM). The simplest SDM method is to use multiple fibers. 
This requires parallel transmitters, fibers, amplifiers, and 
receivers. System complexity will scale approximately 
linearly with capacity, so cost reduction per bit will only be 
achieved by minimizing the cost of inline amplifiers and 
transponders [29]. 
An alternative strategy is to have SDM within a single 
strand of fiber. Two schemes have been proposed:  multicore 
fiber (MCF), and multimode fiber (MMF) [29].  
B. Future Optical Access Network’s Requirements 
Due to the proximity of access networks with the end 
users, the access network presents additional technological 
and economic challenges. In consequence, those additional 
challenges had increased the bottleneck at access networks to 
deliver enough bandwidth to end users. The introduction of 

143
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
optical fiber to the customer sites has been accepted as the 
solution to relieve the access bandwidth bottleneck and to 
cope with the ever increasing users’ bandwidth demand 
[4][33]. 
 Requirements 
of 
network 
capacity, 
adaptation, 
scalability, energy efficiency, data integrity and other aspects 
will be summarized below. 
1) Network Capacity 
The future optical access network must be faster with 
increased bandwidth compared to current standards (e.g., 
EPON and GPON). Some authors expect that the minimum 
bit rate required in future PON architectures for downstream 
will be around 10Gbps, while the upstream requirement will 
be around 2.5 Gbps [34].    
If ONUs shares the same channel for downstream and 
upstream, the bandwidth allocation will be dynamic. The 
dynamic bandwidth allocation allows operators to manage 
several kinds of traffic and different transmission bit rates 
upon requests. There are two kinds of bandwidth allocation 
mechanisms used in PON: status‒reporting mechanism and 
non‒status‒reporting mechanism. In non‒status‒reporting, 
the CO continuously allocates a small amount of extra 
bandwidth to each ONU. The status‒reporting mechanism 
and dynamic bandwidth allocation (DBA) are based on the 
Multi‒Point Control Protocol (MPCP) specified in the IEEE 
802.3ah standard [35]. 
Hybrid WDM‒PON architectures such as TDM‒ 
WDM‒PON, 
OCDM‒WDM‒PON 
and 
OFDM‒WDM 
‒PON allow to achieve higher transmission bit rate and to 
have more disposition of  the bandwidth.  
2) Adaption and Scalability 
The massive deployment of fiber is limited by 
infrastructure investment. Hence, it is required to ensure 
future adaptation and scalability of the inversion. A major 
challenge for service providers is to keep simple operating 
procedures and ensure convergence of different networks. A 
migration to packet traffic transport platforms and the 
tendency towards a common access architecture facilitate the 
acquisition of new access technologies  [36] . 
The system must be flexible with the ability to be 
incorporated in sequential and modular way. Satisfy the 
needs of the operator in terms of network administration and 
implementation costs. The network must allow different 
types of user (e.g., business user, residential users, etc.) 
where each user may have different requirements and be 
subject to individual claims [36]. 
3) Costs and Energy Eficiency 
The cost is the current limiting factor for massive 
deployments of optical access networks. There are different 
costs to consider in the networks: implementation, 
maintenance, infrastructure, network improvement and 
environmental impact. Energy efficiency has become a very 
important aspect for network design, due to increased 
operating costs related to energy consumption, increasing 
awareness of global warming and climate change. Due to its 
low power consumption, PON is considered as a green 
technology [9]. 
 
4) Integrity and Other Aspects 
Redundancy includes automatic reconnection across 
redundant network elements, and should minimize the 
impact in case of failure. The system must be able to provide 
mechanisms for fault detection as monitoring and diagnosis 
for proper management. The network must also be able to 
locate and remotely provide a solution at the full extent of 
the network [36]. 
The systems must support heterogeneous access 
networks. The convergence of networks offers the possibility 
to optimize the total costs and to provide access technology 
solutions. In this context, fixed access backhauling and 
mobile backhauling must be considered [36]. 
Network operators are looking forward to simplify the 
network structure and reduce the number of access sites. 
Node 
consolidation 
would 
satisfy 
this 
requirement 
improving the overall cost efficiency of the network. Node 
consolidation is possible by increasing the reach (@100 Km) 
and the number of users supported by each access site [36]. 
Future access networks must provide data security and 
integrity to the customers. The terminal equipment should be 
simpler in terms of administration and configuration as 
possible (i.e., plug and play) [36]. 
IV. 
EVOLUTION OF OPTICAL ACCESS NETWORKS 
In this section the evolution of optical access networks 
towards a future proof solution is presented. 
A. TDM‒PON 
Time Division Multiplexing (TDM) is a multiplexing 
scheme that allows N users to share in time the bandwidth 
offered by the provider. In optical communications the 
shared resource is an assigned wavelength [13]. Currently, 
there are a few implemented standards of TDM based PON. 
However, the most employed are EPON (IEEE 802.3ah), 
principally adopted in Asia, and GPON (ITU‒T G.984) in 
Europe and North America [13]. 
EPON transports Ethernet frames in PON, this standard 
combines the low costs of the Ethernet devices with the 
passive optical components of PON. IEEE 802.3 (Ethernet in 
the First Mile) in 2004 established the standard for 
symmetric traffic at 1 Gbps, for a 10 to 20 km link, with 16 
ONUs per each OLT.   
GPON transmits TDM data frames, at a data rate of 2.5 
Gbps for the downlink and 1.25 Gbps for the uplink.  
With the higher bandwidth requirements, it was 
necessary to implement a 10 Gbps standard (10 GE‒PON). 
However, as the number of users and the bandwidth 
requirements increase, the TDM‒PON architecture becomes 
insufficient. 
B. WDM‒PON 
A straightforward and widely accepted upgrade for 
TDM‒PON is the introduction of wavelength division 
multiple access in PON [6][10][11][12]. The WDM‒PON 
approach assigns an individual wavelength to each ONU. 
This strategy allows the use of higher bandwidth for each 
ONU, longer reach, better scalability towards higher users’ 
concentration, and provides transparent bit rate channels 

144
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[11][12]. WDM‒PON provides security and integrity to end 
users, and it facilitates network upgradeability for enhanced 
future‒prooﬁng. 
The high cost of WDM‒PON has made it less attractive 
for implementation. To date, the only commercially available 
WDM‒PON system has a cost roughly twice of EPON or 
GPON [10]. 
The GigaWaM Project aims to develop essential optical 
subsystem 
components 
required 
for 
a 
future‒proof 
WDM‒PON broadband access system providing each end 
user with up to 1 Gbps bidirectional data bandwidth. A main 
goal of GigaWaM Project is to achieve a target cost below 
that of a typical TDM‒PON implementing 70 Mbps per user 
[10]. 
C. Hybrid WDM‒PON 
In this subsection, three hybrid access technologies that 
provide 
improved capacity, scalability, and spectral 
efficiency are presented. Such technologies are envisioned to 
meet the requirements of future services and applications.  
Even though high speed digital signal processors are in 
continuous evolution, the photonic circuits still an immature 
technology. Therefore, practical implementation of Hybrid 
WDM‒PON architectures represents a major challenge due 
to the complexity and costs in both photonics and high speed 
electronics hardware [8]. 
1) TDM‒WDM‒PON  
A Combination of TDM and WDM over PON turns out 
into a hybrid optical network known as TDM‒WDM‒PON. 
In this scheme a set of wavelengths are shared over time by 
different ONUs instead of being dedicated as in 
WDM‒PON. This architecture improves the efficiency of the 
network resources [13].  
The design and implementation of this architecture 
present new challenges, because the network should be 
dynamic, in the sense that each ONU must tune into the 
different wavelengths of the OLT. Also, the transmission and 
reception of the TDM packets shall be configurable. 
An architecture based in TDM‒WDM‒PON is proposed 
in [13] using new modulation schemes. On the downlink, 
Phase Shift Keying (PSK) is used. On the Uplink the signals 
are remodulated with On‒Off Keying (OOK) using a delay 
Interferometer (DI), and an NxN cyclic Arrayed Wave guide 
Grating (AWG). In this scheme, the interference between 
both, uplink and downlink is decreased. Also, only one 
instead of two dedicated DI are required on each ONU. The 
architecture was demonstrated at a data rate of 10 Gbps on 
the downlink and 1.25 Gbps on the Uplink.  
High capacity and long reach architectures have been 
demonstrated [14][15]. A TDM‒WDM‒PON with capacity 
of 8192 ONUs, symmetric traffic of 320 Gbps and links of 
135.1 km length was demonstrated [14]. The configuration 
of the network consisted of 32 wavelengths in the downlink 
and another 32 in the uplink, with 50 GHz spacing. The 
transmission was in burts at 10 Gbps each. The total capacity 
achieved was 256 ONUs per wavelength. A similar 
architecture with capacity of 16384and 100 km reach is 
demonstrated in [15]. 
 
2) OFDM‒WDM‒PON 
OFDM is a multiplexing scheme that offers a major 
spectral efficiency due to the use of orthogonal frequencies 
for data transmission. It has been demonstrated that N 
carriers could be transmitted over the same frequency band 
without interfering each other [16]. With respect to other 
multiplexing schemes like Single Carrier Multiplexing 
(SCM) or Frequency Division Multiplexing (FDM), 
OFDM‒WDM‒PON is more efficient, because it eliminates 
the guard bands between the different channels.  
An OFDM channel offers many possibilities for 
modulation formats, such as amplitude, phase, polarization 
and intensity. For this reason, depending on the type of the 
modulation format selected, it is possible to obtain different 
reception schemes. Among these architectures are: amplitude 
modulation Optical OFDM (O‒OFDM), optical modulation 
with Coherent detection (CO‒OFDM), and All Optical 
OFDM (AO‒OFDM).  
OFDM is an option that may offer a bigger capacity for 
the optical fiber systems. There are multiple variations for 
the implementation of optical OFDM. In the simplest form, it 
is possible the transmission of multiple dedicated optical 
subcarriers over the passive optical network, this is known as 
OFDM‒PON. A more complex scheme is to provide 
multiple access by sharing the subcarriers as needed. 
Therefore, subcarriers are allocated to different users in 
different 
slots 
of 
time; 
this 
is 
the 
case 
of 
TDM‒OFDMA‒PON. Last but not least important, there is 
the possibility of transmitting the subcarriers over a 
dedicated 
wavelength; 
this 
is 
the 
principle 
of 
OFDMA‒WDM‒PON. This option offers the biggest 
capacity and applicability for the future optical networks 
[16].  
 Record of 1.92 Tbps (40λ × 48Gbps/λ) coherent DWDM 
‒OFDMA‒PON 
without 
high‒speed 
ONU‒side 
was 
demonstrated over 100km straight Standard Single Mode 
Fiber (SSMF) with a 1:64 passive split [37]. Novel 
optical‒domain OFDMA sub‒band selection, coherent 
detection, and simple RF components are exploited. As an 
experimental verification of a next‒generation optical 
platform capable of delivering 1 Gbps to 1000 users over 
100km, this is a promising architecture for future optical 
Metro‒ Access consolidation.  
The 
proposed 
DWDM‒OFDMA‒PON 
architecture 
consists of optical carriers separated by a 50 GHz band for 
both the uplink and the downlink, without the use of high 
speed ONUs in the downlink, because of the coherent 
detection. The optical channels contain four subcarriers at 12 
Gbps data rate each. The result is 48vGbps‒λ speed. For the 
DS/US 40 wavelengths on the 1532.29‒1563.45nm range are 
used [37]. 
Symmetric 
1.2 
Tbps 
DWDM‒OFDMA‒PON 
is 
demonstrated in [31] over a SSMF with a 1:32 passive 
splitter. The proposed system supports 800 ONUs with 
reduced complexity and it could be a solution for 
Metro‒Access consolidation. 
The proposed architectures in [16][37] are resumed in 
[38], where the future terabit optical networks based in 
DWDM‒OFDMA‒PON are shown. N subcarriers are 

145
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
generated and then modulated by an optical continuous 
wave. All the wavelengths are transmitted with an AWG, 
and an Optical Single Side Band (OSSB) signal is produced 
with an interleaver (IL). The transmission is made through a 
SSMF. After X kilometers a local exchange is made, where 
the signals are amplified and rerouted through an AWG, and 
DS/US pairs are retransmitted to the ONUs. Once the signal 
arrive to the destination each ONU tune in to the subcarrier 
of interest. On the uplink the subcarrier is mapped back to 
the band from where it was selected, and then is transmitted 
in the wavelength of US. The signals from different ONUs 
are combined and received coherently by the OLT. This 
architecture supports λ x N without dispersion compensation.  
A symmetric transmission on baseband and 4‒ 
Amplitude Shift Keying (ASK) Fast OFDM (F‒OFDM) was 
realized for colorless ONUs [37]. The difference between 
this scheme and the one showed in [38] is that the DS 
wavelength is reused for the US transmission, in 
consequence the ONU is colorless. The achieved capacity 
was 160 Gbps (16λx10Gb/s) in symmetric traffic.  
All the presented architectures show a trend to metro 
access integration, since the main goal is to achieve the 
highest transmission speed and a long reach.  
3) OCDM‒WDM‒PON 
A Combination of the OCDM and WDM over passive 
optical networks turns out into a hybrid optical network 
known as OCDM‒WDM‒PON.   
With OCDMA each ONU has a code word to 
differentiate their optical transmissions. At the ONUs an 
optical operation encodes each bit before transmission. At 
the receiver, an inverse decoding operation must be 
performed to retrieve data. OCDMA has a scheme similar to 
WDMA, offering point to point virtual links over one 
physical point to multipoint architecture, providing data 
transparency and security to end users. OCDMA supports a 
higher number of users than TDMA asynchronously, 
eliminating the processing and network overhead required 
for synchronization of TDMA. Thus OCDMA is presented 
as an interesting access technique for the optical access 
network of the future [8][17]. 
OCDMA‒WDM‒PON has unique features as full 
asynchronous transmission, low‒latency access, demand 
‒driven 
capacity, 
and 
data 
integrity. 
Using 
OCDMA‒WDM‒PON it has been shown experimental 
speeds higher than standard 10G‒PON [39]. The authors in 
[39] included a multiport device encoder and decoder with 
the ability to generate and process calculations with multiple 
codes on multiple wavelengths. The multiport allows 
multiple users to connect and thus the cost of infrastructure 
can be shared between multiple users. The implementation 
of an 8x8 multi‒port using 4 wavelengths, each at 40 Gbps, 
permits to achieve a maximum transmission speed of 2.56 
Tbps (40Gbps x 8λ x 4 OC x 2 PM), over a 50 km fiber. 
Mechanisms such as VPN (Virtual Private Network) in 
OCDMA system can be generated with Walsh coding. Some 
studies has proposed the creation of VPN using keys to feed 
each of the PRBS (Pseudo Random Bit Sequence) producing 
non‒orthogonal sequences with larger spacing, making it 
more attack resistant  [40].  
The OCDM‒WDM‒PONs suffer from a lack of 
transitional models that take into account legacy systems [7]. 
V. 
TIME‒WAVELENGTH (   ) ROUTING OPTICAL 
ACCESS NETWORK ARCHITECTURE 
In order to design a future proof optical Access Network, 
the nonuniform traffic profile represents an interesting useful 
behavior to be exploited by architectures with optical bypass. 
Optical bypass is a technique to avoid the electronic routing 
tasks like: optic‒electronic conversions (O‒E), error 
correction algorithms, electronic 
buffering, electronic 
processing, 
and 
electronic‒optic 
conversions 
(E‒O). 
Therefore, Optical bypass will reduce power consumption 
and node complexity. 
The t‒  routing optical access architecture exploits the 
traffic profile of Metro‒Access networks to introduce optical 
bypass and passive self‒aggregation of Metro‒Access traffic  
[19]. The goal of the architecture is to use the nonuniform 
traffic distribution of access networks to select the major 
traffic portion to transmit it through all optical channels 
(on‒the‒fly routed). In consequence, the t‒  routing optical 
access architecture reduces the electronic traffic aggregation 
and routing tasks. 
The selection of the traffic portion, which will be 
optically bypassed relies on the analysis and evaluation of a 
multiple gateway traffic‒distribution [23]. Based on this 
analysis up to 70% of the traffic generated in the access 
networks is destined to the Metro‒Access interfacing node 
(called major destination). In consequence, the t‒  routing 
approach is designed to perform optical bypass and traffic 
self‒ aggregation at COs of the major destination traffic (up 
to 70% of all traffic generated by the users). The minor 
destination traffic (local traffic) is sent through electronically 
routed channels using common stop‒and‒forward policies.  
The underlying idea of the t‒   routing approach is 
presented in Figure 1 using a PON to connect N=3 ONUs. 
The architecture arranges ONUs in groups that are equal 
to the number of wavelength in the t‒  frame (3 wavelengths 
in the case depicted in Figure 2). For each PON the COs 
assign a specific wavelength/channel to perform the optical 
bypass (passive channel) for upstream major traffic. To 
avoid wavelength interference at the COs network, the 
wavelength assignment must ensure different passive 
wavelengths for each PON sharing links in their path 
towards the major destination. 
Based on the requirements of future access networks, the 
t‒  routing architecture employs colorless reflective ONUs. 
Reflective ONUs allow providers to have centralized control 
over the access network at the COs. The COs send 
Continuous Wave (CW) seed light to ONUs based on the t‒  
frame. Each ONU sorts packets at the customer sites on the 
basis of their destination. Major traffic is introduced in a 
buffer associated with the passive wavelength (passive 
channel). Minor destination traffic is arranged in other 
buffers associated with electronically routed channels. 
Colorless reflective semiconductor optical amplifier 
modulators  (RSOA) are used to transmit data by modulating 

146
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 2.  Underlying idea of the time‒wavelength assignment and Central 
Office (CO) schematic diagram, for time‒wavelength routed architecture to 
provide on‒the‒fly routing to Major destinations. CW: Continuous Wave. 
the CW seeded by COs [25][41]. Major destination traffic 
only modulates the predefined passive wavelength. 
A collision free optical self‒aggregation will be achieved 
by assuring that the upstream signals arrive at the remote 
node (splitting and combining point) properly adjusted in 
time based on the t‒  frame (see Figure 1). In consequence, 
each wavelength at the CO will contain self‒aggregated data 
from several ONUs. At COs the self‒aggregated major 
destination traffic is optically routed on‒the‒fly (optical 
bypass). The rest of the wavelengths are sent to local 
processing units for destination inspection, routing and 
forwarding (electronically routed channels). As shown in 
Figure 1, the CO assigns λ1 as passive channel. Hence λ1 is 
self‒aggregated and on‒the‒fly routed towards the major 
destination. 
VI. 
RELATED WORK 
In a former performance evaluation, the authors have 
shown the advantages of t‒  routing architecture over a 
conventional WDM‒PON. It was therefore proposed as 
solution 
for 
a 
transparent 
and 
self‒aggregating 
Metro‒Access integration architecture [19]. In the former 
evaluation the architectures were assessed by means of 
dedicated discrete step‒based simulation models, with a 
Poisson process for traffic arrivals and packet Loss Rate 
(LR) as the performance metric [19]. In the present work, an 
event‒based simulation model has been developed. The 
developed model introduces some enhancements in relation 
with the previous architecture. 
A. Excess Traffic in passive channels 
In the simulation model developed in the prior 
evaluation, the excess traffic in passive channels was 
distributed to electronically routed channels. Excess traffic in 
passive channels constitutes major traffic (traffic destined to 
a major destination) arriving at ONUs, which produces 
overflows of buffers associated with the passive channels 
(passive buffers). Therefore, upon passive channel overflows  
 
Figure 3.  Basic Reflective Optical Network Unit (ONU) scheme. 
Downstream and Upstream channels coming from the Central Office (CO) 
are separated by a wavelength filter. The seeded upstream Continuous 
Wave (CW) is modulated and reflected back to the CO by the colorless 
reflective semiconductor optical amplifier (RSOA). Incoming customer 
traffic is sorted by destination in specific buffers. 
the major excess traffic is electronically routed towards the 
major destination. This approach allows to use passive 
channels resources at the maximum and to distribute major 
excess traffic trough the electronically routed channels. 
LR was the only performance metric used in the former 
evaluation, and advantages of the t‒λ routing architecture 
over WDM‒PON have been shown [19]. But customers are 
demanding 
applications 
with 
requirements 
beyond 
bandwidth and loss rate. According to Cisco’s Visual 
Networking Index, globally Internet video traffic will grow 
from 40% of all consumer’s Internet traffic in 2010 to 61% 
in 2015 [2]. Inelastic traffic applications especially video‒ 
related traffic hava been flooding the networks, and future 
optical access networks must address the requirements of 
low delay and jitter. 
There is a negative behavior in the t‒   routing 
architecture if the excess traffic in passive channels is 
distributed through electronically routed channels. In 
general, using this approach the packets will arrive at major 
destination with high delay variations. Such delay variations 
lead to constant packet reordering at the major destination. 
Packet reordering can be compensated with buffering at the 
price of an additional delay. In future optical access networks 
(managing traffic volumes of Tera bits per second), the 
buffer size for packet reordering could be prohibitive. We 
analyze two types of Internet traffic for discussing the traffic 
behavior and the consequences of this approach: 
1) Inelastic traffic (voice, video‒related and time 
sensitive traffic) 
The packet reordering compensation adds additional 
delay. Thus, inelastic traffic will be most likely to be 
discarded, because even when the destination is reached, it 
could not meet the low delay and jitter requirements. 
Additionally, this traffic (most likely to be discarded) will 
compete inside the t‒λ routing architecture for resources with 
minor destination traffic. 
 
 

147
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
2) Elastic traffic (web, mail) 
TCP (Transport Control Protocol), the standard Internet 
transport protocol for non delay sensible traffic, has been 
proven to be packet reordering‒sensible. TCP produces 
unnecessary traffic retransmission under constant packet 
reordering, and can lead to bursty traffic behavior, thus 
increasing the network overload [42]. 
Based on the negative behavior in elastic and inelastic 
traffic produced by the use of the approach presented in [19], 
in this work we use a different approach for excess major 
traffic. 
 The t‒λ routing architecture has been proposed as a 
solution for a transparent and self aggregating Metro‒Access 
integration. Considering that inelastic traffic will flood future 
networks, we developed an enhanced t‒λ routing architecture 
model. In the enhanced version, the excess traffic in passive 
channels is dropped at the ONUs. In consequence, the delay 
variations and the packet reordering problems are avoided. 
By dropping the excess traffic at ONUs the electronic 
routing tasks are reduced, avoiding the electronic bottleneck 
at COs (i.e., it moves the network bottleneck of major traffic 
from the COs to the ONUs). The considered approach in the 
proposed enhanced t‒λ routing architecture is that if some 
packets should be discarded by a network bottleneck, it is 
better that happen as soon as possible.  
B. Routing algorithm 
Routing in the network model implemented in [19], is 
based on the Dijkstra algorithm. For each network node, all 
possible paths to other nodes are calculated. Next, the 
shortest paths to all achievable destinations are selected. The 
shortest path in the Dijkstra algorithm is the smallest weight 
path, so it potentially introduces the smallest delay and 
losses. The unique names of destinations with the “best” next 
hops are written into the routing table. Thus, the Dijkstra 
algorithm was implemented to consider only one shortest 
path even if there is more than one equal weight shortest path 
to any particular destination. 
The proposed enhanced routing approach considers all 
different equal weight shortest paths and evenly shares the 
traffic between them, performing a network load balancing. 
Load balancing improves network performance by reducing 
losses caused by buffer overflows and by reducing the 
average packet end‒to‒end delay due to the reduction of the 
time that packets spent in the buffers. 
In the developed model, the nodes manage routing tables 
based on the OPNET Modeler DJK package. The DJK 
package is based on a variation of Dijkstra algorithm to 
generate the set of shortest paths for each node [43].  
VII. PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT OF WDM‒PON VS. 
    ROUTING OPTICAL ACCESS NETWORK 
In the present work, the enhanced t‒λ routing architecture 
and a conventional WDM‒PON architecture (as reference) 
have been evaluated by means of simulation models 
developed in OPNET Modeler. OPNET Modeler is an 
event‒based state‒of‒the‒art network system modeling and 
simulation environment [43].  
A. Performance metrics 
In the related work, the authors had only considered LR 
to assess the architectures. Nevertheless, the delay metrics 
had gained more relevance to offer today services. Globally, 
Internet video traffic is expected to grow from 40% of all 
consumer Internet traffic in 2010 to 61% in 2015 [2]. In the 
present work, the developed simulation model in OPNET 
Modeler introduces LR, end‒to‒end delay and average buffer 
delay as performance metrics. 
1) Loss Rate LR 
It is the relation between lost packets and sent packets 
(1). When a specific node, is congested the packet loss is 
unavoidable. Based on LR we determined if the t‒λ routing 
architecture can effectively avoid the packet loss due to the 
electronic routing bottleneck (the cause of network 
congestion). 
 
   
           
           


2) End‒to‒End delay EED 
It is the time difference between the time instant when 
the first bit of a packet arrives at an ONU and the time 
instant when the last bit of a packet is received at its 
destination. Packet EED is calculated as the summation of 
buffering delay, processing delay and transmission delay. 
The EED is an important metric for the performance 
assessment of optical bypass in the t‒λ routing architecture, 
and the benefits of avoiding electronic routing at COs. 
3) Average Buffer Delay 
Defines the average time experienced by each packet into 
a specific buffer. The buffer delay is the time difference 
between the time instant when the first bit of a packet arrives 
at a specific buffer and the time instant when the last bit of a 
packet gets out of the buffer. It is calculated based on (2). 
 
            
                     
 
   
             
  
   
 

Where             
                     is the average delay experienced by 
the packets that went out in the time window  .    is the 
number of packets that went out of the buffer in the time 
window  .              is the delay experienced by the 
    packet in the      time window.
The variations in the EED experienced by the packets are 
consequence of medium access, electronic routing and 
aggregation tasks (processing and buffering delay). Thus 
buffer delay is an interesting useful metric, which allows 
determining bottlenecks and congestion points in the 
evaluated networks. 
B. Traffic model 
At ONU nodes a traffic generator models incoming 
traffic. The traffic is generated based on probabilistic 
distributions for: packet inter‒arrival times, packet length 
and packet destination. 
The traffic model used in [19] was Poisson, with fixed 
length. In the present work a more accurate traffic model was 
introduced for a more accurate performance assessment.  

148
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
At ONU nodes a traffic generator can generates incoming 
traffic with several short range dependence distribution (e.g., 
Poisson) and long range dependence distribution (e.g., 
Fractal Point Process), using a variation of the OPNET 
simple source and the raw packet generator respectively [43]. 
It is well known that Internet traffic presents self‒similar 
behavior, which reproduces the burstiness of Internet traffic 
[44]. Hence, for the performance evaluation the traffic 
generator was configured to generate incoming traffic with 
self‒similar inter‒arrivals times. 
C. Validation of t‒λ Routing Architecture Model 
For validation purposes the simple topology presented in 
Figure 4 was used.  
 
Figure 4.  Validation scenario. Four Optical Network Units (ONU) 
connected through a Passive Optical Network to a Central Office (CO_1), 
the CO_1 is connected to the Metro‒Access interfacing node (Metro_0). 
The validation scenario consisted in a PON based on the 
t‒λ routing architecture connected to     ONUs and the 
CO_1 was connected to the Metro‒Access interfacing node 
(Metro_0). 
1) Scenario Configuration 
The 
t‒λ 
frame 
period 
was 
set 
to 
                     long. Therefore, each t‒λ slot time 
was set to       
      
 
       . There were only two 
possible destinations in the network: CO_1 and Metro_0. 
Optical bypass was performed for traffic destined to Metro_0 
(through the t‒λ passive channel). ONU–CO_1 links had 
four WDM channels to accomplish the t‒λ frame, and a 
transmission rate of                (OC3). The 
CO_1‒Metro_0 link was configured with two WDM 
channels at               . CO_1 and Metro_0 
processing capacity were in line with the transmission links 
rate               . The buffer size was set to 
introduce a maximum buffer delay of         based on the 
following equation: 

                               

The traffic inter‒arrival time was set to present 
self‒similar properties generated with a Power ON‒Power 
OFF model with Hurst parameter H    . Packet length was 
exponentially distributed with a mean of           
Simulation time was set to        . 
 
2) Theoretic Analisys 
Each ONU had     buffers associated with each t‒λ 
channel. Because of the time division multiplexing, in 
average each ONU experienced a transmission rate of 
   
 
     .  
The t‒λ routing architecture was proposed to introduce 
the optical bypass of only one passive channel per each CO 
[19]. In consequence, for each ONU the optical bypassed 
traffic (destined to Metro_0) experienced in average a 
transmission rate of               . While the rest of the 
traffic (destined to CO_1) experienced in average a 
transmission rate of        .  
Even though the CO_1 ‒ Metro_0 link had 2 WDM 
channels at      , the t‒λ routing architecture used only one 
WDM channel for traffic destined to Metro_0. Channel sub 
utilization was expected due to the lack of packet 
segmentation to fill up the t‒λ slots in the simulation model. 
The developed model considered error free optical links. 
Therefore, as CO_1 and Metro_0 processing capacity were 
in line with the transmission rate, losses were only produced 
by buffer overflow. 
There was a major bottleneck at the passive channel of 
the t‒λ routing architecture. When the traffic destined to 
Metro_0 exceeds arrivals at               the buffer 
associated with the passive channel overflowed and in 
consequence, packets were lost. 
3) Simulation Results 
Figure 5 depicts the results of Loss Rate (LR) vs. Offered 
Traffic (A) for four different traffic distributions. The 
distributions ranges from 25% of   destined to Metro_0 
(75% destined to CO_1) to 100% of A destined to Metro_0.  
a) Case 1: 25% of   destined to Metro_0 and 75% of A 
destined to CO_1 
In this case, the t‒λ routing architecture perceived a 
uniform distribution of    in the four t‒λ channels. When 
      there were no buffers overflow because there is 
none overloaded channel. For       the four channels 
started to lost packets due to buffers overflow. When the 
network was fully loaded          the four channels 
were overloaded and the overall LR was 20%. This 20% of 
LR was consequence of the channel sub utilization. 
Therefore, there was a 5% of capacity in each channel being 
lost due to the channel sub utilization. 
b) Case 2: 50% of A destined to Metro_0 and 50% of A 
destined to CO_1 
The 50% of A destined to CO_1 was transmitted by three 
not overloaded channels. Those three channels handled 
without overloading up to 60% of A (20% per each channel). 
For       the passive channel started to get overloaded. 
For        there was 30% of LR, due to only 20% of A 
was transmitted through the passive channel. 
c) Case 3: 75% of A destined to Metro_0 and 25% of A 
destined to CO_1 
In this case, 25% of A was transmitted loss‒free towards 
CO_1 through 3 t‒λ channels. When       , from the 
75% of A destined to Metro_0 the passive channel  was  only  

149
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 5.  Loss Rate (LR) vs. Offered Traffic (A) for the t‒λ Routing 
Architecture. The four curves represents diferent traffic distributions. 
able to transmit up to 20% of A. In consequence, for 
       LR was expected to be 55%. 
d) Case 4: 100% of A destined to Metro_0 
For this case, when       the LR started to increase 
because the passive channel was overloaded. For        
a 80% of LR was expected. 
Figure 6 presents the curve of Carried Traffic      vs. 
Offered Traffic     for link ONU_0 ‒ CO_1 using the first 
case of traffic distribution (25% of   destined to Metro_0 
and 75% of A destined to CO_1). In this case the Offered 
Traffic was uniformly distributed through the four t‒λ 
channels. For       the curve obtained is a straight line 
where     . When       the four channels started to 
get overloaded and their associated buffers started to 
overflow. Therefore, the Carried Traffic    had a limit of 
80%. These results were consistent with the analysis 
presented with Figure 5. 
Figure 7 depicts the average Buffer Delay for the 
associated passive channel of ONU_0 using the first case of 
traffic distribution (25% of A destined to Metro_0 and 75% 
of A destined to CO_1). There are six curves corresponding 
to                                
To evaluate the results of Figure 7, it has to be remember 
that each channel perceived in average a transmission rate of 
             , but 5% of the channel capacity was lost 
by the channel sub utilization. Therefore, the buffer of each 
channel must be overflowed for      . 
In Figure 7, for       there is a proportional increase 
of the average Buffer Delay related to A. For       the 
mean value of the average buffer delay was          . For 
      the mean value of the average buffer delay was 
          ; showing that the buffer was overflowed. 
The maximum buffer delay was set to        . 
However such maximum delay was defined by (3), where no 
channel sub utilization was considered. However, the 
channel sub utilization made packets to stay more than 
        at the buffers. 
 
Figure 6.  Carried Traffic      vs. Offered Traffic     for link ONU_0 ‒ 
CO_1 using the first case of traffic distribution (25% of   destined to 
Metro_0 and 75% of A destined to CO_1). 
 
Figure 7.  Average Buffer Delay for the associated passive channel of 
ONU_0 using the first case of traffic distribution (25% of   destined to 
Metro_0 and 75% of A destined to CO_1). Results are presented for five 
values of Offered Traffic                             . 
D. WDM‒PON Model Validation 
For validation of developed WDM‒PON model, the 
simple topology presented in Figure 4 was used with the 
same configuration parameters. Thus, allowing for model 
validation and performance comparison between both 
architectures. 
 

150
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1) Theoretic Analisys 
In WDM‒PON, a WDM channel was dedicated to each 
ONU, i.e., Offered Traffic perceived in average a 
transmission rate of       . Therefore, there must be no 
buffer overflow at ONUs even when       . 
The processing capacity of the nodes was in line with the 
transmission rate. In consequence, CO_1 was capable of 
processing all arriving packets, presenting a maximum for 
    ONUs of        .  
There must be a bottleneck at the CO_1 – Metro_0 link 
because there were only 2 WDM channels at        Thus, at 
Metro_0 can arrive traffic at a maximum of        . When 
traffic destined to Metro_0 arrived at CO_1 at more than 
        buffers started to overflow and the loss rate started 
to increase. 
2) Simulation Results and Analysis 
Figure 8 shows gathered results of Loss Rate (LR) vs. 
Offered Traffic (A). Results are presented for three cases of 
traffic distribution. 
a) 50% of A destined to Metro_0 and 50% of A 
destined to CO_1 
The curve associated with this case shows that there was 
no packet loss. As it was expected only when at CO_1 
arrives traffic destined to Metro_0 at more than         
there will be packet loss. 
b) 75% of A destined to Metro_0 and 25% of A 
destined to CO_1 
In this case, the bottleneck imposed by the 2 WDM 
channels started to produce buffer overflows for        . 
For       the ONUs were generating traffic destined to 
Metro_0 at more than         . For         there was a 
LR of 25% because 75% of the offered load requested the 
CO_1 ‒ Metro_0 link and it only supported 50% of the 
offered load          . 
c) 100% of A destined to Metro_0  
It can be seen that for        the LR curve started to  
 
Figure 8.  Loss Rate (LR) vs. Offered Traffic (A) for the WDM‒PON 
Architecture. The three curves represents diferent traffic distributions.  
grow, as was expected. When 100% of generated traffic was 
destined to Metro_0, the 2 WDM channels of CO_1 ‒ 
Metro_0 link only supported up to 50% of the load without 
packet loss. 
E. Performance Assessment 
Figure 9 presents the simple network topology used in 
the simulation experiments. This topology was selected in 
order to establish some comparison with the former 
evaluation [19]. It consisted of five COs with four ONUs 
connected to each CO and a Metro‒Access Interfacing Node 
(MN) as major destination. The COs were connected to each 
other in a ring arrangement. Just one CO was connected to 
the MN. 
1) Scenario Configuration 
The set up of the performance assessment scenario was 
as follow. Transmission Rate was set at             
(one magnitude order below EPON standard rates). The 
processing rate of the nodes was set to be on line with the 
transmission rate. Buffer sizes were assigned to limit the 
maximum buffer delay at        in relation with the 
transmission rate; based on design considerations assumed in 
[45]. 
The applied traffic model had self‒similar arrivals 
processes with Hurst parameter H   0,74; based on empirical 
traffic evaluations [44]. The traffic distribution was the same 
as used in the former evaluation. It was taken from a multiple 
gateway traffic assessment, where 70% of   was destined to 
the major destination (i.e., the MN) and the rest was equally 
distributed among the minor destinations (i.e., the five COs) 
[19][23]. 
The t‒   frame period was set to                 ; 
compatible with the Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH). 
Each frame is composed by four t‒  slots (same number 
as ONUs connected to each CO). The time slots were 
assigned to specific wavelengths, and the wavelengths were 
associated with the MN as the major destination and with the 
COs as minor destinations.  
 
Figure 9.  Simple Access network topology used for the performance 
evaluation, based on a ring interconection of COs. The Metro‒Access 
interfacing Node (MN) represents the major destination (for the 
performance assessment up to 70% of traffic was destined to MN). 

151
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In conventional WDM‒PON, each ONU had its own 
dedicated wavelength, which is terminated at the CO, i.e., no 
passive channels provided. 
2) Simulation Results and Analysis 
Performance assessment was carried out using a worst case 
electronic bottleneck scenario; i.e., up to 70% of the offered 
traffic was destined to the major destination (MN). As there 
were four ONUs per each CO (see Figure 9), the t‒  frame 
was composed by four time shared wavelengths. Only one 
wavelength was optically bypassed towards the major 
destination per each CO (i.e., one on‒the‒fly routed path 
established from CO to MN). In this way, each ONU 
perceived up to 25% of the transmission rate to send traffic 
through the passive channel, producing fast overload of the 
passive channels. 
Figure 10 shows the simulation results for LR and EED 
vs. A for the enhanced t‒  routing architecture and the 
conventional WDM‒PON as reference. As can be observed 
in Figure 10, the conventional WDM‒PON has a superior 
performance, based on LR, because of the expected fast 
overload of passive channels in the enhanced t‒  routing 
architecture. However the LR in WDM‒PON tends to worse 
when A increases (higher degree of congestion in the 
network) as a consequence of the COs’ electronic bottleneck. 
 
 
Figure 10.  Loss Rate (LR) vs. Offered Traffic (A);  for 70% of A destined 
to Metro Node (MN). 
Figure 11 presents the EED experienced by the enhanced 
t‒  routing architecture, based on three curves: electronically 
routed paths, on‒the‒fly routed paths (optically bypassed), 
and overall paths. Only one WDM‒PON EED curve is 
shown, because all packets were electronically routed in 
WDM‒PON. 
Figure 11 shows that the electronically routed paths of 
the enhanced t‒  routing architecture presented the lowest 
EED   , because minor destination traffic (local traffic) 
perceived congestion free COs. The on‒the‒fly routed paths 
EED curve suggests that the ONUs passive buffers were 
overloaded for      . In Figure 11 the enhanced t‒  
overall EED curve indicates that when the passive buffers 
were overloaded (     ) there was an increasing portion 
of major traffic being lost, as is clearly showed in Figure 10. 
The WDM‒PON LR and EED curves depicted the WDM 
electronic bottleneck problem. Even though we have moved 
the bottleneck from COs to the ONUs in the enhanced t‒  
architecture, producing a fast overload of the passive 
channels; the WDM‒PON performance tends to worse when 
the network is highly loaded (     ). Figure 11 shows 
that the WDM‒PON COs tend to get congested when the 
network load is increased. For       the WDM‒PON 
EED becomes worse than the EED experienced by the 
enhanced t‒  architecture.  
 
Figure 11.  End‒to‒End Delay (EED) vs. Offered Traffic (A);  for 70% of A 
destined to Metro Node (MN). 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In a future scenario with higher users’ bandwidth demand 
for video‒related traffic (video‒related representing 61% of 
all customer traffic for 2015) and faster networks, the access 
network must successfully deliver the demanded bandwidth 
and cope with the strict traffic requirements on low delay and 
jitter. 
A former t‒  routing architecture model feature was 
found, which produces constant packet reordering and 
performance problems. To avoid such packet reordering and 
performance problems, we have proposed an enhanced 
version of the t‒  routing architecture, which effectively 
avoids the reordering packet problems. The proposed scheme 
was evaluated against a traditional WDM‒PON architecture 
using developed simulation models in the OPNET Modeler 
tool. 
Although EED on WDM‒PON and t‒  routing are not 
very different, our simulation results showed that the 
WDM‒PON leads to congestion at COs in presence of 
nonuniform access traffic distribution, as a consequence of 

152
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the electronic bottleneck. In spite of the fast overload of the 
passive channel at ONUs, the use of the proposed enhanced 
t‒   routing architecture, allows the COs to remain 
congestion free. In consequence, the introduction of optically 
bypassed channels leads to congestion avoidance, thus the 
network can more efficiently support different traffic 
requirements while reducing the power consumption. 
In a future proof optical access scenario, each CO must 
manage much more than 64 ONUs. However, the t‒λ routing 
architecture cannot meet this requirement because it presents 
a limitation in the number of ONUs managed by the CO.  
The t‒λ frame is composed by the same number of 
wavelengths as ONUs connected to the CO. Because of the 
time division multiplexing, in average each ONU experience 
a transmission rate    
 
     . The architecture was 
proposed to introduce the optical bypass of only one passive 
channel per CO [19]. In consequence, for each ONU the 
optical bypassed traffic experience in average a transmission 
rate of     
 
     , while the rest of the traffic experience in 
average a transmission rate of            . Therefore, as 
the number of ONUs ( ) increases, the average transmission 
rate of the passive channel perceived by each ONU 
decreases. In the case of a CO with 128 ONUs the average 
transmission rate of the passive channel perceived by each 
ONU will be    
 
         In such scenario, the 
performance of the t‒λ routing architecture will be very poor, 
because there will be one or just few channels associated 
with the major destination (up to 80% of offered load 
destined to major destination) increasing the bottleneck at the 
passive channel.  
Hybrid 
Wavelength 
Division 
Multiplexing-Passive 
Optical Networks (XDM‒WDM‒PON) seems to be the 
solution to tackle the requirements for optical access 
networks of the future. The introduction of optical bypass 
(on‒the‒fly routed) channels based on the nonuniform access 
traffic distribution to achieve a transparent, low latency and 
low power consumption Metro‒Access interface could 
represent an interesting useful approach to consider in 
XDM‒WDM‒PON architectures. Based on our simulation 
results, we propose to combine the best of the t‒λ routing 
architecture and XDM‒WDM‒PON. A more effective 
combination could be by means of hybrid OFDM 
‒WDM‒PON or OCDM‒WDM‒PON, in substitution of the 
time division multiplexing. Such hybrid WDM‒PON must 
be able to provide transparent ONU‒CO connections and 
transparent Metro‒Access optical bypass routed paths 
(releasing electronic bottleneck) without restrictions to 
increase the number of ONUs per CO. 
It would be convenient to conduct some additional 
experiments 
introducing 
inelastic 
and 
elastic traffic 
differentiation. Using traffic differentiation can assure that 
only inelastic traffic will be sent by the optical bypassed 
channels, whereas elastic traffic could be sent through 
electronically routed channels.  
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by the Applied Networks 
and Telematics Group at Simon Bolivar University 
(GRETA‒USB), Venezuela, and the Metro Access and Short 
Range Systems Group at Technical University of Denmark, 
Denmark. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
R. Alvizu, M. Huerta, R. Gonzales, R. Martinez, L. Rodríguez, 
and I. Tafur, "On-the-Fly Routing and Traffic Self-Aggregation 
Towards Metro-Access Integration," in INFOCOMP 2011, The 
First International Conference on Advanced Communications 
and Computation, Barcelona, Spain, 2011. 
[2] 
Cisco Visual Networking Index: Forecast and Methodology, 
2010-2015. http://www.cisco.com . 12.12.2011.  
[3] 
A. Di Giglio, et al., "STRONGEST: Challenges for network 
architectures," in Future Network and Mobile Summit, 2010, 
2010, pp. 1-8. 
[4] 
J. i. Kani, "Enabling Technologies for Future Scalable and 
Flexible WDM-PON and WDM/TDM-PON Systems," IEEE J. 
Sel. Topics Quantum Electron., vol. 16, pp. 1290-1297, 2010. 
[5] 
P. E. Green, "Fiber to the home: the next big broadband thing," 
IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 42, pp. 100-106, 2004. 
[6] 
L. G. Kazovsky, W.-T. Shaw, D. Gutierrez, N. Cheng, and S.-W. 
Wong, "Next-Generation Optical Access Networks," J. Lightw. 
Technol., vol. 25, pp. 3428-3442, 2007. 
[7] 
X. Shilin, Z. Zhao, B. Meihua, Z. Min, and C. He, "Evolution 
scenarios for passive optical access networks," in International 
Conference on Information Communications and Signal 
Processing (ICICS) 2011 8th, 2011, pp. 1-5. 
[8] 
E. Wong, "Next-Generation Broadband Access Networks and 
Technologies," J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 30, pp. 597-608, 2012. 
[9] 
Fiber-to-the-Home 
(FTTH) 
Council 
website. 
http://www.ftthcouncil.org/. 12.12.2012.  
[10] 
K. Prince, et al., "GigaWaMNext-Generation WDM-PON 
Enabling Gigabit Per-User Data Bandwidth," J. Lightw. 
Technol., vol. 30, pp. 1444-1454, 2012. 
[11] 
K. Grobe and J. P. Elbers, "PON in adolescence: from TDMA to 
WDM-PON," IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 46, pp. 26-34, 2008. 
[12] 
C. Gee-Kung, et al., "Key Technologies of WDM-PON for 
Future Converged Optical Broadband Access Networks 
[Invited]," IEEE J. Opt. Commun. Netw., vol. 1, pp. C35-C50, 
2009. 
[13] 
Z. Luying, C. Xiaofei, Y. Yong-Kee, and N. Lek heng, "Hybrid 
WDM-TDM PON architectures and DWBA algorithms," in 
Communications and Networking in China (CHINACOM), 2010 
5th International ICST Conference on, 2010, pp. 1-6. 
[14] 
P. Ossieur, et al., "A 135-km 8192-Split Carrier Distributed 
DWDM-TDMA PON With 2 x 32 x 10 Gb/s Capacity," J. 
Lightw. Technol., vol. 29, pp. 463-474, 2011. 
[15] 
P. Ossieur, et al., "Demonstration of a 32 x 512 Split, 100 km 
Reach, 2x 32 x 10 Gb/s Hybrid DWDM-TDMA PON Using 
Tunable External Cavity Lasers in the ONUs," J. Lightw. 
Technol., vol. 29, pp. 3705-3718, 2011. 
[16] 
N. Cvijetic, "OFDM for Next-Generation Optical Access 
Networks," J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 30, pp. 384-398, 2012. 
[17] 
K. Fouli and M. Maier, "OCDMA and Optical Coding: 
Principles, Applications, and Challenges [Topics in Optical 
Communications]," IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 45, pp. 27-34, 
2007. 
[18] 
J. i. Kani, et al., "Next-generation PON-part I: Technology 
roadmap and general requirements," IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 
47, pp. 43-49, 2009. 
[19] 
M. Wieckowski, A. V. Osadchiy, J. P. Turkiewicz, and I. T. 
Monroy, "Performance assessment of flexible time-wavelength 
routing 
for 
a 
self-aggregating 
transparent 
Metro-access 
interface," 
in 
35th 
European 
Conference 
on 
Optical 
Communication (ECOC) 2009, pp. 1-2. 

153
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[20] 
B. Mukherjee, Optical WDM Networks: Springer, 2006. 
[21] 
Metro 
Ethernet 
services 
- 
a 
technical 
overview. 
http://metroethernetforum.org/PDF_Documents/metro-ethernet-
services.pdf. 12.12.2012.  
[22] 
F. Davik, M. Yilmaz, S. Gjessing, and N. Uzun, "IEEE 802.17 
resilient packet ring tutorial," IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 42, pp. 
112-118, 2004. 
[23] 
P.-L. Tsai and C.-L. Lei, "Analysis and evaluation of a multiple 
gateway traffic-distribution scheme for gateway clusters," 
Comput. Commun., vol. 29, pp. 3170-3181, 2006. 
[24] 
E. Van Breusegern, et al., "Overspill routing in optical networks: 
a true hybrid optical network design," IEEE J. Sel. Areas 
Commun., vol. 24, pp. 13-25, 2006. 
[25] 
A. V. Osadchiy, J. B. Jensen, P. Jeppesen, and I. T. Monroy, 
"Colorless receiver enabling crossconnect based metro-access 
interfacing nodes for optically labelled DQPSK payload signals," 
in 21st Annual Meeting of the IEEE Lasers and Electro-Optics 
Society (LEOS), 2008, pp. 612-613. 
[26] 
S. Chatzi, J. A. Lazaro, J. Prat, and I. Tomkos, "A quantitative 
techno-economic comparison of current and next generation 
metro/access converged optical networks," in 36th European 
Conference and Exhibition on Optical Communication (ECOC), 
2010, pp. 1-3. 
[27] 
J. Berthold, A. A. M. Saleh, L. Blair, and J. M. Simmons, 
"Optical Networking: Past, Present, and Future," J. Lightw. 
Technol., vol. 26, pp. 1104-1118, 2008. 
[28] 
C. Zhang, W. Zhao, and X. Yi, "100Gb/s technology and future 
development 
in 
China," 
in 
OptoeElectronics 
and 
Communications Conference (OECC), 2011 16th, 2011, pp. 169-
171. 
[29] 
E. Ip, et al., "100G and Beyond Transmission Technologies for 
Evolving Optical Networks and Relevant Physical-Layer Issues," 
100G and Beyond Transmission Technologies for Evolving 
Optical Networks and Relevant Physical-Layer Issues, vol. 100, 
pp. 1065-1078, 2012. 
[30] 
R. Van Nee and R. Prasad, OFDM for Wireless Multimedia 
Communications: Artech House, 2000. 
[31] 
N. Cvijetic, M.-F. Huang, E. Ip, Y.-K. Huang, D. Qian, and T. 
Wang, "1.2 Tb/s Symmetric WDM-OFDMA-PON over 90km 
Straight SSMF and 1:32 Passive Split with Digitally-Selective 
ONUs and Coherent Receiver OLT," in Optical Fiber 
Communication Conference and Exposition (OFC/NFOEC), and 
the National Fiber Optic Engineers Conference 2011, pp. 1-3. 
[32] 
G. Wellbrock, "Preparing for the future," in 36th European 
Conference and Exhibition on Optical Communication (ECOC), 
2010, pp. 1-10. 
[33] 
A. Di Giglio, et al., "STRONGEST: Challenges for network 
architectures," in Future Network and Mobile Summit, 2010, pp. 
1-8. 
[34] 
F. J. Effenberger, J. i. Kani, and Y. Maeda, "Standardization 
trends and prospective views on the next generation of 
broadband optical access systems," IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., 
vol. 28, pp. 773-780, 2010. 
[35] 
S. Huan, K. Byoung-Whi, and B. Mukherjee, "Long-reach 
optical access networks: A survey of research challenges, 
demonstrations, and bandwidth assignment mechanisms," IEEE 
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 12, pp. 112-123, 
2010. 
[36] 
P. Chanclou, A. Cui, F. Geilhardt, H. Nakamura, and D. Nesset, 
"Network operator requirements for the next generation of 
optical access network," IEEE Netw., vol. 26, pp. 8-14, 2012. 
[37] 
N. Cvijetic, et al., "1.92Tb/s coherent DWDM-OFDMA-PON 
with no high-speed ONU-side electronics over 100km SSMF and 
1:64 passive split," Opt. Express, vol. 19, pp. 24540-24545, 
2011.. 
[38] 
N. Cvijetic, et al., "Terabit Optical Access Networks Based on 
WDM-OFDMA-PON," J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 30, pp. 493-
503, 2012. 
[39] 
N. Kataoka, N. Wada, G. Cincotti, and K. Kitayama, "2.56 Tbps 
(40-Gbps x 8-wavelength x 4-OC x 2-POL) asynchronous 
WDM-OCDMA-PON using a multi-port encoder/decoder," in 
37th European Conference and Exhibition on Optical 
Communication (ECOC), 2011, pp. 1-3. 
[40] 
A. A. Ortega, V. A. Bettachini, J. I. Alvarez-Hamelin, and D. F. 
Grosz, "Point-to-point and Point-to-multipoint CDMA Access 
Network with Enhanced Security," 2011, p. ATuB6. 
[41] 
F. Payoux, P. Chanclou, and N. Genay, "WDM-PON with 
colorless ONUs," in Optical Fiber Communication and the 
National Fiber Optic Engineers Conference, 2007. OFC/NFOEC 
2007. Conference on, 2007, pp. 1-3. 
[42] 
L. Ka-Cheong, V. O. K. Li, and Y. Daiqin, "An Overview of 
Packet Reordering in Transmission Control Protocol (TCP): 
Problems, Solutions, and Challenges," IEEE Trans. Parallel 
Distrib. Syst., vol. 18, pp. 522-535, 2007. 
[43] 
OPNET Technologies Inc. http://www.opnet.com/. 12.12.2012  
[44] 
W. E. Leland, M. S. Taqqu, W. Willinger, and D. V. Wilson, 
"On the self-similar nature of Ethernet traffic (extended 
version)," IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 2, pp. 1-15, 1994. 
[45] 
B. Skubic, C. Jiajia, J. Ahmed, L. Wosinska, and B. Mukherjee, 
"A comparison of dynamic bandwidth allocation for EPON, 
GPON, and next-generation TDM PON," IEEE Commun. Mag, 
vol. 47, pp. S40-S48, 2009. 
 
 

