Constraint-Based Graphical Modelling of On-Site and Factory-Based Construction 
Production Systems 
 
Ian Flood 
Rinker School, College of Design, Construction and Planning, 
University of Florida, 
Gainesville, Florida, USA 
flood@ufl.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract — Planning and control of a construction project 
requires the development of an appropriate model of the 
project’s processes. The Critical Path Method (CPM) is the 
most widely used process modelling method in construction 
since it is simple to use and reasonably versatile.  Discrete-
event simulation is the most versatile of existing modelling 
methods in terms of the type of work and detailed logic that 
can be represented, but it is not easy to use compared to CPM 
and for this reason has not been widely adopted in practice. 
Foresight is a new modelling method designed to combine the 
simplicity of CPM and versatility of simulation.  Earlier work 
has demonstrated the modelling simplicity and versatility of 
Foresight relative to other project planning tools for a range of 
on-site based processes. This paper continues this investigation, 
focussing on the relative performance of Foresight and 
discrete-event simulation in terms of modelling both on-site 
and factory-based (manufactured) process logic. The principles 
and relative performances of the two approaches are 
demonstrated in application to three example problems.  The 
study demonstrates the advantages of Foresight over 
simulation hold for both on-site and manufacturing type 
processes. 
Keywords – discrete-event simulation; Foresight modeling; 
interactive modeling; process modeling; visualization. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
This paper extends earlier work comparing the 
performance of conventional simulation and constraint 
based modelling techniques in application to both on-site 
and factory-based construction production [1]. 
 
A wide range of methods for modelling construction 
processes have been developed over the last 100 years since 
the introduction of the Gantt Chart.  An analysis of the 
genealogy [2] of these tools shows that they can be grouped 
into three main categories: the Critical Path Methods 
(CPM); the linear scheduling techniques; and discrete-event 
process simulation.  Most other tools are either an 
enhancement or an integration of these methods or have a 
very limited scope of application.  For example, 4D-CAD 
and nD-CAD planning methods [3] [4], where one of the 
dimensions is time, are strictly CPM models hybridized 
with 3D-CAD for visualization purposes. 
 
Each of the three main groups of modelling method 
have, unfortunately, practical limitations in terms of their 
application to construction planning.  The CPM methods 
(the most popular in construction) are well suited to 
modelling projects at a relatively general level of detail, but 
are limited in terms of the types of interactions they can 
consider between tasks [5].  Moreover, CPM models 
become cumbersome when used to model repetitive 
processes, and provide little understanding of the 
interactions between repetitive tasks.  When presented in 
Gantt Chart format, a CPM model provides some visual 
insight into how a system’s logic affects its performance 
(thus suggesting more optimal ways of executing work) but 
this is limited to event-based logical dependencies and their 
impact on time-wise performance. 
 
Linear scheduling, on the other hand, is targeted at 
projects where there is repetition at a high level, such as 
high-rise, tunnelling, and highway construction work (see, 
for example, Matilla and Abraham [6]).  These models are 
very easy to understand and represent the system’s logic and 
its 
performance 
within 
an 
integrated 
framework.  
Consequently, they provide the modeller with strong visual 
insight that can help identify more optimal ways of 
achieving the project’s production goals.  For example, they 
show in graphic form how the relative progress of repetitive 
tasks can lead to conflict, both in terms of time and physical 
interference between productive resources (such as crews 
and equipment).  However, linear scheduling cannot be used 
to model non-repetitive work, and it includes some 
simplistic assumptions which often make it difficult to 
model real-world repetitive processes.  For example, 
velocity diagrams (a linear scheduling technique) cannot 
easily represent operations that follow different paths, such 
as two underground utility lines that interact at a cross-over 
point but otherwise follow different routes.   
 
Discrete-event simulation (see, for example, Halpin and 
Woodhead [7]; Sawhney et al. [8]; Hajjar and AbouRizk 
[9]) is an established tool that is very versatile in that it can 
in principle model any type of interaction between tasks and 
any type of construction process (including repetitive and 
non-repetitive work).  However, the relatively high degree 
of expertise and effort required to develop and validate a 
simulation model has limited its adoption in the field.  In 
1
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

addition, simulation models provide no direct visual 
indication of how a system’s logic determines its 
performance.  That is, performance is an output from the 
model after it has been fully developed; it is not an integral 
part of the model and therefore its dependence on the 
model’s logic is not directly apparent.  
 
Most projects include a variety of processes some of 
which may be best modelled using CPM while others may 
be better represented by linear scheduling or simulation.  
However, it is not normally practical to expect planners and 
plan-users to employ more than one modelling method to 
manage a project.  In any case, using several tools that are 
not fully compatible makes it impossible to seek a globally 
optimal solution to a planning problem.  On the other hand, 
the alternative approach of using one tool to model all 
situations (typically CPM) compromises a user’s ability to 
plan and control work optimally. 
 
The ideal solution would be a single tool that combines 
the versatility of discrete-event simulation (in terms of 
modelling the broad spectrum of repetitive and non-
repetitive construction work), the visual insight of linear 
scheduling, and the ease-in-use of CPM.  Foresight [10] has 
been developed to meet these objectives, and has been 
demonstrated capable of modelling all types of work 
covered by CPM, linear scheduling and discrete-event 
simulation. 
Construction 
processes 
are 
traditionally 
performed on-site; however, some are performed within a 
controlled environment such as a factory, and in recent 
years there has been a slowly growing interest in 
manufactured and modular component production.  The 
logistics of manufactured processes can be quite different 
from on-site processes, often characterized by a job-to-
process flow of work (as opposed to process-to-job flow), 
and batch processing of multiple component types.  This 
paper compares Foresight with CYCLONE [7] (a commonly 
adopted simulation modelling system designed specifically 
for construction) in application to a variety of construction 
processes including a factory based production system. 
 
Section II introduces the principals of the Foresight 
modelling system.  Sections III to V provide three case 
studies: a multiple-cycle earthmoving operation that 
includes an intermediate storage facility, a tunnelling 
operation; and a factory-based process that produces batches 
of various types of prefabricated reinforced concrete 
components. The paper concludes in Section VI with a 
summary of the findings and an identification of continuing 
research. 
II. 
PRINCIPAL MODELING CONCEPTS OF FORESIGHT 
 
The goal in developing the new approach to modelling 
was to attain the simplicity of CPM, visual insight of linear 
scheduling, and the modelling versatility of simulation.  In 
addition, hierarchical structuring of a model (see for 
example, Huber et al. [11] and Ceric [12]) and interactive 
development of a model were identified as requisite 
attributes of the new approach since they facilitate model 
development and aid understanding of the organization and 
behaviour of a system. 
 
The three principle concepts of the Foresight modelling 
approach are as follows and illustrated in Figure 1:  
(1) Attribute Space.  This is the environment within which 
the model of the process exists.  Each dimension defining 
this space represents a different attribute involved in the 
execution of the process, such as time, cost, excavators, 
skilled labour, number of repetitions of an item of work, 
permits to perform work, and materials.  The attributes that 
make-up this space are the resources that are used to 
measure performance and/or that could have a significant 
impact on performance. 
(2) Work Units.  These are elements that represent specific 
items of work that need to be completed as part of the 
project.  They are represented by a bounded region within 
the attribute space.  A unit can represent work at a high level 
(such as ‘Construct Structural System’), a low level (such as 
‘Erect Column X’) or any intermediate level.  Collectively, 
the work units must represent all work of interest but should 
not represent any item of work more than once. Work units 
may exist in different or overlapping subsets of attribute 
space. 
(3) Constraints and Objectives.  Constraints define the 
relationships between the work units and the attribute space, 
either directly with the attribute space (such as constraint ‘a’ 
in Figure 1) or indirectly via relationships with other work 
units (such as constraints ‘b’, ‘c’, and ‘d’ in Figure 1).  
These constraints effectively define the location of the edges 
of the work units.  A constraint can be any functional 
relationship between the borders of the work units and/or 
the space within which they exist.  Practical examples 
include: (i) ensuring that crews at different work units 
maintain a safe working distance; (ii) ensuring that the 
demand for resources never exceeds the quantity available; 
(iii) determining the duration for a work unit based on the 
number of times it has already been repeated; and (iv) 
  work unit 1 
 
work unit 1.1 
work unit 1.2 
work unit 
1.2.1 
work unit 1.1.1 
attribute W (e.g. time) 
work unit 1.3 
attribute X (e.g. distance) 
constraint ‘d’ (objective) 
constraint ‘c’ (relative) 
constraint ‘b’ 
(relative) 
 constraint ‘a’ (absolute) 
Figure 1.  Schematic illustrating the three principal concepts of Foresight. 
work unit  
1.3.3  1.3.3.1 
work unit F 
1.3.2   1.3.2.1 
work unit 
1.3.1  1.3.1.1 
2
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

ensuring that idle time for a task is kept to a minimum.  The 
objectives are the specific goals of the planning study, such 
as to maximize profits or to complete work by a deadline 
(such as constraint ‘d’ in Figure 1).  Fundamentally, they are 
the same thing as constraints, albeit at a higher level of 
significance, and therefore are treated as such within the 
proposed new modelling system. 
There are two secondary concepts of the Foresight 
modelling system, both concerned with its structure: 
(1) Nesting.  Work units can be nested within other work 
units (such as work unit ‘1.2.1’ in Figure 1 which is shown 
to be within work unit ‘1.2’ which is respectively part of 
‘1’).  Nesting of work units is defined explicitly, allowing 
the model to be understood at different levels of abstraction, 
increasing its readability, reducing the likelihood of errors in 
the design of the model, and reducing the amount of work 
required to define and update a model. 
(2) Repetition. Work units can be repeated (such as occurs 
within work unit 1.3 in Figure 1) and can be implemented at 
any level within the nesting hierarchy, thus minimizing the 
amount of work required to define a model.  Repetition of a 
work unit will include a repetition of all relevant constraints 
and its nested work units and their constraints. 
A standard specification of Foresight is that model 
development be implemented interactively.  That is, the 
visual presentation of a model is updated and all constraints 
are resolved as the work units and constraints are either 
edited or added to the model.   This way, the modeller can 
see immediately the impact of any changes or additions that 
are made.  Another point to note is that these models are 
presented as a plot of the work units within at least two 
dimensions of the attribute space.  This form of presentation 
allows the progress of work to be visualized within the 
model’s functional structure.  This is an extrapolation of the 
way in which linear scheduling models are presented, and 
has the advantage of allowing the user to visualize directly 
how the performance of the model is dependent on its 
structure.   These points will be illustrated in the following 
three example applications. 
It should be noted that Foresight is, strictly speaking, a 
simulation system in that it requires the use of a three-phase 
simulation algorithm to resolve its constraints. 
III. 
EARTHMOVING OPERATION 
 
The first system to be modelled is that of an 
earthmoving system comprising a bulldozer used to push 
dirt from the cut area into a stockpile, and an excavator used 
to load dump trucks which, in turn, haul the dirt to a fill 
area.  Figure 2 shows the CYCLONE [7] simulation diagram 
of this system for a situation where there is 1 bulldozer that 
can push 3 cu-m of dirt on each cycle, a loader with a 1 cu-
m bucket, and 3 dump trucks of 5 cu-m capacity each.  The 
loader must therefore perform five cycles to load a truck. 
This model, once defined within the computer and 
validated, would be run several times to gain measures of 
performance of the system, such as production rates and 
queue length distributions.  To the lower left of Figure 2, for 
example, is a measure of the amount of dirt in the stockpile 
plotted against time resulting from a single simulation run.  
Similarly, to the lower right of the figure is a measure of 
output from the system against time, measured as truck loads 
at the “dump” activity. 
The Foresight representation of this system is presented 
in Figure 3.  The first part of this figure shows the 
hierarchical form of the model (without the main constraints 
added) whereas the second part shows the model in its 
normal format with all constraints included representing, for 
example, work unit durations, and precedence.   In this case, 
the model is displayed within the attribute dimensions of 
“quantity of dirt” and “time”.  The model is shown for the 
first 10 cu-m of dirt removal. 
Inspecting the second part of Figure 3, it can be seen 
that the bulldozer (yellow) and loader (blue) cycles are well 
balanced, operating at a similar rate of performance.  The 
loader and trucks, however, are not well balanced leaving the 
loader in an idle state for much of the time.  It can be seen 
from the second part of this figure that the addition of one or 
two more dump trucks would improve this situation. 
One of the benefits of the Foresight mode of 
representation is that it is possible to see how the 
performances of different sections of a model are related.  
For example, the growth in the amount of dirt in the 
stockpiles (the green bars) can be seen in terms of both the 
input rate (the leading edges defined by the performance of 
the bulldozer) and the output (the trailing edge defined by the 
performance of the loader and dump trucks).  However, 
sometimes it is helpful to isolate a part of a model and 
inspect that on its own terms.  This can be at any level in a 
model hierarchy; for the stockpiles, this is shown in part 3 of 
Figure 3.  Alternative filtering could have been undertaken to 
monitor the utilization of any item of equipment, time-wise 
variance in the length of a queue, or output from the system.  
Other attributes that may have been included to impose 
additional constraints on the system or to monitor 
performance, include cost and location. 
Several important differences between CYCLONE and 
Foresight can be understood by comparing the model 
representations of Figures 2 and 3.  First, it should be 
understood that CYCLONE requires the complete logic of the 
model (as represented by the CYCLONE diagram of Figure 
2) to be finalized before the system’s performance can be 
predicted in a simulation run.  In contrast, the Foresight 
model integrates the structure and logic of the model and the 
estimated performance of the system within a single format 
as represented by the second part of Figure 3.  This gives 
Foresight a couple of significant advantages.  First, as work 
units are added to a model and their parameters altered, the 
impact of these edits on the estimated performance of the 
system are seen immediately - the model does not have to be 
3
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

completed before the simulation results are produced.  This 
is a similar advantage to that seen in other graphically based 
planning tools such as linear scheduling.  The second 
advantage is that in a Foresight model, the way in which the 
logic and structure of the model affect the performance of the 
system is directly visible, which in turn assists in the 
optimization of the design of the system - this point will be 
illustrated in the next case study of a sewer-tunneling 
operation. 
IV. 
TUNNELLING OPERATION  
The second study is concerned with modelling the 
construction of a 2 m internal diameter sewer, where 
tunnelling is through a stiff clay and the lining is formed 
from concrete ring segments grouted in place.  The example 
is used to illustrate the steps in developing a Foresight model 
for a problem that, given its complexities, would best be 
modelled using simulation methods.  
A component oriented approach should be adopted when 
developing a Foresight model, such that each work unit 
represents the construction of a physical component or sub-
component of the facility under construction.  A top-down, 
hierarchical approach is an effective strategy for developing 
these models, starting with the highest level component (the 
complete facility) and then breaking it down into its 
constituent components.  The first part of Figure 4 shows the 
hierarchical structure of the Foresight model of the 
tunnelling operation.  At the lowest level in this breakdown 
are the work units “excavate” representing the cutting of 1 m 
length of the tunnel, and “line tunnel” which involves 
placing and grouting concrete ring segments in the 1 m cut.  
The work units “excavate” and “line tunnel” are repeated 3 
times to construct a 3 m length of tunnel.  These are followed 
by “lay track” which adds a 3 m length of track used to carry 
a manually propelled train for removal of spoil and delivery 
of materials.  If two crews are used for the project then the 
model shown in Figure 4 would be duplicated (once for each 
crew) and placed within a parent work unit. 
The work unit at the second highest level represents the 
process of constructing a 3 m section of tunnel, and will be 
repeated for the length of the tunnel.   
Addition of constraints can occur as work units are added 
to the model.  For this tunnel model, the main constraints 
were as follows: 
Figure 2.  CYCLONE simulation model of an earthmoving operation. 
return 
push 
Bulldozer Cycle (3 cu-m) 
start 1 
Dirt Stockpile 
dig 
wait 
load 
Loader 
Cycle  (1 cu-m) 
wait 
start 1 
Dump Trucks Cycle (5 cu-m) 
dump 
consolidate 5 
stock- 
pile 
generate 3 
return 
haul 
wait 
start 2 
generate 5 
stockpile quantity (cu-m) 
time (min) 
output of “dump” activity 
time (min) 
4
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
         earthmoving operation   
   dirt stockpile 
 earthmoving operation 
   dirt stockpile 
 
 
 
 
 
   earthmoving operation 
bulldozer cycle 
bulldozer cycle 
bulldozer cycle 
return 
push 
dirt stockpile 
dirt 
dirt 
dirt 
truck cycle 
truck cycle 
truck cycle 
haul 
load truck 
bulldozer cycle 
bulldozer cycle 
loader cycle 
dig 
load 
dump return 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
time 
quantity of dirt (cu-m) 
Figure 3.  Foresight model of a simple earthmoving operation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
time 
dirt (cu-m) 
 
  
  
  
(1) model hierarchy 
with no constraints 
(2) addition of constraints 
(3) filtering for stockpile content 
0.0 
10.0 
0.0 
10.0 
0.0 
0.0 
5
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

• The work units representing “3 m tunnel sections” are 
positioned serially both in the “time” and “tunnel 
length” dimensions. 
• The work unit representing the “sewer tunnel project” 
extends in the “tunnel length” direction to a value equal 
to the tunnel length. 
• The “3 m tunnel section” work units start at the left side 
of the “sewer tunnel project” work unit and extend all 
the way to (but not beyond) the right side of the “sewer 
tunnel project” work unit. 
• The “1 m lined section” work units are positioned 
serially both in the “time” and “tunnel length” 
dimensions.  
• The “1 m lined section” work units span from the left to 
right side of their “3 m tunnel section” work unit.  
• The work units “excavation” and “concrete lining” are 
positioned sequentially in the “time” dimension. 
  sewer tunnel project 
   3 m tunnel section 
 lay track 
 3 m lined section 
    
 1 m lined section 
line 
tunnel 
excavate 
tunnel length 
Fast crew 
Slow crew 
access shaft at midpoint of tunnel 
total progress (m) 
 
Figure 4.  Foresight model of a sewer tunneling operation. 
cost per section ($) 
time  
time  
tunnel length 
(2) addition of constraints 
(1) model hierarchy 
with no constraints 
6
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Completion of any Foresight model requires addition of 
the constraints. For the tunnelling model, this includes 
adding functions specifying the individual durations of the 
“excavation”, “concrete lining”, and “light track” work units, 
the result of which is shown in the part 2 of Figure 4, 
specifically the upper left quadrant of the diagram.  In this 
model, two tunnelling crews have been added by duplicating 
the highest level work unit.  The crews are started at the 
access shaft located at the midpoint of the tunnel, then head 
in opposite directions but with different rates of production. 
For convenience, only the first 60 m of tunnel construction is 
shown.  Note, the progress of the crews follows a curve 
(reducing with time) which results from the fact that the 
duration to remove spoil and bring concrete ring segments to 
the tunnel face increases with tunnel length. This dependence 
was established by making the duration for a work unit a 
function of its position along the length of the tunnel. 
There are many refinements that may be made to this 
model to provide more accuracy and/or greater detail to 
allow decisions to be made about equipment types to be 
employed.  Additional detail may involve, for example, 
further decomposition of the “excavate”, “line tunnel” and 
“lay track” works units.  Furthermore, “excavate” may 
contain work units representing digging at the tunnel face, 
loading the light train, hauling the spoil from the tunnel, 
dumping the spoil, and returning the light train.  Other 
attributes may be added, such as crew members, allowing 
these to be shared between different work units concurrently. 
The visual power of these models is apparent by 
inspecting the upper left quadrant of the second part of 
Figure 4, which shows clearly the relative performances of 
the two crews across the length of the tunnel.  In this case 
crew-performance records had indicated that 1 crew operated 
about 50% faster.  From the Foresight model it is apparent 
that, for a 30 m tunnel, the optimum position for the access 
shaft would be 3 m to the left of its current position, giving 
the slow crew just 27 m of tunnel to construct and the fast 
crew 33 m of tunnel. 
Alternatively, an additional attribute could be added to 
the model representing starting the crews at different 
positions along the tunnel length, thus providing an 
automated sensitivity analysis of project duration versus 
starting point for the crews. 
V. 
MANUFACTURE OF REINFORCED CONCRETE 
PREFABRICATED COMPONENTS 
This third case study compares the performance of 
Foresight with CYCLONE based simulation for modelling a 
manufacturing 
process. 
Specifically 
a 
prefabricated 
reinforced concrete component production system was 
considered comprising job-to-process flow logic, multiple 
batch production, a constraint on storage space for 
components in mid-process, and a dependence on an external 
material supply line.   
Figure 5 shows the CYCLONE diagram of this system 
where production starts with a batch of 10 type A 
components, followed by a batch of 6 type B components, 
and finishes with a second batch of 3 type A components.  
The system is also dependent on the supply of steel 
reinforcing (rebar) which is delivered to the factory in three 
lots at different points in time.  Finally, there is a limit of 3 
components allowed within the curing room at any time (a 
high humidity space), which is implemented by a permitting 
resource “cure space”.  Note, the model would be set-up with 
a component numbering system that gives priority to the 
batches in the required order of manufacture.  
Figure 6 shows the equivalent Foresight model for this 
manufacturing process. The first part of Figure 6 shows the 
hierarchy of work units involved in the batch production of 
the types A and B prefabricated reinforced concrete 
component, and the supply of rebar.  At the third level in the 
hierarchy are work units representing stations in the factory 
where tasks such as setting-up forms are executed or 
temporary storage is provided such as for the curing of the 
cast concrete components. At the fourth level are the 
individual repetitions of these tasks. 
The second part of Figure 6 shows this section of the 
model with all constraints added, and is plotted for: Units 
(counting the number of components produced); and Time. 
The constraints, which would be added as the work units are 
added, include: 
• The durations of each third level work unit which are 
defined as the difference between the start and end of a 
work unit measured in the time dimension. 
• Two batches of 10 and 3 units respectively for the Type 
A components, interposed with a batch of 6 Type B 
components.  The limits on each batch are defined in a 
similar way to the durations, as difference between the 
limits of the parent work unit. 
• The time dependences between the finishes and starts of 
Set-Up Forms, Cut & Fix Rebar, Place Concrete, Cure 
Concrete, and Remove Forms.  
• Place Concrete precedes Cure Concrete for each 
component. 
• Cure Concrete precedes Remove Forms for each 
component. This is implemented by introducing a new 
attribute Curing Space Permits, assigning all fourth level 
work units within Place Concrete and Cure Concrete a 
value of 1 in the Curing Space Permits dimension, and 
setting the first level work unit for the system to a value 
of 3 in this dimension.  The impact of this limit can be 
seen in the second part of Figure 6 whereby every 3rd 
component experiences a delay to Place Concrete. 
• The final constraint is concerned with the delivery of 
rebar. This may be constrained in another dimension, 
measuring say weight of steel, although for convenience 
here it is measured in components.  The constraint limits 
the start of Cut & Fix Rebar and is shown in green in 
Figure 6. The impact of the scheduled delivery is also 
indicated within this figure. 
 
7
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 5.  CYCLONE model of manufacture of RC prefabricated components (adapted from Flood [13]) 
  cut & fix 
rebar 
  set-up 
forms 
place 
concrete 
cure 
concrete 
  remove 
forms 
  set-up 
forms 
  cut & fix 
rebar 
place 
concrete 
cure 
concrete 
1 crew 
1 crew 
  remove 
forms 
1 crew 
1 crew 
1 crew 
3 cure 
spaces 
Type A Component, Batch 1 Fabrication:  
Type B Component Fabrication: 
start 10 
(components) 
start 10 
(components) 
start 6 
components 
start 6 
components 
  set-up 
forms 
  cut & fix 
rebar 
place 
concrete 
cure 
concrete 
  remove 
forms 
Type A Component, Batch 2 Fabrication: 
start 3 
components 
start 3 
components 
start 7 
   delay 2 
 delay 1 
start 8 
start 3 
Mechanism for implementing 
rebar supply delays: 
8
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Prefabricated RC Component Production 
Type B Component Fabrication 
Set-up 
Forms 
Cut & Fix 
Rebar 
Place 
Concrete 
Cure 
Concrete 
Remove 
Forms 
Type A Component Fabrication 
Set-up 
Forms 
Cut & Fix 
Rebar 
Place 
Concrete 
Cure 
Concrete 
Remove 
Forms 
Rebar 
Delivery 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
time 
components (units) 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
Type A 
Comp. 
Type B 
Component 
Type A 
Component 
rebar supply delay 
limited storage induced delay 
Figure 6.  Foresight model of manufacture of RC prefabricated components (adapted from Flood [13]) 
(1) model hierarchy 
with no constraints 
(3) filtering for “remove forms” 
component output 
(measured at 
“remove forms”) 
(2) addition of constraints 
9
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

An important advantage of Foresight over CYCLONE is 
the relative simplicity of the models.  A total of 95 terms are 
required to define the CYCLONE model shown in Figure 5 
while just 30 terms are required to define the Foresight 
equivalent.  This is similar to the findings made by Flood and 
Nowrouzian [14] where they made a direct comparison 
between Foresight and STROBOSCOPE [15] (a derivative of 
the 
CYCLONE 
modelling 
system) 
for 
construction 
operations and found that Foresight required around one 
third of the number of terms to define a model.  It was also 
shown that while STROBOSCOPE may employ 25 or more 
modeling concepts for a relatively simple model, the number 
of basic modeling concepts employed in Foresight will never 
exceed 5 (the work unit, constraint, attribute, nesting, and 
repetition).  This comparison is for deterministic versions of 
both the CYCLONE and Foresight models; if stochastic 
factors were considered then both models would require the 
input of additional information describing the uncertainty. 
For CYCLONE these parameters would define uncertainty in 
the activity durations, for Foresight they would define 
uncertainty in the value of a constraint. This highlights 
another advantage of Foresight over CYCLONE that 
uncertainty can be applied to any model parameter not just 
activity duration, although simulation in general is also 
capable of this. 
It can be seen visually from Figure 6 that delays in 
production due to limited curing room space could be 
removed by expanding this facility to enable storage of an 
additional 4 components.  However, it is also apparent that 
the most significant cause of poor performance results from 
the delays to the delivery of rebar. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper the author has proposed a new approach, 
named Foresight, for modelling construction processes built 
on concepts relevant to contemporary project planning.  The 
principles upon which Foresight is based provide it with the 
versatility necessary to model the broad spectrum of 
construction projects that until now have required the use of 
several different modelling tools. The resultant models are 
highly visual in form, representing the progress of work 
within the model structure.  This provides insight into how 
the design of a process will impact its performance, and 
suggests ways of optimizing project performance.  
Research is on-going developing detailed models using 
this method for a variety of project types.  The objective of 
these studies is to determine the successes and limitations of 
the proposed planning method in the real-world, and to 
determine refinements that will increase its value as a 
modelling tool. 
REFERENCES 
[1] I. Flood, “A Constraint-Based Graphical Approach to Modelling 
Construction Systems: An alternative to discrete-event simulation,” 
4th International Conference on Advanced Communications and 
Computation, INFOCOMP 2014, July 20 - 24, 2014, Paris, France, 
pp. 168-174. 
[2] I. Flood, R.R.A. Issa, and W. Liu, “A New Modeling Paradigm for 
Computer-Based Construction Project Planning,” Proc. Joint Intnl. 
Conf. on Cmptg. and Decision-Making in Civil and Building 
Engineering, Montreal, Canada, ASCE, June 2006, pp. 1-11. 
[3] B. Koo and M. Fischer, “Feasibility Study of 4D CAD in Commercial 
Construction,” Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 
ASCE, 126(4),  2000, pp. 251-260. 
[4] R.A. Issa, I. Flood, and W. O’Brien, (Eds.), 4D CAD and 
Visualization in Construction: Developments and Applications, A. A. 
Balkema Publishers, Steenwijk, 2003. 
[5] R.B. Harris and P.G. Ioannou, “Scheduling Projects with Repeating 
Activities,” Journal of Construction Engineering and Management. 
ASCE, 124(4), 1998, pp. 269-276. 
[6] K.G. Matilla and D.M. Araham, “Linear-Scheduling: past research 
efforts and future directions,” Engineering, Construction, and 
Architectural Management, Blackwell Science Ltd, 5(3), 1998, pp. 
294-303. 
[7] D.W. Halpin and R.W. Woodhead, Design of Construction and 
Process Operations, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, NY, 1976. 
[8] A. Sawhney, S.M. AbouRizk, and D.W. Halpin, “Construction 
Project Simulation using CYCLONE,” Canadian Journal of Civil 
Engineering, 25(1), 1998, pp. 16-25. 
[9] D. Hajjar and S.M. AbouRizk, “Unified Modeling Methodology for 
Construction Simulation,” Journal of Construction Engineering and 
Management, ASCE, 128(2), 2002, pp. 174-185. 
[10] I. Flood, “Foresight: A Structured Graphical Approach to Constraint-
Based Project Planning,” Proc. 2nd International Conference on 
Advances in System Simulation, SIMUL 2010, IEEE CSDL, Nice, 
France, August 2010, 6 pp. 
[11] P. Huber, K. Jensen, and R.M. Shapiro, "Hierarchies of Coloured 
Petri Nets," Proc. 10th Int. Conf. on Application and Theory of Petri 
Nets, (LNCS 483), Springer-Verlag, 1990, pp. 313-341. 
[12] V. Ceric, “Hierarchical Abilities of Diagrammatic Representations of 
Discrete-Event Simulation Models,” Proc. 1994 Winter Simulation 
Conference, (Eds. J. D. Tew, S. Manivannan, D. A, Sadowski, and A. 
F. Seila), 1994, pp. 589-594. 
[13] I. Flood, “Modeling Construction Processes: A Structured Graphical 
Approach Compared to Construction Simulation,” International 
Workshop on Computing in Civil Engineering, Austin, TX, ASCE, 
June 2015, 8 pp. 
[14] I. Flood and V. Nowrouzian, 2014, “Discrete-Event Simulation 
versus Constrained Graphic Modelling of Construction Processes,” 
Australasian Journal of Construction Economics and Building, 2 (1), 
2014, pp. 13-22. 
[15] J.C. Martinez, “STROBOSCOPE, State and Resource Based 
Simulation of Construction Processes,” PhD. Dissertation, University 
of Michigan, 1996. 
 
 
10
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

