Automated Driving – Testing at the Functional Limits
Steffen Wittel∗, Daniel Ulmer∗ and Oliver B¨uhler∗
∗Steinbeis Interagierende Systeme GmbH, Esslingen, Germany
Email: {steffen.wittel,daniel.ulmer,oliver.buehler}@interagierende-systeme.de
Abstract—As vehicles move toward a high degree of automation,
the control of the vehicles is taken over from the human drivers
for increasing periods of time. This will allow the human drivers
to turn their attention away from the vehicles and to focus on non-
driving activities instead. With the takeover of the vehicle control,
the automobile manufacturers also take over the responsibility for
the driving maneuvers automatically performed by the vehicles.
As a result, they can no longer rely on immediate interventions of
the human drivers in case of critical situations, where the vehicles
cannot cope with the road trafﬁc or if the vehicles behave in
an unexpected way. Intensive testing activities are necessary to
ensure the safety of the vehicles in any situation. Even when the
vehicles do not work as expected, a safe state must be achieved
without endangering the passengers or other road users. To test
automated driving, the established software testing techniques,
which have been in use so far in the automotive development,
seems no longer sufﬁcient due to the temporary unavailability of
the human driver as an immediate fallback level. Revised test
approaches that do not require immediate human interventions
to ensure the safety of the vehicles are therefore needed. This
paper depicts the characteristics of automated driving from a
functional point of view and presents an approach based on those
characteristics to test the system at its functional limits. Therefore,
it makes no difference whether the system reaches its limits by
itself or by the individual behavior of other road users on the
street.
Keywords–Automated Driving; Automotive Testing; Functional
Limits; Individual Behavior.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This paper extends our previous approach to test automated
driving [1], which distinguishes between the functional and
temporal behavior of the system, as well as demands the use of
automation for the test case generation and the test execution.
The approach presented here in addition incorporates the
functional system limits [2] of the vehicle for increased testing
activities in areas, where fallback strategies are necessary to
ensure the safety of the vehicle. Each function of the vehicle
which is looked at is pushed to its limits to evaluate the vehicle
behavior in situations that exhibit behaviors different from the
original functionality while exceeding limits. Moreover, the
approach also takes the individual behavior of the road users
who surround the vehicle into account as they can also take the
vehicle beyond its functional limits. Therefore, the evaluation
of the vehicle behavior is done at the system level as introduced
in [3].
With technological progress, human activities are being
shifted to technical systems. Automation can help to execute
actions that are difﬁcult for humans to perform or go beyond
human abilities. But it also changes the role of humans work-
ing with systems. The use of automation transforms the human
participation in the execution of tasks from the execution of
activities through the supervising of activities to the complete
replacement by the automated systems. Thereby, the level of
automation differs in the way of human interaction. As the
level of automation rises, the systems are increasingly inde-
pendent in executing actions. At a low automation level, the
systems only support the humans while an action is executed
autonomously without human conﬁrmation at a high degree of
automation. The automation levels can be categorized like it
is in [4]:
a)
There is no automation.
b)
The system proposes different possibilities of action
and highlights its favorite action.
c)
The system proposes a single possibility of action,
but it does not execute the action.
d)
The system executes the action after a conﬁrmation
by a human.
e)
The system executes the action, when it is not con-
tradicted by a human within a certain time.
f)
The system executes the action and informs the
humans in retrospect.
g)
The system executes the action and informs the
humans on demand.
h)
The system executes the action without any interac-
tion with a human.
It is assumed that automation can contribute to the trafﬁc
safety by taking over the vehicle control and thus remove the
human driver out of the loop in as many situations as possible.
Incorrect performing of driving maneuvers, carelessness or
wrong decisions lead to road accidents, which are caused
by the human drivers. The human driver is therefore one of
the causes for road accidents and thus offers the potential to
improve the trafﬁc safety.
The term ”automated driving” or ”autonomous driving”
is used in many different meanings. Several institutions, e.g.,
the German Federal Highway Research Institute (BASt), the
US National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Administration (NHTSA),
the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) and the German
Association of the Automotive Industry (VDA), have classiﬁed
the different levels of driving automation. In this paper, the
driving automation levels are used according to the deﬁnition
speciﬁed in SAE J3016 [5]:
No Automation: The system does not take over the vehi-
cle control with the exception of short-term interventions of
emergency functions in critical trafﬁc situations. The human
driver is fully responsible for the vehicle.
Driver Assistance: The vehicle is controlled either in the
lateral or longitudinal direction by the system. The human
driver controls the remaining direction, while she or he has
to monitor the behavior of the vehicle and has to intervene
immediately in case of a critical situation.
212
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Partial Automation: The system controls the longitudinal
and lateral direction. The human driver has to monitor the
behavior of the vehicle and has to intervene immediately in
case of a critical situation.
Conditional Automation: The vehicle is controlled in the
longitudinal and lateral direction by the system. The human
driver has to react within a reasonable time after a warning by
the system.
High Automation: The system controls the longitudinal and
lateral direction. It has to handle all trafﬁc situations, even if
the human driver does not react appropriately.
Full Automation: The system has to handle all trafﬁc
situations on its own.
With the increasing automation of the driving tasks, the
automobile manufacturers are taking over more and more re-
sponsibility from the human drivers for the driving maneuvers
automatically performed by the vehicles as shown in Table I.
While the ﬁrst safety assistance systems, like the Electronic
Stability Control (ESC) [6] or the Antilock Braking System
(ABS) [6], only supported the driver to cope with critical
situations, nowadays the Advanced Driver Assistance Systems
(ADAS) [7] provide comfort functions for speciﬁc driving
scenarios. But until now, the automobile manufacturers were
able to use the human driver as an immediate fallback level in
case the system could not handle the situation or if the vehicle
behaved in an unexpected way.
It is not sufﬁcient for automated driving that the vehicles
are working as expected in known environments, but also in
unknown trafﬁc situations. Each drive is different from the
previous one, e.g., with respect to the encountered environ-
mental conditions like trafﬁc or weather. With each step in
the direction towards automated driving, the operating hours
of the vehicle functions, as well as the time required for
a handover of the vehicle control to the human driver, is
increased. In consequence, this means that the period of time
for which the automobile manufacturers are responsible for
the vehicle also increases. A technical solution to keep this
time as short as possible would be an early and safe handover
to the human driver. But in the premium market especially
the customers do not tolerate vehicle functions, which have
been degraded by the safety concept of the vehicle and are
therefore not available in a large number of situations. Hence,
the automobile manufactures have to ﬁnd a balance between
the safety of the vehicle and the availability of the vehicle
functions.
According to [8], current software testing techniques do not
adequately take into account the temporary unavailability of
the human driver as an immediate fallback level for automated
driving. Most of them are based on the assumption that
the human driver continuously monitors the vehicle and its
surroundings, and is able to intervene immediately in case
of a critical situation that cannot be handled by the vehicle
itself. The software testing techniques that have been used
so far in the automotive development expect certain abilities
from human drivers, which they prove by passing the driving
test necessary to legally control vehicles in most countries.
With the driving license, a person can show that she or he
meets the necessary physical and mental requirements to be
responsible for the vehicle behavior at any time. The complete
takeover of responsibility by the human driver at present still
allows the automobile manufactures to reduce the number of
test cases required for ensuring the safety of the vehicles.
Due to the temporary unavailability of the human driver as
an immediate fallback level, the software testing techniques
have to deal with the large number of different environmental
conditions and timing behaviors, which occur in the road
trafﬁc. Without revised or new software testing techniques,
representative driving scenarios can no longer be used for the
testing to show that the vehicle reaches its destination without
endangering occupants or other road users in the automated
driving mode.
The following section shows the related work. Section III
evaluates the road accident statistic of Germany to give an
idea about the current accident situation and how the number
of accidents has changed in recent years due to automation. In
Section IV, the human factor in the road trafﬁc is investigated
as a cause for road accidents, whereas Section V shows how
driving automation can play a part in contributing to a higher
level of trafﬁc safety and how otherwise it can affect the human
driver in a negative way. Section VI addresses the challenges
in the ﬁeld of automated driving with the view of functional
testing. Finally, Section VII presents the extended approach
for increased testing activities at the functional limits of the
system.
II.
RELATED WORK
While so far the complexity and performance of the vehicle
were limited by the hardware, the embedded software, as well
as the development and test process, which now seem to be the
limiting factors as elaborated in [9]. The report predicts that
the distribution of the functionality over several components
leads to a level of testing beyond the economical and temporal
feasible possibilities. Thus, the authors see the testing of such
systems, which have to work in any trafﬁc situation, as one of
the highest technical hurdles for automated driving.
The national research project with the name ”PEGASUS”
[10], founded by the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs
and Energy (BMWi) in conjunction with automobile com-
panies, suppliers, small and medium-sized companies and
research institutes from Germany, should provide standards
TABLE I. OVERVIEW ABOUT THE DRIVING AUTOMATION LEVELS BASED ON SAE J3016 [5].
Level
Name
Functions
Monitoring
Controlling
Fallback
Responsibility
0
No Automation
None
Human Driver
Human Driver
Human Driver
Human Driver
1
Driver Assistance
Some
Human Driver
System / Human Driver
Human Driver
Human Driver
2
Partial Automation
Some
Human Driver
System
Human Driver
Human Driver
3
Conditional Automation
Some
System
System
Human Driver
Automobile Manufacturer / Human Driver
4
High Automation
Some
System
System
System
Automobile Manufacturer
5
Full Automation
All
System
System
System
Automobile Manufacturer
213
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

for the automated driving to close essential gaps in the ﬁeld of
testing and the release of vehicles. Among others, the research
project should answer the questions about the requirements
that must be met by self-driving vehicles, how the safety and
reliability of these systems can be demonstrated and the role
the human factor plays in the future. As published by the
project, new and uniform quality standards and methods are
necessary for the accreditation of automated driving functions.
The project goal is to establish generally accepted quality crite-
ria, tools and methods. Moreover, scenarios and situations shall
be provided for the release of automated driving functions, as
well as procedures for the testing. The main project objectives
are:
a)
Deﬁnition of a common approach for the testing of
automated vehicle systems in the simulation, at test
benches and in real-world environments
b)
Development of a continuous and ﬂexible tool chain
for the testing of automated driving
c)
Integration of the tests in the development process at
an early stage
d)
Creation of a test method for automated driving
features among manufactures
According to [11], the formal veriﬁcation is currently the
only known way to ensure that a system works as speciﬁed.
This means that the implementation strictly follows the speci-
ﬁcation and thus it is possible to determine its behavior in any
situation. To perform a formal veriﬁcation, the speciﬁcation
must meet some preconditions. Among others, the speciﬁcation
must be complete and correct. This precondition can be a big
challenge, especially in large projects with many dependencies
to external components from different suppliers.
Driving automation can bypass current risks as described
in [12], but can also lead to new risks, which have not
existed before. The paper shows that ”demonstrating safety
of automated driving in advance of introduction is nearly
impossible”. Thereby, they illustrate that the necessary number
of kilometers to demonstrate the safety of a system cannot
be provided economically by real test vehicles due to the
complexity of the possible trafﬁc situations. The statement is
based, among others, on the assumptions that it is not possible
to drive the required number of kilometers in the available
time for testing and that the testing must be at least partially
repeated after changes in the software or hardware.
III.
ROAD ACCIDENTS STATISTIC
Over the years, the number of road accidents rose with
the increasing number of road users in Germany as shown in
Figure 1. But this did not lead to an increase in the number of
injured or dead people. The technical progress in passive and
active safety systems of the vehicles signiﬁcantly contributed
to the mitigation of the road accidents and personal injuries.
Safety systems, which already belong to the standard equip-
ment of almost all new vehicles on the market, prevent road
accidents or reduce their impact. Thereby, driving automation
helps to eliminate weaknesses of human drivers by ﬁnding
appropriate reactions in critical situations.
As explained in Section I, the human driver is one of the
cause of road accidents. The road accidents statistic [13] shows
mistakes of human drivers in Germany, which led to road
accidents that were reported to the police. These are mainly
the accidents with serious consequences. Minor road accidents
with only material damages or minor injuries are not covered
by the statistic, because they are usually not reported to the
police. A list of common areas in which mistakes made by
improper human driving can be categorized as presented in
the following to show the complexity of today’s road trafﬁc as
provided by the Federal Statistical Ofﬁce of Germany in the
road accidents statistic:
a)
Use of the road
b)
Speed
c)
Distance
d)
Overtaking
e)
Driving past
f)
Driving side by side
g)
Priority, precedence
h)
Turning, U-turn, reversing, entering the ﬂow of trafﬁc,
starting off the edge of the road
i)
Improper behavior towards pedestrians
j)
Stationary vehicles, safety measures
k)
Failure to observe lighting regulations
When looking at the road accident statistic of Germany as
visualized in Figure 2, it is noticeable that the risk potential
varies accordingly with the street location. Within villages or
towns, road accidents occur due to the accumulation of road
users or confusing trafﬁc situations. There are a lot of different
reasons for road accidents in urban environments (66.8 %)
that could not be assigned to a single major cause, which
can be seen in Figure 2a. In non-urban environments, there
are ﬁrst major causes of accidents that are the result of the
increased velocity in comparison with urban environments.
With more than 30 percent of all road accidents in non-urban
Figure 1. Statistic about road accidents in Germany over a period of 50
years [13].
214
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 2. Summary about road accidents in Germany in 2015 [13] separated by the street location: a) urban environments b) non-urban environments c)
freeways.
environments, leaving the carriageway is the most common
reason. On freeways, the human driver is confronted with a
simpler road course, which limits the number of causes for
road accidents. Almost half of all road accidents on the freeway
are rear-end collisions.
The number of road fatalities and seriously injured people
in urban environments (14.5 %) represent in total a lower
percentage than in non-urban environments (25.7 %) or on
freeways (19.1 %) as illustrated in Figure 3. But in absolute
numbers, most of the people are seriously injured or even killed
in accidents within towns and villages. A majority of them
are pedestrians or cyclists, who hardly have any protection to
mitigate the consequences of the road accidents. On freeways,
which represent only a small percent of the entire road network
of Germany, road accidents with injured people occur relatively
more often in relation to urban and non-urban environments.
This can, however, be explained by the high usage of freeways,
which is about one third of all kilometers driven for Germany.
IV.
THE HUMAN FACTOR
According to [14], about 94 % of the road accidents are
caused by the human drivers. The human driver is therefore
the main cause of the majority of all road accidents. There is
not only a single human driver on the road, but also many other
road users, whose misbehavior must be taken into account as
well. Driving in a dynamic environment is subject to a variety
of cognitive demands [15] of the human driver. The human
driver has to correctly perceive relevant objects and events,
interpret them, and derive his or her actions from them. It
is also necessary to recognize new circumstances and make
appropriate adjustments well in advance to have time to react.
Research activities on the driving behavior have shown that
the personality of a human driver has an impact on the driving
style and thus on the involvement in critical trafﬁc situations
and road accidents. In the course of life, the personality of a
human changes only insigniﬁcantly despite external inﬂuences.
The ﬁve-factor model [17], which can be used to describe indi-
vidual behavior, suggests that the characteristics of personality
vary in their intensity for each human. As deﬁned in [18],
the ﬁve characteristics that lead to the individual behavior of
humans are:
Openness (inventive/curious vs. consistent/cautious): Ap-
preciation for art, emotion, adventure, unusual ideas, curiosity,
and variety of experience.
Figure 3. Summary about personal injuries caused by road accidents in Germany in 2015 [13] separated by the street location: a) urban environments b)
non-urban environments c) freeways.
215
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Conscientiousness
(efﬁcient/organized
vs.
easy-going/
careless): A tendency to show self-discipline, act dutifully,
and aim for achievement; planned rather than spontaneous
behavior.
Extroversion (outgoing/energetic vs. solitary/reserved): En-
ergy, positive emotions, urgency, and the tendency to seek
stimulation in the company of others.
Agreeableness (friendly/compassionate vs. cold/unkind): A
tendency to be compassionate and cooperative rather than
suspicious and antagonistic towards others.
Neuroticism (sensitive/nervous vs. secure/conﬁdent): A ten-
dency to experience unpleasant emotions easily, such as anger,
anxiety, depression, or vulnerability.
Various studies [19][20][21][22][23][24][25][26] have re-
vealed that trafﬁc violations and road accidents are related
to risky driving, which is motivated by the personalities of
the human drivers. Particularly vulnerable to risky driving are
humans who score low on conscientiousness, have a high level
of openness, extroversion and neuroticism, as well as indicate
a lack of agreeableness as illustrated in Figure 4. A human
that score low on conscientiousness is described as impulsive
and careless, while somebody with a high level of openness,
extroversion and neuroticism is keen to experiment, willing to
improvise, distracted and prone to react to stress. This mix of
personal traits in combination with a lack of agreeableness,
which leads to aggression in terms of emotions as well as
behavior, makes the involvement in road accidents more likely.
In the road trafﬁc, people with different personalities meet
each other. There is an interaction between the road users in a
speciﬁc area and their behavior. The road users inﬂuence each
other through different behaviors they show in certain trafﬁc
situations. The behavior of a road user is not only inﬂuenced
by the current trafﬁc situation, but can also vary based on
situations experienced previously. A human driver has to cope
with her or his personality and with the personalities of the
other road users in the road trafﬁc.
V.
AUTOMATED DRIVING
Current vehicle generations already have the necessary
technical equipment, i.e., sensors and actuators, to automat-
ically cover a distance in the road trafﬁc independent from
the human driver, if certain conditions are fulﬁlled. On the
freeway, it is already customary for premium vehicles that the
human driver can preset a time interval to the vehicle ahead,
which is automatically maintained by the vehicle. If the trafﬁc
situation requires, the vehicle can decelerate to a standstill and
then continue to drive as soon as the trafﬁc ﬂow allows it.
In addition, the vehicle is able to keep the lane by steering
interventions, if a wheel of the vehicle is close to the left or
right lane mark when a lane change is not indicated.
It is hardly surprising that the automobile manufacturers
will provide their ﬁrst automated vehicle functions for the
use on freeways [27], because 92.3 % of all road accidents
on freeways can be avoided or signiﬁcantly reduced in their
consequences by automation as shown in Figure 2. Road
accidents in non-urban environments (56.1 %) and urban en-
vironments (33.2 %) are much less suitable for introducing
automated driving due to the high number of different accident
causes. Simpliﬁed, it can be said that the freeways offer a
manageable complexity, both in the driving tasks and the road
characteristics, and thus the vehicle control is limited to ap-
proaching and overtaking. From the view point of automation,
it would make more sense to introduce automated driving in
urban environments, since human drivers there fail most often
and thus the greatest impact can be had through the driving
automation.
Currently it is accepted in the literature that automated
driving contributes to increasing trafﬁc safety. Automated
driving can usually achieve a better performance than human
drivers in situations which lead to a high degree of criticality
or even trafﬁc accidents due to the misconduct of the human
driver. However, the vision of accident-free driving still seems
far away. Automation can not only contribute to the trafﬁc
safety, but also leads to a contrary effect. The use of automation
can lead to new critical situations and road accidents that were
not present before when the vehicle was controlled only by the
human driver. It is also assumed that the number of serious
accidents will be reduced by automated driving. However, the
number of minor accidents will increase as it is not possible
to completely avoid all accidents and only a mitigation of the
consequences of the accidents is achieved. Moreover, the use
of automated driving can lead to a reduction of the awareness
of the situation, which means that the driver is overwhelmed
Figure 4. Characterization of two human drivers with different personalities and therefore with individual driving styles illustrated according to [16]: a) higher
risk of road accident b) lower risk of road accident.
216
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

by the takeover of the vehicle control and misjudges the trafﬁc
situation. The cognitive demands described in Section IV,
which a human driver must satisfy in order to participate in the
road trafﬁc, are lost without an adequate training and thus are
either not available, or only to an insufﬁcient degree. Studies
[28][29] have already shown that the use of a low degree
of automation can lead to a deteriorated lane-keeping and to
delayed reactions in critical situations. In addition, the speed
is underestimated and it is driven too fast.
VI.
CHALLENGES FOR AUTOMATED DRIVING
With automated driving, the automobile manufacturers
are responsible for the driving maneuvers to be performed
automatically by the vehicles as soon as they allow the human
drivers to divert attention from the environmental conditions
and the vehicle. Until now, it was not necessary for the
automobile manufacturers to take full responsibility as the
human driver was an immediate fallback level in the case of an
unintended vehicle behavior. This applies not only to ADAS,
but also to emergency functions like the Collision Mitigation
System (CMS) [30], which usually intervene only in critical
situations. The automated interventions of the emergency func-
tions are additionally limited in time and thus their effects
on the moving vehicle. The human driver has to monitor the
vehicle all the time and immediately take over the control
of the vehicle to perform an intervention. In the event of
damage, the human drivers have the sole responsibility and
not the automobile manufactures. Extensive test activities are
nevertheless performed at test benches and with test vehicles,
particularly in the premium segment, to make sure that the
human driver rarely has to intervene. Especially for automated
driving, the period of time, until the human driver has taken
over the vehicle control, needs a closer look. Within this
period of time, automated driving has to be maintained by
the vehicle. This means, e.g., that a takeover just before a
collision, in which the human driver has no possibility to avoid
the collision, is not a suitable measure for handing over the
vehicle control. Depending on the degree of distraction and
the complexity of the current trafﬁc situation, the necessary
time until the takeover differs. In addition, characteristics of
the human driver, e.g., the age and the mental state, play an
essential role for the time required for the takeover of the
vehicle control. The automobile manufacturers must assume
that an appropriate time, which is expected to be in the double-
digit seconds range [31], will be required by the human driver
after the takeover notiﬁcation from the vehicle.
Automation takes the human driver out of the loop from
the driving task as often as possible to contribute, among other
things, to an increase in the road safety. However, driving
automation cannot avoid all accidents, which happen on the
road. On the one hand, it is to be assumed that due to
the complexity of automated driving, faultlessness cannot be
guaranteed. On the other hand, unpredictable actions by other
road users can also result in accidents, which can sometimes
only be mitigated and not avoided. Individual behavior of
road users is a challenge. Especially in the transition, where
there is a mixed operation between conventional and automated
vehicles in the road trafﬁc, individual behavior must be taken
into account. Individual behavior occurs not only with human
drivers, but also with different implementations of automated
vehicles. There are already initial efforts to develop global
standards, e.g., World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle
Regulations [32], which deﬁne conditions and limits with the
goal of harmonization across manufacturers. Even in the case
of harmonization, individual behavior can still occur as long
as the human driver can intervene at any time by taking over
the vehicle control.
The degradation of the vehicle’s functionality, which is part
of the safety concept for automated driving, is based on the
assumption that the vehicle knows its state and its operating
limits at all times. On the basis of the current vehicle state
and the exact characteristics of its functional limits [33], the
vehicle can decide when and how it comes into a safe state in
the event of a fault. A certain tolerance between the operating
limits and the limits used for the degradation thereby ensures
the robustness of the automated driving, even if there are
deviations due to tolerances of individual components. But in
practice, it is difﬁcult to determine the limits in advance for
all situations and to specify fallback strategies to reach a safe
vehicle state, which do not endanger the passengers or other
road users. Moreover, the vehicle has to predict its state so as
to have enough time to react appropriately to changes in the
environmental conditions.
While the emergency functions are active for only a few
seconds, comfort functions are often activated for several
hours at a time. Over this long period of time, the testing
for automated driving must ensure that the vehicle can cope
with all situations that occur. The diversity of environmental
conditions can no longer be tested only with real vehicles.
Simulation allows the execution of the tests on the computer by
representing the reality, which is reproduced as a model with
some precision. If a comparison between the real vehicle and
the simulation shows deviations, which affect the test result, an
improvement of the model is necessary in order to get closer
to the real world. The closer to reality, the greater the effort
involved for the modeling. A perfect representation of reality
would be desirable, but for many test scenarios a less precise
representation is sufﬁcient, if it does not affect the test result.
However, it is not possible to dispense with real vehicles,
since they are required to demonstrate the signiﬁcance of the
simulated test result.
As described in [8], current test activities for vehicles
primarily focus on the controllability of the vehicles by the
human drivers. Even emergency functions of the vehicle, which
should only become active in the event of a loss of control
by the human driver, can be overruled. The responsibility for
the behavior of the vehicles stays with the human drivers
for the entire time and does not pass over to the automo-
bile manufacturers. Technical solutions, e.g., the hands-free
detection, explicitly point out the driver’s responsibility for
the vehicle through acoustic and haptic signals. The human
driver thereby constitutes a mainstay for the vehicle testing.
The safety of the vehicle is built on the combination of the
vehicle and the human driver, implicitly assuming that each
human driver has the ability to drive the vehicle. Usually, the
human driver learns this ability, if not already present, in the
driving school and proves them by passing the driving test.
Due to the fact that the human driver is at least temporarily
distracted from the driving activity during the automated
driving, the mainstay is increasingly moving away from the
human driver as the degree of automation increases. As a result
of this, the vehicle must assume the tasks of the human driver
217
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

for this period. The responsibility for the driving maneuvers
performed independently by the vehicle is handed over to the
automobile manufacturer, while the human driver is allowed to
be distracted from the vehicle and its surroundings. In the case
of a handover, it is no longer possible to refer to the human
driver until the vehicle control has been taken over again. This
changes the perspective on the vehicle testing, which means
that the safety must now only be ensured by the vehicle and
no longer by the combination of the vehicle and the human
driver. With the increasing automation level, the human drivers
can take over the vehicle control after the notiﬁcation from the
vehicle, but they do not have to until the end of the takeover
period. The testing will still have to ensure the controllability
of the vehicle by the human driver, but it does not play such
a decisive role as before. Until the vehicle is taken over by
the human driver, the vehicle is placed on its own and has
to cope with the environmental conditions encountered during
this time.
State of the art test methods [34][35] are based on the
approach that a certain selection of the system input represents
the complete input range. Examples of such test methods are
the Boundary Value Analysis, the Equivalence Class Analysis
and the Classiﬁcation Tree Analysis. These approaches to the
system input can reduce the number of tests tremendously. To
apply such an approach, it is necessary that the test method
divides the system input into classes in which the test object
is expected to show the same response independently of the
value taken out of the class. However, the classes are usually
derived from the system requirements. Both, the requirement
process and the derivation of the classes are human tasks
and are therefore error-prone. In complex implementations
with a large number of parameters, there might be branches
implemented, which cannot be seen in the requirements. Even
with systematic testing, it is sure that not every input pattern
is tested, which can result in a misbehavior of the system.
As a worst case scenario, this misbehavior can lead to a road
accident, if it is either not compensated by the system itself
or recognized and corrected by the human driver. Since the
human driver is assumed to be distracted, the system either
has to avoid such trafﬁc situations or has to be able to cope
with them, if they are in the period of time before the vehicle
control is taken over. As a result of the possible distraction
of the human driver during the automated driving, the human
driver can no longer be used as an immediate fallback level.
Thus, a limitation of the input space on the basis of the human
fallback level can no longer be performed according to [8].
During the testing, the additional tasks of the vehicle must
now be taken into account that are otherwise assumed by the
human driver. The test methods must be adapted in such a way
that human errors are largely excluded and that they can be
used with an economically justiﬁable effort for the testing of
automated driving.
VII.
THE APPROACH
According to [36], the test aim is transformed into an
optimization problem in which the input of the test object
creates the so called search space. The search space is a
numeric representation for the possible stimulations that can
be applied to the test object to obtain a response. For obtaining
a speciﬁc system response, it is necessary to stimulate the
system with the corresponding input pattern from the search
space. The other way round, a speciﬁc input pattern from the
search space causes a speciﬁc response of the system. Since
automated driving algorithms are time variant [3], it is not
sufﬁcient to test only static input patterns, but also variations of
the test scenarios that differ over time. Changes in the timing of
the input sequence can affect the system, e.g., feedback control
loops. The same input values with a different timing might
lead to a different response of the system. For this reason,
it is proposed that the search space shall be divided into the
following two parts:
a)
Functional behavior
b)
Temporal behavior
The consideration of the temporal behavior adds another
dimension to the system input many times over. However, the
proposed separation between the functional and the temporal
behavior allows a prioritization during the test execution. Thus,
it is possible to test the functional behavior of the system at
ﬁrst, followed by the testing of the temporal behavior. The
temporal behavior is especially important for systems that have
memories as explained in [3]. For this kind of systems, the
points of time, e.g., at which a vehicle performs a speciﬁc
action, are crucial factors.
Given the expected number of test cases derived from the
system input, a manual creation of the test cases is infeasible.
Common sense is that test case generators must be used for
the test creation. The usage of test case generators multiplies
the number of test cases, but not necessarily increases the
quality of the tests or the covered system input. Generated
test cases, which are redundant or outside the operating limit
of the system, do not contribute to the improvement of the
system. Hence, test case generators shall be optimized to focus
on the relevant parts of the test object. Having said that, from
a coverage point of view, many test cases are needed to ensure
the safety of the vehicle. It is to be stated that an execution
of these test cases is only feasible, if the test execution
is fully automated. This requirement is valid to both test
generation and test execution. In contrast to today’s available
test case generators, which mostly leave the speciﬁcation of
the expected system response to the testers, they must be
able to provide the system response based on the generated
stimulation even for complex systems. But the handling of the
test execution also takes a lot of time, if the allocation of the
test cases to the test resources is not automated. A huge number
of generated test cases require the corresponding amount of test
resources, which can be optimized without human interaction.
In summary, it can be said that the usage of test case generators
leads to the following requirements:
a)
Effective test case generators for the automated driv-
ing domain
b)
Test resources that are fully automated to increase the
throughput
c)
Scalable test resources to cope with the number of
generated test cases
d)
Test case generators that also provide the expected
system behavior for the evaluation
Particularly critical in automated driving is the unexpected
exceeding of a system limit, where the provided functionality
of the vehicle is no longer available. With the approach of
a functional limit, the vehicle behavior changes increasingly
until it has deteriorated to such an extent that the functionality
218
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

of the vehicle can no longer be provided within an acceptable
manner as shown in Figure 5. Even before such a functional
limit is crossed, the vehicle must have a strategy, which
ensures that the vehicle retains its control. In order to prevent
the vehicle from exceeding the limit, taking a safe state is
considered to be an effective means. According to [37], a safe
vehicle state is achieved, when the current and future risk is
below a threshold accepted by the society and therefore no
unreasonable risk exists. The threshold represents the value
up to which the risk is still accepted from an ethical, moral,
and social point of view. Depending on the situation and its
criticality, a safe state can be achieved in different ways. The
higher the criticality of a situation, the more drastic measures
are used in order to achieve a safe state for the vehicle. The
range varies from changing the lane to stop the vehicle at
the edge of the road to the immediate stop of the vehicle at
the current position as described in [38]. In order to test the
vehicle behavior shortly before the loss of functionality, the
approach suggests that the test activities are intensiﬁed at the
transition area around the functional limits. However, since
the functional limits of a system are situation-dependent and
only partially known in advance, the used method must be
systematic and with the greatest possible variation of the test
scenarios as is possible to push the vehicle functions to their
limits. The variation, which is necessary to take the different
environmental conditions and the individual behavior of the
road users into account, results in a large number of test cases
that must not only be executed, but also evaluated. For the
evaluation, the approach proposes an evaluation at the system
level from the viewpoint of an external observer as described
in [3].
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Automation plays an important role in the technical
progress. Technical systems are increasingly taking on human
tasks. Some of the technical systems overcome human beings
at present. Currently, automation facilitates driving and helps
to reduce or even eliminate risks caused by human drivers.
However, the human driver has to monitor the vehicle and its
surroundings for the whole drive to be immediately available
as a fallback level in case that the vehicle cannot cope with
a situation or a malfunction occurs. The responsibility for
the vehicle and possible damages lies with the human driver.
In contrast to emergency functions, which only intervene
in critical trafﬁc situations for a short period of time, the
latest comfort functions temporarily take over the lateral and
longitudinal control of the vehicle for longer time. With further
steps in the direction of automated driving, the automobile
manufacturers will have to take over the responsibility for the
driving maneuvers automatically performed by the vehicles
until the human driver takes over the vehicle control from the
vehicle.
The safety of current vehicle generations is built on the
combination of the vehicle and the human driver. If the
vehicle has a malfunction or cannot handle the situation, the
human driver should be ready to take over the vehicle control
immediately. This means that the test activities for vehicles
primarily focus on the controllability of the vehicle by the
human driver. With the transition in the direction of automated
driving, the human driver is less and less often available for a
takeover of the vehicle control and if the human driver is up
to it, it will take longer due to the possible distraction from
the driving task. The temporary unavailability of the human
driver as an immediate fallback level requires new or revised
test concepts and test methods, which take these changes into
account for the testing of the vehicle’s functionality.
Driving automation can contribute to the trafﬁc safety
by removing the human driver out of the loop in as many
situations as possible. But driving automation, which does
not endanger the passengers or other road users, can only be
achieved, if a correct operation of the vehicle is ensured at all
times and in any situation. The presented approach proposes
that the search space of the system shall be divided into the
functional behavior and the temporal behavior, which allows a
prioritization during the test execution. It demands in addition
the full automation of the test generation and test execution
to increase efﬁciency. The approach assumes that the number
of test cases required for a release of a vehicle will increase
considerably in order to meet the variety of different envi-
ronmental conditions. The expected number of test cases will
Figure 5. Schematic representation of a functional limit (marked with a red line) on the example of lane keeping assistant.
219
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

result in mostly a manual test process with low throughput and
poor scalability infeasible for automated driving. An increased
test activity is intended by the approach to ﬁnd situations,
where functional limits are crossed unexpectedly and neither
the provided vehicle’s functionality is no longer available
nor the time remaining to reach a safe state is sufﬁcient. It
proposes therefore a systematic method, which considers the
environmental conditions and the individual behavior of the
road users to bring the generated test scenarios iteratively
closer to the functional limits of the system by evaluating the
vehicle behavior on the system level.
It is left for future work to implement the presented
approach and to apply it to a real vehicle function in a case
study. Furthermore, efﬁcient techniques are needed to push the
function which is looked at speciﬁcally to its limits. Metrics
must be determined to evaluate the vehicle behavior. From the
vehicle behavior, the distance to the functional limits can be
estimated. It is assumed that the vehicle behavior does not
change abruptly, but continuously deteriorates if the safety
strategies are not active.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Wittel, D. Ulmer, and O. B¨uhler, “Challenges in Functional Testing
on the Way to Automated Driving,” in The Twelfth International
Conference on Systems, 2017, pp. 16–21. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=icons 2017 1 30 40051
[2]
S. Wittel, D. Ulmer, and O. B¨uhler, “The Testing Aspects of Automated
Driving,” 2017, [Online]. Available: http://www.steinbeis.de/ﬁleadmin/
content/Publikationen/transfermagazin/191523-2017-02.pdf [retrieved:
December, 2017].
[3]
S. Wittel, D. Ulmer, and O. B¨uhler, “Automatic Test Evaluation for
Driving Scenarios Using Abstraction Level Constraints,” in The Eighth
International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation
Lifecycle, 2016, pp. 14–19. [Online]. Available: https://www.thinkmind.
org/index.php?view=article&articleid=valid 2016 2 20 40023
[4]
S.
Eschen,
Personality
as
predictor
for
performance
in
highly
automated man-machine teams in aviation (Pers¨onlichkeit als Pr¨adiktor
f¨ur Leistung in hoch automatisierten Mensch-Maschine-Teams der
Luftfahrt).
Shaker Verlag, 2014. [Online]. Available: http://elib.dlr.de/
89149/
[5]
SAE International, “Automated Driving - Levels of Driving Automa-
tion are Deﬁned in New SAE International Standard J3016,” 2014,
[Online]. Available: https://www.smmt.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/sites/
2/automated driving.pdf [retrieved: December, 2017].
[6]
A. Zanten and F. Kost, Handbook of Driver Assistance Systems:
Basic Information, Components and Systems for Active Safety
and Comfort.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2016, ch.
Brake-Based Assistance Functions, pp. 919–967. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-12352-3 40
[7]
A. Paul, R. Chauhan, R. Srivastava, and M. Baruah, “Advanced driver
assistance systems,” in SAE Technical Paper.
SAE International, 02
2016. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.4271/2016-28-0223
[8]
W. Wachenfeld and H. Winner, The Release of Autonomous Vehicles.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2016, pp. 425–449.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-48847-8 21
[9]
Fraunhofer Institute for Industrial Engineering IAO, “Highly Auto-
mated Driving on Freeways - Industrial Policy Conclusions (”Hochau-
tomatisiertes Fahren auf Autobahnen
Industriepolitische Schlussfol-
gerungen”),” 2015, [Online]. Available: http://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/
DE/Downloads/H/hochautomatisiertes-fahren-auf-autobahnen.html [re-
trieved: December, 2017].
[10]
German Aerospace Center, “Research Project PEGASUS,” URL: http:
//www.pegasus-projekt.info [retrieved: December, 2017].
[11]
G. Klein, J. Andronick, K. Elphinstone, T. Murray, T. Sewell,
R. Kolanski, and G. Heiser, “Comprehensive formal veriﬁcation of an os
microkernel,” ACM Trans. Comput. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 2:1–2:70,
Feb. 2014. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2560537
[12]
H. Winner, W. Wachenfeld, and P. Junietz, “(How) Can Safety
of Automated Driving be Validated?” 2016, [Online]. Available:
http://www.fzd.tu-darmstadt.de/media/fachgebiet fzd/publikationen
3/2016 5/2016 Wi Wf Ju ViV-Symposium Graz.pdf
[retrieved:
December, 2017].
[13]
Federal Statistical Ofﬁce of Germany, “Road Trafﬁc Accidents -
2015 (”Verkehrsunf¨alle - 2015”),” 2016, [Online]. Available: https:
//www.destatis.de/DE/Publikationen/Thematisch/TransportVerkehr/
Verkehrsunfaelle/VerkehrsunfaelleJ2080700157004.html
[retrieved:
December, 2017].
[14]
NHTSA’s National Center for Statistics and Analysis, “Critical Reasons
for Crashes Investigated in the National Motor Vehicle Crash Causation
Survey,” 2015, [Online]. Available: https://crashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov/Api/
Public/ViewPublication/812115 [retrieved: December, 2017].
[15]
D. R¨osler, “The relevance of trafﬁc elements in driving situations
deﬁnition, measurement, and application,” Ph.D. dissertation, Chemnitz
University
of
Technology,
2010.
[Online].
Available:
http://nbn-
resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:bsz:ch1-201000403
[16]
F. Lorig and I. Timm, “How to model the ”human factor” for agent-
based simulation in social media analysis? work in progress paper,”
vol. 46, pp. 89–94, 01 2014.
[17]
J. M. Digman, “Brake-based assistance functions,” in Annual Review
of Psychology, vol. 41, 11 2003, pp. 417–440.
[18]
Crowe Associates, “The ”BIG 5” PERSONALITY TRAITS,” URL:
http://www.crowe-associates.co.uk/coaching-and-mentoring-skills/the-
big-5-personality-traits/ [retrieved: December, 2017].
[19]
W.
Arthur
and
W.
G.
Graziano,
“The
ﬁve-factor
model,
conscientiousness, and driving accident involvement,” Journal of
Personality, vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 593–618, 1996. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6494.1996.tb00523.x
[20]
B. A. Jonah, “Sensation seeking and risky driving: a review and
synthesis of the literature,” Accident Analysis & Prevention, vol. 29,
no. 5, pp. 651–665, 1997.
[21]
D. F. Cellar, Z. C. Nelson, and C. M. Yorke, “The ﬁve-factor
model and driving behavior: Personality and involvement in vehicular
accidents,” Psychological Reports, vol. 86, no. 2, pp. 454–456, 2000.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.2466/pr0.2000.86.2.454
[22]
R. Lancaster and R. Ward, The contribution of individual factors
to driving behaviour: Implications for managing work-related road
safety .
HSE Books, 2002. [Online]. Available: http://www.hse.gov.
uk/research/rrpdf/rr020.pdf
[23]
N. S¨umer, T. Lajunen, and T. ¨Ozkan, “Big ﬁve personality traits as the
distal predictors of road accident involvement,” pp. 215–227, 01 2005.
[24]
E. Constantinou, G. Panayiotou, N. Konstantinou, A. Loutsiou-Ladd,
and A. Kapardis, “Risky and aggressive driving in young adults:
Personality matters,” vol. 43, pp. 1323–31, 07 2011.
[25]
J. Vazquez, “Personality factors, age, and aggressive driving: A valida-
tion using a driving simulator,” 2013.
[26]
A.
af
Whlberg,
P.
Barraclough,
and
J.
Freeman,
“Personality
versus trafﬁc accidents; meta-analysis of real and method effects,”
Transportation Research Part F: Trafﬁc Psychology and Behaviour,
vol. 44, pp. 90 – 104, 2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1369847816304156
[27]
Verband der Automobilindustrie e.V., “Automation - From Driver Assis-
tance Systems to Automated Driving,” 2015, [Online]. Available: https://
www.vda.de/dam/vda/publications/2015/automation.pdf [retrieved: De-
cember, 2017].
[28]
N. J. Ward, “Task automation and skill development in a simpliﬁed
driving task,” Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics
Society Annual Meeting, vol. 44, no. 20, pp. 3–302–3–305, 2000.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/154193120004402020
[29]
N. Merat, A. H. Jamson, F. C. H. Lai, and O. Carsten, “Highly
automated driving, secondary task performance, and driver state,”
Human Factors, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 762–771, 2012, pMID: 23156621.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0018720812442087
[30]
B. Danner, T. Dohmke, J. Hillenbrand, V. Schmid, and A. Spieker,
“Method and apparatus for avoiding or mitigating vehicle collisions,”
Apr. 3 2012, US Patent 8,150,583.
220
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[31]
Gesamtverband der Deutschen Versicherungswirtschaft e.V., “Takeover
times in highly automated driving - Compact accident research,” 2016,
[Online].
Available:
https://udv.de/en/publications/compact-accident-
research/takeover-times-highly-automated-driving [retrieved: Decem-
ber, 2017].
[32]
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE), “World
Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle Regulations (WP 29),” URL: http:
//www.unece.org/trans/main/wp29/meeting docs wp29.html [retrieved:
December, 2017].
[33]
A. T. Kleen, “Controllability of partially automated interventions in
vehicle guidance (”Beherrschbarkeit von teilautomatisierten Eingriffen
in
die
Fahrzeugf¨uhrung”),”
Ph.D.
dissertation,
2014.
[Online].
Available:
http://publikationsserver.tu-braunschweig.de/receive/dbbs
mods 00056694
[34]
O. B¨uhler, “Evolutionary functional testing of embedded systems for
distance-based automotive driver assistance functions (”Evolution¨arer
Funktionstest von eingebetteten Systemen f¨ur abstandsbasierte Fahreras-
sistenzfunktionen im Automobil”),” Ph.D. dissertation, University of
T¨ubingen, 2007.
[35]
I. Jovanovic, “Software Testing Methods and Techniques,” in The
IPSI BgD Transactions on Internet Research, 2009, pp. 30–41.
[Online].
Available:
http://tir.ipsitransactions.org/2009/January/Full%
20Journal.pdf
[36]
F. Rothlauf, Optimization Problems.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer
Berlin
Heidelberg,
2011,
pp.
7–44.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-72962-4 2
[37]
A. Reschka, Safety Concept for Autonomous Vehicles.
Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2016, pp. 473–496. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-48847-8 23
[38]
M. Binfet-Kull and P. Heitmann, “System safety for an autonomous
driving vehicle,” 1998.
221
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

