Silicon Photomultiplier: Technology Improvement and Performance 
 
 
Roberto Pagano, Sebania Libertino, Domenico Corso, 
and Salvatore Lombardo 
Istituto per la Microelettronica e Microsistemi 
CNR 
VIII Strada Z.I. 5, 95121, Catania, Italy 
roberto.pagano@imm.cnr.it, 
sebania.libertino@imm.cnr.it, 
domenico.corso@imm.cnr.it, 
salvatore.lombardo@imm.cnr.it 
Giuseppina Valvo, Delfo Sanfilippo, Giovanni. 
Condorelli, Massimo Mazzillo, Angelo Piana, Beatrice 
Carbone, and Giorgio Fallica 
Sensor Design Group 
STMicroelectronics 
Stradale Primosole, 50 95121 Catania, Italy 
giusy.valvo@st.com, delfo.sanfilippo@st.com, 
giovanni.condorelli@st.com, massimo.mazzillo@st.com, 
angelo.piana@st.com, beatrice.carbone@st.com, 
giorgio.fallica@st.com
 
 
Abstract— Our main results on the study of both single pixels 
and 
Silicon 
Photomultiplier 
arrays 
produced 
by 
STMicroelectronics in Catania are reviewed. Our data, 
coupled to an extensive simulation study, show that the single 
pixel technology is close to its ultimate physical limit. The 
distribution of dark current in large arrays follows a 
Poissonian law. Cross talk effects are strongly reduced by the 
presence of optical trenches surrounding each pixel of the 
array. Finally, we demonstrate that these devices can also be 
used as single photon counters also without a complex 
amplification stage. 
Keywords – Silicon Photomultiplier; dark count; trenches.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The ability to detect single photons represents the 
ultimate goal in optical detection. To achieve such sensitivity 
a number of technologies have been developed and refined to 
suit particular applications. These include: Photomultiplier 
Tubes (PMTs), Microchannel Plate Photomultiplier Tubes 
(MCPMT), 
Hybrid 
Photon 
Detector 
(HPD), 
p-i-n 
photodiodes, linear and Geiger mode Avalanche Photo 
Diodes (APDs), etc. [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. The need for ever 
more sensitive, compact, rugged, and inexpensive optical 
sensors in the visible region of the spectrum continues today, 
and it is particularly acute in the fields of the biological 
sciences, medicine, astronomy, and high energy physics. 
Applications such as fluorescence and luminescence 
photometry, absorption spectroscopy, scintillation readout, 
light detection and ranging, and quantum cryptography 
require extremely sensitive optical sensors often in adverse 
environments, such as high magnetic fields, and where space 
is limited. 
In many of these applications, the PMT has become since 
mid-1930’s the detector of choice almost without a 
convincing alternative. However, PMT presents some 
disadvantages: it is fragile, it requires high operating voltage 
(higher than 100 V), and it can not operate without a 
shielding protection in magnetic environment. Since its 
inception in the 1980's, the so-called Silicon Photomultiplier 
(SiPM) has begun to rival the PMT in many of its parameters 
such as gain, photon detection efficiency, and timing [6], [7], 
[8], [9], [10], [11]. The SiPM has all the additional benefits 
of silicon technology such as compactness, reliability, 
ruggedness, high volume of production, and long term 
stability. Although all the previous motivations would be 
sufficient to explore this alternative to PMT, it is the low 
production cost of silicon technology that attracts the most 
and has led to the efforts that finally has enabled the 
realization of this photodetector. 
The SiPM major drawback is the relatively large dark 
current [11], due to the combination of a diffusion current 
produced at the quasi-neutral regions at the boundaries of the 
device active region and of generation of carriers due to 
point defects and/or metallic impurities in the active area 
depletion layer emitting carriers through the Schockley-Hall-
Read (SHR) mechanisms, eventually boosted by the Poole-
Frenkel effect [12]. 
In this paper, after a detailed discussion on the principle 
of operation of SiPMs presented in Section II, two different 
pixel 
design 
technologies 
of 
SiPM 
developed 
by 
STMicroelectronics are discussed. They consist in a n+ on p 
silicon structure. The device active part is the same in both 
pixels. They differ in the doping of the epitaxial layer and in 
the starting substrate (n-type Si for the first device and p-type 
Si for the second device). The differences between the two 
technologies lead to significant differences in the dark count 
rate (DC) measured at temperatures higher than 10°C. In 
Section III the two device structures, the experimental setup, 
and the simulation environment used are discussed. The 
current–voltage characteristics in forward and reverse bias of 
the two pixels for temperatures ranging from -25°C to 65°C 
are presented and discussed comparing the measured data 
with electrical simulations in Section IV. Moreover, 
electrical and optical performance of SiPM devices suitable 
for large scale fabrication in a VLSI production line are 
reviewed in Section V. Finally, the conclusions are outlined 
in Section VII. 
124
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

  
 
Figure 1.  (a) Microphotograph of a 64×64 pixels SiPM with 6.5 mm2 active area produced by STMicroelectronics.The pixel, shown in the inset, has an 
active area of 40 µm × 40 µm. (b) Schematic circuit diagram of a SiPM with n×m pixels. The pixel, enclosed by the dashed line, is composed of an SPAD 
and a quenching resistor. Note that node 1, 2 and 3 are the same in Fig. (a) and (b).  
II. 
PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION 
The principle of operation of SiPMs is inspired to the 
demand of information on the exact determination of the 
arrival time and density of a very low photon flux. Due to the 
quantum nature of light, a low photon flux is composed by 
few photons distributed in time and space. A dense array of 
space distributed micro-devices (the pixels), individually 
able to detect the arrival time of a single photon can, in 
principle, resolve the time and the space distribution of the 
impinging photons. This is the basic SiPM operation 
principle. In a SiPM the pixels are electrically connected in 
parallel forming a matrix of n × m adjacent sensors (see Fig. 
1a). Each pixel, known in literature as Single Photon 
Avalanche Diode (SPAD) or Geiger Mode Avalanche 
Photodiode (GM-APD) [13], [14], consists of a p-n junction 
suitably doped in order to have avalanche breakdown in a 
well defined active area with an integrated quenching 
resistance in series, as shown in the schematic picture of 
 Fig. 1b. The active area is formed by creating an enriched 
well zone, generally doped by ion implantation followed by 
thermal processing for dopant activation and defect 
annealing. This dopant local enrichment generates regions 
where the vertical junction electric field is higher, and these 
become the pixel active areas for photon detection [15]. The 
p-n junction devices are operated in Geiger mode, that is, 
they are biased above the junction breakdown voltage (BV). 
Above BV the device can stay in a quiescent state for a 
relative long time, up to ms, depending on the technology 
quality process (low defect density) and the operating 
condition (temperature and voltage) [16]. Then, when the 
device is in quiescent state, the active volume (active area 
times the depleted region) is characterized by an electric 
field well above the breakdown field. However, the p-n 
junction does not go into avalanche breakdown. In such 
condition, the absorption of a single photon in the active 
volume will trigger, through the generation of an electron-
hole pair, the onset of the junction avalanche with a 
probability depending on the operating voltage [17]. A 
macroscopic current pulse flows through the junction 
resulting in a strong amplification of the single photon 
arrival. The amplification value, usually indicated as Gain 
(G), is above 106 electrons per pulse. This large gain is the 
cause of the strong SPAD sensitivity. 
The avalanche process is a self-sustaining process and to 
quench it the integration of a resistor in each pixel is 
required. In our device the resistor is connected in series to 
the cathode of the p-n junction (see Fig. 1). The quenching 
mechanism introduced by the resistor acts as follow: the 
avalanche following the photon absorption causes a rapid 
increase of the current flowing through the p-n junction as 
well as through the external resistor. The voltage drop across 
the series resistor decreases the voltage applied to the p-n 
junction below the BV, forcing the avalanche quenching and 
the consequent extinction of the current flux. Once the 
avalanche is quenched, a recharge time is required to restore 
the pixel to the original condition of electric field above BV, 
making the pixel ready to the detection of a new photon [18]. 
Therefore, the detection of a photon by a single pixel results 
in a current pulse, which can then be easily measured by an 
external circuit. However, a single pixel works as a digital 
photon sensor, that is, it can not detect multiple photon 
arrival. This task is accomplished by the full array. In fact, 
the current detected by the overall SiPM is simply the sum of 
the currents produced by the various pixels. Hence, this 
device compared to the original design of the SPAD has the 
advantage of having a response, which is in a relatively large 
dynamic range, proportional to the flux of photons impinging 
on the detector at the same time [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]. 
The SiPM Gain is about 106, similar to the one of single 
pixel. 
The capability to measure low photon fluxes is limited by 
the device DC. In fact, the single pixel can have a breakdown 
event even if it does not detect a photon because of thermal 
generation of electron-hole pairs within the depletion region 
assisted by defects (SHR mechanism) and / or of minority 
carrier diffusion from the depletion region boundaries. Such 
events result in current spikes having the same features of the 
"real" counts due to photon arrival. This determines a lower 
limit to the photon count rate. A high performance SiPM 
125
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

must have a very low DC rate. Typical value is in the order 
of 1MHz/mm2 at room temperature. 
Another limiting factor to the device operation is the 
cross-talk effect. The cross-talk is a noise contribution 
common to all pixelated devices. A pulse current produced 
by a pixel, due to a photon detection event or to a primary 
dark noise event, can induce one or more adjacent pixels to 
experience 
the 
avalanche 
breakdown. 
Then, 
the 
corresponding output pulse current of the SiPM has an 
amplitude peak proportional to the sum of the pixels 
involved in the single photo-detection and in the correlated 
cross-talk phenomena. This noise contribution is detrimental 
for all the applications where a single photon resolution is 
required.  
The cross-talk noise has two different physical origins: 
optical and electrical. The optical cross-talk is due to the 
photons generation by radiative emission from the hot 
carriers produced during an avalanche discharge. In an 
avalanche multiplication process, on average 3 photons, with 
energy higher than the silicon band gap (1.12eV), are emitted 
every 105 carriers [19]. These emitted photons can travel to a 
neighboring pixel and trigger a breakdown there.  
The electrical cross-talk can occur when carriers, 
generated during the avalanche breakdown in a pixel, can 
travel along the epitaxial layer, common to all pixels, and 
reach the neighboring pixels triggering there a new 
avalanche breakdown [20]. Some strategies have been 
studied to reduce the cross-talk between neighboring pixels. 
The first is to increment the distance between adjacent 
pixels. This approach has a detrimental effect on the 
geometrical fill factor of the SiPM. The second strategy 
consists in fabricating grooves, filled with optical absorbing 
material, all around each pixel. These grooves, commonly 
named trenches, prevent from optical and electrical coupling 
between pixels. The reduction of the geometrical fill factor 
with such design is mild while the effect on the cross-talk 
noise is considerable. The devices studied in this paper are 
fabricated using the second approach and the beneficial 
effects provided by the trench presence are discussed in 
Section V-A. 
An important feature of SiPM, as one would expect from 
a semiconductor device, it is the long term stability of its 
parameters (BV, G, DC, etc.). In many applications, in fact, 
the variation of such parameters in the course of time may be 
a problematic issue. As reported by other authors SiPMs 
have no aging and show stable parameters even if exposed to 
elevated temperature for long time [10], [21], [22]. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL  
Electrical characterization was performed at wafer level 
using a Cascade Microtech Probe Station 11000. The 
samples were cooled using a Temptronic TPO 3200A 
ThermoChuck that provides a stable temperature, within 
0.1°, between -60°C and 200°C. Current vs. voltage 
measurements (I-V) were acquired using an HP4156B 
precision semiconductor parameter analyzer with an 
integration time of 1s. The DC and the gain were measured 
using a Tektronix DPO 7104 Digital Oscilloscope (OSC) 
with 1 GHz bandwidth and 20 Gsa/s measuring the voltage 
drop through a 50 Ω resistor connected between the cathode 
of the pixel and the ground. The I-V characteristics have 
been measured on more than 30 devices, for both single 
pixels and SiPM arrays of both technologies.  
Optical measurements were carried out using a Cube 
laser diode with a wavelength of 659 nm by Coherent 
working from continuous wave to 6 ns pulses. Modulation 
was achieved using an external trigger (Agilent 81110A 
165/330 MHz). The device was biased and the signal 
acquired using the source-meter and oscilloscope already 
mentioned. 
A. Device structures 
In this work, two different technologies are compared. 
They differ for few, but important, characteristics. The full 
device fabrication details can be found in [23]. In this paper, 
we want to focus our attention on similarities and 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Schematic cross-section of a SiPM pixel. (a) Device 1: double epitaxial layer, n-substrate, trenches crossing sinker diffusion (b) Device 2: single 
epitaxial layer, p-substrate, isolated sinker diffusion.  
126
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

differences between the two technologies. They have the 
same device active part and guard ring, fabricated as 
discussed in [23], the same BV (-28.2±0.3V at 25°C) and the 
same active area, of 40×40 µm2.  
Fig. 2 shows a half cross section of the two studied 
technologies, Fig. 2a and 2b for device 1 and 2, respectively. 
The main differences between the two technologies are the 
doping of the epitaxial layer and the starting substrate. In the 
first technology, device 1, a double epitaxial layer, first p+ 
layer, then followed by a p-type Si, is grown on a low doped 
n-type (100) oriented Si substrate. In the second technology, 
device 2, only a single p-type epitaxial Si layer is grown on a 
highly doped p+-type (100) Si substrate. In both cases, deep 
optical trenches are fabricated for the optical and electrical 
isolation between the pixels [24]. In device 2 the optical 
trench is closer to the active region than in device 1 (see Fig. 
2). As a result, the thermal diffusion of the p++ implanted 
sinker needed for the anode contact, is shielded by the 
trenches. 
In both devices, the same anti-reflecting coating, poly-
silicon quenching resistance and metal contact are integrated 
as discussed in [23]. These elements are not included in the 
cross sections of Fig 2.  
Fig. 2 also shows three regions enumerated as 1, 2 and 3: 
region 1 is the central epitaxial layer below the active area of 
the pixel (0 µm < x < 20 µm and 0 µm < y < 7 µm for both 
devices); region 2 is the border epitaxial region of the pixel 
(x > 20 µm and 0 µm < y < 7 µm) and region 3 is the 
substrate (y > 7 µm). They have been identified for 
simulation purposes. It allows to define trap energy and 
lifetime separately for each region, to better simulate the real 
structure. 
Fig. 3 shows the comparison between the data (symbols) 
and the simulated results (lines) of the final net doping along 
the cut line 1 (dashed with lines in Fig. 2) for device 1 (blue 
solid line) and device 2 (red dashed line). The experimental 
doping profile was obtained by the spreading resistance 
measurements for both device 1 (blue squares) and device 2 
(red circles). The simulated profiles follow quite well the 
experimental data. It is important to stress that the profiles of 
the two devices overlaps in the full active region. The main 
differences are in the region below 2 µm. Part of it is 
highlighted in Fig. 3 (EPI). 
The structural differences described so far are at the base 
of the electrical behavior shown in the following sections. 
B. Simulation parameters 
Electrical simulations were obtained using a 2-D drift-
diffusion solver developed by Silvaco Co. LTD [25].  
 
Figure 3.   Doping profile of device 1 (blue) and device 2 (red) 
experimentally measured (symbols) and simulated (lines). 
The adopted model is the drift-diffusion approximation 
including standard SHR generation/recombination, Auger 
recombination, band gap narrowing, Coulomb scattering, and 
SHR surface recombination. The parameters of the TCAD 
simulations are those connected to the minority carrier 
lifetime in the three device regions above described. The 
SHR generation (G) / recombination (R) adopted model 
consists of the following equations: 
 
G ! R =
pn ! nie
2
" p n + nie exp ET
kT
#
$%
&
'(
)
*+
,
-. + " n
p + nie exp ! ET
kT
#
$%
&
'(
)
*+
,
-.
   (1) 
where: 
 
! n =
! n0
1+ ND NRe f
 ,! p =
! p0
1+ ND NRe f
 
           (2) 
where p, n, and nie are the hole, electron, and intrinsic carrier 
concentration, ET and kT are the trap and the thermal energy, 
ND is the local dopant concentration, and NRef=5×106cm-3. We 
have assumed that τn0=τp0=τ0. In the model we assume three 
different values for τ0 and ET in the three above defined 
device regions, i.e., τ01, τ02, τ03, ET1, ET2, and ET3 resumed in 
Table I.  In the same table are also resumed the experimental 
activation energies discussed in Section IV-B. 
 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS AND EXPERIMENTAL ACTIVATION ENERGIES 
Simulation 
Experimental 
Device 
τ01 (s) 
τ02 (s) 
τ03 (s) 
ET1 (eV)* 
ET2 (eV)* 
ET3 (eV)* 
SR (cm/s) 
Ea1 (eV) 
Ea2 (eV) 
1 
10-3 
10-5 
10-5 
0.06 
0.2 
0 
100 
0.57 
1.18 
2 
10-3 
10-5 
10-3 
0.06 
0.2 
0 
150 
0.59 
1.12 
* Energies values are with respect to the midgap of the Si energies bandgap. 
127
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

IV. 
SINGLE PIXEL TECHNOLOGY 
In this section, the experimental data of the two single 
pixel technologies described previously are discussed and 
compared with the electrical simulation for both forward and 
reverse bias. 
A. Forward current 
In this paragraph, the pixel forward regime will be 
discussed. The study of the pixel behavior in forward, even if 
this is not the regime for photon-detection, is functional to 
understand the causes leading the differences in the DC of 
the two devices. Moreover, the simulations presented in this 
paper are the results of the best fit obtained from forward and 
reverse currents at different temperatures and for different 
geometries as discussed in the following.  
The forward current for both devices has a dominant 
component at the perimeter of the active area. This effect has 
been observed in pixels of both types having different active 
areas (AACT) and dead areas (ADEAD). The dead area of a pixel 
is the area surrounding the active region as shown in the inset 
of Fig. 4. In the same figure, the projection of the measured 
I-V in the ideal diode regime to the y axis (V=0) (symbol), 
i.e, the pre-factor I0 of the Schockley diode equation [26], is 
reported for pixels with three different AACT and four 
different ADEAD compared with simulations (dashed line). The 
data clearly show that I0 is almost independent from AACT and 
has strong dependence on ADEAD. This geometrical 
information has been taken into account in the electrical 
simulation defining the physical parameters discussed in 
Section III-B. Moreover, a surface recombination model 
[27], with velocity SR at the boundary between silicon and 
oxide, is included in region 2. The final parameters, almost 
the same for both devices, are summarized in Table I. 
Such high difference between the carrier lifetime 
(electron and hole) in region 1 and in region 2 produces a 
preferential current path at the perimeter of the p-n junction, 
as suggested by the experimental data. This effect is clearly 
visible in Fig. 5 that shows the 2D distribution of the total 
current density (Jtot) at 25°C and for a forward bias of 0.3V  
 
 
Figure 4.  Measured (symbols) and simulated (dotted line) I0 as function of 
the active area and the dead area for device 1 @ 25°C. The inset is a plane 
view of a pixel showing the active area and the dead area. 
in both device 1 and 2 (Fig 5 a and b, respectively). The 
dashed circle in Fig. 5 highlights the interested region.  
Fig. 6 shows the measured I-V (symbols) of device 1 
(Fig. 6a) and device 2 (Fig. 6b) at three different 
temperatures: -25°C (circles), 25°C (triangles) and 65°C 
(squares). The measured data are compared with the 
simulated I-V (dashed line). Two regimes can be clearly 
observed: the ideal diode following the Schockley law at low 
voltages (linear region) and the resistive regime due to the 
integrated quenching resistor RQ at higher voltages. Actually, 
the current of device 1 at high voltages deviates from the 
simulated current (in the range 0.4V - 0.5V depending on 
temperature). This is due to a parasitic Schotky diode at the 
anode contact that has been removed in device 2. In the 
simulation this effect has not been considered. The effect of 
the RQ was simulated including an ideal resistor at the 
cathode contact equal as the measured value in both devices 
(220 kΩ at 25°C). 
          
 
Figure 5.  Distribution of the total current density (Jtot) at 25°C and at V=0.3V of (a) device 1 and (b) device 2. 
128
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 6.  Measured (symbols) and simulated (dotted line) IV in forward polarization at three temperatures of (a) Device 1 and (b) Device 2. 
The simulation shows a very good agreement with the 
experimental data for both devices and deviates only in 
device 1 as just discussed. The simulations have been carried 
out using the parameters summarized in Table I.  
B. Reverse current and Dark Count 
Fig. 7 shows the dark currents as a function of voltage at 
three different temperatures, -25°C (circles), 25°C (triangles) 
and 65°C (squares) for a single pixel belonging to device 1 
technology (blue symbols) compared to the dark current of a 
pixel with the structure of device 2 (red symbols). The BV of 
the two pixels is the same, -28.2 V at 25°C, with a 
temperature coefficient of -29mV/°C. 
The leakage currents, i.e., the currents at voltage below 
the BV, are nearly the same for the two kind of devices in the 
full range of temperature, ∼10pA at 25°C. However, the 
currents at voltage above BV increase with a different rate 
with respect to the temperature. At -25°C the dark currents  
 
(circles) are roughly the same while, by increasing the 
temperature, they show remarkable differences. At 25°C and 
voltages of -32V (+ 3.8V over-voltage, OV) the dark current 
in the device 1 is one order of magnitude higher than that of 
the device 2. At 65°C the difference increases approaching 
two orders of magnitude. When the pixel works as photon 
detector it is biased above breakdown and the dark currents 
define the lower limit to the photon rate detectable. The 
understanding of the physical origin of these currents is an 
important achievement to improve the device technology. 
Although the measurements show steady-state I-V curves, 
the time resolved analysis of the current at the oscilloscope, 
at a fixed bias above BV, reveals that the time averaged 
current of Fig. 7 is a random sequence of current spikes. 
Fig. 8 shows a trace of a single pixel dark current at 
OV=+3.8V, at 25°C in a time window of 1ms acquired with 
the OSC. Five current spikes with ∼90  µA amplitude 
randomly distributed in time are clearly visible. The 
 
 
Figure 7.   I-V in dark and in reverse bias at -25°C (circle), 25°C (triangle) 
and 65°C (square) of device 1 (blue) and of device 2 (red). 
 
 
Figure 8.  Dark Current v.s time at 25°C and at OV=+3.8V. 
129
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

frequency of these spikes is the DC of the pixel. These dark 
counts are attributed to generation inside the depleted region 
of the junction and / or diffusion from quasi neutral 
boundaries of a single free carrier which triggers the 
avalanche. The integrated current signal of a dark count in a 
short time window, typically 50-100 ns, divided by the 
electron charge q, is usually referred as the gain of the pixel 
(G). It was demonstrated in a previous work [28] that the 
steady-state dark current at any temperature and voltage 
condition of Fig. 7 is the product of q, G and DC, in 
symbols: 
 
I V,T
(
) = q ! G(V,T ) ! DC(V,T )      
      (3) 
It is clear that the difference between the dark currents of 
the two devices at 25°C and 65°C (Fig 7) is necessarily due 
to a difference or in the G or in the DC. 
Fig. 9 shows the measured G of device 1 (blue symbol) 
and of device 2 (red symbol) at voltages higher than the BV 
and at three temperatures: -25°C (circles), 25°C (triangles) 
and 65°C (squares). G was measured as described in [28] 
integrating the mean dark pulse. As the data show, the gain is 
nearly the same for both devices at all the investigated 
temperatures. This is expected because G = 1/q × C × OV, C 
is the junction capacitance, and the values of C and OV are 
the same for both devices. 
The DC of the two devices is shown in Fig. 10 for the 
same voltage and temperature ranges investigated for the G 
(Fig 9). It was measured counting the dark pulses in a time 
window of 1s. Blue symbols are used for the DC of device 1 
and red symbols for the DC of device 2. At -25°C (circles) 
both devices have the same DC (~10 hz at V=-31V). At 
25°C (triangles) the DC of device 1 is ~ 10 times the DC of 
device 2 and at 65°C the difference becomes ~ 2 order of 
magnitudes, roughly the same difference observed in the 
dark current of Fig. 8.  
To better understand the DC behavior with respect to the 
temperature, the DC of both devices has been measured at 
fixed OV in a temperature range of 100°C, from -25°C to 
85°C. 
The Arrhenius plot of the DC at a fixed OV=+3V, i.e. the 
Napieran logarithm of the DC vs. 1/kT, where k is the 
Boltzmann constant and T the temperature in Kelvin, is 
shown in Fig. 11. The experimental data for device 1 (blue 
symbols) are compared with those of device 2 (red symbols). 
Lines are the simulation results, as discussed in the 
following. The slope of the ln(DC) as a function of 1/kT 
provides the DC activation energy Ea [29]. Two different 
slopes are recognized from the plot: for temperature lower 
than ~ 10°C for device 1 and ~ 40°C for device 2 the 
activation energy is Ea1~EG/2, where EG is the silicon 
forbidden energy bandgap (1.12eV). At higher temperature 
(>10°C for device 1 and >40°C for device 2) the slope of the 
Arrhenius plot provides an activation energy Ea2~EG. The 
experimental values of Ea1 and Ea2 are summarized in  
Table I. Similar values are found regardless of OV. Ea1 value 
indicates that at low temperature the DC of both devices is 
due to SHR generation-recombination defects located inside 
the depleted region of the p-n junction. The physical 
explanation of Ea2=EG is that the diffusion of minority 
carriers from the boundary of the depleted region is the 
prevalent effect causing the DC at high temperature. Now it 
is clear that the larger reduction of the DC of device 2 with 
respect to the DC of device 1 at temperatures higher than 
10°C (Fig. 10) is due to a reduction of the diffusion current 
in device 2. However, it is still unclear why it happens. At a 
first glance, one may expect that a reduction of the diffusion 
current at the perimeter of the active area could cause a 
reduction in the DC, as already observed in the forward 
regime [1]. This hypothesis could be suggested also by the 
different device architecture at the borders, region 2 in Fig. 2, 
for the two devices. Device 1 shows a large p-type dopant 
 
 
 
Figure 9.   Gain v.s. voltage at -25°C (circle), 25°C (triangle) and 65°C 
(square) of device 1 (blue symbols) and of device 2 (red symbols).  
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.  Dark count rate v.s. voltage at -25°C (circle), 25°C (triangle) 
and 65°C (square) of device 1 (blue) and of device 2 (red).
130
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 11.  Comparison of the Arrhenius plot of DC measured (symbol) and 
simulated (dotted lines) at constant OV=+3 V (10%) for device 1 (blue) and 
device 2 (red). 
concentration (2×1018/cm3), while device 2 has the epitaxial 
Si concentration value (~1×1015/cm3). Since the Auger effect 
[30] is a relevant recombination mechanism at high dopant 
concentration, a different effective lifetime in the periphery 
of the two devices could explain the lower diffusion current. 
A more careful inspection of the results, supported by our 
electrical simulations, allowed us to obtain a different 
conclusion. The electrical behavior of both devices was 
simulated at different temperatures and reverse bias 
conditions varying the devices physical parameters in the 
three defined region (see Fig. 2). τ0 was varied in the range 
10-7 – 10-3 s and ET in the range 0 – 0.3 eV from to EG/2. 
The simulation shown in Fig. 12 refers to 65 °C since at 
this temperature only the diffusion regime is present. It 
shows the current density distribution of device 1 at  
 
 
OV=+3V. Even if the 2D drift-diffusion simulator can not 
reproduce the exact value of JTOT above BV, i.e., it can not 
simulate the device operation in the Geiger Mode, it gives 
important information. At voltages above the BV, the current 
flows preferentially at the center of the device. This behavior 
was found for all the explored parameter set and for both 
devices, since it is due only to the electrical field distribution. 
Fig. 13 shows the 2D simulation of the electrical field of 
device 1 at 65°C and +3V of OV (same conditions of Fig. 
12). The electrical field at the lateral border is well below the 
junction breakdown value. It is negligible with respect to the 
maximum value in the active region, in which, the field is 
above the value needed for avalanche breakdown. Even if the 
diffusion current in forward bias or in reverse bias at 
voltages below BV has it maximum value at the border of the 
device junction, above BV the probability to trigger an 
avalanche in this region is too low. The results above 
described allowed us to conclude that the large reduction of 
the diffusion current between the two devices, is due to 
differences in the region 1 physical characteristics. The 
simulations do not allow us to obtain information on the dark 
current value above breakdown, but can discriminate 
between the different components of the leakage current 
below 
breakdown. 
It 
should 
be 
reminded 
that 
experimentally, the leakage current below breakdown is due 
to three components: minority carrier diffusion and SHR 
generation in region 1, and perimeter current [31]. Since the 
first two components contribute also to the dark current, the 
main difference between the two reverse bias regimes (below 
and above breakdown) is due to the presence of perimeter 
current below breakdown. In fact, a carrier coming from the 
perimeter has a probability close to zero to trigger an 
avalanche [32]. Moreover, the sum of the first two current 
components is well below the experimentally measured 
value, demonstrating that the leakage current below 
breakdown is entirely dominated by the perimeter 
component. Similar considerations and results hold for 
device 2. 
 
 
Figure 12.  Total current density  distribution (Jtot) at 65°C and at OV=+3V 
of device 1. 
 
Figure 13.   Electrical field distribution at 65°C and at OV=+3V of  
device 1. 
131
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 14 shows the simulated total current density at 65°C 
and at -20V of device 1. 
The simulated DC of Fig. 11 was then obtained 
considering the JTOT value taken in the center of the depletion 
layer in region 1 for V=-20V, as shown by the cut line 1 in 
Fig. 14. Moreover, a uniform triggering probability, Pt, of 
0.35 at OV=+3V was assumed, as calculated in [33] for a 
similar device. In symbols: 
 
DC=AACT×Pt×JTOT /q. 
(4) 
The best fit parameters obtained predict the same τ0 and 
ET for both devices. In region 1, τ0=1ms and the SHR trap 
energy is ET=60 meV below midgap, i.e., 0.54 eV, while in 
region 2 τ0=10 µs and ET=200 meV. 
The lower simulated JTOT in the active area of device 1 
with respect to that of device 2 (not shown) is due to a large 
difference in the diffusion component of the DC for the two 
devices at temperatures higher than 10°C. The simulation 
results are shown in Fig. 11 with the dashed line for device 1 
and solid line for device 2.  
The differences in the diffusion current passing trough 
the p-n junction between the two devices in region 1 at 65° 
must be due to different contribution of the diffusion current 
components. JTOT is the sum of the diffusion electron current 
(Je-) and the diffusion hole current (Jh+) The first is due to 
minority electron carriers diffusing from the p bulk to the n++ 
cathode, the latter is due to the diffusion of minority hole 
carriers from the cathode to the p bulk. The JTOT (squares), Je- 
(continuous line) and Jh+ (dashed line) of device 1 (blue) and 
of device 2 (red) along the cut line 1 of Fig. 14 in the first 2 
µm of depth at 65°C and for a voltage polarization of -20V 
are summarized in Fig. 15. In device 1, JTOT~Je- while in 
device 2 JTOT~Jh+ as shown in Fig. 15. 
The reduction of the Je- current in device 2 is the cause of 
the strong reduction of the diffusion current. In fact, Jh+ is 
the same in both devices being only due to the doping profile 
of the n++ cathode. As discussed in [34], the Je- 
 
 
Figure 14.  Total current density  distribution (Jtot) at 65°C and  at V=-20V 
of  device 1. The current inside the depletied region along the cut line 1 is 
the value cosidered for the DC simulation . 
 
Figure 15.  JTOT (squares), Je- (continuous line) and Jh+ (dashed line) at 
65°C and at -20V along the cut line 1 of fig. 14 of device 1 (blue) and 
device 2 (red). W is the length of the depleted region of the p-n junction. 
decrease in device 2 is mainly due to the doping profile in 
the epitaxial region, shadowed area in Fig. 3. In fact, 
minority carriers in this layer (electrons) have a different 
gradient in their concentration in the substrate direction in 
the two devices. The gradient is higher in device 2 with 
respect to device 1, leading to a diffusion of electrons toward 
the substrate higher than in device 2. As a result, the net 
diffusion current of electron toward the cathode is reduces 
below the hole diffusion current flowing in the opposite 
direction. 
Finally, Fig. 16 shows the comparison of the 
experimental DC (symbols) and the DC simulated without 
SHR generation and recombination (dotted line) at OV=+3 V 
with respect to 1/kT for device 2. The comparison shows that 
at room temperature the experimental DC is close to its 
minimum physical level due to DC diffusion component. It is 
to note that the diffusion process of minority carriers is an 
intrinsic property of p-n junctions and cannot be avoided. In 
device 2, diffusion current has been reduced to its minimum 
value, being dominated by the cathode design. In order to 
achieve a further reduction of the hole diffusion, a different 
architecture must be designed. An improvement of the DC at 
room temperature can be reached reducing the defect 
concentration in the depleted region. We estimated the 
presence of about 1.6±1.3 defects/cm-3 in both devices hence 
a further reduction is a difficult goal to achieve.  
V. 
SIPM PROPERTIES 
In this section, electrical and optical performance of 
SiPM full array are presented and discussed. 
A. Dark count and Cross Talk 
The DC in a SiPM is conventionally defined as the 
frequency of dark pulses exciding half of the amplitude of 
the signal produced by one photo-electron (p.e.) [35]. 
132
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 16.   Comparison of the Arrhenius plot of DC measured (symbols) 
and simulated (dotted lines) without SHR G-R at constant OV=+3 V of 
device 2. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17.  Measured DC at different OV of a 20×20 pixels SiPM as a 
function of the photoelectron signal amplitude threshold. 
Fig. 17 shows the DC measured at room temperature for 
a 20×20 pixels SiPM (the pixel AACT is 40×40 µm2) at 
different OVs, from +1V (diamonds) to +4V (circles) as a 
function of the normalized photo-electron threshold. The DC 
at 0.5 p.e. threshold level varies from 400 kHz to 3 MHz in 
the measured OV range. This value is roughly the DC rate 
due to only one pixel in breakdown, being the contribution of 
two or more pixel in breakdown at the same time to the DC 
rate at least one order of magnitude lower. In fact, at 1.5 p.e. 
threshold level (two pixels in breakdown simultaneously) the 
DC decreases of about three order of magnitudes at the 
lowest OV (∼1 kHz at OV=+1V). The decrease is even more 
pronounced at 2.5 p.e (three pixels in breakdown 
simultaneously), being ∼2 Hz at +1 OV. 
The strong reduction in the DC value from 0.5 p.e. to 1.5 
p.e. is due to different factors. First, the probability of 
simultaneous avalanche in two different pixels is lower than 
the probability of a single count. Moreover, the second pixel 
avalanche may be related to the first pixel one. In fact, there 
is a finite Cross Talk Probability (CP) for each device, 
strongly related to the array layout. The CP can be roughly 
quantified as:  
 
CP = DC1.5
DC0.5
         
       (5) 
where DC0.5 and DC1.5 are the dark count rate at 0.5 and at 
1.5 of the photoelectron signal level threshold. It should be 
stressed that using this approximation two pixels going in 
breakdown simultaneously are considered correlated.  
The effect of the trench presence in the SiPM array is 
clearly visible by the inspection of Fig. 18 a. In fact, in figure 
the dark counts of two SiPM both having 20×20 pixels 
biased to the same OV (+2V) are compared. The red triangles 
are the data obtained from a SiPM with trenches, while the 
blue squares are from a SiPM without trenches around the 
pixels. Despite of the fact that the two devices have the same 
DC for single pixel breakdown, they strongly differ in the 
DC for two pixels in avalanche at the same time, being CP 
0.7% for the device with trenches and 7% for the array 
without trenches. The trenches presence reduces the two 
pixels DC of one order of magnitude.  
The CP probability was measured as a function of the OV 
for the two devices described before and the results are 
summarized in Fig. 18 b. The difference is one order of 
magnitude in the full range of operation. It could be inferred 
that the CP for the array with trenches we measured is 
actually the probability that two uncorrelated single events 
occur at the same time. All the devices discussed from now 
on are arrays with trenches. 
B. Dark current in large device 
The data so far shown in Section IV refers only to the 
best single pixels investigated. Since SiPM are an array of 
pixels, their performances are not exactly the best pixel 
performances multiplied by the number of pixels in the array. 
The dark currents can be worsened by the presence of 
randomly distributed defects that cause a distribution of 
performances around a mean value. The relationship among 
the dark currents in single pixels and in complete SiPM 
arrays can be summarized by the data (points) and 
simulations (lines) compared in Fig. 19 and already reported 
in [36]. We modeled the dark current of a single pixel as: 
 
ID =q(NDef
!
+ APixel
! i
)G      
      (6) 
where q is the elementary charge, NDef is the number of 
carrier generating defects per pixel in the active volume, τ is 
the average time for carrier generation event by one defect, 
133
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

           
 
Figure 18.  (a) Comparison of the dark count rate as a function of the photoelectron signal amplitude treshold and (b) of the cross talk probability vs. 
overvoltage of a 20×20 pixels SiPM with trenches (red closed symbols) and a 20×20 pixels SiPM without trenches (blue open symbols). 
APixel is the single pixel active area, τi is the average time per 
unit area for the intrinsic carrier generation due to diffusion 
from the quasi neutral regions to the active volume, and G is 
the gain. The ID of the overall SiPM devices is simply the 
sum of the currents of single pixels as above modeled, with 
no contribution of extrinsic defects providing high leakage 
paths. In particular, Fig. 19 shows frequency histograms 
comparing the dark currents measured at room temperature 
of single pixels and SiPM arrays for a total of 952 devices at 
OV of 2, 3, and 4 V. The SiPM device contains 4096 pixels, 
so the respective currents of SiPM to single pixel should 
stay in ratio of about 4,000, as actually found. 
To model ID in the present devices, we should observe 
that the term NDef /τ dominates at room temperature [36], 
hence the ID statistics should essentially coincide with the 
NDef statistics. The NDef statistics is a Poisson statistics, hence 
the probability dP to have a DC between ID and ID+dID is: 
 
 
Figure 19.  Probability density as a function of the output current at OV of 
2V, 3V and 4V, for both single pixels and arrays (having 4096 pixels). The 
solid red lines are the model results. 
 
dP
dID
=N exp mID
! ID
2
(ID log(mID / ID ) + (ID " mID )
)
#
$
%
%
&
'
(
(
      
     (7) 
where N is a normalization constant, m2
ID is the statistical 
average of the dark current and σ2
ID  is the variance. In the 
case of the SiPM arrays the same expression holds. Fig. 19 
reports also the model curves, which show a good match 
with the experimental data. The model predicts that the 
combination of statistical parameters σ2
ID /m2
ID should be 
equal to q/τG or 4096× q/τG, for the single pixel and the 
SiPM array, respectively.  
C. SiPM operation under illumination 
Once defined the array performances in dark, measurements 
under a low illumination were carried out. The device was 
biased at +2V OV and the pulsed laser (6ns pulses) light was 
defocused in order to reduce the photon density. The device 
response is summarized in Fig. 20. In particular, Fig. 20a 
shows the persistence signal acquired on the OSC. The signal 
is due to the current spikes provided by one to 6 pixels 
(clearly identified) fired at the same time. More pixels have 
been fired by with a lower probability during the acquisition 
time (about 15 min). The signal width is limited by the 
oscilloscope resolution. This measurement can be made 
quantitative as shown in Fig. 20 b, where counts vs. the 
signal integrated charge (in 20 ns time range) is reported. 
The simultaneous firing of up to 8 pixels has been detected. 
The Gaussian distribution of each peak in Fig. 20 b is a clear 
evidence of the good pixel uniformity in terms of 
performances. Moreover, the distance between the peaks 
provide the information on the array gain [37]. It has been 
estimated as 106 at +2V OV. It should be stressed that the 
light signal, down to one photon count, has been acquired 
using only a digital oscilloscope, hence this device can be 
used without an external amplification circuit.  
 
134
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 20.  (a) Image of a persistence on a digital OSC and (b) charge distribution of the pulses a 20×20 pixels SiPM for a low intensity nano second laser 
light at OV=+2V. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
We reviewed our main results on the study of both single 
pixels and SiPM arrays produced by STMicroelectronics in 
Catania. Our data coupled to an extensive simulation study, 
show that the single pixel technology is close to its ultimate 
physical limit. The DC is dominated by diffusion of minority 
carriers from the cathode for temperatures down to 40°C. At 
lower temperatures, SHR generation is the main DC source. 
The only improvement in the single pixel technology could 
be provided by a further reduction in the defect concentration 
that, up to now, has been estimated to be ~ 1.6±1.3 
defects/cm-3 in the best device. Obviously, the single pixel 
performances have a spread, due to the very low defect 
concentration needed to obtain the “best” device.  
Not all the pixels forming the SiPM array are the “best” 
pixel, their dark current is distributed around a mean value. 
We found that it follows a Poissonian distribution perfectly 
mirroring the defect random distribution on the wafer. 
Hence, SiPM arrays exhibit performances worsened by the 
presence of defects placed according to a Poissonian 
distribution.  
The presence of optical trenches surrounding each pixel 
strongly improves the SiPM performances, reducing the 
cross talk probability of one order of magnitude with respect 
to arrays without trenches.  
The DC of SiPM arrays having the latest pixel design 
technology described at room temperature is in the order of 1 
MHz/mm2 at OV=+3V (~10%), close to that reported by 
other scientists. The CP, thanks to the fabrication of the 
trenches, is lower than 2% till OV=+4V (~15%), the lowest 
value, to our knowledge, reported in literature. 
Finally, we have shown that these devices can be used as 
single photon counters also without a complex amplification 
stage. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This 
work 
has 
been 
partially 
funded 
by 
STMicroelectronics and by the national project MIUR-PON 
“Hyppocrates – Sviluppo di Micro e Nano-Tecnologie e 
Sistemi Avanzati per la Salute dell’uomo” (PON02 00355). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Pagano et al., “Improvement of the diffusive component of 
dark current in SiPM pixels”, The Third International 
Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications, 
SENSORDEVICES 2012, ISBN: 978-1-61208-208-0. 
[2] M. D. Eisaman, J. Fan, A. Migdall, and S. V. Polyakov, 
“Invited 
Review 
Article: 
Single-photon 
sources 
and 
detectors”, Rev. Sci. Instrum., vol. 82, no. 071101, 2011, pp. 
1-25. 
[3] D. Renker and E. Lorenz, “Advances in solid state state 
photon detectors”, Journ. Instrum., vol. 4, no. P04004, 2009, 
pp. 1–56. 
[4] T. Iijima, “Status and perspectives of vacuum-based photon 
detectors”, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. 639, 
no. 1, 2011, pp. 137–143. 
[5] J. C. Campbell et al., “Recent Advances in Avalanche 
Photodiodes”, IEEE Journ. Selec. Topic Quant. Electr., vol. 
10, no. 4, 2004, pp. 777-788. 
[6] G. Bondarenko, B. Dolgoshein, V. Golovin, Ilyin, R. Klanner, 
and E. Popova, “Limited Geiger-mode silicon photodiode 
with very high gain”, Nucl. Phys. B Proc. Suppl., vol. 61 B, 
1998, pp. 347-352. 
[7] P. Buzhan et al., “Silicon photomultiplier and its possible 
applications,” Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res. A, vol. 504, 
no. 1–3, 2003, pp. 48–52. 
[8] N. Otte et al., “The Potential of SiPM as Phototn Detector in 
Astroparticle Physics Experiments like MAGIC and EUSO”, 
Nucl. Phys. B Proc. Suppl., vol. 150, 2006, pp. 144-149. 
[9] V. D. Kovaltchouk, G.J. Lolos, Z. Papandreou, and K. 
Wolbaum, “Comparison of a silicon photomultiplier to a 
traditional vacuum photomultiplier” Nucl. Instrum. Meth. 
Phys. Res. A, vol. 538, no. 1–3, 2005, pp. 408–415. 
135
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[10] B. Dolgoshein, et al. “Status report on silicon photomultiplier 
development and its applications”, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. 
Res. A, vol. 563, 2006, pp. 368-376. 
[11] D. Renker, “Geiger-mode avalanche photodiodes, history, 
properties and problems”, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res. A, 
vol. 567, no.1, 2006, pp. 48-56. 
[12] S. Cova, A. Lacaita, and G. Ripamonti, “Trapping 
Phenomena in Avalanche Photodiodes on Nanosecond Scale” 
IEEE Electr. Dev. Lett., vol. 12, 1991, pp. 685-687. 
[13] M. Ghioni, A. Gulinatti, I. Rech, F. Zappa, and S. Cova, 
“Progress in Silicon Single-Photon Avalanche Diodes”, IEEE 
Jour. Sel. Top. Quant. Electr.,vol. 13, no. 4, 2007, pp. 852-
862.  
[14] B. F. Aull et al., ”Geiger-Mode Avalanche Photodiode for 
Three Dimensional Imaging”, Lincoln Lab. Jour., vol. 12, no. 
2, 2002, pp. 335-350. 
[15] E. Sciacca et al., “Silicon Planar Technology for Single-
Photon Optical Detectors”, IEEE Trans. Electr. Dev., vol. 50, 
2003, pp. 918-925. 
[16] F. Zappa, S. Tisa, A. Tosi, and S. Cova, “Principles and 
features of single-photon avalanche diode arrays” Sensors and 
Actuators A, vol. 140, 2007, pp. 103-112. 
[17] W. G. Oldham, R. R. Samuelson, and P. Antognetti, 
“Triggering Phenomena in Avalanche Diode”, ”, IEEE Trans. 
Electr. Dev., vol. 19, no. 9, 1972, pp. 1056-1060. 
[18] S. Cova, M. Ghioni, A. Lacaita, C. Samori, and F. Zappa, 
“Avalanche phototdiodes and quenching circuits for single-
photon detection”, Appl. Opt., vol. 35, no. 12, 1996, pp. 
1956-1976. 
[19] A. Lacaita, F. Zappa, S. Bigliardi, and M. Manfredi, “On the 
bremsstrahlung origin of hot-carrier-induced photons in 
silicon devices”, IEEE Trans. Electr. Dev., vol. 40, no. 3, 
1993, pp. 577-582. 
[20] J. Briare and K. S. Krisch., “Principles of Substrate Crosstalk 
generation in CMOS circuits”, IEEE Trans. Comp. Aided 
Des. Integr. Circ. And Sys., vol. 19, no. 6, 2000, pp. 645-653. 
[21] O. Mineev et al.,” Scintillator counters with multi-pixel 
avalanche photodiode readout for the ND280 detector of the 
T2K experiment”, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res. A, vol. 
577, no. 3, 2007, pp. 540-551. 
[22] M. Danilov,” Novel photo-detectors and photo-detector 
systems”, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res. A, vol. 604, no. 1-
2, 2009, pp. 183-189. 
[23] M. Mazzillo et al., “Silicon Photomultiplier Technology st 
STMicroelectronics”, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 56, 2009, 
pp. 2434-2442. 
[24] E. Sciacca et al., “Arrays of Geiger Mode Avalanche 
Photodiodes”, IEEE Phot. Tech. Lett., vol. 18, no. 15, 2006, 
pp. 1633-1635. 
[25] [Online 13.06.2013]. Available at http://www.silvaco.com. 
[26] W. Shockley, “The Theory of p-n Junction in Semiconductors 
and p-n Junction Transistors”, Bell Sys. Tech. Jour., vol. 48, 
1949, pp. 435-489. 
[27] W. N. Grant, “Electron and Hole Ionization Rates in Epitaxial 
Silicon at High Electric Fields”, Solid-State Electr., vol. 16, 
1973, pp. 1189-1203. 
[28] R. Pagano et al., “Dark Current in Silicon Photomultiplier 
Pixels: Data and Model”, IEEE Trans. Electr. Dev., vol. 59, 
no. 9, 2012, pp. 2410-2416. 
[29] W. J. Kindt and H. W. van Zeijl, “Modelling and Fabrication 
of Geiger mode Avalanche Photodiodes”, IEEE Trans. Nucl. 
Sci., vol. 45, no. 3, 1998, pp. 715-719. 
[30] L. Passari and E. Susi, “Recombination mechanisms and 
doping density in silicon”, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 54, no. 7, 1983, 
pp 3935-3937. 
[31] A. Poyai, E. Simeon, C. Claeys, and A. Czerwinski, “Silicon 
substrate effects on the current-voltage characteristics of 
advanced p-n junction”, Mat. Sci. Eng. B, vol. 73, no. 1-3, 
2000, pp. 191-196. 
[32] J. C. Jackson, P. K. Hurley, B. Lane, and A. Mathewson, 
“Comparing leakage currents and dark counts rate in Geiger-
mode avalanche photodiodes”, App. Phys. Lett., vol. 80, no. 
22, 2002, pp. 4100-4102. 
[33] M. Mazzillo et al., “Quantum Detection Efficiency In Geiger 
Mode Avalanche Photodiode,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 
55, no. 6, 2008, pp. 3620–3625. 
[34] R. Pagano et al., “Silicon photomultiplier device architecture 
with dark current improved to the ultimate physical limit”, 
App. Phys. Lett., vol. 102, no. 183502, 2013, pp. 1-4. 
[35] P. Finocchiaro et al., “Characterization of a novel 100-
channel silicon photomultiplier – part I: noise”, IEEE Trans. 
Electr. Dev., vol. 55, no. 10, 2008, pp. 2757-2764. 
[36] R. Pagano et al., “Silicon Photomultipliers: Dark Current and 
its Statistical Spread”, Sensors & Transducers Journal, vol. 
14, no. 1, 2012, pp. 151-159. 
[37] P. Finocchiaro et al., “Characterization of a novel 100-
channel silicon photomultiplier – part II: Charge and Time”, 
IEEE Trans. Electr. Dev., vol. 55, no. 10, 2008, pp. 2765-
2773. 
 
 
136
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

