124
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Investigating Different Ballistic Threats to Validate the Simulation Model  
 
of Fiber-Reinforced Plastics  
Experimental Model Validation of Fiber Composites Under Ballistic Impact 
 
Arash Ramezani and Hendrik Rothe 
Chair of Measurement and Information Technology 
University of the Federal Armed Forces  
Hamburg, Germany 
Email: ramezani@hsu-hh.de, rothe@hsu-hh.de 
 
 
Abstract—In the security sector, the partly insufficient safety of 
people and equipment due to failure of industrial components 
is an ongoing problem that causes great concern. Since 
computers and software have spread into all fields of industry, 
extensive efforts are currently made to improve the safety by 
applying certain numerical solutions. A fibre-reinforced 
composite is a promising material for ballistic protection due 
to its high strength, stiffness and low density. The use of ultra-
high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMW-PE) composite as 
part of the personal armour system has the potential to provide 
significant weight savings or improved protection levels over 
traditional metallic materials. Although already used in 
different applications, both as spall liners and within complex 
multi-element/multi-material packages, there is a limited 
understanding 
of 
the 
mechanisms 
driving 
ballistic 
performance. Existing analysis tools do not allow a good 
approximation of performance, while existing numerical 
models are either incapable of accurately capturing the 
response of thick UHMW-PE composite to ballistic impact or 
are unsuited to model thick targets. In response, this paper 
aims to identify the key penetration and failure mechanisms of 
thick UHMW-PE composites under ballistic impact and 
develop analytical and numerical models that capture these 
mechanisms and allow accurate prediction of ballistic 
performance to optimize modern armour systems. An analysis 
methodology is proposed to model the behaviour of thick 
UHMW-PE composite panels under ballistic impact using 
inhomogeneities on the macroscale. A sub-laminate approach 
for discretisation of the target is proposed to overcome the 
problems of premature through-thickness failure in the 
material model. The methodology was extensively validated 
against existing experimental ballistic impact data and results 
for UHMW-PE targets. Finally, a numerical modelling 
methodology was developed for the analysis of thick UHMW-
PE composite under ballistic impact. 
Keywords-generally valid simulation models; hydrocode 
analysis; fiber-reinforced plastics; optimization; armor systems; 
ballistic trials. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
For thousands of years, natural materials had formed the 
basis of human existence: clothing, tools, and articles of 
consumption, all were made from leather, metal, stone, clay, 
or other substances obtained directly from nature. In 
contrast, most of the manmade materials such as porcelain, 
glass, and metal alloys were discovered more or less by 
accident. At the beginning of the twentieth century, 
dwindling deposits of important resources and their 
escalating prices triggered off an intensive search for 
synthetic, or manmade, substitute materials. The demand 
from the fast-growing industries was increasing in line with 
fundamental technical changes and could no longer be 
satisfied with natural materials alone. In time, countless 
compounds, including a high number of plastics, were 
synthesized from naturally occurring raw materials such as 
coal, coal tar, crude oil, and natural gas.  
The object behind combining different materials to form 
a composite with enhanced properties and synergetic effects 
is par for the course in nature. A section through a 
paracortical cell in merino wool or through a bamboo stems 
exhibits structures similar to the micrograph of a 
unidirectional carbon-fibre-reinforced epoxy resin (CF-EP). 
Not only in the microstructure can nature be seen as the 
progenitor of fibre-reinforced plastics, but also in the 
application of lightweight design principles.  
Why material scientists integrate fibers in materials to 
such advantage can be answered by the following four 
paradoxes of engineering materials:  
• 
The paradox of the solid material: The actual 
strength of a solid material is very much lower than the 
calculated theoretical value. 
• 
The paradox of the fiber form: The strength of a 
material in fiber form is many times higher than that of the 
same material in another form, and the thinner the fiber, the 
greater the strength. 
• 
The paradox of the free clamped length: The 
shorter the length between the clamps, the greater the 
strength measured on the test piece. 
• 
The paradox of composites: When taken as a 
whole, a composite can withstand stresses that would 
fracture the weaker component, whereas the composite’s 
stronger component can exhibit a greater percentage of its 
theoretical strength than when loaded singly. 
So, the principle of combining different materials to 
form a composite with enhanced properties is just as 

125
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
common in nature as it is in lightweight engineering. This 
design method based on nature’s example has virtually 
revolutionized many fields of technology, with the result 
that they can now utilize the superior properties of high-
tensile, lightweight materials for the first time. 
This work will focus on fiber-reinforced plastics, more 
precisely composite armor structures consisting of several 
layers of ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene 
(UHMW-PE), a promising ballistic armor material due to its 
high specific strength and stiffness. First approaches are 
discussed in detail in [1]. 
UHMW-PE is a thermoplastic polymer made from very 
long molecular chains of polyethylene. Thermoplastics 
soften when subjected to heat and so can be repeatedly 
remoulded. Cut-offs can be remelted and introduced back 
into the production process. Many thermoplastics are 
soluble in organic solvents. Thermoplastics can be joined by 
welding under the application of heat or by the action of 
solvents [2]. 
Figure 1 shows the chemical structure of polyethylene, 
where in UHMW-PE the number of repeated chains (n) is in 
the order of 105, giving rise to molecular weights in the 
order of 106 [3]. As a non-polar molecule, interaction 
between polyethylene molecules is given by very weak Van 
der Waals forces.  
However, due to the ultra-long polymer chain, 
significant strength can be derived through a gel spinning 
process that produces highly oriented and crystalline 
molecular structures aligned in the spinning direction. The 
gel spinning process firstly involves dissolving UHMW-PE 
in a solvent at high temperature. The solution is then pushed 
through a spinneret to form liquid filament that is then 
quenched in water to form gel-fibers. These fibers are then 
drawn in hot air at high strain rates of the order of 1 s-1 
forming 
fibers 
with 
smooth 
circular 
cross-sections 
approximately 17 mm in diameter [4] with a molecular 
orientation greater than 95% and a crystallinity of up to 85% 
[3], see Figure 2. 
 
Figure 1.  Skeletal formula and spacefill model of a polyethylene. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Increase in molecular orientation and crystallinity through gel 
spinning of UHMW-PE [5]. 
These fibers are composed of smaller macro-fibrils 
approximately 0.5 mm to 2 mm in diameter, which in turn 
are made of micro-fibrils, 20 nm in diameter. Commercial 
UHMW-PE fiber is manufactured by, amongst others, 
Dutch State Mines (DSM) and Honeywell under the trade 
names Dyneema® and Spectra®, respectively. The fibers are 
used in a variety of applications requiring high specific 
strength and low weight. This includes high strength ropes 
and nets, cut-resistant gloves, as well as blast and ballistic 
protection. 
For ballistic protection applications, the fibers can be 
woven into fabrics to provide a soft and flexible material or 
coated in a matrix and aligned to form uni-directional plies, 
which are then stacked and pressed under temperature and 
pressure to form rigid laminates. 
UHMW-PE composites and fabrics have been shown to 
be extremely effective against ballistic threats, particularly 
in weight-critical applications, e.g., personal protection 
vests and helmets for protection against small calibre threats 
[6]. The goal is to evaluate the ballistic efficiency of 
UHMW-PE 
composite 
with 
numerical 
simulations, 
promoting an effective development process.  
Due to the fact that all engineering simulation is based 
on geometry to represent the design, the target and all its 
components are simulated as computer-aided design (CAD) 
models. The work will also provide a brief overview of 
ballistic tests to offer some basic knowledge of the subject, 
serving as a basis for the comparison of the simulation 
results. Details of ballistic trials on composite armor 
systems are presented. Instead of running expensive trials, 
numerical simulations should identify vulnerabilities of 
structures. Contrary to the experimental result, numerical 
methods allow easy and comprehensive studying of all 
mechanical parameters. Modelling will also help to 
understand how the armor schemes behave during impact 

126
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and how the failure processes can be controlled to our 
advantage. By progressively changing the composition of 
several layers and the material thickness, the composite 
armor will be optimized.  
There is every reason to expect possible weight savings 
and a significant increase in protection, through the use of 
numerical techniques combined with a small number of 
physical experiments. 
This work deals with numerical simulations of impact 
problems on fiber-based composite armor using the 
commercial finite-element-code 
ANSYS 
AUTODYN. 
Having presented some basic knowledge on the theory of 
numerical simulation in 
AUTODYN, 
two 
recently 
published approaches for modelling impact on the selected 
composite (Dyneema® HB26) are explained. While both of 
them make use of a nonlinear-orthotropic material model 
implemented in the AUTODYN-code, they differ in the way 
how the highly inhomogeneous microstructure of HB26 is 
represented geometrically. The first approach chooses a 
fully homogeneous description, whereas the other approach 
discretizes the composite into sublaminates, which are 
kinematically joined at the surfaces and breakable when a 
certain contact-stress is reached. They will be discussed in 
detail in Section III. In order to validate the two approaches, 
the response of HB26-samples impacted by handgun-
projectiles was determined experimentally and compared to 
the corresponding numerical results. Unfortunately, a poor 
agreement between experimental and numerical results was 
found, which gave rise to the development of an alternative 
modelling approach. In doing so, the composite was 
subdivided into alternating layers of two different types. 
While the first type of layers was modeled with open-
literature properties of UHMW-PE-fibers, polymer-matrix-
behavior was assigned to the second type. Having adjusted 
some of the parameters, good agreement between 
experiment and simulation was found with respect to 
residual velocity and depth of penetration for the considered 
impact situations.  
After a brief introduction and description of the 
principles of simulation in Section II, state-of-the-art models 
of fiber-reinforced plastics are discussed in Section III. 
There is a short section on ballistic trials where the 
experimental set-up is depicted, followed by Section V 
describing the model validation. Section VI presents the 
analysis with numerical simulations and the results of this 
work. The paper ends with a concluding paragraph in 
Section VII and an outlook in Section VIII. 
II. 
PRINCIPLES OF SIMULATION 
To deal with problems involving the release of a large 
amount of energy over a very short period of time, e.g., 
explosions and impacts, there are three approaches: as the 
problems are highly non-linear and require information 
regarding material behavior at ultra-high loading rates 
which is generally not available, most of the work is 
experimental and thus may cause tremendous expenses. 
Analytical approaches are possible if the geometries 
involved are relatively simple and if the loading can be 
described through boundary conditions, initial conditions or 
a combination of the two. Numerical solutions are far more 
general in scope and remove any difficulties associated with 
geometry [7]. They apply an explicit method and use very 
small time steps for stable results. 
For problems of dynamic fluid-structure interaction and 
impact, there typically is no single best numerical method 
which is applicable to all parts of a problem. Techniques to 
couple types of numerical solvers in a single simulation can 
allow the use of the most appropriate solver for each domain 
of the problem.  
The goal of this paper is to evaluate a hydrocode, a 
computational tool for modelling the behavior of continuous 
media. In its purest sense, a hydrocode is a computer code 
for modelling fluid flow at all speeds [8]. For that reason, a 
structure will be split into a number of small elements. The 
elements are connected through their nodes (see Figure 3). 
The behavior (deflection) of the simple elements is well-
known and may be calculated and analyzed using simple 
equations called shape functions [9].  
By applying coupling conditions between the elements at 
their nodes, the overall stiffness of the structure may be built 
up and the deflection/distortion of any node – and 
subsequently of the whole structure – can be calculated 
approximately [10].  
A repeatedly used term in this context will be 
discretization. Its meaning is that equations, formulated to 
continuously describe a function or functional in space and 
time, is solved only at certain discrete locations and instants 
of time [11]. The most commonly used spatial discretization 
methods are Lagrange, Euler, ALE (a mixture of Lagrange 
and Euler), and mesh-free methods, such as Smooth Particles 
Hydrodynamics (SPH) [12].  
A. Lagrange 
The Lagrange method of space discretization uses a mesh 
that moves and distorts with the material it models as a result 
of forces from neighboring elements (meshes are imbedded 
in material). There is no grid required for the external space, 
as the conservation of mass is automatically satisfied and 
material boundaries are clearly defined. This is the most 
efficient solution methodology with an accurate pressure 
history definition.  
The 
Lagrange 
method is 
most 
appropriate for 
representing solids, such as structures and projectiles. If 
however, there is too much deformation of any element, it 
results in a very slowly advancing solution and is usually 
terminated because the smallest dimension of an element 
results in a time step that is below the threshold level. 
 
Figure 3.  Example grid. 

127
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
  
B. Euler 
The Euler (multi-material) solver utilizes a fixed mesh, 
allowing materials to flow (advect) from one element to the 
next (meshes are fixed in space). Therefore, an external 
space needs to be modeled. Due to the fixed grid, the Euler 
method avoids problems of mesh distortion and tangling that 
are prevalent in Lagrange simulations with large flows. The 
Euler solver is very well-suited for problems involving 
extreme material movement, such as fluids and gases. To 
describe solid behavior, additional calculations are required 
to transport the solid stress tensor and the history of the 
material through the grid. Euler is generally more 
computationally intensive than Lagrange and requires a 
higher resolution (smaller elements) to accurately capture 
sharp pressure peaks that often occur with shock waves.  
C. ALE  
The ALE method of space discretization is a hybrid of 
the Lagrange and Euler methods. It allows redefining the 
grid continuously in arbitrary and predefined ways as the 
calculation 
proceeds, 
which 
effectively 
provides 
a 
continuous rezoning facility. Various predefined grid 
motions can be specified, such as free (Lagrange), fixed 
(Euler), equipotential, equal spacing, and others. The ALE 
method can model solids as well as liquids. The advantage of 
ALE is the ability to reduce and sometimes eliminate 
difficulties caused by severe mesh distortions encountered by 
the Lagrange method, thus allowing a calculation to continue 
efficiently. However, compared to Lagrange, an additional 
computational step of rezoning is employed to move the grid 
and remap the solution onto a new grid [13].  
D. SPH 
The mesh-free Lagrangian method of space discretization 
(or SPH method) is a particle-based solver and was initially 
used in astrophysics. The particles are imbedded in material 
and they are not only interacting mass points but also 
interpolation points used to calculate the value of physical 
variables based on the data from neighboring SPH particles, 
scaled by a weighting function. Because there is no grid 
defined, distortion and tangling problems are avoided as 
well. Compared to the Euler method, material boundaries 
and interfaces in the SPH are rather well defined and 
material separation is naturally handled. Therefore, the SPH 
solver is ideally suited for certain types of problems with 
extensive material damage and separation, such as cracking. 
This type of response often occurs with brittle materials and 
hypervelocity impacts. However, mesh-free methods, such as 
Smooth Particles Hydrodynamics, can be less efficient than 
mesh-based 
Lagrangian 
methods 
with 
comparable 
resolution. 
ANSYS Autodyn lets you select from these different 
solver technologies so he most effective solver can be used 
for a given part of the model. Figure 4 gives a short overview 
of the solver technologies mentioned above. The crucial 
factor is the grid that causes different outcomes.  
 
Figure 4.  Examples of Lagrange, Euler, ALE, and SPH simulations on an 
impact problem [14]. 
  
Using a CAD-neutral environment that supports 
bidirectional, direct, and associative interfaces with CAD 
systems, the geometry can be optimized successively [17]. 
Therefore, several runs are necessary: from modelling to 
calculation to the evaluation and subsequent improvement 
of the model (see Figure 5). 
AUTODYN’s interaction logic enables automatic 
communication between the various solvers coexisting 
within the same model. Lagrange-Lagrange, SPH-Lagrange 
and Euler-Lagrange interactions can all be created within 
the model in a simple and intuitive manner. This allows 
fluid structure interactions to be simulated. Furthermore, it 
can be combined with AUTODYN’s extensive remapping 
and dezoning capabilities between the different solvers and 
a wide range of erosion settings. It is also possible to retain 
inertia of eroded material. In this case, the mass and 
momentum of the free node is retained and can be involved 
in subsequent impact events to transfer momentum in the 
system. 
 
Figure 5.  Basically iterative procedure of a FE analysis [15]. 

128
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
III. 
STATE-OF-THE-ART 
The numerical modelling of composite materials under 
impact can be performed at a constituent level (i.e., explicit 
modelling of fiber and matrix elements, e.g., [9]), a meso-
mechanical level (i.e., consolidated plies or fiber bundles, 
e.g., [10]), or macromechanically in which the composite 
laminate is represented as a continuum.  
In [11–14] a non-linear orthotropic continuum material 
model was developed and implemented in a commercial 
hydrocode (i.e., ANSYS AUTODYN) for application with 
aramid and carbon fiber composites under hypervelocity 
impact. The non-linear orthotropic material model includes 
orthotropic coupling of the material volumetric and 
deviatoric responses, a non-linear equation of state (EoS), 
orthotropic hardening, combined stress failure criteria and 
orthotropic energy-based softening. For more detail refer to 
[15]. Lässig et al. [16] conducted extensive experimental 
characterization of Dyneema® HB26 UHMW-PE composite 
for application in the continuum non-linear orthotropic 
material model, and validated the derived material 
parameters through simulation of spherical projectile 
impacts at hypervelocity.  
A number of researchers have applied the non-linear 
orthotropic model for UHMW-PE composites with varying 
levels of success (Hayhurst et al. [17], Herlaar et al. [18], 
Ong et al. [19], Heisserer and Van der Werff [20] and 
Lässig et al. [16]). Ong et al. [19] assumed material 
properties of UHMW-PE composite based on those of 
Kevlar® with some data from literature, which resulted in 
poor predictions of the penetration behaviour. Hayhurst et 
al. [17], Herlaar et al. [18] and Heisserer and Van der Werff 
[20] used material input parameters derived from a range of 
experiments, and reported better prediction, although the 
results cannot be independently verified because the 
material parameters are not provided. 
Nguyen et al. [21] evaluated and refined the modelling 
approach and material model parameter set developed in 
[16] for the simulation of impact events from 400 m/s to 
6600 m/s. Across this velocity range the sensitivity of the 
numerical output is driven by different aspects of the 
material model, e.g., the strength model in the ballistic 
regime and the equation of state (EoS) in the hypervelocity 
regime. 
This paper will present an optimized solution of this 
problem with an enhanced model for ultra-high molecular 
weight polyethylene under impact loading. For the first 
time, composite armor structures consisting of several layers 
of fiber-reinforced plastics are simulated for all current 
military threats. 
IV. 
BALLISTIC TRIALS 
Ballistics is an essential component for the evaluation of 
our results. Here, terminal ballistics is the most important 
sub-field. It describes the interaction of a projectile with its 
target. Terminal ballistics is relevant for both small and 
large caliber projectiles. The task is to analyze and evaluate 
the impact and its various modes of action. This will 
provide information on the effect of the projectile and the 
extinction risk.  
Historically, impact events are classified according to 
the impact velocity. One such approach was proposed by 
Zukas et al. [22] who categorised impact problems based on 
impact velocity, where the material response and established 
strain rate characterised the impact problem. Figure 6 
depicts the strain rate, the impact velocity required to 
achieve the strain rate and the material effects as proposed 
by Zukas et al. [22]. 
Under this classical approach, the ballistic regime could 
be considered to be within the strain rate range of 102 s-1 to 
104 s-1, which corresponds to an impact velocity of between 
50 m/s to 3000 m/s. Beyond 4000 m/s (depending on the 
materials), an impact will lead to a complete break-up and 
melting of the projectile. According to Zukas et al. [22], 
within this region the material strength is important in 
resisting penetration, and there is an onset of hydrodynamic 
effects. This approach to define the impact regime using the 
strain rate is insufficient when considering the impact 
behaviour for a diverse range of materials with different 
properties. For example, very low velocity impact of a hard 
object into a fluid can be described entirely using 
hydrodynamic theory, which under Figure 6 would be 
classified as both a low strain rate (low velocity) and high 
strain rate (hydrodynamic effects) problem.  
On the other hand, Wilbeck (in [23]) proposed 
classification by the ratio of the impact pressure (P) to the 
material strength (S).  
P/Sp and P/St 

where subscripts p is the projectile and t is the target. The 
pressure, P, according to hydrodynamic theory is given by:  
P  V2

where  is material density and V is the impact velocity. 
From this, impact events can be classified in nine different 
regimes, depicted in matrix form in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 6.  Impact response of high strength materials [22]. 

129
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 7.  Matrix of impact regime [23]. The ballistic regimes are shaded. 
The ballistic regime is considered to reside in regime 2, 
4, 5, 6, and 8 according to Figure 7, where the impact 
pressure is close to the material strength of the target, 
projectile or both. For this paper, regime 5, 6 and 8 are of 
interest because at impact velocities typical of FSPs and 
projectiles, the impact pressures are considered to be on the 
order of, or greater than the strength of UHMW-PE 
composite. 
Given that a projectile strikes a target, compressive 
waves propagate into both the projectile and the target. 
Relief waves propagate inward from the lateral free surfaces 
of the penetrator, cross at the centerline, and generate a high 
tensile stress. If the impact was normal, we would have a 
two-dimensional stress state. If the impact was oblique, 
bending stresses will be generated in the penetrator. When 
the compressive wave reached the free surface of the target, 
it would rebound as a tensile wave. The target may fracture 
at this point. The projectile may change direction if it 
perforates (usually towards the normal of the target surface).    
Because of the differences in target behavior based on the 
proximity of the distal surface, we must categorize targets 
into four broad groups. A semi-infinite target is one where 
there is no influence of distal boundary on penetration. A 
thick target is one in which the boundary influences 
penetration after the projectile is some distance into the 
target. An intermediate thickness target is a target where the 
boundaries exert influence throughout the impact. Finally, a 
thin target is one in which stress or deformation gradients are 
negligible throughout the thickness. 
There are several methods by which a target will fail 
when subjected to an impact. The major variables are the 
target and penetrator material properties, the impact velocity, 
the projectile shape (especially the ogive), the geometry of 
the target supporting structure, and the dimensions of the 
projectile and target. 
In order to develop a numerical model, a ballistic test 
program is necessary. The ballistic trials are thoroughly 
documented and analyzed – even fragments must be 
collected. They provide information about the used armor 
and the projectile behavior after fire, which must be 
consistent with the simulation results. 
In order to create a data set for the numerical simulations, 
several experiments have to be performed. Ballistic tests are 
recorded with high-speed videos and analyzed afterwards. 
Testing was undertaken at an indoor ballistic testing facility. 
The target stand provides support behind the target on all 
four sides. Every ballistic test program includes several trials 
with different composites. The set-up has to remain 
unchanged.  
 The camera system is a PHANTOM v1611 that provides 
the versatility and flexibility needed in a variety of 
applications. With the proprietary widescreen CMOS sensor, 
the v1611 can acquire and save up to 16 gigapixels-per-
second of data. That means at its full megapixel resolution of 
1280×800, it can achieve 16,000 frames-per-second (fps). At 
reduced resolutions, the v1611 offers frame rates of 646,000 
fps. With an internal mechanical shutter, the black frame can 
be obtained by simply closing the shutter. No physical access 
to the camera is needed. Ease-of-Use features include 
common signal connections which are conveniently located 
on its back panel, and include connections for timecode, dual 
power inputs, HD-SDI, a GPS input, frame synchronization, 
and trigger.  
The use of a polarizer and a neutral density filter is 
advisable, so that waves of some polarizations can be 
blocked while the light of a specific polarization can be 
passed. 
Several targets of different laminate configurations were 
tested to assess the ballistic limit (V50). The ballistic limit is 
considered the velocity required for a particular projectile to 
reliably (at least 50% of the time) penetrate a particular piece 
of material [24]. After the impact, the projectile is examined 
regarding any kind of change it might have undergone.  
V. 
MODEL VALIDATION 
Experimental 
characterisation 
of 
the 
ballistic 
performance of UHMW-PE composite can be prohibitively 
expensive, 
so 
it 
is 
highly 
desirable 
to 
establish 
computationally efficient numerical models that accurately 
predict the ballistic response of the material. First, existing 
models should be validated. 
A. Resources 
In [16], numerical simulations of 15 kg/m2 Dyneema® 
HB26 panels impacted by 6 mm diameter aluminum spheres 
between 2052 m/s to 6591 m/s were shown to provide very 
good agreement with experimental measurements of the 
panel ballistic limit and residual velocities, see Figure 8. The 
modelling approach and material parameter set from [16] 
were applied to simulate impact experiments at velocities in 
the ballistic regime (here considered as < 1000 m/s). 
Lambert-Jonas parameters (a, p, Vbl) are provided in the 
legend.  
In Figure 8, the results of modelling impact of 20 mm 
fragment simulating projectiles (FSPs) against 10 mm thick 
Dyneema® HB26 are shown. The model shows a significant 
under prediction of the ballistic limit, 236 m/s compared to 
394 m/s. 

130
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 8.  Experimental and numerical impact residual velocity results for 
impact of 6 mm diameter aluminum spheres against 15 kg/m2 Dyneema® 
HB26 at normal incidence (left) and impact of 20 mm FSP against 10 mm 
thick HB26 at normal incidence (right). 
B. Method 
The FSP material was modelled as Steel S-7 from the 
AUTODYN library using a linear EoS and the Johnson-
Cook strength model [25]. The aluminum sphere was 
modelled using AL1100-O from the AUTODYN library that 
uses a shock EoS and the Steinburg Guinan strength model 
[26]. The master-slave contact algorithm was used to detect 
contact between the target and projectile. 
The sub-laminate model with shock EoS was applied to 
the aluminum sphere hypervelocity impact series and 20 mm 
FSP ballistic impact series presented in Figure 8, the results 
of which are shown in Figure 9.  
The sub-laminate model is shown to provide a significant 
improvement in predicting the experimental V50 of 394 m/s 
for the FSP ballistic impacts (377 m/s) compared to the 
monolithic model (236 m/s).  
The ballistic limit and residual velocity predicted with the 
sub-laminate model for the hypervelocity impact case are 
shown to be comparable with the original monolithic model. 
For conditions closer to the ballistic limit, the sub-laminate 
model is shown to predict increased target resistance (i.e., 
lower residual velocity). For higher overmatch conditions, 
there is some small variance between the two approaches. 
Now, regarding common handgun projectiles, the results 
look sobering. As the most widespread weapon in the world, 
the Kalashnikov rifle (AK-47) is a good example to compare 
ballistic trials and simulation results.  A 7.62×39 mm full 
metal jacket (FMJ) projectile with a velocity of 700 m/s is 
used and the model is shown in Figure 3.  
In Figure 10, a qualitative assessment of the bulge 
formation is made for the 11 mm panel. Prediction of bulge 
development is important as it is characteristic of the 
material wave speed and is also a key measure in defence 
applications, particularly in personal armour systems (i.e., 
vests and helmets). In the ballistic experiments, the 11 mm 
target panel resists the 7.62×39 mm FMJ projectile. But in 
both models, material fails and the projectile penetrates the 
plate. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Comparison of the experimental results with the two numerical 
models for impact of 20 mm FSP against 10 mm thick Dyneema HB26® at 
normal incidence (left) , and impact of 6 mm diameter aluminium spheres 
against 15 kg/m2 HB26 at normal incidence (right).  

131
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 10.  Bulge of a 11 mm target impact by a 7.62×39 mm FMJ 
projectile at 689 m/s (experiment) and the simulation results using both 
“state-of-the-art” models of Lässig and Nguyen 700 m/s. 
There is no accurate reproduction of the bulge. The 
problem is a neglect of micro-structures. Fraction and 
fragmentation between the laminate layers cannot be 
described by homogeneous continuum models. These 
disadvantages are addressed in a very new and more 
representative model. 
VI. 
NUMERICAL SIMULATION 
As mentioned before, the ballistic tests are followed by 
computational modelling of the experimental set-up. Then, 
the experiment is reproduced using numerical simulations. 
Figure 3 shows a cross-section of the projectile and a CAD 
model. The geometry and observed response of the laminate 
to ballistic impact is approximately symmetric to the axis 
through the bullet impact point.   
Numerical simulation of modern armor structures 
requires the selection of appropriate material models for the 
constituent materials and the derivation of suitable material 
model input data. The laminate system studied here is an 
ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene composite. Lead 
and copper are also required for the projectiles.  
The projectile was divided into different parts - the jacket 
and the base - which have different properties and even 
different meshes. These elements have quadratic shape 
functions and nodes between the element edges. In this way, 
the computational accuracy, as well as the quality of curved 
model shapes increases. Using the same mesh density, the 
application of parabolic elements leads to a higher accuracy 
compared to linear elements (1st order elements). 
Modelling of fiber-reinforced composites under impact 
is challenging because of the complexity of the material 
composition and the many failure modes it exhibits at 
different scales (fibrillation, intra- and inter-laminar failure, 
etc.) and impact regimes. For this reason, numerical 
simulation of impact using hydrocodes was exclusively 
performed for isotropic materials up until the late 1990’s. 
Since then, there have been many advances in modelling 
composites brought about by the introduction of more 
accurate constitutive models and modelling techniques. In 
general, fiber-reinforced composites can be modelled at 
three different scales, as shown in Figure 11:  
• 
Micro-scale, where the individual fiber, matrix and 
(in some cases) the fiber-matrix interface is explicitly 
modelled; 
• 
Meso-scale, where the properties of the individual 
plies that are homogenised in the principal directions are 
modelled and stacked together to produce a laminate; and 
• 
Macro-scale, where the laminate is modelled as a 
continuum and the properties of the laminate are 
homogenised in the principal directions. 
 
Figure 11.  Micro, meso and macro mechanical model of fiber reinforced 
composites [27]. 

132
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Modelling of fiber-reinforced composites at the micro-
scale has several important advantages. This includes 
increased model fidelity, relatively simpler constitutive 
equations to describe the fiber, matrix and the interface, and 
characterisation tests that are relatively easy to perform. 
However, models at this scale require explicit modelling of 
every single fiber, matrix and the contact interface, which is 
extremely computationally expensive and not practical 
currently for typical engineering problems (see Figure 12). 
While 
the 
meso-scale 
approach 
is 
far 
more 
computationally tractable compared to the micro-scale, 
models at this scale are still not practical for thick targets. 
A. Modelling 
Because of the discrepancies discussed in Section V, a 
new model was developed – a concept for the numerical 
simulation of fiber-reinforced plastics under impact loading. 
Here, the homogeneous continuum model is replaced. 
Alternating layers of fibers and matrix are used for the 
geometry. The layers are bonded and have different material 
models (see Figure 13).  
The fiber layers apply anisotropic elasticity, no plasticity 
and anisotropic material failure (stress-dependent). The 
matrix layers use isotropic elasticity, von Mises plasticity 
and isotropic material failure (stress-dependent). To simulate 
the effect of delamination, principal stress failure is applied. 
3D numerical simulations were performed of the full 
target and projectile, where both were meshed using 8-node 
hexahedral elements. The projectile was meshed with 9 
elements across the diameter. The target is composed of sub-
laminates that are one element thick, separated by a small 
gap to satisfy the master-slave contact algorithm (external 
gap in AUTODYN) and bonded together as previously 
discussed. The mesh size of the target is approximately equal 
to the projectile at the impact site. The mesh was then graded 
towards the edge, increasing in coarseness to reduce the 
computational load of the model. Since UHMW-PE 
composite has a very low coefficient of friction, force fit 
clamping provides little restraint. High speed video of 
ballistic impact tests typical showed clamp slippage upon 
impact. As such no boundary conditions were imposed on 
the target. 
 
Figure 12.  Cross section of a Dyneema® HB26 panel. 
 
Figure 13.  Geometry of a target plate: alternating layers of fibers and 
matrix are used in the computer model. 
B. Simulation Results 
The model developed in [16] was adjusted and the 
concept has been extended to different calibers and projectile 
velocities. Composite armor plates between 5.5 and 16.2 mm 
were tested in several ballistic trials and high-speed videos 
were used to analyze the characteristics of the projectile – 
before and after the impact. The simulation results with the 
modified model and a 7.62×39 mm bullet are shown in 
Figures 14, 15, and 16.  
The deformation of the projectile is in good agreement 
with the experimental observation. Both delamination and 
fragmentation can be seen in the numerical simulation. 
Compared to the homogeneous continuum model, fractures 
can be detected easily. Subsequently, the results of 
experiment and simulation in the case of perforation were 
compared with reference to the projectile residual velocity. 
Here, only minor differences were observed. The results are 
summarized in Table I.  
 
Figure 14.  Effect of a 5.5 mm target impact by a 7.62×39 mm bullet at 686 
m/s, 47 µs and 88 µs after the initial impact. 

133
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 15.  Effect of a 11.0 mm target impact by a 7.62×39 mm bullet at 
682 m/s. 
 
Figure 16.  Effect of a 16.2 mm target impact by a 7.62×39 mm bullet at 
679 m/s. 
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY OF RESULTS FOR A 7.62×39 MM BULLET 
Target 
Thickness 
5.5 mm 
Residual 
Velocity  
11.0 mm 
Residual 
Thickness 
16.2 mm 
Residual 
Thickness 
Experiment 
604 m/s 
6 mm 
11 mm 
Simulation 
587 m/s 
4 mm 
10 mm 
 
Even the simulation results with other calibers provide 
very good results. A common projectile is the 9×19 mm 
Parabellum. Under STANAG 4090, it is a standard cartridge 
for NATO forces as well as many non-NATO countries.  
According to the 2014 edition of Cartridges of the World, the 
9×19 mm Parabellum is “the world's most popular and 
widely 
used 
military 
handgun 
and 
submachinegun 
cartridge.” In addition to being used by over 60% of police in 
the U.S., the 9×19 mm pistols are more popular than 
revolvers. The simulation results with the modified model 
and a 9×19 mm bullet are shown in Figures 17, 18, and 19. 
 
Figure 17.  Effect of a 5.5 mm target impact by a 9×19 mm Parabellum 
bullet at 348 m/s. 
 
Figure 18.  Effect of a 11.0 mm target impact by a 9×19 mm Parabellum 
bullet at 343 m/s. 

134
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 19.  Effect of a 16.2 mm target impact by a 9×19 mm Parabellum 
bullet at 346 m/s. 
The next step is to test the influence of meshing, based 
on Ramezani and Rothe [28]. The accuracy that can be 
obtained from any FEA model is directly related to the finite 
element mesh that is used. The finite element mesh is used to 
subdivide the CAD model into smaller domains called 
elements, over which a set of equations are solved. These 
equations approximately represent the governing equation of 
interest via a set of polynomial functions defined over each 
element. As these elements are made smaller and smaller, as 
the mesh is refined, the computed solution will approach the 
true solution. This process of mesh refinement is a key step 
in validating any finite element model and gaining 
confidence in the software, the model, and the results. 
Early in the analysis process, it makes sense to start with 
a mesh that is as coarse as possible – a mesh with very large 
elements. A coarse mesh will require less computational 
resources to solve and, while it may give a very inaccurate 
solution, it can still be used as a rough verification and as a 
check on the applied loads and constraints. 
After computing the solution on the coarse mesh, the 
process of mesh refinement begins. In its simplest form, 
mesh refinement is the process of resolving the model with 
successively finer and finer meshes, comparing the results 
between these different meshes. This comparison can be 
done by analyzing the fields at one or more points in the 
model or by evaluating the integral of a field over some 
domains or boundaries. Table II summarizes the four 
different mesh sizes. A Hewlett-Packard (HP) ProLiant 
DL380p G8 Server is used for all calculations. By comparing 
these scalar quantities, it is possible to judge the convergence 
of the solution with respect to mesh refinement. The results 
are shown in Figure 20. It should be noted that an explicit 
modelling of the individual fibers is not an option, since the 
computational effort would go beyond the scope of modern 
server systems. 
TABLE II.  
COMPARISON OF THE CALCULATION TIME 
Mesh Size 
Number of Elements 
over Edge Length 
Calculation Time [h] 
Coarse 
25 
0.5 
Medium 
50 
4 
Fine 
75 
25 
Very Fine 
100 
268 
 
Figure 20.  Convergence analysis: comparison of the projectile velocity 
(7.62×39 mm bullet) at different mesh sizes. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
The material model developed in [16] has some 
shortcomings regarding 
the simulation of 
handgun 
projectiles (e.g., 7.62×39 mm). Although previously found 
to provide accurate results for hypervelocity impact of 
aluminum spheres, the existing model and dataset was 
found to significantly underestimate the composite 
performance under impact conditions driven by through-
thickness shear performance (ballistic impact of fragment 
simulating projectiles). The model was found to exhibit 
premature through thickness shear failure as a result of 
directional coupling in the modified Hashin-Tsai failure 
criterion and the large discrepancy between through-
thickness tensile and shear strength of UHME-PE 
composite. As a result, premature damage and failure was 
initiated in the through-thickness shear direction leading to 
decreased ballistic performance. By de-coupling through-
thickness tensile failure from the failure criteria and 
discretizing the laminate into a nominal number of 
kinematically joined sub-laminates through the thickness, 
progresses in modelling the ballistic response of the panels 
was improved. 
A major difficulty in the numerical simulation of fiber 
composites under impact is the detection of failure 
processes between fiber and matrix elements as well as 
between the individual laminate layers (delamination). One 
promising 
approach 
is 
the 
use 
of 
"artificial" 
inhomogeneities on the macroscale.  
This paper is based on Ramezani and Rothe [29]. New 
approaches make it possible to increase the accuracy of the 

135
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
simulation results. The previous concept was not valid for 
all projectiles/calibers. An alternative model has been 
developed to overcome these difficulties. Using sub-
laminates and inhomogeneities on the macroscale, the 
model does not match the real microstructure, but allow a 
more realistic description of the failure processes mentioned 
above. The numerical model proposed a sub-laminate 
discretisation of the laminate in order to better model 
delamination failure. For this to occur, the sub-laminates are 
joined together using bonded contacts where failure is 
initiated based on a combined normal and shear stress 
criterion. Such approach is known to be mesh-dependent 
and has been replaced by fracture energy based failure 
(mode I, II, and III) [30]. Most finite element models of 
fibre-reinforced composite today capture interlaminar 
failure through zero thickness cohesive elements which 
accounts for both damage and fracture mechanics (using 
tractionseparation laws), though this is not available in the 
hydrocode used in this work. 
This work also demonstrated how a small number of 
well-defined experiments can be used to develop, calibrate, 
and validate solver technologies used for simulating the 
impact of projectiles on complex armor systems and 
composite laminate structures. Ballistic trials can be used as 
the basis of an iterative optimization process. Numerical 
simulations are a valuable adjunct to the study of the 
behavior of metals subjected to high-velocity impact or 
intense 
impulsive 
loading. 
The 
combined 
use of 
computations, experiments and high-strain-rate material 
characterization has, in many cases, supplemented the data 
achievable by experiments alone at considerable savings in 
both cost and engineering man-hours.  
VIII. FUTURE WORK 
Generally, the field of ballistic and penetration 
mechanics is extensive due to the unlimited combination of 
targets and threats. The response of targets is different 
depending on the projectile size, geometry, material and 
impact velocity. The scope of this work was restricted to the 
most common threats (where FSPs are used as a 
representative surrogate), however, understanding the 
penetration and failure mechanisms of the material impacted 
by different projectiles (spherical and ogive) can also be 
valuable. This work also only considered normal impacts 
(the worst-case scenario), but attacks experienced on the 
front line are almost always at an oblique angle (large or 
small). Understanding how UHMW-PE composite responds 
to obliquity is important and deserves attention. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Ramezani and H. Rothe, “A New Approach to Modelling 
Fiber-Reinforced 
Plastics 
for 
Hydrocode 
Analysis 
- 
Experimental Model Validation of Composite Materials 
Under Ballistic Impact,” The Ninth International Conference 
on Advances in System Simulation (SIMUL 2017) IARIA, 
Oct. 2017, pp. 41-50, ISBN 978-1-61208-594-4. 
[2] R&G 
Faserverbundwerkstoffe 
GmbH, 
Handbuch 
Faserverbundwerkstoffe. D-71111 Waldenbuch, 2009. 
[3] J. Van Dingenen, “Gel-spun high-performance polyethylene 
fibres,” in High Performance Fibres, pp. 62–92, 2001. 
[4] B. Russell, K. Karthikeyan, V. Deshpande, and N. Fleck, 
“The high strain rate response of ultra-high molecular-weight 
polyethylene: From fibre to laminate,” in International Journal 
of Impact Engineering (60), pp. 1–9, 2013. 
[5] L. H. Nguyen, The Ballistic Performance of Thick Ultra High 
Molecular 
Weight 
Polyethylene 
Composite. 
RMIT 
University, 2015. 
[6] P. M. Cunniff, “Dimensionless parameters for optimization of 
textile based body armor systems,” in 18th International 
Symposium on Ballistics, pp. 1303–1310, 1999. 
[7] J. Zukas, Introduction to hydrocodes. Elsevier Science, 2004. 
[8] G.-S. 
Collins, 
An 
Introduction 
to 
Hydrocode 
Modeling. Applied Modelling and Computation Group, 
Imperial College London, 2002. 
[9] E. Madenci and I. Guven, “The Finite Element Method and 
Applications in Engineering Using ANSYS,” Springer 
Verlag, February 2015. 
[10] H.-B. Woyand, FEM with CATIA V5. J. Schlembach 
Fachverlag, 2007. 
[11] S. J. Hiermaier, Structures Under Crash and Impact. Spinger 
Verlag, 2008. 
[12] R. F. Stellingwerf and C. A. Wingate, “Impact Modeling with 
Smooth Particle Hydrodynamics,” International Journal of 
Impact Engineering, vol. 14, pp. 707–718, Sep. 1993. 
[13] X. Quan, N. K. Birnbaum, M. S. Cowler, and B. I. Gerber, 
“Numerical Simulations of Structural Deformation under 
Shock and Impact Loads using a Coupled Multi-Solver 
Approach,” 5th Asia-Pacific Conference on Shock and Impact 
Loads on Structures, Hunan, China, Nov. 2003, pp. 152-161. 
[14] ANSYS Inc. Available Solution Methods. [Online]. Available 
from: 
http://www.ansys.com/Products/Simulation+Technology/Stru
ctural+Analysis/Explicit+Dynamics/Features/Available+Solut
ion+Methods [retrieved: April, 2014] 
[15] P. Fröhlich, “FEM Application Basics,” Vieweg Verlag, 
September 2005. 
[16] D. B. Segala and P. V. Cavallaro, “Numerical investigation of 
energy absorption mechanisms in unidirectional composites 
subjected to dynamic loading events,” in Computational 
Materials Science 81, pp. 303–312, 2014. 
[17] S. Chocron et al., “Modeling unidirectional composites by 
bundling fibers into strips with experimental determination of 
shear and compression properties at high pressures,” in 
Composites Science and Technology 101, pp. 32–40, 2014. 
[18] C. J. Hayhurst, S. J. Hiermaier, R. A. Clegg, W. Riedel, and 
M. Lambert, “Development of material models for nextel and 
kevlar-expoxy for high pressures and strain rates,” in 
International Journal of Impact Engineering 23, pp. 365–376, 
1999. 
[19] R. A. Clegg, D. M. White, W. Riedel, and W. Harwick, 
“Hypervelocity impact damage prediction in composites: Part 
I—material model and characterisation,” in International 
Journal of Impact Engineering 33, pp. 190–200, 2006. 
[20] W. Riedel, H. Nahme, D. M. White, and R. A. Clegg, 
“Hypervelocity impact damage prediction in composites: Part 
II—experimental 
investigations 
and 
simulations,” 
in 
International Journal of Impact Engineering 33, pp. 670–80, 
2006. 
[21] M. Wicklein, S. Ryan, D. M. White, and R. A. Clegg, 
“Hypervelocity impact on CFRP: Testing, material modelling, 
and numerical simulation,” in International Journal of Impact 
Engineering 35, pp.1861–1869, 2008. 

136
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[22] ANSYS. AUTODYN Composite Modelling Release 15.0. 
[Online]. Available from: http://ansys.com/ [retrieved: May, 
2017]. 
[23] T. Lässig et al., “A non-linear orthotropic hydrocode model 
for ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene in impact 
simulations,” in International Journal of Impact Engineering 
75, pp. 110–122, 2015. 
[24] C. J. Hayhurst, J. Leahy, J., M. van der Jagt-Deutekom, and P. 
Kelly, “Development of Material Models for Numerical 
Simulation of Ballistic Impact onto Polyethylene Fibrous 
Armour,” in Personal Armour Systems Symposium, pp. 5–8, 
2000. 
[25] K. Herlaar, M. van der Jagt-Deutekom, and M. Jacobs, “Finite 
element simulations and experiments of ballistic impacts on 
high 
performance 
PE 
composite 
material,” 
in 
22nd 
International Symposium on Ballistics, pp. 1040–1047, 2005. 
[26] C. Ong, C. Boey, R. S. Hixson, and J. O. Sinibaldi, 
“Advanced layered personnel armor,” in International Journal 
of Impact Engineering 38(5), pp. 369–383, 2011. 
[27] U. Heisserer and H. Van der Werff, “The relation between 
Dyneema fiber properties and ballistic protection performance 
of its fiber composites,” in 15th International Conference on 
Deformation, Yield and Fracture of Polymers 3, pp. 242–246, 
2012. 
[28] A. Ramezani and H. Rothe, “Influences of Meshing and High-
Performance Computing towards Advancing the Numerical 
Analysis of High-Velocity Impacts,” in International Journal 
on Advances in Systems and Measurements, Volume 9, 
Numbers 3 & 4, 2016, ISSN 1942-261x , S.142-153. 
[29] A. Ramezani and H. Rothe, “Numerical Simulation and 
Experimental Model-Validation for Fiber-Reinforced Plastics 
Under Impact Loading - Using the Example of Ultra-High 
Molecular Weight Polyethylene,” The Eighth International 
Conference on Advances in System Simulation (SIMUL 
2016) IARIA, Aug. 2016, pp. 17-25, ISBN 978-1-61208-442-
8. 
[30] Y. Mi, M. Crisfield, G. Davies, and H. Hellweg., “Progressive 
delamination using interface elements,” in Journal of 
Composite Materials, 32(14), pp. 1246–1272, 1998. 

