22
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Evaluating Key Factors Influencing ERTMS Risk Assessment: a Reference Model 
 
Katja Schuitemaker 
Design, Production and 
Management Department, 
University of Twente 
Enschede, the Netherlands 
e-mail: 
k.schuitemaker@utwente.nl 
 
Heidi van Spaandonk 
Safety Department, 
ProRail 
Utrecht, the Netherlands 
e-mail: 
heidi.vanspaandonk@prorail.
nl 
 
Marco Kuijsten 
Safety Department, 
NS,  
Utrecht, the Netherlands 
e-mail: marco.kuijsten@ns.nl 
 
 
 
Mohammad Rajabalinejad 
Design, Production and 
Management Department,  
University of Twente 
Enschede, the Netherlands 
e-mail: 
m.rajabalinejad@utwente.nl
 
Abstract— The European Railway Traffic Management 
system (ERTMS) aims to replace the various national train 
command and control systems in Europe, and will serve to 
improve cross-border interoperability,  with the final aim of 
improving the competitiveness of the rail sector. As an additional 
effect, it is argued that implementation of ERTMS will improve 
safety. To provide insight into safety developments within the 
European railway system, this study evaluates ERTMS at both 
the national and international levels. For this purpose, 
international data from European ERTMS implementations is 
combined using data obtained from interviews with ERTMS 
stakeholders and safety experts from the Netherlands. Effects of 
the safety case regime, interoperability, deregulation and 
dynamic specifications on the European railway system have 
been researched. We present our findings into a reference model 
that describes the existing situation and shows what key factors 
are most suitable to improve the situation. The challenges are to 
improve 
resilience, 
to 
generate 
more 
awareness 
of 
interrelationships between hazards and risks, but even more: 
comprehending the safety architecture and creating cross-
discipline understanding. 
Keywords - ERTMS; railway safety; interoperability; risk 
management. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This paper is an extension to the work presented at the 
Seventh International Conference on Performance, Safety 
and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications 
(PESARO) 2017 conference [1]. Safety has always been one 
of the key priorities in the railway industry. There have been 
many initiatives to improve railway safety in the Netherlands, 
some of them which are listed below: 
 Reducing the number of train-on-train collisions by, 
among other actions: 
o 
Implementation of the Routelint system: providing 
train drivers with real-time information about 
nearby trains. 
o 
Implementation of the improved version of the 
Dutch Automatic Train Control System (ATB Vv).  
 It has been argued that the implementation of the 
European 
Railway 
Traffic 
Management 
System 
(ERTMS) has beneficial effects on the overall safety level 
of the railway system [2]. As ERTMS seems to hold great 
promise at both the Dutch national and international 
levels, we will discuss this system in more detail. 
 
The European Union (EU) has adopted Directives 
concerning the interoperability of the European railway 
system and railway safety. The implementation of these 
Directives is aided by committees such as the European 
Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization (CENELEC). 
The CENELEC European Norm  (EN) 5012x is a family of 
standards that contain requirements and recommendations 
concerning processes to be followed for the development and 
assurance of safety-critical systems. As part of CENELEC, the 
EN50126 
(The 
Specification 
and 
Demonstration 
of 
Reliability, 
Availability, 
Maintainability 
and 
Safety) 
describes a performance-based approach that includes 
proactive argumentation on why a system is acceptably safe. 
The railway industry in the Netherlands tends to follow the 
safety case regime recommended in EN50126. As early as the 
1990s, the European Commission (EC) decided that passenger 
trains should be able to travel seamlessly across international 
borders in Europe. In 1998, the EC requested the foundation 
of the Union Industry of Signalling (UNISIG) and assigned 
this with the task of drafting the technical specifications for 
ERTMS. The International Union of Railways states that the 
goal of ERTMS is “to enhance cross-border interoperability 
and signalling procurement by creating a single Europe-wide 
standard for railways with the final aim of improving 
competitiveness of the rail sector” [3]. ERTMS is a command, 
control, signalling, and communication system for railway 
management and safe regulation. It is composed of two 
technical layers: 
 European Train Control System (ETCS): the Automatic 
Train Protection (ATP) system that makes sure trains do 
not exceed safe speeds or run too close together. 
 Global System for Mobile Communications – Railways 
(GSM-R): helps provide communication for voice and 
data services.  
 
Beyond these two technical layers are the European 
Operating Rules (EOR) and European Traffic Management 
Layer (ETML). 
ERTMS implementation can vary in: 
 Level: basic concepts of the ERTMS. 
 Baseline: corresponds to the version of the technical 
specifications. 
 Version: modification of properties.  
 Operation mode: various conditions required for 
managing various situations. 
 

23
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
ERTMS has become the European standard for the 
Automatic Train Control (ATC) that facilitates an 
interoperable railway system in Europe. This means that 
ERTMS allows trains to run across borders without changing 
their control systems. Recently, the ERTMS European 
Deployment Plan (EDP) has set targets that by 2023 50% of 
the core network corridors will be equipped with ERTMS. The 
aim is to implement ERTMS Level 2 on key routes in the 
Netherlands by 2028. With these aims in mind, there is the 
promise of an increase of railway safety by implementation of 
ERTMS, which self-evidently would be very beneficial for 
railway industry and the general public. Some reasons why 
ERTMS is considered to increase railway safety include: 
 ETCS supervises both the position and speed of trains to 
make sure they continuously remain within the allowed 
speed and distance limits, and, if necessary, it will 
command the intervention of the braking system to avoid 
any collision [2]. The train can continually receive 
authorisation to continue running at maximum allowed 
speeds through the GSM-R system (only available at 
ERTMS level 2 and when driving in the correct operation 
mode). 
 Reduce the risk of human error [4]; for example, work-
related errors caused by stress, tiredness, fatigue, and sleep 
disturbance.  
 Decreasing the number of Signals Passed At Danger 
(SPADs) [5][6]. This can be explained by the fact that 
ETCS is able to intervene in the braking curve for a train 
driving at any speed.  
 
However, there is evidence that implementation of 
ERTMS does not automatically mean a safer railway system. 
For example, in practice, in the Netherlands, SPADs still 
occur when driving with ERTMS [7], see Table I. 
TABLE I.  SPADS UNDER ERTMS 
 
2013 
2014 
2015
2016
SPADs under ERTMS 
Level 1 
1
0 
1
4
SPADs under ERTMS 
Level 2 
9
10 
16
15
 
However, these numbers are low, so they can only be 
considered 
as 
an 
indication, 
and 
not 
necessarily 
representatives of a trend. More studies, both scientific and 
industrial, question the safety benefits arising from the 
implementation of ERTMS. 
 
At the international level: 
 
Smith et al. addresses issues relevant to the safe 
introduction of ERTMS into European railway systems 
[8]. These issues include technical system integration, 
technical 
system 
failures 
and 
human 
factor 
considerations. 
 
Laroche and Guihéry study the European Transport 
Policy, the role played by the EC, and the ERTMS 
innovation process in relation to innovation processes in 
surface transport, and the difficulties inherent in the 
implementation of an intelligent transportation system 
innovation [9]. 
 
Ghazel addresses the regular evolving documents that 
give rise to successive ERTMS versions [10]. 
 
The EC itself has studied past and current problems 
resulting from ERTMS implementation [11]. 
 
At the Dutch national level: 
 
The Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment, 
ProRail and NS have collected information on 
ERTMS standard usage for safety systems, and the 
effects on various goals of the Railmap 1.0 [12].  
 
ProRail and NS executed a pilot to gain experience 
with driving under ERTMS [13]. 
 
A specialised team investigated the sequence of 
events and decision-making processes in the 
Netherlands that have led to delays in deployment of 
the ERTMS train signalling systems in the High 
Speed Line (HSL) railway project [14]. 
This study evaluates the effects of the safety case regime, 
the inclusion of various ERTMS specifications, the exclusion 
of a responsible integrator, deregulation, and the final effects 
for risk assessment and safety. The focus is on risk 
management and safety of ERTMS as a System of Systems 
(SoS). We bring all our findings together and represent them 
into a reference model that illustrates the main line of 
argumentation. This reference model points out the key 
factors that are most suitable to address in order to improve 
the situation.  
Section II provides an overview of the background of 
railway deregulation, ERTMS specifications, European 
interoperability, and cost reduction that are the results of 
changes in organisational behaviour. The methodology is 
discussed in Section III. Section IV explains findings with 
regard to the number of stakeholders and accompanying 
views, interests and interactions, possible local goal trade-
offs, various interpretations, the decision-making processes, 
borders between disciplines leading to unique design 
realisations, and the relationship between overview and safety 
architecture understanding. Findings are discussed in Section 
V. Section VI summarises the findings, draws conclusions and 
highlights challenges.  
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Every railway system faces technical, managerial, 
organisational, and regulatory challenges. The subsystems can 
work perfectly individually, but together they can create a 
hazardous state. Many factors, both technical and socio-
institutional, need to be combined to turn the challenge of one 
European train system into a great success, satisfying social 
needs for lower costs, better utilisation of infrastructure, and 
less complex logistics [15]. During this study, several 
developments in the rail industry appeared to have a great 
effect on the safety level of a railway system including 
ERTMS. 

24
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A. Deregulation 
Regulation is required to prevent monopoly exploitation, 
to reduce asymmetry of information, to guarantee non-
discriminatory access to any essential facilities and to 
monitor the performance of a service provider [16].  
Deregulation is the reduction or elimination of 
government power in an industry, usually promoted to 
encourage more competition within a specific market. 
Starting in the 1990s, in order to promote greater competition, 
the rail industry in Europe has been gradually restructured. 
On the one hand, vertical separation means that the 
management and ownership of infrastructure are totally 
separated from the operation of passenger and freight rail 
services. On the other hand, multiple operators are using the 
infrastructure. In some countries, infrastructure has been 
separated from train operations, whereas in others, this has 
not been the case. Privatisation and deregulation have led to 
an increased involvement of private actors, both nationally 
and internationally [17].  
B. ERTMS specifications 
The Union Industry of Signalling (UNISIG) was founded 
in 1998/99 at the specific instigation of the European 
Commission (EC) [18]. It was created to develop ERTMS 
specifications. The final version of ERTMS specifications 
was published by the EC following the approval of the 
Member States. In November 2012, the EC intentionally 
deleted ERTMS Functional Requirement Specifications, 
making these specifications no longer mandatory. The 
remaining System Requirements Specifications are written in 
a natural language. These specifications allow multiple 
interpretations [19]. 
C. Interoperability 
The meaning of interoperability is two-fold. On the one 
hand, interoperability refers to a geographical interoperability 
among countries and among projects. On the other hand, it 
also refers to interoperability among suppliers. This opens the 
supply market and increases competition within the industry 
[20]. The result of this is the absence of a single entity that is 
responsible for the railway system as a whole. 
D. Safety case regime 
The safety case approach is goal-oriented, meaning that 
organisations should always seek for improvements in safety. 
It requires a detailed hazard analysis comprising causal 
analysis, a dedicated hazard identification focusing on the 
system under consideration, and a common cause analysis. A 
hazard is a potential source of harm in a system. Hazard 
identification is performed during risk assessment and within 
hazard control. The results of risk assessment are a set of 
safety requirements that define the required efficiency of 
safety functions. These can be assessed both quantitatively 
and qualitatively. Taken into consideration the identified 
hazards, risks should be reduced to an acceptable level. It has 
to be demonstrated that the risk is reduced to ‘As Low As 
Reasonably Practicable’ (ALARP). In the end, one is able to 
argue whether the system is acceptably safe. 
E. Cutting cost and time 
According to Rasmussen, systems and organisations 
continually experience change, as adaptions are made in 
response to local pressures and short-term productivity and 
cost goals. Several accidents such as Bhopal, Flixborough, 
Zeebrugge, and Chernobyl demonstrate that they have not 
been caused by a coincidence of independent failures and 
human errors, but by a systematic deterioration of 
organisational behaviour towards an accident under the 
influence of pressure towards cost-effectiveness in an 
aggressive, competitive environment [21].  
In order to reduce the risk, Dutch national safety goals are 
approached through use of the ALARP-principle and 
standstill-principle. This means that all risks must be reduced 
such that they are below a threshold of practicability. For 
risks in the “ALARP area”, all potential risk reducing 
measures must be evaluated in terms of cost efficiency, cost-
benefit balance or some similar economic measure. Selected 
risk-reducing measures may be introduced based on 
experience or best practice in combination with cost-
efficiency considerations [22]. 
III. 
METHOD 
The objective of this empirical research is to identify key 
factors and interrelationships of the safety of ERTMS. 
Emphasis was placed on the ERTMS safety architecture, and 
the relationships between social and technical safety entities 
of ERTMS at both the Dutch national and international levels. 
The findings in this paper are based on international data from 
European ERTMS implementations, linked with national data 
obtained 
from 
semi-structured 
interviews 
based 
on 
questionnaires.  
To investigate the nature of phenomena, we adopt 
qualitative and quantitative analysis methods in the form of 
standardised interviews. We used an interview guide with a 
list of questions generated in advance, allowing the same 
topics to be covered during interviews, and at the same time, 
if necessary, leaving room for more exploration of certain 
issues. This interview guide consisted of a brief description on 
one’s background and relationship with ERTMS, open 
questions with regard to pros and cons of ERTMS, and more 
detailed question to cover specific topics. For this research, 
the data are transcribed and analysed using Grounded Theory 
data analysis [23]. By constant comparison, every new piece 
of data is compared with earlier data to find similarities and 
differences. The data was used for formulation of hypotheses, 
and hypotheses are verified logically on internal validity and 
external validity.  
The topics discussed include the effects observed from 
inclusion of various ERTMS specifications, the exclusion of a 
responsible integrator, deregulation, and the final effects for 
risk assessment and safety. Systems under consideration are 
ERTMS Level 1 and ERTMS Level 2. Projects discussed 
during interviews are the five ERTMS-projects in the 

25
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Netherlands (Betuweroute, Port of Rotterdam, HSL South, 
Amsterdam-Utrecht and Lelystad-Zwolle). 
Participants were Dutch ERTMS key stakeholders and 
safety experts from the Ministry of Infrastructure and the 
Environment, train operating companies, infrastructure 
managers, and independent consultants involved with the 
ERTMS national program, each representing their own 
viewpoint. 
For 
increasing 
validity 
and 
minimising 
subjectivity, we ensured each topic was discussed from 
various points of view (political, company, management, 
operations). The average number of years of experience of the 
participants varies from 2 to 14, with an average of 8. The 
educational background was mostly technical or safety 
related, with a few exceptions. Participants are informed about 
the aim of this study beforehand the interview. Also, it was 
explained that they should have in mind their own expertise 
when answering the questions, meaning, they should respond 
from their own viewpoint, not from someone else’s viewpoint. 
Contact between researcher and participants has been direct.  
Interviews lasted between 30 and 90 min. Data was 
collected between February 2016 and August 2016. In total, 
15 semi-structured interviews were held, performed face to 
face. All interviews were audio recorded, transcribed 
verbatim, and summarised. Transcriptions were processed 
through qualitative inductive content analysis in order to 
develop a theory, and identify themes through repeated 
examination, comparison, abstraction, and data reduction.  
The material was abstracted and reduced to a set of themes. 
Resulting themes were quantified and integrated with the 
responses. The procedure was repeated to refine chosen 
themes. Two main categories were identified as a thread 
through transcriptions: (1) implications with regard to socio-
technical safety; and (2) implications with regard to the safety 
architecture. Using the Design Research Methodology [24] as 
a supporting framework, key factors found were translated 
into a reference model, which graphically shows the current 
understanding of the safety challenges of ERTMS. 
As for verification, summaries were send to the 
interviewee. Most interviewees made small corrections in the 
summaries. The reference model is logically verified by 
consistency, meaning there are no internal conflicts between 
interview answers, key factors and well-established literature. 
For this literature review, the high level goal is to identify 
supporting evidence and contradictions. For the search string: 
 
Part 1 
The first part captures keywords related to the system 
under consideration such as “European Railway Traffic 
Management System”, “ERTMS” or “ETCS”. 
AND 
 
Part 2 
The second part captures keywords related to safety such 
as “railway safety”, “safety case”, “safety analysis”, “risk 
assessment”, “risk analysis” or “risk evaluation”. 
OR 
Part 3 
The third part captures keywords related to complexity 
and interdisciplinary such as “architecture”, “socio-
technical safety”, “decision-making process”, “integral 
assessment”. 
Next  to this, we also verify logically on internal validity 
with the meaning of causes and effects of key factors that 
could be interchangeable, and external validity with the 
meaning of participant- and time dependency. 
IV. 
FINDINGS 
To obtain an understanding of the existing situation, we 
represent our findings by the creation of a reference model. 
This reference model consists of key factors and links among 
key factors that can come from resources, assumptions, or the 
experiences of stakeholders. In the end, many key factors 
influence safety of ERTMS, and result in a high complexity. 
A graphical representation is created to provide an overview. 
In order to limit the amount of information, this 
representation is divided into two parts: a lower part, and an 
upper part.  
A. Reference model lower part 
Next, we discuss the lower part of the reference model, 
representing implications with regard to socio-technical 
safety. Key factors identified include effects of the safety case 
regime and ERTMS specifications, and how the decision-
making processes and missing integrator influence risk 
assessment. 
 
1) Safety case regime 
The safety case is the documented demonstration that the 
product, system or process complies with the relevant safety 
requirements. It can be seen as a risk- or hazard management 
framework, where the organisation identifies controls to deal 
with identified hazards and measures. Such controls must 
ensure the continued working of safety-related functions. The 
Netherlands evaluates risks using the ALARP-principle, 
described by EN50126, allowing cost-effectiveness of safety 
measures to be explicitly considered. In order to classify risks, 
hazards are categorised on frequency and severity, resulting in 
a risk matrix. High risks require mitigation or risk acceptation. 
The European Union Agency for Railways explains a shift 
from quantitative data to qualitative data [25]. As a result, 
organisations must come up with descriptions instead of 
numbers and observe data rather than just collecting data. This 
qualitative data is based on the logical reasoning of many 
experts. Stakeholders experience this regime as a challenge, 
as logical reasoning can cause multiple interpretations. Also, 
they experience the safety case approach as complex and time-
consuming. For example, in practice, the safety case for the 
High Speed Line South resulted in only addressing major 
hazards due to time pressure [26]. 
Barua explains that one disadvantage of the safety case 
approach is that the explanation and interpretation of the 
desired performance levels expressed in the regulation can be 
both complex and challenging [27]. Nair identifies 25 studies 
citing ambiguities in the application of standards, such as the 
existence of multiple interpretations of the evidence 
requirements in the standards [28].  

26
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
According to the ERTMS strategy group in Great Britain, 
initially the principal motivation for ERTMS was to further 
improve safety. “Over approximately the last ten years, 
capacity became a more significant influence and then, more 
recently, cost reduction [29].” Demonstration of compliance 
by reference to safety standards is usually costly and time-
consuming [30]. Pressure towards cost-effectiveness can 
inadvertently lead to generating adaptive responses.  
According to Leveson [31], pressure towards cost-
effectiveness and increased productivity is the dominant 
element in decision making.  
 
2) ERTMS specifications 
ERTMS is not fully specified. Rather it is a system 
architecture, which describes how a range of elements should 
function. Earlier studies explained that ERTMS specifications 
are unstable [9][32], written in informal language [10], non-
consolidated [8] and incomplete [15][33]. To be more 
specific, missing parts concern management, integral system 
integration, and physical design. Therefore, stakeholders still 
claim that the specifications are not sufficient. These 
specification deficiencies have effects on system safety in the 
three ways described below. 
 
The management of railway signalling in ERTMS is not 
based on global rules, meaning they are customised to 
each country. Every country uses its own interpretation 
of the European Norm (EN) 50126. It is therefore 
difficult to compare the systems in terms of safety. 
 
As for system integration, the lack of harmonised 
specifications requires the development of various 
solutions for each project. As for safety, this implies a 
need for additional safety analyses. 
 
Open specifications that exclude physical design, result 
in unique ERTMS design realisations, and the 
occurrence of not fully compatible solutions for each 
system to be developed. Again, this implies a need for 
additional safety analyses. 
In practice, updates to new systems are postponed in 
anticipation of new specifications, covering multiple 
requirements through one update. Experts explain that 
unstable specifications make it difficult to adopt innovations 
and that problems occur with adapting the new system to the 
old one. There is consensus among experts about the effects 
of the inclusion of various ERTMS specifications on the 
safety of the System of Systems (SoS). 93% of the participants 
explained the relationships between a high variety of ERTMS 
specifications and the decision-making process. 
 
3) Decision-making 
Today’s ERTMS requires strategic safety decisions 
concerning functionality and policies. This process is based on 
criteria resulting from risk analyses, and organised through a 
specified organisation. Experts explain the open specifications 
complicate the architecture, but also safety decision-making 
processes. As a consequence of incompleteness, it could be 
possible to make a decision based on implicit factors. For 
example, as safety is sometimes seen as hindrance to effective 
marketing solutions, the focus can be on finishing on time and 
approving a design. In the case of a complex architecture, it 
can be difficult to identify hazards and what control measures 
must be taken by whom. Care should be taken that risk is 
evaluated using complete information. 
According to the parliamentary commission that looked at 
the failed Fyra project, it seemed that safety had become a 
subject for negotiation [34]. As also described by Nusser [35], 
“Black box” approaches are regarded with suspicion – even if 
they show a very high accuracy of available data – because it 
is not feasible to prove that they will show a good performance 
under all possible input combinations.  
Late safety inclusion is also questioned by Enserink in the 
context of major projects in the Netherlands: “It is strange to 
see how in many large projects, such as the Westerschelde 
tunnel, the Betuwelijn, and the ‘Groene Hart’ bored tunnel for 
the High Speed Line South, the discussions of safety issues 
and safety management took place at a very late stage in the 
project cycle” [36]. He also explains: “In all the examples in 
the planning phase, the analysts neglected the safety issues or 
these issues were temporarily stalled because of their 
complexity.” According to Høj et al.: “Biased results may 
result from excluding certain events, different analytical 
methods and data, different modelling assumptions, different 
methods for including uncertainties, best estimates vs. 
estimates “on the safe side”, etc.” [37]. 
 
4) Integrator 
EN50126 describes a simplified approach that helps 
organisations to conduct risk assessment and hazard control. 
This approach, the so-called hourglass model, provides an 
overview of the major safety-related activities that are 
required to reach an acceptable safety level for a technical 
system, including defining the corresponding responsibility 
areas. This hourglass model is shown in Fig. 1. This model 
provides an overview of major safety-related activities that are 
needed to ensure an acceptable safety level for a technical 
system, including the corresponding responsibility areas. As 
shown, responsibilities overlap. According to EN50126, risk 
assessment should be done at the railway system level, where 
it relies on system definition, and includes risk analysis and 
risk evaluation. This risk analysis includes hazard 
identification, consequence analysis, and the selection of risk 
acceptance criteria. Hazard analysis at the level of the system 
under consideration includes a causal analysis, hazard 
identification focusing on the system under consideration, and 
a common cause analysis. CENELEC requires that, during 
each 
project, 
responsibilities 
have 
to 
be 
clarified 
unambiguously in order to avoid gaps or overlaps.  
The Dutch ERTMS program is a collaboration of 
stakeholders, not as if it were a single person that acts for 
certain purposes. Experts explain that without the ERTMS 
program being a legal entity, it is difficult to allocate hazards 
and risks, especially the ones on interfaces, to a responsible 
stakeholder. As for the Netherlands, what makes this even 
more difficult is a missing central designer, or indeed any 
party, that knows the entire complex system. Although the 
Common Safety Method (CSM) aims at an integral safety 
approach, the final report on the ERTMS pilot between 
Amsterdam and Utrecht explains that “overarching processes 

27
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
between railway and train transportation are missing and that 
these are necessary for optimum implementation of ERTMS” 
[13]. One of the safety case principles is that those who create 
risks are responsible for controlling those risks. Experts 
explain that as a result, organisations feel responsible for their 
own processes, not for the integral railway system. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. 
Hourglass model described by EN50126. 
 
Lack of responsibility is also recognised by the Dutch 
Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment [13]. This is a 
known challenge explained by Harvey: “Complexities at the 
organisational level can breed a culture in which no-one is 
willing to accept responsibility for risk and blame is always 
shifted to a higher level in the network [38].” 
Next to the hourglass model, safety activities tend to be 
performed in parallel with systems engineering activities [39] 
[40]; see Fig. 2. Shown is the left side of the V-model [41]. 
Squares on the right represent well-known stages in system 
development. Squares on the left represent safety activities 
executed during each of the system development stages. For 
example, safety engineers analyse requirements for hazards 
and communicate these to system designers. According to 
Mauborgne et al., who defined a missing link between safety 
and systems engineering, the two activities are not always well 
integrated [42]. Experts explain communication of safety 
integration in the development phase as a challenge, 
especially with regard to defining interfaces. 
Communication both within development teams and 
between individual developers is considered to be a source of 
safety-related faults in critical systems [43] [44]. According to 
Leveson, the defence community tried using the standard 
safety engineering techniques on their complex new systems, 
but the limitations became clear when interface and 
component interaction problems went unnoticed until it was 
too late, resulting in many losses and near misses [31].  
 
5) Risk assessment 
The generation of adaptive responses, complexity in 
decision-making processes and a missing overarching view 
affect risk assessment in the three ways discussed below: 
 
First, adaptive responses can depend on a number of 
assumptions. Such assumptions can be explicitly 
formulated, but the danger is in including these without 
being subject to uncertainty. Describing and making 
judgements about risks in advance can misguide risk 
assessment.  
 
Second, the decision-making process and risks 
assessment process are not always interrelated, resulting 
in a missing integral assessment in the Netherlands.  
 
Third, risk assessment must be performed at the railway 
system level. Experts indicate the challenge lies in the 
incorporation at the System of Systems (SoS) level, 
which requires an overview of all safety entities to be 
considered. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Relationships between safety and SE activities [38][39]. 
 
For example, misjudgements happened in relationship to 
the Piper Alpha accident in 1988: a series of events considered 
of low risk prior to the accident. Adaptive responses lead 
ultimately 
to 
related 
problems, 
having 
unforeseen 
ramifications in addition to system complexity, and therefore, 
to further unexpected behaviour, which reduces system safety 
[45]. At the technical level, much attention is given to safety 
issues, but hardly any attention is paid to safety at the level of 
decision-making [36]. According to Aven, the benefits related 
to the activity studied, as well as strategic and political aspects 
could be decisive for the decision making but may not be 
captured by risk assessment [46]. According to Harvey, the 
many and varied interactions among the individual 
components of a SoS produce emergent behaviour, which 
cannot be predicted on the basis of the performance of the 
individual subsystems in isolation [38]. 
 
The described relationships are shown in the lower part of 
the reference model of ERTMS in Fig. 3. This reference model 
represents the existing situation on implications with regard to 
the socio-technical safety of ERTMS. All ellipses represent 
key factors meaning those influencing factors that are 
considered as the core factors or root causes. The links 
describe the existing relationships. Not all relationships come 
from direct experiences. Therefore, these relationships are 
indicated as an assumption. The existing qualitative value of 
a key factor is represented by means of a ‘+’ or ‘-’. For 
example, the ‘+’ next to ‘number of different ERTMS 
inclusions’ indicates a high degree. Quantitative classification 
of whether or not participants experience a challenge in one of 
the key factors is shown in Fig. 4. 

28
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. Reference model upper part 
Next, we discuss the upper part of the reference model 
including implications with regard to the safety architecture. 
Key factors identified include the effects of the 
deregulation and the increased number of stakeholders with 
their own specific languages and cultures. Also, how 
dynamic specifications have resulted in unique design 
realisations. We argue how the quality of overview influences 
risk assessment, and therefore, the overall safety level of 
ERTMS. Some key factors are safety related items that 
fundamentally contribute to a successful system operation 
[47].  
 
1) Deregulation 
Available historical data on fatal railway accidents has 
shown a solid gradual improvement in railway safety over the 
past three decades. However, this trend has slowed down 
since 
the 
late 
1990s 
[48]. 
Increasing 
regulation, 
standardisation and systematisation have paid safety 
dividends, although an adverse effect is the increase in 
regulation. Safety regulation has increased a hundred-fold 
between 1947 and 2008 [49]. Experts indicate the deregulated 
organisation results in many stakeholders. As is also 
concluded 
by 
Iglesias 
[50], 
incomplete/unstable 
specifications of ERTMS are further hampered by company 
specific requirements.  
 
2) Number of stakeholders 
At the national level, the change from one national actor 
to multiple commercial actors shows an increase in operators 
(CFL, NS, SNCB, etc.) using ERTMS tracks. Also, with 
previous Dutch automatic train protection (ATB) tracks, only 
one manufacturer (Alstom) was involved. With ERTMS and 
the tendering of subsystems, various manufacturers (Alstom, 
Ansaldo, Bombardier, etc.) are involved. Stakeholders within 
the ERTMS program include train operating companies, 
infrastructure provider and independent consultants. At the 
international level, infrastructure managers (Deutsche Bahn, 
INFRABEL, ProRail, etc.) from various countries must 
collaborate in order to provide a seamless transition.  
In the first place, the rising number of parties involved 
entails a considerable diversity of points of view, skills, 
responsibilities, and interests. Experts explain the challenge 
lies with the many interests, creating the risk of 
compromising too much on safety. For example, the train 
derailment in Hilversum shows that the commercial character 
of maintenance, specifically the introduction of market 
forces, has led to an unavoidable interplay of forces. 
According to the Dutch safety board: “In this context, the 
train derailment in Hilversum teaches us that the related 
interests can gradually and unnoticed apply pressure on the 
management of safety risks [51]”. 
 
3) Language and culture 
Laurino explains that the historical world-wide railway 
framework is modified to country specific approaches to 
public policy, geographical context, transport system, 
economic situation, business and regulatory environment 
[52]. On top of this, countries use their own language, making 
intersectional challenges even more complex. Somerville 
describes that much of the work of professionals is 
knowledge-based and reflects their professional discipline, 
training and culture [53]. As an example, experts explain 
differences in both language and culture can lead to different 
people doing the same job, but working in different ways, 
leading to differences in understanding the overall risk 
assessment and evaluation. For this reason, risk perception can 
be different per organisation, even different per stakeholder. 
For these reasons, at both the international level and 
national levels, stakeholders experience difficulties with 
understanding their respective systems. This is also described 
by Forsberg [4], who states that the new societal organisation, 
where rail transport is controlled by an increasing number of 
mainly private actors, intersectional issues and decisions have 
increased among the various actors. This happens particularly 
since mishaps or accidents are often caused by circumstances 
or weak links between them.  
 
4) Boundaries 
Experts explain the increased number of stakeholder 
viewpoints in ERTMS result in a complex architecture. They 
explain a system becomes complex when it is composed of 
many components that interact with each other. Complex 
intersections affect clarity of boundaries among subsystems 
within the system and between the system and its interaction 
with the environment.  
Dekker explains that with increasing complexity, 
boundaries of what constitutes the system become fuzzy; 
interdependencies and interactions multiply and mushroom 
[54]. According to Rasmussen [21], people under pressure 
tend to explore and sometimes cross boundaries of safe 
operations. 
 
5) ERTMS specifications 
With the gradual implementation of a single signalling 
system through the EU, the EC has opted for radical 
innovation for all Member States. In the same vein, the 
Netherlands has opted for innovation in the form of a systems 
leap from traditional ATB to ERTMS. This can be contrasted 
with, for example, Belgium, which has opted for a more 
incremental development. Preferences vary at both the 
international and national levels. The signalling system for the 
Netherlands – Germany trajectories (remote monitoring) 
differs significantly from the signalling system for the 
Netherlands – Belgium – France trajectories (more autonomy 
for the train driver), which is more in line with ERTMS Level 
2. Therefore, to migrate to ERTMS Level 2, France does not 
have to change much. To migrate to ERTMS Level 2, 
Germany and the Netherlands face a break with the past. Both 
the signalling systems and the automatic train protection 
systems are still markedly different from one EU country to 
another [55]. In addition, the various ERTMS levels include 
varying technical requirements and applications. 

29
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 3. 
Lower part of the reference model on implications with regard to socio-technical safety of ERTMS. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. 
Participants experiencing challenges in key factors. 
 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Number of different inclusions ERTMS…
Inclusion of responsible integrator
Number of borders between disciplines
Quality of overview
Proactivity
Risk evaluation in terms of cost‐efficiency
Generation of adaptive responses
Decision‐making in risk allocation
Participants experiencing challenge [%]
Key facor

30
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Various ERTMS subsystems have been tendered. In 
practice, the various stakeholders, even at the Netherlands 
national level where there have been 5 ERTMS-projects so far 
(see Table II), every subsystem is considered unique, and 
requires customised procedures and processes. Next to the 5 
ERTMS-projects, Table II also shows which manufacturer 
was contracted, what ERTMS level was implemented, and 
when the track became operable. 
TABLE II.  
ERTMS-PROJECTS IN THE NETHERLANDS 
Project 
Supplier 
ERTMS 
level 
In service 
date
Betuweroute 
Alstom 
2 
2007
Port Rotterdam 
Alstom 
1 
2009
High-Speed 
Line South 
Thales/ 
Siemens 
1 and 2 
2009
Lelystad-Zwolle 
railway 
Alstom 
2 
2012
Amsterdam-
Utrecht railway 
Bombardier 
1 and 2 
2013
 
The various levels have been defined to allow each 
individual railway administration to select the appropriate 
ERTMS/ETCS application trackside, according to their 
strategies, to complement their trackside infrastructure and to 
achieve the required performance [57]. Considering only 
permitted disparities, such as varying ERTMS levels (0, STM, 
1, 1 infill, 2, 3), already result in 31 possible transitions; see 
Table III.  
TABLE III.  
ERTMS POSSIBLE TRANSITIONS 
           To 
From 
0 
STM 
1 
1 
infill 
2 
3
0 
 
 
 
 
 
STM 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
1 infill 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Once a hazard scenario is identified, it is not trivial to 
identify all the possible causes in the system [33]. In other 
words, a system that is new, or particularly complex, can 
generate scenarios that are not generated during hazard 
analysis of previous comparable systems. Stoop also 
comments on the underestimation of ERTMS development: 
“There has been tension between incremental progress on the 
one hand and implementation in an existing railway network 
on the other hand with the ambitions on innovative ERTMS 
and public-private partnership” [14]. 
A higher level involves less side track equipment, but 
more on-board equipment. This change also implies that many 
of the costs of the signalling system will migrate from 
infrastructure managers to train operators. Infrastructure 
managers anticipating developments, whereas operators are 
reluctant to upgrade existing rolling stock [56], could be an 
explanation for the varying preferences. 
6) Borders between disciplines 
Experts explain employees are often focused on their own 
job. Ascribing meaning to data, so that it could be more 
readily used by others, is of less importance. Experts know a 
lot about their own subject, though knowledge of each 
component is limited. As a result, data is set and send to the 
next disciplines. 
This is also explained by literature. As described by Baxter 
[58], borders between disciplines have been largely 
maintained despite efforts at creating interdisciplinary teams 
by involving domain specialists in the design process. The 
success of system implementation is dependent on effective 
cross-discipline communication. The borders between 
disciplines are a known challenge for the safety of Systems of 
Systems [41].  
 
7) Comprehending the architecture 
Problems often arise at these borders due to a lack of 
shared understanding among the developers of subsystems. 
Gaps in assumed knowledge can influence both understanding 
and integration. The majority of the experts (87%) indicated 
difficulties with comprehending the architecture, and how this 
low comprehension affected the accomplishment of their 
tasks. One of the safety architects tried to obtain insight, by 
creating physical overviews of the SoS.  
Leveson [59] states that lack of shared understanding 
among the developers of subsystems create coordination 
problems, ambiguity, and conflicts among independent 
decisions.  
 
8) Number of unique design realisations 
In practice, various preferences and implementations of 
ERTMS subsystems result in many transitions among various 
subsystems. In other words, implementation is unique for 
every project, and dependent on stakeholders, the 
environment, and activities. Table III shows just a fraction of 
the number of possible transitions. As a result, systems can be 
incompatible. For example, the two implementations made by 
Alcatel (Dutch part of the railway) and Alstom (Belgium part 
of the railway) that differed too much, so that a so-called 
gateway (network node) was necessary to transition from one 
system to another. 
As is also explained by Leveson [57], the interconnectivity 
and interactivity among system components implies that 
greater complexity leads to vastly more possible interactions 
than could be planned, understood, anticipated or guarded 
against. As also concluded by Smith [8], the existence of many 
versions of ETCS with technical problems require a backup 
system. 
9) Number of procedures and processes 
In the end, when using ERTMS, the complexity of 
technology, use, and processes of the railway system 
increases. 
Experts 
indicated 
that 
the 
technological 
developments in ERTMS are underestimated. A failure when 
using ETCS can have up to 100 causes. Train drivers and 
signallers must find a solution through applying difficult 
procedures and processes, while using limited technical 
system knowledge. A large number of human resources 

31
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
executing unique safety-critical procedures, increase the risk 
for human errors and therefore, influence the overall safety 
level of the system. 
 
10) Local goal trade-offs  
Stakeholders that are involved in multiple projects can 
have, depending on the meeting, various goals. Experts 
explain the creation of fuzzy boundaries and the lack of 
understanding of the safety architecture, allow local actors to 
change their conditions in one of its corners for good reasons, 
and without apparent consequences. This can bring immediate 
gains on some local goal trade-off. In other words, the 
decision-making process can be person-focussed, instead of 
organisation-focussed.  
Both Leveson [59] and Dekker [54] explain that with a 
high number of widely distributed interacting components in 
an organisation, small ‘drifts’ in procedure or policy will not 
necessarily be identified as risks to the safety of the SoS. 
 
11) Overview 
As stated before, according to EN50126, risk assessment 
should be done at the railway system level. Taking into 
account that any party that knows the entire complex system 
is missing, experts explain a challenge when considering the 
integrated system. For the creation of the total safety 
architecture, an integrator should create an integral coherence 
of the safety architecture and the define interdependencies 
between elements. An overview is necessary to define a 
complete, comprehensive, and defensible argument 
Earlier research explained the need for a comprehensive 
approach to obtain better understanding of the complex nature 
of hazards, and understand interrelatedness of all factors that 
play a role in risk assessment [60]. The complexities of an 
entire SoS may be more obvious when analysing the overall 
system architecture and therefore managed more effectively 
[39]. However, a lack of a system overview can be a major 
barrier to evolve systems.  
 
12) Risk assessment 
Experts indicate knowledge and understanding of the total 
safety architecture are of primary importance to foresee 
hazards and risks. The creation of the overall safety 
architecture requires full knowledge of the risks involved. 
Organisations manage risk by identification, analysis, and 
evaluation. Safe operations are achieved by setting and 
achieving relevant goals.  
Without understanding the purpose, goals and decision 
criteria used to construct and operate systems, it is not possible 
to completely understand and most effectively prevent 
accidents [31]. Strong knowledge implies a low degree of 
uncertainty, and poor knowledge implies a high level of 
uncertainty [46]. 
 
13) Safety 
Experts acknowledge complexity in safety. It is assumed 
that richer understanding of risk assessment improves safety. 
Effective management of risk allow an organisation to 
improve its safety performance. “Practical safety is risk 
management” and once that link has been clearly established, 
the role of safety becomes significant and its value-add more 
measurable [61].  
 
These described relationships are shown in the upper part 
of the reference model in Fig. 5. This reference model 
represents the existing situation on implications with regard to 
the safety architecture of ERTMS. All ellipses represent key 
factors, meaning those influencing factors that are considered 
as the core factors or root causes. The links describe the 
existing relationships. Not all relationships come from direct 
experiences. Therefore, these relationships are indicated as an 
assumption. The existing value of a key factor is represented 
by means of a ‘+’ or ‘-’. For example, the ‘+’ next to ‘number 
of different ERTMS inclusions’ indicates a high degree. 
Quantitative classification of whether or not participants 
experience a challenge in one of the key factors is shown in 
Fig. 6. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
As for the interviews, we assure the basic quality of the 
data by forwarding the summary of the interview to each 
participant, asking for their feedback, and made corrections 
if there were any misinterpretations.  
The reference model is logically verified by consistency, 
meaning there are no internal conflicts between the key 
factors, and well-established literature to identify supporting 
evidence and contradictions. Relationships between safety 
overview and risk assessment, comprehension of the safety 
architecture and safety overview, and comprehension and 
risk assessment, are labelled as assumptions, because they are 
not described from direct experiences. We verify logically on 
internal validity and external validity. 
As for internal validity of the reference model, causes and 
effects of a key factor could have been interchanged. For 
example, a low degree of comprehension of the architecture 
that leads to a low degree of quality of overview. On the other 
hand, a low degree of quality of overview that leads to a low 
degree of comprehension of the architecture. Also, we 
experienced two causal relationships between fuzzy 
boundaries and comprehending the architecture, and between 
various languages and cultures and variety in inclusion 
ERTMS specs. In the reference model, this is shown through 
a combined relationship. 
As for external validity, findings are person and time-
related. Various participants have various experiences. They 
can interpret a key factor in a different way. Participants with 
experience between 10 and 20 years will allow fewer 
generalisation then participants with 5 years of experience 
and varying backgrounds. Also, statements of participants 
about topics that fall outside of their expertise are less reliable 
than the statements of participants that have direct experience 
with the topic. For these reasons, care is taken that collected 
data is relevant. Data obtained within the participant’s 
expertise, based on direct experience, is valued higher than 
the data from an unexperienced participant. We prevent 
asking leading questions or emphasising a specific detail of 
the 
topic. 
Challenges 
of 
key 
factors 
and 
their 
interrelationships must be suggested by the expert. An 

32
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 5. 
Upper part of the reference model on implications with regard to the safety architecture of ERTMS 
 
 
Figure 6. 
Participants experiencing challenges in key factors
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Number of stakeholders
Number of views
Number of fuzzy boundaries
Number of different languages and cultures
Number of unique design realizations
Number of procedures and processes
Comprehending the architecture
Possibility of local‐goal trade‐offs
Quality of risk assessment
Safety of ERTMS
Participants experiencing challenge [%]
Key facor

33
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
explanation of a real-life example or experience suggested by 
the participant was valued higher. 
As for the relationships that are labelled as assumption, 
we plan to verify them in a real ERTMS case that, at this 
moment, is setting up their risk analyses and evaluations. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Evaluating risks using the ALARP-principle involves 
complex and challenging explanations and interpretations of 
the desired performance levels. Time pressure and pressure 
towards cost-effectiveness can inadvertently lead to 
generating adaptive responses, wrong/missing identification 
of hazards and safety risks, and also to safety concessions. 
Addressing 
primarily 
potentially 
catastrophic 
risks 
automatically means accepting the remaining risk.  
Both internationally and nationally, stakeholders have 
different preferences for ERTMS design. In addition, 
specification interpretations by train operators, infrastructure 
providers and manufacturers vary markedly.  
A system integrator that knows the entire complex system, 
misses. A system model cannot be built by a bottom-up 
aggregation of models, derived from research in the individual 
disciplines, but by a top-down, system-oriented approach 
based on control theoretic concepts [21]. At the same time, a 
trade-off 
using 
bottom-up 
aggregation 
can 
provide 
information that helps to focus on more detailed problems of 
subsystems. Both implicit data-exchange and a missing 
integral view make it hard to perform a comprehensive safety 
assessment. 
Both international and national preferences, changing 
specifications, 
varying 
stakeholders 
and 
various 
manufacturers led to a unique realisation for every subsystem. 
Similarly, the occurrence of further transitions with 
accompanied complexity and procedures and processes that 
multiply and have wider ramifications. The checking of the 
critical specifications in natural language is a burdensome 
task.  
Since there is no integral view, local actors can change 
their conditions without, what at first glance may seem, 
apparent implications. This in turn leads to a system of a wide 
variety of subsystems, and the associated increase of 
transitions that affect safety. In view of this, in order to 
develop a safe system, the key role is that of the safety 
architect to define an integral safety architecture, representing: 
 
Safety functions.  
 
A top-down risk assessment at the railway system level 
that relies on system definition, and includes risk 
analysis and risk evaluation. 
 
A bottom-up hazard analysis of the system under 
consideration. 
 
Split-responsibility results in stakeholders that lack insight 
into cross-border information. Understanding relationships 
between risk and design can aid in communication between 
safety engineer and designer. Clear communication regarding 
safety, which supports critical system development, is 
essential. 
In practice, the unstable specifications and various 
interpretations are a major problem when dealing with such 
systems. The consequences are significant: the five ERTMS-
projects in the Netherlands (Betuweroute, Port of Rotterdam, 
HSL South, Amsterdam-Utrecht and Lelystad-Zwolle) are all 
different [12] in design and use, let alone the wider European 
variants. 
The current integral architecture lacks integrated 
knowledge, traceability, and consistency. As for safety, this 
means that the lack of availability of information makes it 
difficult to find a root cause for each hazard.  
Assuming that a safety assessment is conducted in a 
professional and scientific way, it will meet some standards 
on quality. For example, all the steps of the assessment are 
traceable, all assumptions are recorded, and all analysis 
principles and methods adopted are justified [46]. To meet 
unforeseen events and surprises, and to identify safety 
requirements at the system level, a systems engineering 
approach to safety must be treated adequately in the context 
of the social and technical system as a whole. As Kecklund 
[62] also explained: “It became clear that the work of several 
organisations and authorities at the societal level has 
implications for railway safety, and therefore, it is important 
that established channels for communication and co-
operation among these parties exist, and that there is a level 
that affords an overall, holistic perspective.”  
Current challenges concern an interdisciplinary approach 
on both the social and technical level, and how parts interact 
and fit together. Accompanying questions concern the 
acceptability of the level of incompleteness. ERTMS is a great 
example of a complex system, subject to an increasing number 
of stakeholders, various interpretations of requirements, 
where overall responsibility is split. As for safety, many and 
varied interactions among the individual components is to be 
approached proactively and qualitatively where time drain and 
pressure towards cost-effectiveness can inadvertently lead to 
generating adaptive responses.  
These challenges require improvements in resilience, 
more awareness and sensitivity for interrelationships between 
hazards and risks, but even more: comprehending the safety 
architecture and creating cross-discipline understanding. 
In this study, the effects of the safety case regime, 
interoperability, deregulation and dynamic specifications on 
the ERTMS have been researched at the Dutch national level. 
Achieving an interoperable and safer railway system by 
implementing ERTMS appears not to be straightforward for 
three key reasons: 
 The safety case argument involves descriptions and 
observations 
that 
require 
explanations 
and 
interpretations from various stakeholders having 
various points of view, skills, responsibilities and 
interests into the outcomes of the assessments. 
 For the Dutch situation, the absence of central designer 
and overall processes lowers the degree to which the 
parties succeed in effectively harmonising various 
processes. 
 An increased number of actors has caused a lack of 
insight into cross-border information. 

34
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Specifications allowing multiple interpretations result in a 
wide variety of design choices, disparities among systems, 
possible little recognition of hazards and risks, and needlessly 
cumbersome procedures. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Schuitemaker and M. Rajabalinejad, “ERTMS Challenges 
for a Safe and Interoperable European Railway System,” 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
7th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and 
Applications (PESARO 2017), pp. 17-22, April 2017. 
[2] European Commission, “ERTMS – European Rail Traffic 
Management 
System,” 
Available 
from: 
http://www.ec.europea.eu [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[3] International Union of Railways, “SafeCulture: A method for 
assessing organisational safety at interfaces,” UIC, 2004. 
[4] R. Forsberg, “Conditions affecting safety on the Swedish 
railway – Train drivers’ experiences and perceptions,” Safety 
Science, vol. 85, pp. 53-59, 2016. 
[5] Ministry of Transport, Public Works and Water Management, 
“Cost benefit analysis of implementation strategies for ERTMS 
in the Netherlands,” 2010. 
[6] Ministry 
of 
Infrastructure 
and 
the 
Environment, 
“Beleidsimpuls Railveiligheid,” 2016. 
[7] Prorail, 
“Jaarrapport 
2015. 
Analyse 
STS-passages” 
Unpublished. 
[8] P. Smith, A. Majumdar, and W. Y. Ochieng, “An overview of 
lesson learnt from ERTMS implementation in European 
railways,” Journal of Rail Transport Planning & Management, 
vol. 2, pp. 79-87, 2012. 
[9] F. Laroche and L. Guihéry, “European Rail Traffic 
Management System (ERTMS): Supporting competition on 
the European rail network?” Research in Transportation 
Business & Management, vol. 6, pp. 81-87, 2013. 
[10] M. Ghazel, “Formalizing a subset of ERTMS/ETCS 
specifications for verification purposes,” Transportation 
Research Part C, vol. 42, pp. 60-75, 2014. 
[11] European Commission, “ERTMS – FAQ on ERTMS,” 
Available from: http://www.ec.europa.eu [retrieved: March, 
2017]. 
[12] Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment, “ERTMS 
kennisboek 
versie 
2.0,” 
2014 
Available 
from: 
http://www.rijksoverheid.nl [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[13] Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment, “Eindrapport 
Lessen uit het rijden onder ERTMS Level 2 in Dual Signalling 
omstandigheden,” 
2015 
Available 
from: 
http://www.rijksoverheid.nl [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[14] J. Stoop, J. Vleugel, and J. Baggen, “Testing the untestable: 
towards pro-active safety assessment,” Proceedings of the 9th 
International probabilistic safety assessment and management 
conference (PSAM 9), May 2008, pp. 784-791, ISBN: 978-
988-99791-5-7. 
[15] L. de Haan, J.L.M. Vrancken, and Z. Lukszo, “Why is 
intelligent technology alone not an intelligent solution?” 
Futures, vol. 43, pp. 970-978, 2011. 
[16] OECD. Structural reform in the rail industry. Policy 
roundtables. 2005. 
[17] G. Alexandersson and S. Hultén, “The Swedish Deregulation 
Path,”Review of Network Economics, vol. 7, issue 1, pp. 1-19, 
March 2008. 
[18] UNIFE, “UNISIG, An industrial consortium to develop 
ERTMS/ETCS technical specifications,” Available from: 
http://www.ertms.net [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[19] European Union, “Commission Decision of 25 January 2012 
on the technical specification for interoperability relating to the 
control-command and signalling subsystems of the trans-
European rail system,” Official Journal of the European Union, 
vol. 55, pp. 1-51, February 2012. 
[20] UNIFE, “A Unique Signalling System For Europe. The long 
journey to an interoperable railway system,” Availale from 
htttp://www.ertms.net [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[21] J. Rasmussen, “Risk management in a dynamic society: a 
modelling problem,” Safety Science, vol. 27, pp. 183-213, 
1997. 
[22] N.P. Hoj and W. Kroger, “Risk analyses of transportation on 
road and railway from a European Perspective,” Safety 
Science, vol. 40, pp. 337-357, 2002. 
[23] B. G. Glaser and A. L. Strauss, “The Discovery of Grounded 
Theory: Strategies or Qualitative Research,” Weidenfeld and 
Nicolson, London, 1967. 
[24] L. Blessing and A. Chakrabarti, “DRM, a Design Research 
Methodology,” Springer-Verlag London, 2009. 
[25] European Railway Agency, “Intermediate report on the 
development of railway safety in the European Union,” 2013 
Available from: http://www.era.europa.eu [retrieved: March, 
2017]. 
[26] K. Schuitemaker, J.G. Braakhuis, and M. Rajabalinejad, “A 
Model Based Safety Architecture Framework for Dutch High 
Speed Train Lines,” Proceedings of the 10th International 
Conference on System of Systems Engineering (SoSE), May 
2015, pp. 21-29, 2015. 
[27] S. Barua, X. Gao, and M.S. Mannan, “Comparison of 
precriptive and performance-based regulatory regimes in the 
U.S.A and the U.K.,” Journal of Loss Prevention in the Process 
Industries, vol. 44, pp. 764-769. 2016. 
[28] S.Nair, J.L. de la Vara, M. Sabetzadeh, and D. Falessi, 
“Evidence management for compliance of critical systems with 
safety standards: a survey on the state of practice,” Information 
and Software Technology, vol. 60, pp. 1-15, 2015. 
[29] ERTMS Strategy Group, “National ERTMS Business 
Requirements,” 
Available 
from: 
http://www.rssb.co.uk 
[retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[30] D. Falessi, M. Sabetzadeh, L. Briand, E. Turella, T. Coq, and 
R. K. Panesar-Walawege, “Planning for Safety Standards 
Compliance: A Model-Based Toolsupported Approach,” IEEE 
Software, Vol. 29, pp. 54-70, 2011. 
[31] N.G. Leveson, “Engineering a Safer world, Systems Thinking 
Applied to Safety,” The MIT Press, 2011. 
[32] H. Priemus, “Mega-projects: Dealing with Pitfalls,” European 
Planning studies, vol. 18, pp. 1023-1039, 2010. 
[33] T. Pasquale, E. Rasaria, M. Pietro, and O. Antonio, “Hazard 
Analysis of Complex Distributed Railway Systems,” 
Proceedings of the 22nd International Symposium on Reliable 
Distributed Systems (SRDS’03), October 2003, pp. 283-292, 
ISSN: 1060-9857, ISBN: 0-7695-1955-5. 
[34] Tweede Kamer Der Staten-Generaal, “Verslagen van de 
openbare 
verhoren,” 
Available 
from: 
http://www.tweedekamer.nl [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[35] S. Nusser, “Robust Learning in Safety-Related Domains. 
Machine Learning Methods for Solving Safety-Related 
Application Problems,” Doctoral Thesis, Univ., Fak. Für 
Informatik, 2009. 
[36] B. Enserink, “Integral assessment – putting safety on the 
agenda for mitigation and preparedness,” Safety Science, vol. 
39, pp. 93-105, 2001. 
[37] N.P. Høj and W. Krӧger, “Risk analyses of transportation on 
road and railway from a European Perspective,” Safety 
Science, vol. 40, pp. 337-357, 2002.  
[38] C. Harvey and N. A. Stanton, “Safety in System-of-Systems: 
Ten key challenges,” Safety Science, vol. 70, pp. 358-366, 
2014. 

35
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[39] T. Kelly, “A Systematic Approach to Safety Case 
Management,” SAE Technical Paper, pp. 239-248, 2004. 
[40] N. Yakimets, S. Dhouib, H. Jaber, and A. Lanusse, “Model-
Driven Safety Assessment of Robotic Systems,” IEEE 
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 1137-1142, 2013. 
[41] P. 
Rook, 
“Controlling 
Software 
Projects,” 
Software 
Engineering Journal, vol. 1, pp. 7-16, 1986. 
[42] P. Mauborgne, S. Deniaud, E. Levrat, E. Bonjour, J. Micaëlli, 
and D. Loise, “Operational and System Hazard Analysis in a 
Safe Systems Requirement Engineering Process – Application 
to automotive industry,” Safety Science, vol. 87, pp. 256-268, 
2016. 
[43] K. J. Hayhurst and C. M. Holloway, “Challenges in software 
aspects of aerospace systems,” Proceedings of the 26th Annual 
NASA Goddard, August 2002. 
[44] Lutz, R, “Analyzing software requirements errors in safety-
critical, 
embedded 
systems,” 
Proceedings 
of 
IEEE 
International Symposium on Requirements Engineering, pp. 
126-133, 1993. 
[45] J. Bradley, M. Efatmaneshnik, and M. Rajabalinejad, “Toward 
a Theory of Complexity Escalation and Collapse for System of 
Systems,” Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on 
System of Systems Engineering (SoSE), pp. 7-11, 2015. 
[46] T. Aven, “Risk, Surprises and Black Swans: Fundamental 
Ideas and Concepts in Risk Assessment and Risk 
Management,” Routledge, 2014. 
[47] M. Rajabalinejad, A. Martinetti, and L. A. M. van Dongen, 
“Operation, safety and human: Critical factors for the succes of 
railway transportation,” Proceedings of the 11th System of 
Systems Engineering Conference (SoSE), pp. 1-6, 2016. 
[48] ERA, “Intermediate report on the development of railway 
safety in the European Union,” 2013. 
[49] A. S. Townsend, “Safety Can’t Be Measured – An Evidence-
based Approach To Improving Risk Reduction,” Gower 
Publishing, 2013. 
[50] J. Iglesias, A. Aranz, M. Cambronero, C. de la Roza, B. 
Domingo, J. Tamarit, J. Bueno, and C. Arias, “ERTMS 
deployment 
in 
Spain 
as 
a 
real 
demonstration 
of 
interoperability. Near future challenges,” 9th World Conference 
on Railway Research, 2011. 
[51] The Dutch Safety Board, “Train Derailment Hilversum,” 2014. 
Available from: http://onderzoeksraad.nl/ [retrieved: March 
2017]. 
[52] A. Laurino, F. Ramella, and P. Beria, “The economic 
regulation of railway networks: A worldwide survey,” 
Transportation Research Part A, vol. 77, pp. 202-212, 2015. 
[53] I. Sommervile, R. Lock, T. Storer, and J. Dobson, “Deriving 
Information Requirements from Responsibility Models,” 
Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Advanced 
Information Systems Engineering, pp. 515-529, 2009. 
[54] S. Dekker, “Drift into failure: from hunting broken components 
to understanding complex systems,” CRC Press, 2011. 
[55] European Transport Safety Council (ETSC), “Transport 
accident and incident investigation in the European Union,” 
Available from: http://www.etcs.eu [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[56] European 
Railway 
Agency, 
“Analysis 
of 
Potential 
Interoperability Problems Final Report WP4,” Available from: 
http://www.era.europea.eu [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[57] European Railway Agency, “Subset-026—2 v300,” Available 
from: http://www.era.europea.eu [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[58] G. Baxter and I. Sommerville, “Socio-technical systems: From 
design methods to systems engineering,” Interacting with 
Computers, vol. 23, pp. 4-17, January 2011. 
[59] N. G. Leveson, “A new accident model for engineering safer 
systems,” Safety Science, vol. 42, pp. 237-270, 2004. 
[60] K. Schuitemaker, M. Rajabalinejad, and J.G. Braakhuis, 
“Model-based safety architecture framework for complex 
systems,” Proceedings of the European Safety and Reliability 
Conference (ESREL), pp. 3611-3618, 2015. 
[61] S. Merchant, “Role of Safety and Product Integrity,” Procedia 
Computer Science, vol. 8, pp. 443-451, 2012. 
[62] L. Kecklund, E. Olsson, A. Jansson, G. Kecklund, and M. 
Ingre, “The Train Project: Effects of organizational factors, 
automatic train control, work hours and environment: 
suggestions for safety enhancing measures,” Proceedings of the 
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 47th Meeting, pp. 
1835-1839, 2003. 
  

