Modelling Player Combat Behaviour for Dynamic Difficulty Scaling and Combat 
Perception Analysis in First Person Shooter Games 
Paul Williamson 
School of Computing and Mathematics 
University of South Wales 
CF37 1DL, Pontypridd 
e-mail: paul.williamson@southwales.ac.uk 
Christopher Tubb 
School of Computing and Mathematics 
University of South Wales 
CF37 1DL, Pontypridd 
e-mail: christopher.tubb@southwales.ac.uk
Abstract—Non-Player Characters are a core aspect of a 
modern video game. They fulfil a wide range of roles and 
features in most genres. How they are perceived can have an 
impact on the overall enjoyment of the game, and when the 
NPCs are poorly modelled, the experience can be negative. This 
paper explores modelling human player behaviour to develop a 
combat model for NPCs, which will provide a dynamic solution 
for skill scaling. Game difficulty is a subjective notion and when 
games have a predefined classification, being able to satisfy all 
players is not realistic. This paper investigates if the combat 
model can therefore be used to scale the difficulty of the NPC in 
real-time, by dynamically adjusting a skill attribute, which is 
used by several key combat behaviours. As combat perception 
is critical to maintaining an immersive and entertaining 
experience, this paper also explores the degree of combat 
awareness exhibited by players. 
Keywords—NPC; Player Modelling; Difficulty; Combat 
Behaviour; Gameplay; FPS; Perception; Combat Awareness. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
This paper explores a player driven approach for 
dynamically adjusting the difficulty of Non-Player Characters 
(NPCs) in real-time [1]. This is achieved by modelling player 
combat gameplay. The model is then applied directly to NPCs. 
The combat efficiency is controlled by dynamically adjusting 
the variable parameters in real-time for the purpose of 
difficulty scaling. The reasoning behind modelling human-
player gameplay is to help define the generalised upper and 
lower skill level of average players. These bounds are then, in 
determining how skilfully an NPC should behave, based on 
data rather than developer interpretation. 
This paper conducts three experiments. The first 
experiment uses predetermined combat scenarios that records 
the data of human subjects, which is used to model generalised 
combat behaviours. The second experiment applies the 
combat model to NPCs, then evaluates the performance of the 
model when human subjects conduct a deathmatch scenario 
with the skill of the NPC increasing with each round. While 
the third experiment is also a deathmatch scenario, however, 
some behaviours have been altered to determine if subjects 
notice this irregularity. 
The results show that generalising human combat data 
provides a suitable base for controlling the combat 
effectiveness of NPCs. It demonstrates that by using a variable 
to denote the skill level of the NPC, the difficulty can be 
dynamically adjusted to reflect a desired outcome. 
The perception test had mixed results, with subjects 
generally displaying good combat awareness but lacking 
awareness of their surroundings. It also raised the question 
about the authenticity of subject opinions, because in several 
cases the subject made statements about the NPC that were 
not factual. 
In Section II, this paper provides a background for NPCs 
in first-person shooter (FPS) games, the role of difficulty, and 
perception. Section III discusses the motivation behind this 
paper and what impact this research could have on the gaming 
industry. In Section IV, a literature review is undertaken to 
discuss relative research, which is consistent with the NPCs in 
the FPS genre. Section V details the three experiments, the 
first is used to capture and model human subject combat 
behaviour, while the second experiment evaluates the model 
by having human subjects compete against NPCs with the 
combat model in a deathmatch scenario. The third experiment 
assesses the combat awareness of subjects by implementing 
common flaws in the combat model and then having the 
subject compete in a deathmatch. In Section VI, the results of 
the experiments are analysed and displayed. Firstly, a 
numerical comparison between the human subject data and 
NPCs is discussed. An evaluation of the feedback from human 
subjects, regarding the perception of the combat model. An 
assessment of the model when determining if the combat 
model provided a suitable solution for dynamic skill scaling. 
Lastly, the data from the combat awareness experiment is 
analysed to determine the impact of the flaws had on the 
combat experience. Section VII concludes the paper and 
discusses the impact of the combat model. Finally, Section 
VIII discusses the potential future work that can be undertaken 
to build upon the work presented in this paper.  
II. BACKGROUND 
A. Non-Player Character 
A non-player character (NPC) is a character in a video 
game that is not controlled by a player. In a first-person 
shooter (FPS) game, NPCs are often used to add depth to the 
game's story and provide opponents for the player to fight 
against. There are several types of NPCs that can be found in 
FPS games. Some NPCs are simply background characters 
that exist to add atmosphere to the game world. These NPCs 
may not interact with the player in any meaningful way and 
are simply there to create a sense of realism. Other NPCs are 
more interactive and may offer the player quests or other tasks 
to complete [2]. 
Some NPCs are friendly to the player and will offer 
assistance or information, while others are hostile and will 
66
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

attack the player on sight. There are also NPCs that are neutral 
and will only attack the player if provoked. The behaviour of 
NPCs is often determined by the player's actions and choices 
within the game. 
NPCs can also play a role in the game's story by advancing 
the plot or providing important information to the player. In 
many FPS games, the player will encounter NPCs who are key 
characters in the story and will have to interact with them in 
order to progress through the game. 
The appearance and behaviour of NPCs in FPS games can 
vary widely. Some NPCs may be highly detailed and realistic, 
while others may be more stylized or cartoonish. The AI 
(artificial intelligence) that controls NPCs can also vary in 
complexity, with some NPCs behaving in a very lifelike 
manner while others are more robotic in their actions. 
Overall, NPCs play a vital role in FPS games by providing 
opponents for the player to fight against, advancing the game's 
story, and adding depth and realism to the game world. 
Research has shown that poorly designed and/or 
developed NPCs can be detrimental to the overall enjoyment 
of a game, and that thorough modelling should be considered 
when created NPCs [3][4].  
B. Difficulty in Games 
Difficulty is a key factor that can greatly impact a player's 
enjoyment of a video game. For some players, a high level of 
challenge is an essential part of the enjoyment of a game, as it 
allows them to feel a sense of accomplishment upon 
completing a difficult task. These players may seek out games 
that are known for their high level of difficulty and enjoy the 
sense of satisfaction that comes from overcoming that 
challenge. 
On the other hand, some players may find a high level of 
difficulty to be frustrating and may not enjoy a game that is 
too difficult. These players may prefer games that offer a more 
casual or easy-going experience, allowing them to relax and 
enjoy the game without feeling overwhelmed or frustrated. 
The ideal level of difficulty for a game can vary widely 
from player to player, and many games offer options for 
adjusting the difficulty level to better suit the player's 
preferences. Some games may allow the player to choose from 
several different difficulty levels at the start of the game, while 
others may have the difficulty based on the type of experience 
the player is interested in playing. For instance, the difficulty 
could be ‘Story’ or ‘Challenge’. 
In general, a well-designed game will offer a range of 
difficulty levels that allow players to choose the level of 
challenge that best fits their preferences. This can help to 
ensure that players of all skill levels can enjoy the game and 
find it to be a rewarding experience. 
Ultimately, the enjoyment of a game is subjective and will 
depend on the individual player's preferences and skill level. 
Some players may find a high level of difficulty to be a key 
part of the enjoyment of a game, while others may prefer a 
more relaxed and easy-going experience. By offering a range 
of difficulty levels, developers can help to ensure that a wider 
range of players can enjoy their games. 
In FPS games, difficulty is often represented in how adept 
NPCs are during combat encounters with the player. This 
presents a problem when having static difficulties because 
some players will have a skill level that is situated between 
two of the difficulty categories. Furthermore, when NPCs are 
artificially boosted, whether by increasing weapon damage or 
unnatural awareness, the player could feel a sense of 
unfairness. 
C. Definition of Combat Perception 
In an FPS game, combat perception refers to a player's 
ability to effectively and efficiently gather and process 
information about their surroundings, enemies, and allies 
during combat situations. This includes things like identifying 
enemy positions, anticipating enemy movements, spotting 
opportunities for cover and flanking, and using terrain and 
other environmental features to their advantage. 
Good combat perception is crucial, as it allows players to 
make quick and accurate decisions in the heat of battle, which 
can be the difference between success and failure. There are 
many factors that can influence a player's combat perception, 
including their skill level, game experience, and the design of 
the game itself. Some players may have naturally strong 
combat perception, while others may need to practice and 
improve their skills over time. 
As combat perception refers to the player's ability to gather 
and interpret information about the game environment, 
opponents, and their own character to make strategic decisions 
and take actions in real-time. Good combat perception 
involves being aware of one's surroundings, anticipating 
enemy movements, and reacting quickly and effectively to 
changing circumstances. 
• Situational awareness: This refers to the player's ability to 
understand what is happening around them in the game 
world. This includes things like knowing where enemies 
are located, what weapons they are using, and what their 
current objectives are. It also involves being aware of the 
layout of the environment, including cover, choke points, 
and potential flanking routes. Good situational awareness 
allows the player to make informed decisions about how 
to approach combat situations. 
• Target acquisition: This refers to the player's ability to 
identify and engage enemy targets effectively. This 
involves aiming and shooting accurately, as well as 
choosing the appropriate weapons and tactics for different 
ranges and situations. Players with good target acquisition 
can quickly and effectively eliminate enemy threats. 
• Movement: In many FPS games, the player's character can 
move around the game world in a variety of ways, 
including walking, running, crouching, and jumping. 
Good combat perception involves being able to use 
movement effectively to avoid enemy fire, take cover, or 
position oneself for an attack. Players may also need to 
consider factors such as the speed and agility of their 
character, the layout of the environment, and the 
positioning of enemies when deciding how to move. 
• Decision-making: Good combat perception also involves 
being able to make quick and effective decisions in the 
heat of battle. This may involve choosing the right 
67
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

weapons and tactics for a given situation, deciding 
whether to attack or retreat, or choosing which objectives 
to prioritize. Players with good combat perception can 
adapt to changing circumstances and make informed, 
strategic decisions. 
Therefore, when modelling NPCs from key human-based 
combat behaviours, it is pivotal to identify and model 
generalised combat patterns. This should help control the 
degree of skill of NPCs and help maintain a realistic combat 
experience where NPCs operate in a similar manner as human 
players. 
III. MOTIVATION 
A goal of this paper is to explore the purpose of different 
difficulty levels in video games and to consider how these 
levels might be classified. The difficulty of a game can affect 
how it is perceived by players, and it is important that the 
chosen difficulty level is perceived appropriately in order to 
avoid negative experiences. This is a subjective topic, as 
different players may have different preferences when it 
comes to the level of challenge they prefer in a game. 
An FPS game was chosen as the subject of study because 
it is a well-established and popular genre in the gaming 
industry and can provide useful insights into how players 
perceive and respond to increasing difficulty. FPS games 
often rely on player skills such as quick reaction time, 
accuracy, and decision-making in combat situations, which 
makes them a suitable choice for evaluating how players 
perceive changes in difficulty. By focusing on a single genre, 
the scope of the research can be kept narrow and more specific 
conclusions can be drawn from the data. It is common practice 
in the video game industry to adjust certain gameplay 
elements such as reaction time, damage dealt, and precision 
when changing the difficulty level in FPS games. 
The idea behind real-time skill scaling is that a single, 
fixed difficulty setting may not be suitable for all players. By 
adjusting NPC abilities based on the player's performance, the 
game can offer a more personalized and player-centric 
approach to difficulty. Maintaining immersion in combat is 
important because NPCs and human players are often 
perceived differently in FPS games, even when they are 
fulfilling similar roles. Real-time skill scaling could allow 
developers to balance uneven teams with NPCs without 
breaking immersion for the player, by making NPCs 
indistinguishable from human players. Combat perception is 
also a key characteristic of distinguishing which players are 
human or NPC controlled. The motivation around 
determining the generalised awareness of players, is to 
provide a better understanding which where a combat model 
for NPCs can be improved, with the focus of maintaining 
immersion. 
A study undertaken by Williamson and Tubb [5] indicated 
that gameplay could be categorised into fundamental 
behaviours and patterns that could be modelled. They 
suggested that the effects of having poorly modelled and 
designed NPCs, such as high accuracy in combat, can result 
in a negative experience and that their opponent could be 
mistaken as cheating. 
IV. RELATED RESEARCH 
A. Non-Player Characters in Combat Roles 
When discussing NPCs in a combat role, the focus will be 
primarily on the FPS genre. While NPCs have been present 
since the inception of the FPS genre, there has been some 
progress in the scope of their capabilities. Orkin [6] showed 
that NPCs could display seemingly complex characteristics, 
such as tactics, by using Goal Orientated Action Planner 
(GOAP), which enabled individual actions to be undertaken 
based on current circumstance. This technique sparked a host 
of research based around maximising the effectiveness of 
using action planners. Influenced by GOAP, Pezzato et al. [7] 
researched a technique that uses active interference and 
Behavioural Trees (BT) to develop decision-based plans, 
which are adaptable and created in real-time for robotics.  
However, Agis et al. [8] suggest that because GOAP are 
individual by design, NPCs are not actively cooperating with 
allies and just giving the illusion of working as a team. They 
proposed using a new form of Event Driven Behavioural Tree 
(EDBT), 
where 
three 
extra 
nodes 
are 
added 
for 
communication purposes between same team NPCs. These 
nodes facilitate actions in a sub-tree, so the sender can request 
the receiver/s to perform certain actions. 
 Neufeld et al. [9] propose that behavioural trees are a good 
approach to NPC decision-making, when combined with a 
Hierarchical Task Network (HTN). The HTN was able to 
instruct multiple NPCs what to do but leave the low-level 
execution of tasks to the BTs. When comparing this hybrid 
approach against a pure HTN solution. The results showed the 
hybrid approach to be more flexible and fail less often. 
B. Human Imitation 
The idea to measure and quantify the skill of human 
players is not a new idea and in essence this research is akin 
to work undertaken to develop NPCs to appear more 
believable. While believability can have many interpretations 
depending on the context of the topic, this paper is focused on 
NPCs with a generalised skill level. Camilleri et al. [10] 
identify believability as: 
Player believability is a highly subjective notion 
commonly viewed as the ability of a game playing 
character to convince observers that it is being controlled 
by a human player 
This suggests that for an NPC to be deemed as a believable 
character, it needs to exhibit human-like behaviours. So, 
observers are convinced the character is human controlled. In 
the context of the FPS genre, these behaviours will range from 
combat efficiency to pathfinding characteristics and decisions. 
 Polceanu et al. [11] presented two solutions for imitating 
human player behaviour. The first is a human behaviour 
mirror technique, while the second uses interactive genetic 
algorithms. This is supported by Mora et al. [12], they 
combined the techniques to create a hybridisation model. 
When experimented in a Turin Test scenario, the results 
showed that a high level of “humanness” was achieved. 
The importance of imitating human players extends 
beyond difficulty scaling. Wehbe et al. [13] argue that the 
difference between playing with other human participants and 
68
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

NPC is profound because it intersects the artificial world of 
the game with real life. They also imply that quasi-feudalistic 
tendencies of human players should be encouraged in NPCs 
where possible. 
C. Difficulty Control in FPS Games 
When discussing difficulty control, it is important to 
define the terminology in the context of a video game. 
Smeddinck et al. [14] state: 
Game difficulty choices that are presented in menus with 
typical labels such as “easy, medium, hard” can be found 
even in very early and simple games. The “classic way to 
present difficulty choices” has arguably evolved largely as 
a matter of technical circumstance. 
This suggests that difficulty has been part of video games for 
a long time and has needed to evolve out of necessity.  
Hendrix et al. [15] showed a positive result when 
developing a six-point system, which gathers data and applies 
an algorithm to determine the capabilities of the player 
through engagement. 
Blom et al. [16] have taken a different approach to 
identifying the currently perceived difficulty experienced by 
the player. They developed a system that monitors facial 
expressions to determine the difficulty the subject is 
experiencing, achieving 72% accuracy. The model was able 
to adapt to the individual’s performance level via their facial 
expression and establish which tasks or challenges presented 
the most difficulty. 
The research shows that while difficulty may be an easily 
defined concept, problems occur when putting the theory into 
practice. For the remainder of this paper, difficulty will be 
defined as: 
The degree of challenge presented to an individual when 
undertaking game related tasks or mechanics. 
These tasks can range from game objectives, such as solving 
puzzles or combat interactions that relies on eliminating 
opponents. 
The idea of a personalised approach to NPC development 
is not a novel idea. Research by Bakkes [17] discusses the 
notion of using player models to generate an individualistic 
experience. Their research shows that a few viable techniques 
have been examined [18]-[20]. These techniques mainly use 
NPC training methods or manipulate external constraints, 
such as environmental, to achieve the desired outcome. 
However, the purpose of this paper is to use generalised player 
data to control the combat efficiency of NPCs, which can be 
adapted in real-time. 
D. Impact of Perception 
There is a growing body of research relating to combat 
perception and/or behaviours in FPS games. Moreira et al. 
[21] argue that there are negative experiences when playing 
against an opponent that is much weaker or stronger. For 
weaker players, they experience frustration because they are 
likely to lose, and the stronger players have a lower sense of 
challenge which can manifest into boredom. They proposed 
three systems to help bridge the gap between the varying skill 
levels: 
• Better aim assist: They used a system in which implements 
a bullet magnetism effect, which is where bullets are 
slightly attracted to the target. 
• Activation and duration: This system dynamically controls 
when aim assist should be active. 
• Variable manipulation: This system varies some of the 
game variables, such as weapon damage. 
While this approach yielded extremely positive results, 
and the overall enjoyment of their subjects increased, there is 
an issue of fairness which could manifest into something 
negative if a player thinks their opponent is be artificially 
boosted because it could appear as though their opponent is 
cheating. This perception is essential to this research because 
when a player ‘feels’ they are at a disadvantage through no 
fault of their own, it can affect the entertainment value [22]-
[24].  
Choi et al. [25] used a different approach in which they 
developed a cognitive architecture to control how NPCs act 
throughout an FPS game. They created a system called 
‘ICARUS’ which exhibited reactive and goal orientated 
behaviours, that were designed to imitate human-like 
gameplay. This system is based on psychological theories of 
human intelligence, it differentiates between short-term and 
long-term memories, and stores information in symbolic list 
structures. It operates in cycles of recognition and action, and 
its learning process is incremental and integrated with 
performance. The ICARUS architecture records the actions 
and observations of the NPC during exploration and tries to 
explain how these actions contributed to achieving the goal. It 
does this by linking known skills and concepts, and by 
creating generic templates for basic action models to explain 
any 
unexpected 
changes. 
ICARUS 
converts 
these 
explanations into new skills that can be used to achieve similar 
goals in the future, including strategies, route knowledge, and 
ways to overcome obstacles. 
J. Asensio et al. [26] conducted research on the idea of 
imitating human behaviour by implementing a two-tier 
system. The system used symbols to represent and understand 
the world and artificial neural networks (ANN) to replicate the 
human nervous system's ability to adapt and recognize 
patterns. When this system was tested using the Turin Test for 
Bots, the results indicated a positive trend towards the NPC's 
perceived "humanness". This research shows that players' 
perceptions of NPCs are important and experimenting via a 
Turin Test, it removes knowledge that the subject is playing 
against an NPC. Therefore, identifying the degree of 
generalized combat perception exhibited by players is crucial 
in determining how much imitation is necessary to pass as a 
human player. 
V. EXPERIMENTS 
A set of experiments were done to study the combat 
effectiveness of human subjects, including a perception test to 
measure their level of combat awareness. First, a combat 
modelling experiment was required, where subjects undertake 
a series of combat scenarios and their data recorded. The data 
is used to develop a combat model and then the NPC with the 
combat model undertakes the same experiment. Next, subjects 
69
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

are tasked with competing against NPCs with the combat 
model, with increasing difficulty as the stages progress. 
Lastly, subjects fight against NPCs with the combat model in 
a deathmatch scenario, however, key gameplay behaviours 
have been altered which will help evaluate the awareness of 
the subjects. 
The purpose of these experiments is to find patterns in the 
combat gameplay, which can be modelled and applied to 
NPCs. After modelling, the experiments evaluate how well 
the model works in a deathmatch scenario, which is a popular 
game mode in FPS games. The objective for the perception 
test is to see where the focus of the modelling should be, 
because if subjects notice that the model has unnatural 
elements to the combat, it will mean the attention to detail of 
the model will need to be very high. 
A. Experimantal Environment 
The experiments in this paper were created using Unity3D 
and were uploaded to an online server. Participants had to 
download and run the experiments on their own computers. 
The first experiment took about 15 minutes to finish, and data 
was saved and uploaded to an online database after each stage. 
The second and third experiment took 10 minutes each, and 
also had an accompanying questionnaire that participants 
completed through a web browser. Data from this experiment 
was also saved online after each stage. 
In both experiments, the subjects were not identifiable by 
name and no personal information was collected. No specific 
skills or knowledge were required to participate. The data 
collected during the experiments did not contain any 
identifying information that could be linked to a specific 
individual. As the subjects were anonymous participants and 
it was conducted online, a certain level of control was reduced. 
To help protect and verify the integrity of the data, the actions 
of the subjects was also saved, this enabled the researchers to 
watch all of the entries and look for any irregularities. It 
should be noted that as a consequence of anonymity, it was 
possible for participants to run the experiments multiple of 
times, there was no data to suggest this happened. For the 
combat behaviour experiment, a total of 30 subjects fully 
completed the experiment, and for the dynamic difficulty 
experiment, a total of 21 participants. 
B. Combat Behaviour Experimental Protocol 
The experiment involved five scenarios in which the 
actions and decisions of the subjects were recorded as they 
completed each task. Each scenario had three levels of 
difficulty, with the targets appearing at various distances from 
the subjects. The subjects were not able to move, except to 
turn, and the targets randomly appeared within their field of 
view. These scenarios were chosen because they represent 
typical combat situations in first-person shooter games. It was 
determined that it would be best to only model the basic 
scenarios and evaluate the effectiveness of the skill scaling 
system rather than including more complex scenarios that may 
not be applicable in all modern games. The specific scenarios 
were derived by analysing how combat emerges and the 
various conditions, and through an examination of literature 
focused on combat [6][27][28]. The importance of these 
scenarios can be seen in research undertaken by Conroy [27], 
they devised a model where NPCs calculated the degree of 
threat based on their current situation and part of the threat 
analysis is whether to engage in combat based on state of the 
opposition. They showed that distance to opponents has an 
impact on combat behaviour and was reflected in the results. 
While Rayner [28] conducted research focused on cursor-
based mechanics, which partly discusses the implications of 
modelling player behaviour when the crosshair is in the centre 
of the screen. They also suggest that skill is therefore based on 
how fast a player can control the targeting across a 2D plane, 
whilst also being accurate so the target remains in the centre 
of the screen. 
Figure 1 shows an example of a target, all targets spawn 
facing the subject and are eliminated from a single shot. 
 
 
Figure 1. Example of Target 
 
While it is understood that in most FPS games targets will 
take more damage if hit in a particular spot, however, this 
experiment does not employ such mechanics as the objective 
is to observe the combat behaviour as well as combat 
efficiency. 
The experiment cycles through all weapons and stances 
until the subject has completed all scenarios using both 
weapons and both stances. The weapons and stances are as 
follows: 
• Pistol: Off hip 
• Pistol: Aiming down sights 
• Assault Rifle: Off hip 
• Assault Rifle: Aiming down sights 
Figure 2 shows an example of both pistol and assault rifle 
from the perspective of shooting off the hip. In this stance each 
weapon has a crosshair in the middle of the screen and when 
shooting, the shots will be towards the centre of the crosshair. 
When the weapon is continuously shot, the size of the 
crosshair grows, making the weapon less accurate, until they 
stop firing and the crosshair recedes back to normal size. The 
purpose of this is see how accurate subjects are when tasked 
with this constraint, because it is possible to increase accuracy 
by controlling the about of burst firing. 
 
70
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 2. Off the Hip 
 
Figure 3 shows an example of both assault rifle and pistol 
when aiming down the sights. When aiming down the sights 
there are no crosshairs, the subject will need to use pip on the 
sights. Both guns have kickback, with the pistol having a large 
kickback, and the assault rifle small. The reason this 
experiment is required is because it will compare how 
efficient subjects are when attempting the same problem with 
different means. 
 
 
Figure 3. Aiming Down Sights 
 
The purpose of the experiments is to understand how the 
use of different weapons and the way they are held can 
influence combat behaviour and effectiveness. This 
information will be used to create realistic models of weapon 
behaviour and to assess the impact of these behaviours on 
game difficulty. All targets in the experiments are identical 
and have a fixed amount of health that is depleted when they 
are hit. When the health of a target reaches zero, it is 
destroyed. 
a) Normal Scenario 
In this scenario, the objective is to eliminate the target 
before it self-destructs. Targets spawn one at a time and the 
subject has 2 seconds to eliminate before it disappears, a new 
target will not spawn until the current target is destroyed or 
self-destructs, there is also a small delay between target being 
destroyed and a new one spawning. The purpose of this 
scenario is to measure the player's accuracy and reaction time 
at different distances from the target (near, medium, far) to 
understand the average reaction time in a normal scenario. A 
total of five targets spawn at each distance, is within view of 
the subject’s field of view, and are facing the subject. Figure 
4 provides an example of a target spawning at a medium 
distance. 
 
 
Figure 4. Normal Scenario Screenshot 
 
This scenario represents a common encounter in an FPS 
game because it highlights how subjects react when they first 
observe their target. 
b) Increased Spawn Rate 
This scenario was conducted to see if the presence of 
additional targets while a subject is already in the process of 
eliminating another target, affects the subject's reaction time 
and combat efficiency. Specifically, the experiment aimed to 
investigate whether external influences can negatively impact 
combat efficiency and if so, to what extent. There are three 
stages which correspond to near, medium, and far distance, 
each stage will have a total of five targets. Similar to the single 
target scenario, the target self-destruct after 2 seconds, 
however, the spawn rate of targets is increased as the stages 
advance. The first stage (near) has a spawner time of 1.8 
seconds, second stage (medium) 1.6 seconds, and last stage 
(far) 1.4 second, this provides a situation where a subject is 
likely to have multiple targets on the screen at a given time. 
While more aggressive spawn times could have been used, it 
was decided that the scenario was to observe how subjects 
react when a new target appears and if it affects their combat 
performance and decision-making, rather than overwhelming 
subjects. 
Figure 5 shows an instance of the scenario when the 
targets are at a far distance. 
 
 
Figure 5. Increased Spawn Rate Screenshot 
 
71
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The importance of this scenario is to observe the combat 
behaviour when a new target appears, because in most FPS 
there will be times when combat is underway, and a new threat 
appears. It is important to determine if subjects’ efficiency 
decreases because their focus is momentarily altered. 
c) Grouped Targets 
In this scenario, multiple targets may appear at the same 
time, as is common in modern games. The scenario also 
involves a three-stage approach, with an increasing number of 
targets spawning simultaneously as the stages progress. In the 
near stage, there are three targets, in the medium stage there 
are five targets, and in the far stage there are seven targets. 
Each target remains visible for five seconds before 
disappearing. This scenario is designed to study the pattern of 
behaviour exhibited when multiple opponents suddenly 
appear, rather than appearing after the combat is already 
underway. 
This scenario differs from the increased spawn rate 
because the targets are all present and in view from the start 
of a round. The increase spawn rate scenario analyses how 
subjects adapt to a new target appearing while they are 
currently engaging a different target, whereas the grouped 
targets scenario addresses how subjects formulate attack 
strategies on multiple targets and the impact it has on combat 
efficiency. 
Figure 6 displays a screenshot of the grouped targets at a 
medium distance. 
 
 
Figure 6. Grouped Targets Screenshot 
 
This scenario is the often experienced when a player enters 
a new and/or open area, multiple enemies can be in view and 
then player needs to quickly form a targeting strategy. 
d) Varying Size 
In this scenario, the normal scenario stage is repeated but 
with target size decreasing as the stages progress. The purpose 
of this is to determine if precision has a significant impact on 
combat efficiency. The near stage will have a normal target 
size, medium stage the size will be 0.9x and the far stage a size 
of 0.8x. This scenario will help factor precision into the 
modelling, if the results suggest that there is a combat 
performance drop due to the target size.  Figure 7 shows a 
screenshot of a target during the last stage when the targets 
spawn far away from the subject. 
 
 
Figure 7. Smaller Target Screenshot 
 
This scenario represents conditions when a player spots a 
target that is far away, or when smaller and specific parts of 
the target provide bonus damage when attacked. For instance, 
it is common in FPS games when attacking a humanoid enemy 
in the head, often referred as a ‘headshot’, it yields a lot higher 
damage than attacking not critical parts such as arms or legs. 
e) Moving Target 
In this scenario, targets appear every 2.5 seconds and 
disappear after 5 seconds. The targets move from left to right 
at a constant speed, reversing direction when they reach the 
edge of a predefined boundary. It follows the same set up as 
the normal target scenario, regarding near, medium, and far 
stages. A total of five targets spawn per stage, and when 
moving targets rotate to face the subject, this was to keep the 
targets area size the same regardless of the offset angle from 
the location of the subject. A new target spawns every 2 
seconds, therefore, if the targets are not eliminated quickly 
enough, they may overlap on the screen. The purpose of this 
scenario is to see if combat efficiency is affected by the 
presence of moving targets. 
C. Dynamic Difficulty Experimental Protocol 
This experiment involves a deathmatch with the goal of 
achieving a set number of eliminations before the opposition 
does. In this case, the requirement is set at 5 eliminations. The 
experiment has three stages, and as the stages progress, the 
base skill level of the non-player characters (NPCs) is 
increased. The stages and their corresponding base skill levels 
are as follows: 
• Stage One: NPC Base Skill is 3 
• Stage Two: NPC Base Skill is 6 
• Stage Three: NPC Base Skill is 9 
Along with the subject there are two NPC opponents, as it 
is a deathmatch, all players are hostile, this means NPCs will 
attack each other as well as the subject. One NPC uses a pistol 
and the other uses an assault rifle. Both weapons have a sub 
model that affects attack distance and has its own attributes, 
such as clip size and bullet damage. 
72
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Subjects will be equipped with three different weapons, 
which can be selected by pressing 1,2 or 3 on the keyboard. 
All weapons have separate ammunition, weapon damage and 
bullet spread. Table 1 highlights the key attributes for each 
weapon. 
 
Table 1. Weapon Details 
Weapon 
Description 
Pistol 
The pistol has high recoil and kickback, slow 
fire-rate, but deals high damage 
Assault 
Rifle 
This weapon has high fire-rate, medium 
damage, and moderate recoil 
Shotgun 
The shotgun fires 12 pellets per shot, each of 
which deal low damage, high recoil, and high 
pellet spread over range 
 
There are two types of collectables scattered throughout 
the map. There are three medic-packs and three ammunition 
packs, the location for each collectable is the same across all 
instances and available to both subject and NPC. The 
collectable is collected by moving over it, after which it will 
be destroyed and then respawns 5 seconds later at the same 
location. The medic pack provides up to 50% health, 
depending how much missing health the character has, and the 
ammunition resupplies up to one clip worth for the currently 
equipped weapon. Figure 8 displays an example of a medic 
and ammunition pack. 
 
 
Figure 8. Health and Ammunition 
 
The purpose of this experiment is to assess the 
effectiveness of the combat model in terms of adjusting the 
combat capabilities of NPCs based on the base skill level. This 
skill scaling is important because in a real-world setting, there 
is a range of player skill levels, and the model needs to be able 
to adapt to these different levels. If NPCs can increase or 
decrease their combat efficiency in real-time, it would allow 
for more challenging NPCs and provide a way to match the 
skill level of the player during a game. 
a) Combat Model 
The model is based on data and results from an experiment 
called the "Combat Behaviour Experiment." The goal of the 
model is to make the NPCs behave in a way that resembles 
human combat behaviour. The NPCs' combat efficiency is 
linked to a skill variable that can range from 1 to 10, with 10 
representing very high efficiency and 1 representing very poor 
efficiency. In this paper, the NPC's skill level is set to 5, which 
represents an average level of efficiency based on the data 
from the Combat Behaviour Experiment. The concept of skill 
in this context refers to how well the NPC performs in combat 
compared to the average performance level observed in the 
experiment. 
When creating the combat model, only standardised 
development techniques were considered during the 
modelling, which were suitable with the data captured from 
the combat behaviour experiment. As the experiment uses 
Unity3D, it was decided that scripting and object orientated 
programming would be the best solution, as the model will be 
using coroutines and multiple scripts accessing the model data 
at a given time.  
It was important to capture some of the highs and lows that 
players often experience during a game. This is when players 
have a run of successful eliminations called ‘hot streak’, or a 
run of losses called ‘cold streak’. These streaks are directly 
linked to the combat efficiency of a player, therefore, the 
model tracks how well the NPC is currently performing and 
adjusts the active skill level to incorporate cold and hot 
streaks. However, it was important that there was a limit to 
how much influence a streak can have on the NPC, this 
prevents NPCs drifting to far from the initial base skill level. 
There are three main factors that affect the active skill level 
(Table 2). 
 
Table 2. Active Skill Modifiers 
Modifier 
Description 
Weapon 
Like players, NPCs have a ‘preferred’ 
weapon/s. When they have a favourite 
weapon equipped, it increases the active 
skill by up to +1. 
Death 
Resets the active hot streak, if the NPC is 
not in a hot streak, they enter a cold steak 
adding -0.5 to the active skill. 
Eliminations 
Resets the active cold streak, if the NPC is 
not in a cold streak, they enter a hot steak 
adding +0.5 to the active skill. 
 
The active skill is accumulative, with an upper limit of 
+2.5 and a lower limit of -2.5. Therefore, if an NPC has a base 
skill level of 5, the active skill level can be a maximum of 7.5 
and a minimum of 2.5. 
As NPCs could not change weapons during this 
experiment, it was decided to provide them with +1 to the 
weapon skill modifier. 
The activate skill is determined by the base skill, weapon 
modifier and current streak. This allows for some flexibility 
in how the NPC performs, rather than a static or manufactured 
combat efficiency. The active skill directly features in the 
equations for reaction time and accuracy. 
Equation (1) shows how active skill was used to control 
the aiming speed, considering the location and size of the 
target in the field of view of the game camera. 
 
Reaction Time = 𝑇𝑠 + ((𝑆 ∗ 𝑀) ∗ 𝐷𝑥)
𝐷𝑧
 
(1) 
 
Where, Ts is the target size, S the active skill attribute, M 
is a generic modifier, Dx the 2D distance from the centre of 
73
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the screen to the target and Dz the Euclidean distance from the 
NPC to the target. This represents a comprehensive approach 
to targeting because it considers not only the size of the target 
(Ts) but also the distance (Dz). This was required because the 
further away the target was in game, the smaller it would 
appear on the screen. This underscores the importance of 
precision when determining the initial reaction targeting 
speed. 
The Equations (2) and (3) are for accuracy, it was decided 
to separate the two shooting stances as looking down sights 
should provide better control than shooting off the hip. 
 
Aiming =  Vp +  Vf ∗ (Mx + (My ∗  S)) 
(2) 
 
Vp is the vector position and Vf the vector forward 
direction of the NPC, Mx and My are generic modifiers and S 
the active skill of the NPC. 
 
Off Hip = Vp +  Vf ∗ (Mx ∗  S)
𝑆𝑥 ∗  𝑊𝑠
 
(3) 
 
Like the aiming equation, Vp is the vector position and Vf 
the vector forward direction of the NPC, Mx a generic 
modifier and S the active skill of the NPC. However, Sx is the 
locale scale of the crosshair and Ws is the equipped weapon 
bullet spread. As previously stated, the bullet spread is 
focused on the crosshair, and the longer the weapon is 
continuously fired, the bigger the crosshair grows, making it 
more inaccurate. 
D. Combat Perception Experiment 
The perception experiment was developed in the same 
way as the dynamic difficulty experiment. It consisted of a 
deathmatch in which the subject will be against two NPCs in 
an all vs all scenarios. As the intention is to determine if 
subjects can identify inconsistencies in the combat, both NPCs 
have a static skill level of 5. This represents an averaged 
skilled opponent, and it was important to maintain an even 
level of combat efficiency so that perception was consistent 
across all subjects. 
The objective of the experiment was to achieve 8 
eliminations before any of the NPCs. There were three combat 
perception focused areas: 
• Omniscient Player Awareness: When the NPC is 
ambushed and attacked from behind, the NPC will be 
given the location of the attacker. This will enable them to 
have omniscient awareness of its target in combat only. 
• Aggressive Combat Personality: During combat the NPCs 
will make a beeline towards the subject, attacking as it 
moves. The NPC will not break off combat until its target 
is eliminated or it loses sight of the target for a period.  
• Non-Smooth Pathing when Roaming: During roaming the 
path smoothing has been removed. This is where when the 
NPC requests a path, no extra smoothing technique has 
been used. This makes NPCs movement somewhat 
jagged/jerky at times, when scrutinised from an observer. 
These perceptions were specifically designed as they 
target different areas of interaction with players. The 
omniscient player awareness will determine if subjects can 
identify that they have no advantage when trying to ambush 
the NPC. This is essential because it will show that players 
have an understanding about opponent reaction times, and 
when they know their opponent has not seen them, the 
reaction behaviour should different than when they know they 
have been spotted. 
The aggressive combat personality will determine if 
subjects can identify and form opinions of opponents 
attacking behaviours. If subjects identify the aggressive 
attacking, it will mean that to fully encapsulate believability, 
NPCs will need to have a range of combat personalities in 
which how the engage in combat will impact if they are 
believable. 
The non-smooth pathing when roaming will test the 
observational ability of subjects when not in combat. The 
main purpose is to see how much attention subjects give to 
their opponents, or if the main concern is focused on 
maximising their combat advantage. If subjects can notice the 
NPCs sometimes jagged pathing, it will mean that all areas of 
the NPCs behaviours will be under scrutiny by players. This 
has a severe impact on the modelling because it means that a 
consistent level of detail will be required across all gameplay. 
VI. RESULTS 
According to the results of the study, it is effective to 
model human behaviour in order to create NPCs with dynamic 
skills in a video game. It is also possible to generalize the 
efficiency of combat in this way. Additionally, the method of 
skill scaling, which adjusts the combat efficiency of NPCs in 
real-time gameplay, was found to be very effective. However, 
when evaluating the level of awareness possessed by players, 
specifically when in combat situations, the results was mixed. 
Furthermore, some subjects had negative opinions regarding 
the combat, which were based on a false awareness that NPCs 
had perfect accuracy. 
a) Combat Model Analysis Comparison 
The analysis of the combat model shows that it was 
generally well received, but there are some areas of the 
combat that need more attention. The purpose of this analysis 
is to determine two key objectives about the combat model: 
• Statistically: How does did the model perform from 
numerical perspective, when compared to human subjects. 
• Perceptually: What was the overall perception of the 
combat behaviour of NPCs and how human-like did they 
appear. 
The results suggest subjects were fairly accurate in their 
perception of NPC combat efficiency because the combat 
model was over tuned which increase NPC accuracy. 
The graph in Figure 9 illustrates the average shooting 
accuracy for both NPCs at each stage, as well as the overall 
shooting accuracy for all subjects when playing against NPCs 
with a base skill of 3 (stage 1). The data suggests that while 
the scaling was effective, the NPCs may have been too 
difficult in general. 
74
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 9. Shooting Accuracy Comparison. 
 
Figure 10 displays the feedback from subjects when asked 
which part of the NPCs combat behaviour was the weakest. 
This was a multichoice question, therefore, subjects were able 
to select more than one aspect of combat. The accuracy relates 
to the overall shooting accuracy of NPCs, the targeting refers 
to how much the NPCs lock on to subjects, player awareness 
is focused on how much omniscient awareness did the NPC 
appear to have, and reaction speed in how quickly NPCs could 
aim and shoot when spotting a subject. 
 
 
Figure 10. Combat Perception Analysis. 
 
The results highlight that accuracy was significantly the 
most pressing issue, with more than 85% of the subjects 
stating it was not human-like. This is followed by targeting 
with more than half of the subjects suggesting NPCs had 
unnatural targeting in combat. The reaction time of the 
subjects was higher than expected. This indicates that the 
subjects had difficulty competing with the NPCs. One 
potential solution to this issue is to lower the modifier in the 
reaction time equation. However, more testing will be needed 
to determine the optimal adjustments to the model. 
When asking subjects about how believable the NPCs 
appeared, in relation to human players, the results were mixed. 
Figure 11 shows that none of the subjects thought the NPCs 
were human-like, but 50% thought they were somewhat 
human-like. 
 
 
Figure 11. Combat Feedback. 
 
While the feedback did not state that the model had 
human-like combat behaviour, it did show that potentially, the 
model could be tweaked and revised to be more accurate. 
b) Gameplay Influence 
When looking at the feedback, it became clear that other 
gameplay elements were influencing people's perceptions of 
the combat's realism. This meant that issues with the NPC's 
navigation were causing subjects to have negative views on 
the NPC's combat abilities. This is highlighted when analysing 
the specific responses from subjects when asked about non-
combat elements. One of the responses, shown in Figure 12, 
emphasises that other gameplay aspects like navigation can 
affect how believable the combat appears. 
 
 
Figure 12. Specific Combat Subject Feedback. 
 
This shows that different gameplay elements are 
interconnected. When one aspect is not modelled well, it can 
affect the perceptions of other elements and cause undesirable 
results. This means that when creating models for certain 
behaviours, it's important to consider how they may impact 
other behaviours in certain situations. 
c) Skill Scaling 
The skill scaling seemed to work well based on the 
feedback, when asking the subjects if they noticed the 
63
77
90
32
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy
ACCURACY (%)
Shooting Accuracy Comparison
Base Skill level 3
Base Skill level 6
Base Skill level 9
Subjects
85.7
57.1
23.8
42.9
0
20
40
60
80
100
Combat Behaviour
SUBJECT RESPONSES (%)
Combat Perception Analysis
Accuracy
Targeting
Player Awareness
Reaction Speed
75
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

difficulty increasing as they progressed through the stages 
(Figure 13). Of the respondents, 57.1% noticed an increase in 
difficulty, while 42.9% did not notice if the difficulty changed 
as the stages progressed. 
 
 
Figure 13. Difficulty Identification Feedback. 
 
This suggests that the combat model could be a viable 
option for creating NPCs with adaptable real-time difficulty. 
It should be noted that this is the perception of difficulty, and 
it could be suggested it is common for a player to experience 
higher difficulty when getting familiar with a game. However, 
when analysing the combat efficiency of NPCs, the data 
shows they did become better, and this could have been 
noticed by the subjects. This would support the idea that 
players have some understanding of the combat abilities of 
their opponents. As a result, this would emphasize that a one-
size-fits-all approach to difficulty will not work for all players. 
When looking at the pistol combat performance for the 
three different difficulties, a pattern emerges where the 
individual combat behaviours improved as the base skill level 
increased (Figure 14). 
 
 
Figure 14. Pistol Damage Done Skill Comparison. 
 
This indicates that as the base skill level increased, the 
average amount of damage inflicted by the NPC also 
increased. This suggests that the NPC's combat efficiency 
improved with a higher base skill level. This is supported by 
the analysis of the average initial reaction time for the assault 
rifle across all three stages (Figure 15). 
 
 
Figure 15. NPC Skill Reaction Time Initial Comparison. 
 
The results suggest that there is a small relationship 
between reaction time and active skill level. While there is 
some variation, this could be caused by changes in active skill 
level due to the triggering of hot and cold streaks. 
Figure 16 looks at the first and third stages only and shows 
the average number of eliminations for each character. On 
average, the subjects did not perform very well and the NPC 
with the assault rifle was particularly effective, especially in 
the first stage. 
 
 
Figure 16. Eliminations Comparison. 
 
This data supports the idea that the NPC's accuracy was 
too high and will be less effective after balancing. However, 
when looking at the NPC with the pistol, the data showed that 
it improved as its skill level increased. This had a noticeable 
322
441
480
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Pistol
TOTAL DAMAGE DONE
Pistol Analysis
Base Skill Level 3
Base Skill Level 6
Base Skill Level 9
1
0.8
0.67
0
0.5
1
Assualt Rifle
TIME (S)
Initial Reaction Time
Base Skill Level 3
Base Skill Level 6
Base Skill Level 9
2.1
3.6
4.3
4
2.3
1.5
0
1
2
3
4
5
Stage 1
Stage 3
ELIMINATIONS ACHIEVED
Eliminations Comparison
Pistol
Assault Rifle
Human
76
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

impact because both the subjects and the assault rifle NPC's 
elimination count decreased. While further experimentation 
and refinement of the model is necessary, this is a promising 
result. 
This model and set of algorithms are innovative because 
they could allow the NPC's combat efficiency to be directly 
affected by the skill level of the player. More research is 
needed to accurately track the skill of the player in real time 
so that the NPC can adjust its own skill level to create a 
personalized difficulty experience that is tailored to the 
player's individual skill level. 
d) Perception 
The results indicate that subjects had a good sense of 
awareness. When specifically analysing the omniscient player 
awareness test, most of the subjects stated not only did they 
notice the unnatural ability to locate the subject when they are 
ambushing, but it has a detrimental effect on how the NPC 
was perceived. Figure 17 shows a selection of responses from 
subjects when they were asked which aspect of the NPCs 
combat was the least believable when compared to a human. 
 
 
Figure 17. Combat Perception Feedback 
 
This is further supported when highlighting the subject 
responses when asked a multichoice question about key 
combat behaviours from the combat perception experiment 
only (Figure 18). 
 
 
Figure 18. Combat Multichoice Feedback 
 
This negative reaction shows that when developers try to 
take shortcuts on NPC combat modelling, the results can 
severely impact the perception of the NPC. This is further 
supported when discussing the aggressive combat personality 
because a selection of subjects commented on how they 
noticed NPCs would move in such a way, where it appeared, 
the NPC was always committed to a destroy or be destroyed 
mentality (Figure 19). 
 
 
Figure 19. Specific Feedback 
 
This feedback highlights that subjects’ perceptions may 
not always be correct or a fair reflection of the NPCs. The 
comment about NPCs not acquiring ammunition is factually 
incorrect, as the data shows NPCs consistently looked for 
ammunition when they were below a threshold. When 
scrutinising the feedback further, it became apparent that 
subjects’ opinions about some of the NPC’s characteristic was 
wrong. The main complaint about the NPC combat was that 
they were overly accurate and never missed, however, the data 
shows that while the accuracy was higher than an average 
subject, NPCs did not have perfect accuracy when shooting. 
This adds complexity to the modelling because if the subjects’ 
perceptions do not match the numerical data, it could mean 
the modelling will need to account for incorrect perceptions. 
It is interesting that subject perceptions were significantly 
higher in combat situations, than when they were observing 
the NPCs from a distance. Figure 20 shows the feedback from 
subjects when asked to comment on the navigation 
performance of the NPCs, and which part of the pathing 
finding was the least believable. 
 
 
Figure 20. Navigation Feedback 
 
There is no commenting on the NPCs having a jagged 
pathing when roaming, but significant feedback on how the 
NPCs moved in combat. This suggests that perceptions are not 
even across all aspects of gameplay, instead the subjects were 
more likely to perceive something as ‘off’ when directly 
interacting with the NPCs. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The objective of this paper was to develop a dynamically 
skill scaling combat modelled based off data acquired from 
human subjects.  
This paper has shown that the combat model provided a 
good solution for modelling human combat behaviours, 
however, more research is required to improve the modifier 
weight in relation to the active skill of the NPC. There is 
77
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

evidence to suggest that modelling combat alone would not be 
enough to create dynamic NPCs, several subjects referred to 
the pathfinding/navigation when asked to provide feedback on 
the combat behaviours. Therefore, it could be argued that 
gameplay behaviours are uniquely intertwined and when one 
gameplay behaviour is poorly modelled, it can influence other 
behaviours. 
The skill scaling showed a positive result, the data 
highlighted that there is a somewhat linear change in reaction 
time and accuracy, as the skill of the NPC was increased. This 
was noted by 57.1% of the subjects, with zero subjects stating 
that they thought the NPCs did not increase in difficulty. 
However, the combat efficiency of the NPC was deemed to be 
too high, even on the easiest difficulty stage, this was 
supported when analysing the number of eliminations 
achieved and the NPC with the assault rifle significantly 
outperformed the subjects. 
The perception feedback indicated that subjects had 
specific awareness about their opponent when engaging in 
combat. The data suggests that subjects knew there was 
something unnatural when NPCs were able to know where 
they were when they were ambushed. This proved that 
subjects were able to assess the actions of an opponent during 
real time, and when something was ‘off’ it impacted how they 
viewed the opposition. However, there was data to conclude 
that not all the opinions were correct, and the incorrect 
assumptions influenced perceptions. This presents an 
interesting problem because when modelling combat for 
NPCs, should they be modelled on human gameplay, or on 
how players ‘think’ the NPCs should behave. There is the 
possibility that the problem could be with the experimental 
protocol, and that by telling the subject their opposition is an 
NPC, it subconsciously influences their perception. Therefore, 
an experiment should be undertaken where the subject does 
not know whether they are competing against NPCs or human. 
VIII. FUTURE WORK 
As the results indicated the combat behaviour was 
negatively impacted by the other gameplay behaviours, 
research is required to the extent of this influence. This means 
navigation and decision-making will need to be modelled then 
the experiment run again, and results compared. 
Identifying real-time player skill level could further 
enhance the effectiveness of dynamic skill scaling, research in 
this area could help determine if dynamically adjusting NPC 
skill based on the current player perform provides a more 
engaging experience. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Williamson and C. Tubb, “Modelling Player Combat 
Behaviour for Dynamic Difficulty Scaling in First Person 
Shooter Games,”   The Fourteenth International Conference on 
Advances in System Simulation. pp. 22-28, Lisbon, Portugal, 
October 16-20, 2022. 
[2] H. Warpefelt, “The Non-Player Character: Exploring the 
believability of NPC presentation and behavior,”  (Doctoral 
dissertation, Department of Computer and Systems Sciences, 
Stockholm University), 2016. 
[3] P. Hingston, “A turing test for computer game bots,” IEEE 
Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games, 
pp.169-186, 2009. 
[4] P. Lankoski and S. Björk, “Gameplay Design Patterns for 
Believable Non-Player Characters,” DiGRA Conference, pp. 
416-423, 2007. 
[5] P. Williamson and C. Tubb, “Modelling Player Combat 
Behaviour for NPC Imitation and Combat Awareness 
Analysis,” ECMS, pp. 205-212, 2021. 
[6] J. Orkin, “Three states and a plan: the AI of FEAR,” Game 
developers conference pp. 04, 2006. 
[7] C. Pezzato, C. Hernandez, S. Bonhof, and M. Wisse, “Active 
Inference and Behavior Trees for Reactive Action Planning and 
Execution in Robotics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09756, 
2020. 
[8] R. A. Agis, S. Gottifredi, and A. J. García, “An event-driven 
behavior trees extension to facilitate non-player multi-agent 
coordination 
in 
video 
games,” Expert 
Systems 
with 
Applications, pp. 155, 2020. 
[9] X. Neufeld, S. Mostaghim, and S. Brand, “A hybrid approach 
to planning and execution in dynamic environments through 
hierarchical task networks and behavior trees,” In Proceedings 
of the Fourteenth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
and Interactive Digital Entertainment. AAAI Press, Article 29, 
pp. 201–207, 2018. 
[10] E. Camilleri, G. N. Yannakakis, and A. Dingli, “Platformer 
level design for player believability,” Conference on 
Computational Intelligence and Games (CIG) pp. 1-8. IEEE, 
2016. 
[11] M. Polceanu, A. M. Mora, J. L. Jimenez, C. Buche, and A.J. 
Fernandez-Leiva, “The believability gene in virtual bots,” The 
Twenty-Ninth International Flairs Conference, pp. 346-349, 
2016. 
[12] A. M. Mora, A. Gutiérrez-Rodrıguez, and A. J. Fernández-
Leiva, "Optimising Humanness: Designing the Best Human-
Like Bot for Unreal Tournament 2004," In International Work-
Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, pp. 681-693. 
Springer, Cham, 2017. 
[13] R. R. Wehbe, E. Lank, and L. E. Nacke, “Left the 4 dead: 
Perception of humans versus non-player character teammates 
in cooperative gameplay,” In Proceedings of the 2017 
Conference on Designing Interactive Systems pp. 403-415, 
2017. 
[14] J. D. Smeddinck et al., “How to present game difficulty 
choices? Exploring the impact on player experience,” CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems pp. 
5595-5607, 2016. 
[15] M. Hendrix, T. Bellamy-Wood, S. McKay, V. Bloom. and I. 
Dunwell, “Implementing adaptive game difficulty balancing in 
serious games,” IEEE Transactions on Games, 11(4), pp. 320-
327, 2018. 
[16] P. M. Blom, S. Bakkes, and P. Spronck, “Modeling and 
adjusting in-game difficulty based on facial expression 
analysis,” Entertainment Computing, 31, p. 100307, 2019. 
[17] S. Bakkes, C. T. Tan, and Y. Pisan, “Personalised gaming: a 
motivation and overview of literature,” In Proceedings of the 
8th Australasian Conference on Interactive Entertainment: 
Playing the System, pp. 1-10, 2012. 
[18] P. H. M. Spronck, I. G. Sprinkhuizen-Kuyper, and E. O. 
Postma, “Difficulty scaling of game AI,” In A. E. Rhalibi and 
D. Van Welden, editors, Proceedings of the 5th International 
Conference 
on 
Intelligent 
Games 
and 
Simulation 
78
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(GAMEON’2004), 
pp. 
33–37. 
EUROSIS-ETI, 
Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium, 2004. 
[19] P. Demasi and A. J. de. O. Cruz, “Online coevolution for action 
games,” International Journal of Intelligent Games and 
Simulation, 2(3), pp.80–88, 2002. 
[20] G. N. Yannakakis and J. Hallam, “Towards optimizing 
entertainment in computer games,” Applied Artificial 
Intelligence, 21(10), pp. 933–971, 2007. 
[21] R. Vicencio-Moreira, R.L. Mandryk, and C. Gutwin, “Now 
you can compete with anyone: Balancing players of different 
skill levels in a first-person shooter game,” In Proceedings of 
the 33rd annual ACM conference on human factors in 
computing systems, pp. 2255-2264, 2015. 
[22] S. Hladky and V. Bulitko, “December. An evaluation of 
models for predicting opponent positions in first-person 
shooter video games,” IEEE Symposium on Computational 
Intelligence and Games, pp. 39-46, 2008. 
[23] J.J. De Simone, T. Verbruggen, L.H. Kuo, and B. Mutlu, “Is 
cheating a human function?” The roles of presence, state 
hostility, and enjoyment in an unfair video game. Computers in 
Human Behavior, pp.2351-2358, 2012. 
[24] S. Pontiroli, “The cake is a lie! Uncovering the secret world of 
malware-like cheats in video games,” VB2019, pp.2-4, 2019. 
[25] D. Choi, T. Konik, N. Nejati, C. Park, and P. Langley, “A 
believable 
agent 
for 
first-person 
shooter 
games,” 
In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment, Vol. 3, No. 
1, pp. 71-73, 2007. 
[26] J.M.L. Asensio et al., “Artificial intelligence approaches for the 
generation and assessment of believable human-like behaviour 
in 
virtual 
characters,” 
Expert 
Systems 
with 
Applications, 41(16), pp.7281-7290, 2014. 
[27] D. Conroy, P. Wyeth, and D. Johnson, “Understanding player 
threat responses in FPS games,” In Proceedings of the 9th 
Australasian Conference on Interative Entertainment: Matters 
of Life and Death, pp. 1-3, 2013. 
[28] C. Rayner, “Player Modelling for Cursor-Driven Games,” 
[Unpublished], 2007. 
 
79
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

