Biodiversity Information Systems Evolution: 
The MABIS model to gather several communities on an adaptable environment 
 
Didier Sébastien, Noël Conruyt,  
Rémy Courdier, Nicolas Sébastien 
IREMIA, LIM-EA2525, 
Université de la Réunion 
Saint-Denis, France 
didier.sebastien/noel.conruyt/remy.courdier/ 
nicolas.sebastien@univ-reunion.fr 
Tullio Tanzi 
Département TSI - LTCI UMR 5141 - CNRS 
Institut TELECOM - TELECOM ParisTech 
Paris, France 
tullio.tanzi@telecom-paristech.fr
 
 
Abstract—The computerization of scientific data treatment and 
the relatively recent awareness of the fragility of the natural 
world environment (Rio Conference "Earth Summit" in 1992) 
have led to the proliferation of Information Systems dedicated 
to biodiversity. Given the various data that they contain, they 
are complex applications, focused on the needs of one type of 
environmental scientist, closed to amateur’s contributions and 
unable to support ethological information. Moreover, the data 
contained in these systems are hardly accessible to non-
specialists like the general public or decision-makers. 
At the same time, new communication protocols, like 
webservices ensure a better sharing of information between 
applications; while immersive representations of three-
dimensional virtual worlds, also known as metaverses, allow a 
more natural assimilation of information. By putting users in a 
reality reproduction built from information systems, all entities 
can be represented in a consistent virtual environment [15]. 
But sharing and turning Biodiversity Information System’s 
data in a coherent metaverse is not a trivial process. It relies on 
an adapted architecture and the availability of specific 
metadata, as several virtual worlds representing several levels 
of details can be generated. 
This paper is a contribution to the enhancement of Biodiversity 
Information Systems in order to make them more adaptable, 
usable, and representable for several kinds of users: different 
types of specialists, amateurs, and the general public. The 
MABIS modular architecture is presented as an open, efficient 
and 
evolutionary 
model 
for 
structuring 
Biodiversity 
Information System. The advantages of its architecture allow 
to ease its development, store ethological data, manage, share 
and represent complex entities and metadata while ensuring 
their authentication through an evaluation process. 
Keywords: Biodiversity Information System, BIS, MABIS, 
behavior, immersion, metaverse, data evaluation, webservice 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The important loss of world biodiversity has led Eco-
Informatics experts [18] to develop specific Environmental 
Management 
Information 
Systems 
(EMIS) 
called 
Biodiversity Information Systems (BIS). The objective is to 
help communities of practice in Biology (thematic experts, 
also called “thematicians”) who work on this phenomenon in 
their everyday tasks: produce inventories of species, obtain a 
better visibility on biodiversities’ studies, plan coordinated 
actions between institutions and communicate their results. 
In this context, Information Systems (IS) are more and more 
used to manage biodiversity data [6]. 
Most BIS focus on the management of taxa and 
specimens [9], but the available functions and uses are 
directed to fit the needs of a specific category of scientific 
specialists. 
For 
the 
same 
substrate 
(environmental 
information), it is possible to define three different types of 
users and needs: researchers, managers, and curators. Each 
of these professions works with different objectives in the 
environmental field and thus has different needs in terms of 
BIS functions (see Figure 1). 
 
The researchers’ objective is to make scientific progress 
by accumulating new knowledge. They accomplish it mainly 
by discovering new specimens, analyzing them in 
laboratories (ex situ), and studying them by experimentation 
(in situ). On the global scale, the objective is to understand 
the diversity and evolution of the life through time, space 
and interactions, as well as the mechanisms at the origin of 
this diversity. 
The objective of environment managers is to discover 
ways to preserve and restore the ecosystems for which they 
are responsible. To achieve these goals, they need to uncover 
specific indicators that characterize the environment and they 
 
Figure 1. Main types of scientific professions involved in 
environmental data management 
269
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

must accurately adhere to the policies of environmental 
restoration they have developed. 
The curators’ aim is to preserve and manage collections. 
Fulfilling this task requires acquiring new specimens, sorting 
and arranging them in order to preserve the taxonomists’ 
primary tool and biodiversity hot spot, but also setting up 
expositions destined for the general public. 
As we can see, in these three scientific vocations 
specimens are manipulated, but apart from sharing a 
metadata basis, there is a need to associate different types of 
entities (documents, maps, collections) with different levels 
of granularity. That is why, even if their field of work is the 
same, researchers, environment managers and curators will 
use a specific BIS to manage their data. This however, 
implies lost time in repeated metadata entries in the absence 
of data sharing and communication between the communities 
that work on the same set of taxa. 
Moreover, amateurs are not allowed to contribute on the 
system by adding their own data in order to share them with 
the scientific community. Indeed, the biodiversity field 
attracts a parallel community of non-specialists which 
gathers important sets of data. Most of time, these data are 
rejected by BIS only because they were not provided by 
experts. However, to profit from these data, it would be 
useful to let amateurs have a controlled access on the system. 
Another common limitation of BIS is they do not support 
ethological information as a specific data type. Because 
ethological studies are not considered as a specific 
experimentation, specimen’s behavior is not recognized as 
an independent entity on the system, and researchers 
studying them have no access to specialized and structured 
forms, like ethograms, to enter this type of information. 
Lastly, biodiversity information systems contain a huge 
quantity and variety of data that lead to important 
assimilation’s difficulties, especially for non-specialists of 
the thematic. Thus, it is often difficult for thematicians to 
communicate their results to the general public or the 
decision makers through the classic Graphic User Interface 
(GUI) of BIS. 
Therefore, we propose an open architecture that tries to 
find a place for each type of users, from the experts to the 
general public. The aim is to make information systems more 
adaptable, usable, and representable for several kinds of 
users; without losing the scientific credibility. 
II. 
THE MABIS MODULAR ACHITECTURE 
A. General architecture 
In order to share common data and knowledge between 
distinct BIS, it is possible to create a complete set of web 
services, which translates into a great amount of 
development for each platform. Another possibility would be 
to set up an adaptable BIS, corresponding to the needs of 
each type of user, without imposing a complex Graphic User 
Interface. Relying on this approach, we propose the Modular 
Architecture for Biodiversity Information System (MABIS). 
This model uses several Web applications that constitute 
modules interconnected together by webservices (Figure 2). 
 
These Web applications are structured in four layers: 
• 
The first layer is dedicated to the management of the 
main BIS entities, i.e. the directory of participants to 
the project, the thesaurus for explaining the meaning 
of terms, the Documentary Multimedia Database 
(DMD) [14] for the studied objects, the systematics 
module for storing, organizing and presenting 
specimens and taxa, the cartographic module for 
georeferencing them, and the Behavior Management 
Module (BMM) to register ethological data, 
• 
The second layer provides tools to authenticate the 
information stored in the first layer (evaluation 
module), to allow curators to archive collections’ 
data about specimens, and to manage the several 
types of entities from the first layer in the frame of 
contextual environmental projects, for example to 
provide managers the means to monitor their 
protected areas (follow-up module), 
• 
The third layer provides the software tools to 
visualize, represent, analyze and treat the data from 
the first two layers. For instance, the Biodi-Verse 
software is dedicated to the generation of immersive 
views for selected data, whereas the Multi-Agent 
Simulation (MAS) software offers simulation’s 
possibilities with the codified information on 
specimens [2], 
• 
The fourth layer is dedicated to vulgarization. It 
hosts Web portals relying on data supported by the 
other layers. 
 
More than the advantage of facilitating its development, 
thanks to its modular architecture, MABIS let each type of 
user focuses on his immediate task: each module constitutes 
 
Figure 2. MABIS general architecture 
 
Figure 3. Screenshot of the connexions between modules’ GUIs 
270
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

an entry point (Figure 3) corresponding to precise 
expectancies and functionalities. Furthermore, to ensure 
exchanges between the MABIS architecture and other BIS, 
two gates allow remote controls on the main layers: the Web 
Components Services (WCS) gate opens on functionalities 
offered by the two first layers, whereas the Web Software 
Services (WSS) gate provides a convenient access to the 
third layer. 
B. The modules 
The modules constituting the IS are applications 
dedicated to the management of a limited set of entities’ 
types. All the information related to an entity (for example, a 
document) is gathered on a structured card which can be 
enhanced with elements from another entity (Figure 4). 
Each module has three functioning modes: main, 
deported, and remote mode. In main mode, users work 
directly in the environment of the Web application dedicated 
to the management of the entity he is focusing on. The 
deported mode is used to provide popup windows and 
inclusions offering synthetic graphical information’s and 
functionalities from a module in another one used in main 
mode. The remote mode means that the Web application is 
used through its webservices, in order to fully integrate its 
data and functionalities in another module’s GUI. 
 
Moreover, a distinction can be made between modules, 
taking into account their complexity. The Web applications 
of the first and second layers are dedicated to the 
management of entities. They can be fully used through Web 
browsers in the three modes and constitute WCS. By 
contrast, the Web applications of the third layer, provide 
complex treatment tools on primary data of the first layer, so 
rely on a main mode requiring a typical installation on 
computers. Thus, this mode is mainly not working like a 
SaaS (Software as a Service) application. Only deported and 
remote modes can be used through Web Browser.  These 
modules constitute WSS. 
In order to make easier the assimilation of the Web 
Components Services, which represent the common entry 
points of new primary data, we have standardized them to 
keep the same logic of entities’ management. Indeed each 
entity’s type has to support common categories to guaranty a 
good communication between contributors. The simple 
template represented on Figure 5, established through a 
human centered development [14], has led the general 
organization of all the WCS deployed in MABIS. 
 
An instance of this template can be seen on Figure 9. 
III. 
THE EVALUATION OF SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION 
The biodiversity field attracts a community of 
enthusiasts, non-expert of the thematic: amateurs. They 
gather a huge quantity of data that are often not accepted on 
BIS because the providers are not specialists. A solution to 
this loss of information is to support a scientific data 
validation policy, which is often made by an administrator in 
Biodiversity Information Systems. However, because the 
quantity of data expert-administrators have to validate is 
colossal, they cannot afford to treat amateurs’ resources. 
In this context, we propose a Scientific Information 
Evaluator (SIE) model. This model relies on the MABIS 
architecture and comes into the form of a SIE module that 
manages the evaluation of all entities’ cards distributed in the 
IS. Our aim is not to provide a methodology to analyze data, 
for instance by error elimination [12], but to deliver a tool 
that follows the enhancement of a card until it reaches the 
best acknowledgement level. This module offers several 
ways to authenticate the scientific aspects of data, to share 
the evaluation’s work, to simplify the communication 
between experts, and to ease the identification of the 
evaluation’s state by end-users. The enhancement process 
can be represented as in Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 4. Screenshot of a card representing a document 
A: deported mode from the evaluation module 
B: main part of the card in the main mode of the multimedia database 
C: data provided by the remote mode of the cartographic module 
 
Figure 6. Evaluation of scientific information in MABIS model 
 
Figure 5. Template standardizing the WCS 
271
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

Contrary to most validation processes that result in a 
binary answer (validated/not validated), evaluations result in 
certificates associated to a precise time. Each certificate 
corresponds to a level of trustworthy that gives a more 
precise idea of the data condition (Figure 7). The certificates 
can be considered as a succession of steps toward the 
validation level. In order to reduce the work of data 
evaluation by experts, two evaluation systems are offered. 
 
The authoritative certification represents the evaluation 
of the current version of the entity’s card made by identified 
specialists of the thematic on the BIS. Depending on their 
recognized specialization in a discipline, a limited set of 
experts acquire from the administrator the possibility to 
deliver certificates that represent their approval to the data. 
This ability to deliver up to a defined level of certification is 
entity-specific, and for the taxa, taxa-specific. So the SIE 
stores a list of privileges that can be associated to profiles of 
users registered in the directory. The propagation of this 
certification is regulated by a cooptation system that let 
specialists share their privileges to other users up to their 
own level. Thus the administration and the evaluation work 
are shared. This evaluation based on hierarchy is summed up 
by a simple icon that represents the lowest certification given 
by the highest specialist. Experts’ debate, i.e. when two or 
more specialists at the same highest level deliver different 
certificates for the same card, is automatically detected and 
notified by the sign “!”. In this case, users are warned that it 
could be necessary to read the comments and evaluate 
themselves the card.  
The community certification is the evaluation of the card 
made by all identified users on the BIS. Because everyone 
can participate and deliver the certificate they consider 
deserved, this evaluation is less specialized than the 
precedent one; however, a certificate coming under an 
important participation of users gives a good basis of 
evaluation if experts have no time to consider the card. This 
notation based on folksonomy is summed up by an icon that 
shows the average level of certification given by voters. 
These two certification modes are easy to use (a simple 
button) and can be used as criteria, in a combined way or not, 
to sort and research data. Thus, it is easy to work only with, 
for instance, data defined as relevant by experts. 
The Scientific Information Evaluator’s deported mode 
(Figure 8) adds three inclusions in the graphical interface of 
cards, to: 
• 
indicates the level of validation, which represents the 
level of approval of the information. Each level is 
represented by an icon that sums-up the participative 
evaluation of a data. 
• 
presents detailed information and an historic about 
the evaluation of the card (all marks from all voters), 
• 
offers a simple thread that permits authors and 
evaluators to discuss about the card. 
The SIE’s main mode (Figure 9) is the Web application 
that gathers all information about evaluation of entities. It 
allows to: 
• 
present general metadata about entities’ evaluation 
on 
the 
BIS 
(most 
discussed 
cards, 
most 
heterogeneous evaluation per module, etc.). 
• 
list all evaluations’ requests and focus on those 
concerning the authenticated user. 
• 
show the logged in user his own evaluation requests, 
delivered certificates, discussions’ threads (new 
messages since last connection), and the current 
evolution of his cards. 
• 
manage the sharing of privileges concerning the 
authorized level of certification. 
 
The remote mode of the SIE is of course not related to a 
specific GUI, but it is often used in other modules, for 
instance to sort entities by certification level in other Web 
applications’ main mode. 
IV. 
THE MANAGEMENT OF ETHOLOGICAL INFORMATION 
A. States and actions, a difference between specialists’ 
approach and system’s structure 
Ethology is the science that studies the behavior of living 
species. Biologists that analyze the behavior of animals (also 
called “ethologists”) focus their researches on the 
establishment of lists of states and actions, the determination 
of their occurence and linking. By observing several 
individuals of a taxon, they identify their way of life, gaits, 
interactions between them and other species, impact on their 
ecosystem, etc. These observations are usually made during 
short analyses’ sessions, on a limited number of specimens; 
so a lot of data is produced in a short duration, often 
associated to a precise scale of time (minutes or seconds). 
This kind of scale is hardly supported by common BIS, on 
 
Figure 8. Screenshot of the SIE deported GUI 
 
 
 
 
 
level 0 
level 1 
level 2 
level 3 
level 4 
not evaluated 
can be greatly 
improved 
still need 
improvments 
almost finalized 
validated at 
present time 
 
 
 
 
- 
trustworthy 
+ 
Figure 7. Levels used for the evaluation 
 
Figure 9. Screenshot of the SIE main mode 
272
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

which temporal data associated to a biodiversity project (like 
a monitoring) uses larger time’s scales (days). 
Independently of the structural aspect of BIS that has to 
evolve to handle the information associated to precise scales 
of time, the user interface has to be enhanced in order to 
facilitate the data’s entry process. That is why the best way 
to integrate this dimension without compromising the 
human-computer interaction is, in the frame of our 
architecture, to add a new WCS: the Behavior Management 
Module (BMM). As we have said, ethologists focus on states 
and particularly actions (movements) performed by the 
studied species. Indeed states and actions are linked:  
particular characteristics of internal (not visible) and external 
(visible) state lead to specific actions. Without a sustained 
analysis of a specimen, it is hard to evaluate its state (for 
instance, his hunger): researchers have to determine it from 
the actions that will be induced. So even if a state leads to 
specific actions, for animals, ethologists often deduce the 
precedent state from the following action. That is why, to 
follow their methodology of work and processes, our module 
focuses more on actions. However, by developing tools 
permitting biologists to gather and represent dynamical data 
through a formalized approach, this work also contributes to 
initiate a discussion with experts to enhance their 
methodology of study. 
B. Implementation in the MABIS architecture 
In the frame of our architecture, entities from the WCS 
are intended to be used by the WSS as primary resources. 
Thus, it is interesting to take into account the use that will be 
done with the ethological data since the conception of the 
application. Specimen’s behavior information, by facilitating 
the extraction of rules leading agents used in MAS, 
constitutes relevant information to build simulations. 
Moreover, the description of actions stored in the behavior 
module can be useful to generate immersive representations 
of data. That is why, in the implementation of this module, 
we have anticipated the use that will be made in terms of 
data treatments and representations. 
 
 
Behavior 
 
State 
Action 
Text 
body description 
description of body 
movements 
Representation 
photo/icon/model of 
different poses 
animation between 
static poses 
MAS 
list of relevant factors and 
way to determine their value 
Rules of variation 
 of the values 
TABLE I.  
DESCRIPTORS FOR STATES AND ACTIONS 
Current BIS are able to handle temporal data associated 
to specimens as a succession of observations describing its 
general state [2]. If this information could be sufficient in 
some cases, for instance phenological studies on plants, it is 
not in many others, like behavioral studies on animals. 
Finally, only little information can be automatically extracted 
from Systematics module to generate rules necessary to build 
Multi-Agent Simulation, as the observations are consigned in 
generic text fields. So there is a strong need to formalize 
spatio-temporal metadata about specimen’s evolution and 
behavior. However, there are several ways to manage 
behavioral information in BIS. For instance, it is possible to 
consider either only one default state with actions as 
variations to this referential, or several states associated to 
actions that make the links between them. In order to clearly 
separate actions and states, we chose the second possibility 
structured through three approaches: textual description, 
visual representation, and formalized rules describing 
specimens’ behavior as agents in MAS (TABLE I.). The 
objective is to establish a consistent timeline (Figure 10) 
made by states and actions, linked to the Systematics 
module, and ready to provide a formalized support to the 
immersive representation and ecosystems’ simulation. 
 
The way specimens’ states are described also has to 
change for a more generic aspect. This directly impacts on 
the general Systematics module’s structure. Instead of 
describing several times the same state of a specimen as 
several observations, it is possible to define a set of generic 
states associated to a taxonomic level. Doing this way, an 
observation on a specimen becomes the junction between a 
generic action of the taxon, and a specialized scientific 
annotation (Figure 11). The process is, of course, the same 
for states. Indeed the introduction of a BMM in BIS, and its 
strong relation with the module in charge of taxa and 
specimens’ management lead to several evolutions of the 
Biodiversity module. The main improvements are explained 
in parallel of the descriptions of the three BMM’s sides, but 
first, we have to take over global aspects of this tool. 
 
The BMM aims to manage specimen’s behavior in two 
ways. The first one is to store labeled descriptions of actions 
and states achieved by specimens in the frame of a behavior 
process to achieve a goal. Ontologies are constituted by 
linking actions to a taxonomic rank in order to specialize or 
generalize it. For instance, the action “eat” can be defined in 
general for mammalians, and a second occurrence can be 
added to specialize the action for the Felidae family. Lists of 
different actions focusing on the same taxa can be gathered 
on a single view in order to constitute ethograms. 
The second one is to store lists of actions related to 
specimens to constitute spatio-temporal capture sessions that 
 
Figure 10. Consistency of timeline offered by the BMM 
 
Figure 11. BMM entities’ integration in MABIS 
273
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

focus specimens. Indeed ethologists mainly study animal 
behavior through three methods: 
• 
Focus sampling with continuous recording, which 
focuses and list all actions achieved by a specific 
specimen during a very limited time. 
• 
Scan sampling, which point out all relevant actions 
achieved by several specimens. 
• 
Ad libitum sampling, which means that the observer 
records as much as he can of whatever he can see. 
This method is generally used to get an overview of 
the specimen’s group. 
In all cases, the user has to associate or describe actions 
made by one specimen or more. Digitally speaking, it is just 
a matter of presentation, by action or by specimen. After 
entering the data on the system, it is easy to sort them by 
using the BMM. 
So, in terms of use cases, the BMM answers to several 
users needs. Firstly, it will help ethologists to provide 
standardized, easily interoperable by computational request, 
action cards. Secondly, they will easily constitute and share 
sampling sessions on the Web. Thirdly, it will allow them to 
easily 
communicate 
with 
the 
general 
public 
their 
observations by showing immersive reconstitutions through 
immersive representations. Fourthly, simulation experts, will 
access to the module as a warehouse of generic and specific 
models for their MAS, knowing they could possibly 
represent their results in an immersive way. Fifthly, the 
collection of 3D models, animated or not, gathered in the 
frame of the BMM will constitute a warehouse [5] of 
species’ shapes and movements for computer graphics 
experts. 
As we have explained, states are often deducted from the 
following actions, so action represents the main point for 
ethologists. In this frame, we will now focus on how the 
“action” entity can be integrated through the three 
approaches in the same module. 
C. Three representations for one action 
To build a reliable and generic action’s description form, 
that allows a relevant generation of action’s description 
cards, we have to consider the definition of “behavior”. For 
J.B. Watson, the behavior is “the whole of the objectively 
observable reactions that an organization generally equipped 
with a nervous system carries out in answer to stimulations 
of the medium, themselves objectively observable”. Note 
that this definition is particularly opened, and underlines 
following key points. Behavior: 
• 
refers to any specimen, whatever its phylum is (not 
restricted to animals), 
• 
considers the observation’s environment, 
• 
focuses on objective actions. 
Regarding these clues, and usual form’s fields, we tried 
to build a generic action’s description form that will gather 
main data (Figure 12). This general part contains textual and 
numerical data that are used by several users (ethologists, 
simulation experts, computer graphics experts). These fields 
allow multicriteria searches to retrieve specific actions and 
are highly used by the simulation and the representation 
engines (especially the duration and the periodicity fields). 
 
In the frame of a BIS’s module, the aim is to formalize 
the descriptions in order to meet both user’s expectations and 
system’s requirements, for instance, to avoid future plain text 
searches. The consistency of the integration of the behavior 
module in the IS relies on the links each entity (action, state, 
and sampling session) for each approach (text, simulation, 
representation) develops with other modules. Given the 
nature of the entities and their metadata, the systematic and 
the cartographic modules are particularly important in their 
description cards. 
1) Descriptive aspect 
The textual description (Figure 13) of specimen’s 
behavior constitutes a classic approach of an ethological 
study. It is dedicated to specialists in Ethology, as the 
technical vocabulary they use is sometimes unreachable for 
the general public. That is why visual representation is so 
important. The general context field describes the conditions 
that must be gathered, for the specimen and the environment, 
to produce the action. It is described in a more formal way in 
the simulation aspect’s part. 
 
The gathering of main research fields in the general form 
permitted to simplify the textual description ones. That is 
why this part allows specialists to work in the way they are 
used with. 
 
Figure 12. General description fields of the behavior form 
 
Figure 13. Textual description fields of the behavior's form 
274
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

2) Representation aspect 
This part collects the files made by ethologists and 
computer graphics experts to graphically represent the 
actions. The system accepts as inputs several files 
corresponding 
to 
several 
representations. 
Traditional 
graphical representations, in two dimensions, is relevant in 
the frame of the IS because it allows thematicians to gather 
all their data on the same system. Indeed, with the 
affordability of digital camera, thematicians produce more 
and more videos and photos to illustrate their researches. 
Furthermore, immersive environment are able to display this 
information on 3D surfaces as animated textures when 
tridimensional meshes are not available. That is why we 
chose to support this usual approach on the graphical 
action’s description card’s part (Figure 14). However, as we 
also aim at representing immersive representations, the 
application gathers all files needed to prepare this process. 
 
Thus, several graphic-representation files are supported: 
• 
The icon is an illustration created by the user to 
represent a specific action of a species. It can be 
used either in the IS to graphically sum-up a 
sampling session, or by the multi-agent simulation 
engine for its usual 2D visualization, or by the 3D 
engine as a texture. 
• 
The photos and videos are multimedia documents 
representing actions, linked to its card. Because 
biologists usually take several photos and sketches to 
illustrate the same action, it is important that the 
system allows them to gather all their pictures by 
handling multiple file uploading. 
• 
The 
“Animation 
bones” 
field 
refers 
to 
a 
tridimensional spatio-temporalized description of 
animation, in the BVH (BioVision Hierarchy) 
format, which is very used by motion-capture 
(“mocap”) systems. Indeed, an animation description 
file can be built with several methods (handmade by 
a computer graphic expert, or with an automatic 
acquisition system). The description of action can 
then be applied to the 3D model of the specimen in 
order to make it reproduce the movement. This step 
requires a computer graphic expert to help the 
thematicians. 
• 
Because it is not always possible to apply an 
animation to the 3D shape linked with the specimen 
in the Biodiversity module, a possibility is given to 
directly upload an animated model that shows the 
3D reproduction of an action for the specimen. In 
this case, the COLLADA format, which stands for 
“Collaborative Design Activity”, is favored, as it is 
an open and compatible file. 
All files linked to this part are stored and managed by the 
documentary multimedia database of the IS, and shared by 
webservices in a transparent way for the user. 
3) Simulation Aspect 
The Multi-Agent Simulation (MAS) aspect of the 
Behavior 
Management 
Module 
aims 
at 
gathering 
information concerning taxa behavior for multi-agent 
simulation. Toward the generation of metaverses, we use the 
multi-agent paradigm as presented by Ferber [3] to define the 
different components that take parts in simulation: 
• 
Agents are used to represent specimens. Indeed, 
agents are autonomous entities that have their own 
partial perception of the environment they live in. 
They also interact with other agents and with the 
environment. 
• 
Environment is used to describe the landscape of the 
simulation and the global evolution rule of the 
ecosystem. 
In 
multi-agent 
simulation, 
the 
environment is the world agents evolve in. It can 
adopt many topologies: spatial or non spatial, with 
metrics, etc. The environment also defines global 
evolution rules: for example gravity or temperature 
evolution during a year. 
• 
Objects are used to represent some specimens that 
do not play a major role in the simulation. In our 
description, some specimens can impact the behavior 
of agents but their own behavior is not really 
interesting considering the simulation scope. So to 
avoid useless computation, these specimens are not 
described as agents but as situated objects that 
interact with agents. 
 
Classic BIS provides information for environment 
initialization: many layers of geographic information systems 
are used to describe the topographic landscape and to 
provide objects or agents localization. Based on this layers 
principle, we defined the Dynamic-Oriented Modeling [11] 
which uses the multi-environment approach. This approach 
enables the splitting of the environment into sub-
environments. Each one of these environments contains a 
specific information layer. For example, a first environment 
will contain topographic information, another one will be 
used for messages exchanges between specimens and a third 
one will describe the vegetal food repartition. 
In GEAMAS-NG [17], our MAS platform, we also 
described a new temporal approach: the Temporality Model 
[10][16]. This model enables agents to define their own 
activation times and to link them with periodic behaviors. 
For example, an agent can define a temporality associated 
with its reproduction period: this temporality 
will 
periodically trigger the agent reproduction behavior. 
Moreover, the Temporality Model perfectly matches action’s 
description proposed by the general part of the Descriptive 
Aspect of the Behavior Management Module. 
 
Figure 14. Form dedicated to graphical representations 
275
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

Toward the building of metaverses, the main issue 
remains the definition of taxa’s behavior. Indeed, both the 
Descriptive Aspect and the Representation Aspect of the 
BMM aims at gathering information on a particular 
specimen: thematicians must analyze this information to 
determine the taxon’s generic behavior. To build a taxon’s 
multi-agent representation, they must define its state, i.e. the 
key internal (physiological or intellectual) parameters that 
drive its behavior, its perception capacities, i.e. its sensitivity 
towards the environment stimuli, and its action capacities, 
i.e. the way it updates its state and modify its environment. 
To define the complete behavior of a taxon, a first step 
consists in defining the set of actions this taxon can 
undertake. In the Behavior Management Module the 
Simulation Aspect is linked with the other aspect and so 
centered on actions description. 
Defining an agent’s action consists in answering three 
questions: 
• 
What did trigger the action? What are the external 
or/and internal causes that made the agent undertake 
the action? 
• 
How does the action impact the agent’s internal 
state? 
• 
How does the action impact the agent’s environment 
and other agents? 
Answering these questions requires knowledge of the 
environment the taxon evolves in, and its state. In the Multi-
Agent Simulation Aspect of the BMM, we provide basic 
edition for action definition: having defined the key 
parameters of the taxon’s state and the parameters of 
environments, the user can select some of the parameters and 
propose the action precondition (Figure 10). In the same 
way, user defines the consequences of the action on the 
taxon’s state and the environments (Figure 15). 
 
We chose to provide a basic formalism so that 
thematicians can fill in the Multi-Agent Simulation aspect 
with a minimal assistance from modelers. The modelers, or 
the multi-agent system, can then adapt the behavior to more 
complex formalisms like DEVS [20] or Netlogo [19]. 
D. General considerations on the proposed solution 
The three approaches used to describe the same 
phenomenon “action” can be identified as equivalent to the 
Model-View-Controller (MVC) paradigm developed in 
computer science. The textual description of an action 
corresponds 
to 
model’s 
presentation; 
the 
graphical 
description’s section is a view; whereas the simulation’s part 
represents the controller. By reproducing the MVC paradigm 
in the frame of a BIS module, we provide a stable and 
adaptive structure to the immersive world’s generation 
process. 
As we have said, each of the three aspects corresponds to 
a specific profession: ethologist, computer graphics expert, 
and simulation expert. Even if each of them can limit their 
use of the BMM at their specific section, the real 
improvement in the process of porting a part of the IS as a 
virtual world is reached when their work can be merged in 
one representation: the meaning given by the ethologist, the 
quality of representation provided by the computer graphic 
expert, and the formalism by the simulation expert. To obtain 
the best result on a specific mirror world, a meeting between 
the three specialists on a co-design platform [1] is necessary 
to ensure the correspondence of the three aspects. Indeed, 
without a good communication between the ethologist and 
the two other experts, the consistency of the three aspects is 
not guaranteed. Only the expert in behavior has the scientific 
knowledge to accurately describe relevant movements done 
by specimens during specific behaviors. 
However ensuring the communication between the 
experts is not a trivial task. In this way, multi-competent 
profile experts constitute a real advantage for the system, as 
they could check data consistency. This should be done at 
least for entries at the top of systematics hierarchy. Thus, the 
validated data can then be considered as references for users 
working at more specialized level of the taxonomy. In this 
way, it is important to feed the BMM with a set of generic 
initial values describing very common actions for each 
kingdom of systematics. These data will provide a frame for 
a future evolution of the module in terms of error prevention 
and detection. Moreover, it is important that ethologists use 
the same labels for equivalent actions and states at different 
levels of the systematics, in order to ensure the automation of 
the specialization and generalization process in data 
representation and simulation. 
Alongside these recommendations that contribute to the 
proper deployment of the application, several improvements 
of this tool can be set up. More than an automatic 
comparison between specific and generic data, a comparison 
between different occurrences of equivalent actions for 
different taxa would greatly improve scientific knowledge in 
term of species’ evolution. Another track of BMM technical 
evolution would put up with the enhancing of the 
interoperability between several BMM. Indeed the BMM 
shares its data with other modules and other BIS through 
webservices. Evolving the BMM to a meta-component able 
to exchange, compare and analyze data of other BMM would 
provide a controlled approach on information availability, 
validity, and contributor’s relative participation. The more 
structured data is available, the better the quality of 
simulation and representation will be. 
V. 
THE GENERATION OF BIS’ IMMERSIVE 
REPRESENTATIONS 
Because of the diversity and the huge amount of 
information contained in BIS, it is very difficult to evaluate 
the contribution of a user, to understand and keep in mind all 
the data associated to a specimen or a project. Furthermore, 
 
Figure 15. Description’s fields of the behavior's form dedicated to 
graphical representations 
276
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

this information is hardly understandable in that shape to the 
general public. In the same time, the progress of real time 3D 
technologies allows to build new representations of 
information by creating virtual worlds, also called 
“metaverses”. These metaverses are built up by an 
aggregation of 3D models which can be seen from any point 
of view at any time (spatiotemporal representation). These 
3D shapes can represent any object, with a variable Level Of 
Details (LOD). Because metaverses offer visualizations close 
to reality, it is more easy to figure out and understand 
specific configurations of the IS entities through their 
realistic representations [7]. Modeling research results 
through virtual immersive learning environment also 
constitutes an ideal way to analyze and communicate them 
with decision-makers and the general public. 
However, obtaining 3D representations of information 
systems, and specially those dedicated to biodiversity 
management, is not a trivial task since the creation of the 
virtual world must be automated to support on demand 
generation. This section is a contribution to achieve this goal 
through a Biodi-Verse module, by defining a generic process 
to build metaverses from IS data [15], and establishing a 
typology of the different virtual world models that can be 
obtained. 
A. From 2D to 3D BIS representation: General Steps 
The principle of porting IS information from a 2D 
interface to a 3D immersive environment assumes that 
metadata associated to its entities provide a way to place 
(through lat-long coordinates) and to represent (3D models) 
them. If this last point is missing, then a substitute like 
generic representations (3D icons) can be used. We must 
precise here that our work aims to produce three-dimensional 
views of BIS data, not a 3D interface to manage them. The 
general process of the porting (Figure 16) can be divided into 
3 phases: 
1. The user (thematicians, decision-makers or general 
public) expresses his request to the system, that is to 
say, defines the part of the IS he wants to see as a 
metaverse. In order to limit the processing time, it is 
necessary to reduce the research’s field by 
submitting a context of request to the user. An 
acceptable basis is to focus the request on a project 
(i.e. a metaverse representing all the entities of a 
particular project), or on users (i.e. a metaverse 
representing all entities belonging to specified 
users). 
 
2. The description of the metaverse should be obtained 
by a software, the Virtual World Builder (VWB) 
[13], which interrogates the BIS (by using, for 
instance, its webservices). This analyzer works in 2 
steps. First, it takes a “photo” of the IS data 
(depending on the above request) at a precise time 
by creating an XML World Description (XWD, see 
Illustration 1) file gathering all the instances and 
metadata that have to appear in the virtual world. It 
creates a list of the entities that matches the 
request’s specifications. Then, the analyzer builds 
the metaverse architecture that will contain the 
entities and places them on it. The more accurate 
the VWB makes this generic XWD and the more 
accurate to the IS the metaverse will be. The 
configuration of the analyzer by users allows the 
software to determine the world’s architecture that 
will contain the representation of entities. 
 
3. The description of the virtual world can then be 
combined with 3D models by the 3D engine in 
order to create the metaverse corresponding to the 
user visualization request (configuration of the 
VWB). Depending on the 3D engine, the XWD file 
is converted in a compatible input format. The 
specificities of the representation (level of details, 
representation type) are settled by the user before 
the metaverse generation, in order to lead and limit 
the complexity of the 3D world. It can be seen as a 
second filter, after the initial request. 
As in all metaverses, a single click on a 3D entity can 
show the 2D card of its metadata from the IS, this 
representation combines the advantages of standard 
representation with the immersive visualization. We will 
now focus on the possibilities the Virtual World Builder 
could offer by defining the different appearances that should 
lead the generation process. 
B. Typology of immersive representations for IS dedicated 
to biodiversity 
Depending on the nature of entities, and the information 
linked to them, several representations are possible. In this 
part we will present the two models of representation and 
their declinations that correspond to four levels of details. 
1) Tree of rooms 
In order to represent the maximum of information from 
BIS, it is necessary to imagine a way to generate a metaverse 
compatible with all their entities, whatever the nature and the 
number of metadata associated to them would be. The tree of 
 
Figure 16. Data and generic processes to 3D IS 
<world name=”...” builder=”...” date=”...” owner=”...”> 
<request=”select * from entity where owner in ('user1', 'user2') order by owner, 
entities, collection” /> 
<description> 
<room name=”entrance” label=”1”> 
<room name=”user 1 entities” label=”1.1”> 
                            ... (list of entities and metadata)... 
</room> 
<room name=”user 2 entities” label=”1.2”> 
                            ... (list of entities and metadata)... 
</room> 
</room> 
</description> 
</world> 
Illustration 1. Simplified example of XWD 
277
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

rooms is the first model of representation, and the most 
general one. It consists in a schematic 3D view of several 
rooms linked by tunnels, forming a tree data structure. Each 
tunnel gives information about the following room which 
contains 3D icons of entities’ instances. 
The positioning of these rooms and the connections 
between them are driven by the XWD which is itself built 
from the user request. Because each entity has a specific 
nature (contact, document, taxon, specimen, observation, 
map, definition and project) and belong to at least one user, 
we assume these two points can be used as default 
classification parameters for the representation of the entities 
in virtual worlds. Most of time, instances of entities are 
gathered in collections and subcollections in the Information 
Systems’ modules. This third parameter should then be 
suggested to the user, in order to refine the generic 
arrangement of the metaverse. 
Thus, the user chooses in his request which restrictions 
could be done (for instance, build a world representing the 
files shared by a specific user), and the kind of hierarchy that 
should be used to build the XWD (example: by user, then by 
nature of entity, then by collection). Note that if the request 
aims at representing a whole biodiversity project stored in 
the project management module, the hierarchy is inherent to 
the project’s structure, so it is not necessary to ask the user 
for classifications or hierarchy details. 
Because the size of each room depends on the number of 
files contained in it, the general architecture of the metaverse 
gives a good idea of a project importance, or of users 
participation in the IS content. 
 
As we can see on Figure 17, there are a lot of lost spaces 
beside tunnels in the metaverse architecture. But that is one 
of the advantages of virtual architectures: usability and 
appropriation can be the main focus of the world’s shape, 
independently of cost or space optimization’s matters. 3D 
representation also helps to show several levels of 
granularity. Thus, if the tree data structure is used to 
represent groups of entities, relations between them stored in 
the IS can be represented by wires linking them above the 
room’s walls (Figure 18). So users can “jump” from a 
document to all the related ones easily. Of course these links 
can be deactivated on demand in order to preserve the 
visibility of documents. In that way, this first level of 
representation offers several granularity levels corresponding 
to several data structures: one tree of hierarchical entities for 
several graphs of related documents. 
 
2) Mirror Worlds 
One of the specificities of IS dedicated to biodiversity is 
that they mainly deal with entities that have a physical 
materiality in the real world. In that way, it is possible to 
generate a virtual world trying to reproduce reality with 3D 
shapes correctly positioned. This kind of virtual worlds are 
called “mirror worlds” and constitute the second model of 
representation. Three increasing levels of complexity can be 
defined and mixed together with this model. 
a) Static mirror worlds 
Static mirror worlds try to reproduce reality at a precise 
frozen time: it is a photo of a scene reconstitution. All 
represented entities need a precise geolocation in order to be 
placed in the virtual world. Furthermore, to proceed to the 
automatic generation of the instantiated entities, several 
descriptive metadata are required to build their three-
dimensional shapes. TABLE II.  presents a list of entities that 
could be shown in mirror worlds, and the associated 
descriptors (other than location) that would greatly help to 
automate the process of shape customization. 
 
Entity 
User 
Specimen 
Map 
Sound 
(document) 
Common in 
most IS 
gender 
associated 
photo 
 
 
Not 
common. 
Improve 
virtual 
objects 
recognition 
real dimensions (width, length, 
and height) 
altitude of 
the 
viewpoint 
scope 
skin color, 
haircut/color, 
distinctive 
signs 
(glasses/beard) 
viewpoint 
and clipping 
of associated 
photos 
Generated 
Object 
3D avatar 
3D shape or 
textured 
pictures 
adapted to 
visualization 
angle 
move view 
at a precise 
position and 
zoom 
sound played at 
the defined 
position 
TABLE II.  
ENTITIES VISUALIZATIONS IN MIRROR WORLD AND 
METADATA NEEDED 
 This level of details has two main advantages. First, 
because static mirror worlds tend to reproduce reality, they 
are directly understandable by all kind of public. Second, 
they can display a configuration at a precise time and place, 
 
Figure 17. Example of blueprint for immersive world architecture 
based on the tree of rooms model 
 
Figure 18. Screenshot of Tree of rooms view 
1: 3D icons, 2: metadata, 3: links between entities, 4: path to the next room 
278
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

so it is possible to represent and immerse the user in 
configurations that do not exist anymore. 
But mirror worlds also bring new constraints and 
difficulties compared to the first model: 
• 
Mirror worlds are usually built by placing 3D 
models on a background map (generally an 
orthophotographic view of the place) as ground. So 
it is necessary to have a background map of the place 
which needs to be represented, at a scale that fits 
user’s request. 
• 
Depending on the request, it is difficult to make a 
metaverse adapted to several scales (microscale or 
macroscale). Without the assistance of a proper 
Head-Up Display (HUD), users risk to miss existing 
information. 
• 
It is impossible to represent entities that have not a 
physical materiality (for example a definition in the 
thesaurus). If it should imperatively be represented 
in the virtual world, then it would be compulsory to 
use the 3D icons like those used at the tree of rooms’ 
level. 
More generally, when an entity’s representation is not 
available at a level of detail, it is possible to use its 
representation at the precedent level. For instance, if a 
generic 3D shape is not available for a specimen, it is 
possible to use its photo as a planar representation. 
b) Scripted mirror worlds 
The scripted mirror world is the second level of this 
model and introduces the notion of time in the generated 
metaverse. Indeed, BIS contain temporal information. 
Especially, 
project 
management 
modules 
contain 
information like “specimen S of taxon T has been observed 
(observation O) at time tx and place P (map) by user U”. 
Several data from a specimen studied in the frame of a 
monitoring experimentation constitute the script of a 
chronosequence that can be represented by an interpolated 
animation: the movement of thematicians and specimens’ 
representation in the metaverse (Figure 19). Of course, 
depending the size of the gap between interpolated keys, an 
important bias can be introduced, but the resulting 
animations are still interesting for the immersion as long as 
this uncertainty is clearly notified to user and identified in 
the 3D scene (opacity modified during interpolation). 
 
With the implementation of a behavior module like the 
BMM in MABIS, common actions (like eating, sleeping, 
etc.) could then be represented. The most complex available 
representation is used to show the action: tridimensional 
shapes are better than videos, which are better than photos, 
themselves superior to icons in terms of immersion 
experience. If none are available, it is then possible to find a 
substitute at a more generalist level of the systematic 
hierarchy (Figure 20). In the case of an immersive 
representation, depending the choices made by the users 
during the visualization’s configuration, a specific 2D 
representation (icon) can be given a better importance than a 
generic 3D representation. 
 
The animation in the virtual world can focus on a specific 
place or follow a particular specimen among the other 
inventoried in the area of study. Because this representation 
allows a more natural visualization of data, it is often easier 
to analyze than the original script. By enlarging the research 
scope of the VWB in the IS (from a project’s entities to the 
whole IS), and adjusting the tuning of the passage of time, 
researchers can discover which other specimens and 
thematicians come at the same place but different times. 
Thus, it is possible to identify inter-species relations and 
establish collaborations between specialists working on 
nearby subjects. 
So, this level of representation makes a new step toward 
the representation of reality, which is very useful to handle 
specific configurations of entities. Showing animated 
chronosequences is also demonstrative and useful for the 
analysis of collected data, but, given the focus made by IS 
dedicated to biodiversity, restricted to the representation of 
users and specimen (Directory and Systematics modules). 
However, it uses the information from other modules (e.g. 
cartographic module). 
c) Simulation metaverses 
The scripted mirror world has introduced the time factor 
by representing actions described in the project management 
module. The third, and highest level of complexity in this 
second model, keeps the time factor, but instead of just 
reproducing past actions, it introduces a simulation engine 
that analyses the scripted data of each module, and 
particularly those provided by the BMM, in order to 
 
Figure 19. Screenshot of mirror world view 
1: background map, 2: user, 3: planar representation of a specimen, 4: 3D 
representation of a specimen, 5: planar representation of a moving specimen 
(colored/direction given by an arrow) 
 
Figure 20. Evaluation of representations availability in the BMM for 
an action, given their precision (taxonomic hierarchy) 
279
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

represent possible present and future of specimens’ 
instances. 
There are two ways to simulate entities’ moves: by using 
a mathematic model, or a multiagent system [2]. In the first 
case, most of the actions in the simulation are established by 
determining periodic elements in the script. In the second 
case, each entity (specimen) becomes an agent in the 
simulation. The aim is to generate rules to define agent 
behavior and interactions from its data in the IS. For the 
moment, this can only be done by simulations’ experts. 
Automating this step is facilitated by the structure chosen for 
the Behavior Management Module. 
 Using a multiagent approach, it is possible to link 
specimens to the behavior module that returns adapted rules 
to feed agents in the simulation. Because species behavior 
can be linked to their taxonomic level, generic rules can be 
determined to ensure results at several granularity levels. 
Indeed the BMM module greatly helps BIS that have to 
generate simulation metaverses. 
C. General considerations on the proposed solution 
BIS entities can be represented in metaverses as four 
representations corresponding to two models (Figure 21). 
The first representation (view) is generic, compatible with 
almost all IS structures, whereas other representations 
require a lot more metadata and specific information related 
to entities. However, each view has its own relevance. The 
first view provides an easy way to immersively evaluate the 
IS content according to specific grouping factors, as “user” 
or “project”. The second view is adapted to the immersion in 
a frozen scene to analyze its configuration. The third view 
(second level of the second model) is an animated reality 
reproduction that tries to represent moves and actions: it is 
adapted to scene reconstitution. The fourth view is based on 
a simulation engine, and represents its output as a metaverse 
in order to facilitate the simulation’s understanding by 
decision-makers. 
 
If we analyze the request that allows the generation of a 
metaverse, we can determine that it can be divided into two 
steps. The first one is always to select the entities that have 
to be represented in the virtual world. The second step, in the 
first model, is to build the tree structure, whereas, in the 
second model, there is no structure to build but a background 
map to retrieve, on which entities will be placed by 
exploiting their geographical metadata. That fact means that, 
from an XWD file, it is not possible to change from a model 
to another without making new requests to the IS. The XWD 
needs 
to 
be 
regenerated 
to 
swap 
views, 
instant 
rearrangements of virtual worlds are not possible without 
preserving all metadata (even those not represented) 
associated to entities. 
Thus, depending their needs and the data availability, 
users can choose the representation that would help them 
most. However, it is possible to assist them in the choice of 
the representation that would give them more information by 
using the evaluation of the metaverse’s quantity of 
representable information. Indeed, from the initial request, 
the VWB is able to determine metadata on the different 
models of virtual worlds that could be generated: number of 
entities corresponding to the request, availability of metadata 
(georeferencing data necessary for mirror worlds, quantity of 
temporal information associated to entities for scripted 
worlds), or determination of the application’s resources 
limitations (i.e. generic shapes for the entities that have to be 
represented). Using these clues, the system can suggest a less 
complex view if the one asked by user risks to appear empty. 
Future evolutions of the application will probably greatly 
improve the immersion experience in BIS. Prospection fields 
are numerous and rely on the same technical development 
that edutainment software [4] have recently received, 
adapted to the thematic: 
• 
Share the immersion experience on virtual online 
worlds [7] that could be visited by several 
thematicians at the same time. 
• 
Add a pattern recognition module to the VWB in 
order to generate, at the same time of the metaverse, 
a list of interest points that should be considered by 
researchers, or by general public. 
• 
Profit from the growing interoperability between 
BIS to provide a better integration of distributed data 
with data warehouses (like Google 3D warehouse 
[5]). 
The generation of virtual worlds from IS is indeed a 
research field that will require numerous studies and 
propositions, since it is a recent field of investigation. 
VI. 
OVERALL DISCUSSION 
The MABIS architecture has been instantiated in the Etic 
program, and more recently in its last evolution, in the 
Nextic project: two French environmental initiatives to build 
a BIS dedicated to the management of tropical information in 
Mascarenhas Archipelago. The screenshots we presented are 
extracted from these BIS which permitted us to gather 
feedbacks in order to improve our model up to the one we 
have presented here. If the global layered structure is now 
stable, it is however difficult to obtain feedbacks from 
anything else than a driven discussion with end-users. 
Indeed, it is not an easy task to formalize a study to globally 
analyze an IS that is distributed through several applications 
without having to evaluate each of the modules’ GUI. That is 
why our multidisciplinary team is now associated with 
knowledge engineers that focus on the evaluation of the 
interactions between the interfaces of modules and the 
different types of users. 
In the same time, we are also trying to improve our 
innovative modules, like the Biodi-Verse that tries to 
generate metaverses from BIS information. Now that a 
 
Figure 21. Immersive representations of information 
for the main entities, at each complexity level 
280
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

reliable process has been defined and first experimentations 
started, we are expecting precise analysis for testing and 
optimizing both BMM and Biodi-Verse applications. One of 
the aims is to build a protocol to evaluate the relevance of 
metaverses, depending their structure and level of details, 
and their utility to the different types of users. Although we 
have no doubt that the complexity of virtual world 
generation from BIS is a brake for the non-specialists, in the 
frame of the Nextic project, we first prefer to focus on 
experts and amateurs which represent our main users at the 
present time. 
The MABIS model offers a convenient evolution of its 
own structure through its modular layered architecture. In the 
frame of the whole BIS, major enhancement like the adding 
of a new entity, is supported through the development of a 
new module: a WCS or a WSS, depending the complexity of 
the new entity and its treatments. In the frame of a single 
module, in order to provide the three modes (main, deported, 
and remote) of use, functionalities are fully decoupled from 
the GUI. Thus enhancement through the adding of 
functionalities is facilitated. 
However, it is important to note that each module does 
not require all functioning mode. In the frame of the Nextic 
project, we decided to separate the authentication of users 
and the provisioning of their data, two features initially 
gathered by the directory, in two modules. The idea is to 
keep the provisioning in the directory and extract the 
authentication part in a new dedicated module supporting 
several protocols like Lightweight Directory Access Protocol 
(LDAP), OpenID and Code Access Security (CAS). This 
evolution is to let other institutions use our BIS through their 
own authentication server. In this case, the MABIS 
authentication module does not require a main mode as this 
functionality will essentially be used through its webservices, 
in remote mode. 
This generalization of webservices in MABIS also allows 
to expect major enhancements in terms of inter-BIS data 
sharing. Two cases can be considered: 
1. Exchanges between two BIS build on the MABIS 
structure. As the systems rely on the same 
architecture, it is convenient to exchange and merge 
the information from the two platforms. Thus the 
search engine of all modules should soon integrate a 
simple checkbox allowing to extend the search of 
any entities to all referenced MABIS platforms. 
2. Exchanges between an information system built on 
MABIS architecture, and another BIS. In this case, 
the communication between the two platforms 
directly depends on the existing webservices and 
the data models used to describe the entities. As 
several structures coexist (for instance Dublin Core 
and METS for documents, or SDD and DELTA for 
taxa), and because BIS concept is relatively young, 
it is difficult to choose and exchange among the 
different possibilities. 
Note that the current MABIS architecture does not impose a 
particular data model for entities as the structure defined is 
more global. However, even with two MABIS systems based 
on different data models describing its entities, the existence 
of homologous webservices ensures the facilitation of 
exchanges. 
In terms of general evolution of the MABIS structure 
now, we plan to prospect on two points. The first one is to 
try to implement parts of WSS, like the VWB of Biodi-
Verse, in SaaS. Indeed new evolutions of programming 
languages, like Action Script 3, allow unexplored 
possibilities to provide on the Web traditionally installed 
complex software. The second point is to build an abstract 
presentation layer to virtually gather all the functionalities 
offered by the WCS and the WSS gates in a consistent, easy 
to interrogate, interface. These developments are part of a 
strategy to strengthen the exchanges between MABIS 
architecture and international initiatives like the Global 
Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF). 
VII. CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES 
We have presented a new model of modular Biodiversity 
Information System: the MABIS architecture. These 
modules are components and software offering services 
through three different modes (main, deported and remote). 
MABIS provides a better flexibility on a relevant layered 
structure, in order to gather different types of users usually 
spread on several systems. Using this model, we have 
focused on three specialized modules: 
• 
 An evaluation component, the SIE, to associate 
certificates to scientific information stored in the 
BIS. This tool allows to follow the enhancement of 
data shared by specialists and amateurs through an 
authoritative and a community certification process. 
It allows users to debates on cards information with 
the aim to improve their content. 
• 
A behavior management component (the BMM), to 
manage ethological data on specimens and taxa. The 
main considered entities are action, as a behavior 
unit, and sampling session, that represents an 
ordered collection of actions associated to one or 
more specimens. Three descriptive approaches are 
supported (textual, visual, and formal) to respond to 
the needs of three different experts (ethologists, 
computer graphics experts, simulation experts). 
• 
A Biodi-Verse software, to generate immersive 
representations of selected MABIS entities. Because 
information systems dedicated to biodiversity gather 
sets of data difficult to appropriate, we present 
several possibilities to represent them through virtual 
worlds. Using a generic process, it is possible to 
generate up to four different representations of an IS 
part, depending on the available resources and the 
data structure. 
The instantiations of MABIS architecture through the 
Etic program and Nextic project have already given positive 
feedbacks that also suggest enhancement tracks to the model 
in terms of data exchanges between BIS. Our future 
researches will be directed toward these fields. 
 
281
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The ETIC program promotes the enhancement of insular 
tropical environment contents from biological researchers 
using Information and Communication Technologies. The 
European Union, the French National Government, and the 
Regional Council of Reunion funded it in the frame of the 
DOCUP-FEDER 2002-2006, A9-04 ICT measure. 
NEXTIC is the next ETIC project for distributing 
Biodiversity edited contents on the Web with webservices, 
then with Semantic and Immersive services. It is supported 
by the PO-FEDER 2007-2013 measure. 
We are also grateful to Mr Laurent Cochet, engineer on 
Nextic project, for the implementation information provided 
to our research team. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Conruyt, P. Conruyt, O. Sebastien, “A methodology for Designing 
E-services from a Co-Design Platform,” Proc. of the 6th International 
Conference on Knowledge Management, I-know’06, Graz, Austria, 
K. Tochtermann / H. Maurer Eds., pp. 226-230, September 2006. 
[2] N. Conruyt, D. Sebastien, R. Courdier, D. David, N. Sebastien, T. 
Ralambondrainy, “Designing an Information System for the 
preservation of Insular Tropical Environment in Reunion Island. 
Integration of Databases, Knowledge Bases and Multi-Agent Systems 
by using Web Services”, Advanced Agent-Based Environmental 
Management Systems, Whitestein Series in Software Agent 
Technologies and Autonomic Computing, Cortés, Ulises; Poch, 
Manel (Eds.), Birkhäuser, pp. 61-90, March 2009. 
[3] J. Ferber, “Multi-Agent Systems: An Introduction to Distributed 
Artificial Intelligence”, Addison-Wesley Professional, 1999. 
[4] F. Garzotto, M. Forfori, “Hyperstories and social interaction in 2D 
and 3D edutainment spaces for children”,  Proceedings of the 
seventeenth conference on Hypertext and hypermedia table of 
contents, Odense, Denmark, pp. 57-68, 2006. 
[5] A. Hudson-Smith, “Digital Urban – The Visual City”, UCL Center 
for advanced spatial analysis, Working paper series, paper 124, 1999, 
ISSN 1467-1298. 
[6] K. D. Fook, A. M. V. Monteiro, G. Câmara, “Web Service for 
Cooperation in Biodiversity Modeling”, Advances in Geoinformatics, 
Clodoveu A. Davis Jr., Antônio Miguel V. Monteiro (Eds.), Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 203-216, November 2007. 
[7] G. McArdle, “Exploring the Use of 3D Collaborative Interfaces for E-
Learning,” Studies in Computational Intelligence, Intelligent Systems 
and Technologies, H.-N. Teodorescu et al. (Eds),  Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, pp. 249-270, July 2009. 
[8] I. Marmaridis, S. Griffith, “Metaverse Services: Extensible Learning 
with Mediated Teleporting into 3D Environments,” Information 
Processing, Information Systems: Modeling, Development, and 
Integration, 
Proc. 
International 
United 
Information 
Systems 
Conference, UNISCON, J. Yang et al. (Eds.), Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, pp. 229-239, April 2009. 
[9] S. J. Mayo et al., “Alpha e-taxonomy: responses from the systematics 
community to the biodiversity crisis,” Kew Bulletin vol. 63: 1–16, 
Springer Netherlands, pp. 1-16, May 2008, doi: 10.1007/s12225-008-
9014-1. 
[10] D. Payet, R. Courdier, T. Ralambondrainy, N. Sebastien, “Le modèle 
à Temporalité : pour un équilibre entre adéquation et optimisation du 
temps dans les simulations agents, ” Proc. Journées Francophones des 
Systèmes Multi-Agent, 2006. 
[11] D. Payet, R. Courdier, N. Sebastien, T. Ralambondrainy, 
“Environment as support for simplification, reuse and integration of 
processes in spatial MAS,” Proc. Information Reuse and Integration, 
pp. 127-131, September 2006. 
[12] K. R. Popper, “All life is problem solving,” Routledge (Eds.), 1999. 
[13] D. Sebastien, “Contribution à la génération de représentations 
immersives des données de Systèmes d’Information sur la 
Biodiversité, ” PhD. Thesis, University of Reunion Island, (to 
appear), 2010. 
[14] D. Sebastien, N. Conruyt, “Online multimedia database for 
communities of practice in Biology: a real use challenge,” Proc. 
International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and 
Services, pp. 549-554, IEEE Computer Society, May 2008, doi: 
10.1109/ICIW.2009.89. 
[15] D. Sebastien, N. Conruyt, R. Courdier, T. Tanzi “Generating Virtual 
Worlds from Biodiversity Information System: requirements, general 
process and typology of the metaverse’s models,” Proc. of the Fourth 
International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and 
Services, Venice, Italy, May 2009. 
[16] N. Sebastien, R. Courdier, D. Hoareau, M. P. Huget, “Analysis of 
temporal dependencies of perceptions and influences for the 
distributed execution of agent-oriented simulations,” Proc. European 
Simulation and Modelling Conference, October 2008. 
[17] N. Sebastien, “Distribution et Parallélisation de simulations Orientées 
Agent, ” PhD. Thesis, University of Reunion Island, 2009. 
[18] F. Recknagel, “Ecological informatics: Current scope and future 
directions,” Proc.  
Information 
Technologies 
in 
Environmental Engineering, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 3-22, 
May 2009, doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88351-7. 
[19] S. Tisue, U. Wilensky, “NetLogo: A Simple Environment for 
Modeling Complexity,” Proc. International Conference on Complex 
Systems, 2004. 
[20] B. P. Zeigler, “DEVS representation of dynamical systems: event-
based intelligent control,” Proc. of the IEEE, vol. 77, n°1, pp72–80, 
January 1989. 
 
282
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

