Smart Factory Systems - Fostering Cloud-based Manufacturing based on
Self-Monitoring Cyber-Physical Systems
Simon Bergweiler
German Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DFKI)
Kaiserslautern, Germany
Email: simon.bergweiler@dfki.de
Abstract—This paper describes the concept and realization of an
architecture using cloud-based smart components to achieve a
more responsive production system that provides a modular and
re-conﬁgurable production framework. For each important part
of the plant and the manufactured product, digital virtual copies
are created and stored in active digital object memories, a uniﬁed
structured format for data access and further processing. Cyber-
Physical Systems act as intelligent nodes within the cloud-based
network and guarantee the function of technical communication
and data exchange. Moreover, these systems continuously perform
and execute almost autonomous simple state and feature checks,
up to a certain level of complexity. In various points of the
production process these simple checks can ensure or even
optimize the quality of the product. An assistance system makes
use of these technical solutions and manages and monitors
the distributed components and their responsibilities for quality
assurance during the whole production process. In compliance
with prescribed quality characteristics and the situational context
necessary processing steps are deﬁned or rearranged.
Keywords–active digital object memory; cyber-physical systems;
cyber-physical production system.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The present approach of intelligent manufacturing, called
cyber-physical Production Assistance System (cPAS), shows
the realization and implementation of a concept of networked
autonomous devices, sensors and machines that monitor them-
selves and perform condition-based, decentralized small tasks
for continuous monitoring and self-diagnosis by simple state
checks. The crosslinking is carried out by upstream Cyber-
Physical Systems (CPS) and the data storage and the extended
decentralized monitoring is realized by Active Digital Object
Memories (ADOMe) [1].
The industry is facing a change and needs improved
production system efﬁciency and robustness through more
ﬂexible, automated production, because it will no longer be
sufﬁcient to produce good products in high quality. The current
order of the market is shifting more and more towards the
idea of contemporary customer-speciﬁc individual production,
combined with the shortest possible cycles for development
and processing, different product variants need to be made in
almost no time [2]. However, this ﬂexible approach also requires
that future factories must be easily adapted and converted
to the order situation, but this is time-consuming and costly.
To make such a complex task more manageable, parts of
the plant, e.g., sensors, machinery and products need to be
developed that will make a ﬂexible and modular engineering
possible. Through the application of innovative self-monitoring
techniques for manufactured products and ﬁeld devices the
efﬁciency in production will be increased [3]. Nowadays, as a
general trend, the focus shifts from pure engineering, which is
based on mechanical processes, to software-controlled processes
that offer potential for further optimization [4].
The evolution of the Internet to the Internet of Things
(IoT) corresponds to the fusion of the real and the virtual
world. When considering this trend, CPS play a main role by
coupling the different scientiﬁc worlds - mechanical engineer-
ing, electrical engineering and computer science. This trend
reveals the German industry that it stands on the threshold
of the fourth industrial revolution (Industrie 4.0) [3]. Future
production processes are characterized by speciﬁc requirements
to the individual manufacturing of products. This opens up
new requirements for highly ﬂexible production systems, and
increasing efﬁciency in industrial production processes will
become a signiﬁcant competitive factor. CPS form a solid basis
for Industrie 4.0 [5], and this approach shows the integration
of these systems in a real production environment. The vision
of Industrie 4.0 describes the digital transformation of industry
and the networking of production and products. With the
development of Industrie 4.0, machinery, equipment and sensors
are communicating with each other and exchange data. This
leads to a combination of the physical and the virtual world
[2], [3].
The development of component-based machine-to-machine
(M2M) communication technologies enable ﬁeld devices to
exchange information with each other in an autonomous way
without human intervention. The concept of IoT extends this
M2M concept by the possibility to communicate and interact
with physical objects, which are represented by CPS. These
CPS provide the necessary computing power, storage, sensors
and ubiquitous access to the functionality of the instrumented
machines and ﬁeld devices [6], [7]. In this approach, all
major ﬁeld devices are equipped with CPS and installed
in spatially separated production lines. The idea goes here
towards the concept of “retroﬁtting” [8]. Retroﬁtting means the
advanced equipment of existing facilities through additional
hardware: function-enhancing modules for communication and
distributed processing. With this instrumentation, it is possible
that individual ﬁeld devices and the manufactured products
communicate with each other, until the industrial plant meets
the standards and directives of future factories and principles
of Industrie 4.0 [9].
In Section II, this paper gives an overview of used
technologies and introduces the terms ﬁeld devices, IoT, CPS,
automation pyramid, active digital object memories, smart
factories and smart products. It closes with a with a brief
summary that addresses the importance of networking in the
industry and manufacturing domain. Section III describes the
concept of cloud-based manufacturing, the modeling, and
91
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

distributed decentralized CPS and corresponding locally and
globally stored data structures. Section IV describes the scenario
and application domain and shows how the approach and the
developed framework can be used in this industrial environment.
In the following Section V, the technical realization of an
infrastructure for distributed CPS-based product memories and
the upstream assistance system of the CPPS is shown. Section
VI gives a conclusion and an outlook on future work.
II.
BACKGROUND
A. Field Devices
Field devices are electronic devices that are located at the
ﬁeld level, the lowest level in the hierarchical level model for
automation. They are associated with sensors that, on one hand,
detect the data of the measuring points and on the other pass
the control data to the actuators. At certain time intervals, ﬁeld
devices continuously supply measured data for process control
and receive control data for the actuators.
B. Internet of Things
The inexorable growth and innovation diversity of informa-
tion and communication technologies leads to a fundamental
change in daily life. Computers are becoming smaller and
can be used almost anywhere. They are built almost inside
of all of our technical equipment, e.g., smart watches that
track bio-physical data. These devices provide a wide range of
technical capabilities that can be used quite comfortable and
allow individual components to communicate and cooperate
by constantly exchanging sensor information. Following this
future trend it can be expected that all utensils of our daily life
are turning into smart nodes within a global communication
network: this is called the IoT [10], a trend that will also ﬁnd
its way into domains such as consumer electronics and also
industrial production.
The term Internet of Things was coined and popularized by
the work of the Auto-ID Center at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology (MIT), which in 1999 started to design and
propagate a cross-company RFID infrastructure. In 2002, its
co-founder and former head Kevin Ashton was quoted in
Forbes Magazine as saying, “We need an internet for things, a
standardized way for computers to understand the real world”
[11]. This article was entitled “The internet of things”, and was
the ﬁrst documented use of the term in a literal sense [12].
C. Industrial Internet
The idea of the Industrial Internet, also known as the
Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), is a network of physical
components, systems and applications that contain embedded
technology to communicate. The term is coined by the company
Frost & Sullivan and refers to the integration or union of phys-
ical machines with their networked sensors and actuators with
complex software technologies, like Machine Learning, Big
Data, IoT, and Machine-to-Machine communication. Machines
are talking to machines and analyze and optimize data to
perform better. Different components, like sensors or actuators,
share intelligence and solve complex problems in combination
with a CPS.
For a better coordination, acceleration, and development
of Industrial Internet technologies the Industrial Internet
Consortium (IIC) was founded by AT&T, Cisco, General
Electric, IBM, and Intel, in 2014. This consortium of industry
players from multinational corporations attempts to establish a
comprehensive application of the identiﬁed technologies.
The focus of the IIoT is on improving efﬁciency, safety,
productivity of processes in the ﬁeld of production. Optimized
machine-to-machine communications, efﬁcient parametrization,
easier monitoring, and a better planning of capacities leads to
a signiﬁcant cost reduction in production and to a quick return
on invest [13].
D. Cyber-Physical Systems
In the ﬁelds of agriculture, health, transport, energy supply
and industry, we are facing a revolution, a new era, and the
IoT will open up new ways and possibilities in the upcoming
years. Modern information technologies connect data out of
different areas and bring them together. This works, if there
is a virtual counterpart for every physical product, that can
reproduce, by means of sensors and cameras, the environment
and the context to combine simulation models and predictive
models.
Therefore, the paradigm of the IoT describes distributed
networks, which in turn are composed of networks of smart
objects. As a technical term for such smart objects, the term
Cyber-Physical System (CPS) was coined [14]. The main
feature of a CPS is that the information and communication
technologies were developed and ﬁnely tuned to create virtual
counterparts to physical components. CPS link data of the
real world and this increases the effectiveness and does not
encapsulate computing power in an embedded system. Over the
communication channel available distributed computing power
can be used to solve problems within a network.
The IoT and CPS are not fundamentally new concepts.
Indeed, Simon [15] already identiﬁed the importance and
beneﬁts of combining both, physical and virtual domains. His
approach was presented many years ago, when not all embedded
platforms and manufacturing techniques were developed as
today. In fact, the possibility to develop and use a mature
platform and techniques are nowadays widely accepted by the
industry. Production processes in the context of the initiative
“Industrie 4.0” of the federal German government can be ﬁne-
grained equipped with sensors and deliver real-time internal
and external production parameters in an very high level of
detail [3], [16].
These following four features typically characterize CPS [17]:
•
A physical part, e.g., sensors and actuators capture
physical data directly. This allows a direct inﬂuence
on physical processes.
•
A communication part, e.g., connected to digital
networks: wireless, bound, local, global. This allows
the use of globally available data and services.
•
A computation part, e.g., save and evaluate data and
interact on this basis, active or reactive with physical
and digital worlds.
•
An interaction-layer for HMI, e.g., feature a range of
interfaces for multi-modal human-machine interaction.
92
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

This provides dedicated facilities for communication
and control, like control by speech and gestures.
In this approach, CPS are embedded micro-controllers
installed either inside or outside of physical objects, responsible
for the connection and communication over a network, e.g.,
the Internet. The technical aspect of classical embedded
systems is extended by the idea of Real World Awareness
and tight integration in digital networks. In the context of this
implementation, CPS act as digital counterpart and couples the
real and the virtual worlds [5], [18]. Furthermore, the “Real
World Awareness” and dynamic integration of CPS is based on
three basic principles: self identiﬁcation (Who am I?), service
exploration (What do I offer?) and active networking (Where
are my buddies?).
E. Cyber-Physical Production Systems
The application of CPS in production systems leads to the
Cyber Physical Production Systems (CPPS), in which products,
machines and other resources are represented by CPS sharing
information and services across the entire manufacturing and
value network. Future factories use CPPS, semantic machine
to machine communication (M2M) and semantic product
memories to create smart products [19]. These smart products
are the basis for smart services that use them as a physical
platform.
Overall, a CPPS, which is based on decentralized production
logic and networked principles, offers advantages in terms
of transparency, adaptivity, resource efﬁciency and versatility
over traditional production systems. In the context of CPPS,
CPS are fundamental units that have almost instant access
to relevant information and parametrization of machines,
production processes and the product itself. On the automation
level of a CPPS all these information out of the CPS-network
is needed to run the manufacturing process successfully and to
make strategic decisions. For decision making and control of the
manufacturing processes, consistent and coherent information
of the “real” world is needed [20].
F. Automation Pyramid
Today’s conventional automation pyramid consists of three
clearly separated levels, see Figure 1. The automation level,
where sensors, actuators and in general ﬁeld devices are located,
the Manufacturing Execution System (MES) level, and the
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) level. In each of these
levels, different planning and construction processes take place.
A new control paradigm, based on CPS and Service-Oriented
Architectures (SOA) that interact in an automation network,
and the direct communication and administration of ﬁeld
devices puts a question mark on the strict separation of the
automation pyramid. The digital transmission and permeability
of the engineering is in the focus of current factories of the
future and softenings up the concept of the strict separation
in encapsulated automation levels, where a strong vertical and
horizontal communication of ﬁeld devices within automation
systems is not considered [3], [21].
Through the vision of networking of Industrie 4.0 this strict
separation of the levels and the top-down approach of the
information ﬂow is mixed. Intelligent networked devices can
operate independently and communicate with each other via
Figure 1: Conventional automation pyramid.
services that in turn can be used ﬂexibly to support value-added
processes [22].
G. Active Digital Object Memories
The development of the IoT makes it possible to assign a
digital identity to physical objects [23], [24]. Paradigms, such
as human-machine interaction and machine-to-machine com-
munications are implemented by the use of clearly identiﬁable
markers, so-called smart labels. However, the identiﬁcation is
not only bound to those labels, it can be also achieved by
integrated sensors or by providing identiﬁcation methods.
These developments pave the way for the concept of Active
Digital Object Memories (ADOMe), which extend the usage of
smart labels by additional memory and processing capabilities
[25]. By the use of the product memory concept all data in the
life cycle of a product (manufacturer information, suppliers,
dealers and users) can be added, and furthermore, the data
exchange can be made over this speciﬁc memory model. Also,
memory-related operations can be performed by small scripts
in a local runtime environment directly on the ADOMe [26].
According to the functionality of these scripts it is possible to
closely monitor decentralized production processes and resource
consumption, to impove the quality of the products [27].
These innovative technologies and techniques are crucial
parts and the further development is highly supported in national
research initiatives, such as Smart Manufacturing Leadership
Coalition in the US [28] and Industrie 4.0 in Germany [3].
The next step in the development and to establish new
technologies is to evaluate, process and merge data from
existing enterprise resource planning systems (ERP) [29] and
data from different ADOMes. Both sources, considered as a
single unit, offer comprehensive access to domain knowledge
and contextual information. A more concrete description of the
industrial environment and the running manufacturing processes
93
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

enables a better user assistance to automatically recognize
intentions and activities of the worker. Recommendations for
improvements of the current activity of the worker can be
presented proactively by the system. The approach of Haupert
et al. [30] refers to a system for intention recognition and
recommendation that shows an example scenario also based
on ADOMes.
Furthermore, the concept of digital product memories still
has an active part. This activity is realized in the form of
small embedded scripts that can be run in a separate runtime
environment on the speciﬁc CPS. Thus, according to the
computing power and storage capacity autonomously simple
tasks can be executed independently in a decentralized way.
In a certain interval or linked to events, deployed scripts are
executed and perform small tasks such as storage cleaning,
threshold value monitoring or target/actual-value comparisons.
The present work uses the idea of the Object Memory
Modeling (OMM) [31] and implemented an Application
Programming Interface (API) on this basis. OMM is an XML-
based object memory format, which can be used for modelling
events and it also deﬁnes patterns, so called block structures, to
store information about individual physical objects. Moreover,
this format is designed to support the storage of additional
information of physical artifacts or objects.
H. Fields of Application - Smart Factories and Smart Products
Powerful computers are becoming smaller, inexpensive and
energy efﬁcient and suitable for the integration in devices, the
instrumentation of everyday objects and integration in clothes -
smart products. Tiny CPS-adapted sensors and actuators are
able to perceive and respond to their environment and interact
with connected services in the network. These sensor networks
are an essential piece of the foundation for future factories -
smart factories. Software-deﬁned platforms, like CPPS, make
sensor data available and processable, enriched with intelligence
by integrated analysis methods for monitoring and controlling.
CPS-enabled factory modules or factory parts and the produced
smart products communicate and interact with each other. In
this context, ADOMes provide a way to collect and analyze
structured data and gives an answer to the question in which
format the obtained data sets of all connected CPS could be
stored. A smart service uses a smart product of the smart factory,
to use smart data as an asset, linked via semantic technologies,
see Figure 2 [32].
Smart factories and smart products characterize a generation
change to new, highly ﬂexible and adaptive manufacturing
technologies for the production.
•
More computing power in many small devices - extend
functionality of existing industrial plants with several
CPS.
•
Better networked via Cloud-services.
•
Gathering and fusion of information - local and global
data processing (sensors, actuators).
•
Create object memories, and store product/object-
speciﬁc data.
Figure 2: Customization based on semantic technologies [32].
I.
Summary
Goal of research in this ﬁeld is the virtualization of the
traditional automation pyramid from sensor control to the ERP
level to achieve the synchronization of the digital and the
real world, as well as the integration of novel distributed
architectures into existing production systems. Mechatronic and
logical hierarchies must be decoupled and the turn to service
orientation leads to an adjustment of the existing hierarchical
layer structure. In our point of view, a production line, of a
Smart- or Future Factory, consists of many autonomous CPS-
enabled modules, which in turn could be composed of several
CPS. Only with the appropriate infrastructure it is possible to
create hybrid products, combinations of goods and services.
The IIoT uses the embedded technology of CPS to com-
municate and share intelligence within a network of physical
objects. It connects platforms, applications sensors, and devices
and enables improved availability and affordability of sensors,
devices, processors and other infrastructure components that
facilitate and provide a stable access to real-time information.
Figure 3: Cloud infrastructure.
Figure 3 shows the cloud that connects and combines
94
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

infrastructure components, like the assistance system and the
ADOMes, the interaction layer via mobile devices (from the
perspective of the worker), the manufactured products, and
the ﬁeld device level, e.g., sensors and machines. Based on
a systematic monitoring of all components intelligent data
analysis (data mining) can help to detect early signs of problems
or uncover impending problems on device level. This saves
maintenance costs and avoids a system break down.
III.
CONCEPT OF DISTRIBUTED MANUFACTURING DATA
This concept is based on the idea of distributed manufactur-
ing data across a network. This distributed functionality forms
the basis for the independent conﬁguration of system compo-
nents and the context-speciﬁc consideration by analysis tools.
In the implementation, we use the vision of agile automation
systems that is based on distributed CPS and SOA. This vision
deﬁnes a new control paradigm to improve traditional control
structures in the domain of industrial automation [21], [33] and
puts focus on the four-stage concept of intelligent behavior of
production systems [5]:
1) Communication and distributed functionality
•
Factory as a network of mechanical parts
•
Resolution of the communication hierarchy
•
Horizontal and vertical integration
2) Adaptivity and autonomy
•
Independent conﬁguration of the system control at
run-time
•
Autonomous control of machining processes by
target
3) Context-sensitive cognitive machine systems
•
Dynamic adjustment of production parameters is
determined by environmental inﬂuences
•
Consideration of knowledge of products and sys-
tems to optimize production by target
4) Self-optimizing production systems
•
Independent setting of production targets of the
individual process steps for the comprehensive
optimization of the value chain
Today’s efforts tackle the challenges, described at the ﬁrst
stage communication and distributed functionality, with focus
on the horizontal and vertical integration and the communication
without hierarchical restrictions. This work exactly aims on this
aspect and considers a production line of a smart factory as a
sum of several autonomous CPS. In addition to these aforemen-
tioned smart products, there are also intelligent CPS-enabled
ADOMes that structure the accruing data of ﬁeld devices
and produced objects and make them accessible. Accordingly,
each of these systems is able to act self-regulating and self-
monitoring as autonomous factory component, consequently
they are able to communicate with each other.
To get a higher impact and more context-sensitive adaption
of the production system, the heterogeneous environment of
a production line must be virtually mapped and formalized.
In this concept we use the ADOMe-approach in combination
with suitable models that describe resources and the situational
context. These models minimize the dependencies between
technologies providing ﬂexibility and individual adaptability.
The creation, maintenance, evaluation and handling of the
models require a series of processing steps that have been
merged into one production system to achieve a combination
of decentralized control, data storage, and access.
A. Cloud-based Manufacturing
This approach makes use of the potential of a cloud-based
networked service platform to improve the manufacturing
process, information sharing, and quality management. The
advantages of the IoT and information technology, that ev-
erything is linked via network, promote the combination and
conversion of manufacturing and service, to integrate new
resources or orchestrate existing resources in the manufacturing
process in a new manner [34], [35]. Figure 4 shows the focus on
SOA and services, which means that the existing hierarchical
level structure needs to be adjusted. Tasks and functions of
individual systems will be divided and provided by services.
Functionalities of the MES level are split up and different
parts are assigned to the CPPS and the ﬁeld device level. Basic
services describe ﬁeld device functionality and each device also
addresses dedicated requirements and complex dependencies.
In addition, the services provide convenient access to their
knowledge sources and the parametrization of dedicated ﬁeld
devices and sensors. Thus, it is possible to adjust a device for
the purposes of conﬁguration or optimization within the cloud.
Figure 4: Cloud-based automation network.
Within the cloud network different resources, such as pro-
cessing power, memory or software, in the form of little scripts,
are provided dynamically and appropriately. In this approach,
small decentralized scripts perform simple comparison tasks,
like state monitoring and value checks, and the result is reported
to an upstream assistance system. In same cases a reaction,
like a rework task for drilling a whole again with another drill,
can be immediately triggered in the process.
The Object Memory Server (OMS), described in detail in
Section V-B, is a decisive infrastructure component that stores
ADOMes, according to the model of an application server to
serve a large number of users.
95
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

B. Smart CPS-enabled Field Devices and Active Digital Object
Memories
In this approach, each ﬁeld device has an upstream CPS,
described as CPS-enabled, but in the future existing micro
controllers and CPS merge to a smart system and take over
the tasks of networking and automation control. The speciﬁc
functionality of each the ﬁeld device is offered by a service
description, e.g., Web Service Description Language (WSDL)
[36], in a SOA, shown in Figure 5. The networking of the
individual devices is carried out in accordance with an IP
network.
Figure 5: Smart CPS-enabled ﬁeld devices.
From the user perspective it is absolutely essential to
save the production data both locally and globally in a
respective ADOMe. This is intended for safety reasons in
case of failure or network problems to provide additional
security and another possible way to access the production
data. Whereby both versions differ from each other, the local
memory represents only a subset of the global memory. Because
large amounts of data or storage-intensive data types (e.g.,
CAD drawings, manufacturer documentation and other internal
company documents, videos and examples, electrical wiring
diagrams, data history) must be stored in the global version
of the ADOMe, because the storage capacity of embedded
systems is usually tight. Taking into account these memory
restrictions, the local version is an adaptation or ﬁltered version
of the global ADOMe, only the necessary information, required
for operation and production are stored here. But to accomplish
this and to create a special limited local version of an ADOMe,
there exist synchronization points and communication structures
to ensure the correct synchronization when modifying local
or global variables or parameters. Nevertheless, the speciﬁc
parametrization of ﬁeld devices should be done ﬁrst on the
unit’s local ADOMe and shall be directly accessible. For the
ﬁne tuning of dedicated ﬁeld devices, it is to complex and
not practicable to access the central CPPS or global ADOMe.
This decentralized parametrization can also be advantageous by
setting up a new plant whose infrastructure is also still under
construction, or when plant parts are reconstructed and quick
compatibility checks must be performed using local data access.
Moreover, by the idea that the data is available on the produced
object, the ability is given to access these information, just in
other factory halls or other companies without access to the
central network. Due to the possibility, to keep only certain
production data locally in the product’s object memory, no
sensible production data leaves the factory.
C. Data Modeling and Interpretation
Modeling is an aim to make a feature or part easier
to understand, deﬁne, monitor, and analyze by referencing
on common knowledge. Modelling processes using semantic
technologies provide machine- and as well as human-readable
descriptions. Such descriptions give more control on the deﬁned
processes compared to syntactic technologies in terms of
meaningful relations, reusability, and interoperability.
Within complex processes of modern production facilities
information from different sources of knowledge are used to
monitor and analyze the expiring manufacturing processes.
A simpliﬁed representation of complex processes and data
structures by special classiﬁcation structures or taxonomies of
categories and concepts can contribute added value, because
problems, e.g. of ﬁeld devices or machines, can be detected in
an early stage of production. Figure 6 shows needed parts for
a uniform description of ﬁeld device functionality.
Figure 6: Uniform description of ﬁeld device functionality.
As a solution of this project, we created semantic models
of the different application domains that represents the proper-
ties and characteristics of the factory environment, sensors,
processes, products and ﬁeld devices and describes them
formally and unambiguously. To bind all of these different
application models via one situational base model allows
drawing connections, so-called implicit dependencies, e.g., of
certain groups of devices or users and processes.
The situational model represents the data structures from
all connected application domains, see Figure 7. The user
model gives a personalized view on handling user roles and
skills. Whereas the device and resource model creates a
semantic description for the whole factory view. This includes
large amounts of sensor and ﬁeld device data as well as the
functionality parametrization of these different devices. The
process and the product model handle large amounts on process
or product data. One goal of this approach is to examine
technical speciﬁcations and dependencies of products and their
quality characteristics and create a speciﬁc model, in order to
make a discovery or usage in the production process possible.
Through the use of such a device model, neighboring CPS-
enabled devices can communicate with each other. This allows
96
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 7: Models of different application domains.
a better coordination of relevant dependencies of ﬁeld devices
with encapsulated functionality, e.g., just to deﬁne the transfer
points of a workpiece or the conveyor belt height and speed.
Furthermore, this model also allows the aggregation of ﬁeld
devices within a production line. Speciﬁc manufacturing steps
can be carried out in encapsulated manufacturing steps of a CPS-
enabled ﬁeld device, but all processes are effectively planned,
managed, and overall controlled by inference mechanisms at
CPPS-level.
Involving semantic technologies in the industrial domain of
manufacturing requires a comprehensive analysis of existing
approaches, standards and guidelines. The examination, analysis
and evaluation of existing research approaches and standards,
currently used in the ﬁeld of automation and process industry,
leads to the conclusion that there exists no model for the
description of ﬁeld devices which could be taken without any
change or adaptation. To ﬁnd or develop an existing approach,
an analysis and assessment has been carried out, describing how
semantic technologies in exactly this areas are used. Private
domain models, e.g., to describe ﬁeld devices of speciﬁc plant
parts in detail with information classes and concepts have been
build on this consideration. Furthermore, this model formally
represents encapsulated speciﬁc control knowledge and concrete
parametrization of ﬁeld devices in machine-readable structures.
This is also important for further processing of the data in
order to use background, environmental or implicit knowledge
by inference mechanisms.
IV.
SCENARIO
In our scenario, depicted in detail in Figure 8, we take the
speciﬁc case of the production of a gearbox that should be
improved or modiﬁed during the manufacturing stage. The focus
is on the milling of the base plate and the subsequent process
of assembling the individual parts. First, the bottom plate is
milled and veriﬁed by camera, before in a second production
step, the product is assembled. These processes take place in
different production lines, which are coupled via a workpiece
carrier (WPC). The WPC accompanies the product through
the milling, assembling and processing cycle and carries the
product physically. The WPC is also equipped with a CPS-
enabled ADOMe, which couples the physical product part with
its virtual counterpart, which represents all product-speciﬁc
data. Within this interconnected infrastructure, the WPC has
access to all information of the product, to provide relevant
and necessary data at the respective part of the industrial plant.
The WPC communicates with the ADOMe of the respective
object, to provide information for the next production step.
Thus, produced objects can be registered early in the process
ﬂow.
Figure 8: Production scenario.
Beside the idea to structure information in a uniﬁed struc-
tured format, another goal of this approach is the decentralized
autonomous processing of information and immediate derivation
of a solution on a CPS-enabled ADOMe. After milling a small
script, which has already be embedded to the local ADOMe of
the product, checks in a comparison task, whether the actual
values match to the speciﬁed target values, which are also stored
in the same ADOMe. This review will determine, whether the
product is ﬁne and meets the quality requirements for the
production order, if rework is necessary or it is a faulty product.
If reworking is required for that workpiece, a note is stored
in the product’s memory and the product can be supplied to
the production cycle again, when a correctable deviation can
be solved directly in the production line. The delayed delivery
of produced products, because of reworking, can bring the
production process to a standstill. Such bottlenecks can be
identiﬁed and communicated early enough, so that the overall
system is able to reschedule the production workﬂow.
The smart product knows the sequence and which operations
a machine did during the production cycle. Each action is stored
by timestamp in an ADOMe. In this assembling scenario of
a gearbox, many parts exist that look very similar and have
to be prepared and assembled in a certain order. In many
cases, it is difﬁcult or not possible to distinguish the material
characteristics and the suitability of the gear parts with the
naked eye, or depending on the order speciﬁcation materials of
different quality, e.g., stainless steel, titanium or steel, are used
and incorporated in the gearbox. In this special case, every
produced part has its ADOMe that allows access to the data,
which are needed for the next processing or assembling step
97
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

and for reasons of quality assurance. Furthermore, every single
processing step is registered and must be compared with the
desired processing steps, deﬁned in the detailed construction
phase of the product. Furthermore, also the quality of products
varies depending on the customer different dimensions of the
gaps are tolerated.
In order to deploy and synchronize a global ADOMe, an
server platform was created, the Object Memory Server (OMS),
which provides service functionality in the cloud or the local
network. This component is described in detail in Section V-B,
cloud-based manufacturing.
V.
TECHNICAL COMPONENTS OF THE FRAMEWORK
The approach can be subdivided into three processing areas
that need to interact with each other. Figure 9 shows the
actual products and ﬁeld device level, represented by each
CPS and the associated ADOMe, furthermore, the supply level,
where services, snippets and ADOMes are hosted as cloud-
based networked solutions, and the assistance level for decision
support and knowledge acquisition of the CPPS. Decision
making is based on the dedicated processing steps and the
context-adaptive provision of information of ﬁeld devices and
manufactured products stored in their ADOMes. Each product
or ﬁeld device has both a local and a global ADOMe. The local
ADOMe is stored directly on the CPS with limited memory,
and the global ADOMe, for storage-intensive data types, is
stored by a central server, the OMS.
Figure 9: Interaction of the individual components of the
framework.
A. Production Assistance System
In a CPPS with many decentralized CPS-enabled modules,
condition reports to the overall system are very important. The
adopted assistance system for CPPS acts as logical parent
unit and is based on managed information out of individual
product ADOMes. As presented in Figure 10, the contextual
evaluation and context-speciﬁc management of processes and
procedures is based on facts about the manufactured products
(ADOMe), the factory parts (factory model) and the current
situation, inﬂuenced by the manufacturing process and the
skills and role of the user (user model, situational model).
The assistance system monitors and supervises the course
of production based on process data of the production cycle,
and it also monitors and supports the decisions taken by the
decentralized scripts. If an intervention in the workﬂow of
the current manufacturing process is needed, based on all
converging information here, it generates precise instructions for
handling and rescheduling of the production order, or triggers
actions, such as maintenance, alteration, or replacement of
system components. These reactions of the system are deﬁned
in context-dependent rules based on described models, which
represents the domain knowledge and the special vocabulary
and terminology. The system decides, whether the manufactured
parts are ready for further processing, if they must be revised
or if it is rejected goods. These actions are transferred to
and processed by the module for output presentation and
communicated to the registered clients and subsequent actors.
[30]
Figure 10: Contextual management based on a situational
model.
However, the focus of this approach is not on the con-
sideration and evaluation of complex relationships, for which
this assistance system has been designed, but ﬁrst on simple
evaluation purposes, such as self-monitoring and the self-check
of quality parameters of a manufactured object or a single ﬁeld
device within its ADOMe and its aligned embedded system.
Each distributed ADOMe performs its individual quality checks
and returns the data to the assistance system. For example,
when a ﬁeld device is re-parametrized, recommendations are
formulated that rely upon the data stored in the history of the
memories of this device.
Within the system infrastructure, the tiny scripts, we named
them snippets, will be hosted in a central cloud-based Snippet
Store, see Figure 9. Moreover, based on the task description
of the assistance system, e.g., “quality control by target value
comparison”, concrete recommendations for scripts are given
which adequately provide the required skills. An appropriate
matching script is installed in the local ADOMe, when it is
compatible with the existing combination of hardware and
software of the CPS. The assistance system administrates the
98
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

runtime of the local ADOMe and sets the execution interval of
the script. This scheduling job of the script runs the small tasks,
like memory operations or maintenance procedures, based on
necessary boundary parameters made dynamically available
on the product memory. Moreover, the assistance system must
react according to the notiﬁcation or event mechanism and
create a listener functionality for this device conﬁguration.
This means that the overall CPPS must check within a time
interval, whether the message or event status of an ADOMe
has changed. In accordance to these message or event types a
recommendation is triggered of the CPPS, which may affect
the current production process.
The component is used for decision support and the
derivation of recommendations. The structure and the data ﬂow
of the assistance system with its input and output channels is
shown in Figure 11. Several information sources, like products
and machine parts, and also the decentralized working small
scripts report data in certain time intervals. All these information
are classiﬁed and evaluated by the assistance system using the
situational model and the models of the different application
domains. To evaluate the inputs, a rule system is used that
operates on a set of predeﬁned rules, adapted to the present
compilation of the plant. The results of the evaluation process
are delivered to the presentation manager, which prepares them
for the respective user and his device.
Figure 11: Assistance system and data ﬂow.
B. Object Memory Server
OMM-based object memories can be created and stored as
XML-ﬁle or binary block, but this is no longer practical for a
large number of memories. For this reason, the OMS has been
implemented, which can be embedded as a service in the cloud
infrastructure and manages all ADOMes. Figure 12 shows the
architecture and dedicated modules of the OMS that can be
orchestrated on demand, depending on the intended application
scenario. This server component allows the deployment and
undeployment of ADOMes at runtime and uses for protection
of the stored contents a role based authentication module for
restricted access. Currently, three different modes are supported
for data access: passwords, certiﬁcates and electronic ID cards
[37].
Figure 12: Server-based OMM Architecture [37].
Via a RESTful Web service interface the OMS permits
access to process data of each manufacturer and provides
the functions to create, store, replace, and modify the data
structures in a uniform and consistent manner. Figure 13 shows
the interaction of the CPS’ client layer with the OMS. The OMS
uses an generic software library to handle XML-based OMM
representations to structure and represent the delivered data in
an appropriate format. This entails the creation of OMS-records,
all communicated data are checked and traceably documented
at the time the information was accepted and inserted in the
CPS’ ADOMe [25]. But upon closer examination of the data
structures from different manufacturers, it becomes evident that
no approach is suitable for all requirements, hence the OMS
will always be characterized by a certain heterogeneity.
Figure 13: OMS creates ADOMe in production.
C. Interaction and Output Presentation
A smart factory can never operate without human employees,
so one key issue is the human to machine interaction. In a
99
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

production process, a lot of information passes from monitoring
and control, but the problem usually lies in the overview and
the appropriate visualization. When people work together with
self-learning and self-adapting systems like CPS-based systems,
they need to understand each other and which processes are
internally occurring. Therefore, the user interface for technical
experts or operators is dynamically adapted by a personal
assistance system and its module for situational management.
This system creates speciﬁc UI-layouts or templates for the
presentation of contents for diverse mobile devices of the
workers (notebooks, smartphones, tablets, smart watches).
Currently available monitoring data are presented in adaptable
views in form of a curve visualization as depicted in Figure 14.
This overview allows the trained experts to draw conclusions
about the manufacturing process and possible bottlenecks.
Figure 14: Worker performing a maintenance task with a mobile
device.
First, the situational management component selects the
appropriate visualization for a registered device. This selection
is based on the situational model, that provides all gathered
information about the present situational factors (e.g., user
model, parametric inﬂuences of the location, factory and
production process). According to speciﬁc predeﬁned inference
rules, which are applied to this model, a visualization pattern
is determined and prepared for different devices. In this
consideration, the special privileges and responsibilities play
a major role for an adaptive intelligent visualization, because
a technician requires a different view in error or maintenance
purposes, as a machine operator who inspects the up and
running plant.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
This article described the conceptualization and implemen-
tation of a cyber-physical industrial environment and the use
of virtual counterparts of real physical objects, whose data
is stored in active digital object memories (ADOMe), hosted
on a dedicated Object Memory Server. The described Cyber-
Physical Systems (CPS) enable these memories to communicate
over the network and to fulﬁll small tasks in a decentralized
autonomous way, which contribute to the production cycle, like
storage cleaning, threshold value monitoring or target/actual-
value comparisons. The expertise of a fully ﬁtted and conﬁgured
production line is now available and formalized in the dedicated
ADOMes of each plant part. Based on this data an assistance
system can easily assist in the conﬁguration or reconﬁguration
of new devices, machine parts, and CPS. Furthermore, the
permanent monitoring of the data generates a large amount of
data that can be used to improve the early detection of errors
and feedback loops, as well as for functional testing. This could
even reach a stage, referred to the case of maintenance, in which
production systems autonomously order spare parts long before
a component fails. With these interconnected CPS, it will be
possible to implement further product requirements, such as
the efﬁcient use of energy and raw materials in production.
Moreover, it will be possible to personalize products and adapt
product features in regards to local needs and their individual
manufacturing process. According to the product lifecycle
management (PLM) and the deposited history in the active
digital object memories, it is easily possible to draw conclusions
from the product to the plant parts, which has manufactured
the product. This could be advantageous in cases of warranty
claims.
A smart factory can never operate without human employees,
so one key issue is the visualization of the stored contents of a
dedicated ADOMe. Future work will cover this topic and will
further develop strategies that will help to identify and visualize
important key values and how these should be presented to the
worker (e.g., via tablets or smart watches).
VII.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was funded in part by the German Federal
Ministry of Education and Research under grant number
02PJ2477 (project CyProS), 01IA11001 (project RES-COM),
and the EIT project CPS for Smart Factories. The responsibility
for this publication lies with the authors.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Bergweiler, “Intelligent manufacturing based on self-monitoring
cyber-physical systems,” in The Ninth International Conference on
Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies.
International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems,
Services and Technologies (UBICOMM-15), 9th, located at located at
NexTech 2015, July 19-24, Nice, France, C. B. Westphall, J. L. Mauri,
and P. Pochec, Eds., International Academy, Research, and Industry
Association (IARIA).
IARIA, 2015, pp. 108–113.
[2]
S. Russwurm, “Digital Factory: Why the Digital Transformation
Offers a World of Opportunities,” Magazine for Research and
Innovation,
2015,
[retrieved:
May
2016].
[Online].
Available:
https://www.siemens.com/innovation/en/home/pictures-of-the-future/
industry-and-automation/digital-factory-chances-of-digitalization.html
[3]
H. Kagermann, W. Wahlster, and J. Helbig, Eds., Securing the
future of German manufacturing industry - Recommendations for
implementing the strategic initiative INDUSTRIE 4.0, Final report of
the Industrie 4.0 Working Group.
Berlin: acatech National Academy
of Science and Engineering, 2013, [retrieved: May 2016]. [Online].
Available: {http://www.acatech.de/ﬁleadmin/user upload/Baumstruktur
nach Website/Acatech/root/de/Material fuer Sonderseiten/Industrie 4.
0/Final report
Industrie 4.0 accessible.pdf}
[4]
M. Loskyll, I. Heck, J. Schlick, and M. Schwarz, “Context-based
orchestration for control of resource-efﬁcient manufacturing processes,”
Future Internet, vol. 4, no. 3, 2012, pp. 737–761.
[5]
J. Schlick, P. Stephan, M. Loskyll, and D. Lappe, “Industrie 4.0 in
der praktischen Anwendung [Industrie 4.0 implemented in practical
applications],” in Industrie 4.0 in Produktion, Automatisierung und
Logistik, T. Bauernhansl, M. ten Hompel, and B. Vogel-Heuser, Eds.
Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden, 2014, pp. 57–84.
[6]
S. Weyer, M. Schmitt, M. Ohmer, and D. Gorecky, “Towards industry
4.0-standardization as the crucial challenge for highly modular, multi-
vendor production systems,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 48, no. 3, 2015,
pp. 579–584.
100
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[7]
J. Manyika et al., “The internet of things: Mapping the value beyond
the hype,” McKinsey Global Institute Report, 2015, p. 131.
[8]
A. Gontarz, F. H¨anni, L. Weiss, and K. Wegener, Sustainable Manufac-
turing: Shaping Global Value Creation.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, ch. Machine Tool Optimization Strategies:
Evaluation of Actual Machine Tool Usage and Modes, pp. 131–136.
[9]
S. Russwurm, Industrie 4.0: Beherrschung der industriellen Komplexit¨at
mit SysLM [Industrie 4.0: Control of industrial complexity with SysLM].
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, ch. Software: Die
Zukunft der Industrie [Software: The future of the industry], pp. 21–36.
[10]
J. H¨oller, V. Tsiatsis, C. Mulligan, S. Karnouskos, S. Avesand, and
D. Boyle, From Machine-to-Machine to the Internet of Things: Intro-
duction to a New Age of Intelligence.
Elsevier, 2014.
[11]
C. R. Schoenberger, “The internet of things,” 2002, [retrieved: March
2016]. [Online]. Available: http://www.forbes.com/global/2002/0318/
092.html
[12]
F. Mattern and C. Floerkemeier, “From the internet of computers to the
internet of things,” in From Active Data Management to Event-Based
Systems and More, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, K. Sachs,
I. Petrov, and P. Guerrero, Eds.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, vol.
6462, pp. 242–259.
[13]
P. C. Evans and M. Annunziata, “Industrial Internet: Pushing
the Boundaries of Minds and Machines,” General Electric, Tech.
Rep.,
2012,
[retrieved:
May
2016].
[Online].
Available:
http:
//www.ge.com/docs/chapters/Industrial Internet.pdf
[14]
E. Lee, “Cyber physical systems: Design challenges,” in Object
Oriented Real-Time Distributed Computing (ISORC), 2008 11th IEEE
International Symposium on, 2008, pp. 363–369.
[15]
H. A. Simon, The Sciences of the Artiﬁcial (3rd Ed.).
Cambridge,
MA, USA: MIT Press, 1996.
[16]
M. Broy, Cyber-Physical Systems: Innovation durch softwareintensive
eingebettete Systeme [Innovation through software-intensive embedded
systems], ser. acatech Diskutiert.
Springer, 2010.
[17]
B. Vogel-Heuser, “Automation als enabler f¨ur industrie 4.0 in der
produktion auf basis von cyber physical systems [automation as an
enabler for industrie 4.0 in production on the basis of cyber physical
systems],” Engineering von der Anforderung bis zum Betrieb, vol. 3,
2013, p. 1.
[18]
F. Hu, Cyber-Physical Systems: Integrated Computing and Engineering
Design.
Taylor & Francis, 2013.
[19]
W. Wahlster, Ed., SemProM: Foundations of Semantic Product Memories
for the Internet of Things.
Heidelberg: Springer, 2013.
[20]
G. Reinhart, B. Scholz-Reiter, , W. Wahlster, M. Wittenstein, and
D. Z¨uhlke, Eds., Intelligente Vernetzung in der Fabrik: Industrie 4.0
Umsetzungsbeispiele f¨ur die Praxis [Intelligent networking in the factory:
Industrie 4.0 application examples for use in practice].
Stuttgart:
Fraunhofer Verlag, 10 2015.
[21]
D. Z¨uhlke and L. Ollinger, “Agile automation systems based on
cyber-physical systems and service-oriented architectures,” in Advances
in Automation and Robotics, Vol.1, ser. Lecture Notes in Electrical
Engineering, G. Lee, Ed.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, vol. 122,
pp. 567–574.
[22]
M. Kleinemeier, “Von der automatisierungspyramide zu unternehmenss-
teuerungsnetzwerken,” in Industrie 4.0 in Produktion, Automatisierung
und Logistik, T. Bauernhansl, M. ten Hompel, and B. Vogel-Heuser,
Eds.
Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden, 2014, pp. 571–579.
[23]
L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The Internet of Things: A survey,”
Computer Networks, vol. 54, no. 15, 2010, pp. 2787–2805.
[24]
H. Chaouchi, Ed., The Internet of Things: Connecting Objects. Hoboken,
NJ, London: Wiley-ISTE, 2010.
[25]
J. Haupert, “DOMeMan: A framework for representation, management,
and utilization of digital object memories,” in 9th International Confer-
ence on Intelligent Environments (IE) 2013, J. C. Augusto et al., Eds.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 84–91.
[26]
A. Kr¨oner, J. Haupert, C. Hauck, M. Deru, and S. Bergweiler, “Fostering
access to data collections in the internet of things,” in UBICOMM 2013,
The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing,
Systems, Services and Technologies, W. Narzt and A. Gordon-Ross,
Eds.
IARIA, 2013, pp. 65–68, best Paper Award.
[27]
L. Abele, L. Ollinger, I. Dahmann, and M. Kleinsteuber, “A decentralized
resource monitoring system using structural, context and process informa-
tion,” in Trends in Intelligent Robotics, Automation and Manufacturing.
Intelligent Robotics, Automation and Manufacturing (IRAM-2012), vol.
330.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 371–378.
[28]
“SMLC Forum: Priorities, Infrastructure, and Collaboration for
Implementation
of
Smart
Manufacturing:
Workshop
Summary
Report,”
Workshop
Summary
Report,
2015,
[retrieved:
March
2016]. [Online]. Available: https://smartmanufacturingcoalition.org/sites/
default/ﬁles/smlc forum report vf 0.pdf
[29]
L. Wylie, “A Vision of Next Generation MRP II,” Gartner Group, 1990,
pp. 300–339.
[30]
J. Haupert, S. Bergweiler, P. Poller, and C. Hauck, “IRAR: Smart
Intention Recognition and Action Recommendation for Cyber-Physical
Industry Environments,” in Intelligent Environments (IE), 2014 Interna-
tional Conference, 2014, pp. 124–131.
[31]
A. Kr¨oner et al., “Object Memory Modeling,” Worldwide Web
Consortium, Tech. Rep., 2011, [retrieved: May 2016]. [Online].
Available: http://www.w3.org/2005/Incubator/omm/XGR-omm/
[32]
W. Wahlster, “Semantic Technologies for Mass Customization,” in
Towards the Internet of Services: The THESEUS Research Program,
ser. Cognitive Technologies, W. Wahlster, H.-J. Grallert, S. Wess,
H. Friedrich, and T. Widenka, Eds.
Springer International Publishing,
2014, pp. 3–13.
[33]
D. Zuehlke, “SmartFactory - Towards a Factory-of-Things,” Annual
Reviews
in
Control,
vol.
34,
no.
1,
2010,
pp.
129
–
138.
[Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1367578810000143
[34]
T. Song, H. Liu, C. Wei, and C. Zhang, “Common engines of cloud
manufacturing service platform for smes,” The International Journal of
Advanced Manufacturing Technology, vol. 73, no. 1, 2014, pp. 557–569.
[35]
L. Zhang et al., “Cloud manufacturing: a new manufacturing paradigm,”
Enterprise Information Systems, vol. 8, no. 2, 2014, pp. 167–187.
[36]
E. Christensen, F. Curbera, G. Meredith, and S. Weerawarana,
“Web Services Description Language (WSDL) 1.1,” W3C, W3C
Note, March 2001, [retrieved: May 2016]. [Online]. Available:
http://www.w3.org/TR/wsdl
[37]
A. Kr¨oner, J. Haupert, M. Deru, S. Bergweiler, and C. Hauck, “Enabling
data collections for open-loop applications in the internet of things,”
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol. 7, no.
1+2, 2014, pp. 75–85. [Online]. Available: http://www.iariajournals.org/
internet technology/inttech v7 n12 2014 paged.pdf
101
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

