 
 
Approaches for Securing Smart Meters in Smart Grid Networks 
 
 
Mustafa Saed 
Electrical and Computer Engineering 
University of Detroit Mercy 
Detroit, USA 
saedma@udmercy.edu 
Kevin Daimi and Nizar Al Holou 
College of Engineering and Science 
University of Detroit Mercy 
Detroit, USA 
{daimikj, alholoun}@udmercy.edu
 
 
Abstract— The Traditional Power utilities are gradually 
moving towards the Smart Grids. These Grids deploy a very 
large number of smart meters at the consumers’ sites using bi-
directional communication networks based on Internet 
protocols. Smart meters collect consumption data and allow 
customers other useful functions such as control their 
consumption electrical power and obtaining current energy 
usage. With the reliance on the internet protocols, the smart 
grids become vulnerable to various cyber-attacks. Consumers 
are worried about their privacy, integrity of their data, 
availability, and confidentiality when managing their power 
consumption. In an attempt to contribute to the protection of 
these smart meters against attacks, threes approaches based on 
cryptographic protocols are proposed for securing the direct 
and indirect connection of smart meters to collectors. The 
security 
requirements; 
confidentiality, 
integrity, 
and 
authentication are analyzed with respect to these approaches. 
Keywords- AMI; Direct Connection;Indirect Connecetion; 
Smart grid; Security 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
   Within 
the 
smart 
grid, 
the 
Advanced 
Metering 
Infrastructure (AMI) and security play a major role [1]-[3]. 
Smart grids utilize bidirectional communication with 
consumers to facilitate an information-driven style to indirect 
energy control and management. To this extent, they deploy 
large scale smart meters at consumer’s sites for bidirectional 
real time communication using Internet protocols [4]. The 
smart grid characterizes the new trends of the current power 
grid nationally and internationally. It emerged in response to 
environmental changes, improved energy efficiency, and 
reduced pollution emissions [5]. The smart grid, which is 
supported by information technology and intelligent control, 
relies on six components, namely; power generation, 
transmission, transformation, distribution, consumption and 
dispatching [6]. As shown in Fig. 1, smart grid refers to the 
next generation power grid, which upgrades the electricity 
distribution and management by encompassing a scalable 
and ubiquitous two-way communication infrastructure to 
enhance control, efficiency, reliability and safety [7]-[8]. It 
is, therefore, no surprise that many countries are considering 
it as the future direction of the power grid [9]-[11]. 
   Smart grids have many components, such as smart meter in 
their architecture to manage and control the power grid [12]. 
A smart meter is attached to every house to provide utility 
companies with more accurate electricity consumption data 
and customers with convenient way to track their usage 
information. It interfaces a house’s appliances and Home 
Energy Management Systems (HEMS) on the one hand, and 
interfaces with data collectors on the other [13]. 
   The Smart meters comprise two main components: an 
electronic meter that measures energy information accurately 
and a communication module that transmits and receives 
data [14]. Based on the importance of AMI and the vital role 
that it plays within the smart grid [15]-[18], it is very 
demanding that the AMI be protected from various possible 
cyber-security attacks [19]. Incorporating the Internet in the 
smart grid will widely open the door for various security 
attacks traditionally associated with the Internet. 
   Undoubtedly, Smart Grid systems will significantly 
improve efficiency and reliability but at the expense of 
possibly introducing new vulnerabilities. Hence, smart grid 
utilization should meet rigorous security requirements [19].      
Cyber-security, as a vital challenge of the smart grid 
transformation must be enforced right at the beginning and 
not glued when attacks take place [21]. Vulnerabilities are 
expected in power transmission networks, power grid and 
zone management [22]-[24]. To eliminate vulnerabilities or 
at least minimize their impact, strong security measures must 
be put in place. To reach full customer trust and to ensure 
excellent permanence of the current power supply, all 
components of smart grid communication network need to 
be extremely secure to satisfy the security requirements; 
confidentiality, integrity, availability, and nonrepudiation 
[25]-[26]. 
   Consumers do not want others to know how much energy 
they are consuming or how it is being used (confidentiality). 
Meter readings and control commands should not be 
modified while they are being transferred (integrity). The 
availability of meter reading is critical for utilities and 
consumers. It is also critical that sending and receiving 
components and devices cannot deny sending information 
including readings and commands (nonrepudiation). There 
are a number of possible attacks on AMI components 
including denial of service, device tampering, snooping, 
impersonation, wormhole, black hole and routing attacks. 
Therefore, 
AMI 
demands 
a 
reliable 
and 
secure 
communication approach between the smart meters and 
consumer equipment [26]. The AMI architecture used for 
this approach will be introduced, and the security of the 
approaches will be analyzed. 
265
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Smart Grid: Power and Information System Architecture. 
 
   The reminder of the paper is organized as follows: Related 
work is introduced in Section II. Section III introduces the 
AMI architecture & network topology of the smart meter. 
Section IV deals with the proposed security approaches. The 
analysis of AMI communication security is presented in 
Section V. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section VI. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
   Vaidya et al. [28] stressed that many of the available 
schemes for both single-path and multipath routing are not 
suitable for meshed AMI network. Consequently, they 
introduced a security mechanism for multipath routing based 
on Elliptic Curve cryptology, digital signature, and Message 
Authentication Code (MAC) for such an AMI network. Their 
approach allows the Certificate Authority to do a lot more 
work than they should normally do (issuing certificates) 
including controlling the nodes’ creation of public and 
private key. Nodes (smart meters) perform a number of 
computations despite their known limited computing power. 
This also tends to slow the system. Furthermore, a smart 
meter sends its information to all the neighboring smart 
meters with no security. This provides a potential attacker 
the opportunity for attacking more than one goal (smart 
meter) as they all have the information of the source meter. 
The neighboring nodes, acting as intermediate nodes, will do 
more calculations and broadcast the results. This means all 
other nodes (smart meters) have now the information. This 
implies, there are many nodes that the attacker can try and 
many nodes will be affected. 
   An interesting security protocol for AMI communications 
in smart grid where the smart meters are interconnected 
through wireless network was introduced by Yan et al. [29]. 
Their techniques indicated that the PKI is not desirable and 
relied on symmetric key cryptology. However, the number of 
symmetric keys used is large and possibly comparable to the 
number of keys should PKI has been followed. Furthermore, 
smart meters have limited capabilities, and therefore, 
verifying the MAC should have been left to the collector. 
The authors did not specify what will happen when the two 
MAC’s are not equal. This implies that the integrity of a 
meter’s reading is not handled correctly [30]-[31]. 
   Seo et al. [32] discussed the use of public key 
infrastructure (PKI) in smart grid and what security 
requirements need to be implemented in smart grid 
architecture including the smart meter to secure the smart 
meter communication in the AMI. The authors did not 
propose any security technique/protocols to secure the smart 
grid network but only provided a survey. 
   Dong et al. [33] proposed a protection scheme for the 
automation of smart grid system and patch distribution from 
the control center to data transmission security. Some of the 
functions were tested on the simulation platform, through 
intrusion detection system and using field devices such as 
smart meter. Their proposal considers the security within 
smart meter but not for the smart meter communication, such 
as smart meter to smart meter and smart meter to collector 
[34]. Furthermore, their proposed protection system did not 
use digital signature to protect against forgery. 
   Zhao et al. [35] provide the fundamental limit of cyber-
physical security in the presence of low sparsity 
unobservable attacks. It is shown in [36]-[37] that a complete 
system matrix can be identified using an independent 
component analysis method. Nevertheless, such attack 
schemes might not be easy to implement, as all meter data 
are required to be known and all the meters are required to be 
controlled. On the other hand, several detection and defense 
schemes are provided based on the complete knowledge of 
the system matrix. The off-line method, based on the 
Kullback-Leibler distance, is proposed to track malicious 
attacks using historical data [38]. They added their method 
may not work very well for continuous small-scale attacks. 
Our work can tackle continuous small-scale attacks through 
the various techniques that are proposed in the next sections. 
   Giani et al. [39] utilize the sparse topology information of 
the smart grid to determine the attack meter sets. However, 
these works lack the discussion of the system matrix 
acquisition. In fact, the design of the attack vector relies 
heavily on precise knowledge of the system matrix. In this 
case, it would not be easy to obtain such confidential 
information for an attacker who has limited access to the 
smart grid. Overall, a feasible unobservable attack scheme 
based on the incomplete system matrix has not yet been fully 
investigated. The authors in their proposal were not covering 
the smart meter communication attack. They only mentioned 
for the possible vulnerabilities related to attack meter in 
physical layer.  
   Li et al. [40] presented an efficient and robust approach to 
authenticate data aggregation in smart grids. Aggregation 
refers to the communication between the smart meters and 
the collector. This is achieved via deploying signature 
aggregations, implementing batch verification, and signature 
266
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
amortization schemes to reduce communication overhead 
and number of signing and verification operations, and 
providing fault tolerance. The authors proposed an efficient 
authentication scheme for power usage data aggregation in 
Neighborhood Area Networks (NAN) and smart meter to 
collector communications. The contributions for this work 
were represented by deploying digital signatures so that 
when the collector is out of service, alternative or backup 
collectors can execute the authentication approach without 
any additional configuration or setup. Their research also 
sought to reduce the number of signature and verification 
operations. However, the research is limited to authentication 
only. Thus, they are not securing the messages’ (reading) 
between smart meter and collector. 
   F. Li et al. [41] introduced a distributed incremental data 
aggregation approach, in which data aggregation is 
performed at all smart meters involved in routing data from 
the smart meter to the collector unit. In this research, the 
authors presented an efficient information aggregation 
approach, in which an aggregation tree, constructed via 
breadth-first traversal of the graph and rooted at the collector 
unit, is deployed to cover all smart meters in the 
neighborhood. This protocol can let the control unit collect 
all smart meters’ information in the area. Furthermore, to 
protect users’ privacy, all information is encrypted by a 
homomorphic encryption algorithm. Since no authentication 
scheme is emphasized, the approach faces the potential risk 
that malicious smart meter can forge packets, thus causing 
the smart grid system to fil to detect or diagnose bogus data. 
Adversaries can maliciously forge their own data to 
manipulate the aggregation results. Therefore, adversaries 
and false data reports need to be detected through advanced 
auditing approaches. 
   This paper proposes schemes for securing the direct and 
indirect smart meter-to-collector communications. The 
schemes are based on PKI. Unlike the work of Vaidya et al., 
the proposed indirect scheme in our paper allows each node 
to send the encrypted, authenticated, and signed reading of a 
smart meter to its successor only (just one node). The 
successor cannot tell the reading of the predecessor node. If a 
node is attacked, readings of other nodes will not be affected. 
Our paper also avoids the need for a certificate authority for 
both proposed schemes by allowing the collector/substation 
node to take care of issuing certificates to all smart meters 
under its authority. Furthermore, nodes do not waste time 
performing lengthy calculations. In contrast to the approach 
of Yan et al., PKI provides stronger encryption using public 
and private keys. It is clear how the keys are 
created/recreated and exchanged. The messages (readings) 
are small indicating PKI is the convenient way here. The 
verification of the hash functions is carried out by the 
collector, which has more powerful computing capabilities. 
If the computed hash function is not equal to the received 
hash function for a smart meter’s reading, the collector will 
reject that reading and inform the substation of a possible 
attack on that smart meter. Therefore, the integrity of a 
message (reading) is handled correctly. Furthermore, this 
proposed idea adds anonymity to the meters by using 
anonymous IDs, and adds confusion to the order of readings 
of smart meters using a PRNG. Two different security 
protocols are proposed to enhance the security of the direct 
(centralized) communication between smart meters and 
collector in a smart grid. The proposed work contributed to 
protecting the two-way direct communication of smart 
meters with collector through the introduction of two 
cryptographic protocols. The AMI architecture used for this 
scheme will be introduced, and the security of the schemes 
will be analyzed. 
 
III. 
ADVANCED METERING INFRASTRUCTURE (AMI) 
ARCHITECTURE & SMART METER NETWORK TOPOLOGY 
   AMI networks are responsible for connecting a substantial 
number of devices needed to collect readings from smart 
meters. As this paper is concerned with securing smart 
meters to collector communication, only this part of the AMI 
architecture will be introduced. There are two ways of 
connecting smart meters to connecters; direct and indirect 
connections. In direct connection, smart meters directly 
communicate with collectors to transfer readings and 
exchange 
information 
and 
commands. 
For 
indirect 
connection, one or more smart meters are directly connected 
to the collector. The rest are either connected to the nearest 
smart meters that have direct connection with the collector or 
through a series of smart meters until the one directly 
connected to the collector is reached. The collector is 
responsible for collecting readings from all smart meters 
within its coverage area (network). Coverage area could 
include both direct and indirect connection. Figure 2 depicts 
the direct smart meter-to-collector communication topology. 
The collector (C) is the central point between the substation 
and the smart meters (SMs). To clarify the connection, an 
example of an indirect connection is presented in Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Centralized smart meter-to-collector communication topology. 
267
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Smart meter-collector indirect connection. 
IV. 
PROPOSED SECURITY APPROACHES 
   Two different security protocols are proposed to enhance 
the security of the direct communication between smart 
meters and collectors in a smart grid as describes in section 
(A) and (B). The symbols and notations used in these 
protocols are summarized in Table I below. 
   The approach used for the indirect communication between 
smart meters and collector will be introduced in section (C). 
 
TABLE I.  
NOTATIONS & SYMBOLS USED 
Symbol 
Meaning 
SMi 
Smart Meter #i, i=1, 2, …n 
C 
Collector 
S 
Substation 
PUc, PRc, PUi, PRi 
Public & Private keys for collector & meter 
respectively 
IDc, IDi, IDS 
Identification for collector, smart meter, and 
substation 
Ri 
Meter #i ’s Reading, i=1, 2, …n 
Ki 
Symmetric Key shared between collector and 
meter #i 
H(Ri) 
Hash value for meter #i ’s reading, i=1, 2, 
…n 
Ti 
Meter #i ’s processor temperature 
A-IDi, A-IDc , A-
IDs 
Anonymous ID for meter, collector, and 
substation 
Ccert, SMi–cert, CRi 
Certificate of collector & smart meter i 
respectively 
SM0, SM6 
Smart meters directly connected to C 
|| 
Concatenation 
E 
Encrypt 
 
Send to 
PRV 
Period of validity 
 
A. Securing direct communication without certificates 
   This section relies on public key cryptology. No 
certificates are needed here. The substation, which is only 
directly connected to the collector (see Figure 2), will assist 
in the enrollment and activation part of the protocol. Note 
that the processor’s temperature for each smart meter is used 
as a random number to further confuse the resulting 
message. 
 
 
Enrollment and activation process: 
   The Substation in charge authenticates the SMs 
and the collector. This includes any newly joined 
smart meter. The substation provides each smart 
meter with the ID of the collector for authentication 
purposes, and the public key, PUc. It also provides 
the collector, C, with the ID’s of the smart meters. 
The collector sends a message to each smart meter, 
SMi, requesting the PUi of each SMi. The collector 
inserts its ID in the message. The request and ID are 
encrypted with its private key, PRc. Having verified 
the collector’s ID, each smart meter will send its PUi 
and IDi encrypted with the public key of the 
collector, PUc.The collector, C, decrypts the message 
and verifies the IDi. If it is valid, it accepts the PUi. 
Figure 4 illustrates this process. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Enrollment and activation-Without Certificate. 
 
268
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
Smart meter to collector security process: 
   Each SMi XORs its reading Ri, with the processor 
temperature, Ti, to get the message Mi, finds the hash 
function H(Ri) of the reading Ri, and concatenate Mi, 
H(Ri), Ti, and IDi. Note the IDi is needed to allow the 
collector to identify the sender smart meter. The 
resulting message will be encrypted with collector’s 
public key, PUc, and forwarded to C. Upon receiving 
the message, the collector, C, uses its private key, 
PRc, to decrypt the message. It then XORs Mi with 
Ti to get the reading Ri and the hash function H(Ri). 
The collector then calculates the hash value of the 
extracted Ri and verifies it is equal to H(Ri) to ensure 
the integrity of the reading. 
This is clarified in Figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Smart meter-collector security process. 
 
 
Key update and exchange process: 
   After a predefined number of readings, new public 
keys for both collector and SMs will be generated 
and exchanged. The collector uses the old PRc to 
encrypt the new PUc, old PUi to encrypt the resulting 
message, and inserts its IDc before sending it to 
smart meter #i, SMi. At the other end, Smart meter i, 
SMi, decrypts the received message, verifies IDc, and 
gets the new PUc. The smart meter, SMi, generates 
new PUi and PRi. It encrypts the new PUi with the 
old PRi, encrypts the resulting message with the new 
PUc adds its IDi, and sends it to the collector, C. C 
reacts by decrypting the received message, verifying 
the IDi, and then obtaining the new PUi. 
This process is further detailed in Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Key update and exchange process. 
 
B.  Securing Direct Communication using Certificates 
   This section relies on certificates. These certificates will 
be issued by the substation to which the collector connects. 
 
 
Enrollment and activation process: 
   The Substation acts as the Certification Authority 
(CA). It creates the certificates for all the smart 
meters and the collector. In these certificates, the real 
ID of the SMs and collector are replaced with an 
anonymous ID. These certificates are then sent to the 
respective party. At the time of setup and installation 
of the collector and smart meter, the substation’s 
anonymous ID, A-IDs, and public key PUs, will be 
provided to the collector and smart meters. This will 
include any newly added smart meter. The collector 
and smart meters will create their own anonymous 
IDs. Each collector requests its certificate from the 
Substation. The request includes the public key of 
the collector PUc, both IDc and A-IDc, and a request 
message, CCert-Req, all encrypted with the substation’s 
public key PUs. This request will be forwarded to S. 
The Substation creates the collector’s certificate, 
Ccert= E [PRs,PUc|| A-IDc|| T1 || T2] and then encrypts 
it with the collector’s public key PUc. The encrypted 
Ccert is then sent to the collector. Note that T1 is the 
creation time, and T2 is the expiration time for the 
certificate. In a similar way, each smart meter, SMi, 
demands its certificate from the Substation. The 
request includes the public key of the smart meter 
PUi, its ID, IDi, its anonymous ID, A-IDi, and a 
request message, SMi-Cert-Req., all encrypted with the 
substation’s public key PUs. This request will be sent 
to the substation. The Substation creates each smart 
meter’s certificate, SMi–cert = E [PRs ,PUi|| A-IDi|| T1 
269
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
|| T2], and then encrypts it with the smart meter’s 
public key PUi. The anonymous ID is concatenated 
to the encrypted SMi-cert before sending it to the 
collector. Knowing it is not its ID; the collector will 
broadcast the message to all the smart meters 
connected to it. Only the smart meter with A-IDi can 
decrypt the message and get its certificate, SMi-cert. 
To complete the enrollment process, the substation, 
S, sends a list of ID pairs including the real and 
anonymous ID’s for all smart meters to the collector 
to enable it to figure out the sending smart meter. 
This is because the certificate only contains the 
anonymous ID, and therefore, there is no way the 
collector can tell who the sender is. The enrollment 
process is further demonstrated in Figure 7. 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  . Enrollment and activation process-With Certificate. 
 
Smart meter to collector security process: 
   The collector and each smart meter will exchange 
their certificates for authentication purposes. Each 
party decrypts the received certificate to get the 
public key and ID of the other party. The keys and 
IDs are only trusted after verifying T1 and T2. Once 
each party obtains the public key of the other, the 
smart meter to collector security process of section 
(A) will be applied. 
 
Certificate update process: 
   After a predefined number of readings, new 
certificates for both collector and SMs will be 
generated by the substation. The substation will 
inform the collector and smart meters to create their 
new public and private keys and to go ahead to 
request new certificates as above. If either the 
collector or a smart meter needs to have a new 
certificate issued as a result of any threat, they can 
request new certificates from the substation 
following the process mentioned above. 
C. Securing Indirect Communication 
   The approach for the indirect communication between 
smart meters and collector will be introduced below. In this 
approach, anonymous ID’s (A-ID’s) for the smart meters are 
used. To create anonymous ID’s, each smart meter XORs the 
current ID (real one initially and then anonymous) with the 
output of a true random number (TRN) generated by a ring 
oscillator, Ti [42]. Any other true random value can be used 
instead of or in addition to the one generated by the ring 
oscillator. In other words, A-IDi = IDi XOR Ti for the first A-
IDi, and A-IDi = Previous A-IDi XOR Ti for subsequent A-
IDi’s. Table I presents the notations and symbols used in 
these approaches. 
 
Enrollment-Activation and Certificate Exchange: 
   In this approach, the collector C should have 
initially received all the public keys and IDs of the 
smart meters. On the other hand, the smart meters, 
SM’s, should have the public key of the collector 
using 
any 
secure 
process. 
Furthermore, 
the 
predecessor and successor nodes for each smart 
meter 
are 
identified 
during 
installation 
and 
configuration of each smart meter. The node directly 
connected to the collector has no successor. The 
nodes at the end of the connection have no 
predecessors. Note that the scheme will be applied to 
the upper part of Figure 3 to observe how smart 
meters SM0-SM5 securely send their readings to the 
collector C. The readings for smart meters SM6-SM9 
at the lower part of the figure will be collected using 
the same approach. Each smart meter, SMi, replaces 
its real IDi with an anonymous one, A-IDi, appends 
IDi to it and encrypts both with the public key of 
collector, PUc, before sending the resulting message, 
E(PUc, A-IDi || IDi), to C through the indirect 
connection (Figure 8). 
 
 
Figure 8.  Creating and sending anonymous ID. 
 
The collector, C, creates certificates for each smart 
meter, SMi. It appends A-IDi to the public key of 
each smart meter, PUi, and the period of validity 
270
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
PRV, and then encrypts PUi||A-IDi||PRV with its 
private key, PRc to get the certificate for each smart 
meter (CRi = E(PRc, PUi||A-IDi||PRV) since all smart 
meters have the public key PUc of the collector. The 
CRi is further encrypted with PUi. Having done that, 
C then attaches A-IDi to the resulting message and 
forwards E(PUi, CRi) || A-IDi to smart meters via 
SM0. Certificate creation is depicted in Figure 9 for 
both the collector and smart meter. 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Creating and sending certificates. 
 
 
   Every SMi checks the A-IDi. If it is its ID, it 
decrypts E(PUi, CRi) with its private key PRi to get 
its certificate. Otherwise, it will forward the message 
to adjacent smart meters to do the same until all 
smart meters receive their certificates. 
 
 
Secure Reading Collection Process: 
   Each SMi XORs its reading, Ri, with the TRN 
produced by the ring oscillator, Ti, concatenates the 
resulting message with Ti and the hash function of 
the reading H(Ri). The resulting message will be 
encrypted with PRi to get Xi = E [PRi, Mi || H(Ri) || 
Ti], where Mi = Ri XOR Ti. To enable the collector 
to recognize the source meter’s reading, A-IDi is 
attached to Xi and both encrypted with PUc to get Yi 
= E(PUc, Xi || A-IDi). The XOR operation is used to 
obscure the reading of the meter. Ti is needed to 
allow the receiver to XOR it with Mi to get Ri. 
Having done that, Ri will be hashed and compared to 
H(Ri). 
   The predecessor and successor nodes exchange 
certificates to authenticate each other. On successful 
authentication, the predecessor smart meter encrypts 
its Yi with the public key PUi-1 of the successor, and 
forward E[PUi-1, Yi] to the successor. 
   The receiving successor decrypts the received 
message with its private key PRi-1, prepends or 
appends its own Yi-1 and encrypts the two (Yi || Yi-1, 
or Yi-1 || Yi, for example) with its successor’s public 
key. This process will continue until all Yi’s have 
been concatenated at SM0. Using Figure 3 above, we 
should have Y = Y5 || Y4 || Y3 || Y2 || Y1 || Y0 or any 
other ordering. SM0 sends Y to C. Any missing Yi 
indicates a problem, possibly an attack, within that 
meter. If this occurs, the collector will reject the 
received message and report to the substation to 
investigate the issue. The decision on whether to 
append or prepend Yi is based on pseudorandom 
number 
generator 
(PRNG’), 
which 
generates 
pseudorandom bit stream. Yi-1 is prepended if the 
pseudorandom bit is ‘0’ and appended if the bit is 
‘1’. This will obscure the order of Yi’s and make it 
hard to relate the Yi’s to their smart meters. 
   To illustrate this, Figure 10 is provided. 
 
 
Figure 10.  Pseudorandom Number Generator PRNG’ operation (Smart 
mete- to-Smart meter). 
 
   The collector, C, uses its PRc to decrypt Y. Then, 
based on the A-IDi, it uses the appropriate PUi to 
decrypt each Yi to obtain Mi || H(Ri) || Ti for each 
smart meter. It XORs Mi with Ti to get the reading 
Ri. It later finds the hash function of Ri and ensures it 
is equal to the received hash function H(Ri) to 
guarantee the integrity of the reading, Ri. Figure 10 
illustrates the meter readings collection process. 
   To simplify Figure 11, Z = Y5 || Y4 || Y3 || Y2 || Y1 
(order is based on PRNG’) is used. Note that smart 
meter 5, SM5, has no predecessor, and therefore, no 
PRNG’ unit exists. Only smart meters SM4-SM1 
have it because they have predecessors (smart meters 
connected to them, as depicted in Figure 3). 
   Once the order of Yi’s is decided, the result is 
encrypted with the public key of the next meter, PUi-
2, and forwarded to the next smart meter, SMi-2. The 
PRNG for SM0 is not followed by encryption as in 
Figure 10 because it is forwarding directly to the 
collector. To illustrate this, Figure 12 is provided. 
271
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
Figure 11.  Meter readings collection process. 
 
 
Figure 12.  PRNG operation (Smart meter - to - Collector). 
 
Key Update and Certificate Exchange Process: 
   After a predefined number of readings or when the 
validity period PRV of the certificate expires, new 
keys for both collector and SM’s will be generated 
and exchanged. The collector will use its old PRc to 
encrypt the new PUc and then encrypt the result with 
the old PUi and attaches A-IDi prior to sending it to 
SMi. The A-IDi will allow each smart meter to tell if 
the message is intended for it. The smart meter in 
question, SMi, will decrypt this message to get the 
new public key of the collector. At the other side, 
each smart meter generates new A-IDi, PUi and PRi, 
appends the new A-IDi to the new PUi, encrypts the 
resulting message with the old PRi and then with the 
new public key of the collector, PUc. Finally, the old 
A-IDi is attached before sending it to the collector. 
The collector will apply the required series of 
decryptions to get the new A-IDi and PUi of each 
smart meter. Note that the old A-IDi is added to allow 
the collector to recognize each smart meter. 
Furthermore, new certificates will be generated and 
forwarded to the smart meters as mentioned above. 
This is detailed in Figure 13 below. 
 
 
Figure 13.  Exchanging new keys, IDs, and certificates. 
New keys, certificates, and anonymous IDs are also 
created and exchanged when an attack is anticipated 
or has already occurred. An alternative approach is 
used if the creation and storage of certificates are not 
desirable due to computing power and memory 
limitations. For each adjacent smart meter pair, the 
collector sends the predecessor the public key of the 
successor encrypted with the public key of the 
predecessor, and sends the successor the public key 
of the predecessor encrypted with the public key of 
the successor. In both cases, the A-IDi is attached to 
allow smart meters to capture messages belonging to 
them. Apart from replacing the certificate with the 
collector providing the public keys for the 
predecessors and successors, the rest is exactly as in 
the first approach. 
V. 
ADVANCED METERING INFRASTRUCTURE (AMI) 
COMMUNICATION SECURITY ANALYSIS 
   The security of the above schemes is analyzed with respect 
to confidentiality, integrity, and authentication. Although 
hash functions can help with intrusion and virus detection, 
availability cannot be satisfied by cryptology alone (schemes 
above), and therefore, it will not be part of the analysis. 
Table II illustrates the security analysis for both proposed 
schemes. 
272
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
TABLE II.  
ADVANCED METERING INFRASTRUCTURE (AMI) COMMUNICATION SECURITY ANALYSIS
Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) Communication Security Analysis 
Security 
Req. 
Direct Communication 
Indirect Communication 
 
 
Confidentiality 
The confidentiality achieved when the message that sent from the SMs to the 
collector is encrypted using the public key of the collector and the only 
collector will be able to decrypt and read the received  message from the smart 
meter using the collector private key PRc. The hash value, H(Ri) of direct 
approach, is encrypted with the public key of the collector (Yi = E [PUc, Mi || 
H(Ri) || Ti]). Only the collector with its private key (PRc) can decrypt the hash 
value. 
The proposed protocol for indirect approach ensure that 
confidentiality is met through the message that is forwarded 
to the next smart meter or directly to the collector in the case 
of SM0 is encrypted with the public key of the collector (Yi 
= E(PUc, Xi || A-IDi)). Only the party that has the private key 
(collector), PRC, can decrypt this message. 
 
 
Integrity 
The reading, Ri, in the proposed schemes has its integrity fulfilled through the 
use of cryptographic hash function, H(Ri). Upon receiving the message, the 
collector extracts Ri and find its H(Ri). It then compares the computed H(Ri) 
with the received one. Any mismatch indicates the message has been 
modified.  
The reading, Ri, in the proposed scheme has its integrity 
fulfilled through the use of cryptographic hash function, 
H(Ri). Upon receiving a message, the collector extracts Ri 
and find its H(Ri). It then compares the computed H(Ri) 
with the received one. Any mismatch indicates the message 
has been tempered with. 
 
 
Authentication 
The substation, which is only directly connected to the collector (see Figure 
2), will assist in the enrollment and activation part of the protocol. The 
Substation in charge authenticates the SMs and the collector. This includes 
any newly joined smart meter. The substation provides each smart meter with 
the ID of the collector for authentication purposes, and the public key, PUc. It 
also provides the collector, C, with the ID’s of the smart meters. The collector 
sends a message to each smart meter, SMi, requesting the PUi of each SMi. 
The collector inserts its ID in the message. The request and ID are encrypted 
with its private key, PRc. Having verified the collector’s ID, each smart meter 
will send its PUi and IDi encrypted with the public key of the collector, PUc. 
The collector, C, decrypts the message and verifies the IDi. If it is valid, it 
accepts the PUi. Figure 4 illustrates this process. 
The contents of Xi are encrypted with PRi, and then Xi is 
encrypted with PUc. Therefore, authentication is also taken 
care of. 
 
 
   The proposed security protocols introduce an additional 
enhancement resulting from XORing smart meters’ readings 
with a random value to make it hard for attackers to extract 
the actual reading. In addition, the replacement of real IDs 
with anonymous ones will make it hard to relate a reading to 
a particular smart meter. Finally, the use of pseudorandom 
number generator (PRNG) introduced further hardship in 
judging the link between the reading and smart meter. 
Further, to ensure the message is protected against forgery, 
digital signature is used. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
   Efforts to establish the Smart Grids are constantly 
increasing globally. The Smart Grid is a bi-directional 
communication system enabling customers through their 
smart meters to administer their energy service and access a 
number of features including using energy during low cost 
intervals, reading consumption electricity bills online, and 
scheduling turning on/off home appliances. These services 
need to be available when needed, the integrity of meter 
readings should be preserved, and privacy of these services 
need to be maintained. Intruders with access to these services 
can result in a great damage to consumers and the 
distribution of services by utilities. Comprising one smart 
meter can result in comprising many others and the 
collectors. This paper contributed to protecting the two-way 
direct and indirect communication of smart meters with  
 
 
 
 
collectors through the introduction of two cryptographic 
protocols based on PKI. Securing indirect communication is 
harder than the direct one because readings have to travel 
through other smart meters before reaching the collector. The 
introduced schemes satisfied the security requirements; 
confidentiality, integrity, and nonrepudiation. Future work 
will concentrate on verification of theses protocols. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Saed, K. Daimi, and N. Al-Holou, “Securing Indirect 
Communication for Advanced Metering Infrastructure in Smart 
Grid,” in Proc. EMERGING 2015 the Seventh International 
Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence, pp. 84-
90, 2015. 
[2] J. H. Khan and J. Y. Khan, “A Heterogeneous WiMAX-WLAN 
Network for AMI Communications in the Smart grid,” in Proc. the 
IEEE third International Conference on Smart Grid Communication 
(SmartGridComm), Tainan, Taiwan, 2012, pp. 710-715. 
[3] U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), “The Smart Grid: an 
Introduction,” Available: http://energy.gov/oe, [retrieved: November, 
2017]. 
[4] Y. Simmhan, A. G. Kumbhare, B. Cao, and V. Prasanna, “An 
Analysis of Security and Confidentiality Issues in Smart Grid 
Software Architectures on Clouds,” in Proc. IEEE 4th International 
Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD 2011), Washington, DC, 
USA, 2011, pp. 582-589. 
[5]  X. Miao, X. Chen, X. Ma, G. Liu, H. Feng, and X. Song, 
“Comparing Smart Grid Technology Standards Roadmap of the IEC, 
NIST, and SGCC,” in Proc. 2012 China International Conference on 
Electricity Distribution (CICED 2012), Shanghai, China, 2012, pp. 5-
6. 
273
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
[6] X. Jin, Y. Zhang, and X. Wang, “Strategy and Coordinated 
Development of Strong and Smart Grid,” in Proc. the 2012 IEEE 
Conference on Innovative Smart Grid Technologies – Asia (ISGT 
Asia), Tianjin, China, 2012, pp. 1-4. 
[7] U.S. 
Department 
of 
Energy 
(DOE), 
Available: 
www.smartgrid.gov/the_smart_grid, [retrieved: November, 2017]. 
[8] Y. Yan, Y. Qian, H. Sharif, and D. Tipper, “A Survey on Smart Grid 
Communication Infrastructures: Motivations, Requirements, and 
Challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 15, 
no. 1, 2013, pp. 5-20. 
[9] A. Ipakchi and F. Albuyeh, “Grid of the Future,” IEEE Power and 
Energy Magazine, vol. 7, no. 2, 2009, pp. 52-62. 
[10] R. O'neill, “Smart grid sound transmission investments,” IEEE Power 
and Energy Magazine, vol. 5, no. 5, 2007, pp. 104-102. 
[11] H. Tai and E. Hogain, “Behind the Buzz: Eight Smart-Grid Trends 
Shaping the Industry,” IEEE Power and Energy, vol. 7, no. 2, 2009, 
pp. 96-97. 
[12]  A. Molina-Markham, P. Shenoy, K. Fu, E. Cecchet, and David Irwin, 
“Private memoirs of a smart meter,” in Proc. of the 2nd ACM 
workshop on embedded sensing systems for energy-efficiency in 
building, pp. 61–66, 2010. 
[13] E. D Knapp and R. Samani, “Applied Cyber Security and the Smart 
Grid,” implementing Security Controls Into the Modern Power 
Infrastructure. Newnes, 2013. 
[14] Botswana Power Corporation, “A SAP IS-U and Smart Meter,” 
implementation project experience in Botswana, Africa. 
[15] I. Joe, J. Y. Jeong, and F. Zhang, “Design and Implementation of 
AMI System using Binary CDMA for Smart Grid,” in Proc. the Third 
International Conference on Intelligent System Design and 
Engineering Applications, Hong Kong, 2013, pp. 544-549. 
[16] M. Chebbo, “EU Smart Grids Framework: Electricity Networks of 
Future 2020 and Beyond,” IEEE Power Engineering Society General 
Meeting, Tampa, FL, 2007, pp. 1-8. 
[17] D. G. Hart, “Using AMI to Realize the Smart Grid,” IEEE Power 
Engineering Society General Meeting, Pittsburgh, PA, 2008, pp. 1-2. 
[18] J. Wang and V. C. M. Leung, “A Survey of Technical Requirements 
and Consumer Application Standards for IP-based Smart Grid AMI 
Network,” in Proc. the International Conference on Information 
Networking (ICOIN), Barcelona, 2011, pp. 114-119. 
[19] S. Choi, S. Kang, N. Jung, and I. Yang, “The Design of Outage 
Management System Utilizing Meter Information Based on AMI 
(Advanced Metering Infrastructure) System,” in Proc. the 8th 
International Conference on Power Electronics, Shilla Jeju, Korea, 
2011, pp. 2955-2961. 
[20] A. R. Metke and R. L. Ekl, “Smart Grid Security Technology,” in 
Proc. IEEE Conference on Innovative Smart Grid Technologies 
(ISGT), Gaithersburg, MD, 2010, pp. 1-7. 
[21] S. M. Amin, “Smart Grid Security, Confidentiality, and Resilient 
Architectures: Opportunities and Challenges,” IEEE Power and 
Energy Society General Meeting, San Diego, CA, 2012, pp. 1-2. 
[22] G. Chen, Z. Y. Dong, J. H. David, G. H. Zhang, and K. Q. Hua, 
“Attack Structural Vulnerability of Power Grids: A Hybrid Approach 
Based on Complex Networks,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and 
its Applications, vol. 389, 2010, pp. 595-603. 
[23] S. Clements and H. Kirkham, “Cyber-security Considerations for the 
Smart Grid,” IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting, 
Minneapolis, MN, 2010, pp. 1-5. 
[24] G. N. Ericsson, “Cyber-security and Power System Communication: 
Essential Parts of a Smart Grid Infrastructure,” IEEE Transactions on 
Power Delivery, vol. 25, no. 3, 2010, pp. 1501-1507. 
[25] M. Wagner, M. Kuba, and A. Oeder, “Smart Grid Cyber Security: A 
German Perspective,” in Proc. International Conference on Smart 
Grid Technology, Economics and Policies (SG-TEP), Nuremberg, 
2012, pp. 1-4. 
[26] F. M. Cleveland, “Cyber Security Issues for Advanced Metering 
Infrastructure (AMI),” IEEE Power and Energy General Meeting- 
Conversion and Delivery of Electrical Energy in the 21st Century, 
Pittsburgh, PA, 2008, pp. 1-5. 
[27] V. Aravinthan, V. Namboodiri, S. Sunku, and W. Jewell, “Wireless 
AMI Application and Security for Controlled Home Area Networks,” 
IEEE Power and Energy General Meeting, San Diego, CA, 2011, pp. 
1- 8. 
[28] B. Vaidya, D. Makrakis, and H. Mouftah, “Secure Multipath Routing 
for AMI Network in Smart Grid,” in Proc. IEEE 31st International 
Conference on Performance Computing and Communications 
(IPCCC), Austin, TX, 2012, pp. 408-415. 
[29] Y. Yan, Y. Qian, and H. Sharif, “A Secure and Reliable In-network 
Collaborative Communication Scheme for Advanced Metering 
Infrastructure 
in 
Smart 
Grid,” 
in 
Proc. 
IEEE 
Wireless 
Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), Cancun, 
Quintana Roo, 2011, pp. 909-914. 
[30] G. 
N. 
Ericsson, 
“Cyber 
security 
and 
power 
system 
communicationessential parts of a smart grid infrastructure,” IEEE 
Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 25, No. 3, pp. 1501-1507, July 
2010. 
[31] R. Anthony, L. Metke, L. Randy, and Ekl, “Security technology for 
smart grid networks,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, Vol. 1, No. 
1, pp. 99-106, June 2010. 
[32] J. Seo and C. Lee, “The green defenders,” IEEE Power and Energy 
Magazine, VOL.9, NO.1, pp. 82-90, January/February 2011. 
[33] D. Wei, Y. Lu, M. Jafari, P. Skare, and K. Rohde, “An integrated 
security system of protecting smart grid against cyber -attacks,” 
Innovative Smart Grid Technologies (ISGT), Gaithersburg, MD, 
USA, 19-21 January 2010. 
[34] M. A. Rahman and H. Mohsenian-Rad, “'False data injection attacks 
with incomplete information against smart power grids,'' in Proc. 
IEEE Conf. Global Commun. (GlobeCom), Dec. 2012, pp. 3153-
3158. 
[35] Y. Zhao, A. Goldsmith, and H. V. Poor, “Fundamental limits of cyber 
physical security in smart power grids,'' in Proc. 52nd IEEE Conf. 
Decision Control, Florence, Italy, Dec. 2013, pp. 200-205. 
[36] Y. Huang, Mohammad Esmalifalak, Huy Nguyen, Rong Zheng, and 
Zhu Han, “Bad data injection in smart grid: Attack and defense 
mechanisms,'' IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 27-33, Jan. 
2013. 
[37] M. Esmalifalak, H. Nguyen, R. Zheng, L. Xie, L. Song, and Z. Han, 
“A stealthy attack against electricity market using independent 
component analysis,'' IEEE Syst. J., to be published. 
[38] G. Chaojun, P. Jirutitijaroen, and M. Motani, “Detecting false data 
injection attacks in AC state estimation,'' IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, 
vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 2476-2483, Sep. 2015. 
[39] A. Giani, E. Bitar, M. Garcia, M. McQueen, P. Khargonekar, and K. 
Poolla, “Smart grid data integrity attacks,'' IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, 
vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 1244-1253, Sep. 2013. 
[40] D. Li, Z. Aung, J. R. Williams, and A. Sanchez, “Efficient 
Authentication Scheme for Data Aggregation in Smart Grid with 
Fault Tolerance and Fault Diagnosis,” Innovative Smart Grid 
Technologies (ISGT), 2012 IEEE PES, pp. 1-8.  
[41] F. Li, B. Luo and P. Liu, “Secure Information Aggregation for Smart 
Grids Using Homomorphic Encryption,” in Proc. 2010 IEEE Conf. 
Smart Grid Communication, pp. 327-332. 
[42] P. Schaumont, “True Random Number Generation,” Circuit Cellar, 
No. 268, pp. 52-58, Nov. 2012. 
 
274
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

