220
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Big Data for Personalized Healthcare 
 
Liseth Siemons, Floor Sieverink, Annemarie 
Braakman-Jansen, Lisette van Gemert-Pijnen 
Centre for eHealth and Well-being Research 
Department of Psychology, Health, and Technology 
University of Twente 
Enschede, the Netherlands 
(l.siemons, f.sieverink, l.m.a.braakman-jansen, j.vangemert-
pijnen)@utwente.nl 
 
Wouter Vollenbroek 
Department of Media, Communication & Organisation 
University of Twente 
Enschede, the Netherlands 
w.vollenbroek@utwente.nl 
Lidwien van de Wijngaert 
Department of Communication and Information Studies 
Radboud University 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands 
l.vandewijngaert@let.ru.nl 
 
 
Abstract - Big Data, often defined according to the 5V model 
(volume, velocity, variety, veracity and value), is seen as the 
key towards personalized healthcare. However, it also 
confronts us with new technological and ethical challenges that 
require more sophisticated data management tools and data 
analysis techniques. This vision paper aims to better 
understand the technological and ethical challenges we face 
when using and managing Big Data in healthcare as well as the 
way in which it impacts our way of working, our health, and 
our wellbeing. A mixed-methods approach (including a focus 
group, interviews, and an analysis of social media) was used to 
gain a broader picture about the pros and cons of using Big 
Data for personalized healthcare from three different 
perspectives: Big Data experts, healthcare workers, and the 
online public. All groups acknowledge the positive aspects of 
applying Big Data in healthcare, touching upon a wide array of 
issues, both scientifically and socially. By sharing health data, 
value can be created that goes beyond the individual patient. 
The Big Data revolution in healthcare is seen as a promising 
and innovative development. Yet potential facilitators and 
barriers need to be faced first to reach its full potential. 
Concerns were raised about privacy, trust, reliability, safety, 
purpose limitation, liability, profiling, data ownership, and loss 
of autonomy. Also, the importance of adding the people-
centered view to the rather data-centered 5V model is stressed, 
in order to get a grip on the opportunities for using Big Data in 
personalized healthcare. People should be aware that the 
development of Big Data advancements is not self-evident. 
Keywords - Big Data; personalized healthcare; eHealth. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The “Big Data” revolution is a promising development 
that can significantly advance our healthcare system, 
promoting personalized healthcare [1]. Imagine a system that 
analyzes large amounts of real-time data from premature 
babies to detect minimal changes in the condition of these 
babies that might point to a starting infection. Science 
fiction? No, IBM and  the Institute of Technology of the 
University of Ontario developed a system that enables 
physicians to respond much sooner to a changing condition 
of the baby, saving lives, and leading to a significantly 
improved quality of care for premature babies [2].  
We are standing at the beginning of the “Big Data” 
revolution. Many different definitions exist for “Big Data”. 
Where Mayer-Schönberger and Cukier [2] focus on the new 
insights and economic value that can be obtained from Big 
Data in contrast to traditional smeller settings, Wang & 
Krishnan [3] refer to Big Data as complex and large data sets 
that can no longer be processed using the traditional 
processing tools and methods. Yet another definition comes 
from Laney [4], who defines Big Data according to 3 assets 
(often referred to as the 3V-model) that require new, cost-
effective forms of information processing to promote insight 
and decision making, including: 1) high-volume (i.e., the 
quantity of data), 2) high-velocity (i.e., the speed of data 
generation and processing), and 3) high-variety (i.e., the 
amount of different data types). Marr [5] expanded this 3V 
model to the 5V model by adding 2 additional Vs: veracity 
(i.e., the accuracy or trustworthiness of the data) and maybe 
the most important asset: value (i.e., the ability to turn the 
data into value). 
Though this is just a grasp out of all the definitions 
available, there is one thing they have in common: The use 
of Big Data for analysis and decision making requires a 
change of thought from knowing “why” to knowing “what”. 
Where we focused on small, exact datasets and causal 
connections in the past (i.e., knowing “why”), we now focus 
on gathering or linking large amounts of (noisy) data, with 
which we can demonstrate the presence of (unexpected) 
correlational connections (i.e., knowing “what”) [2]. As a 
result, we will obtain (and apply) new insights that we did 
not have before. Insights that can not only be lifesaving, as 
demonstrated by the example of IBM and the University of 
Ontario, but that also opens the door towards more 
personalized medicine [6-8]; i.e., where medical decisions, 
medications, and/or products are tailored to the individual’s 
personal profile instead of to the whole patient group. For 
example, when genetic biomarkers in pharmacogenetics are 
used to determine the best medical treatment for a patient [6] 
or when data from thousands of patients that have been 

221
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
treated in the past is being analyzed to determine what 
treatment best fits the individual patient that is under 
treatment now (e.g., in terms of expected treatment effects 
and the risk for severe side-effects given the patient’s 
personal characteristics like age, gender, genetic features, 
etc.). 
This shift towards more personalized healthcare is 
reflected in the change of focus within healthcare from a 
disease-centered approach towards a 
patient-centered 
approach, empowering patients to take an active role in the 
decisions about their own health [8]. As a result, an 
increasing number of technologies (e.g., Personal Health 
Records) are being launched by companies to support 
chronically ill people in the development of self-
management skills [9]. 
The past decades have also shown a rapid growth in the 
amount of (personal) data that is digitally collected by 
individuals via wearable technologies that may or may not be 
stored on online platforms for remote control [2, 6-8, 10], or 
shared via other online sources like social media. Social 
media have become socially accepted and used by a growing 
group of people [11]. They use it, for example, to share data 
collected by activity, mood, nutrition and sleep trackers on a 
variety of online platforms (such as Facebook, Twitter, blogs 
or forums). These data provide new opportunities for 
healthcare to personalize and improve care even further [12-
14]. Furthermore, the data and messages shared via these 
tools provide insight in vast amounts of valuable information 
for scientific purposes. For example, [14] used the data from 
Twitter to predict flu trends and [15] used social media as a 
measurement tool for the identification of depression. The 
information gleaned from social media has the potential to 
complement traditional survey techniques in its ability to 
provide a more fine-grained measurement over time while 
radically expanding population sample sizes [15]. 
By combining clinical data with personal data on, for 
instance, eating and sleeping patterns, life style, or physical 
activity level, treatment and coaching purposes can be 
tailored to the needs of patients even better than before and 
are, therefore, seen as the key towards a future with optimal 
medical help [6]. However, it also confronts us with new 
technological and ethical challenges that require more 
sophisticated data management tools and data analysis 
techniques. This vision paper aims to better understand the 
technological and ethical challenges we face when using and 
managing Big Data in healthcare as well as the way in which 
it impacts our way of working, our health, and our wellbeing. 
This paper builds on first insights obtained from Big Data 
experts as already described in [1] and adds the perspectives 
of healthcare workers (HCWs) and the online public. Section 
I describes the background of Big Data in literature. Section 
II describes the procedure of the meetings with experts 
(focus group; individual meetings) and HCWs (interviews), 
and describes how the online public’s associations with Big 
Data in a health context were assessed. Section III presents 
the results, which are discussed more into depth in Section 
IV. Finally, Section V concludes this paper, describing a 
number of implications for research using Big Data in 
healthcare and addressing some future work. 
II. 
METHODS 
The impact and challenges of Big Data will be examined 
from three different perspectives:  1) from the perspective of 
Big Data experts [1], 2) from the perspective of HCWs, and 
3) from the perspective of the online public. Different 
methods were used to gather information from each group. 
Where a focus group was planned with the Big Data experts, 
this turned out to unfeasible with HCWs because of their 
busy schedule. That is why individual interviews were 
scheduled with them. Finally, to evaluate the perspective of 
the online public, social media posts were scraped and 
analyzed. 
A. Focus group with experts 
Many potential issues regarding the use of Big Data have 
already been mentioned in the literature, newspapers, social 
media, or debates, and panel discussion websites. However, 
many of these media sources do not specifically address the 
healthcare setting and only focus on a limited set of issues at 
a time (e.g., the privacy and security issues).  
To gain more in depth insights into the pros and cons of 
using Big Data in personalized healthcare, a focus group was 
organized [16]. The aim was to gain a variety of opinions 
regarding the scientific and societal issues that play a role in 
using and managing Big Data to support the growing needs 
for personalized (and cost-effective) healthcare. 
Purposeful sampling was used in the formation of the 
focus group, meaning that the selection of participants was 
based on the purpose of the study [16]; i.e., to map the 
experts’ variety and range of attitudes and beliefs on the use 
of Big Data for (personalized) healthcare purposes. To gather 
a broad perspective of viewpoints, multiple disciplines were 
invited to join the expert meeting, resulting in a panel of 6 
experts in Big Data research and quantified self-monitoring 
from different scientific disciplines: psychology, philosophy, 
computer science, business administration, law, and data 
science. Participants were recruited at the University of 
Twente (the Netherlands), based on their societal impact, 
expertise, and experiences with conducting Big Data 
research. Individual face to face meetings were conducted to 
validate the focus group results. 
The focus group took 2 hours in total and was facilitated 
by LS and FS (authors). All participants signed an informed 
consent for audiotaping the focus group and for the 
anonymous usage of the results in publications. LVGP and 
ABJ took additional notes during the discussion. Group 
discussion was encouraged and participants were repeatedly 
asked to share their concerns and thoughts. 
In preparation of the focus group discussion, literature 
and multiple sources of (social) media were searched for 
information on potential Big Data issues that might play a 
role. During the discussion itself, experts were asked to write 
down as many issues as they could think of that might 
become relevant using Big Data for healthcare. Flip-overs 
were used to express the issues and experts had to categorize 
these issues into overall concepts that covered the issues. 
They named these overall concepts themselves by thinking 
aloud. These concepts are presented in this vision paper. The 
focus group was audio taped and transcripts were made by 

222
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
authors of this paper. Loose comments without any further 
specification were excluded to ensure the results are not a 
representation of the authors’ interpretation. Ethical approval 
for the scientific expert meeting and the consent procedure 
was obtained by the ethics committee of the University of 
Twente. 
B. Interviews with healthcare workers 
Based on the results of the focus group, an interview 
scheme was constructed to assess how HCWs perceive and 
experience the issues that were identified. Questions were 
formulated open-ended to encourage HCWs to elaborate on 
their perceptions of and experiences with Big Data (or 
eHealth applications) in healthcare. For each question, 
HCWs were asked to think aloud and to elaborate on their 
thoughts. Interviews were transcribed verbatim afterwards 
and a coding scheme was developed. 
A total of 6 physicians  with experience in Big Data were 
interviewed. Participants received a first description of the 
aim of the interviews by e-mail and, in addition, each 
interview started with a 1.5 minute long movie presenting 
the interview’s subject: Big Data eHealth applications in 
healthcare. All participants were interviewed in their work 
setting. Interviews were semi-structured and continued until 
the interviewer felt that all questions were answered and no 
new information could be expected. This took about 60 
minutes on average. Participants gave informed consent for 
audiotaping the interviews and for the anonymous usage of 
the results in publications. The study was approved by the 
ethics committee of the University of Twente. No additional 
ethical approval was necessary from the medical ethical 
committee.  
C. Online public’s associations with Big Data in a health 
context 
Though Big Data receives a lot of attention nowadays, 
little is known about the publics’ associations with the term 
Big Data in health contexts. With the digitalization of 
society, the online public that uses social media channels 
encloses a large proportion of the potential users of Big 
Data-driven 
technological 
applications 
in 
healthcare. 
Furthermore, the content within the social media provides 
new opportunities to identify the associations made by the 
online public in relation to Big Data in a healthcare setting. 
These associations provide a better understanding of the 
concerns, opportunities, and considerations that the health 
sector must take into account.  
As such, Coosto, a social media monitoring tool 
(www.coosto.com), was used as a first explorative analysis 
to analyze these associations among social media users, 
using multiple data sources (social networks, microblogs, 
blogosphere, forums) in both Dutch and English. 
The identification of the online public’s perceptions 
regarding the terms they use when discussing about Big Data 
in relation to healthcare was completed by following three 
phases. In the first phase, social media posts were scraped, 
based on 6 search queries in the Dutch social media 
monitoring tool Coosto (Table I). To avoid issues caused by 
word variations (for example: healthcare, health-care, health 
TABLE I.  
SEARCH QUERIES 
Search query 
1. "big data" "e-health" OR "ehealth" OR "e health" 
2. "big data" "healthcare" OR "health care" OR "health-care" 
3. "big data" "care" 
4. "big data" "sensors"  OR "health" OR "e-health" OR "e health" OR 
"ehealth" OR "care" OR "healthcare" OR "health care" OR "health-care"  
OR "wellness" OR “wellbeing” OR “well-being” 
5. "big data" "wearables"  OR "health" OR "e-health" OR "e health" OR 
"ehealth" OR   OR "care" OR "healthcare" OR "health care" OR "health-
care" OR  OR "wellness" OR “wellbeing” OR “well-being” 
6. "big data" "domotica" 
 
care) and synonyms, an extensive list of different spellings 
was used in each search query. The terms selected for the 
search query were derived from a systematic analysis of 
synonyms in academic literature, popular literature, and 
websites and Google search results. To treat (longer) blog 
posts and (shorter) tweets equally, each sentence of all posts 
was analyzed separately in the second phase. More citations 
and shares means that more online users are interested in that 
particular topic. 
The second phase was aimed at extracting the most 
commonly used (combinations of) terms in the collected 
social media posts and measuring the proximity (the relative 
distance (similarity)) of these terms. The more frequently 
two terms are mentioned simultaneously in the whole dataset 
the higher the proximity between these two (combinations 
of) terms. Based on a codebook (Appendix 1) consisting of 
terms that are related to and associated with Big Data and/or 
healthcare, the most frequently mentioned terms in the social 
media posts were identified. The codebook terms were 
selected based on a systematic analysis of scientific and 
popular literature (including references) and websites 
(including links to other websites), news articles, social 
media posts (e.g., Twitter), and Google search results. In our 
design, the sentences of analysis were considered as the 
cases, and the terms in these messages – after properly 
filtering for example the stop words, hyperlinks and 
@mentions – as the variables. The next step in our analysis 
was to find the terms (e.g., privacy) or phrases (e.g., Internet 
of Things) from the codebook in the sentences (cases). The 
sentences without any of the terms were omitted from further 
analysis. Thus, a matrix was operated that contained terms as 
the variables in the columns and sentences as cases in the 
rows. The cells in the matrix consisted of binary data 
(whether or not a particular term occurs in the sentences). A 
proximity measurement [17] indicates what combinations of 
terms are most prevalent.  
In the third phase, the main objective was to determine 
what terms are mostly associated with Big Data in the 
context of healthcare within the social media. To do so, the 
open-source network analysis and visualization software 
package Gephi (http://gephi.github.io/) was used to visualize 
the interrelationships between (groups of) terms in a 
semantic network [18]. The binary matrix formed the basis 
for the semantic network graph. Due to the reasonably large 
dataset and the minimum agreement between the terms, the 
correlations have been relatively low. Therefore, all 
correlations higher than 0.02 were included in the actual 

223
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
analysis. The terms which served as the basis for the search 
queries were then removed from the semantic network 
analysis, since the preservation of these terms in the search 
results would produce biased results because they will occur 
significantly more than in reality may be assumed. 
III. 
RESULTS                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Results are presented separately for each group:  1) Big 
Data experts, 2) HCWs, and 3) the online public. 
A. Focus group meeting with experts 
The results can be subdivided in 3 categories: 1) 
empowerment, 2) trust, and 3) data wisdom. 
1) Empowerment  
What does it mean when you monitor your activities, 
food intake, or stress 24 hours a day using technologies like 
smart wearables? What drives people to use these 24 hour 
monitoring devices and what do they need to understand the 
data generated by these systems? Do they understand the 
algorithms that are used to capture our behaviors and moods 
in pictures and graphs? Who owns the data and how to 
control the maintenance of that data? How to avoid a filtered 
scope on our lives ignoring others that are out of our affinity 
groups? The concept of empowerment captures topics as 
autonomy, freedom, and having control.  
Big data evokes a discussion about freedom and 
autonomy. Autonomy concerns our critical view on how to 
use technology, while freedom is more about our way of 
living and thinking. It might, therefore, be more important to 
focus on freedom instead of autonomy: understanding how 
you are being influenced and taking a stance against that 
instead of trying to keep everything away. The focus group 
made a distinction between positive freedom and negative 
freedom; two common concepts within the field of 
philosophy. Positive freedom is the freedom to do something 
yourself (e.g., to decide for yourself that you want to share 
your data), whilst negative freedom is the freedom to keep 
things away, protecting yourself (e.g., when you do not give 
permission to companies to link your data with other 
sources). Not losing control, being able to use, share and 
understand your data is one of the topics when discussing 
freedom, self-efficacy using self-monitoring technologies.  
Empowerment forces us to think about having control, 
who has the power through the use of Big Data? There might 
be just a small elite that understands the algorithms and with 
the increasing complexity, this elite will become even 
smaller in the future. This can create a division between 
people who can access and understand the algorithms and 
people who do not.  
Empowering by personalization is one of the aims of the 
participatory society. Big data can be a leverage to realize 
this by creating a personal profile, providing the right 
information, at right moments to enable just in time 
coaching. Though it can be useful to put people in a profile, 
the danger of profiling is that you can never leave the 
assigned group again; once assigned to a group means 
always assigned to that group. Profiling might be suffocating 
to people because it creates uncertainty about what people 
know about you, what data are being collected, and for what 
purposes. Also, it is often unclear how to determine the norm 
to which people are compared when assigning them to a 
group (i.e., standardization, losing freedom). Furthermore, 
being assigned to a profile might lead to discrimination and 
certain prejudices/biases. Questions that arise are: How can 
profiling be used in a sensible/sound way? And who is 
responsible when mistakes are being made based on a certain 
profile? 
2) Trust  
Trust will become a key concept in a data driven society. 
This concept captures more than privacy and security issues. 
Trust refers to topics as how to create faith in data 
management and data maintenance, and how to make sense 
of these data for humans.  
Privacy issues become particularly relevant when the 
linkage of anonymous datasets leads to re-identification. 
Encryption of the data might prevent identification of 
individuals, but transparency is not always possible (e.g., 
when analyzing query logs with search terms). In the end it is 
all about creating trust to overcome uncertainty or anxiety 
for a digital world.  
People often give consent to institutions to use their data 
for certain purposes in return for the (free) use of the product 
or service. However, data can be (re)used for other purposes 
as well or can be sold to other interested parties, even though 
that is not always allowed. This leads to great concerns: e.g., 
healthcare insurance companies who use treatment data for 
other purposes on a more personal level (for instance, for 
determining a personalized health insurance premium based 
on your personal data about your health and lifestyle). It is 
not that people do not want to share data, they already do this 
using Facebook or Google services, but they want to 
understand what happens with the data, in particularly when 
it concerns the health domain.  
Self-monitoring technologies, with no doctors or nurses 
involved in the caring process, are provided more and more 
by institutions. Smart algorithms can be applied to 
personalize data in such a way so you can manage your 
health and wellbeing yourself. However, these algorithms 
decide what information you get to see, based on information 
about you as a user (e.g., search history, Facebook friends, 
location). This will influence trust in the healthcare system, 
using data from your device compared to personal advices 
given by your doctor or nurse. 
3) Data Wisdom  
There is a rapid growth of self-monitoring technologies, 
but little is known about the reliability and validity of these 
systems. The lack of evidence for causality can lead to 
unreliability as well. Furthermore, how can you tell what you 
are actually measuring? How can the correlations that are 
found be validated? Does it really say what we think it says 
or are it just assumptions? 
Data wisdom is the concept that captures scientific and 
societal topics. Scientific refers to how to create data 
wisdom, in several ways. Those who generate data are not 
the ones that have the knowledge to analyze, those who 
analyze lack domain insight (technologies, behaviors). 
Different kinds of expertise will be needed in the future to 

224
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
deal with Big Data. For instance, expertise to analyze Big 
Data, expertise to develop and understand the working of 
algorithms, or expertise 
in 
data 
interpretation 
and 
visualizations. The use of data to personalize healthcare 
demands for new knowledge to support critical and creative 
thinking to understand data driven decisions and to watch the 
impact on science, health and society. We all know the 
disaster with google flu trends, but we have to learn from 
these failures to set the agenda for future research in using 
several sources of data (geospatial data, medical data, 
technology device data) to develop predictive models about 
health and wellbeing. We have to search for new models, 
methods to deal with huge datasets, search for patterns rather 
than testing hypotheses based on small data. Results are not 
causal-driven but correlational-driven. This requires a 
change in thought. The golden rule for Randomized Clinical 
Trials will no longer be the ultimate format for health 
sciences. New methods are needed to get a grip on “big”, 
how many data (critical mass) is needed and how rich and 
mature should data be to make meaningful decisions? How 
to add qualitative experiences and expertise to Big data? 
Numbers do not tell the whole story, and a clinical eye is 
important to interpret data in the context of individual health 
and wellbeing.  
Societal refers to the implications for healthcare, 
addressing topics as ethics, values for a meaningful life. How 
to avoid a division between people who can access and 
understand the data and analytics that rule the decisions 
about treatments and lifestyle advices, and people that 
cannot? Knowledge and skills are needed to empower people 
and people should participate in debates about the values of 
data for self-regulations on the level of individuals, 
communities and society. Transparency and trust are the key-
topics in that debate. Digging into data starts with a scientific 
and societal debate on the vales of data for a smart and 
healthy society. 
B. Interviews with healthcare workers 
Again, the results can be subdivided in the 3 categories: 
1) empowerment, 2) trust, and 3) data wisdom. 
1) Empowerment 
Physicians recognize the advantages of data sharing. For 
instance, it provides them easy insight in treatment 
outcomes, which is an important instrument for quality of 
care. Yet though the large majority of people probably do not 
have any problems with sharing their data, patients cannot be 
forced to share their data and should give informed consent 
first. Nevertheless, patients often do not understand where 
they give permission for. What if they change their minds, is 
it possible to undo their data sharing? What if the data is 
already shared with different disciplines, will they all be 
refused access after withdrawing the data sharing approval? 
Possibly, an independent supervisor should be appointed the 
task to safeguard the proper handling of patient data (at least 
till data encryption). 
There was no consensus among the physicians about data 
ownership. Some argue the data is primarily of the patient, 
but the hospital or healthcare practitioner should be able to 
gain access to it as well when they have to give account for 
their actions. On the other hand, it is the physician who 
writes most of the medical data down in the patient’s 
personal health record, so it can be argued that he owns (that 
part of) the data (as well). 
Next, the physicians argued that profiling as a concept is 
nothing new. Current practice is already to gather as much 
information as possible from a patient and to “go through a 
checklist” of characteristics, symptoms, or complaints before 
deciding which treatment might be best. Yet profiling based 
on Big Data might make this process more accurate, 
improving treatment outcomes. Especially in complex cases, 
profiling based on Big Data might be of significant value. It 
promotes personalized healthcare. Concerns about profiling 
mainly involve drawing conclusions with far-reaching 
consequences based on incomplete/imprecise data and the 
unauthorized misuse of data by third parties, like insurance 
companies. Also professionals might lose professional skills 
when they do not have to think for themselves anymore. 
When using Big Data for predictive modeling proposes 
(e.g., to predict the chance you might get lung cancer in the 
next 5 years), people have the “right not to know”. Within a 
certain boundary that is. If national health is in danger, 
personal rights do not weigh up to national security. Patients 
should be informed at an early stage about their rights and 
about who is liable when something goes wrong. In case of 
treatment decisions, the physician is most of the time liable if 
something goes wrong. In the Netherlands, physicians are 
guilty until proven innocent in case of an accusation. When 
using Big Data algorithms in treatment decisions, physicians 
should still think for themselves whether the provided advice 
by a system appears to be reasonable, because they make the 
final judgment about the best possible treatment for their 
patient. That is not different from the current process in 
which a physician also has to deal with information from, for 
instance, radiology, long-term research, laboratory results, 
etc. It does not matter whether choices are based on Big Data 
or not, the physician needs to keep thinking as a doctor. Yet 
liability is not always clear. For instance, what if a patient 
wears a smart watch that registers his blood pressure, but the 
device has a defect. Who is liable? The manufacturer or 
supplier of the device? But how to deal with liability when 
the patient uses the device in an ignorant way? Who is liable 
then? Who has to prove what and how is it regulated? It will 
be a long juridical procedure because rules are not clear and 
straightforward in cases like this. 
2) Trust 
Physicians definitely recognize the importance of secure 
data management. Data management might be outsourced to 
a third party, on condition that the liability in case of data 
leaks is properly arranged. Yet physicians might also play an 
important role in data management, since they are needed for 
data interpretation. Furthermore, there should be restricted 
access to sensitive patient data. For instance, when 
implementing a patient portal, it can be decided to only grant 
the patient and his own physician access to the portal. In 
addition, it is of utmost importance that the portal’s 
communication and data transport mechanisms between the 

225
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
patient and the physician are thoroughly thought through, to 
minimize the risk on data leaks and cyber-attacks. 
Opinions on the need to understand the underlying 
algorithms of the system were divided. Yet most physicians 
do want to know the basic reasoning behind the algorithms. 
They fear to lose their professional clinical skills when 
blindly following the system, without thinking for 
themselves anymore. They also argue that the standards and 
guidelines in the medical field exist because the reasoning 
behind them are clear. They would never trust a computer 
without at least some insight into the underlying principles, 
the reliability of the results, and the parameters that were 
taken into account. Others, however, express no need to 
understand the algorithms, but they do argue that the 
algorithms should be checked by a group of experts. 
3) Data Wisdom 
When asking about their (future) profession, physicians 
acknowledge the added value of Big Data systems. The 
medical field encompasses an enormous amount of data that 
has been collected over the years. It would be helpful if the 
data from all the existing different platforms could be 
combined into one overall system to make it surveyable for 
both clinical and scientific purposes. When the Big Data 
revolution offers new opportunities for combining this data 
using innovative data management tools, many new medical 
and scientific research questions can be explored. When the 
right algorithms are being developed, Big Data systems 
might be more accurate than the patient and physician 
together could ever be, improving quality of care. For 
instance, when monitoring a patient’s condition at home, the 
data is send to the physician via an interactive application 
right away (i.e., real-time, 24/7), changes can be detected at 
an early stage, and (remote) treatment can be provided 
timely. Also, certain risk factors can be detected and 
controlled at an early stage. Such applications can improve 
treatment outcomes and significantly reduce healthcare costs. 
A certain expertise is needed to translate the enormous 
amount of data into clinically relevant pieces of information. 
These Big Data specialists might be appointed from outside 
the hospital, although the hospital might not have the 
financial means to do this. Nevertheless, when implemented, 
Big Data applications can serve as medical decision aids that 
help the physicians to combine and process all the available 
data real quick or it could be used for e-consults, where the 
patient can login onto the system to see lab results, to make 
appointments, or to ask questions. As a result, patients need 
to visit the physician less often. An important note that was 
made, is the need for guidance to the patients. For instance, if 
a patient suddenly notices a drop in his blood pressure from 
120 to 90, he might think: “oh, I am dying”. However, it is 
still within the norm and this should be explained to the 
patient to reassure him. 
The physicians also recognize the challenges that come 
with the application of Big Data systems in healthcare. First 
of all, not all patients will be able to use such systems. For 
instance, elderly or cognitively impaired patients might not 
understand  the working mechanisms and do not know how 
to interpret the results. Furthermore, the physicians already 
always base their decisions on data and it does not really 
matter where that data comes from (and, as such, whether it 
is called “Big Data”). What really matters is that the data is 
reliable. When you start digging into the data without any 
clinical expertise, chances are that you will find a significant 
result. However, it might have no clinical meaning and 
relevance at all. Data collection and data interpretation cost 
time (and money) as do the development and testing of the 
underlying algorithms. People (and insurance companies) 
should be aware of the imperfections of the system and 
should not blindly follow it as if it is the golden rule. The 
system does not replace the physician. The physician still 
makes the decisions and they will only use a Big Data 
system if it is proven to be more effective than current 
practice.  
C. Online public’s associations with Big Data in a health 
context 
For the social media analysis, a total of 5.852 social 
media posts (blogs, forums, microblogs, and social 
networks) were crawled and scraped, with a total of 59.281 
sentences from a time period of five years, with a focus on 
Big Data in the context of healthcare. In Appendix 1, the 
frequencies of emerging words are given. Fig. 1 shows the 
semantic graph consisting of 49 nodes (interrelationships) 
and 174 edges (collections of terms). The larger the node, the 
higher the frequency with which the term is mentioned in 
relation to Big Data in the context of healthcare. The weight 
of the edges is determined by the proximity between the 
terms. 
With the modularity algorithm [19], ten clusters of terms 
were established that are often used together. The modularity 
metric is a well-known exploration concept to identify a 
network that is more densely connected internally than with 
the rest of the network [20]. Five of the major ten clusters are 
(Fig. 1): concerns (red), opportunities (violet), personalized 
healthcare (green), infrastructure (yellow), and applications 
(blue). These clusters cover 92 percent of the associations. 
The remaining clusters (8 percent) are solitary nodes or 
dyads and have a lack of power. 
When evaluated per cluster, the cluster concerns shows 
the most frequent associations with the terms: 1) privacy, 2) 
regulations, 3) reliability, 4) algorithms, 5) transparency, and 
6) legislations. The terms that are mentioned the most in the 
cluster involving the opportunities of Big Data in the context 
of healthcare are 1) innovation, 2) future, 3) development, 4) 
technology, 5) challenges, 6) start-up and 7) revolution; 
whereas the personalized healthcare cluster shows the most 
frequent associations with the terms 1) quantified self, 2) 
medicine, and 3) personalization. In the infrastructure 
cluster, the most associated terms with Big Data and 
healthcare are 1) cloud, 2) service, 3) platform, and 4) 
software. And finally, the majority of social media posts 
related to applications  focus on 1) S-Health app, 2) 
Healthkit, and 3) Healthtap. 
On average, the vast majority of terms are related to more 
than one other term (average degree: 7.102). The average 
degree is a numerical measure of the size for the 
neighborhood of an individual node [21]. The terms most 
associated with Big Data in the context of healthcare that 

226
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 1.  Total semantic network graph (49 nodes – 174 edges). 
have a reciprocal degree with other terms in this study are: 
technology (11), cloud (11), privacy (8), innovation (8), 
software (8), service (7), development (7), and platform (6). 
The most frequently mentioned terms in the social media are: 
technology 
(1.726), 
innovation 
(1.361), 
development 
(1.337), future (794), service (638), platform (618), software 
(610), cloud (581), and privacy (545). 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
With this study we aimed to set a first step in 
understanding how Big Data impacts healthcare and which 
critical factors need to be taken into account when using Big 
Data to personalize healthcare. This was examined from 
three different perspectives:  1) scientific Big Data experts, 
2) HCWs, and 3) the online public. 
Results show that Big Data touches upon a wide array of 
issues, both scientifically and socially. In general, experts 
and HCWs discussed the future of Big Data on a meta-level, 
from the perspective of their expertise and their discipline, 
while the online public considered Big Data more from a 
consumer-perspective, as end-users of wearables and other 
technologies. The experts and HCWs make a distinction 
between promises and concerns depicted as crucial for 
successfully using and managing Big Data to support the 
growing needs for personalized healthcare and two rather 
identical clusters (concerns and opportunities) were found in 
the social media analyses as well. Concerns are mainly about 
trust, reliability, safety, purpose limitation, liability, 
profiling, data ownership (which is unclear), and autonomy, 
which is consistent with literature [2, 6, 7]. Perhaps the most 

227
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
well-known concern bears upon our privacy [6, 7]. For a 
great deal, these privacy concerns are associated with 
potential misuse of data by, for instance, insurance 
companies [6, 10]. If these privacy concerns are not dealt 
with appropriately, the public’s trust in technological 
applications might diminish severely [10]. According to the 
HCWs, patients are often unaware of what is being collected, 
who is able to view it, and what decisions are being made 
based on that information. Transparency is needed, people 
should know what they give informed consent for when they 
decide to share their data and what happens if they change 
their mind after some time. 
Both experts and HCWs acknowledge the need for a new 
sort of expertise to be able to understand the algorithms (or 
at least the basic reasoning behind them) and to interpret the 
data that is being generated by the technology. At the end, 
the technology does not replace the physician but they 
supplement each other. Quality of care can be improved and 
personalized healthcare becomes the future. Personalized 
healthcare received a lot of attention in the expert group and 
among the HCWs. Telemonitoring is seen as a promising 
development, enabling the physician to react quickly on 
changes in the clinical status of a patient 24/7, improving the 
patient’s prognosis. In social media personalized healthcare 
showed clear associations with the Quantified Self 
movement, medicine, and personalization. Though the 
semantic network graph (Fig. 1) only visualized the 
interrelationships between the (groups of) terms without 
providing it with an interpretation, this result does 
demonstrate that the emergence of personalized healthcare 
and the Quantified Self movement receives a lot of attention 
in science as well as in society. Yet the main themes 
discussed by the online public did not include personalized 
healthcare that much, but rather focused on the technological 
innovation brought by Big Data, the infrastructure that is 
needed to make this happen, and privacy issues. The need for 
a good infrastructure was something the experts also 
stressed, whereas HCWs focused less on this technological 
aspect of Big Data. 
Some other differences between the groups could be 
identified as well. An aspect specifically addressed by the 
HCWs is a concern about a potential loss of their autonomy, 
control, and professional skills if they “ blindly”  follow an 
algorithm and do not have to think for themselves anymore. 
The technology has to respect and keep into account their 
medical autonomy. Furthermore, experts were rather 
concerned about the misuse of profiling, whereas HCWs 
stated that profiling in itself is nothing new. According to the 
experts, the danger of profiling is that you can never leave 
the assigned group again. Also, profiling might be 
suffocating to people because it creates uncertainty about 
what people know about you, what data is being collected, 
and for what purpose. Profiling might lead to discrimination 
and certain prejudices/biases and people might experience 
the feeling that they lose control. On the other hand, HCWs 
claim that “profiling is something we have always done, 
otherwise you cannot start any treatment”. HCWs believe 
that Big Data has the potential to increase its accuracy even 
further. One concern they do have, in correspondence with 
the experts, is about the potential misuse of profiling by third 
parties like insurance companies. 
Though these results provide a broad overview of 
promises as well as barriers that need to be taken into 
account when using Big Data in healthcare, a few important 
limitations should be taken into consideration when 
interpreting the results. At first, we only performed one focus 
group. This provided us with diverse insights, but we are not 
able to determine if saturation has been reached [16]. Still, 
we do expect that we covered a rather broad area, given the 
multidisciplinary composition of the group and the large 
variety of expertise they brought into the discussion. To 
ensure the accuracy of the results and to prevent that the 
results represent the interpretation of the researchers, 
clarification and follow-up questions were asked in case of 
ambiguity to ensure the validity of the results. As such, we 
believe that the findings provide an accurate exploration of 
issues that play a role when using Big Data for 
personalization purposes in healthcare, from a scientific 
perspective as well as from a societal perspective. 
Secondly, 
only 
6 
physicians 
were 
interviewed, 
potentially providing a rather limited view on how HCWs in 
general think about Big Data. However, that was also not the 
intent of this study. The aim was to gain a better 
understanding of technological and ethical challenges that 
need to be faced when using and managing Big Data in 
healthcare, as well as to gain insight into its impact on our 
way of working, our health, and our wellbeing. The 
interviews with the physicians provide some important first 
insights for this that can be studied further. All physicians 
had knowledge of and/or experience with Big Data in some 
way, to ensure they were able to discuss the topics that were 
addressed. The interview scheme was constructed based on 
the input from experts to make sure the same themes were 
addressed, allowing us to compare the results. At the same 
time the interview scheme was semi-structured and questions 
were formulated open-ended to allow the physicians to raise 
other thoughts as well, enriching the data. 
Another limitation is that the results from the perspective 
of the online public might be colored, as the data are 
restricted to those who use social media. Therefore, a 
completely reliable reflection of how the general (online) 
public thinks or speaks about Big Data in the context of 
healthcare cannot be given at this moment. 
Finally, none of the experts or healthcare workers turned 
out to be a strong adversary of Big Data in healthcare, even 
though they did provide some critical comments. As such, it 
would be interesting to extent the results with the opinions of 
strong adversaries. After all, for sake of implementation, it is 
important to take their concerns into consideration as well. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Big Data is seen as the key towards personalized 
healthcare. However, it also confronts us with new 
technological and ethical challenges that require more 
sophisticated data management tools and data analysis 
techniques. This vision paper aimed to better understand the 
technological and ethical challenges we face when using and 
managing Big Data in healthcare as well as the way in which 

228
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
it impacts our way of working, our health, and our wellbeing. 
A mixed-methods approach (including a focus group, 
interviews, and an analysis of social media) was used to gain 
a broader picture about the pros and cons of using Big Data 
for personalized healthcare from three different perspectives: 
Big Data experts, HCWs, and the online public. All groups 
acknowledge the positive aspects of applying Big Data in 
healthcare, touching upon a wide array of issues, both 
scientifically and socially. By sharing health data, value can 
be created that goes beyond the individual patient. The Big 
Data revolution in healthcare is seen as a promising and 
innovative development. 
Yet the development of these advancements is not self-
evident and potential facilitators and barriers need to be 
addressed first. Concerns were raised, mainly about privacy, 
trust, reliability, safety, purpose limitation, liability, 
profiling, data ownership, and loss of autonomy. Also, trust 
in the technological applications is essential to overcome 
uncertainty or anxiety for a digital world. To achieve this, a 
first condition is that privacy and security issues are dealt 
with appropriately. People should be able to decide for 
themselves whether or not to share their data and with 
whom. Also, algorithms should be transparent (at least to a 
certain degree) to the users (e.g., physicians) to make them 
meaningful. Reliability should be assured and different kinds 
of expertise need to evolve. Expertise to analyze Big Data, to 
develop and understand the working of algorithms, and to 
interpret and visualize the data in a meaningful way. 
Moreover, technology should be embedded in our way of 
working and living. As such, technology should supplement 
the work of physicians, not replace it, respecting the medical 
autonomy. The digitalization of society is an ongoing 
process and the “Big Data” revolution is already changing 
science, healthcare, and society. 
In general, Big Data is described according to the 5V 
model (Volume, Velocity, Variety, Veracity and Value) [5]. 
Yet this paper stresses the importance of adding the people-
centered view to this rather data-centered 5V model, in order 
to get a grip on the opportunities for using Big Data in 
personalized healthcare. Following this view, this vision 
paper aimed to discuss Big Data topics for personalized 
healthcare that need to be investigated further to 1) develop 
new methods and models to better measure, aggregate, and 
make sense of previously hard-to-obtain or non-existent 
behavioral, psychosocial, and biometric data, and 2) to 
develop an agenda for Big Data research to transform and 
improve healthcare. Topics include:  
 Health analytics: Advanced methods (machine learning) 
and models to analyze Big Data. 
 Predictive modelling: To set up smart models to predict 
behaviors, to prevent diseases, and to personalize 
healthcare.  
 Visualization of data: How to present data meaningful (to 
the patient as well as the HCW) to support decision 
making? 
 Integration of (mobile) technology with data-platforms to 
enable automated services and to tailor feedback.  
 Disruptive models (new actors, role-players in data 
driven systems). 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank the participants of the focus group as 
well as the healthcare workers that were interviewed for their 
valuable input in this study. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. E. W. C. van Gemert-Pijnen, F. Sieverink, L. Siemons, and 
L. M. A. Braakman-Jansen, "Big data for personalized and 
persuasive coaching via self-monitoring technology," The 
Eigth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, 
and Social Medicine (eTELEMED 2016), IARIA, 2016, pp. 
127-130, ISBN: 978-1-61208-470-1. 
[2] 
V. Mayer-Schonberger and K. Cukier, Big data: a revolution 
that will transform how we live, work, and think. New York, 
NY: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2013. 
[3] 
W. Wang and E. Krishnan, "Big data and clinicians: a review 
on the state of the science," JMIR Med Inform, vol. 2, pp. e1, 
2014, doi:10.2196/medinform.2913. 
[4] 
D. Laney, 3D Data management: Controlling data volume, 
velocity, and variety. Stamford, CT: META Group Inc., 
2001.  
[5] 
B. Marr, Big Data: Using SMART big data, analytics and 
metrics to make better decisions and improve performance. 
West Sussex, United Kingdom: John Wiley & Sons, 2015.  
[6] 
S. Klous and N. Wielaard, We are big data. The future of the 
information society [Wij zijn big data. De toekomst van de 
informatiesamenleving]. Amsterdam: Business Contact, 
2014. 
[7] 
T. B. Murdoch and A. S. Detsky, "The inevitable application 
of big data to health care," JAMA, vol. 309, pp. 1351-1352, 
2013, doi:10.1001/jama.2013.393. 
[8] 
N. V. Chawla and D. A. Davis, "Bringing big data to 
personalized healthcare: a patient-centered framework," J 
Gen 
Intern 
Med, 
vol. 
28, 
pp. 
S660-665, 
2013, 
doi:10.1007/s11606-013-2455-8. 
[9] 
F. Sieverink, L. M. A. Braakman-Jansen, Y. Roelofsen, S. H. 
Hendriks, R. Sanderman, H. J. G. Bilo, et al., "The diffusion 
of a personal health record for patients with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus in primary care," International Journal on Advances 
in Life Sciences, Vol. 6, pp. 177-183, 2014. 
[10] P. Kamakshi, "Survey on big data and related privacy 
issues," International Journal of Research in Engineering and 
Technology, vol. 3, pp. 68-70, 2014. 
[11] A. M. Kaplan and M. Haenlein, "Users of the world, unite! 
The challenges and opportunities of Social Media," Business 
Horizons, vol. 53, pp. 59-68, 2010. 
[12] R. Batool, W. A. Khan, M. Hussain, J. Maqbool, M. Afzal, 
and S. Lee, "Towards personalized health profiling in social 
network," Information Science and Service Science and Data 
Mining (ISSDM), 2012 6th International Conference on New 
Trends in (IEEE, 2013), 2012 pp. 760-765, ISBN: 978-89-
94364-20-9. 
[13] F. Greaves, D. Ramirez-Cano, C. Millett, A. Darzi, and L. 
Donaldson, "Harnessing the cloud of patient experience: 
using social media to detect poor quality healthcare," BMJ 
quality & safety, vol. 22, pp. 251-255, 2013, doi: 
10.1136/bmjqs-2012-001527. 
[14] R. Nagar, Q. Yuan, C. C. Freifeld, M. Santillana, A. Nojima, 
R. Chunara, et al., "A case study of the New York city 2012-
2013 influenza season with daily geocoded Twitter data from 
temporal and spatiotemporal perspectives," J Med Internet 
Res, vol. 16, pp. e236, 2014, doi: 10.2196/jmir.3416. 
[15] M. De Choudhury, S. Counts, and E. Horvitz, "Social media 
as a measurement tool of depression in populations," 

229
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Proceedings of the 5th Annual ACM Web Science 
Conference (ACM 2013), 2013, pp. 47-56, ISBN: 978-1-
4503-1889-1. 
[16] R. A. Krueger and M. A. Casey, Focus groups - a practical 
guide for applied research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2015. 
[17] D. Wishart, CLUSTAN user manual, 3rd ed., Edinburgh: 
Program 
Library 
Unit, 
Edinburgh 
University, 
Inter-
university research councils series, 1978. 
[18] M. Bastian, S. Heymann, and M. Jacomy, "Gephi: an open 
source software for exploring and manipulating networks," 
Proceedings Third International ICWSM Conference, 2009, 
pp. 361-362. 
[19] V. D. Blondel, J.-L. Guillaume, R. Lambiotte, and E. 
Lefebvre, "Fast unfolding of communities in large 
networks," Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and 
Experiment, vol. 10, pp. P10008, 2008, doi: 10.1088/1742-
5468/2008/10/P10008. 
[20] M. E. Newman, "Modularity and community structure in 
networks," Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 
2006, 
vol. 
103, 
pp. 
8577-8582, 
doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0601602103. 
[21] J. Scott, Social network analysis. London: Sage, 2012. 
 
 
 
 
SUPPORTING INFORMATION - APPENDIX 1 
WORD FREQUENCY TERMS “BIG DATA” – “HEALTHCARE. 
 
Term* 
Word frequency 
Term 
Word frequency 
Care 
7469 
Safety 
167 
Health 
4196 
Anonymity 
163 
Technology 
1726 
Patients 
153 
Innovation 
1361 
Algorithms 
142 
Development 
1337 
Reliability 
139 
Healthcare 
1320 
Legislations 
91 
Future 
794 
Ethics 
90 
eHealth 
668 
Healthtap 
90 
Service 
638 
S Health 
89 
Platform 
618 
Ownership 
83 
Software 
610 
Smarthealth 
81 
Cloud 
581 
Personalization 
81 
Privacy 
545 
Wellbeing 
80 
Challenges 
484 
Regulations 
74 
Security 
400 
Google Glass 
69 
Wearable 
374 
Domotica 
55 
Social media 
374 
Quantified self 
53 
Big Data 
337 
iWatch 
44 
Start-up 
324 
Healthkit 
42 
Medical data 
311 
Autonomy 
37 
Health insurance 
310 
Profiling 
36 
Trust 
310 
Pedometer 
34 
Medicine 
309 
Wellness 
31 
Infrastructure 
291 
Biometrics 
19 
Analytics 
249 
Scalability 
13 
Revolution 
242 
Runkeeper 
12 
Sensors 
229 
Fitnesstracker 
11 
Transparency 
196 
Health condition 
4 
Fitbit 
185 
Fitness 
2 
Internet of Things 
185 
Standardization 
1 
 
* Bold: Not included in the data-analysis, since they were also present in the search query. Not bold: Included in the data-analysis. 

