71
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Age-Related Differences of Cognitive Functions when Encountering Driving 
Hazards on Expressways 
 
Kazuhito Sato, Yuki Oomomo, Hirokazu Madokoro 
Department of Machine Intelligence and Systems Engineering, 
Faculty of Systems Science and Technology, Akita Prefectural University 
 Yurihonjo, Japan 
Email: ksato, m18a016, madokoro @akita-pu.ac.jp
Momoyo Ito 
Institute of Technology and Science, 
Tokushima University 
 Tokushima, Japan 
Email: momoito@is.tokushima-u.ac.jp 
Sakura Kadowaki 
 SmartDesign Co., Ltd. 
Akita, Japan 
Email: sakura@smart-d.jp 
 
Abstract - For this study, we defined four situations that are 
likely to trigger accidents on highways as driving hazards: 
vehicle breakdowns, sudden appearance of small animals, 
falling objects, and lane decreases. Carrying out running 
experiments while controlling the time of day (daytime or 
nighttime) and traffic flow (presence or absence of overtaking 
vehicle), we conducted a comparison for each driving topic, 
particularly addressing driving characteristics of young drivers 
and elderly drivers related to "cognition", "judgment", and 
"operations". Using evaluation experiment results, we strove to 
analyze the driving characteristics of elderly drivers for driving 
hazards encountered on highways based on comparison to those 
of young drivers. Results revealed findings unique to elderly 
drivers for response after "cognition" and reaction times 
necessary for "judgment and operations". 
 
Keywords – driving behavior; driving topic; elderly drivers; 
highway; human engineering 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Although the annual numbers of deaths caused by traffic 
accidents in Japan show a downward trend, traffic accidents 
caused by erroneous operations by elderly drivers and reverse 
running on highways have become particularly problematic 
in recent years. Traffic accidents caused by elderly drivers are 
frequent and entail a high risk of severe injury. Therefore, 
countermeasures must be taken to cope with Japan’s 
impending super aging society. 
As factors contributing to traffic accidents by elderly 
drivers, there might be common points among elderly people 
such as slowed driving operations related to cognition, 
judgment, and operations, mistaken operations of handles 
and brakes because of the distribution of attention to multiple 
tasks and concentration, and momentary carelessness and 
distraction. Recently, various traffic accident preventive 
safety systems have been studied, as represented by 
automatic driving efforts. Practical application of these 
systems has been accelerating. However, most such systems 
merely collect and analyze external information of the 
vehicle. Such systems cannot deal adaptively with the driving 
characteristics of individual drivers. Furthermore, preventive 
safety technologies based on some standard general driver 
make it difficult to address the slowing of driving behaviors 
that are peculiar to elderly people, related to recognition, 
judgment, and operations. Approaches must be made for 
preventive safety systems dedicated to the driving 
characteristics of elderly drivers. 
Our earlier study [1] examined four driving situations as 
driving hazards that are likely to trigger accidents: vehicle 
breakdowns on the road shoulder, sudden appearance of 
small animals, falling objects, and lane decreases. Those 
situations are especially dangerous for highways: they have 
high mortality rates and easily lead to severe accidents. We 
conducted running experiments while controlling the time of 
day (daytime or nighttime) and traffic flow (with and without 
overtaking vehicles). Specifically, we devoted attention to a 
series of driving behaviors related to cognition, judgment, 
and operations for the respective driving topics. We 
compared and analyzed the driving characteristics of young 
drivers and elderly drivers. Results clarified that elderly 
drivers had longer reaction times than young drivers. 
Particularly, the reaction time associated with "cognition" 
was remarkable. However, we have not validated the findings. 
The running scenarios were limited for analyses in terms of 
the time of day (daytime) and the traffic flow (no overtaking 
vehicle), with few elderly driver participants. 
This study clarifies the driving characteristics of elderly 
drivers for these driving hazards by increasing the number of 
elderly driver participants and performing comparison with 
data of young drivers, examining influences of visibility 
because of changes in the time of day (daytime / nighttime) 
and changes in the surrounding cognitive situation because of 
the presence or absence of overtaking vehicles. 
This paper is presented as follows. We review related work 
to clarify the position of this study among existing studies of 

72
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the literature in Section II. Section III presents a definition of 
the experiment protocols, driving topics, and running 
scenarios. In Section IV, we examine the correspondence 
relation between measurement points of driver reaction and 
eye-gaze information, particularly addressing the reaction 
time necessary for each action, i.e., cognition, judgment, and 
operations for driving topics.  Additionally, we compare the 
average reaction times of all drivers, elderly drivers, and 
young drivers at each measurement point for "falling objects", 
which is one of the driving topics. Finally, we present 
conclusions and intentions for future work in Section V. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Causes of fatal accidents involving are mostly unsuitable 
driving 
operations 
and 
are 
attributed 
to 
physical 
characteristics, 
psychological 
characteristics, 
driving 
characteristics, and social characteristics of the elderly 
drivers 
themselves. 
Physical 
characteristics 
indicate 
declining physical function such as vision and exertion ability. 
Assistive technologies and systems can reduce the operation 
load imposed by steering. Some systems automatically 
reduce the speed and mitigate damage when a possibility of a 
collision arises. Many systems have been put into practical 
use [2]. Psychological characteristics of elderly drivers 
render them as less able at parallel processing of multiple 
streams of information. They tend to become self-oriented. 
Driving characteristics show a mismatch of consciousness 
and behaviors caused by feeling overly "accustomed" to 
driving or relying on skills of "driving that would be" based 
on past experiences. Additionally, social characteristics 
imply differences in characteristics by generations, such as a 
decline in communication skills and the influence of 
automation [3]. As solutions to these characteristics which 
might impede elderly drivers, the following have been 
reported. It is possible to reform consciousness and motivate 
people for safe driving by having each elderly person 
participate in efforts for traffic safety by their own will rather 
than passively [3]. Elderly drivers are able to improve their 
attention abilities by pointing and designating signs to 
recognize [4]. 
Recent studies examining elderly drivers have been 
specifically undertaken by the Nagoya COI project, which 
was adopted by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, 
Science and Technology as an innovative creation program 
[5]. It has pursued the construction of a human aging driving 
characteristics database (Dahlia) promoted as part of this 
project, with cognitive function tests, driving aptitude tests, 
visual function tests, driving characteristics surveys, etc. 
They have been conducted for 300 elderly people each year 
[6]. The project collects and analyzes actual road driving data 
from a drive recorder and driving test data from a driving 
simulator. The results clarify correlation between cognitive 
and visual functions of elderly people and collision rates [7]. 
Additionally, a driver agent system was developed to 
encourage and improve elderly drivers' good driving 
behavior [8] [9]. Experiments were conducted to evaluate the 
acceptability of the system. Results demonstrated the 
effectiveness of repeatedly experiencing video feedback [10] 
[11]. 
Furthermore, Takahara et al. [12] analyzed the 
characteristics at a temporary stop location to study the 
cognitive function of elderly drivers. Results demonstrated 
the effectiveness of their system through development of a 
voice guidance type temporary stop support system. Iida et al. 
[13] assessed a hypothesis of reverse running processes as an 
example of elderly drivers’ accidents on an expressway. They 
confirmed that the psychological state of the elderly driver 
and the road composition make reverse running occur easily. 
Abe et al. [14] constructed a driving simulator experiment 
to investigate driving condition and traffic environment 
effects on visual behavior. Specifically, they examined how 
a visual field is influenced as a function of cognitive 
distraction. They simulated cognitive distraction by an 
experimental secondary task related to mental calculations. 
Their results indicated that a driver's reaction time to a target 
mark was increased as a result of cognitive distraction. 
Honma et al. [15] examined how drivers' visual attention is 
influenced when a driver is drowsy. They used the 
knowledge to assess driver impairment related to object 
recognition. Driving simulator experiment results showed 
that drowsy driving impaired drivers' visual attention, 
particularly on conditions with no vehicle ahead, compared 
to normal driving. 
For research and development of Autonomous Driving 
Systems (i.e., Strategic Innovation Creation Program: SIP), 
which have recently attracted much attention, legal systems 
and infrastructure developments have been promoted to 
realize automatic driving on expressways and autonomous 
automatic driving in restricted areas [16]. Wada et al. [17] 
compared and verified perceptions of elderly drivers and 
general drivers on the expressway during autonomous 
driving based on SAE level 2 [18]. As in their earlier studies, 
results of analyzing characteristics of elderly drivers using a 
semi-autonomous vehicle (i.e., pro-pilot) of SAE Level 2 
confirmed that peripheral cognitive levels decrease [19] [20]. 
Nevertheless, these studies have not particularly analyzed 
situations (driving topics or hazards) that readily induce 
accidents on highways, such as vehicle breakdowns on the 
road shoulder, sudden movements of small animals onto the 
roadway, falling objects, and reduced lanes during 
maintenance work. This study used driving experiments with 
controlled time of day and traffic flow to analyze driving 
behaviors related to cognition, judgment, and operations of 
these driving topics. Results clarify the elderly drivers’ 
driving characteristics. 
III. 
METHODS 
This section defines the experiment protocols and four 
driving hazards that are likely to cause accidents. Next, we 
present running scenarios with controlled daytime or 
nighttime, and presence or absence of an overtaking vehicle. 

73
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A. Experiment Systems 
Although many people perform driving behaviors every 
day, many difficulties arise in clarifying individual driving 
characteristics from actual behaviors on the road in real 
environments. Driving behaviors vary depending on the road 
environment and traffic conditions prevailing at the time. 
Actual road conditions cannot be reproduced constantly. If 
any behavior varies, distinguishing clearly whether the 
variation is caused by a difference in traffic conditions or by 
variation among individuals is not possible. 
This study used a driving simulator (DS) to assess driving 
behaviors for freely set road environments and traffic 
conditions affecting driver behaviors. Figure 1 portrays the 
experiment system configured to measure driver behaviors. 
The DS used for experiments has platforms corresponding to 
compact and six-axis motion, which is equipped with 
ordinary cars. The DS has three-color liquid-crystal displays 
mounted at the cabin front. It also has a function reproducing 
pseudo-driving environments that are freely configurable to 
horizontal viewing angles. Figure 1 shows cameras installed 
to the left and right and center of the three-color liquid-crystal 
monitors mounted at the cabin front. Without restraining 
drivers, they gather body information such as head poses, 
face orientations, and eye-gaze movements. Additionally, we 
set an infrared pod on top of the instruments at the cabin front. 
The camera heads and infrared pod are input-based sensors 
of a head-gaze tracking device (FaceLAB; Ekstreme 
Machine Corp.). Through preliminary test runs with multiple 
subjects, we confirmed that the stereo camera head and the 
infrared pod installation do not interfere with visibility during 
driving. To capture driver facial expressions, a USB camera 
(Xtion pro Live; ASUS Corp.) was installed at the top of the 
liquid crystal monitor at the center of the cabin front. 
B. Experiment Protocols 
Figure 2 presents the experiment protocol outline. Initially, 
as individual characteristics of each subject, we conducted an 
examination of the following questionnaire methods using 
the driving style check sheet: attitude, orientation, and 
concept to work on driving [21]. The operation burdens were 
imposed using a driving load sensitivity check sheet [22]. For 
one running test, each target subject wore a heart rate monitor 
(RS800CX; Polar). We measured the instantaneous heart rate 
during a normal state at 1 min in advance. Next, to improve 
the measurement accuracy for face orientation and eye-gaze 
movements of each participant, we calibrated the cameras for 
use with a head-gaze tracking device (FaceLAB). We 
recorded a video of the driver’s face while driving with the 
USB camera (Xtion Pro Live; ASUS Corp.) to analyze the 
driver facial expressions. After these preparations, each 
participant ran along the four running scenarios described in 
Section III.C by synchronizing the time bases of all 
measuring devices. Finally, a questionnaire specifically 
asking about the driving hazards given at random, subjective 
reviews, a four-stage check was administered when a driving 
hazard occurred. After obtaining approval of the Akita 
Prefectural 
University 
Research 
Ethics 
Board, 
the 
experiment 
contents 
were 
explained 
completely 
to 
participants, after which we obtained written consent from 
participants. We also obtained their agreement to publish 
their face images. Participants were 26 people: 10 young 
drivers (avg. 22 years old) and 16 elderly drivers (avg. 64 
years old). 
C. Driving hazards and Running scenarios 
The driving course used for the experiment is a straight 
course of two lanes with no lane changes on one side 
simulating the Tohoku Expressway. The course starts 
running from the driving scene, which converges from the 
acceleration lane to the expressway. Driving hazards in one 
 
 
                     
Figure 1. Experiment system for measuring driver behaviors. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Outline of experiment protocols. 
 

74
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
run were set randomly. Measurement points of each driver’s 
reaction for each driving hazard are shown in Figure 3. Figure 
4 presents the state of each driving hazard. The falling object 
in Figure 4(a) is installed at the center of the left lane. It 
interferes with the running course. The sudden appearance of 
small animals shown in Figure 4(b) was set so that when the 
vehicle passed the fixed point, it emerged from the front left 
side of the vehicle and traversed to the right to close the 
driving path of the vehicle. The broken down vehicle in 
Figure 4(c) represented a large truck parked on the shoulder 
because of a failure. Because of the lane decrease in Figure 
4(d), the overtaking lane is unavailable because of 
maintenance. Lanes decrease from two lanes to one lane. For 
cases in which a driving hazard and the vehicle come into 
contact, "collision" was displayed on the front screen, but 
running experiments continued. 
Next, we present an overview of running scenarios. To 
incorporate consideration of differences in visibility because 
of the time of day, we set the two conditions of daytime and 
nighttime, as well as the presence or absence of an overtaking 
vehicle as traveling conditions when encountering each 
driving hazard. Figure 5 presents driving scenarios of four 
types with control of the time of day (i.e., daytime or 
nighttime) and traffic flow (i.e., presence or absence of 
overtaking vehicles). The orders of occurrence of each 
driving topic were of two patterns: type A (i.e., falling objects 
→ sudden appearance of small animals → breakdown 
vehicles → lane decrease) and type B (i.e., breakdown 
vehicles → sudden appearance of small animals → falling 
objects → lane decrease). The running time for one scenario 
is about 7–10 min. We gave instructions to each driver to 
observe the speed limit of 100 (km/h). Additionally, the 
maximum speed was limited automatically to 120 (km/h) on 
the DS side. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENT RESULTS AND ARGUMENTS 
Based on safety confirmation behaviors related to the 
driving hazards, we analyzed the reaction times of all drivers, 
elderly drivers, and young drivers at each measurement point. 
Finally, we assessed differences of driving characteristics 
between elderly drivers and young drivers, particularly 
addressing cognition, judgment, and operation. We will 
further develop the analysis of an earlier study [1] based on 
the influence of visibility because of changes in the driving 
time of day (daytime / nighttime) and changes in the 
perception of surroundings because of the presence or 
absence of overtaking vehicles. Specifically addressing the 
reaction time related to cognition, and that related to 
judgment and operation, we compare and analyze the 
respective driving characteristics of elderly drivers and 
young drivers. 
A.  Measurement points and driver response to driving 
hazards 
Specifically examining eye-gaze behaviors for these 
driving topics and safety confirmation behaviors related to 
lane change, we assess the correspondence between 
measurement points of driver reaction and eye-gaze 
information (i.e., heat maps, saccades) as portrayed in Figure 
3. Figure 6 presents the time series changes of heat maps and 
saccades corresponding to each measurement point for the 
falling object. Each heat map represents the degree of gaze 
concentration in each of the following sections. They are 
from b) passing the reference point to c) falling object gazing, 
from c) falling object gazing to d) checking surrounding 
conditions, from d) checking surrounding conditions to e) 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Measurement points of driver reaction to driving topics. 

75
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
avoidance actions. In addition, the time series changes of 
saccades are divided into two sections: from a) 5 s before 
passing the reference point to b) passing the reference point, 
and from b) passing from the reference point to e) avoidance 
action. Specifically examining the time series changes of heat 
maps and saccades in Figure 6, we can confirm driver states 
related to the attention to the falling object and the 
surrounding situation confirmation because of lane change. 
Consequently, based on the vehicle speed of b) the reference 
point during the passage, one can estimate the reaction time 
required for each action: the cognition, judgment, and 
operation for the falling object. 
B. Driver Response to Falling Objects 
Figure 7 presents the respective average reaction times of 
all drivers, elderly drivers, and young drivers at each 
measurement point for "falling objects" which is one driving 
topic. In Figure 7, the respective reaction times are shown. 
1) from b) passing the reference point to c) falling object 
gazing, 
2) from c) falling object gazing to d) surrounding 
situation confirmation, 
3) from d) surrounding situation confirmation to e) 
avoidance behavior 
Results for driving behaviors related to cognition, judgment, 
and operations for falling objects show that the elderly drivers 
tended to have longer reaction times than young drivers. 
    
 
(a) Falling objects                (b) Sudden appearance of small animals 
    
 
(c) Vehicle breakdown         (d) Lane decrease during work 
 
Figure 4. Driving topics for running test. 
 
    
 
(a) Sunny daytime; no overtaking vehicles      (b) Sunny daytime; overtaking vehicles  
    
 
(c) Sunny nighttime; no overtaking vehicles          (d) Sunny nighttime; overtaking vehicles 
 
Figure 5. Running scenarios. 
 

76
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Furthermore, by classifying drivers based on the average of 
all participants and devoting attention to the relation with the 
driving style, we analyzed the existence of the following four 
groups. 
· Group A: Discovery and situation confirmation are quick; 
allowance for operation (i.e., cognition, 
judgment, and operation are all fast) 
· Group B: Discovery is late, but situation confirmation and 
handling are quick (i.e., cognition is slow, but     
judgment and operation are fast) 
· Group C: Discovery and situation confirmation are slow; 
operation is gradual (i.e., cognition, judgment, 
and operation are gradual) 
· Group D: All reactions are average (i.e., cognition, 
judgment, and operation are all average) 
Young drivers were classified into Group A or Group D, 
whereas the elderly drivers were more likely to be classified 
as Group B or Group C. We infer that driving behavior 
characteristics shift from group B to group C as drivers age. 
 
 
Figure 6. Time series changes of heatmaps and saccades corresponding to respective measurement points. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Driver reaction time to falling objects. 
 

77
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
C. Driver Response to Cognition 
We next analyze driver reaction times for "cognition" from 
the viewpoint of surrounding recognition because of the 
presence or absence of overtaking vehicles. Figure 8 presents 
the reaction time of "cognition" during daytime. Figure 9 
depicts the reaction time of "cognition" during  nighttime. In 
these figures, panel (a) shows results for young drivers; panel 
(b) shows result for elderly drivers, clarifying differences of 
reaction time related to the presence or absence of overtaking 
vehicles. Particularly for young drivers in Figure 8 and Figure 
9, the reaction time of "Overtaking vehicle: Yes" is longer 
than that of "Overtaking vehicle: No" for both daytime and 
nighttime. Especially, in "Time period: Nighttime", a 
significant difference (p = 0.04) was found. As a general 
characteristic, we can confirm that the reaction time tends to 
be longer at night with poor visibility. However, for elderly 
drivers, differences of the reaction time depending on the 
presence or absence of the overtaking vehicle are only 
slightly noticed. The reaction time of nighttime tends to be 
shorter than that of daytime. 
Next, we attempt to analyze visibility because of 
differences of the driving time of day (i.e., daytime and 
nighttime). Figure 10 presents the reaction time of 
"cognition" for "Overtaking vehicle: No". Figure 11 shows 
the reaction time of "cognition" for "Overtaking vehicle: 
Yes". In these figures, panel (a) shows results for young 
drivers; panel (b) presents results for elderly drivers. 
Specifically examining the elderly drivers in Figures 10 and 
11, the response time of "Time period: Nighttime" is shorter 
than that of "Time period: Daytime", irrespective of the 
presence or absence of overtaking vehicles. A significant 
difference (p = 0.034) was found. By contrast, for young 
drivers, the difference of the reaction time between daytime 
and nighttime is slight, but reaction times of "Overtaking 
vehicle: Yes" tend to be longer than those of "Overtaking 
vehicle: No" 
Based on the results described above, after summarizing 
conditions related to daytime and nighttime, and the presence 
or absence of overtaking vehicles, we analyze the reaction 
times and the moving distances required for "cognition" 
while comparing the elderly drivers to the young drivers. 
       
 
(a) Young drivers                    (b) Elderly drivers 
 
Figure 8. Response time for "cognitions" during daytime. 
 
      
 
(a) Young drivers                  (b) Elderly drivers 
 
Figure 9. Response time for "cognitions" during nighttime. 
 

78
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 12 presents results obtained for "Time period: 
Daytime" and "Overtaking vehicle: No". Figure 13 presents 
results for "Time period: Nighttime" and "Overtaking 
vehicle: Yes". In these figures, panel (a) shows the reaction 
times of "cognition"; panel (b) shows the moving distance 
necessary for recognition, indicating the difference between 
elderly drivers and young drivers. By analyzing the results 
depicted in Figure 12, we can confirm that the reaction time 
and the moving distance of elderly drivers are longer than 
those of the young drivers. Especially, a significant 
difference (p = 0.09) in the moving distance was found. 
Actually, the tendency is reversed for results of Figure 13. 
The reaction time and the moving distance of the elderly 
drivers are shorter than those of the young drivers. 
Specifically examining the young drivers in Figures 12 and 
13, one can confirm that the reaction time and the moving 
distance during nighttime are longer than those during 
daytime. Generally, visibility during nighttime is regarded as 
worse. Therefore, the results of young drivers are valid. 
However, the results obtained for elderly drivers in Figures 
12 and 13 did not reflect the same tendency. The reaction 
time and the moving distance during nighttime were shorter 
than those during daytime. According to the questionnaire 
survey after the running test, the majority accounted for the 
elderly drivers as "the nighttime course made it easier to 
recognize falling objects". The reason for this trend might be 
that eye-gaze targets were limited during nighttime driving. 
D. Driver Response to Judgment and Operation 
We attempt to analyze the driver reaction time for 
"judgment and operation" from the viewpoint of recognition 
of the surroundings because of the presence or absence of 
overtaking vehicles. Figure 14 presents the reaction time of 
"judgment and operation" for daytime. Figure 15 portrays the 
reaction time of "judgment and operation" during nighttime. 
In these figures, panel (a) shows the results obtained for 
young drivers; panel (b) shows result obtained for elderly 
drivers, clarifying difference of reaction times related to the 
presence or absence of overtaking vehicles. Specifically 
examining the young drivers in Figures 14 and 15, 
      
 
(a) Young drivers                (b) Elderly drivers 
 
Figure 10. Response time for "cognitions" in "Overtaking vehicle: No". 
 
 
      
 
(a) Young drivers                (b) Elderly drivers 
 
Figure 11. Response time for "cognitions" in "Overtaking vehicle: Yes". 
 

79
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
differences of the reaction time depending on the presence or 
absence of the overtaking vehicle is noticed only slightly 
during daytime. However, the reaction time of "Overtaking 
vehicle: Yes" is longer than that of "Overtaking vehicle: No" 
during nighttime. A significant difference (p = 0.007) was 
found. However, for elderly drivers, the reaction time of 
"Overtaking vehicle: Yes" is longer than that of "Overtaking 
vehicle: No" during daytime. A significant difference (p = 
0.024) was found. However, the difference of the reaction 
time related to the presence or absence of the overtaking 
vehicle is noticed only slightly at nighttime. Additionally, we 
can confirm that the reaction time of daytime tends to be 
shorter than that of nighttime. 
Next, we particularly address the environment in which the 
driving conditions are the most severe for each driver (i.e., 
"Time period: Nighttime" and "Overtaking vehicle: Yes"). 
Thereby, we attempt to analyze the response time for 
"judgment and operation" and their necessary moving 
distance by comparing elderly drivers to young drivers. 
Figure 16 presents the result for "Time period: Nighttime" 
and "Overtaking vehicle: Yes". In the figure, panel (a) shows 
the response time of "judgment and operation"; panel (b) 
shows the moving distance required for them. It shows the 
difference between elderly drivers and young drivers. The 
response time and moving distance of the elderly drivers are 
shorter than those of the young drivers. Particularly for the 
moving distance, a significant difference (p = 0.012) was 
found. The elderly drivers have more driving experience than 
the young drivers. We infer that the difference in driving 
behaviors related to "judgment and operation" after 
recognition resulted from their differences in driving 
experience. 
Finally, to evaluate the state of peripheral recognition for 
each driver quantitatively, we specifically examine the 
number of saccades caused by differences in the driving time 
of day (i.e., daytime or nighttime), and compare data obtained 
for the elderly drivers and the young drivers. Figure 17 
presents the number of saccades occurring per second related 
to "judgment and operation". In the figure, panel (a) shows 
the number of occurrences of "Time period: Daytime"; panel 
        
 
(a) Response time for "cognitions"             (b) Moved distance for "cognitions" 
 
Figure 12. Response time and moved distance for "cognitions" in "Time period: Daytime" and "Overtaking vehicle: No". 
 
       
 
(a) Response time for "cognitions"            (b) Moved distance for "cognitions" 
 
Figure 13. Response time and moved distance for "cognitions" in "Time period: Nighttime" and "Overtaking vehicle: Yes". 
 

80
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(b) shows the number of occurrences of "Time period: 
Nighttime". Differences between the elderly drivers and the 
young drivers are apparent. However, both (a) and (b) include 
datasets on the presence or absence of the overtaking vehicle. 
In "Time period: Daytime", the saccade frequency of the 
elderly drivers is higher than that of the young drivers. In 
contrast, their difference is not recognized in "Time period: 
Nighttime". The reason is the following. During the daytime 
    
 
(a) Young drivers                 (b) Elderly drivers 
 
Figure 14. Response time for "judgement and operations" during daytime. 
 
      
 
(a) Young drivers                (b) Elderly drivers 
 
Figure 15. Response time for "judgement and operations" during nighttime. 
 
      
 
(a) Response time for "judgement and operations"       (b) Moved distance for "judgement and operations" 
 
Figure 16. Response time and moved distance for " judgement and operations " in "Time period: Nighttime" and "Overtaking 
vehicle: Yes". 
 

81
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
with good visibility, we surmise that elderly drivers 
performed 
more 
peripheral 
recognition 
for 
safety 
confirmation than young drivers did, based on their 
experience. During nighttime with poor visibility, the number 
of occurrences is suppressed by the effective field narrowing 
of each driver. The influence is inferred to have strongly 
affected the elderly drivers. 
Taken together, the results described above confirmed that 
the reaction time related to "cognition" for these driving 
behaviors increases concomitantly with aging. In subsequent 
driving behaviors related to "judgment and operation", the 
elderly drivers tended to drive well based on their experience. 
However, in "Time period: Nighttime" with poor visibility, 
we assume that peripheral recognition for safety confirmation 
was disturbed by field narrowing of the elderly drivers. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
For this study, we defined four situations that are likely to 
trigger accidents on highways as driving hazards, i.e., vehicle 
breakdown, sudden appearance of small animals, falling 
objects, and lane decrease. By running experiments 
conducted while controlling the time period (daytime or 
nighttime) and the traffic flow (overtaking vehicle: Yes or 
No), we undertook comparative analysis for each driving 
hazard, particularly addressing driving characteristics of 
young drivers and elderly drivers related to "cognition", 
"judgment", and "operation". Results clarified the following 
points. 
・Because of "cognition", the response time of young 
drivers of "Overtaking vehicle: Yes" was longer than that 
of "Overtaking vehicle: No" in both daytime and 
nighttime. Particularly, in "Time period: Nighttime", 
significant difference (p = 0.04) was found. 
・Regarding elderly drivers, irrespective of the presence or 
absence of an overtaking vehicle, the response time 
related to "cognition" of "Time period: Nighttime" was 
shorter than that of "Time period: Daytime". Particularly, 
for "Overtaking vehicle: No", significant difference (p = 
0.034) was found. 
・For "Time period: Daytime" and "Overtaking vehicle: 
No", the response time and the moved distance related to 
"cognition" of the elderly drivers are longer than that of 
the young drivers. Particularly, significant difference of 
the moved distance (p = 0.09) was found. 
・Regarding young drivers, the response time because of 
"judgment and operations" of "Overtaking vehicle: Yes" 
was longer than that of "Overtaking vehicle: No" in 
nighttime. Significant difference (p = 0.007) was found. 
・Regarding elderly drivers, the response time because of 
"judgment and operations" of "Overtaking vehicle: Yes" 
was longer than that of "Overtaking vehicle: No" in 
daytime. Significant difference (p = 0.024) was found. 
・For "Time period: Nighttime" and "Overtaking vehicle: 
Yes", the response time and the moved distance related 
to "cognition" of the elderly drivers was shorter than that 
of the young drivers. Particularly, significant difference 
of the moved distance (p = 0.012) was found. 
Future work will be undertaken to construct a dangerous-
driving prediction model based on findings obtained from 
this study with the aim of improving the prediction model 
accuracy. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by a technical research grant of 
East Nippon Expressway Company Ltd. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
K. Sato, Y. Oomomo, H. Madokoro, M. Ito, and S. Kadowaki, 
"Analysis of Cognitive Functions in the Encountered State of Driving 
Topics on Expressways," Proceedings of the Fourteenth International 
Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information 
Technology (ICCGI2019), pp.1-8, July 2019. 
[2] 
K. Kamiji and N. Takahashi, "Achievement and Effort of Safety 
Traffic Society for Elderly Drivers by JAMA," International 
     
 
(a) Time period: Daytime              (b) Time period: Nighttime 
 
Figure 17. Number of saccade occurrences for "judgement and operations" 
 

82
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Association of Traffic and Safety Sciences, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 221-227, 
2011. 
[3] 
H. Suzuki, "Motivating Senior Drivers toward Traffic Safety: The 
Traffic Sociology Viewpoint," International Association of Traffic 
and Safety Sciences, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 194-202, 2011. 
[4] 
Y. Nakano, T. Kojima, H. Kawanaka, and K. Oguri, "Improvement of 
Elderly Driver’s Ability by Pointing and Calling Method," The 
Institute of Electronics, Information and Communication Engineers D, 
vol. J97-D, no.1, pp. 135-144, 2014. 
[5] 
T. Tanaka, K. Fujikake, T. Yonekawa, M. Yamagishi, M. Inagami, F. 
Kinoshita, H. Aoki, and H. Kanamori, "Analysis of Relationship 
between Forms of Driving Support Agent and Gaze Behavior: Study 
on Driver-Agent for Encouraging Safe driving Behavior of Elderly 
Drivers," IEICE Technical Report, 117(72), pp. 13-18, 2017. 
[6] 
H. Aoki, H. Kanamori, M. Yamagishi, T. Tanaka, and T. Yonekawa, 
"Study on Driver Characteristics for Delaying Driving Cessation (1), 
– Construction of Human, Aging, and Driving Characteristic Database 
for Elderly Drivers –," Society of Automotive Engineers of Japan, Inc. 
(JSAE), Annual Conference (Spring) Proceedings, 2015. 
[7] 
T. Tanaka, K. Fujikake, T. Yonekawa, M. Yamagishi, M. Inagami, F. 
Kinoshita, H. Aoki, and H. Kanamori, "Driver Agent for Promoting 
Driving 
Behavior 
Improvement 
of 
Elderly," 
Human-Agent 
Interaction Symposium 2016, G-4, 2016. 
[8] 
T. Tanaka, T. Yonekawa, H. Aoki, M. Yamagishi, M. Inagami, I. 
Takahashi, and H. Kanamori, "Analysis of Relationship between 
Driving Behavior and Biofunction of Drivers including Elderly at 
Intersection with a Stop Sign: – Study on Driver Characteristics for 
Delaying Driving Cessation –," Society of Automotive Engineers of 
Japan, Inc. (JSAE), Vol. 48, No. 1, pp.147-154, 2017. 
[9] 
T. Tanaka, K. Fujikake, T. Yonekawa, M. Yamagishi, M. Inagami, F. 
Kinoshita, H. Aoki, and H. Kanamori, "Study on Driver Agent based 
on Analysis of Driving Instruction Data – Driver Agent for 
Encouraging Safe Driving Behavior (1) –," IEICE Transactions on 
Information and Systems, Vol. E101-D, No. 5, 2018. 
[10] K. Fujikawa, T. Tanaka, T. Yonekawa, M. Yamagishi, M. Inagami, F.  
Kinoshita, H. Aoki, and H. Kanamori, "Comparison of Subjective 
Evaluation of Different Forms of Driving Agents by Elderly People," 
Japan Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, Vol.53, pp.214-224, 
2017. 
[11] K. Fujikake, T. Tanaka, Y. Yoshihara, T. Yonekawa, M. Inagami, H. 
Aoki, and H. Kanamori, "Effect of Driving Behavior Improvement by 
Driving-Support and Feedback-Support of Driver-Agent," Society of 
Automotive Engineers of Japan, Inc. (JSAE), Vol. 50, No. 1, pp. 134-
141, 2019. 
[12] M. Takahara, M. Kokubun, T. Wada, and S. Doi, "Effects of a 
Stopping-situation 
Assistance 
System 
for 
Elderly 
Drivers," 
International Association of Traffic and Safety Sciences, Vol. 36, No. 
1, pp. 6-13, 2011. 
[13] K. Iida, "Hypothesis Construction on Reverse Running Occurrence 
Process on Highway," Grant Research by Takata Foundation 
ISSN2185-8950, 
Available 
from 
URL: 
http://www.takatafound.or.jp/support/articles/pdf/150626_10.pdf 
[retrieved: May 2020] 
[14] G. Abe, K. Kikuchi, R. Iwaki, and T. Fujii, "Effects of Cognitive 
Distraction on Driver’s Visual Attention," The Society of Mechanical 
Engineers (JSME), Transactions of the JSME (c), Vol. 76, No. 767, 
pp. 1662-1668, 2010. 
[15] R. Honma, G. Abe, and K. Kikuchi, "Characteristics of Visual 
Attention while Driving under the State of Drowsiness," Society of 
Automotive Engineers of Japan, Inc. (JSAE), Vol. 42, No. 5, pp. 1217-
1222, 2011. 
[16] Council for Science, Technology and Innovation in Cabinet Office: 
Cross-ministerial Strategic Innovation Promotion Program (SIP) 
Innovation of Automated Driving for Universal Services, pp.2, 2017. 
[17] S. Wada, T. Hagiwara, H. Hamaoka, Y. Ninomiya, M. Tada, and T. 
Ohiro, "Comparative Study on Situation Awareness between Elderly 
and General Drivers on the Expressway using Highly Automated 
Vehicle," Society of Automotive Engineers of Japan, Inc. (JSAE), 
Technical Paper, 2018. 
[18] Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE): Autonomous car driving 
levels (SAE J3016), Sep. 2016. 
[19] C. Miyajima, S. Yamazaki, T. Bando, K. Hitomi, H. Terai, H. Okuda, 
T. Hirayama, M. Egawa, T. Suzuki, and K. Takeda, "Analyzing Driver 
Gaze Behavior and Consistency of Decision Making During 
Automated Driving," 2015 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (Ⅳ), 
Seoul, Korea, 2015. 
[20] L. J. Molnar, A. K. Pradhan, D. W. Eby, L. H. Ryan, R. M. St. Louis, 
J. Zakrajsek, B. Ross, B. Lin, C. Liang, B. Zalewski, and L. Zhang, 
"Age-Related Differences in Driver Behavior Associated with 
Automated Vehicles and Transfer of Control between Automated and 
Manual Control: A Simulator Evaluation," Technical Report, UMTRI 
2017-4, University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute, 
2017. 
[21] M. Ishibashi, M. Okuwa, S. Doi, and M. Akamatsu, "HQL Driving 
Style Questionnaire: DSQ," Research Institute of Human Engineering 
for Quality Life, 2003. 
[22] M. Ishibashi, M. Okuwa, S. Doi, and M. Akamatsu, "HQL Workload 
Sensitivity Questionnaire: WSQ," Research Institute of Human 
Engineering for Quality Life, 2003. 
 

