 
Forecasting Transportation Project Frequency using Multivariate Modeling and 
Lagged Variables 
 
Alireza Shojaei  
Building Construction Science Department 
Mississippi State University 
Mississippi State, MS, USA 
e-mail: Shojaei@caad.msstate.edu 
 
   
Hashem Izadi Moud  
Construction Management Department 
Florida Gulf Coast University 
Fort Myers, FL, USA 
hizadimoud@fgcu.edu 
 
Ian Flood 
M. E. Rinker, Sr. School of Construction Management 
University of Florida  
Gainesville. FL, USA 
flood@ufl.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Knowledge of the number of upcoming projects and 
their impact on the company plays a significant role in 
strategic planning for project-based companies. The current 
horizon of planning for companies working on public projects 
are the latest advertised projects for bidding, which in many 
cases is reported less than a year in advance. This provides a 
very short-term horizon for strategic project portfolio 
planning. In this research, a multivariate regression model 
with elastic net regularization and a support vector machine 
are 
used 
to 
forecast 
the 
Florida 
Department 
of 
Transportation’s (FDOT) number of advertised projects in the 
future considering economic indices and other environmental 
factors. Two sets of analyses have been conducted, one with the 
current values of the independent variables and another one 
with up to 12 months lag of each independent variable. The 
results show that, of the predictors considered, the 
unemployment rate in the construction sector and the Brent oil 
price are the most significant variables in forecasting FDOT’s 
future project frequency using current values. Also, it is 
evident that including lagged values of the independent 
variables increase the model’s performance. 
Keywords-Multivariate 
Regression; 
Elastic 
Net 
Regularization; 
Strategic 
Planning; 
Project 
Portfolio 
Management; Forecasting; Support Vector Machine; Time 
Series. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Construction companies, as with many other companies 
working in project-based industries, such as IT, are usually 
managing multiple projects concurrently while looking for 
new projects to maintain their business. The task of 
managing current (ongoing) projects while obtaining projects 
for continuous business is called Project Portfolio 
Management (PPM). A crucial part of the management of a 
portfolio is to make sure that the company resources and on-
going projects are optimally balanced to ensure that not only 
each project meets its objectives but also the whole 
organization meets its overall goals. Management needs to 
make sure that they maximize the utilization of their 
resources by minimizing idle time while not accepting more 
work than they can complete effectively.  
The majority of the literature focuses on internal 
uncertainties that pertain to PPM. In other words, the most 
explored aspect of the uncertainties in PPM is the 
relationships between the projects within the portfolio and 
the interaction between the current ongoing projects and 
possible future projects to measure their compatibility in 
terms of resource demand, and other criteria. However, 
environmental factors, such as economic conditions and 
specific industry conditions (for instance, oil price) can have 
a significant impact on a portfolio and a company’s overall 
performance [1]. This study aims to integrate the 
environmental uncertainties and uncertainties regarding the 
unknown future projects, so that companies can apply this 
approach in their mid-term to long-term strategic planning. 
Martinsuo's [2] review of PPM frameworks showed that the 
uncertainty and continual changes in a company’s portfolio 
has a significant negative correlation with its success. As a 
result, if users can reduce the extent of the uncertainties in 
their planning and have a more robust portfolio, it could 
greatly help their success. In summary, this paper proposes a 
regression model for forecasting the frequency of FDOT’s 
future projects, which helps the user to estimate the number 
and timing of tendered projects in the future. The novelty of 
this approach is the consideration of environmental 
uncertainties in the model and the provision of quantitative 
insights into the unknown future. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the impact of uncertainty on PPM and how 
unknown future projects can impact strategic planning. 
Section III describes the modeling approach followed in this 
paper. Section IV addresses the multivariate modeling of 
FDOT’s number of projects in the future. Section V presents 
the conclusions and identifies future directions for the 
research.  
148
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
II. 
UNKNOWN FUTURE PROJECTS AND PORTFOLIO 
STRATEGIC PLANNING 
Planning is a vital factor in determining the success or 
failure of construction projects. According to Brown et al. 
[3] and World Bank [4] most construction projects 
worldwide do not meet their success targets, in terms of 
budget, duration or other determining factors, due to poor 
management practices. While success factors in different 
sectors of construction, like public, private, commercial, 
residential, infrastructure, differ, budget and equity remain as 
one of the main important factors that determine the success 
of any project. In the public sector, the federal government, 
as the sole client, forecasts the equity needed for the 
upcoming fiscal year in advance in order to accurately plan 
the number of needed projects to meet the society demands. 
Traditionally, governmental agencies had a short sighted 
view of the future budget; mainly due to the hardship in 
accurately estimating the budget needed based on the needs 
in the future. The process of planning future needs is costly, 
slow and uncertain. Also, it is usually based on the historical 
patterns of previously funded projects through earlier years. 
Using historical data for future prediction is useful, and more 
accurate when scope, duration, budget and type of future 
projects are known. Due to the unknown nature of future 
projects, including a lack of information about future 
projects’ scope, number, and types, using historical data for 
projection purposes is not always accurate.  
In principles of project management, the practice of 
batching multiple projects under one umbrella and defining 
target goals for them in a portfolio of a company is usually 
referred to as PPM. PPM is defined as “dealing with the 
coordination and control of multiple projects pursuing the 
same strategic goals and competing for the same resources, 
whereby managers prioritize among projects to achieve 
strategic benefit” [5]. Planview a leading Information 
Technology (IT) firm in project management also defines 
PPM as “Project portfolio management (PPM) refers to 
a process used by project managers and project management 
organizations (PMOs) to analyze the potential return on 
undertaking a project. By organizing and consolidating every 
piece of data regarding proposed and current projects, project 
portfolio managers provide forecasting and business analysis 
for companies looking to invest in new projects” [6]. PPM 
handles two important tasks including: (1) ensuring that the 
investment decisions by managing companies about the 
projects that participate in the portfolio are based on the 
single notion of maximizing the return on investment of the 
portfolio as a whole and minimizing the risks associated with 
participating projects [7], and (2) assuring that distribution of 
resources to different projects within the portfolio meets the 
portfolio goals in maximizing the portfolio and project goals 
and minimizing the risks [8]. Implementing an effective 
PPM process is challenging due to various factors involved 
in PPM. The golden key to a fruitful implementation of PPM 
in any construction enterprise is information. The future is 
unknown; thus having the necessary information that can 
paint a clear picture of the future is crucial in the PPM 
process. Existence of more accurate knowledge of future 
enables decision and policy makers to more accurately 
predict the future events, maximize the goals of the portfolio 
and projects as a whole and minimize the associated risks. 
This will result in maximizing the profit of the commercial 
enterprise [9].  
The science and practice of project management is all 
about managing different kinds of uncertainties. Uncertainty 
could dramatically harm the success of any construction 
project regardless of the quality of staff, equipment, plans 
and drawings, and managers. In project management, 
uncertainty is defined as the degree of accuracy in 
determining future work processes, resource variation and 
work output [6][7][8]. Uncertainty is inherently coupled with 
risks. In traditional project management, risks and 
uncertainties have been usually discussed at the project level. 
However, it is believed that focusing on the totality of risks 
and uncertainties from a broader perspective might be 
beneficial to the success of any enterprise. While the Project 
Management Institute (PMI), one of the leading professional 
organizations in project management, discusses risks in a 
more general context of portfolio management, it does not 
provide 
any 
specific 
details, 
guidelines, 
plans, 
recommendations, directions or procedures on successfully 
managing future projects and portfolios uncertainties at a 
portfolio level. In fact, the whole concept of risk 
management is discussed very briefly by PMI. PMI limits 
discussions on different risk management to a few risk 
management techniques and methods and does not go 
beyond the management of risks and uncertainties at a 
portfolio level. PMI recommends only a few broad 
guidelines 
on 
detection, 
monitoring 
and 
handling 
uncertainties [9]. 
While PMI limits its discussion on risk management and 
uncertainties, from a scientific perspective, the best method 
to handle uncertainties and risks in any commercial 
enterprise is to analyze historical data to predict, model, 
project and mitigate potential harms of uncertainties and 
risks. At a scientific level, a variety of methods, techniques, 
and approaches have been tested to collect historic data, 
analyze the gathered data and find trends and tendencies in 
historical data that could help the project and portfolio 
managers understand the impacts of uncertainties of projects’ 
success, and consequently portfolios. Artificial Intelligence 
(AI) is found to be a powerful tool in portfolio management 
[10]. A variety of algorithms have been developed in 
numerous research that can help to assess and to allocate 
risks and other types of uncertainties in project selection, 
execution 
and 
portfolio 
management 
[11]. 
Other 
contemporary analysis and computation techniques, such as 
multi-agent 
modeling 
[12], 
multi-objective 
binary 
programming [13], heuristic methods such as neural 
networks [14] and use of complicated Bayesian Network 
models [15] have been proposed and implemented by many 
scholars to study the nature of uncertainties, risks allocation 
patterns and process of risk allocation management at the 
project and/or portfolio levels. It is worth noting that the 
success rates of the aforementioned methods are not 
consistent. The success rates of implementing these methods 
vary based on numerous factors including the type of the 
149
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
project, analysis method, the number of projects in a 
portfolio and projects and portfolio specifications. Overall, it 
is still mostly impossible to provide forecast models, to 
perfectly plan portfolios, while considering unknown 
projects and environmental uncertainties and risks. 
III. 
MODELING APPROACH 
The literature [5][7][14] has looked at forecasting 
unknown future projects with a univariate modeling 
approach where the number of future projects is forecasted 
solely based on the past values of the number of projects. 
This study builds upon this work by forecasting unknown 
future projects using multivariate regression in order to 
incorporate environmental uncertainties in a forecast. The 
data used in this case study is obtained by text mining 
FDOT’s historical project letting database. The database 
covers 12 years (from 2003 to 2015) containing 2816 
projects. The features extracted from the database are each 
project letting date, cost, and duration. Table I provides a 
pool 
of 
candidate 
independent 
variables 
including 
macroeconomics and construction indices compiled from the 
literature [5][7][14], which were available at the monthly 
level and did not have any missing values for the explored 
time frame. Table I also provides the abbreviation for each 
variable and the sources from which they have been 
obtained. These factors are considered in the regression 
modeling as the dependent (explanatory) variables. 
The integrity and continuity of the data are important as it 
is a time series. As a result, random cross validation was not 
appropriate, and a rolling forecast origin approach was 
adopted for cross-validation, as illustrated in Figure 1. The 
data were divided into two sections, training and testing. The 
training period starts with three years and increases by one 
year in each iteration while the testing period remains steady 
as the three consecutive years after the training set. In other 
words, seven models are trained, and the average error is 
considered as the result of cross-validation. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Forecast on a rolling origin cross-validation. 
 
TABLE I.  
CANDIDATE INDEPENDENT VARIABLES. 
 
A. Exploratory data analysis 
To 
develop 
the 
multivariate 
models, 
a 
better 
understanding of the data characteristics was first necessary, 
and that information was gained through an exploratory data 
analysis and the identification of potentially relevant 
predictors. 
The first exploratory analysis consisted of correlation 
analysis. Figure 2 provides the correlation plot of the 
variables. The color indicates the magnitude of the 
correlation, and the direction of the ellipse illustrates the 
direction of the relationship. Furthermore, the concentration 
of the ellipse tells us about the degree of the linear 
relationship between the variables. Project frequency is 
represented by “freq” in the last row and column. It appears 
that none of the exploratory variables had a strong linear 
relationship with the project frequency.  
 
Variable name 
Abbreviation of 
variable 
Source 
Dow Jones industrial 
average Vol 
DJI 
Yahoo Finance 
Dow Jones industrial 
average Closing 
DJIC 
Yahoo Finance 
Money Stock M1 
MS1 
Federal Reserve 
System 
Money Stock M2 
MS2 
Federal Reserve 
System 
Federal Fund Rate 
FFR 
Federal Reserve 
Systems 
Average Prime Rate 
APR 
Federal Reserve 
System 
Producer Price Index for 
All Commodities 
PPIACO 
U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics 
Building Permit 
BP 
U.S. Bureau of Census 
Brent Oil Price 
BOP 
U.S. Energy 
Information 
Administration 
Consumer Price Index 
CPI 
U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics 
Crude Oil Price 
COP 
U.S. Energy 
Information 
Administration 
Unemployment Rate 
UR 
U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics 
Florida Employment 
FE 
U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics 
Florida Unemployment 
FU 
U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics 
Florida Unemployment 
Rate 
FUR 
U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics 
Florida Number of 
Employees in Construction 
NFEC 
U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics 
Number Housing Started 
HS 
U.S. Bureau of Census 
Unemployment Rate 
Construction 
URC 
U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics 
Number of Employees in 
Construction 
NEC 
U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics 
Number of Job Opening in 
Construction 
JOC 
U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics 
Construction Spending 
CS 
U.S. Census Bureau 
Total Highway and Street 
Spending 
THSS 
Federal Reserve 
System 
150
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 2.  Correlation plot.
B. Feature selection and feature importance 
Feature selection is the process of selecting the most 
relevant predictors and removing irrelevant variables from 
the pool of potentially useful predictors. Depending on the 
model’s structure, feature selection can improve a model’s 
accuracy. This process can be carried out by measuring the 
contribution of each variable to the model’s accuracy, and 
then removing irrelevant and redundant variables while 
keeping the most useful ones. In some cases, irrelevant 
features can even reduce a model’s accuracy. In general, 
there are three approaches to feature selection: the filter 
method, wrapper method, and embedded method.  
Embedded methods implement feature selection and 
model tuning at the same time. In other words, these 
machine learning algorithms have built-in feature selection 
elements. Examples of embedded method implementations 
include LASSO and elastic net. Regularization is a process in 
which the user intentionally introduces bias into the training, 
preventing the coefficients from taking large values. This 
method is especially useful when the number of variables is 
high. In such a situation, the linear regression is not stable 
and in which a small change in a few variables results in a 
large shift in the coefficients. The LASSO approach uses L1 
regularization (adding a penalty equal to the magnitude of 
the coefficient), while ridge regression uses L2 regularization 
(adding a penalty equal to the square of the magnitude of the 
coefficient). The elastic net uses a combination of L1 and L2. 
Ridge regression is effective in reducing a model’s variance 
by minimizing the summation of the square of the residuals. 
The LASSO method minimizes the summation of the 
absolute residuals. The LASSO approach produces a sparse 
model that minimizes the number of coefficients with non-
zero values. As a result, this approach has implicit feature 
selection. The generalized linear method implemented in the 
next section uses an elastic net. This approach incorporates 
both L1 and L2 regularization and thus has implicit feature 
selection.  
Feature reduction methods, such as principal component 
analysis (PCA), are widely used in studies to reduce the 
number of independent variables. The output of such 
methods is a reduced set of new variables extracted from the 
initial variables while attempting to maintain the same 
information content. However, using these methods can 
drastically decrease the ability to interpret the significance of 
each input, which in itself can be very beneficial. For 
example, in this study knowing that oil price has a significant 
impact on the frequency of the projects compared to 
construction spending can provide valuable insight both for 
policy makers and contractors. As a result, the authors have 
chosen not to implement feature reduction methods, such as 
PCA. 
Looking at the correlation between independent variables 
and the dependent variable, it became evident that a filter 
method using a correlation analysis was not useful, as all the 
variables had a nonsignificant relationship with the project 
frequency. As a result, an elastic net approach is used in the 
next section. 
IV. 
MULTIVARIATE MODELING 
The general process of model optimization and feature 
selection consisted of first defining a set of model parameter 
values to be evaluated. Then, the data was preprocessed in 
accordance with a 0-1 scale to make sure the high value in 
some variables are not skewing the model’s coefficient and 
other variables’ importance. For each parameter set, the 
cross-validation method discussed earlier served to train and 
test the model. Finally, the average performance was 
calculated for each parameter set to identify the optimal 
values for the parameters. 
Ordinary linear regression is based on the underlying 
assumption that the model for the dependent variable has a 
151
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
normal error distribution. Generalized linear models are a 
flexible generalization of the ordinary linear regression that 
allows for other error distributions. In general, they can be 
applied to a wider variety of problems than can the ordinary 
linear regression approach. Generalized linear models are 
defined by three components: a random component, a 
systematic component, and a link function. The random 
component recognizes the dependent variable and its 
corresponding probability distribution. The systematic 
component recognizes the independent variables and their 
linear combination, which is called the linear predictor. The 
link function identifies the connection between the random 
and systematic components. In other words, it pinpoints how 
the dependent variable is related to the linear predictor of the 
independent variables. 
Ridge regression uses an L2 penalty to limit the size of 
the coefficient, while LASSO regression uses an L1 penalty 
to increase the interpretability of the model. The elastic net 
uses a mix of L1 and L2 regularization, which makes it 
superior to the other two methods in most cases. Using a 
combination of L1 and L2, the elastic net can produce a 
sparse model with few variables selected from the 
independent variables. This approach is especially useful 
when multiple features with high correlations with each other 
exist.  
A generalized linear model was fit to the data at the 
current values using the cross-validation method discussed 
earlier. 
Alpha 
(mixing 
percentage) 
and 
lambda 
(regularization parameter) were the tuning parameters. Alpha 
controls the elastic net penalty, where α=1 represents lasso 
regression, and α=0 represents ridge regression. Lambda 
controls the power of the penalty. The L2 penalty shrinks the 
coefficients of correlated variables, whereas the L1 penalty 
picks one of the correlated variables and removes the rest. 
Figure 3 illustrates the results of the generalized linear model 
(for each set of parameters 7 models according to cross-
validation method is trained and the average error is assigned 
to the set of parameters under study), optimized by 
minimizing the RMSE with controlling alpha and lambda. 
The optimized parameters were α=1 and λ= 0.56. The 
authors also tested λ higher than 0.56 up to 1, however, the 
coefficients were not well-behaved beyond lambda=0.56. 
Figure 4 depicts the LASSO coefficient curves. Each 
curve represents a variable. The path for each variable 
demonstrates its coefficient in relation to the L1 value. The 
coefficient paths more effectively highlight why only two 
variables were significant in the generalized linear model. 
When two variables were excluded, all other coefficients 
became zero at the L1 normalization, and this arrangement 
yielded the best performance. Figure 5 offers the variable 
importance for the generalized linear model with all the 
variables. Only the unemployment rate in the construction 
industry, the Brent oil price, and the unemployment rate 
(total) 
had 
non-zero 
coefficients. 
However, 
the 
unemployment rate (total) seemed to be relatively 
insignificant. 
To further prune the generalized linear model, another 
model with only the unemployment rate in the construction 
sector and the Brent oil price was trained and tested. Table II 
contains the optimized parameters (coefficients and 
intercept) for the generalized linear models. The general 
unemployment rate had a low coefficient and, upon pruning 
it, the authors saw an improvement in the performance of the 
model. The most important variable was the unemployment 
rate in construction having the highest coefficient of 4.03.  
Table III illustrates the performance of the optimized 
general linear model using a different dataset on the cross-
validation sections. It was evident that excluding the 
unemployment rate improved the model’s performance over 
most of the cross-validation data sections. It is notable that 
the pruned model performed much better in data section 1 
which had the highest error and produced a more evenly 
distributed error among the different data sections tested. 
The only variables contributing to the final linear model 
were the unemployment rate in the construction sector and 
the Brent oil price.  
 
Figure 3.  Generalized linear method optimization.
152
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 4.  Lasso coefficient curve. 
 
Figure 5.  Variable importance of the generalized linear model. 
TABLE II.  
PARAMETERS OF THE GENERALIZED LINEAR MODEL AT 
CURRENT VALUES. 
Variables 
Coefficients 
Coefficients (Pruned by 
one variable) 
URC 
3.94 
4.03 
BP 
2.80 
2.77 
UR 
0.11 
----- 
Intercept 
17.14 
17.16 
TABLE III.  
PERFORMANCE OF THE GENERALIZED LINEAR MODEL AT 
CURRENT VALUES. 
Error term 
RMSE 
MAE 
Cross-validation set 
All 
Pruned 
All 
Pruned 
1 
16.13 
9.78 
13.24 
10.8 
2 
11.58 
11.94 
9.64 
8.56 
3 
13.86 
13.69 
11.6 
8.01 
4 
13.16 
13.14 
10.82 
8.25 
5 
12.07 
10.94 
9.55 
10 
6 
11.03 
10.27 
8.53 
8.6 
7 
10.89 
10.87 
8.6 
11.28 
Average 
12.67 
11.52 
10.28 
9.36 
 
A Support Vector Machine (SVM) with a Radial Kernel 
were also trained and tested using the cross-validation 
method adopted in this study to evaluate the possible 
nonlinear relationship between the variables.  Figure 6 
depicts the results of the parameter optimization of the SVM 
model optimized by minimizing the RMSE with controlling 
sigma and C. The optimal parameters selected were sigma = 
0.211 and C= 0.5.   
 
Figure 6.  SVM parameter optimization. 
153
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Table IV presents the performance of the optimized SVM 
model on the test sets of the cross validations data sets. The 
results of the SVM are better than the GLM model 
considering all the variables at the current values. 
The two GLM and SVM models so far were trained and 
tested on the current values of the independent variables 
regarding each instance of the project frequency. However, 
some social and economic indices might impact the 
dependent variable with some lag, which means that a 
change in the oil price might take three months to have an 
impact on the number of projects that FDOT is going to 
advertise. Figure 7 depicts the possible relationships between 
the variables. In the next step of this study, GLM and SVM 
models were trained and tested on each independent 
variables’ current value and past 12 months values to test for 
both linear and nonlinear relationships between the lags of 
the independent variables and project frequency.  
TABLE IV.  
PERFORMANCE OF THE SVM MODEL. 
Cross-validation set 
RMSE 
MAE 
1 
10.93 
8.76 
2 
10.31 
8.25 
3 
9.94 
7.19 
4 
12.06 
9.63 
5 
11.95 
9.24 
6 
11.11 
8.38 
7 
10.98 
8.61 
Average 
11.04 
8.58 
 
 
Figure 7.  The possible relationship between the variables. 
Figure 8 illustrates the results of the generalized linear 
model, optimized by minimizing the RMSE with controlling 
alpha and lambda over all the variables with their lagged 
values. The optimized parameters were α=1 and λ= 3.10. 
Figure 9 depicts the LASSO coefficient curves of the GLM 
model. Each curve represents a variable. The path for each 
variable demonstrates its coefficient in relation to the L1 
value. The nature of the lagged value variables make them 
highly correlated to each other, and as a result, the L1 
regularizations removes most of the variables in the process. 
Table V presents the results of the GLM model with the 
lagged variables.  On the one hand, a comparison of the 
results with the GLM model’s results including only the 
current values showed that including the lagged variables can 
increase the performance of the model. On the other hand, 
GLM is not friendly to variables with high correlation, and 
other linear models might show higher accuracy for this 
problem. 
 
Figure 8.  GLM parameter optimization with lagged variables.
154
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Lasso coefficient curves for GLM with all the variables with 
lagged values. 
TABLE V.  
PERFORMANCE OF THE GLM MODEL WITH THE LAGGED 
VARIABLES. 
Cross-validation set 
RMSE 
MAE 
1 
10.34 
8.31 
2 
12.08 
9.65 
3 
9.92 
7.27 
4 
11.98 
9.25 
5 
11.07 
8.43 
6 
11.07 
8.61 
7 
10.95 
8.68 
Average 
11.06 
8.60 
 
To test the nonlinear relationship between the lagged 
variables and the project frequency an SVM was trained and 
tested using the same cross validation method. Figure 10 
depicts the results of the parameter optimization of the SVM 
model optimized by minimizing the RMSE with controlling 
sigma and C. The optimal parameters selected were sigma = 
0.004 and C= 0.05. Table VI presents the performance of the 
optimized SVM model on the test sets of the cross 
validations data sets. The results of the SVM are very close 
to the GLM with the lagged variables and SVM with only 
the current values. As a result, adding the lagged values 
increased the performance of the GLM close to the SVM 
model but did not increase the performance of the SVM 
model. 
 
TABLE VI.  
PERFORMANCE OF THE SVM MODEL WITH LAGGED 
VARIABLES. 
Cross-validation set 
RMSE 
MAE 
1 
11.06 
8.22 
2 
10.22 
7.31 
3 
11.90 
9.36 
4 
11.86 
9.03 
5 
10.99 
8.71 
6 
10.48 
8.19 
7 
11.19 
8.61 
Average 
11.10 
8.49 
 
 
Figure 10.  SVM parameter optimization with lagged variables.
155
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Table 
VII 
provides 
a comparison between 
the 
multivariate models proposed in this study and some other 
univariate models studied previously by the authors [9]. 
Comparing the error terms shows that the multivariate 
models did not outperform some of the univariate models, 
such 
as 
Autoregressive 
Moving 
Average 
(ARMA). 
However, it comes close to the best performing example and 
it provides insight regarding the impact of environmental 
uncertainties on future project streams and thus could be 
valuable in long term strategic planning. 
TABLE VII.  
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT MODELS. 
Model 
RMSE 
MAE 
GLM Regression with Current variables 
11.52 
9.36 
SVM with Current variables 
11.04 
8.58 
ARMA(8,8) 
10.71 
8.45 
ARMA(12,12) 
11.55 
9.23 
AR(8) 
10.92 
8.48 
Exponential MA (8) 
11.4 
9.02 
GLM regression with lagged Variables 
11.05 
8.59 
SVM with lagged Variables 
11.09 
8.49 
 
It is important to note that the result of these models is 
the frequency of FDOT’s unknown future projects, about 
which the user would otherwise have no information. Having 
reliable estimates with known error margins regarding 
unknown future projects can arguably provide more insight 
in strategic planning for a company’s future compared to the 
current conjecture-based decision making. It should be noted 
that the accuracy of the models as long as the models are 
stable (the error is not systematic but random) is acceptable. 
These models are forecasting an unknown-unknown variable 
in the future for which there is no information available 
regarding their existence. However, users can use the output 
of this model including the error margin as inputs to their 
strategic planning. 
The output of this research can provide a quantitative 
insight as a foundation for future planning. It should be noted 
that this model is not a standalone portfolio management 
framework, rather it is a supplement to existing models. For 
example, knowing that there is likely to be a decrease or 
increase in the number of projects in the future can help a 
company prepare in terms of consolidating or expanding its 
resources and assets. Furthermore, this study is limited to the 
FDOT’s project letting database and applicability of the 
concept of looking into unknown-unknown projects in the 
future using historical data should be tested on other datasets 
in future work. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The importance and impact of upcoming projects on a 
project portfolio have been established in previously 
published work. However, little work has been done 
considering 
the 
uncertainties 
regarding 
incorporating 
unknown future projects in long term strategic planning. In 
this paper, an approach for incorporating environmental 
uncertainties for forecasting the number of unknown future 
projects is presented. Two multivariate models, generalized 
linear regression with elastic net regularization and support 
vector machine were used to forecast FDOT’s unknown 
future projects using economic and construction indices, 
once with current values and once with both current and 
lagged values. The results indicate that the approach can 
reduce the impact of uncertainties on a portfolio and thus 
enable the development of a more robust plan with a better 
strategic plan. The generalized linear model with current 
values indicated that the best explanatory variables were the 
unemployment rate in the construction sector and the Brent 
oil price. SVM performed better than the GLM at with the 
current values variables and thus making a hint at the 
existence of the nonlinear relationship between the variables. 
However, adding the lagged values of the variable to the 
pool of the independent variables resulted in almost the same 
performance between the SVM and GLM. Meaning that a 
GLM model with lagged variables performed similarly to the 
SVM with the current values while adding the lagged values 
did not increase the performance of the SVM model.  The 
multivariate model’s performance is no better than other 
methods tried earlier by the authors, such as a univariate 
autoregressive moving average model [9] regressing on 
project frequency’s past value. However, these multivariate 
models 
provide 
insight 
regarding 
the 
impact 
of 
environmental uncertainties on future project streams and 
thus could be valuable in long term strategic planning. 
Exploring other non-linear modeling techniques, such as 
neural 
networks 
for 
capturing 
more 
complicated 
relationships between the variables would be the next logical 
step in this research. The model developed in this study is 
limited to FDOT projects. However, new forecasting models 
specific for other databases can be built by following the 
same steps and adopting appropriate alternative sets of 
independent variables. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Shojaei, H. I. Moud, and I. Flood, “Forecasting 
Transportation 
Project 
Frequency 
using 
Multivariate 
Regression with Elastic Net Regularization Forecasting 
Transportation 
Project 
Frequency 
using 
Multivariate 
Regression with Elastic Net Regularization,” in INFOCOMP 
2018, The Eighth International Conference on Advanced 
Communications and Computation, 2018, no. July, pp. 74–79. 
[2] M. Martinsuo, “Project portfolio management in practice and 
in context,” Int. J. Proj. Manag., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 794–803, 
Aug. 2013. 
[3] A. Brown, J. Hinks, and J. Sneddon, “The facilities 
management role in new building procurement,” Facilities, 
vol. 19, no. 3/4, pp. 119–130, 2001. 
[4] World Bank, “Survey of International Construction Projec,” 
1996. 
[5] R. G. Cooper, S. J. Edgett, and E. J. Kleinschmidt, “Portfolio 
management in new products: Lessons from the leaders, Part 
1,” Res. Technol. Manag., vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 16–28, 1997. 
[6] “Project Portfolio Management Defined | Planview.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
156
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
https://www.planview.com/resources/articles/project-
portfolio-management-defined/. [Accessed: 01-Sep-2019]. 
[7] F. J. Fabozzi, H. M. Markowitz, P. N. Kolm, and F. Gupta, 
“Portfolio Selection,” Theory Pract. Invest. Manag. Asset 
Alloc. Valuation, Portf. Constr. Strateg. Second Ed., vol. 7, 
no. 1, pp. 45–78, Mar. 2011. 
[8] L. D. Dye and J. S. Pennypacker, “Project Portfolio 
Management and Managing Multiple Projects-Two Sides of 
the Same Coin?,” in Managing Multiple Projects: Planning, 
Scheduling and Allocating Resources for Competitive 
Advantage, CRC Press, 2002, pp. 1–10. 
[9] A. Shojaei and I. Flood, “Stochastic forecasting of project 
streams for construction project portfolio management,” Vis. 
Eng., vol. 5, no. 1, p. 11, 2017. 
[10] R. R. Trippi and J. K. Lee, Artificial intelligence in finance & 
investing : state-of-the-art technologies for securities selection 
and portfolio management. McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1996. 
[11] A. D. Henriksen and A. J. Traynor, “A practical r&d project-
selection scoring tool,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag., vol. 46, no. 
2, pp. 158–170, May 1999. 
[12] J. A. Araúzo, J. Pajares, and A. Lopez-Paredes, “Simulating 
the dynamic scheduling of project portfolios,” Simul. Model. 
Pract. Theory, vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 1428–1441, Nov. 2010. 
[13] A. F. Carazo, T. Gómez, J. Molina, A. G. Hernández-Díaz, F. 
M. Guerrero, and R. Caballero, “Solving a comprehensive 
model for multiobjective project portfolio selection,” Comput. 
Oper. Res., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 630–639, Apr. 2010. 
[14] F. Costantino, G. Di Gravio, and F. Nonino, “Project selection 
in project portfolio management: An artificial neural network 
model based on critical success factors,” Int. J. Proj. Manag., 
vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 1744–1754, 2015. 
[15] R. Demirer, R. R. Mau, and C. Shenoy, “Bayesian Networks: 
A Decision Tool to Improve Portfolio Risk Analysis.,” J. 
Appl. Financ., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 106–119, 2006. 
[16] A. Shojaei and I. Flood, “Extending the Portfolio and 
Strategic Planning Horizon by Stochastic Forecasting of 
Unknown Future Projects,” in The Seventh International 
Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation, 
INFOCOMP 2017, 2017, no. c, pp. 64–69. 
[17] A. Shojaei and I. Flood, “Stochastic Forecasting of Unknown 
Future Project Streams for Strategic Portfolio Planning,” in 
Computing in Civil Engineering 2017, 2017, pp. 280–288. 
 
157
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

