A Cross-layer Mechanism Based on Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for
Service Continuity of Real-Time Applications
Luis Rojas Cardenas
Universidad Autonoma Metropolitana
Vicentina DF, Mexico
e-mail: lmrc@xanum.uam.mx
Mohammed BOUTABIA
dept. wireless networks and multimedia services
Telecom Sudparis
Evry, France
e-mail: Mohamed.boutabia@it-sudparis.eu
Hossam AFIFI
dept. wireless networks and multimedia services
Telecom Sudparis
Evry, France
e-mail: Hossam.afifi@it-sudparis.eu
Abstract—Most
important
frameworks
supporting
mobile
communications
are
not
capable
of
meeting
real-time
application requirements because of the service degradation
appearing during the handover process. Such degradation is
mainly noticed as an excessive blocking time and a non-
negligible packet loss rate. This is due to slow procedures for
address allocation, too much packets exchanged by signaling
procedures, and the delay required to establish a new end-to-
end delivery path. Although these problems have been widely
analyzed, and a number of solutions have been proposed,
better handover performances are still needed. In this paper,
we propose the introduction of some functionalities into access
point equipments to improve the handover performances.
These functionalities are based on the reduction of both the
address
allocation delay
and the
number
of
exchanged
signaling packets, as well as the parallel execution of certain
procedures. Our approach is implemented over the signaling
mechanism of Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP),
from which extended options are used to convey information
related to each procedure allowing mobile communication to
be maintained.
Keywords-component;
mobility;
cross-layer;
real-time;
DHCP;
I.
INTRODUCTION
All As new wireless technologies are deployed and Mobile
Nodes (MN) such as mobile phones, PDA, Internet tablets
etc.
acquire
more
hardware
capabilities
in
terms
of
processing speed, communication and storage space, it is
expected
that
wireless
communications
will
be
more
heterogeneous
and
commonly
based
on
IP
protocol.
However, to operate in such scenario, mobile nodes must be
equipped with multiple wireless cards such as WIFI,
WIMAX
(Worldwide
Interoperability
for
Microwave
Access), UMTS (Universal Mobile Telecommunications
System), etc. and special communication protocols able to
cope with mobility. These capabilities will allow Mobile
Nodes not only to communicate through different network
technologies, but also to choose the most convenient one in
case of several available networks; this latter characteristic
is known now as ABC (Always Best Connected) capability.
In this context, it seems that Internet Protocol will play an
important role in this world of heterogeneity and mobility in
spite of the fact that it was not designed to handle mobility.
Indeed, Internet protocols are not suitable for supporting
mobile
communications
because
of
its
principles
for
handling addressing and routing. They establish that any
host address must be derived from the network address
where it is physically attached as well as they do not
consider that a host can change its attachment address at the
middle of a session. Under such scheme, when a MN moves
from its original network to a Foreign Network (FN), it will
experience at least the following problems: 1) when it
reaches a new network, any communication becomes
impossible. Given that its address is not valid in the context
of the foreign network, it can not be accepted neither by
foreign nodes nor corresponding routers. Obtaining a new
valid address from the foreign network is then necessary. 2)
The ongoing communication associations are lost due to
address inconsistency i.e. at operating system level each
communicating
system
represents
a
communication
association by means of a 5-tuple {protocol, local-address,
local-process, foreign-address, foreign-process} [13]. If one
of these elements becomes inconsistent, for example when a
mobile node reaches a
foreign network and a new local
address is obtained, ongoing communications are lost.
Nevertheless, informing the corresponding node about the
new
local
address
can
help
to
recover
the
lost
communication. 3) Mobile hosts disappear from the global
network. Normally, hosts are found in the network by
means of the Location Directory (LD). It is a distributed
database containing the host name and its corresponding IP
76
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

address which is known in the Internet world as DNS
(Directory Name System). If one of the elements of this
association changes without informing the LD, nobody in
the network will be able to reach that host. That is what
happens when a MN goes from one network to the other and
MN changes its IP address. To keep in touch with the global
net, MN must inform the LD each time it acquires a new IP
address.
In
order
to
cope
with
IP
limitations
in
mobile
communications,
a
number
of approaches
have
been
proposed. Although they tackle the problem from different
perspectives [3][4][5], they agree on the way iit must be
handled. Indeed, the main approaches relay on a number of
procedures that can be classified on: 1) network discovery
and address allocation, 2) preservation of the ongoing
communications and 3) update of the global location
directory. These three procedures and the problems they
address are analysed in more detail in the following
paragraphs.
First of all, when a node reaches a new network and
discovers it by means of low level mechanisms, an address
allocation phase starts. We consider that the MN starts this
phase by sending an address request message to the FN.
This phase finishes when the corresponding access point
informs the MN about the allocated address by means of an
acknowledge message (see label A in Figure 1.a).
In the second phase, as soon as MN obtains a new address
and in order to maintain the ongoing communications, MN
notifies the correspondent node (CN) about the new
acquired address (Label B). Then, the CN immediately
redirects the data flow to the new address (see Figure 1.b,
label C). These two phases are the most critical ones.
Actually they form what is known as handover process. In
the third phase, the location tracking procedure is achieved
to maintain the reachability of the MN at global network
level. This is a less critical operation and it is achieved by
updating the Location Directory (LD) with the new acquired
address (see Figure 1.b, label D).
a) address allocation
b) location tracking process
Fig. 1. Handover process
In this paper, we propose the introduction of new
functionalities into access point equipments to improve the
handover performances. Specifically, blocking times are
minimized by reducing both the address allocation delay
and
the
number
of
exchanged
signaling
packets.
Additionally,
parallel
execution
of
certain
procedures
contributes to obtain a performance gain.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In
Section
II,
we
speak
about
the
related
work.
The
architecture of our approach is described in Section III and
the corresponding performance analysis is presented in
Section IV. Section V discusses security issues of our
solution. The conclusion and future work are discussed in
Section VI.
II.
RELATED WORK
By tacking into account the classification of procedure
stated above, we analyse the most representative approaches
for handling node mobility, in particular Mobile IP and SIP.
The global performances around the handover process are
especially important for this analysis.
A.
Network Layer Perspective: Mobile IP
The main goal of Mobile IP (MIP) is to avoid upper
layers to be worried about address changing due to node
mobility. The principle is as follows: when the CN sends
packets to the MN, it employs the home address of the MN
so that packets arriving to the home network are intercepted
by the Home Agent (HA) and sent to the Care-of-Address
(CoA) via a tunnel. As this latter is associated to the FA, it
receives the packets and redirects them to the MN. This
mechanism allows a transparent application operation.
Recent standards of IETF propose more sophisticated
mobility schemes like MIPv6 [9] and Fast MIPv6 [10] but
these standards cannot be widely deployed and have to wait
the transition to IPv6.
Address Allocation
The mechanism for CoA acquisition relies on the services
of the new FA, which periodically broadcasts a Router
Advertisement message containing CoA related information.
This mechanism has a drawback: the minimum broadcast
period is one second [3]. A faster mechanism is based on
Router Solicitation message which explicitly requests a
Router
Advertisement.
This
operation
takes
2ts
and
corresponds to the round-trip time between the MN and FA
(see Figure 2).
Preservation of the ongoing communication
When the new CoA is obtained, the MN must inform its
HA about the obtained CoA by sending a REGISTRATION
message. After this registration, the HA can forward the
packets (originally sent by the CN to MN’s home address)
to the FA by tunneling and then to the MN. This scheme
generates what is known as triangle routing, which is
characterized by the introduction of additional end-to-end
delay. To reduce this delay the Route Optimization (RO) [8]
can be used so the CN encapsulates packets directly to the
77
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

current CoA without passing through the HA.
This
procedure is described in Figure 2.
Fig. 2. Handover process in Mobile IP with RO.
The HA sends to the MN a REGISTRATION Reply
message which is intercepted by the new FA (nFA) and then
sent to the old FA (oFA) which sends a Binding Warning
message to the HA. Finally the HA send a Binding update to
the CN which starts sending data directly to the MN.
Smooth Handoff [4] is an additional functionality that
reduces the packet loss generated during the handover by
means of a Binding Update between the nFA and the oFA.
In accordance with [7], during the handover process, the
service disruption time under MIP with RO is:
Tmip_inter = tno + 3th + thc + tmc
(1)
Where tno denotes the delay of a message between the
new FA and the old FA, th is the delay between the MN and
the HA, thc is the delay between the home network and CN,
finally tmc is the time that data takes to arrive from the CN to
MN.
The smooth handoff starts after a delay of :
Tmip_smooth = 2ts + 2th + 2tno
(2)
The Smooth Handoff avoids packets to be lost by
redirecting packets from the old FA to the new FA before a
handoff process is completely achieved. A tunnel created
between these FAs undertakes this task.
Maintaining the global location tracking
There is no need to a global tracking registration in MIP
since the HA is updated with the new CoA and the future
CNs will use the original home address to reach the MN.
B.
Application Layer Perspective: S IP
Handling mobility at transport and network layer requires
considerable changes in the MN kernel. This is the main
motivation for developing upper layers solutions, such as
Session
Initiation
Protocol
(SIP).
SIP
is
capable
of
supporting terminal mobility, session mobility, personal
mobility, and service mobility. Moreover, SIP has been
widely accepted as the signaling protocol in emerging
wireless networks. Therefore, SIP seems to be an attractive
candidate for an application-layer mobility management
protocol
for
heterogeneous
all-IP
wireless
networks.
However,
SIP
entails
application-layer
processing
of
messages, which may introduce considerable delay.
Address Allocation
After a MN discovers a new network by means of low
level procedures, an address allocation phase starts. The
procedure commonly used
in this context is DHCP.
Although this TCP/IP-based protocol was not designed to
operate in mobile contexts, it is widely employed to support
address allocation in access networks. This protocol relies
on four different DHCP messages: DHCP Discover, DHCP
Offer, DHCP Request, and DHCP Acknowledge, which are
all UDP packets. DHCP satisfies most of
non real-time
applications but it appears to be unsuitable when it deals
with real-time ones. The main problem here is related to the
number of packets and the long delay that DHCP takes for
address allocation. This latter is mainly caused by the
address conflict checking mechanism based on ICMP Echo
request and reply. A DHCP server has to send out an ICMP
Echo Request to the address in question before responding
to a Discover message. If nobody responds with an ICMP
Echo Reply within a typical interval of 1 to 3 seconds, the
DHCP server will send the Offer message. As far as the
client is concerned, it performs a similar checking. In order
to improve the performances of DHCP, there are some
proposals to reduce the number of packets, from four to only
two [2]. Others works suggest to remove the address
conflict checking [17]. And finally, there are proposals to
use new protocols for supporting address allocation more
suitable for mobile applications, in particular, Dynamic
Registration and Configuration Protocol (DRCP) [12].
Preservation of the ongoing communication
The procedure allowing MN to preserve its ongoing
communications is known as mid-call procedure. The
principle is the following: when the MN reaches a new
network and a new address has been acquired, the MN sends
a
re-INVITE
request
to
the
CN.
This
operation
is
accomplished without intervention of any intermediate SIP
proxies. This INVITE request contains an updated session
description with the new IP address. The CN starts sending
data to the MN's new location as soon as it gets the re-
INVITE message.
78
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

In accordance with [6], the total handover delay in SIP
must consider: the DHCP and ARP resolution delay, the
updating delay of the LD or Home Registrar (HR), and the
time the INVITE message takes from the MN to the CN and
the time CN data take to reach the new MN location.
Fig. 3. Handover process in SIP
This total time Tsip_inter is given by:
Tsip_inter = 4ts + tarp + 2th + 2tmc.
(3)
Where 4ts corresponds to the four messages exchanged
by DHCP, tarp is the time of address conflict checking, 2th is
the time to update the HR and 2tmc corresponds to the time
the
INVITE message takes, in addition to time for
redirecting data from the CN to the new MN location.
One drawback of this approach is the packet loss rate
during the handover process; which can also be seen as a
period of disruption. While MIP solves this issue by
implementing
a
smooth
handoff,
SIP
lacks
such
a
mechanism. Consequently all the packets transmitted during
2ts + 2th + 2tno will be lost.
Maintaining the global location tracking
The location tracking procedure is achieved by sending an
update message to the home registrar which update the
current location of the user agent allowing the future clients
to reach the MN with the same URI.
III.
THE FAST CROSS-LAYER HANDOFF
In this section, we describe our proposal called Fast Cross-
Layer Handoff (FCLH) [12], which is capable of improving
the performances of mobile communication with respect to
the approach described above [6]. The handoff improvement
is obtained by following these three operations: i) the
reduction
of
the
address
allocation
delay,
ii)
the
minimization of the number of exchanged signaling packets,
and iii) parallel execution of certain procedures.
These operations are accomplished in order to support the
quality of service requirements imposed by voice over IP
(VoIP) applications type. We integrate FCLH scheme to SIP
mobility which is the most convenient mobility protocol for
real-time applications as it was proven in [14], but it can be
integrated to other application level mobility protocols.
A.
Overview
Our approach is based on the idea that the three main
procedures required to support mobile communications (see
section I) can be achieved in parallel and started by only one
message. Parallel processing is possible because it relies on
three
different
entities:
the
Correspondent
Node,
the
Location Directory and the two access points involved in the
handover process. More specifically, CN is involved in the
preservation of the ongoing communication (POC), The LD
supports the maintaining of the global location tracking
(MGLT) and the APs are responsible of the address
allocation (AA) service and the smooth handoff procedure
(SHP).
In
principle,
these
tasks
are
more
or
less
independent, so they can be achieved in parallel. The only
condition for doing so is breaking the classical layered
protocol stack. In fact, this operation is commonly called
cross-layer which opens up the possibility to introduce
parallelism on the different tasks to maintain ongoing
communications while speeding up the global performance
of the handover process. In order to explain this principle,
consider a MN reaching a new network. To obtain a new
address, it exchanges DHCP messages with the visited
network and then informs its home registrar about the new
location using a SIP-register message. In Figure 4.a, we can
see that DHCP and SIP can only operate in a sequential way
because SIP cannot start updating its home registrar without
knowing the new allocated address. This update is possible
only after receiving the DHCP ACK message. In contrast, a
cross-layer approach has less restriction; therefore the MN
achieves two different transactions with only one DHCP
message as shown in Figure 4.b; It not only negotiates a
new address but also informs the HR about the new
location.
a)
b)
Fig 4. Classical vs Cross-layer protocol transactions.
Two advantages can be obtained from this approach: the
number of exchanged messages is minimized and the
handover delay is reduced. But this approach is possible at
the expense of implementing some SIP functionalities in the
different entities participating in the handoff process. In
Figure 4.b, a SIP register message is built by MN and
79
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

included in discovery message. The nAP completes the
received SIP message with the missing information which is
the new acquired address. At this level, some questions
must
be
asked:
Does
DHCP
allow to
convey
such
information? Is the DHCP payload capacity enough to carry
messages like SIP-messages? The answers are: First, DHCP
has the option fields which have been created to convey
vendor-independent options between client and server, so
we can use these fields to convey SIP-messages. Second, the
payload capacity of a DHCP message depends on the
Maximum Transfer Unit (MTU) of the visited network. For
WiFi networks, the MTU is 1492 bytes. So, there is no
problem with SIP messages, for example, a re-INVITE
message is more or less 140 byte long [6]. Following the
principle stated above, Figure 5 proposes the FCLH
mechanism and
the
interaction
between
the
different
entities.
Fig. 5. A single message starts in parallel all the procedures required for
handling mobility.
It should be noted that the cross-layer capacity is mainly
supported by some functionalities installed on access points.
The procedure is achieved as follows. Access points receive
classical Discovery DHCP messages, which contain upper
level information. The DHCP server installed on access
points process and ask under the standard protocol but upper
layer information contained in DHCP extended options is
extracted and completed with the MN's new allocated
address. Upper layer information corresponds to MGLT,
SHP and POC procedures.
Fig 6, layered protocol stack.
A special
procedure
recovers
this
information
and
generates at least three data packets, which are sent to the
corresponding network entities (see Figure 5 and Figure 6).
As far as correspondent node and location directory are
concerned, their protocol stack is not modified. Figure 6
represents the layered protocol stack of access point as well
as the interaction with the MN and the other elements.
It should be noted that the cross-layer operation is mainly
supported by MN and access points. Indeed, CN and LD do
not require additional components or modifications to
operate with FCLH. Moreover, a MN equipped with our
approach can operate on networks that are not equipped
with FCLH. In this case, MN can distinguish the absence of
the FCLH infrastructure in the new visited network by
means of the options included in DHCP ACK packets. In a
similar way, a network equipped with FCLH can operate
with any standard DHCP client.
Now, as in our approach a handover process is started by
sending only one packet from MN to the discovered access
point, this packet must to convey information corresponding
to the POC, the MGLT and the SHP processes. The POC
process is started by a SIP re-INVITE message, whereas the
MGLT process requires a SIP register message. As far as
SHP process is concerned, it is not related to SIP. It is an
optimization mechanism similar to that proposed in low
latency handoffs in MIPv4
[15]. It supports smooth
handover by creating a tunnel between old and new access
routers. This tunnel is used to convey the packets that were
intended for MN when it was unreachable during the
physical handover. The information that should be known to
previous access router to perform an SHP is the new access
router address so that the tunnel can be initiated. As far as
the AA process is concerned, it is essentially supported by a
DHCP procedure. The protocol stack of a MN with FCLH
capacities is represented in Figure 7.
Fig 7. Protocol Stack at Mobile Node.
SHP and SIP modules insert the necessary information
allowing
the
handover
process
to
be
started.
This
information is inserted in the DHCP-DISCOVER message
by means of the cross-layer. All the information related to
MGLT, POC and SHP processes are sent in a single packet.
However, in the downlink, responses related to those
procedures are processed normally and sent directly to the
MN.
Figure 8 represents the protocol stack of the access point.
This stack is responsible for dispatching the information
contained in the DHCP-DISCOVER message, and then it
80
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

rebuilds each message by filling the destination address with
the new allocated IP address. Finally, the nAP sends all the
messages to the appropriate correspondent modules at once.
Fig 8. Protocol stack at Access Point.
Address allocation
After MN discovers a new network by means of low level
procedures, an address allocation phase starts. In the context
of FCLH, the protocol used is DHCP as proposed in [2].
This document proposes to reduce, from four to two, the
number of messages required to allocate an IP address by
DHCP server. To eliminate duplicate address detection
(DAD) delay we implement a scheme of address reservation
in advance. Under this scheme, a process running in the
access point reserves a number of addresses and keeps them
alive by running the DAD in the background. Moreover, our
proposal is a full compatible approach: a MN with our
solution can operate in classical DHCP context. A node can
distinguish between a FCLH context and a classical context
by the options contained in the DHCP ACK. If the MN
realizes that DHCP ACK does not include the options it
waits for, then it starts a classical procedure. On the other
hand, when a classical DHCP server receives DHCP
messages with extended options, it just drops the options it
does not know and continues a classical procedure. Figure 9
shows the AA procedure in FLCH.
Fig. 9. Address allocation with DHCP-FCLH.
Under this address allocation scheme, an address can be
obtained from the new access point (nAP) in only 2ts, where
ts is the delay of the channel connecting the MN and the
access point.
Preservation of the ongoing communication
At the same time, the DHCP ACK message is sent to the
MN, SIP re-invite message is sent to the CN. Indeed, the
access point builds a SIP message by using the information
contained in the extended option of the DHCP Discover
message. To send this message, the AP acts as a router and
emulates the SIP re-INVITE message as if it was sent by the
MN. This is possible because the access point decides which
address will be allocated to the MN, from the list of
reserved addresses. Once the SIP re-INVITE message has
been accepted by the CN, it finally sends an OK response to
the MN. The different events of the handover process are
described in Figure 10. It should be noted that this approach
is cross-layer because in this case, a link layer message
generates a SIP re-INVITE message without respecting the
classical sequence of events neither the hierarchy of the
protocol layers.
Fig. 10. Preservation of the ongoing communication: the handover process.
The service disruption time during the handover process is
as follows:
Tfclh_inter = ts + (tmc – ts) + tmc
Tfclh_inter = 2tmc
(5)
The Smooth handoff in FCLH is achieved by redirecting the
data packets received by oAP to the nAP before the CN
knows that MN has changed its network attachment point.
The nAP requests this service to oAP by means of a special
message which contains both the old and the new address of
the MN. In contrast to MIP, our approach does not require
the establishment of a tunnel and the encapsulation of the
original data flow. This method improves the procedure
performance and simplifies the implementation.
Fig. 11. Smooth handoff in FCLH.
More specifically, the access point has to change only the IP
header
of
the
packets,
recalculate
the
CRC
(Cyclic
Redundancy Check) and finally redirect the data flow to the
new MN address (Figure 11). The time required to obtain
the smooth handoff is calculated as follows:
Tfclh_smooth = ts + tno + (tno + ts)
Tfclh_ smooth = 2ts + 2tno
(6)
Maintaining the global location tracking
Once again, the SIP Register message is generated by the
access point after the reception of the message DCHP
81
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

Discover. The Information contained in this message as well
as the address chosen by the access point are used to
generate a SIP Register message. The MGLT process is
described in Figure 12.
Fig. 12. Maintaining the global location tracking.
The delay required to update the LD, or HR in the context of
SIP, is only th.
IV.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, our discussion is based on the above
analysis.
More
precisely,
this
work
compares
the
performances of MIP and SIP for an application of voice
over IP (VoIP). So, the test conditions used here are the
same as those considered in [6]. We assume ts = 10 ms
which corresponds to a relative low bandwidth for the
wireless channel. For the wired network connecting wireless
access points, we consider a more important bandwidth,
then a smaller delay tno = 5 ms. On the other hand, we
suppose that processing time of the different entities is
negligible.
Fig 13. Disruption time vs. delay between MN and CN.
We take three different configurations. In the first one,
the MN is connected to the network via a wireless channel
and
the
distance
of
the
CN
varies.
In
the
second
configuration, the CN and the MN are close but the distance
from the MN's home network varies. Finally, in the last
configuration the delay of the wireless channel varies.
In
Figure 13, we can see that the disruption time increases as
the delay tmc between the MN and CN increases. In Figure
14, th increases, tmc = 25 ms, and the wireless link delay is
equal to 10 ms. Observe that the disruption time associated
to SIP becomes smaller than MIP as the delay between MN
and its home network increases. MIP disruption time
increases because the handover delay depends on the
registration within the HR. As far as our approach is
concerned, the handover process depends on the delay
between the CN and the MN only. That explains why the
disruption time is constant.
Fig 14. Disruption time vs delay between the MN and its home network.
Fig. 15. Disruption time vs. wireless link delay.
Fig. 16. Smooth handoff area for MIP.
Finally, the last scenario demonstrates the impact of the
wireless delay on disruption time (see Figure 15). We can
see that the impact of this parameter is limited on the total
handoff delay in the case of FLCH. This result is due to
minimization of signaling packet exchange over the wireless
channel during the hand over.
As far as smooth handoff is concerned, MIP takes advantage
over SIP which lacks this mechanism. By taking into
account tmip_smooth=2ts+2th+2tno, the MN in MIP
starts
receiving data packets before the handover is accomplished.
This
period
can
be
calculated
as
being
Tmip_inter–
Tmip_smooth=Tmip_inte –54 ms (see Figure 16). In our approach
Tfclh_handoff = 2ts + 2tno, therefore the MN receives forwarded
82
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

packets for a period of time equal to Tfclh_inter -Tfclh_handoff =
Tfclh_inter – 30 ms (see Figure 17).
Fig. 17. Smooth handoff area for FCLH.
The smooth handoff period starts earlier in our approach
than in MIP, that is to say, we can recover packets earlier
and for more time before the handover is accomplished. On
the one hand, the smooth handoff should start as soon as
possible in order to avoid damaging the user perception. On
the other hand, the faster the smooth handoff occurs the
smaller the buffer size allocated to packet collection before
redirection in the AP is.
V.
SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
Since our scheme rely on DHCP, it is mandatory to
secure the access to DHCP service by authenticating the
clients
and
encrypting
the
payload
witch
contains
parameters related to the current session. Malicious client
can generate a lot of address requests to prevent the
legitimate users from acquiring their IP addresses. The
second attack is when a malicious DHCP server in the
network answers to client requests and provides bogus
configuration
that
prevent
them
from
using
network
resources normally. As we talk about mobility in wireless
networks, the first thing that should be carefully secured is
the physical medium with adequate authentication and
encryption protocols so that only authorized client can
access
physically
the
network.
To
overcome
DHCP
weakness, IETF proposed an authentication option [11] for
DHCP messages. This option allows only authorized client
to request for address configuration and allows for the
clients to authenticate the server identity. Moreover, the
threat can still come from classical DHCP users since the
critical point is maintaining a pool of addresses ready for
use by mobile hosts. We propose to reduce the lease for
these addresses compared to addresses intended for non
mobile nodes. We also have to encrypt the DHCP option
containing information related to the different operations to
prevent man-in-the-middle attacks.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed the introduction, into access
point equipments, of some functionalities to improve the
handover performances. These functionalities are based on
the reduction of the address allocation delay, the number of
exchanged signaling packets as well as the parallel execution
of certain procedures. Our approach is implemented over the
signaling mechanism of DHCP in such a way that the
proposed functionalities can be used by means of extended
options. The obtained results indicate that our approach can
reduce the handover delay with respect to most popular and
already improved approaches such as MIP with Route
Optimization as well as SIP. Moreover, our proposal does
not require the introduction of additional entities in the
network neither modifications in the current protocol stack,
and in contrary to certain approaches, which do not consider
the address allocation delay in the calculation of their results,
we consider this problem and solve it. Finally, we presented
the main attacks that threaten our system, and proposed some
methods to make it more secure. Future research will be
orientated to the simulation of this approach and its study in
more heterogeneous context.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Rojas-Cardenas, M. Boutabia, and H. Afifi “an infrastructure-
based approach for fast and seamless handover”, 3rd International
Conference in Digital Telecommunications ICDT 2008, Bucharest,
29 June -6 July 2008.
[2]
Park, S., Kim, P., and Volz, B., "Rapid Commit Option for the
Dynamic
Host
Configuration
Protocol
version
4
(DHCPv4),"
RFC4039, IETF, March 2005.
[3]
M. Handley, H. Schulzrinne, E. Schooler, and J. Rosenberg. SIP:
Session Initiation Protocol. rfc 2543, IETF, March 1999.
[4]
C. Perkins, "IP Mobility Support", RFC 2002, Internet Engineering
Task Force, October 1996
[5]
A. C. Snoeren and H. Balakrishnan, "An End-to-End Approach to
Host Mobility", 6th IEEE/ACM Mobicon 2000. Boston, August 2000.
[6]
N. Banerjee, W. Wu, and S. K. Das,"Mobility Support in Wireless
Internet", IEEE Wireless Communications, October 2003.
[7]
T. T. Kwon, M. Gerla, S. Das, S. Das, "Mobility Management for
VoIP Service: Mobile IP vs. SIP", IEEE Wireless Communications,
October 2002.
[8]
Nen-Chung Wang and Yi-Jung Wu, “A Route Optimization Scheme
for Mobile IP with IP Header Extension”, IWCMC'06, Canada, July
3-6, 2006.
[9]
D. Johnson, C. Perkins, and J. Arkko, ”Mobility Support in IPv6”.
RFC 3775, IETF, June 2004.
[10] R. Koodli, “Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6”, RFC 5268, IETF, June
2008
[11] R. Droms, W. Arbaugh, “Authentication for DHCP Messages”, RFC
3118, IETF, June 2001.
[12] A. McAuley et al., "Dynamic Registration and Configuration Protocol
(DRCP) for Mobile Hosts," Internet draft, draft-itsumo-drcp-01.txt,
July 2000, work in progress.
[13] W. Stevens. UNIX Network programming. Prentice Hall
[14] S.
Mohanty,
F.
Akyildiz
“Performance
Analysis
of
Handoff
Techniques Based on Mobile IP, TCP Migrate, and SIP”, IEEE
Transactions on Mobile Computing, VOL.6, NO.7, July 2007.
[15] K. El Malki “Low-latency Handoffs in Mobile IPv4”, RFC 4881,
IETF, June 2007.
83
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/

