153
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Numerical Investigation of the Attenuation of Shock Waves
by Simulating a Second, Transient Medium to Protect Vehicles Against Blasts
Burghard Hillig, Arash Ramezani, Hendrik Rothe
Chair of Measurement and Information Technology
University of the Federal Armed Forces
Hamburg, Germany
Email: burghard.hillig@hsu-hh.de, ramezani@hsu-hh.de, rothe@hsu-hh.de
Abstract—This paper describes the numerical investigations of
a directed blast of 12.5 kg Pentaerithrytoltetranitrate and a
2.6 kg Trinitrotoluene heavy mortar grenade. The propagation
of the resulting shock wave in the direction of a vehicle model is
investigated. Various changes of the properties of the surrounding
air have been made to produce a second, transient medium.
The results are intended to answer the question as to whether
and to what extent the rapid heating of ambient air offers the
possibility to attenuate the amplitude of an approaching shock
wave. A developed test set-up was used to simulate and record the
pressure proﬁles by simulated pressure gauges. To get an optimal
conﬁguration, a parameter study of the properties of the second
medium has been performed. As a result, as well in the case of
12.5 kg explosive ordnance as with the heavy mortar grenade, a
reduction of the peak overpressure compared to the undisturbed
propagation of the shock wave could be determined by about
35 % when heated rapidly to 3000 K.
Keywords–shock wave; attenuation; blast; vehicle protection;
ANSYS AUTODYN.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In this paper, the theoretical feasibility of an attenuation
method for shock waves is further investigated by using
numerical simulation software. The ﬁrst work in this area was
done by fundamental considerations, creation and simulation
of a basic problem set-up [1]. Especially, the idea of forming an
attenuation space out of air to protect vehicles was evaluated.
This idea is based on a patent [2]. An effect of this patent was
a discussion and the preceding simulation about the possibility
to create a weakening mechanism against blasts like some
sort of attenuation shield. Such a shield would be an effective
safeguard against the threats that the armed forces are facing
in today’s operations.
Today’s military operations differ in earlier times particu-
larly in the fact that the stabilization of countries and peace-
keeping have taken a much larger share. These operations vary
in intensity, duration, environment, risk and involvement with
the civilian population [3] [4]. The aim of these missions is to
stabilize a failed or newly formed state. Another possibility is
the reconstruction of a state after war. For that, it is necessary
to establish a peaceful and stable environment for the citizen
as well as for all executive elements. In order to fulﬁll these
missions, not only military armed forces provide security but
also civilian security forces, including police, personal security
and private security personnel.
Besides these stabilizing operations abroad, the number of
deployments taking place within stable countries and normal
peaceful conditions has increased in recent years. This de-
velopment was triggered by an increase of religiously and
politically motivated terrorist attacks and disruptive actions.
The aim of these actions is to intimidate the population, civil
aid organizations, regular army and security forces through
terror. Terrorists of this kind are using explosives by means of
improvised explosive devices (IEDs) to achieve their goals.
This tactic has been used in many different countries and
from numerous terrorist and criminal organizations [5]. Such
a terrorist threat or incident can occur at any time of day
with little or no warning and may result in casualties and
heavy damage. Furthermore, terrorists can also use high-angle
weapons with explosive ammunition, such as mortars, in order
to conceal and ﬂexibly carry out attacks on security forces.
This development results in an increased need for protection
against explosive weapons for all armed and security forces.
For military forces, the protection of existing armor and
protective systems is already at a high level. Nevertheless,
this protection is primarily designed for direct ﬁre, splitter and
shrapnel. Shrapnel are metal fragments which are ﬂung away
by the explosion of an explosive charge. But these damage
effects represent only a part of the entire damage and can be
handled by physical barriers such as armors.
Another damage effect is caused by the shock wave of
the explosion. A shock wave is a very fast moving, strong
pressure wave which is created in air by a rapid release of
energy [6]. Its state variables pressure, temperature and density
change almost instantaneously. The shock wave passes through
surrounding air with a high velocity and with practically no
resistance. If the shock wave has contact with other media
during its propagation, it can be traversed by the shock wave.
Physical barriers, which protect against splitter, offer little or
no protection against shock waves. That is because the abrupt
pressure change of the shock wave can overcome the barrier.
In order to protect people, vehicles and structures from the
destructive forces of shock waves, the peak overpressure and

154
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the rapid pressure increase of the shock wave must be reduced.
Such a reduced pressure could make a major contribution to the
protection of structures, vehicles and personnel of the armed
forces and security forces.
In this paper, the theoretical feasibility of an attenuation
method for shock waves is tested by using the numerical
simulation software ANSYS AUTODYN (Canonsburg, USA).
Especially the idea of forming an attenuation space to protect
vehicles is evaluated.
After this introduction, Section II of this paper presents
an overview about general properties of shock waves and
methods of shock wave attenuation, followed by Section III
about numerical simulation, spatial discretization and material
models. Section IV describes the basic and advanced problem
set-up for the simulation. The results of this problem set-up
with respect to any attenuation will be discussed in Section V.
This paper ends with a conclusion section.
A. Background and Methods
This section describes the general, theoretical properties of
shock waves and is intended to provide an overview of existing
ways to attenuate shock waves. In addition, the idea of an
attenuation method is explained, which is examined in this
paper for feasibility.
1) General Shock Wave Properties: When an explosion is
initiated in a gas, a very rapid exothermic chemical reaction
occurs. As the reaction proceeds, a part of the energy of the
explosive material is released very fast. As source of energy
of this reaction, a multitude of materials can be used in a
wide range of aggregate states. Some well-known examples
of solid explosive materials are Trinitrotoluene (TNT) and
Pentaerithrytoltetranitrate (PETN). But also the stored energy
within a compressed, cold or hot gas can be such an energy
source.
The explosive products initially expand at very high veloc-
ities and reach equilibrium with the surrounding air [7]. The
properties of air as a compressible gas result in a shock wave
that propagates in time. Such a wave differs from a sound
wave where the displacements of the gas molecules are very
small. Instead, the displacements of a shock wave have a ﬁnite
value. The result is a non-linear wave in which the sound
speed is related to the amplitude. The disturbances caused
by the energy release travel faster than the surrounding ﬂuid
can react due to its speciﬁc sound speed. As a consequence,
there is a instantaneous change of the properties of the ﬂuid.
Some examples of these properties are density, pressure and
temperature. In that way, a wave front is created which consists
of strongly compressed air and moves radially away from the
source at supersonic velocity.
If the shock wave is caused by a detonation of an explosive
charge, it is called a blast wave. This name arises from the
strong wind that accompanies the wave and is felt by a
stationary observer as the wave passes. In addition, the term
shock wave is generally used to describe a steep pressure
gradient in which the wave pattern is not characterized in detail
[8].
The behavior of a shock wave can be described by a time-
dependent pressure proﬁle. After a certain time ta the shock
wave reaches a point in space, the pressure will increase
rapidly from ambient air pressure P0. The increase in pressure
reaches a maximum peak pressure value Ppop and decreases
after that. Figure 1 shows the described time-dependent pres-
sure proﬁle of an ideal shock wave as red curve. Due to
the proceeding expansion of the shock wave, the wave will
geometrically occupy an increasingly larger space. Because the
crossed air is heated by the shock wave, a part of its energy will
be dissipated as heat. That is why, the positive pressure drops
exponentially. This is referred as positive phase which ends
after the duration td. As the shock wave continues to expand,
the pressure at a point in space is reduced to values below
P0. These values asymptotically approaches the atmospheric
pressure P0 over time and enter into a state of equilibrium
with the surrounding air. This is referred as negative phase.
Figure 1. Characteristic time-dependent pressure proﬁle of an ideal shock
wave as a red curve. After the explosion, the wave propagates in space and
reaches a point after the ”time of arrival” ta.
The easiest way to mathematically describe the pressure
proﬁle of a shock wave in air is the Friedlander equation [9]:
P(t) = P0 + Ppop ·

1 − t
td

· e− t
td
(1)
In this equation, P0 is the atmospheric pressure,t the time and
td the duration of the positive phase. In this case, the positive
peak overpressure Ppop is the value of pressure at the pressure
peak subtracted by the atmospheric pressure. The Friedlander
equation is valid only from the time of arrival ta.
2) An Overview of Shock Wave Attenuation: The idea of
shock wave attenuation to protect stationary or moving objects
is not new. For structures such as bunkers or tunnel systems,
shock waves can be weakened by being forced into structural
channels. These channels cause multiple abrupt changes of the
propagation direction of the shock wave. Also, reﬂections of

155
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the wave on rough walls contribute to the attenuation by the
disturbance of the unimpeded propagation [10]. If the object is
endangered by shock waves on its exterior side, other methods
must be used to protect the object.
Therefore, there is the possibility to attenuate the shock
wave by bringing in a material between shock wave and object.
This material may have the property of absorbing energy from
the shock wave. An example of a realization of such a absorber
is a porous material, which covers the entire surface of an
object to be protected [11] [12]. A very similar protection
concept can be achieved by a number of cells containing
the attenuating material and placed on the surface [13]. Also,
heavy but transportable attenuation shields are a feasible way
to attenuate the propagation of the shock wave and thus protect
persons [14].
A disadvantage of all of this methods is that the shock
wave attenuating material has to be permanently applied on
a structure, surface or person or it must at least be close to the
object.
3) Suggested Method of Shock Wave Attenuation: The cre-
ation of a second, transient medium offers a dynamical method
for shock wave attenuation. This second medium shall be
created in a region between the site of explosion and the asset
to be protected. It can be made by placing small solid particles
or ﬁne liquid droplets in a gas phase [15]. The density of
air in this volume is lower but the overall density is higher.
Compared to air the solid particles have a higher density and
the more particles are in a volume the higher its density. A
medium created in this way has a higher density than the
surrounding air. It can be observed that a crossing shock wave
is attenuated through this dust-gas-suspension [16].
Such an attenuation can also be achieved if the second
medium is not a suspension. This can be accomplished through
rapid heating of a volume of air between the shock wave
and the object [2]. By that, the heated air creates a medium,
which differs in density, temperature or composition from the
surrounding air. Such a medium should reduce the energy
density of the crossing shock wave by reﬂecting a part of
the shock wave on the interface between the media. Another
part of the shock wave could be scattered away from its
original propagation direction. In addition, the wave front can
be inﬂuenced to diverge within the second medium and gets
partly absorbed. In this way, the entire shock wave should be
weakened.
To accomplish the attenuation of an approaching blast wave
in reality, it is necessary to have a system which offers the
capability to detect an explosive event, determine its direction
and propagation velocity. Subsequently, the system has to
create a second, transient medium to protect an asset. This
second medium has to be placed between shock wave and the
object. Furthermore, the medium should be formed by rapidly
heating a zone of the surrounding, ambient air.
From a technical point of view, such a system should include
a sensor for detecting the source of the shock wave, a computer
system for processing the detected signal, and a triggering
countermeasure communicating with the detection system. In
Figure 2, a sketch of this system is shown based on the
previously cited patent. The asset to be protected can be a
military or a civil safety vehicle. The described countermeasure
has the task to create a second medium by heating the surround
air, which depends on the position relative to the asset to
be protected, the spatial expansion and the composition. The
heating of this intermediate region can be realized through
an electromagnetic arc. Through this electrical arc, an electric
current can ﬂow through air by using a conductive path
which is made by the dielectric collapse of the ionized air.
Other possible ways to archive this heating are by focused
microwaves or laser beams.
Figure 2. Sketch of a vehicle and an explosive event. The vehicle protects
itself by activating a countermeasure which creates an second, transient
medium by heating the ambient air between the explosion and the vehicle.
Adapted from [2].
The surround air can also be heated without an electric arc
by using multiple conductive strips or threads. Starting from
an energy source, a very strong electric current is sent into the
conductive material, so that it evaporates and strongly heats
the air.
In principle, the presented method for attenuating shock
waves can be applied to all types of vehicles, ﬁxed structures,
airplanes and also ships. However, for the subsequent inves-
tigations, the technical realization of the attenuation space is
not a priority. Instead, numerical simulations with the software
ANSYS AUTODYN are used to investigate the theoretical
feasibility and veriﬁability of a blast wave attenuation by using
the described effect of a rapidly, heated region of air.
II.
NUMERICAL SIMULATION
This section explains the basic principles of numerical
simulation and describes the material models used in this work.
A. Spatial Discretization
When it comes to solving problems related to the release
of huge amounts of energy in very short time then different

156
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
solutions are possible. A good possibility to describe such
processes offer analytical solutions. Unfortunately, their ap-
plicability is limited to problems with simple geometries and
few boundary and initial conditions. Numerical simulations,
on the other hand, offer a solution to common problems and
deal with difﬁculties related to geometry [17].
The basic physical model of a numerical simulation can be
attributed to physical conservation laws, the equation of state
and the constitutive model. Partial differential equations for en-
ergy, momentum and mass constitute the physical conservation
laws. Furthermore, the equation of state connects the internal
energy respectively temperature and density of a material with
its pressure. As a result, changes in the density and irreversible
thermodynamic processes such as shock-like heating can be
considered. In addition, the constitutive model contains the
effects of the material to be simulated and describes the effect
of change in shape and material strength properties.
Together, these equations build a set of coupled, time- and
space-dependent, highly non-linear partial differential equa-
tions. These governing partial differential equations must be
solved in both time and space domain. The solution can be
achieved via computer simulations with an explicit method, in
which the solution is expressed at a given time as a function
of the system variables and parameters, without stiffness and
mass matrix requirements. The computation time for every
time step is low, but may require numerous time steps for
a complete solution. The solution for the space domain can be
achieved by using different spatial discretization methods, like
Lagrange [18], Euler [19], Arbitrary Lagrange-Euler [20] or a
mesh free method [21]. Each of this methods has its unique
advantages but also limitations. So, normally there is no single
technique, which handles every part of the problem correctly
[22].
In the presented work, two of these methods are used for
spatial discretization: the Lagrange and Euler method. The
Lagrange method is used to model objects. In return, the multi-
material Euler solver is used to model air and the explosive.
1) Lagrange: The Lagrange method divides an object into
a spatial grid, which is bound rigidly to the object and moves
with it. The material component within an element does not
change. If forces are acting on a node of an element, the node
is displaced and passes the forces to its neighboring nodes.
The behavior of this conﬁguration can be imagined similar to a
spring-mass system. The described effect causes a deformation
of the mesh. Boundary and initial conditions can be applied
easily, so that the nodes of the boundary elements of an object
stay unchanged. Also, very clear material boundaries exist in
the Lagrange method. For the space outside the object, there is
no extra mesh needed and mass conservation is automatically
satisﬁed.
An example of this process is shown in Figure 3. A target
and a bullet like object are modeled with a blue and a
green material. The bullet (blue) has an initial velocity in the
direction of the target. The left side shows the situation before
the impact of the bullet. During the impact process the target
(green) gets deformed and the deformation of the target is
calculated as a result of the deformation of the Lagrange mesh
of both objects at each time step.
Figure 3. Lagrange method example: A bullet (green) and a target (blue),
both with a Lagrange mesh. The left side shows the situation before and the
right side after the impact of the bullet on the target. Adapted from [23].
In general, the Lagrange method is best suited for complex
geometries like structures, projectiles and other solid bodies.
A disadvantage of the Lagrange method is that strong mesh
deformations may occur at high loads. Such a distorted mesh
element can negatively inﬂuence the time-dependent solution
because the time step is proportional to the size of the smallest
element within the Lagrange mesh.
2) Euler: The Euler method differs in this way that the
coordinates of the nodes are ﬁxed and they ﬁll the entire
space. The material ﬂows time-dependent through the mesh
and changes the properties of the elements, while the spatial
coordinates and nodes stay unchanged. That is the reason why
no mesh distortion can occur at the Euler method. In contrast
to the Lagrange method, the boundary nodes do not necessarily
coincide with the material boundary conditions. This can result
in difﬁculties in the application of boundary and interface
conditions.
Figure 4 shows a bullet and a target modeled in the Euler
frame. In contrast to the Lagrange frame, the whole simulation
space consists out of a mesh. Part of this is the white space
on both sides of Figure 4. Other parts of the simulation space
are ﬁlled with material matching the objects they are meant
to represent. After the impact, the material is spread over the
mesh. The result shows a situation which ﬁts Figure 3.
In general, the Euler method is used to represent ﬂuids and

157
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 4. Euler method example: A bullet (green), a target (blue) and a
(white) simulation space are modeled with an Euler mesh. The left side
shows the situation before and the right side after the impact of the bullet on
the target. Adapted from [23].
gases, especially for modeling the propagation of a blast wave
as result of an explosion. If a pure simulation of solids is
needed, the Euler method has the disadvantageous effect, that
the stress tensor and the history of the material has to be
transported through the mesh. In this case, Euler needs more
computation performance and smaller elements to model the
appearing blast wave correctly.
B. Material Models
1) Explosive: PETN and TNT serve as explosive ordnance
through which the blast wave is generated at the beginning of
the simulations. As equation of state, the Jones-Wilkins-Lee
(JWL) equation is used. It describes the blast wave pressure
as a function of the relative volume η = ρ0/ρ and the internal
energy E [24]:
P = A

1 − ω · η
R1

·e
R1
η +B

1 − ω · η
R2

·e
R2
η +ω·ρ·E (2)
In this equation, A, B, R1, R2 and ω are material constants,
which were determined in dynamic experiments.
Four different material models are deﬁned for PETN in
AUTODYN. These four models differ only in their densities
ρ0.88 = 0.88 g/cm3, ρ1.26 = 1.26 g/cm3, ρ1.50 = 1.50 g/cm3
and ρ1.77 = 1.77 g/cm3. Simulations of explosives with these
densities lead to nearly identical pressure proﬁles [25]. That is
why the PETN material model of ρ1.77 has been used in the
ﬁrst part of this work.
In the second part, TNT is used for simulation. Its behavior
can be modeled with the same equation of state as for
PETN. The JWL-equation will then have TNT speciﬁc material
constants and the density of TNT ρTNT = 1.63 g/cm3 is used
for correct calculations [24].
2) Ideal Gas: Air is a gas mixture mainly consisting of
diatomic nitrogen and oxygen. In addition, a multitude of
mono- or poly-atomic trace gases are contained in air. Fur-
thermore, the ideal gas equation is a suitable equation of state
for modeling air in numerical simulations:
P = ρ · Rs · T
(3)
In this equation, P is the pressure, ρ the density of the gas, Rs
a speciﬁc gas constant and T the temperature. An alternative
but equivalent formulation of the previous equation is used in
ANSYS AUTODYN for its internal calculations [24]:
P = (γ − 1) · ρ
ρ0
· E
(4)
In this alternative equation, γ is the ratio of the speciﬁc heat
capacities at constant pressure cP(T) and volume cV(T). This
ratio has the value γ = 1.4 under the conditions of ambient
temperature at Tref = 288 K and atmospheric pressure of
Patm = 101.3 kPa. Based on these values, the reference
density is ρ0 = 1.225 kg/m3 and the internal energy has the
value E = 253.4 kJ/m3.
A complete set of parameter-based data for a large interval
of temperature values can be found in measurement-based
tables [26] [27]. The corresponding values for γ can be
extracted from this data. With these values, the internal energy
E of a gas at a certain temperature T can be calculated by
following equation:
E =
Z T
Tref
cV(T) · dT
(5)
Table I is made up of the empirical and calculated data for
a temperature range of 288 K to 3000 K. The density was
calculated as a function of the temperature according to (3) at
constant atmospheric pressure Patm.
Since air is a gaseous material, it does not suffer shear
stresses or negative pressures. That is the reason why no
strength or failure model is necessary for the numerical simu-
lation of air.
It should be noted that a heating process of air based on (3)
is realized under the conditions, that either volume or pressure
stay constant. A quick heating with constant volume will result
in a very strong change of pressure. On the other hand, an
expansion of the volume, which equals a decrease in density,
leads to rapid heating with constant, ambient pressure.
3) Structural Material: Structured parts will be simulated
by using the Lagrange method and the material steel-1006.
The further material properties of steel are irrelevant, because

158
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I. VALUES FOR DENSITY, INTERNAL ENERGY, HEAT CAPACITY
AT CONSTANT VALUME AND PRESSURE OF AIR AT VARIOUS
TEMPERATURES.
Temperature
Density
Internal Energy
CV
CP
[K]
[g/cm3]
[J/kg]
[kJ/kg K]
[kJ/kg K]
288
0.001225
2.068E+05
0.7173
1.0042
300
0.001177
2.143E+05
0.7177
1.0050
400
0.000882
2.865E+05
0.7262
1.0130
500
0.000706
3.600E+05
0.7423
1.0290
700
0.000504
5.127E+05
0.7876
1.0750
1000
0.000353
7.597E+05
0.8538
1.1410
1200
0.000294
9.341E+05
0.8873
1.1740
1500
0.000235
1.206E+06
0.9239
1.2110
1700
0.000208
1.393E+06
0.9419
1.2290
2000
0.000176
1.679E+06
0.9630
1.2500
2200
0.000160
1.872E+06
0.9731
1.2600
2500
0.000141
2.165E+06
0.9866
1.2740
2700
0.000131
2.364E+06
0.9942
1.2810
3000
0.000118
2.663E+06
1.0040
1.2910
it is only used to ﬁll the object as a rigid body. An interaction
between blast wave and object does not take place.
III.
PROBLEM SET-UP
The following subsections describe the created problem set-
up for the numerical simulation. Each element of the simu-
lation space and all parts of the blast process are explained.
The goal of this section is to get an understanding of how
reality can be modeled in numerical simulations and what
simpliﬁcations have been done to achieve that.
A. Basic Set-Up
1) Undisturbed Propagation: In order to measure the effects
of an attenuation space for blast waves, a simulation set-up was
developed, which ensures uniform and comparable conditions
between individual simulations. This set-up is designed in such
a way that the undisturbed propagation of the blast wave and
its positive peak overpressure Ppop can be measured at various
points in the simulated space. Subsequently, the individual
parameters of the simulation are to be varied in order to be
able to compare the effects on the pressure proﬁle with the
undisturbed case. Parameters to be changed are the thickness
of the attenuation space, its temperature, density, pressure,
position and shape. Other components of the simulation, such
as the type of explosive and the type of space to be viewed,
remain unchanged.
The approximate spatial conﬁguration of the simulation
is based on a certiﬁcation standard for non-destructive re-
quirements on special-safety vehicles. In order to validate
the attenuation space, it is important to check the change of
pressure on the vehicle by gauges. In this ﬁrst view, the direct
impact of the blast wave on the vehicle is negligible. That is
the reason why the vehicle can be simulated as a rigid body
like a dummy. This dummy vehicle has the shape of a sport
utility vehicle (SUV), which is a good example for a security
vehicle and is similar to military off-road vehicles.
The space, in which the blast wave should propagate, will
be modeled with the Euler method. The Euler Multi-Material
solver is used to ﬁll a space with air under ambient temperature
and atmospheric pressure. The created space is designed in
such a way that it can represent all important elements of the
propagation of the blast wave in the direction of the vehicle.
It has a length of l = 13.00 m, a width of b = 6.00 m and a
height of h = 3.00 m. The individual hexahedral elements of
the mesh in the Euler space have an edge length of 0.05 m.
Accordingly, the space is ﬁlled with 1.872 million elements.
The entire set-up of the simulation is shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5. The simulation space ﬁlled with different materials and a vehicle
model from an oblique, lateral perspective with gauges and PETN explosive.
The entire simulation space is mainly ﬁlled with air (blue
space) at ambient condition and with a vehicle model (dark
blue). The view on this simulation space is from an oblique,
lateral perspective. The sides of the simulated space are
provided with boundary conditions, which allow the blast wave
to ﬂow out. In this way, a disturbing reﬂection of the blast
wave on these sides is avoided. Only the ﬂoor of the space is
excluded from this condition, so that the blast wave is reﬂected.
By applying this boundary condition, the computation effort
is reduced and the same result is achieved as if the room was
an inﬁnite space.
At the end of the long side of this space, the vehicle is
positioned in such a direction that it will be hit on the side
by the blast wave. In Figure 5, the PETN explosive with its
detonation point is located to the left of the front of the space.
The explosive is placed in a distance of 10 m away from the
vehicle, exactly centered and hovering in 1 m height. The
hovering state is realized in the simulation just by placing
the explosive at this coordinate. Because of typically very
short durations in high-speed dynamics every inﬂuence of
gravitational forces on the position of the explosive can be
neglected. In reality, the localization of the explosive would
be realized by a platform of easily destructible material, which
holds the explosive. The volume of the explosive is chosen in
such a way that it equals an amount of 15 kg TNT. The TNT

159
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
equivalent of PETN is approximately 1.2, that is why 12.5 kg
of PETN are required [28]. In accordance with the certiﬁcation
standard, the explosive is chosen in the shape of a cube. The
edge length a of this cube for a given mass mPETN = 12.5 kg
and density ρ1.77 can be calculated by its volume V :
a =
3√
V =
3
rmPETN
ρ1.77
≈ 0.19 m
(6)
The detonation point for the explosive is centered on the
surface which is located on the side facing away from the
vehicle. This results in a blast wave moving in the direction of
the vehicle. Left side to the front of Figure 5 shows the PETN
cube with its red detonation point.
The measurement of the pressure proﬁle of the blast wave
is done by ﬁfteen pressure gauges. In Figure 5, the red dots on
the right side represent these gauges at which the pressure can
be measured. They are located above each other, three rows of
ﬁve gauges directly in front of the rigid vehicle. Each gauge
can collect data of various physical properties during the entire
time of simulation.
The presented set-up can be used to perform simulations of
the undisturbed propagation of blast waves.
2) Disturbed Propagation: In a next step, an attenuation
space is placed directly in front of the vehicle. This space con-
sists of front and back faces with constant area and a variable
thickness in the direction of the blast. Furthermore, position,
shape, temperature, density and pressure are changeable. This
set-up with the newly introduced attenuation space is shown
in Figure 6.
Figure 6. The simulation space ﬁlled with different materials and a vehicle
model from an oblique, lateral perspective with a detonation point on the left
side. The reddish space on the right side represents the attenuation space.
The entire simulation space is ﬁlled with different materials
and a vehicle model from an oblique, lateral perspective. The
mainly blue space in this ﬁgure is ﬁlled with air at ambient
condition. The reddish space on the right side represents the
attenuation space. This space has a thickness D, which can be
set arbitrarily in the direction of the blast. Furthermore, shape
and density are variable. The previously described gauges exist
in this set-up as well and they record changes in pressure
during the simulation. For the sake of clarity, the gauges are
hidden in this ﬁgure.
B. Advanced Set-Up
The simulation scenario described before is a very basic and
artiﬁcial attempt to estimate the effect of a blast attenuation
mechanism. However, due to the high strength of the 12.5 kg
PETN explosive used in the previous set-up, the set-up shows
an upper limit of its attenuation capability.
To validate a more realistic scenario the basic set-up is
modiﬁed. A huge PETN explosive ordnance is a good choice
for the certiﬁcation of the demolition of a vehicle but in
reality other threats like high-angle weapons with explosive
ammunition are more plausible. For example, an incoming
mortar grenade next to a security vehicle. Such a mortar
grenade is a weapon not only used by military units but also
by insurgents and terrorist. It is a very simple weapon with
cheap ammunition, which are distributed vastly due to the cold
war. It also satisﬁes the requirements for a ﬂexible weapon as
described in the introduction. The actual form of this weapon
was developed to support infantry units as a light and mobile
weapon [29]. It ﬁlls the gap between artillery and grenades,
so that the troops can adjust ﬂexibly and quickly to possible
threats.
The advanced scenario will use a representation of a mortar
grenade as explosive instead of the huge 12.5 kg PETN
explosive ordnance. The remaining conﬁguration stays the
same.
1) Mortar Ammunition: Mortars are available as lighter or
heavier versions. The lighter version normally has a caliber of
81 mm with a range of about 5000–6000 m. A heavy mortar
has a increased weight but it can ﬁre its 120 mm shells to a
distance of about 7000–8000 m. High ﬁring distances and light
overall weight of about 50–120 kg make the mortar a ﬂexible
and easy transportable weapon [29].
As shown in Figure 7, the body of a mortar grenade consists
of a ﬁn stabilized tail and a shell. Essentially, the shell of the
mortar grenade carries the explosive with the fuze at the top of
the shell. Depending of what kind of fuze is used it is possible
to let the grenade explode by impact or above the ground [30].
The grenade shown in Figure 7 is a light version of a Russian
120 mm grenade, which should be used as an example for
the following simulation. The heavy grenade has an explosive
ﬁller with weight of mgrenade = 2.6 kg TNT and a overall
length of loverall = 0.665 m [31].
2) Modeling a Mortar Grenade: To model such a grenade
in ANSYS AUTODYN, the volume of the explosive ﬁller
is needed. Its value can be calculated by using the simple
relationship between density ρTNT, volume V and mass m:
V = mgrenade
ρTNT
≈ 1.58 · 10−5 m3
(7)

160
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 7. Illustration of a light 82 mm high explosive mortar grenade as used
during cold war and today. The right side shows a cross-section with the
high explosive material ﬁller in the middle and the fuze on top of it [31].
For the sake of simplicity, in the simulation of the mortar
grenade this volume can be represented by a cuboid with
square base. The edge length of the square base is a = 0.10 m
and h = 0.15 m for its height or longest dimension. These
dimensions lead to a volume which satisﬁes the calculation
from equation (7).
For the simulation, an outer shell of the mortar grenade is
not needed because the release of shrapnel is not relevant.
Only the blast wave is needed to get an impression about the
interaction with the attenuation space. The fuze of the grenade
can be modeled as a detonation point on top of the cuboid.
The described design is realized in Figure 8.
Figure 8. Simpliﬁed computer model of a mortar grenade. The space in the
magenta color is ﬁlled with TNT and the red point on top is the detonation
point.
The modeled grenade in Figure 8 is ﬁlled with TNT, which
is represented by the color magenta. It also has a detonation
point on top, shown as red dot. This simple representation of
the grenade shown in Figure 7 meets all requirements to allow
a simulation.
3) Simulation Space: The modeled mortar grenade will be
placed in the simulation space instead of the huge PETN
explosive ordnance. It will be placed in such a way that the
normal component of the surface, where the detonation point
is located, points toward the ground of the simulation space.
This imitates the behavior of a real mortar grenade because
its velocity direction would point toward the ground before
impacting and exploding.
In Figure 9, the mortar grenade model from Figure 8 is
part of the advanced simulation set-up. Again, the grenade
is represented by a magenta color with the detonation point
pointing to the ground.
Figure 9. The simulation space ﬁlled with air and a vehicle model from an
oblique, lateral perspective. On the left side of the space a simpliﬁed mortar
grenade model with a detonation point (red dot) was inserted.
The conﬁguration of this set-up is the same as in the
basic case. Only the explosive ordnance is replaced. With this
set-up the undisturbed propagation of the blast wave and a
propagation through an attenuation space can be investigated.
This offers the possibility to check if the attenuation of the
blast wave will be achieved in the case of a smaller and more
realistic explosive threat for the vehicle.
IV.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The simulation results between the undisturbed and the
attenuated blast wave propagation with the basic and advanced
set-up are described below. The results are compared and
discussed.
A. Undisturbed Propagation of the Basic Set-Up
The numerical calculations of the undisturbed blast wave
propagation agree well with the expected ideal behavior.
After the start of the simulation, the detonation of the PETN
explosive leads to a successive conversion of the explosive.
This results in a blast wave, which propagates radially away
from its source. A part of the expanding blast wave is reﬂected
on the ground and overlaps with the wave front. Hence, spaces
of the blast wave with higher pressure are created, which can
be observed near the ground.
Figure 10 shows this situation in the simulated test set-up.
The blast wave is represented by vector arrows of the velocity

161
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
component in a color coding. The color changes from red to
blue, as does the speed from high to low. The shown blast wave
expands radially away from the explosive ordnance towards
the vehicle. A part of the wave front is superimposed by the
reﬂection on the ground.
Figure 10. The simulation space ﬁlled with different materials and a vehicle
model from an oblique, lateral perspective. A blast wave expands radially
outwards from the left front side towards the vehicle.
If the blast wave reaches the vehicle, the pressure gauges
will record the pressure change. For the evaluation, the data of
gauges 3 (g3), 8 (g8) and 13 (g13) are used. These gauges are
located exactly in the middle of the dimension along the y-axis
of the simulation set-up. Along z-direction they are located at
the ground, in middle height and on top of the vehicle. The
pressure proﬁle of the recorded data is shown in Figure 11. The
overall proﬁle of the measured pressure is in good accordance
to the proﬁle of the ideal shock wave from Figure 1. The peak
overpressure values can be extracted from the recorded data.
It is important to notice that these peak overpressure values
are valid with respect to the atmospheric pressure of 100 kPa.
The gauges measured a peak overpressure of Pg3
=
62.87 kPa at the bottom, Pg8 = 62.45 kPa in the middle
and Pg13 = 62.94 kPa on top. Vehicles that are hit by
a blast wave with a pressure amplitude of about 62 kPA
are overturned and heavily damaged. Buildings cannot resist
this overpressure as well: wood framed buildings collapse,
steel framed buildings receive serious damage and reinforced
concrete structures suffer severe damage [32] [33].
B. Heating under Atmospheric Pressure of the Basic Set-Up
For the next step, a part of the simulation space was ﬁlled
with a cuboid-shaped volume of modiﬁed air at which the
feasibility of the blast wave attenuation can be veriﬁed. The
volume of this space is deﬁned as the entire height and width
of the simulation space. The thickness of the space was set
to D = 1.00 m and placed in a distance of d away from the
vehicle, which in this case equals the amount of the thickness.
Through that, the modiﬁed volume ﬁlls the free space without
touching any part the vehicle. To emulate a rapid heating
Figure 11. Simulated time-dependent pressure proﬁle of the blast wave of
the simulation set-up. After its release through the explosion, the wave
propagates spatially and reaches the vehicle after ta ≈ 14 ms. As in the
ideal proﬁle, a positive and negative phase of the pressure is visible.
under atmospheric pressure, the ambient air was replaced by
air which matches the properties and internal energy of air at
a temperature of T = 3000 K according to Table I.
Three recorded pressure proﬁles of the blast wave, which
has to cross such a volume in the simulation space, are shown
in Figure 12.
Figure 12. Simulated time-dependent pressure proﬁle of the blast wave after
crossing the attenuation space. The pressure proﬁle shows an attenuation in
the direction of the maximum pressure.
At the start of the pressure recording, the used method of
heating will result in a slight vacuum because parts of the
adjacent ambient air ﬂow into the heated region because of
the reduced density. The pressure stabilizes until the time of
arrival of ta ≈ 14 ms. When the blast wave reaches the gauges,
a sudden increase in pressure occurs like in the undisturbed

162
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
case. In contrast, the measured peak overpressure at the gauges
is lower and has the following values Pg3,heat = 40.87 kPa,
Pg8,heat = 41.98 kPa and Pg13,heat = 45.79 kPa.
In direct comparison, the relative differences of these peak
overpressure values are ∆Pg3,rel = 35.0 %, ∆Pg8,rel = 32.8 %
and ∆Pg13,rel = 27.2 % lower than the undisturbed case.
These lower peak overpressure values are the consequence
of the propagation of the blast wave through the attenuation
space. Because of that, the object to be protected experience
lesser damage and an attenuation of the blast wave through
a second, transient medium is provable in the simulation.
Furthermore, it can be seen in the pressure proﬁle of Figure 12
that the pressure stays at a lowered level where the sharp
peak used to be. Finally, the pressure drops off similar to the
undisturbed case.
The three different gauges show small differences in their
individual proﬁles. In contrast to the undisturbed case, the
peak pressure rises from bottom to top gauge. This can
be an indication for a disturbance of the radial, symmetric
propagation of the blast wave. An explanation can be the
diffraction of a part of the blast wave in the direction of the top
gauge. Another reason can be that a fraction of the propagating
blast wave is reﬂected from the ground in an upper direction
towards the top gauge.
Because the attenuation space provided ﬁrst results, the
inﬂuence of its parameters temperature, thickness and distance
was veriﬁed by a parameter study. The ﬁrst changed parameter
was the position d of the attenuation space relative to the
vehicle. The change was applied in steps of ∆d = 1 m.
To compare the difference, the peak overpressure values of
the undisturbed case were related with the attenuated values
as normalized overpressure values. Figure 13 shows these
normalized overpressure proﬁles.
Figure 13. Distance-dependent normalized overpressure proﬁle of the
simulated attenuation space. The simulation data of the bottom, middle and
top gauges are plotted and connected with smoothed curves.
The normalized overpressure rises with increasing distance
from the vehicle. The individual records of the three gauges
are similar to each other. But at near distances d < 4.00 m,
the proﬁle of the top gauge (g13) shows a recognizable
difference to the other two gauges. This difference decreases
with increasing distance d. This behavior can also be an
indication for diffraction of the blast wave or the reﬂection
of parts of the wave from the ground towards the top. In
conclusion, to get a high attenuation of the blast wave, the
attenuation space should be placed as near as possible to the
asset to be protected.
The next parameter variation was done under the same
conditions as before. With the attenuation space near the
vehicle, the thickness D of the space was altered. The resulting
normalized overpressure proﬁle is plotted in Figure 14. It
shows that the normalized overpressure decreases with increas-
ing thickness and stabilizes at values of D > 1.50 m. For best
results, the thickness should be at least D = 1.50 m.
Figure 14. Thickness-dependent normalized overpressure proﬁle of the
simulated attenuation space. The simulation data of the bottom, middle and
top gauges are plotted and connected with smoothed curves.
In a next step, the temperature was changed as a parameter.
To do that, the same conditions as before apply with a change
in temperature. Figure 15 shows these proﬁles.
Figure 15. Temperature-dependent normalized overpressure proﬁle of the
simulated attenuation space. The simulation data of the bottom, middle and
top gauges are plotted and connected with smoothed curves.
In the case of changed temperature, the normalized over-
pressure decreases with increasing temperature. The measure-
ments of the three gauges behave alike to temperatures of
T > 2000 K. From that temperature on, the values of middle
and top gauge differ from the bottom gauge. Again, this can be
indicating a diffraction of the blast wave from bottom to top.

163
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Overall, the attenuation is the better the higher the temperature
is.
The evaluation of this parameter study shows the following
values as the optimal setting for the attenuation space in
the simulation set-up: Thickness D
= 1.50 m, distance
d = 1.50 m, temperature T = 3000 K and the properties of
air at this temperature according to Table I. With this setting
of parameters and the results, the best overpressure values
in the simulation could be extracted: Pg3,best = 39.43 kPa,
Pg8,best = 39.61 kPa and Pg13,best = 40.67 kPa. The relative
differences to the undisturbed case correspond to: ∆Pg3,best =
37.3 %, ∆Pg8,best = 36.5 % and ∆Pg13,best = 35.4 %.
In contrast to the undisturbed case, a lesser pressure dif-
ference of about 40 kPa results in less drastic consequences
for the vehicle being hit. In this magnitude, there is no
overturning of vehicles and a complete destruction of the
vehicle is no longer to be expected. It is shown that under the
correct application of the attenuation space in the simulation
a noticeable attenuation of the blast wave can be detected.
Finally, it should be noted that the simulation differs from
the real conditions in which a volume can be heated. At ﬁrst,
the heated and simulated space is discretely separated from the
environment. Any change of the properties in the attenuation
space does not change anything in the surrounding ambient air
before the simulation starts. Second, the heating takes place in
the case of constant atmospheric pressure in a very short time.
In reality, interactions with the surrounding air, in particular
diffusion, are to be expected during such a heating process.
Additionally, the increase in temperature of T > 3000 K leads
to an ionization of air. Such an ionization is accompanied by a
change in density, which cannot be shown in the simulation. It
is also important that steel can melt at such high temperatures.
Therefore, the attenuation space must not be in direct contact
with the object to be protected. In reality, it is necessary to
examine how such rapid heating of ambient air affects the
asset, as well as people and objects nearby.
C. Results of the Advanced Set-Up
The simulation of the modiﬁed set-up starts with the ignition
of the modeled mortar grenade. This leads to a similar blast
wave behavior as in Figure 10. The shown blast wave expands
radially outwards from the left front side towards the vehicle.
Again, a part of the wave front is superimposed by the
reﬂection on the ground. When the blast wave arrives at the
vehicle, changes of pressure will be recorded by pressure
gauges. As before, only the gauges located in the middle of
the ground, in middle height and on top of the vehicle are used
for collecting and evaluating data.
The pressure proﬁle of the collected data in the undisturbed
case caused by the mortar grenade is shown in Figure 16.
Compared to the ideal shock wave behavior from Figure 1
and the undisturbed propagation from Figure 13 there are some
differences. The rise of the amplitude is not as steep as in the
Figure 16. Simulated time-dependent pressure proﬁle of the blast wave of
the simulation set-up. After the explosion of the mortar grenade, the wave
propagates spatially and reaches the vehicle after ta ≈ 22 ms. As in the
ideal proﬁle, a positive and negative phase of the pressure is visible.
both other cases. The reason for this is that the blast wave
has already slowed down and is increasingly turning into a
compression wave. The cause of the slowdown is the smaller
amount of explosive at the same distance as before. Also, the
amplitude of the blast wave is not as high as with the huge
PETN explosive.
The results are peak overpressure values of Pg3,mor =
8.70 kPa, Pg8,mor = 8.63 kPa and Pg13,mor = 8.76 kPa. At
these overpressure values the following damages are expected:
Glass failure, houses are made inhabitable, slight distortion of
the steel frames of clad buildings and slight to serious injuries
of persons [32] [33]. The amplitude is not strong enough to
overturn a vehicle. It is to be expected that a security vehicle
will withstand such a blast wave.
To get a comparable result about a possible attenuation of
the blast wave, the set-up was provided with an attenuation
space. Like before a cuboid-shaped volume of modiﬁed air
with the same properties (T = 3000 K) was used. The record-
ing of the resulting pressure proﬁle is shown in Figure 17.
From slight underpressure at the beginning, the pressure
stabilizes in Figure 17 until the time of arrival of ta ≈ 22 ms.
When the blast wave reaches the gauges, a steep but not to
sudden increase in pressure occurs. This indicates that the
wave has been weakened. There are also some minor peaks
in the proﬁle of gauge 8 and 13. An explanation could be
an turbulence in the propagation of the blast wave. However,
because of the regular, common intervals at the proﬁles of both
gauges it might be an error in the calculations of the simulation
software. Compared to each other only the proﬁle of gauge 13
has slightly higher values.
In contrast to the undisturbed case shown in Figure 16 the
measured peak overpressure at the gauges is lower and has the
following values Pg3,mor,h = 5.75 kPa, Pg8,mor,h = 5.77 kPa
and Pg13,mor,h = 6.12 kPa. In direct comparison with the

164
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 17. Simulated time-dependent pressure proﬁle of the blast wave after
crossing the attenuation space. The pressure proﬁle shows an attenuation in
the direction of the maximum pressure.
values Pg3,mor, Pg8,mor and Pg13,mor the relative differences
of these peak overpressure values are ∆Pg3,mor,rel = 33.9 %,
∆Pg8,mor,rel = 33.2 % and ∆Pg13,mor,rel = 30.1 % lower.
Like in the set-up before an effect of the attenuation space is
measurable.
V.
CONCLUSION
Assets of armed and security forces are threatened by
terrorists and insurgents, especially by explosive weapons. The
armor of these assets effectively protects them against splinters
and shrapnel, but not against the blast wave of the explosion.
Therefore, in order to reduce the danger of explosions, the
blast wave has to be weakened before reaching the asset. This
can be achieved by rapidly heating a region of normal ambient
air to produce a second, transient medium at which the blast
wave is attenuated.
In this work, a simulation set-up was developed for this
purpose, which could be used to check whether the heating
of a volume of air at a constant ambient pressure leads to a
reduction in the peak pressure of a blast wave. Through this
set-up the undisturbed propagation of the blast wave could
be compared with the disturbed case. An attenuation of the
blast wave was measurable. A further examination through a
parameter study led to the following ﬁndings.
The measurable attenuation of the blast wave is the more
effective the higher the temperature, the nearer the attenuation
space to the asset and the more the thickness becomes a value
of D > 1.50 m. In addition, it was possible to ﬁnd indications
of diffraction or reﬂection of the blast wave.
With the found set of best parameters a simulation of the
basic set-up was performed. It led to a reduction of the peak
overpressure of the blast wave with an achieved attenuation
of about 35.0 %. With respect to the very high overpressure
values of about 63 kPa, this is a reduction which can decrease
the damage of a vehicle signiﬁcantly.
Based on the preceding ﬁndings, the basic set-up was
improved to a more realistic scenario. Instead of using a huge
PETN explosive ordnance, a simpliﬁed model of a mortar
grenade was developed. This model reﬂects the properties of
a vastly distributed ammunition type, which is a real threat for
security forces in many foreign operations. This model allowed
to do an advanced simulation of an undisturbed propagation
of the blast wave and a propagation through an attenuation
space. As result, an attenuation of the blast wave in this more
realistic scenario of up to 33.9 % was achieved.
As this research has shown, it is theoretically possible to
attenuate the blast wave by second, transient medium. In order
to further investigate its effectiveness, the next step should be
to examine how the shape and a more accurate selection of the
gas parameters affect the attenuation. In particular, it must be
checked whether a high attenuation can be achieved by new
material models such as, for example, air with ionization or
an air-dust mixture. An experimental veriﬁcation of such an
attenuation space of heated air would be particularly revealing
for a technical realization. Therefore, it is interesting to ask
whether the presented concept can be developed with a proper
conﬁguration of the second, transient medium to a kind of
attenuation shield against blast waves.
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Hillig, A. Ramezani, and H. Rothe, “Veriﬁcation of the Theoretical
Feasibility of Shock Wave Attenuation by Means of a Second Transient
Medium for Protecting Vehicles Against Blasts,” in SIMUL 2017 :
The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation
(SIMUL 2017) Athens, Greece.
IARIA, Oct. 2017, pp. 68–73, ISBN:
978-1-61208-594-4.
[2]
B. J. Tillotson and M. A. Loudiana, “Method and apparatus for
shockwave attenuation,” U.S. Patent No. 8,806,945, 2014.
[3]
R. Cobbold, “The Effects of Operations Other Than War-Fighting
on the Participants,” in Royal United Services Institute for Defence
and Security Studies, Conference, Paris, France, Jun. 2005, (Keynote
Address).
[4]
P. F. Herrly, The Impact of Peacekeeping and Stability Operations on
the Armed Forces.
Heritage Foundation, 2005.
[5]
J. Kress and S. Grogger, “The domestic ied threat,” Institute for National
Strategic Studies, National Defense University, Washington, Tech. Rep.,
2008.
[6]
D. E. Carlucci and S. S. Jacobson, Ballistics: theory and design of guns
and ammunition.
CRC Press, 2013.
[7]
J. A. Zukas, W. Walters, and W. P. Walters, Explosive effects and
applications.
Springer, New York, 1998.
[8]
I. Sochet, Blast Effects: Physical Properties of Shock Waves. Springer,
2017.
[9]
W. E. Baker, Explosions in air.
University of Texas press, 1973.
[10]
O. Igra, J. Falcovitz, L. Houas, and G. Jourdan, “Review of methods to
attenuate shock/blast waves,” Progress in Aerospace Sciences, vol. 58,
2013, pp. 1–35.
[11]
G. L. Gettle and V. H. Homer, “Acoustic/shock wave attenuating
assembly,” U.S. Patent No. 5,394,786, 1995.

165
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[12]
K. Kitagawa, M. Yokoyama, and M. Yasuhara, “Attenuation of shock
wave by porous materials,” in Shock Waves, Z. Jiang, Ed.
Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 1247–1252.
[13]
J. L. Waddell and J. F. Gordon, “Acoustic shock wave attenuating
assembly,” U.S. Patent No. 8,316,752, 2012.
[14]
E. Lozano and P. Vilem, “Design and testing of blast shields for different
blasting applications,” Blasting and Fragmentation, vol. 9, no. 1, 2015,
pp. 1–18.
[15]
M. Sommerfeld, “The unsteadiness of shock waves propagating through
gas-particle mixtures,” Experiments in Fluids, vol. 3, no. 4, 1985, pp.
197–206.
[16]
O. Igra, G. Ben-Dor, F. Aizik, and B. Gelfand, “Experimental and
numerical investigation of shock wave attenuation in dust-gas suspen-
sions,” in Shock Waves@ Marseille III.
Springer, 1995, pp. 49–54.
[17]
J. Zukas, Introduction to hydrocodes.
Elsevier, 2004, vol. 49.
[18]
A. Hamouda and M. Hashmi, “Modelling the impact and penetration
events of modern engineering materials: characteristics of computer
codes and material models,” Journal of materials processing technology,
vol. 56, no. 1-4, 1996, pp. 847–862.
[19]
D. J. Benson, “Computational methods in lagrangian and eulerian hy-
drocodes,” Computer methods in Applied mechanics and Engineering,
vol. 99, no. 2-3, 1992, pp. 235–394.
[20]
M. Oevermann, S. Gerber, and F. Behrendt, “Euler–lagrange/dem
simulation of wood gasiﬁcation in a bubbling ﬂuidized bed reactor,”
Particuology, vol. 7, no. 4, 2009, pp. 307–316.
[21]
D. Hicks and L. Liebrock, “Sph hydrocodes can be stabilized with
shape-shifting,” Computers & Mathematics with Applications, vol. 38,
no. 5, 1999, pp. 1–16.
[22]
X. Quan, N. Birnbaum, M. Cowler, B. Gerber, R. Clegg, and C. Hay-
hurst, “Numerical simulation of structural deformation under shock and
impact loads using a coupled multi-solver approach,” in Proceedings of
5th Asia-Paciﬁc Conference on Shock and Impact Loads on Structures,
2003, pp. 12–14.
[23]
A. Ramezani, B. Hillig, and H. Rothe, “A Coupled CFD-FEM Analysis
to Simulate Blast Effects on High Security Vehicles Using Modern
Hydrocodes,” in SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference
on Advances in System Simulation (SIMUL 2017) Athens, Greece.
IARIA, Oct. 2017, pp. 74–81, ISBN: 978-1-61208-594-4.
[24]
A. AUTODYN, “Autodyn user’s manual, release 18.0,” 2017.
[25]
M. Johansson, O. P. Larsen, L. Laine, and R. S. AB, “Explosion at
an intersection in an urban environment–experiments and analyses,” in
Proceedings of the 78th Shock and Vibration Symposium, Philadelphia,
PA, USA, 2007.
[26]
E. W. Lemmon, R. T. Jacobsen, S. G. Penoncello, and D. G. Friend,
“Thermodynamic properties of air and mixtures of nitrogen, argon, and
oxygen from 60 to 2000 k at pressures to 2000 mpa,” Journal of physical
and chemical reference data, vol. 29, no. 3, 2000, pp. 331–385.
[27]
J. H. Keenan, J. Chao, and J. Kaye, “Gas tables: international version,”
in Gas tables: international version.
John Wiley & Sons, 1983.
[28]
D. O. Dusenberry, Handbook for blast resistant design of buildings.
John Wiley & Sons, 2010.
[29]
I. V. Hogg, Mortars.
The Crowood Press Ltd, 2001.
[30]
I. V. Hogg, The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Ammuntion.
Chartwell
Books, 1985.
[31]
I. V. Hogg, Ammunition: Small Arms, Grenades, and Projected Muni-
tions.
Greenhill Books/Lionel Leventhal, 1998.
[32]
V. Clancey, “Diagnostic features of explosion damage,” in 6th Int.
Meeting of Forensic Sciences, Edinburgh, 1972.
[33]
U. N. R. Commission et al., “Fire dynamics tools (fdts): Quantitative
ﬁre hazard analysis methods for the us nuclear regulatory commission
ﬁre protection inspection program,” NUREG-1805, December, 2004.

