162
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Asia Techno Farm Initiatives for growing Future Farmers of Asia 
 
Nobutaka Ito 
Faculty of Engineering 
Khon Kaen University 
Khon Kaen 40002 Thailand 
e-mail: nobuito@kku.ac,th 
 
 
Abstract—Humans are now facing the four global issues 
(Global Tetralemma) related to Population, Food, Energy and 
Environment. The key point is to find out the cause of these 
problems and how to solve them. Most of the problems are 
caused by human activities prioritizing economic promotion. It 
can be, however, noted that Asia has a high potentiality to play 
an important role in solving most of the problems in question. 
In this paper, the hopeful technologies applicable to Asian 
agrifuture are introduced mainly from the viewpoint of the 
sustainable development of future Asian society building, by 
establishing and maintaining a harmonic balance between 
ecology and economy leading to stable regional peace keeping. 
 
Keywords- 
global 
tetralemma; 
high-tech 
agricultural 
mechanization; Asia Food Project; Future Farmers of Asia 
growing program; Asian agrifuture; 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Earth is the only planet on which humans can live a 
normal life. The global tetralemma refers to the four global 
issues 
consisting 
of 
population, 
food, 
energy 
and 
environment. Figure 1 shows this ecological concept. When 
the population increases, the food production must be 
increased. To increase the food production, more energy is 
needed. Energy consumption increases CO2 production, 
which jeopardizes the environment. This creates a situation 
in which we, humans, are facing global problems related to 
food, energy and environment [1]. 
                  
GLOBAL TETRALEMMA
Population
Food
Energy
Environment
Ecology
Yellow arrows 
make up the 
ecosystem
  
           Figure 1.  Schematic concept of global tetralemma 
Figure 2 shows how economy breaks ecology and 
produces all the other problems. How to tackle and find the 
solutions for those problems is one of the main objectives of 
this paper.  
 
ECONOMY BREAKS ECOLOGY
Population
increase
Food
Production increase
Food security  2QSL
Traceability
Food mileage
Virtual water
Energy
Energy resource shift
Alternative energy
Bio-fuel (Bio-ethanol,  
Biomass, Bio-gas)
New energy resources
Renewable energy
EV, FCV  
Environment
CO2 production
Climate change /
Global warming
Waste treatment
Carbon footprint, SDGs
Economy
                      
      Figure 2. Economy breaks ecology and contributes to other problems 
 
Currently, the world population is 7.8 billion in 2021 and 
increasing by 80 million per year. Considering this figure 
carefully, about 140 million people are born and 60 million 
are dying each year. The difference of 80 million is the 
population increase per year. As the population grows, more 
food production is needed. It is said that the population 
engaged with food production is around 20% of the world 
population. This simply means that one farmer produces 
food for 5 persons, including that farmer. 
  
WHAT TECHNOLOGY IS  
NEEDED?
Food
Security
Quality Control 
& Management
Safety
Energy
Eco-friendly
No CO2
Environ-
Ment
CO2 absorption
Material
Human 
survival
under 
ASIA
Sustai-
nability
Agriculture
Medicine
(Health)
Environ-
ment
Industry sector
Issues to solve
Others
                           Figure 3. What technology is needed? 

163
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
      Figure 3 shows the relationship between the issues we 
are facing and the industry sector. We are already facing 
two emerging global issues related to energy and the 
environment that we need to solve immediately, however, 
the final and optimum solution has not been found yet, in 
spite of many efforts being done by various scientists, 
researchers and engineers. This is really a competition of the 
production cost and price of petroleum with the other energy 
resources in which most of them are eco-friendly or 
environment friendly ones. Recently, petroleum price has 
been drastically coming down almost 1/3 compared to ten 
years ago, due to the new energy resource discovery of shale 
oil / gas, in which the production cost is very much lower 
and more competitive. Methane hydrate is another 
possibility. Japan successfully developed the technology to 
take it out of the seabed in 2014, however, it is still not cost 
competitive. It will take a little bit more time to make it for 
the commercial base production. It may be guessed that the 
decrease in price of the petroleum may slow down the speed 
of technology development due to enough production to 
supply to the market. On the other hand, the mitigation 
control of CO2 gas may be delayed, and the global warming 
issue cannot be improved if this situation is continued. 
Which one should be chosen, energy or environment, is one 
of the good examples to think about the real meaning of 
sustainable development or low carbon society building 
from the viewpoint of how the harmonic balance can be 
well maintained under this condition in promoting economy 
without jeopardizing the environment. The economy always 
makes us hesitate easily in making a choice. We, humans, 
already know that the fossil energy should not be chosen 
due to the cause of the global warming, however, the lower 
prices of oil entice us. 
     The author delivered a lecture entitled “Asian 
Agriculture Growth Strategy” in Prime Minister ABE's 
doctrine "ABEnomics” as one of the invited keynote 
speakers at the Agricultural Mechanization Session, of the 
JSAMFE (Japanese Society of Agricultural Machinery & 
Food Engineers) annual meeting held at Ryukyu University, 
Okinawa, Japan, May 17, 2014 [2]. Figure 4 is a schematic 
diagram showing ASEAN Economic Community should 
pick up the industrial sector for promoting the economy and 
how it should be done. It is already known that the ASEAN 
Economic Community was officially established in 
December 2015, however, it looks a little bit difficult to 
know what industrial sector should be set as the main 
framework of the body to meet and achieve the final goal of 
the community. In the author's understanding, the goals 
should be 1) To make ASIA the world's food pantry, enough 
to supply safe food on demand and 2) To stabilize the 
economy and maintain the regional peace based on 
agriculture. The following shows the concept outline of 
ASEAN Economic Community proposed by the author and 
how it should be promoted step by step towards the final 
goal achievement [3]. 
     Most Asian countries are more or less still relying on the 
economy of the agricultural production. ASEAN member 
countries are also in similar situation, except some of them. 
It is already well known that, as mentioned above, the 
human population is still rapidly increasing at the rate of 80 
million per year. It can obviously be guessed that sooner or 
later, food production must be increased to feed.  
 
ASIA 
GROWTH 
STRATEGY
PROJECT
SCHEME 
in 
Agriculture
Technology
Oriented 
countries
Dispatching 
Experts to 
deliver a series 
of lecture
Resource
oriented 
countries 
Offering unique 
program for 
staff & student 
mobility
Research Project on 
Smart Agriculture
Precision Agriculture
Green Factory 
Food Safety 
Quality management
Based on Robotics
To make Asia 
World Food Giant
Create Asia Brand
of Food
Mutual Benefit & 
Prosperity for both 
Technology oriented &
Resource oriented 
countries
Final goal 
Economy 
Vitalization & 
Regional stability in
Peace keeping
Asia Brand Food
market
More increase of 
Food Production 
Research & 
Education  
collaboration project
Priority level to achieve
3
2
1
 
 Figure 4. Asian Agriculture Growth Strategy    
    
Otherwise, the food issue will become a serious problem 
later. Asia is fortunately producing a huge amount of bio-
resources, especially food resources, however the quality is 
not well controlled and managed. As far as food production 
is concerned, the priority should be to secure the safety. It 
should be noted that there are two kinds of countries in Asia: 
one kind is resource-oriented countries, and the other kind is 
technology-oriented countries, called ASEAN, plus three 
like China, Japan and South Korea. To secure the quality, 
especially food safety, higher technology is needed and 
applied. The author's proposal is based on the collaboration 
and mutual competition among these two types of countries. 
One needs the resources and the other needs the 
technologies. Both need them mutually and interactively. 
The best way is to collaborate and compete to promote a 
stable economy in Asia. In addition, the following two things 
should be done on the process of final goal achievement. 
They are: 1) Technology transfer and 2) Human Resources 
Development. Both should be desirably promoted in parallel, 
however, due to some inconvenience of laws and 
regulations, it is hard to achieve in practice. Which one 
should be started first? That should be the human resources 
development, especially focusing on universities. The 
extension must be followed through the process of 
technology development and its validation; therefore, it takes 
time for final technology transfer to extension. Even for the 
human resources development, it takes time until the 
effective result could be obtained, therefore the academic 
mobility program should be started earlier and promoted in 
the regional area. It is required that highly educated human 
resources will be absolutely needed by the mature global 
society. Two stages of goal achievement are shown towards 
the final one. The first step is to make Asia one of the world 
food pantries in huge amount of food resources production. 

164
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Secondly, the most reliable Asian food brands should be 
created enough to guarantee both quality and safety. 
Following the process based on this proposed concept, the 
Asian economy can be developed and promoted stably, and 
regional peace keeping can also be maintained. Both 
resource-oriented and technology-oriented countries can get 
mutual prosperity to survive together contributing a lot in 
safe food production and supply to all over the world (Figure 
4). The author already tried to propose the project under the 
title of Asia Food Project consisting of two main parts. They 
are Asia Techno Farm and FFA growing program, where 
FFA means Future Farmer of Asia [4][5][6]. These two 
programs are combined together and the whole framework is 
explained later in detail as whole involved in Asia Food 
Project. This paper therefore discusses the following two 
contents: 1) introduction and application of the various 
technologies seemed to be required for future Asian 
agriculture achievement and 2) Asia Food Project proposal 
consisting of two programs, named Asia Techno Farm and 
FFA (Future Farmer of Asia) growing program, which is one 
of the human resources development program. 
II. 
SMART AGRICULTURE 
  The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries of The 
Government of Japan defines smart agriculture as "New 
agriculture that enables hyper labor saving and high-quality 
products production by utilizing cutting-edge technologies 
such as robotic technology and ICT (Information & 
Communication Technology)". According to the Ministry, 
the materialization of smart agriculture can achieve hyper 
labor saving and large-scale farming production by 
automatic control of agricultural machinery, high-yield, 
high-quality products production that makes full use of 
sensing technology and large data, and heavy labor by using 
robot technology. It can be expected to have more merits 
such as CO2 mitigation and labor saving, simplification of 
agricultural operation by combining know-how with data 
and assisting operating function and providing important 
and necessary information to consumers by providing final 
products information (traceability) [7]. 
A. Precision Agriculture    
    Precision Agriculture has variable rate control function 
for reducing loss and saving materials and energy. The 
concept of this farming system is similar to the TOYOTA 
car manufacturing system named “Kanban (or Kaizen)" 
system mainly consisting of the three conditions listed 
below. 
  1) Car manufacturing company provide the required  
       information on which part, how many sets amount, and  
       by when parts must be prepared should be informed to         
       the related parts supply manufacturing company in  
       advance based on the production schedule every day.   
 2) Parts supply company supplies the ordered parts just  
       enough amounts required for one day manufacturing     
       plan.  
  3) The parts supply company is strictly requested to bring  
       them by the time when appointed without any delay  
        
    In actual farming, three conditions of “What”, “How 
many or How much” and “When” must be decided from 
time to time knowing the data provided by GIS is 
specifically matched with site by site [8][9]. 
 
1
2
3
4
Source: Prof. Noboru Noguchi, Field  
Robotics, Hokkaido University, Japan
 
Figure 5. Farm tractor group guidance driving control 
 
    Figure 5 shows a group guidance control consisting of 
four vehicles (tractors in this case). Tractor No. 1 is leading 
the other three. At the corner or headland of the farm field, 
the leading vehicle (tractor) starts to turn left.  The other 
three are waiting for the leading one until it to completes the 
turning and gets in the new path keeping suitable interval 
and space. In this case the four tractors were used for 
demonstration running test, however the total number of the 
vehicles to be controlled is not the problem. Even the bigger 
group consisting of more number of the vehicles can be 
controlled in the same way. 
 
1
2
3
 
Figure 6. Truck group guidance driving control 
 
      Figure 6 shows the group guidance driving test 
consisting of three trucks in this case demonstrated under 

165
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the leadership of the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, 
Transport and Tourism [10]. The merits are as follows: 1) 
The benefits are: 1) Aging drivers and a shortage of long-
distance truck drivers due to heavy labor within a set limited 
time, 2) Air resistance can be reduced and fuel consumption 
can be reduced since the distance between vehicles can be 
kept short during platooning driving.  
  Communication and information technology has become 
more familiar and easier due to the dramatic spread of its 
technology due to the relaxation of GPS for civilian use, 
which was initially developed for military purposes. Smart 
phone is a typical example, and we are now in an era where 
we can hardly feel the distance of the national sense of the 
world. The era of IoT (Internet of Things) that connects 
various information devices to the Internet is really coming.   
      Until 
now, 
unmanned 
driving 
technology 
for 
automobiles has been the goal of car companies, and the 
development deadline was initially set to the time of the 
Olympic Games 2020, but it has been significantly delayed 
due to the COVID-19 disaster. In the field of agricultural 
machinery and mechanization, unmanned operation of 
mobile vehicles such as tractors and combines has already 
been achieved at the laboratory level. Of course, agricultural 
machinery has an extremely slow running speed compared 
to automobiles, traffic is light on agricultural land, and the 
conditions are relatively good and better, which made it 
possible to develop technology ahead of automobiles, but in 
addition to being small scale in agriculture. Since it is a 
declining industry, it has been considered difficult to be 
accepted and spread out even if it is commercialized in 
terms of cost. 
B. Robotics 
    There are two kinds of robots. One is something like an 
industrial robot set and used to complete the work for the 
post-harvest products, such as selection, weighing, grading, 
sorting, packaging etc. in a specially prepared building or 
facility. The other is a mobile vehicle  uch as tractor, 
combine and transplanter doing the original operation while 
moving, such as tillage, fertilizer application etc. The 
location of the robotic machine is autonomously guided by 
the GPS signal provided from the satellite. The optimal 
operation can be done under the variable rate control based 
on the final decision derived from the data collected and 
provided by GIS continuously from time to time while 
moving.  A laser scanner is mounted in front of the vehicle 
(tractor, in this case) to detect the obstacle and it functions 
to stop the machine immediately. The other direct contact 
type sensor is also mounted for a double check in safety. 
Three way motions of the vehicle, namely pitching, yawing, 
and rolling, reduces accuracy. It is also possible to control 
the automatic guidance operation of a group of vehicles 
consisting of multiple vehicles while maintaining a master-
slave relationship [11]. Figure 7 shows a comparison 
between agricultural and industrial robots function by some 
major items. It can be seen from this that there is a 
fundamental difference in the handling of artificially 
designed and manipulated agricultural products from the 
ones grown in the natural environment between two kinds of 
robots.  
 
Difference between Industrial 
and Agricultural Robots
No.
Item
Agricultural robot
Industrial robot
1
Robot 
motion
Move to work
Search, Find,
Identify, Off road
Stay and wait for
the work
2
Objective 
work
Non standardized
Size, Color, Shape, 
Maturity
Hardness, Location
Standardized
Designated set 
position
3
Operation Autonomous
Program based
4
Function
Learning
Teaching
5
Structure
More complicated
Comparatively simple
          Figure 7. Difference between agricultural & industrial robots 
          
     The biggest difference between agricultural robots and 
industrial robots is that industrial robots handle the 
artificially designed standardized (normalized) products, 
while agricultural robots handle non-standard products. 
Non-standard products are different in color, shape, size, 
weight, ripeness, fruit hardness, etc. for each solid. The 
harvesting robot makes a decision as to whether or not to 
harvest by collating this information with preset standard 
code. Agricultural robot needs to know where the fruit is 
hanging in what part of position of the fruit tree. Robot has 
to check each fruit to see if it should be harvested and only 
fruits that meet the conditions will be harvested. More 
number of sensor and hardware should be mounted on the 
agricultural robot to get more information to make the final 
decision whether the target fruit should be harvested or not. 
Fruit harvesting robot should take action first in the orchard 
even for the recognition and identification of which is fruit 
or not by use of the light reflectance expressed in wave 
length information in case the fruit is hanging on the tree 
with leaves. Harvesting robot is mostly used in green 
factory to harvest vegetables for fresh market use due to 
comparatively uniform and stable growing under suitable 
conditions with environment controlled.  
C. Green Factory 
    This type of farming is different from the conventional 
one using soil, mainly focusing on the mass production of 
fresh market crops such as lettuce, mini-tomatoes etc., 
which is similar to the industrial crop cultivation under 
completely controlled conditions of the environment. This is 
basically managed on hydroponic system, therefore water is 
normally used for fertilizing and circulated for saving. 
Disease infection is tightly controlled. Workers are strictly 
forced to wear special work clothes, masks and caps, in 
addition to special boots and gloves. The environment is 
similar to the clean room of semi-conductor industry plants. 

166
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
They are also strictly forced to take air showers when 
getting in and out of the factory. Since vast agricultural land 
and soil are not required, the completely different kinds of 
industries which are originally unrelated to agriculture are 
increasing to join looking for business opportunities because 
this type of farming uses normally hydroponic system 
instead of soil. Osaka Prefectural University is leading in 
this area [12]. 
 
GREEN
FACTORY
Huge area, 
No season
No disease, Safe, 
Value added
High productivity
RFID Reader terminal
Personal / Community use
Completely closed system
DRIVE GREEN 
HIGHWAY
Completely closed system
Figure 8. Various types of Green Factory 
 
Figure 9 shows the advantages of green factories in terms of 
materials and costs including future business prospects. 
  
CONCLUSION
ASIA 
GROWTH 
STRATEGY
in 
Agriculture
Technology
Oriented 
countries
Dispatching 
Experts to 
deliver a series 
of lecture
Resource
oriented 
countries 
Offering 
unique 
program for 
staff & 
student 
mobility
Research 
Project on 
Smart 
Agriculture
Precision 
Agriculture
Green Factory 
Food Safety 
Quality 
management
Based on 
Robotics
To make 
Asia 
World 
Food 
Giant
Create Asia 
Brand
of Food
Mutual Benefit & 
Prosperity for both 
Technology oriented &
Resource oriented 
countries
Final goal 
Economy 
Vitalizayion & 
Regional stability in
Peace keeping
More 
increase of 
Food 
Production 
Priority level to 
achieve
3
Yield / Unit Area
1
100
Growing speed
1
2.5
Water use 
1
1/10
0
Electricity 
consumption
1
- 40%
Yield /Unit area
1
1.5
Closed Green 
Factory system
System comparison
Open
Closed
Fluorescent
LED
GREEN FACTORY
Hydroponic 
Commercial
Product for sale in 
Thailand 
FUTURE ASPECT OF 
GREEN FACTORY MARKET
Aspect
2015
2013
2018
2020
2025
Unit: million yen
Completely Closed System based Green Factory
Source: YANO RESEARCH INSTITUTE OF ECONOMY
We are here
1/100
                      Figure 9. Green Factory, present and future. 
D. Drone     
    Recently, the number of possibilities of drone application 
to the agricultural sector has grown up rapidly. One of the 
most important merits of applying drone is to get a wide, 
bird eye view photo, which enables to find how the crops 
are growing. Farmers can find what and how they can / 
should do from the image sent to their device, such as a 
smart phone. They can make decision regarding how much 
fertilizer should be applied from the green color image 
(NDVI, Normalized Difference Vegetation Index). 
 
                   NDVI = (NIR - RED) / (NIR + RED)      
 
where NIR–reflection in the near-infrared spectrum 
             RED–reflection in the red range of the spectrum 
According to this formula, the density of vegetation (NDVI) 
at a certain point of the image is equal to the difference in 
the intensities of reflected light in the red and infrared range 
divided by the sum of these intensities. This index defines 
values from -1.0 to 1.0, basically representing greens, where 
negative values are mainly formed from clouds, water and 
snow, and values close to zero are primarily formed from 
rocks and bare soil. Very small values (0.1 or less) of the 
NDVI function correspond to empty areas of rocks, sand or 
snow. Moderate values (from 0.2 to 0.3) represent shrubs 
and meadows, while large values (from 0.6 to 0.8) indicate 
temperate and tropical forests. Crop Monitoring successfully 
utilizes this scale to show farmers which parts of their fields 
have dense, moderate, or sparse vegetation at any given 
moment. Simply put, NDVI is a measure of the state of 
plant health based on how the plant reflects light at certain 
frequencies (some waves are absorbed, and others are 
reflected). Chlorophyll (a health indicator) strongly absorbs 
visible light, and the cellular structure of the leaves strongly 
reflect near-infrared light. When the plant becomes 
dehydrated, sick, afflicted with disease, etc., the spongy 
layer deteriorates, and the plant absorbs more of the near-
infrared light, rather than reflecting it. Thus, observing NIR 
changes compared to red light provides an accurate 
indication of the presence of chlorophyll, which correlates 
with plant health. Drone can be used for many other ways, 
such as seed broadcasting, fertilizer and chemicals 
application. In these cases, the payload is the problem, 
namely, how much it can carry and fly. More applications 
are under consideration; however, the challenges are 
security, privacy, various regulation and the standards. 
Hackers can break into seemingly safe remote-controlled 
engines and networks that control brakes and steering. 
III. 
TECHNOLOGY APPLICATION IN AGRICULTURE 
A. Nano Technology 
Carbon Nano Fiber is famous and well known for its 
light weight and strength. It is already used for aviation and 
car industry. Recently, the bio-based Cellulose Nano Fiber is 
attracting a lot of interest. It is a newly developed material by 
Professor Hiroyuki Yano, Humanosphere Research Institute, 
Kyoto University, Japan from bio-resources equipped with 
unique physical properties, namely, 5 times stronger and 1/5 
lighter than metal, in addition to higher heat resistance. The 
Cellulose Nano Fiber may take the application area and 
replace CNF (Carbon Nano Fiber) in the future. In addition, 
it costs 1/6 of the cost of carbon nano fiber. Cellulose Nano 
Fiber can be produced not only from trees, but also from 
various popularly known cellulose materials such as wood, 
rice straw, cassava and potato.  
Various Nano Bubble water provides other hopeful 
possibilities, such as 
・Oxygen Nano Bubbles 
・Ozone Nano Bubbles 

167
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
・Nitrogen Nano Bubbles 
Hopefully Applicable industrial sector is shown below. 
 ・Food safety – Vegetable sterilization 
 ・Aquaculture (Fishery) – Oyster sterilization 
・Dentistry – Periodontology / Periodontics   
・Medical science - Cancer cell control 
Oxygen nano bubble water has higher effect of promoting 
plant growth and shortening the total growth period. Ozone 
nano bubble water functions effectively for sterilization for 
various bacteria and fungi. In case of washing out the 
chemicals attached to agricultural products, 80% are 
removed by using ozone nano bubble water, whereas only 
20% can be removed at one time with ordinary water. Tooth 
paste water using ozone nano bubble water has been 
commercialized. Periodontal bacteria in the mouth can be 
sterilized just by gargling without brushing your teeth. 
B. Plasma Technology 
    Plasma technology can be used to treat waste and change 
to energy because under high temperature treatment 
hydrogen can be produced. On the other hand, if the plasma 
treatment was done under low temperature, waste oil can be 
changed into fuel. According to the news currently televised, 
it is said that around 4,000 workers are working everyday at 
Fukusima nuclear power plant, however it will take 40 years 
more to remove the debris left in the reactor. The use of 
plasma is promising for treating highly radioactive debris. 
C. Pattern / Face Recognition  
The combined technology of image processing, pattern 
recognition and Artificial Intelligence (AI) is getting 
popularly applied to recognize and identify the individual 
person quickly. This technology can be used even for the 
individual livestock management. Two kinds of memory can 
be found and considered: one is a tag attached to a part of the 
body like ear, and the other is the chip type to be embedded 
in the body. The pedometer, the route traveled, the distance, 
etc. are automatically recorded and sent to the data center for 
recording. These data can be used for observing the health 
status of individual livestock and managing the amount of 
food to feed.   
The net pattern of melons is unique and original to each 
individual and resembles a human fingerprint. By recording 
and memorizing this net pattern as an image, the historical 
background of the melon can be known such as the place and 
when it was harvested and how it came from the production 
site. This is one of the areas called Agribiometrics or 
Bioinformatics. 
IV. 
ROJECTS AND BUSINESS 
In this section, some of the ongoing projects and 
businesses model in commercial base are listed. 
A. Blue fin tuna, Kinki University 
Blue fin tuna is one of the most popular big thick fishes 
served at higher class restaurants in Japan. However, to meet 
the customers demand, fishermen must live away from home 
for months in remote pelagic fisheries. Sometimes the 
weather is unseasonable, and they encounter storms and 
typhoons in case. Some of them will also encounter a fatal 
accident. If they do not have to live away from home for 
fishing, it will make them more relaxed and even their family 
will feel more at ease. Fisheries should be changed from 
going away and fish for months to keeping put and growing 
fish. The Kinki University, succeeded in the cultivation of 
blue fin tuna to grow from the stage of egg up to the final 
stage for shipment. Currently, blue fin tuna cultivated in this 
way is delivered to large cities and rural areas and is also 
served in the cafeteria even on the university campus [13]. 
B. Osaka Prefectural University 
     Osaka Prefectural University is one of the first 
universities in Japan to succeed in researching and 
commercializing a Green (plant) factory. Just like Kinki 
University mentioned above, it can be said that this 
university has demonstrated the industrialization of 
agricultural products production. The cultivation shelves 
lined up in an environmentally controlled building are fully 
covered with LEDs (Light Emission Diodes) of various 
colors, and the workers working inside seem to be working 
in the clean room of a semiconductor manufacturing plant, 
and they are nervous about bringing in pathogens from the 
outside. Harvested lettuce and other fresh vegetables are 
delivered not only to university cafeterias, but also to large 
cities and regions on order. One of the important factors to 
keep in mind is that producers have a clear and reliable 
relationship with consumers. 
C. EUGLENA Project 
     This is a joint venture project already launched few years 
ago. The author does not know how much they have been 
successful up to now, however, this business model is one 
of the few successfully launched examples the author knows 
about. The main product is an algae. Euglena has many 
characteristic features, but it is noteworthy that it absorbs a 
large amount of carbon dioxide. Electric power plants 
discharge a large amount of carbon dioxide, which can be 
absorbed by Euglena to promote its own growth. The 
produced Euglena can be sold as a raw material or resource 
for food, feed and fertilizer, while also contributing to jet 
plane fuel as bio-fuel. The problem with business operations 
is that they need technology to produce a large amount of 
Euglena in a short period of time, and the company founders 
have also proven this technology. Since it is a bio-based fuel, 
it contributes a lot to a low carbon and de-carbonized 
society building from the viewpoint of carbon neutralal 
concept [14]. 
       Euglena, which efficiently produces polysaccharides, is 
promising for health foods, cosmetics, bioplastics, biofuel 
raw materials, and carbon dioxide treatment, but it should be 
more productive for industrial use. Selection of Euglena 
strains is required. 
    Euglena production sufficient to meet the demand 
basically depends on the expansion of the culture space, but 

168
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
in order to improve productivity, it is necessary to identify 
the shape and size of the produced Euglena. 
   For the purpose of increasing the processing capacity, a 
method of flowing Euglena in a flow path at high speed and 
taking an image with a high-speed camera, and an optical 
observation method using light scattering such as 
fluorescence imaging, Raman scattering and Mie scattering 
have been developed [15]. These methods required complex 
optical systems, and the equipment itself was large and 
costly. If electrical shape identification becomes possible, 
complicated optical systems will be eliminated and hyper-
compact shape identification device consisting of electrodes 
and a small circuit board can be realized.  
   Conventionally, it has been known that there is a 
correlation between the average diameter of cells between 
electrodes 
and 
across 
nanopores 
and 
impedance 
characteristics, but it is not suitable for shape measurement 
of elongated cells such as Euglena. An inclined electrode is 
added between the normal electrodes, and the position 
information in the flow path of the target that has entered 
the electric field is the amplitude of the signal, the 
magnitude is the signal width, and the shape is the deviation 
between the rising and falling edges of the signal wave, that 
is, the eccentricity. As the result of measurement as (Tilt 
index), information on the cell shape can be obtained only 
by measuring the electrical impedance. This method of 
measuring electrical impedance using a device with a tilted 
electrode made it possible to accurately measure the size 
and shape of Euglena at a high speed of 1,000 cells per 
second. By widely applying this method to algae other than 
Euglena, it is possible to develop useful substances from 
algae, whose use is expected to expand in the future, from 
research to commercial-based industrialization. 
      Figure 10 shows the schematic flow of Euglena 
cultivation and its various utilizations. The huge amount of 
carbon dioxide is produced at the electric generation power 
company, therefore this massive amount of CO2 can be 
received by EUGLENA Co. Ltd. and used for growing / 
cultivating Euglena, because Euglena can be grown up by 
the absorption of CO2.  Euglena can be used for producing 
many products such as bio-fuel available for cars and jet 
plane. In case of application to cars, ISUZU, a famous diesel 
engine mounted car manufacturer in Japan already has the 
partnership with EUGLENA Co. Ltd. to produce bio-fuel 
for diesel engine in which the registered trade name is 
DEUSEL. This is now being used for public transportation 
bus and other type of cars. As for the case of bio jet fuel, 
HONDA business jet had a successful demonstration test 
flight [16].  
EUGLENA Co. Ltd. and HITACHI PLANT Co. Ltd. are 
jointly working to supply the bio jet-fuel and related plant 
depending on which product is targeting, bio jet fuel or 
residue supply for animal feed, organic fertilizer production 
etc. JX Nisseki Petroleum Co. Ltd plays a role of refining 
bio-fuel for final product. 
     Figure 11 shows the difference of the CO2 absorption 
capacity between Euglena and various kinds of tree. It can 
be obviously found from this comparison data that Euglena 
absorbs 30 times more than cedar and cypress trees. In 
addition it shows that Euglena can be usefully available for 
covering the four global issues. Euglena can be categorized 
as one of the important key resources from this point of 
view. The author understands that key resource may be 
defined as the useful important resource to cover the most of 
four global issues (tetralemma). Most of the agricultural 
crops are therefore categorized as key resources, however 
the conditions should be carefully considered to avoid or not 
to bring in unnecessary problems that conflict with each 
other among the issues. 
 
EUGLENA  
BUSINESS MODEL
Electric 
Power 
Generation 
Company
EUGLENA 
CO. Ltd
HITACHI 
PLANT Co. Ltd.
AIR LINE 
Company
Bio-fuel Refinery
for jet engine &
for diesel engine 
as DEUSEL
Utilization of
Animal feed, 
Fertilizer
Bio Jet Fuel 
Supply 
Industry 
Plant 
providing
JX NISSEKI Petroleum 
company
Industry Farm
Residue 
Supply of 
Protein etc.
Bio-fuel before 
refining
CO2
Decarboni-
zation
 
Figure 10. EUGLENA Co. Ltd. business model going on commercial base  
 
Euglena absorbs 30 times CO2
more than Cedar & Cypress tree
Kinds of tree
Carbon absorptiont-CO2/ha/year   
1 unit = 25 t-CO2
Natural hardwood
5 unit
Cedar
11 unit
Cypress
12 unit
Euglena
330 unit
Fertilizer for farming
Bio fuel / gas energy resource
Environment friendly resource       
Supplement for Human health
Various 
usage of 
Euglena
Figure 11. Euglena CO2 absorption comparison to some of the other trees  
D. Good Harvest Plan  
     This is also a business model proposed by TOYOTA. It 
is a contract-type business model for small-scale farmers or 
farmers who have no successor, but own farmland.  
 
   The farmer will contact the contracted center and request 
the dispatch of machine together with driver to carry out the 
necessary operations timely. The center will respond to the 
request by dispatching an appropriate driver according to 
the type of farming operation. The main operation is tillage, 

169
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
transplanting and harvesting, but the farmer is the owner of 
the farmland, however, does not physically work directly on 
farm. The number of such contractor-type farmers is 
increasing in Japan due to no successors. Agriculture in the 
high-tech and information era has the potential to 
significantly increase the entry of industries from 
completely different original sectors that are not closely 
related to an original agriculture [17]. 
    This plan is now going under trial for future extension 
and now being accepted by hundreds of aged farmers who 
have no next generation successors in some regional area.  
    In this system, they have one private sector company 
expressed above as the center or organization to take care of 
those aged farmers' farmlands not in use and left abandoned 
for them which is a similar organization to the Farmers 
Cooperatives. Famers those who are mentioned above have 
their farmlands, but they can't work physically any more due 
to aging. However they have no need to sell them. Farmland 
is one of the precious properties for them. In the future those 
farmlands may be happily purchased with higher price by 
the local government in case of new city/rural area 
development plan is officially announced. This is the reason 
why most of the aged farmers insist to keep and own the 
farmland in spite of no successors.  
    On the other hand, the completely new or originally 
different industry from agriculture and the related sector 
would like to join and expand the new market in agricultural 
sector business. Not only TOYOTA, but also the other 
industries which are originally different from agricultural 
sector are actively trying to find and actively join the IT, 
Information Technology and IoT, Internet of Things based 
new agriculture business. This is one of the characteristic, 
but common trends and examples of industries how they can 
do it easily without owning any farmlands. It can be 
obviously found from this background that: 
1) Any different kind of industry from agriculture can join  
     the agricultural sector business without owning any  
     farmlands, but IT and IoT instead. 
2) They can provide the technology and farm management  
     system for whole season farming and production based  
     on the contract. 
3) Aging issue of farmers and next era successor growing  
     and development may be solved, however the agriculture  
     promotion must be also achieved along the right way  
     targeting the highly motivated future farmer resource  
     development equipped with higher education    
The following shows the framework structure and function 
of Good harvest plan proposed by TOYOTA.   
Farmers can contact and request the company / organization 
to send the professional operator with machine to complete 
the requested operation. Of course the farmers pay the equal 
amount of fee to the company. They have a contract in the 
beginning of the season. This is one of the contract based 
farming. Crop can be grown up and managed from the 
beginning up to the end of the cultivation. Even while the 
crop is growing, the farmers can monitor and know how 
their crops are growing through the photo taken by drone 
and think what they should do. This is one of the examples 
to see how IT, Information Technology and IoT, Internet of 
Things make any other various industries to join and find 
new business opportunity even though they are completely 
different from the original farmers. 
 
E. Animal Factory 
      This is an animal version factory of a plant factory. The 
target livestock are dairy, beef cattle, pig farming, and 
poultry farming, but unlike growing in a limited space, this 
is a project to give time to walk around freely in a wide 
space and to carry out breeding management of livestock 
with high quality meat. Individual livestock animal 
management such as beef cattle, daily cow etc. using small 
device and equipment incorporating information and 
communication technology is extremely needed. The 
necessary information is sent as data from sensors attached 
to dairy cows and beef cattle grazing in the pasture to the 
central center and used for individual health management.  
   One micro chip memory or the ID tag is embedded or 
clipped to each individual livestock animal. It has not only 
the memory function, but also the one as the sensor for 
gathering and sending the data as the signal to the central 
data acquisition station too. While the herd of animals are 
released in the pasture outside the stable, they walk around 
freely here and there looking for eating grasses. The 
embedded micro chip can be used so as to play a role of ID 
(Identification Card) and sensors, therefore, all the 
biographical data such as the place of birth, how old it is 
now, how it was grown up by whom (livestock animal 
producer) after it was born are installed in there. In addition, 
the various dynamic health data can be gathered and sent as 
the telemetry signal to the central data station. Those data 
are heart pulse, momentum calculated by use of the data 
obtained from the small sensor similar to the pedometer 
function, body temperature to find and know the abnormal 
health condition such as fever, total walking distance and its 
motion trajectory which can be calculated and processed 
from GPS signal. On the way back to the stables, the weight 
of each individual animal can be measured by guiding and 
passing livestock one by one to the place where the load 
sensor to measure the weight is buried. The exact three 
dimensional shape data (weight, length, width) of individual 
livestock animal can be automatically measured too.   
All the gathered data are stored in both of the memories 
installed in the embedded memory chip and the device set at 
the central data acquisition station. Those data can be also 
used in traceability system to ensure the safety and security 
of food. 
 
F. Beef  Traceability 
     It was already mentioned above how important the 
mutual liability between producer and consumer. Food 

170
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
security has four important keywords such as 2QSL 
consisting of Quantity, Quality, Safety and Liability. One of 
the most important problems, but difficult one to negotiate, 
is the mutual liability issue. No matter how famous and 
well-known companies are, if they do not manage well, they 
will disperse false information. They can cheat the place of 
the production, fake the contents of the product, rewrite the 
expiration date, and do embarrassing acts without hesitation. 
The other three conditions except mutual liability are 
relatively easy to clear and satisfy. This is because there is 
no problem as far as the standard code level is cleared. 
   As already mentioned above, all the data related to the 
individual animals are stored in the memory and uploaded 
on the website / homepage normally prepared by the 
producer side such as farmers and shops, therefore any 
consumers, as well as customers seeking beef, can obtain all 
the information about where the beef in front of them was 
produced and how it was brought to this place. Standard 
code varies slightly sometimes depending on the locality 
and the shop. Barcode and QR code (registered trade 
number: 4075066) which is the abbreviated expression of 
Quick Response developed by DENSO Corporation Ltd, 
Japan is normally mounted on the package of final products. 
The consumers can obtain the information easily and make 
the final judge and decision whether to buy or not. The 
shops and producers should know the standard, because they 
must be responsible for the product safety especially for 
food products because it leads to the fatal problem. Even in 
car manufacturing industry, the product liability is the first 
priority to consider as well. One of the most important and 
difficult issues to control is the mutual liability between 
producers (shops and farmers) and consumers. Some of the 
shops put the fake label for the purpose of cheating the 
consumers intentionally caused by the poor management. 
Once this happened even accidentally, it takes longer time 
to get the trust and same level of liability as they had before. 
The issue of product liability should be seriously considered 
with first priority always. This is because those accidents 
lead to fatal injuries and even fatal accidents.  
   The meaning of food security consists of four factors 
expressed 
simply 
with 
2QSL. 
This 
abbreviated 
representation shows the capital letter of the four factors of 
2Q (Quantity and Quality), Safety and Liability.   
   Of these four factors, the most difficult to control is 4. 
There is no problem if the other three meet the set standard 
values, but it is difficult to express mutual trust between 
humans numerically, and the level varies from person to 
person even in case of satisfactory level mutually. Only one 
of the ways at this moment to secure the safety and to 
deepen the mutual liability is to accumulate the mutual trust 
honestly. The name value is also created in this way. 
Therefore, once the act of losing trust was done, it is 
difficult to reestablish mutual trust. With the rapid increase 
of human population in the world, food issue must be one of 
the most serious issues.  
   Even now, about 1 billion people in the world are facing 
food conditions that are insufficient both quantitatively and 
nutritionally. Traceability is one of the issues that should be 
considered immediately from the viewpoint of food 
distribution including the food crisis. It is necessary to 
ensure sufficient food supply to be reliable more than 
sufficient production, supply and safety. The author would 
like to emphasize here the importance of food safety and 
security in order to make Asia, a resource oriented country, 
the world's food pantry. The author strongly hopes that by 
introducing here what kind of situation the effective 
technology for that is currently in, it will lead to the further 
importance and solution of the problem.  
   The reason why the author would like to emphasize the 
importance of food issue can be summarized again as 
follows. 
1) Food production should be increased due to the rapid  
      increase of human population 
2) Asia has a  lot of potentiality to make it possible  
      however there are some problems in safety and quality  
       control of the final food products 
 3)  Safe and reliable food must be supplied always 
 4) Traceability can provide more transparent information  
       related to food safety and liability quickly and exactly. 
 
G. International Collaborations 
      Asia can be qualified as a world food pantry in 
production and supply, however, farmers are still working in 
poor conditions due to various problems such as family 
labor and low income mainly caused by small scale farming. 
The ASEAN community based international collaboration is 
really needed in technology transfer and human resources 
development. Technology oriented countries should join and 
actively invest in Asia for further economic promotion and 
regional peace keeping. The author is making a proposal 
named FFA (Future Farmers of Asia).  
 
V. 
PROJECT PROPOSAL 
A. Asia Food Project 
        Asia is one of the huge agricultural production regions 
and most of the member countries belonging to the ASEAN 
Economic Community (AEC) are more or less dependent on 
the individual national economy obtained from agriculture. 
The agricultural production is extremely high in Asia as a 
whole, producing an amount comparable to that of the world 
food pantry, however each farmer has the following 
characteristics. Most of these characteristics are problematic 
in reducing the attractiveness of the agricultural industry, 
this is, their recognition as unattractive industry, and 
constantly relying on subsidies and support from the central 
government, which encourages young generation people to 
leave agriculture and succeeds. The factors that hinder the 
promotion of agriculture itself are listed as follows. 

171
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1) Small-scale farming, 2) Family labor, 3) Low income, 4) 
Hard work, 5) Aging, 6) Working poor 
     Figure 12 shows the Asia Food Project scheme and 
concept. As already explained in Figure 4, this project 
consists of the collaboration between two types of country 
groups: one is ASEAN community, which is a resource-
oriented country group, will provide resources, and the other 
group is ASEAN plus 3, which is a technology-oriented 
country will provide technology. Then both groups will 
work to create and develop good cooperative and 
competitive relationships with each other. Technology-
oriented countries send experts to this project. Experts 
should be carefully selected and registered referring to the 
program contents.  
      Firstly, the project has to push up Asia to the world's 
food pantry that enables massive production and supply at a 
level enough to respond to the world's food supply and 
demand in a timely manner. Once that goal is achieved, the 
next step will be a development and creation of the reliable 
Asian food brand product that can guarantee safety and 
liability between producer and consumer.  As a result, both 
of the stable agriculture and economy promotion can be 
achieved, and the sustainable stability of regional peace 
keeping in Asia can be maintained. In the way of process, 
technology transfer and human resource development will 
be carried out in parallel. The main purpose of establishing a 
community is to deter war between community member 
countries. Cooperation and competition are necessary for 
mutual encouragement and prosperity. If the spirit of 
collaboration and competition among member countries 
disappears, the interdependence will be increased, which 
will hinder the operation of the community. This spirit is 
also necessary to prevent excessive dependence on other 
countries. If the two promotions of agriculture and economy 
can be stably managed and maintained, the development of 
the community will be well promoted, and the mutual 
prosperity of both technology-oriented and resource-
oriented countries will be achieved, and the win-win 
relationship will be built up as a result. 
 
ASIA FOOD PROJECT
• Project concept
1) Collaboration between Resource 
oriented and Technology oriented 
countries to make  Asia the
World Food Pantry, where 
Resource oriented countries: 
ASEAN (Asia) and Technology 
oriented countries (ASEAN+3)
2) Create and develop Asia food 
brand to promote economy & 
keep regional peace
3) Mutual benefit & prosperity 
sharing 
Collaboration  
/ Competition
New brand
creation
Win-Win
sharing
1
2
3
 
                  Figure 12.  Asia Food Project scheme 
 
     It can be therefore summarized and concluded from 
the discussion mentioned above that the ultimate goal is the 
sustainable development under coexistence and co-prosperity 
of Asian countries. In the process of reaching the final goal, 
the project has to make Asia the world food pantry firstly 
and to develop Asian brand food products secondly that can 
pave safety and security for economic promotion and stable 
maintenance of regional peace keeping. In the process of 
reaching this level, technology transfer and human resources 
development will be carried out in parallel in Asia Techno 
Farm Initiatives program. 
     Figure 13 shows the framework of Asia Techno Farm 
program consisting of three bodies: 1) University, 2) 
Government and 3) Industry. Those three have their own 
roles to play jointly to make the program fruitful and 
successful. They are explained as shown below. 
 
  ① University 
One of the universities offered the project (program) should 
be approved and appointed as the Asia Food Project 
organizer to be responsible even for taking care of Asia 
Techno Farm program management and operation. 
University farm or experiment station should be provided to 
be used as the demonstration site, research experiment site 
and practical cultivation site for growing FFA (Future 
Farmers of Asia program). FFA program participants are 
requested to experience the practical rice cultivation for one 
season from planting to harvesting taking about four months  
  
  ② Government 
The relevant government ministries and agencies will 
investigate the project proposal applied and submitted by 
the universities carefully and make a decision to issue the 
budget allocation, and notify the approved university of the 
examination result of project application. Some additional 
comment and advices may be added if they have. 
 
  ③ Industry 
In promoting the project and program, the participation and 
cooperation by the related industries should be requested, 
especially for machine trouble shooting and maintenance 
with the spare parts supply. The related industries are 
strongly requested to join and provide equipments, and one 
staff for covering the above mentioned correspondence to 
various things. Industries are also requested to provide the 
secondhand equipments as the teaching materials in case. It 
is desirable if one staff is resident and is always on standby 
to prepare for problems. Special benefits should be 
considered instead for the cooperating companies. 
   The main purpose of the Asia Techno Farm Program is to 
train farmers who can lead the next-era agriculture using 
advanced technology. Agricultural income is limited on a 
small scale, and it is unlikely that it will be able to compete 
with big scale agriculture in the world market. 

172
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
ATF, ROLE OF 3 BODIES
provides
1) Machines / 
equipments
2) Technician
University
Provides
Budget as 
National project
Techno 
Farm
Program 
scheme
Global Solution
(Food & Energy / Environment)
Precision Agriculture
Agricultural Robot
Green Factory
Special Education
Social service
1
2
3
4
5
6
Asia 
Techno
Farm
program 
Facilitated at
Some of the
National organizations
Universities 
Research Institutes in 
Some ASEAN member
Agricultural countries
Smart Agriculture
For Demonstration
For Experiment
For FFA Practicing
Government
Industry
Provides
1) Program
2) Facility
(Farm)
for program 
operation
11
1
2
3
Monthly / Regular 
Meeting to get 
together
Asia Techno Farm, Role of 3 BODIES
 
Figure 13.  Asia Techno Farm Initiative program 
 
This program focuses on precision agriculture, robotics, and 
green (plant) factories. It is important to train next-
generation farmers in consideration of large-scale farming. 
Participants are not necessarily limited to Thailand, but 
considering the acceptance of applicants from ASEAN 
countries. The mutual collaboration among the member 
countries of the ASEAN Economic Community can be 
promoted. English is the common official language aiming 
to configure a human resources network not only in Asia, 
but also worldwide toward the future from the viewpoints of 
internationalization and globalization. 
 
Program 
scheme
Global Solution
(Food & Energy / Environment)
Precision Agriculture
Agricultural Robot
Green Factory
Special Education
Social service
1
2
3
4
5
6
Asia 
Techno
Farm
program 
Facilitated at
Some of the
National organizations
Universities 
Research Institutes in 
Some ASEAN member
Agricultural countries
Smart Agriculture
Figure 14.  Further detailed program contents of Asia Techno Farm project 
 
    The initial goal can be therefore achieved by promoting 
agricultural mechanization equipped with highly advanced 
technology considering the farming scale shift from small 
scale to larger scale due to the upper limit of production 
from small-scale farming. This is however not to provide 
the part-time job for small scale farmers to increase the low 
income, but to achieve the goals shown below fostering 
large-scale high-tech based farming. 
  1) Make Asia the world food pantry 
  2) Create Asian food brand with originality 
  3) Promote economy and agriculture through the above  
        two processes in addition to maintain the stability of  
        regional peace. 
Asia Techno Farm program has several fields and functions 
as shown in Figure 14. Smart agriculture consisting of three 
main technologies (precision agriculture, robotics and green 
factory) are already mentioned, therefore the other three 
divisions are explained here.  
 
  ①Global solution 
Lectures on global issues are provided and given not only 
related to agriculture, but also the others such as food, 
energy, environment caused by poverty and hunger, food 
residue, agricultural waste, disaster, waste management & 
treatment, haze issue, ocean pollution due to abandoned 
plastics, flooding & land slide, release of heavy metals, 
mass spraying of chemicals (pesticides and herbicides) etc. 
 
  ⑤Special education 
This division is prepared for teaching the additional 
technique something like the ways how to connect smart 
phone to the various equipment and sense, measure, monitor, 
process the signal and gathered data. The skills of regular 
and final report assembly and presentation material making 
are taught. Formerly as far as concerned with the training 
program of machine design for example, the black smith 
skill was taught first and ends at the level of learning how to 
use CAD, however, the era changed completely and it is still 
changing due to new technology innovation day by day. 
More compact, faster, big data processing capacity handy 
device development can make it possible. These are now 
being applied to new era agriculture. The era has come in 
which even amateurs who has no experience can join and 
start agricultural business, but some training program should 
be prepared to educate even the young ones to make them 
familiar with actual application of knowledge and skill 
usage for farming. In the information era, advanced 
knowledge of technology and skills are acquired and it is 
certain that even amateurs who have nothing to do with 
agriculture can join the agricultural business.  It is however 
necessary to invest the necessary amount of the capital. In 
addition, it is really difficult and impossible to provide the 
technology and financial support to all farmers individually, 
therefore here introduces one idea on how to change and 
improve the current situation of Asian agriculture and 
proposes concrete countermeasures.  
 
1) Most of the farmers can't work physically on farm due to  
     aging. In case of Japan the average age of a farmer is  
     about 65 years old. This background is also an example  
     of the participation of the IT industry such as Good  
     Harvest Plan in the agricultural sector. By the way, who  
     will get more benefit in this case, farmers or  
     industry? For further promotion of agriculture, next era  
     farmers should be grown up, who must be highly  
     interested and motivated to be a farmer equipped with  
     pride and dignity to the profession as the farmer.   

173
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
2) High technology is developed and innovated day by day,  
     however they don't know how to apply and use them for  
     farming. Even in case of high tech equipment such as  
     smart phone connectable to many of things through  
     internet.. It looks extremely hard for aged farmers to  
     learn and use them on farming, who can't work  
     physically any more.  
3) In addition, they require the investment, however, they  
     don't have any extra money to buy those high tech  
     mounted machine and equipment due to low income 
4) The new project should be therefore proposed focusing  
      on youth motivation and considering the above  
      mentioned troublesome situation   
 
    The Future Farmers of Asia Initiative project proposed 
here is mainly aiming at the trainer training / development,  
who can be qualified as the leader enough to transfer those 
high technologies and apply them to actual farming. The 
support to all individual farmers should be separately 
considered because of the reason as shown below.   
 
1) It takes longer time and difficult to consider and take care  
    of all aged farmers.  
2) The issue of farmland ownership involves many  
    complicated problems legally under different conditions  
    of individual farmers 
3) The highly motivated young generation should be  
     targeted for growing FFA. They are already familiar with  
     those high-tech equipments and devices on a daily basis 
4) The target under consideration is neither an individual  
    farmer nor an individual country. That is to train and  
    grow technical leaders first in the region of ASEAN  
    Economic Community.  
5) The regional agriculture and economy should be  
    promoted for regional peace keeping by making Asia the  
    world's food pantry as already mentioned before. 
   The poverty is one of the obstacle factors for regional  
    peace keeping.    
6) Agricultural promotion can't be achieved by supporting  
    individual farmers only. By promoting the economy  
    centered on agriculture in the regional community, it is  
    possible to promote cooperation and competition among  
    the participating countries and maintain and stabilize  
    agriculture, economy and regional peace. 
 
Aged farmer has difficulty to follow the high-technology 
based agriculture, however, the young generation can do it 
easily with pleasure. On the other hand, in this division, 
additional curriculum is offered for the farmers especially 
small scale farmers who would like to actively to change the 
job from agriculture to the other industry. Active 
recommendation and guidance to those farmers is also one 
of the ways of income increase for them. In addition the 
full-time farmer will get more opportunities to have their 
farmlands for large scale farming. Reducing the population 
of small scale farmers makes opportunities for full-time 
farmers to buy those farmlands for farming scale expansion. 
Guidance and future possibility on how they should do are 
advised including the problems to encounter and overcome, 
the way for negotiation etc. Farmers are however not forced 
to change the job and the decision making depends on their 
own will. Only in case they have strong intention to scale-
up or change the job from agriculture to some other sector, 
they are advised and guided. 
    The statement mentioned above may be misunderstood 
too. Further description is therefore added here as follows. 
The situation is different depending on the countries even in 
Asia. Especially in Thailand the farmers (farmland owner) 
are not allowed to leave the farmland left abandoned 
without cultivating any crops. If they do so, they are 
imposed to pay tax and fine, however, the government 
controls rice farmers not to grow rice due to the over-
production of rice in Japan. The farmers are forced to 
submit the cultivation plan not to cultivate rice in the 
beginning of the fiscal year, but they are allowed to cultivate 
rice just for the purpose of farmland conservation, not to get 
income from rice production. Farmers are not allowed to 
harvest rice for this purpose. It should be cut away and 
treated as "not food", but just for maintaining the land as 
paddy field. Certain amount of subsidy had been paid 
instead to cover the income reduction due to this 
cooperation to the production control. The government 
officer come to visit farmer and inspect the site one month 
before the harvest season how the farmer treated rice giving 
the question of "Was rice treated suitably as "Not rice for 
food".  The purpose of policy enforcement is to keep the 
income of farmers as the original because overproduction of 
rice lowers the price of rice. In order to keep farmers' 
income high, rice production is curtailed, and the 
government will cover the income that is reduced by 
production control with taxes. The market principle does not 
work under this circumstance. Not only that, in addition to 
criticism from taxpayers for how to use the taxes they paid, 
farmers' pride in the profession of agriculture and declining 
motivation have resulted in a situation where the future 
successors do not grow. Basically, long-term production 
control policy cannot be continued for a long time by 
private companies. It is a stupid policy that can be done only 
by the government using public subsidy funds (tax). 
   In general, it is common sense not to take production 
control policy in the situation of overproduction, but to 
respond by expanding consumption, developing new 
products, and new markets development. The production 
control policy has been continued over than a half century, 
therefore, most of the rice farmers were spiritually 
discouraged and they have no more hopes to grow next era 
successors. Almost more than 400 thousand hectares of 
paddy fields are not cultivated and left abandoned in Japan 
even though the country is very small and the food self-
sufficiency is less than 40 %. The full-time farmers are only 
15%. The rest of 85% of the farmers are now part-time 
farmers. Full-time farmers are increasing their farming scale 

174
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
by contracting to rent the farmland of small-scale farmers 
who have difficulty in continuing agriculture due to the 
aging population and lack of successors. However, since the 
agricultural land is not accumulated and scattered all over 
the place, the transportation of machines and the delivery of 
the agricultural land to the leased agricultural land are 
problems. 
   Part-time farmers look mostly satisfied enough because 
they can get the regular salary monthly from the part-time 
job, even though they are not paid so much higher, but they 
can purchase the machine to take care of their farmland 
maintenance enough. The increase of part-time farmer by 
providing the part-time job makes the small scale, low 
income farmer rich enough to buy the machine of their own 
for taking care of their family such as the education of their 
children. Most of the part-time farmers are satisfied well 
with such a daily life, therefore they have no need to sell 
their farmland and change the job. This situation was caused 
by the governmental production policy implementation. It 
can be clearly found from this act that it is important and 
necessary to support farmers and make them rich 
financially, however no good results couldn't be brought as 
expected. No promotion of agriculture couldn't be achieved 
even they became rich in economy even in the future as far 
as the same situation is continued. The main point of this 
paper is not to repeat the same thing again as we learned 
from this policy enforcement and show the direction which 
way we should lead and guide the Asian agriculture and 
grow the Future Farmers of Asia. Fortunately Asia has a lots 
of natural resources (including food resources) and higher 
potentiality to produce and supply to all over the world. It is 
extremely important from the food issue viewpoint due to 
the world population increase that we should take action 
immediately to achieve the final goal to transfer the 
technology which is competitive in the world and to grow 
human resources (FFA) equipped with higher education.  
   Japan is well known as one of the technology oriented 
countries, however, agriculture is not an attractive job and 
profession for young generation. 
   The author believes Asia has higher possibility in 
agriculture, and cooperation and competition between 
technology oriented and resource oriented countries can 
maximize its potential towards the future. Time is limited 
and sooner is better to be ready for taking action to the 
upcoming food issue caused by the rapid human population 
growth. 
 
  ⑥Social service 
After the successful completion of the program, the 
official certificate should be issued. This is the division to 
take care of those matters. Required documents for official 
approval, certification and authentication can be prepared 
and issued if needed. 
 
 
 
C. Future Farmer of Asia growing Program 
     Figure 15 shows the FFA growing program scheme and 
content. As already mentioned, Asia is one of the huge 
agricultural production regions in the world. A big amount 
of food resource is grown up, however, the quality of them 
is not highly controlled. The value can be added more if it 
could be controlled in addition to food security. The most 
important point to keep in mind is to promote the regional 
agriculture and economy, not to increase the farmer's 
income.  
    The summarized content of the FFA growing program is 
shown in Figure 15. The total length of the training is set 
around six months including the one month orientation and 
final wrap-up. Participants are normally accepted not only 
from Thailand, but also from ASEAN member countries. 
Acceptance of trainees (participants) from ASEAN member 
countries basically requires a letter of acceptance from the 
host country's national government. The cost of acceptance 
will be borne by the recipient. The target crop of the 
program is mainly rice since rice is a typical staple food 
crop, and more than 90% of the world's production is 
cultivated in Asia. In Thailand, rice can be possibly 
cultivated two to three times a year, therefore, the stable 
production and supply can be possible. Even Data collection 
in rice cultivation tests can be also possible at any time of 
the year. This is also one of the characteristic merits of rice 
cultivation in tropical region. 
 
SA Training center
Japan / Thailand
Trainee /
Participants from 
ASEAN
10~15 / year
Program contents
Length: 7 month in Japan 
1 month in Thailand
for supplementary program
Program package
Small Scale Mechanization
Background / status
Big Scale High Tech Farming
Global solution
(Food, Energy, Environment)
Smart agriculture
・Precision Agriculture
・Robotics
・Green Factory
Special education
Social service
FFAgrowing program
Objective crop: Rice mainly
One season : 4 months
Other crops depend on program topic
plus 3 months : Practical skill up, Field 
work, Data processing, Report assembly, 
Presentation skill etc.
Study tour to Research Institute, 
University, Industry, Related 
organization
Another 1 month: Supplementary 
program in Thailand
Rice and upland agriculture  
FFA growing program 
Training Center
Thailand /Japan
Thailand
Japan
6
1
 
Figure 15. Future Farmers of Asia growing program scheme 
 
     Participants are requested to cultivate rice for one season. 
The purpose is to learn practical skills how to grow it as one 
season experience. Bi-weekly or monthly report submission 
is also requested with short time presentation should be 
done at the regular meeting. Lecturers are invited for 
delivering the lectures during three to four days per one time 
invitation. The lecturer has to stay about one week per one 
time invitation. The rest of two to three days should be spent 
together with the participants to visit site and discuss on the 
related topics. This is a valuable opportunity even for the 
lecturer to know more Asian agriculture and to deepen 
friendship with trainees. The total number of lecturers will 

175
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
be around 20 or so. The ratio of the invited lecturers from 
outside Thailand to inside will be around 60% to 40% or so. 
Further discussion should be done on this matter referring to 
the curriculum. The lecturers may be invited from university, 
research institute, industry, in which they are working 
actively as the professional, expert, engineer, specialist etc. 
 
D. Workshop holding 
Workshop on Precision Agriculture and Agricultural 
Machinery Industry for Thailand 4.0
Date: September 19 ~ 20, 2017
Location:  TISTR Lamtakhong Research station, Ministry 
of Science and Technology, Pakchong Nakorn Rachasima
Thailand Institute of Scientific and Technological Research has 
MOU agreed  with NARO, Japan etc. after this event
Figure 16. Workshop on Precision Agriculture for Thailand 4.0 
 
The workshop on precision agriculture and agricultural 
machinery industry for Thailand 4.0 was organized and held   
by Ministry of Science and Technology, on September 19-
20, 2017 as shown in Figure 16. The author was requested 
to contact and arrange the invited speakers. The field 
demonstration was also conducted by the participated 
industries using their products 
  
E. Similar training programs in the past 
 
JICA Group Training 
Program by NPO
Practicing on 
local farm
Acceptance 
by local 
government
Trainees at Host Farmer’s rice 
processing facility
 
Figure 17.  Joint Group training program by JICA and  NPO 
 
     JICA, Japan International Cooperation Agency, the 
Government of Japan initiated the group training program 
focusing on two courses: 1) Rice mechanization and 2) 
Machine design. Around 15 participants were accepted 
based on bilateral agreements between partner and host 
countries. Participants stay almost six months at the 
accommodation provided by the host country. They were 
requested to join the lectures and field training of rice 
cultivation for practical experience and skill-up. Study tour 
program to visit the various organizations such as university, 
national research institute & experiment station, government 
organization related to the course requirement. Two to three 
days home stay program at Japanese rice farmer was also 
involved to know not only rice mechanization, but also the 
daily life of rice farmer. For home stay program at local 
farmers, the official support was obtained by the city 
government and agricultural cooperatives.     
 
F. Hopeful possibility for hyper-low cost rice production  
   There are two planting ways in existing rice farming, 
however the acceptance ratio of these two planting methods 
varies depending on the following factors such as climate, 
locality, labor force hiring costs, and technical liability. In 
Japan, almost 90% of rice is transplanted, whilst in Thailand 
the ratio of transplanting to direct sowing is 50% to 50%. 
The reason why the transplanting is more widely accepted 
than direct sowing is that the following problems have not 
been solved yet in direct sowing. They are 1) bird attack to 
the seed sowed at the ground surface of paddy field, 2) 
lodging problem by strong wind while growing, because the 
sowed seed is uncovered with soil and exposed, and 3) weed 
control. Seed coating by CaO2, calcium peroxide is to 
provide oxygen to promote germination and improve its 
percentage under submerged condition in the soil. 
     Figure 18 shows the coated seed with CaO2, which 
produces oxygen reacting with water. The ferrite, Fe2O3 
can be also used as coating aids for precision seed sowing, 
because the ferrite coated seed can be used for seed 
detecting by use of magnetic sensor, therefore the number of 
seed can be counted per unit time and area. Seed population 
density sowed per unit area can be easily calculated while 
the operation is going on and monitored for the planting 
machine driver to see. It looks that the coating technology 
has higher potentiality in future as follows. The main 
purpose of coating using CaO2 shown here is to provide 
oxygen for promoting the germination and increasing its 
percentage. The coating with Ferrite (Fe2O3) has the other 
merits such as additional weight increase of seed to 
penetrate into the soil, precision sowing by sensing, 
counting and monitoring the number of seed for the machine 
driver to know how many seeds are being sowed etc. If the 
other functional aids like herbicides, pesticides, fertilizer etc. 
could be possibly coated, the rice cultivation process will be 
drastically simplified. The direct sowing of those coated 
seeds by drone will be one of the near future hopeful 
technologies.  
 The problem of direct sowing of rice is 1) weed control, 2) 
bird attack and 3) lodging in order of importance. Just only 

176
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
two weeks after seed sowing is the most important duration 
for the farmers to be nervous wondering if the seed is 
germinated and sprouted enough 
SEED COATING BY CHEMICALS
Ferrite 
coated 
seed 
1 tray = 3 kg
20~25 trays/0a
600 kg~ 750 kg/ha 
Seed coating 
process
Transplanting
Nursery rice plant 
tray ready for 
transplanting
Seed 3kg + 
Coating aid 
3 kg/10a= 6 
kg x 10= 60 
kg/ha 
CaO2 (left) and Coated rice by it (right) 
  
Figure18. Coated rice with chemicals, CaO2 
 
     Figure 19 shows the rice combine equipped with direct 
de-husking function under harvesting operation, which can 
de-husk the rough rice directly as soon as the rice is 
harvested and threshed. 
EXPERIMENT IN PROGRESS
University Experiment Farm
Direct
De-husker
Husk blower & 
straw chopper
Rice plant 
cutting
Rice husk ratio in 
rough rice
Weight: about 15 %
Volume: 40%
BROWN RICE AT OUTLET
Brown rice
Coming out
Brown rice 
collection
container
Rubber roll
Impeller
COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT 
TYPES OF HUSKING METHODS
Figure 19.  Combine de-husker under harvesting operation 
 
   A series of three operations consisting of harvesting, 
threshing and de-husking can be done in one pass operation 
simultaneously even high moisture rice. This research was 
conducted and reported long time ago by the author, 
however the commercial product is not coming out yet due 
to the small injury on to the brown rice caused by the impact 
of impeller rotating at high peripheral speed of 32m/s.   The 
impeller type de-husker is coming to see often at exhibitions 
mainly focusing on the compactness, maintenance free and 
simple mechanism and structure as the rice de-husker. 
       In the future, the possibility of extending these two 
technologies is extremely high due to the simplification of 
agricultural operation processes, energy saving, labor saving, 
and ease of material handling [18].   
     In the past, the indicators of machine development for 
agricultural mechanization were 1) energy saving, 2) 
automation, and 3) safety. There are some overlaps among 
these three indicators, but basically it starts with 
mechanizing the basic agricultural operation that is the 
principle. The general process is to reduce the number of 
operation process, simplify, perform simultaneous or serial 
operation, and improve accuracy by automation, and the 
technology described here is one of the possibilities. In 
order for technology to be installed in a commercialized 
machine, it will not be put into practical use or 
commercialized at once unless some related technologies 
surrounding it are in the same level of situation and 
environment. As we already know, it is important to identify 
problems and investigate their causes. Needless to say, the 
social needs of the technology are also one of the major 
factors for technological development, commercialization, 
and dissemination. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
    Global tetralemma is a common issue not only in Asia, 
but also in the world, and these issues must be resolved 
urgently. Asia is qualified as a world food pantry capable of 
producing and supplying huge amounts of food. Although 
the production is however large, the quality of the products 
is not well controlled. From the perspective viewpoint of 
food security due to the rapid increase in the world 
population, technology-oriented countries should actively 
invest in Asia through technology transfer and human 
resource development. A collaboration in which technology-
oriented countries provide technology and resource-oriented 
countries provide resources is effective in solving mutual 
common problems. In other words, avoidance of food crisis, 
escape from hunger and poverty, and promotion of regional 
economy bring regional peace keeping and its stability. 
Agricultural policy is not about providing farmers with 
financial support to increase their income. It is more 
important to have a policy to strengthen the agriculture 
rather than supporting farmers. If such a policy is continued, 
there can be no promotion of agriculture. In Japan, a rice 
production control policy was implemented for half a 
century, but, as a result of that, agriculture has declined 
significantly rather than being promoted. Although the 
aging of farmers will come sooner or later, looking down on 
the agriculture industry has brought about a serious situation 
where young successors are not interested in continuing in 
that sector. Given that industry is production-based, 
production control is not an option. Rather, the basic 
principle is to focus on developing new markets and 
increasing consumption. Food is an indispensable resource 
for human survival, and the prosperity of agriculture-based 
Asia is important and necessary not only for Asia, but also 
for the world. Rice cultivation system consists of basically 
three operation processes such as planting, managing rice 
plant while growing and harvesting. The existing rice 

177
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
cultivation system can be reconsidered for further 
improvement to cost down by the replacement of planting 
method from transplantng to direct sowing and the 
introduction of combine harvester equipped with rice de-
husking functional mechanism that enables the threshing of 
high-moisture rough rice. This combine has the function of 
processing the three operations of rice harvesting, threshing, 
and rice hulling at the harvesting stage, further facilitates 
material handling and saves labor. There can be seen a high 
possibility that the shift to a system that aims to save energy 
and achieve hyper-low cost production of rice is high.  
    Due to the preference of consumers who dislike brown 
rice with tiny damage and injury caused in the hulling 
process of high-moisture rough rice, it has not yet been 
commercialized. It should be hurry to set and clarify the 
criteria for the damage rate standard code of brown rice. 
From this point of view, the machine equipped with this de-
husking function has been focusing on the production and 
utilization of processed rice for a while and still some more 
time will be needed to be ready for the acceptance 
environment [19]. 
    IT, Information Technology and IoT, Internet of Things 
based high-tech agriculture provides the opportunity for 
many various kinds of industries to join and invest in 
agriculture. Regional community-based agriculture should 
be promoted in Asia instead of small scale farming. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author would like to express sincere appreciation to 
the organizing committee of SIGNAL 2021 for providing 
invaluable opportunity to deliver the keynote lecture related 
to his research activity in Asia sustainability at SIGNAL 
2021. Thanks to Dr. Ratchatphon Suntivarakorn, Dean of 
Faculty of Engineering and Dr. Chanoknun Sookkumnerd, 
Associate Professor, Faculty of Engineering, Khon Kaen 
University, Thailand for their support and encouragement. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Nobutaka Ito, Technology for overcoming the Global Tetralemma,  
SIGNAL2021 The Sixth International Conference on Advances in 
Signal, Image and Video, Valencia, Spain, May 30 - June 3, 2021 
Proceedings. Assigned and registered contribution id: 60011, 
Registered for main topic: SIGNAL 2021 : Signal process and 
Registered for secondary topic: SIGNAL 2021 : Signal process 
[2] Nobutaka Ito, Asian Agriculture Growth Strategy, Journal of 
JSAMFE, Japanese Society of Agricultural Machinery & Food 
Engineers, Vol. 77, No. 4, p. 226~231, 2015 
[3] Nobutaka Ito, Asian Agrifuture: How the Asian Agriculture can be 
achieved, The 7th International Conference of TSAE, Thai Society 
Agricultural Engineering,, July30, 2020, Suranaree University of 
Technology, Korat, Thailand 
[4] Nobutaka Ito , Asia Techno Farm, The International Conference of 
Building of Food  
Sovereignty through a Sustainable Agriculture: Challenge of Climate 
Change and Global  
Economic Community, University of Jember (UNEJ), East Java, 
Indonesia, August 1st ~ 3rd, 2017 
[5] Nobutaka Ito, Asia Techno Farm Initiative, Thai Society of 
Agricultural Engineering, Impact  
Arena, September 9 ~ 10, 2017 
[6] Noutaka Ito, FFA (Future Farmers of Asia) growing program, 
Proceedings of The  
11th TSAE International Conference, 26~27 April, Chulaborn 
International Convention  
Center (Wora Wara Hua Hin Hotel & Convention) Hua Hin, 
Prachuap Khin Khon, Thailand 
[7] Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, Research Center, 
Smart 
Agriculture 
homepage, 
https://www.maff.go.jp/j/kanbo/smart/ 
[8] Front runner, Professr, Dr. Noboru Noguchi, Graduate School of 
Agriculture, 
Field 
Robotics, 
Hokkaido 
University 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bNGkPfJdSDc 
[9] Noboru Noguchi, AG / SUM Agsum coverage (Hokkaido: the future 
brought about by robot tractors) Hokkaido University, Government of 
Japan, Cabinet Office SIP Secretariat, (AG/SUM means Agricultural 
Summit and SIP meas Cross ministerial Strategic Innovation 
Promotion Program respectively)  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WllOTRW8Hdw 
[10] TV Asahi morning news, One truck driver drives three cars in a   
platoon on the highway, March 9, 2021 
https://news.tv-asahi.co.jp/news_economy/articles/000209325.html 
[11] Nobutaka Ito, Robotics & Abenomics for ASEAN Economic 
Community and Asia Sustainability, MIER 2013, Joint Symposium 
on Mechanical-Industrial Engineering and Robotics 2013, Chiang 
Mai, Thailand, Extended abstract, page 18 November 14 – 17, 2013 
[12] Osaka Prefectural University,  Plant Factory home page 
https://www.plant-factory.osakafu-u,ac.jp/     [accessed   May 2021 
[13] Kinki University Fisheries Laboratory home page: 
http://www.flku.jp/english/index.html 
[14] EUGLENA-ISUZUproject:    
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-06-25/japan-s-isuzu-
euglena-to-begin-biodiesel-development-with-algae 
[15] Oxford Instruments,  
Overview of Various Forms of Light Scattering 
https://andor.oxinst.com/learning/view/article/scattering-of-light-an-
overview-of-the-various-forms-of-light-scattering 
[16] Nikkei Cross tech (X tech) article, June 29, 2021  
Micro that electrically determines the shape of algae  
cells at high speed ... --Euglena https://www.euglena.jp › news 
[17] Toyota 
Motor 
Corporation, 
Ltd., 
Good 
Harvest 
Plan:  
https://www.toyota.co.jp/housaku.plan.html      [accessed  May  2021] 
[18] Nobutaka Ito, Hyper Low Cost Rice Mechanization System, The 14th  
TSAE International Conference and the 22nd TSAE National   
Conference, Paper Code No. 10, May 12 - 13, 2021 organized and  
hosted by Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand, (Paper 
Award)  
[19] Nobutaka Ito, Asian Agriculture: How the Asian Agrifuture  can be 
achieved, The 7th International Conference of TSAE, Thai Society of 
Agricultural Engineering, July 30, 2020, Suranaree University of 
Technology, Korat, Thailand 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

