Effect Analysis of Creators’ Environmental Factors in Making a Tourist Map
for a Familiar Place
Yoko Nishihara
College of Information Science and Engineering
Ritsumeikan University
Shiga, Japan
nisihara@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp
Ryosuke Yamanishi
Faculty of Informatics
Kansai University
Osaka, Japan
ryama@kansai-u.ac.jp
Xinran Lin
College of Information Science and Engineering
Ritsumeikan University
Shiga, Japan
is0440re@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp
Ryohei Ohyama
College of Information Science and Engineering
Ritsumeikan University
Shiga, Japan
is0400hs@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp
Abstract—People use maps for directions and sightseeing,
but they rarely consider the process of map-making. Since
maps are made by several creators cooperatively, map-making
can be considered a collaborative decision-making process. If
this process is analyzed, we may discover that environmental
factors inﬂuence map-making. This study discovers the effects
of environmental factors for map-making through experiments
and analysis. We invited participants to join in the experiments,
in which they made a tourist map for a familiar place, and
we controlled the environmental factors in the map-making
process. The environmental factors include the following: (1) the
number of creators, (2) the presence of creators’ conversations,
and (3) the creators’ space. We analyzed the created maps,
tourist attractions, and participants’ conversations to determine
the effects of the environmental factors and found the following
three effects: (a) If the creators are many, then more tourist
attractions will be mapped, which corresponds to factor (1).
(b) If the creators have conversations, the rate of minor tourist
attractions increase, which corresponds to factor (2). (c) If the
map-making environment is virtual, then the map has more
tourist attractions than a physical one, which corresponds to
factor (3). We discovered the above effects of the environmental
factors in tourist map-making. According to the results of this
study, it is expected that people can obtain their desired maps
using these factors and effects.
Keywords - collaborative decision-making; tourist map making;
number of creators; conversation; physical and virtual spaces.
I. INTRODUCTION
People look at the map for sightseeing that introduces tourist
attractions. Tourist maps can be found in guidebooks or the
Internet. These maps are available at the tourist information
center of the tourist location. Through this map, they can
understand the outline of the tourist destination and locate
exciting places. Further, they can plan a route to see and enjoy
the fascinating tourist attractions.
Although the tourist maps are for the same location, the
creators are different, thus the maps are different. Each map
has original photos and descriptions of the tourist attractions.
People rarely consider the decision-making conducted in mak-
ing maps and choosing tourist attractions. Map-making is
considered a collaborative decision-making process since it
is conducted by several creators cooperatively. If the process
of map-making is analyzed, we may discover environmental
factors inﬂuencing it, which is not for automatic generation of
map but for interaction design for map-making.
This study discovers the effects of environmental factors
for map-making through experiments and analysis. We invited
participants to partake in the experiments of making a tourist
map. If the participants are unfamiliar with an area, they may
fail in an attempt to create a tourist map. Additionally, if tourist
maps already existed, the participants may be confused when
creating maps and choosing tourist attractions. Thus, we asked
the participants to create a map of a familiar place in the
experiment. They re-evaluated the familiar place and chose
spots that were preferable for tourist attractions. We controlled
factors in the experiments to obtain several types of tourist
maps and analyzed the maps to discover how the factors affect
tourist map-making.
The task in the experiment is not just ﬁnd the spot we
have already known but more creative where the participants
have to re-evaluate and create the meaning toward the spot,
thus, we consider that it should be “creator(s)” rather than
just “contributor(s).” We also consider that it should be “en-
vironmental factor(s)” rather than just “context.” Because the
creator’s space of map-making is not context.
A. Contribution
The world is full of contents. The research in computer sci-
ence has tried to analyze and utilize such big data of contents,
e.g., text classiﬁcation and music recommendation. So many
papers have proposed brand new techniques for processing
the data and claimed the effectiveness for some intended tasks.
However, we believe that the point of the research focusing on
contents should be not only the effectiveness in the designed
tasks but also how the data is coming. Especially for some
experience-based contents, how the data is created should be
more notable.
10
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 1. Interaction of tourist map-making. Creators have ideas of spots. They choose spots that would be tourist attractions and map them. They have
conversations among them to ﬁnd the other spots. They can work either in a physical and virtual space.
In our previous study presented at ACHI2021 [1], we
conducted a preliminary analysis of two factors and their
effects on tourist map-making. This study presents detailed
analysis results for the previous experiment and clariﬁes the
effects of the number of creators and the presence of creators’
conversations. Further, we include another factor about the
creators’ space and clarify the effect on tourist map-making.
The contribution of this paper can be summarized as fol-
lows;
1) It has been found that the number of creators and the
usage of virtual space increase the number of tourist
attractions on a tourist map.
2) It has also been found that conversations between cre-
ators increase the rate of minor tourist attractions that
may be exciting for tourists. The minor tourist attractions
included personal memories and impressions in their
descriptions. They re-evaluated their familiar place and
found spots preferable for tourist attractions. The re-
evaluation can generate a new value for a place even
if it is familiar.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II describes related works. Section III demonstrates a map-
making interaction and discusses the expected factors. Section
IV describes the ﬁrst experiment to verify the effect of the
number of creators and their conversations in map-making
and the results. Section V describes the second experiment
to verify the effect of the creators’ space in map-making and
the results. Section VI concludes this paper.
II. RELATED WORK
We introduced previous studies on map- and decision-
making supports.
A. Map-making with sensors and social media
People use map services on the Internet to search for
buildings and facilities. If the name of a building in the United
Kingdom and France are Big Ben and The Arch of Triumph,
respectively, the service will show the location of the building
on map 1. The outline of a city changes continuously as new
roads and buildings are built. Sensors such as GPS (Global
Positioning System) [2], [3] are used to update the existing
map to a new one. GPS data is used not only for updating
maps but also for making new ones; for example, a cycling
map [4], an evacuation map in a disaster-hit area [5], and a
ﬂoor map inside [6]. The trafﬁc volume of a city changes daily.
There may be a trafﬁc jam in the morning and evening, but
not during the day. GPS in automobiles is used for making a
trafﬁc map of a city [7]–[9]. Sensors are installed across a city.
Acoustic sensors are used for making a city noise map [10].
Geographic Information System (GIS) data are also sensor
data that is used for making a hazard map of a landslide [11].
Recently, short messages on social media such as tweets
are used for locating tourist attractions in a city [12], [13].
People can locate streets suitable for jogging by collecting
tweets that include the word “jogging.” Further, by collecting
short messages such as sunset, people can discover viewpoints
for a beautiful sunset [14]. Tweet data can be used for
detecting a neighbor’s boundary [15]. The activities of pets
can be collected and mapped from social media [16]. Because
search results on a Web ’s search engine include future event
information, the event information is extracted and shown on
a map [17].
Our study does not create a map using sensors or social
media. The creators remember suitable spots for tourist at-
1For example, Google Map is one of the services
(https://www.google.com/maps).
11
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

tractions on the map. We analyze the characteristics of the
maps to ﬁnd how the desired map can be obtained.
B. Decision-making support
Decision-making has been supported in various ways, and
multi-agent simulation systems have been studied for com-
plex tasks with numerous constraints and alternatives [18].
Further, optimization methods have been studied for inter-
action among agents, robots, and people [19]. Virtual real-
ity environments are designed for speciﬁc decision-making
processes, such as policymaking [20]. Health care support is
provided through online social networking services [21]. Each
study discovered points that should be considered in decision-
making. These points differ in each decision-making task. The
decision-making process would be analyzed to determine these
points [22].
The volume of decision-making increases as the number of
workers increases; this is called collaborative decision-making.
Many studies have supported collaborative decision-making.
Each worker in a collaborative decision-making process has
the best solution for themselves. However, when a worker pro-
vides the best solution for a small problem, the set of solutions
fails to solve the entire problem [23], [24]. Consensus-building
models and methods have been studied [25], [26]. Workers in
decision-making have a conﬂict of opinions. Thus, the degree
of conﬂict is evaluated to eliminate consensus-building [27].
An enormous decision-making task is broken down into small
decision-making tasks for consensus-building [28]. Our study
focuses on map-making as a collaborative decision-making
process and analyzes the process of locating the support point.
III. EXPECTED ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS IN TOURIST
MAP-MAKING
We consider tourist map-making a collaborative decision-
making process. We demonstrated a tourist map-making inter-
action and discussed the expected factors.
In map-making, people congregate in a space to discuss
and give their opinions [29]. Previously, the creators’ space
was physical, but people can now use virtual space and Web
services for map-making. Figure 1 illustrates the interaction
of a tourist map-making process. Each creator gives an idea
of a spot to map them. If there are several creators, they will
share their ideas of spots that others have not provided. If
the creators can have conversations, they would get others’
opinions to locate the other ideas of spots. If they are in the
same physical space, they can walk the area on the tourist
map to choose the spots for tourist attractions. Map-making
is conducted collaboratively in a physical space. Even if the
creators are in a virtual space, they can walk the area and map
the tourist attractions using Web services.
Figure 2 shows the relations between expected environ-
mental factors and map-making if tourist map-making is
performed. There are three expected environmental factors:
• (1) The number of creators
• (2) The presence of creators’ conversations
• (3) The creators’ space
Although each creator’s choice of tourist attraction is different
and uncontrollable, the three factors are controllable through
experiments. Thus, we chose three environmental factors that
would affect map-making. It is unclear whether these factors
affect map-making simultaneously or individually. Further, we
analyzed how the factors affect map-making in this study.
We conducted two types of experiments to determine the
effects of the three factors. The ﬁrst experiment was conducted
to ﬁnd the effects of factors (1) and (2) (in Section IV). The
second experiment was conducted to ﬁnd the effect of factor
(3) (in Section V).
IV. EXPERIMENT 1: DO THE NUMBER OF CREATORS AND
THEIR CONVERSATIONS AFFECT TOURIST MAP-MAKING?
In this section, we set the main hypothesis as follows: if
two creators make a tourist map while walking the area
and conversing, the tourist map will be different from a
map created by a single person. The hypothesis has two
factors: factor (1) and (2), which are the number of creators
and the presence of conversations, respectively. We divide the
main hypothesis into four smaller hypotheses: H1(a), H1(b),
H2(a), and H2(b).
• H1(a): The number of tourist attractions is higher if a
tourist map is created by two people instead of a single
person.
• H1(b): The number of tourist attractions is higher if a
tourist map is created by two people with conversations
instead of without conversations.
• H2(a): The rate of minor tourist attractions is higher
if a tourist map is created by two people instead of a
single person.
• H2(b): The rate of minor tourist attractions is higher
if a tourist map is created by two people with conver-
sations instead of without conversations.
A. Experimental settings
The experimental procedures are as follows:
1) An experimenter directs participants to a place for tourist
map-making.
2) The participants navigate the place and choose spots for
tourist attractions by taking photos. They have a limited
time.
3) After procedure 2), the participants upload the photos to
Google map 2 with a title and a description to map the
tourist attractions.
Each individual/pair of the participants created a tourist map
of the Biwako-Kusatsu Campus of the Ritsumeikan University.
The campus was not a tourist destination, but it is familiar to
the participants. The experimenter was the third author. The
participants were 35 students who had been on the campus for
over a year.
2https://www.google.com/maps
12
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 2. Relations between expected environmental factors and map-making. We assume that the environmental factors are the number of creators, the
presence of conversations among creators, and the space of map-making.
Figure 3. Example of tourist attractions by Group A in Experiment 1. Group A made a map by a single person.
We divided the participants into Groups A, B, and C. The
information in each group is given as follows:
• Group A: Creating a map by a single person: seven
participants
• Group B: Creating a map by two people without con-
versations: seven pairs and 14 participants
• Group C: Creating a map by two people with conversa-
tions: seven pairs and 14 participants
Group C recorded their conversations using a voice recorder.
The time to navigate the campus in procedure 2) was 45
minutes. The experiments were conducted between April and
September 2020.
B. Obtained data
We obtained the following data.
• Data 1: The number of tourist attractions of each map
• Data 2: The duration for map-making in procedure 3)
• Data 3: Transcripts of creators’ conversations (if any)
C. Method of hypothesis veriﬁcation
We used Data 1 and Data 3 to verify hypotheses H1(a) and
(b) and hypotheses H2(a) and (b), respectively. The campus
has buildings for classes and research. The participants might
choose the buildings as tourist attractions. Further, we would
like to evaluate the quality of each map based on the types
of tourist attractions. We regard a tourist attraction as a major
spot if it is a building/facility that is mapped on a campus
map, which is published by the university 3. However, if the
description of a tourist spot includes personal memories and
3http://en.ritsumei.ac.jp/campusmap/
13
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 4. Example of tourist attractions by Group B in Experiment 1. Group B made a map by two people without conversations.
Figure 5. Example of tourist attractions by Group C in Experiment 1. Group C made a map by two people with conversations.
impressions, the above mentioned building/facility is a minor
spot. If a tourist attraction does not exist on the campus map,
it is a minor spot.
D. Experimental results
Figure 3, Figure 4, and Figure 5 show examples of the
tourist attractions chosen by the participants. The ﬁgures show
photos, titles, and descriptions. Buildings (Co-learning House
1 and 2), cafeterias (Union Cafeteria and Link Meal Shop),
and facilities (Creation Core and Tricia) are shown.
The second column of Table I shows the number of tourist
attractions corresponding to Data 1. The numbers are averages
of seven pairs in each group. The averages of Groups A, B,
and C are 17.6, 18.1, and 10.3, respectively.
The third column of Table I shows the duration of map-
making corresponding to Data 2. The durations are averages
of the seven pairs in each group. The averages for Groups A,
B, and C are 32.1, 28.6, and 22.1 minutes, respectively.
The fourth column of Table I shows the rate of minor spots.
The averaged rates for Groups A, B, and C are 68.3%, 73.7%,
and 86.1%, respectively.
14
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE I
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS IN EXPERIMENT 1. AVERAGED NUMBERS OF TOURIST ATTRACTIONS ON CREATED MAPS, AVERAGED DURATIONS USED FOR
MAP-MAKING, AND AVERAGED RATES OF MINOR SPOTS ARE SHOWN.
Group
Averaged number of tourist attractions
Averaged duration (minutes)
Rate of minor spots (%)
A
17.6
32.1
68.3
B
18.1
28.6
73.7
C
10.3
22.1
86.1
TABLE II
CONVERSATION EXAMPLES BY PARTICIPANTS OF GROUP C IN
EXPERIMENT 1.
Tourist attraction: A view from 7th ﬂoor of Creation Core
Participant B: You can see a nice view from the top ﬂoor of Creation
Core.
Participant A: It’s so nice.
Participant B: The windows are messy but you can see Biwa-lake here.
How do you feel it?
Participant A: I love this. This is the highest building in the campus?
Participant B: Probably yes. This angle is also nice. You can see the whole
view of Biwa-lake.
Tourist attraction: Tricia
Participant A: The building is for Department of Architecture. I hear that
is a cool building. Shall we go there?
Participant B: I have never been there.
Participant A: Students’ works and architecture models are displayed in
the building.
Participant B: Their works are so nice. I love them.
Participant A: Me too. They are so beautiful.
E. Results of hypothesis veriﬁcation
We examined H1(a) and there was no difference between
the number of tourist attractions of Groups A and B (17.6 and
18.1). We discovered that hypothesis H1(a) was not held.
We examined H1(b) and there was a difference between
the numbers of tourist attractions of Groups B and C (18.1
and 10.3). The number of Group B was higher and hypothesis
H1(b) was not held.
We examined H2(a) and there was a difference between the
rates of minor spots of Groups A and B (68.3% and 73.7%).
The rate of Group B was higher and hypothesis H2(a) was
held.
We examined H2(b) and there was a difference between the
rates of minor spots of Groups B and C (73.7% and 86.1%).
The rate of Group C was higher and hypothesis H2(b) was
held.
F. Discussion
1) H1(a) was not held: The small hypothesis H1(a) oc-
curred because the number of tourist attractions is bigger if
a tourist map is created by two people instead of a single
person. However, there was no difference between the two
groups. Each pair of the participants in Group B consisted of
two people. We assumed that Group B mapped more tourist
attractions because there were more participants in a pair. The
participants walked on the campus together and with a time
limit. Thus, the participants of Group B did not discover more
tourist attractions. Although there was no difference between
the number of tourist attractions, the time for map-making of
Group B was approximately three minutes more than Group
A (= 32.1− 28.6 minutes). This is because the Group B
participants can split between uploading photos and writing
descriptions about tourist attractions.
2) H1(b) was not held: The small hypothesis H1(b) oc-
curred because the number of tourist attractions is higher if a
tourist map is created by two people with conversations instead
of without conversations. However, the number of Group B
(two people without conversations) was greater than that of
Group C (two people with conversations). We assumed that the
difference occurred because of the participants’ conversations.
Group C participants were permitted to have conversations
while walking and map-making. They suggested spots that
the others might not be aware of. Table II shows examples of
their conversations. Both conversations are for two different
tourist attractions. The conversations show that a participant
introduces a spot the other is unfamiliar with. Group C
participants assumed that sharing common knowledge about
the campus was meaningless. They re-evaluated the campus
and discovered tourist attractions that the others are not aware
of and mapped the areas on their map. Although the condition
to converse positively affected ﬁnding minor tourist attractions,
Group C participants required more time to locate the spots.
Thus, the number of tourist attractions for Group C was
smaller.
3) H2(a) was held: The small hypothesis H2(a) occurred
because the rate of minor tourist attractions is higher if a
tourist map is created by two people instead of a single person.
Though the participants of Group B walked together, they
chose spots individually. There are the limited number of
major spots so that the two participants can cover most of
them. They tried to ﬁnd another spots rather than the major
spots. Thus, the rate of Group B was greater than that of Group
A.
4) H2(b) was held: The small hypothesis H2(b) occurred
because the rate of minor tourist attractions is higher if a tourist
map is created by two people with conversations instead of
without conversations. The reason is the same as the reason
of the small hypothesis H1(b). The participants of Group C
were permitted to have conversations. The conversation affect
positively to introduce minor spots to the others. Thus, the rate
of Group C was greater than that of Group B.
15
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

V. EXPERIMENT 2: DO THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
PHYSICAL AND VIRTUAL SPACES AFFECT TOURIST
MAP-MAKING?
In this section, we set the main hypothesis as follows: the
tourist map is different from each other if the spaces where
the creators occupy for map-making are different. The
hypothesis is based on one factor (3) the space where the
creators occupy (physical versus virtual). We divide the main
hypothesis into two small hypotheses H3 and H4.
• H3: The number of tourist attractions is higher if a
tourist map is created in the virtual space rather than
the physical space.
• H4: The rate of minor tourist attractions is higher if
a tourist map is created in the virtual space rather than
the physical space.
A. Experimental settings
The experimental procedures are almost the same as those
in Experiment 1. The differences are explained below. The
experimenter was the fourth author. The participants were also
different from those in Experiment 1; they consisted of 28
students who had been on campus for over a year.
We divided the participants into Groups D and E. Groups
D and E walked into the physical and virtual spaces of the
location, respectively. The information in each group is given
as follows:
• Group D: Walking and map-making in a physical space:
seven pairs and 14 participants
• Group E: Walking and map-making in a virtual space:
seven pairs and 14 participants
The physical space was the university campus, whereas the
virtual space was Google’s Street View 4. The experiments
were conducted between June and December 2021, which was
the year after Experiment 1.
B. Obtained data
We obtained the following data: Data 1, Data 2, and Data
3, which were the same as those in Experiment 1. Data 4 was
acquired newly.
• Data 4: Walking routes of the participants.
C. Method of hypothesis veriﬁcation
We used Data 1 and Data 3 to verify hypotheses H3 and
H4, respectively. We employed the same criteria to determine
if a tourist attraction is a major or minor spot in Section IV.
D. Experimental results
Figure 6 and Figure 7 show examples of the tourist at-
tractions chosen by the participants. The ﬁgures show the
buildings (Central Arc), facilities (Across Wing), and track
ﬁeld (Quinns Stadium).
The second column of Table III shows the number of
tourist attractions that correspond to Data 1. The numbers are
4https://www.google.com/streetview/
averages of seven pairs in each group, and the averages for
Groups D and E were 9.9 and 15.3, respectively. Groups D
and C had the same conditions in Experiment 1. The numbers
of the two groups were almost the same (10.3 and 9.9 for
Groups C and D, respectively).
The third column of Table III shows the duration of map-
making that corresponds to Data 2. The durations are averages
of seven pairs in each group. The averages were 26 and 25
minutes for Groups D and E, respectively. The duration of
Groups C and D was almost the same (22.1 and 26 minutes).
The fourth column of Table III shows the rate of minor
spots. The averaged rates were 49% and 52% for Groups D
and E, respectively. Although Groups D and C had the same
conditions in Experiment 1, the rate of Group D was smaller
than that of Group C (86.1% and 49%). In the next section,
we will discuss why the rate for Group D was smaller.
E. Results of hypothesis veriﬁcation
The number of tourist attractions for Group D was lower
than Group E (9.9 and 15.3, respectively). We discovered that
hypothesis H3 was held.
There was no difference between the rates of minor spots
for Groups D and E (49% and 52%). We discovered that
hypothesis H4 was not held.
F. Discussion
1) H3 was held: The small hypothesis H3 occurred because
the number of tourist attractions is higher if a tourist map is
created in a virtual space instead of a physical space. The
participants of Group E used Google’s Street View to walk
and choose tourist attractions. They could walk faster than
those in Group D who were walking on the actual campus.
We examined the routes of Group E and discovered that they
jumped from one spot to another. The routes of Group E were
sets of dots, whereas those of Group D were linear lines.
Because of the jump actions, the participants of Group E
could check a wider portion of the campus, thus increasing the
number of tourist attractions. Therefore, the small hypothesis
H3 was held.
2) H4 was not held: It occurred because the rate of minor
tourist attractions is higher if a tourist map is created in the
virtual space rather than the physical space. However, there
was no difference between the two rates. We assumed that
the participants of both groups were students who knew the
campus and would have similar experiences in either the
physical or virtual spaces. The participants of both groups
chose tourist attractions without effects from their spaces.
3) Difference between Group C in Experiment 1 and Group
D in Experiment 2: The rate of the minor spots of Group D
was smaller than that of Group C in Experiment 1. This might
be because of the amount of personal memory of each par-
ticipant. Experiment 1 in Section IV was conducted between
April and September 2020. Experiment 2 in Section V was
conducted between June and December 2021 after Experiment
16
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 6. Example of tourist attractions by Group D in Experiment 2. Group D made a map in a physical space.
Figure 7. Example of tourist attractions by Group E in Experiment 2. Group E made a map in a virtual space.
1. The campus was occasionally closed because of COVID-19
from the beginning of 2020. The participants of Experiment 2
might have less personal memories of the campus because of
the long shutdown. Thus, the rate of the minor spots of Group
D is lower.
4) Selection order of tourist attractions: We examined
the selection order of tourist attractions for both groups and
assigned a turn number for each utterance. Then, we marked
the utterances where the tourist attractions appeared ﬁrst. The
turn number of the utterance was the number where the tourist
attraction was chosen. We calculated the averaged numbers of
the major and minor spots’ ﬁrst appearance. Each transcript
had different lengths; thus, the numbers of utterances differed.
We normalized the turn-numbers so that the minimum and
maximum were one and 10, respectively. Table IV shows the
averaged turn-numbers of the major and minor spots’ initial
appearance. There was no difference between the averages
of major spots of Groups D and E (4.5 and 4.3). There
was also no difference in the minor spots (6.6 and 7.0).
17
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE III
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS IN EXPERIMENT 2. AVERAGED NUMBERS OF TOURIST ATTRACTIONS ON CREATED MAPS, AVERAGED DURATION USED FOR
MAP-MAKING, AND AVERAGED RATES OF MINOR SPOTS ARE SHOWN.
Group
Averaged number of tourist attractions
Averaged duration (minutes)
Rate of minor spots (%)
D
9.9
26
49
E
15.3
25
52
TABLE IV
AVERAGED TURN NUMBERS INCLUDING A TOURIST ATTRACTION NAME.
Group
Major spots
Minor spots
D
4.5
6.6
E
4.3
7.0
The common point was that major spots were mentioned
ﬁrst, and minor spots were mentioned later. When choosing
tourist attractions, the participants ﬁrst remembered familiar
spots that became major spots. Once they had exhausted
the idea, they started considering other preferable spots for
tourist attractions. During that time, they would look for spots
that others might not know, which they could recall; those
spots would become minor spots. The results indicate that the
selection order of tourist attractions was not affected by the
creators’ spaces.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This study focused on map-making as a collaborative
decision-making process. We analyzed the map-making pro-
cess and conducted experiments to determine the effects of
environmental factors. The expected environmental factors
were (1) the number of creators, (2) the presence of creators’
conversations, and (3) the space occupied by the creators. We
asked participants to make a tourist map for a familiar place
under controlled factors. We analyzed the created maps and
other experimental results. The following three effects were
discovered:
(a)
The more the creators of a tourist map, the more
tourist attractions obtained.
(b)
Since conversations are allowed, the creators can
change their minds while choosing tourist attractions
unknown to others. Thus, the created map has more
exciting tourist attractions.
(c)
The number of tourist attractions becomes higher if
the space in choosing them is a virtual space.
The participants made a tourist map for a familiar place
in this study. As the future work, we would like to conduct
another experiment to create a tourist map for an unfamiliar
place. The three factors will be examined in the next experi-
ments to discover how they affect map-making.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This paper was partly supported by Ritsumeikan Global
Innovation Research Organization and “International Collab-
orative Research for the Digital Archive of Japanese Cultural
Resources,” Art Research Center, Ritsumeikan University. We
show our great appreciation.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Nishihara, X. Lin, and R. Yamanishi, “Do the number of creators and
their conversations affect re-evaluation of a familiar place in making a
tourist map?” in The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances
in Computer-Human Interactions (ACHI2021) in Nice, France, July
2021, pp. 55–56.
[2] C. Chen, C. Lu, Q. Huang, Q. Yang, D. Gunopulos, and L. Guibas,
“City-scale map creation and updating using gps collections,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2016, pp. 1465–1474.
[3] J. Davies, A. Beresford, and A. Hopper, “Scalable, distributed, real-time
map generation,” IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 5, no. 4, 2006, pp.
47–54.
[4] U. Blanke, R. Guldener, S. Feese, and G. Tr¨oster, “Crowdsourced pedes-
trian map construction for short-term city-scale events,” in Proceedings
of the First International Conference on IoT in Urban Space.
Brussels,
BEL: ICST (Institute for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and
Telecommunications Engineering), 2014, pp. 25–31.
[5] K. Asakura, M. Takeuchi, and T. Watanabe, “A pedestrian-oriented map
matching algorithm for map information sharing systems in disaster
areas,” International Journal of Knowledge and Web Intelligence, vol. 3,
no. 4, Jan. 2012, pp. 328–342.
[6] M. Alzantot and M. Youssef, “Crowdinside: Automatic construction of
indoor ﬂoorplans,” in Proceedings of the 20th International Conference
on Advances in Geographic Information Systems. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2012, pp. 99–108.
[7] R. Verma, S. Ghosh, A. Shrivastava, N. Ganguly, B. Mitra, and
S. Chakraborty, “Unsupervised annotated city trafﬁc map generation,”
in Proceeding of the 24th ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference,
10 2016, pp. 1–4.
[8] J. Biagioni, T. Gerlich, T. Merriﬁeld, and J. Eriksson, “Easytracker:
Automatic transit tracking, mapping, and arrival time prediction using
smartphones,” in Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Embedded
Networked Sensor Systems, 11 2011, pp. 68–81.
[9] S. Nawaz and C. Mascolo, “Mining users’ signiﬁcant driving routes
with low-power sensors,” in Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference
on Embedded Network Sensor Systems, ser. SenSys ’14.
New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2014, pp. 236–250.
[10] Y. Wang, Y. Zheng, and T. Liu, “A noise map of new york city,” in
Proceedings of the 16th ACM International Conference on Ubiquitous
Computing, August 2014.
[11] S. Lee and C. P. Poudyal, “Landslide hazard mapping using geospatial
models,” in Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Com-
puting for Geospatial Research and Applications, ser. COM.Geo ’11.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2011, pp.
1–5.
[12] L. Ferrari, A. Rosi, M. Mamei, and F. Zambonelli, “Extracting urban
patterns from location-based social networks,” in Proceedings of the 3rd
ACM SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on Location-Based Social
Networks, ser. LBSN ’11.
New York, NY, USA: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2011, pp. 9–16.
[13] C. Xia, R. Schwartz, K. Xie, A. Krebs, A. Langdon, J. Ting, and
M. Naaman, “Citybeat: Real-time social media visualization of hyper-
local city data,” in Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
World Wide Web, ser. WWW ’14 Companion.
New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2014, pp. 167–170.
[14] B. Pat, Y. Kanza, and M. Naaman, “Geosocial search: Finding places
based on geotagged social-media posts,” in Proceedings of the 24th
International Conference on World Wide Web, 05 2015, pp. 231–234.
[15] J. Cranshaw, R. Schwartz, J. I. Hong, and N. Sadeh, “The livehoods
project: Utilizing social media to understand the dynamics of a city,”
18
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

in Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and
Social Media, vol. 6, no. 1, 2012, pp. 58–65.
[16] A. S. Jose and E. Hernandez, “City-scale mapping of pets using
georeferenced images,” SIGSPATIAL Special, vol. 8, no. 3, May 2017,
pp. 5–6.
[17] W. Li, P. Wang, and K. Yang, “Visualizing city events on search engine:
Tword the search infrustration for smart city,” in 2015 15th IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing, 2015,
pp. 1019–1026.
[18] J. Himoff, “Decision-making support for maritime business,” in Pro-
ceedings of the Fifth International Joint Conference on Autonomous
Agents and Multiagent Systems, ser. AAMAS ’06.
New York, NY,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2006, pp. 1455–1456.
[19] Z. Peng, Y. Kwon, J. Lu, Z. Wu, and X. Ma, “Design and evaluation
of service robot’s proactivity in decision-making support process,”
in Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2019, p. 1–13.
[20] D. Filonik, A. Buchan, L. Ogden-Doyle, and T. Bednarz, “Interactive
scenario visualisation in immersive virtual environments for decision
making support,” in Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGGRAPH Inter-
national Conference on Virtual-Reality Continuum and Its Applications
in Industry, ser. VRCAI ’18.
New York, NY, USA: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2018, pp. 1–4.
[21] V. Sadovykh and D. Sundaram, “Decision making and support in health-
care online social networks,” in Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and
Mining 2015, ser. ASONAM ’15.
New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2015, pp. 1048–1052.
[22] J. L. Mishra, D. K. Allen, and A. D. Pearman, “Information use,
support and decision making in complex, uncertain environments,” in
Proceedings of the 76th ASIST Annual Meeting: Beyond the Cloud:
Rethinking Information Boundaries, ser. ASIST ’13.
USA: American
Society for Information Science, 2013, pp. 1–10.
[23] G. L. Klein, J. L. Drury, and M. S. Pfaff, “Coaction: Collaborative
option awareness impact on collaborative decision making,” in 2011
IEEE International Multi-Disciplinary Conference on Cognitive Methods
in Situation Awareness and Decision Support (CogSIMA), 2011, pp.
171–174.
[24] M. Al-Shawa, “Modeling and analyzing agents’ collective options in
collaborative decision making situations using the constrained rationality
framework,” in 2011 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics, 2011, pp. 1626–1631.
[25] X. Li, H. Zhang, R. Mao, and X. Wang, “A consensus reaching model
for collaborative decision making in web 2.0 communities,” in 2013
Sixth International Conference on Business Intelligence and Financial
Engineering, 2013, pp. 53–56.
[26] J. M. E. M. van der Werf, R. de Feijter, F. Bex, and S. Brinkkemper,
“Facilitating collaborative decision making with the software architec-
ture video wall,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Software
Architecture Workshops (ICSAW), 2017, pp. 137–140.
[27] P. Pengfei, L. Yating, and Z. Linru, “Research on interactive collab-
orative decision-making method of equipment support task planning,”
in 2020 5th International Conference on Computer and Communication
Systems (ICCCS), 2020, pp. 533–537.
[28] P. Peng and Q. Yu, “Study on framework of interactive and collaborative
decision making and design of support system based on network center,”
in 2015 8th International Symposium on Computational Intelligence and
Design (ISCID), vol. 2, 2015, pp. 128–131.
[29] N. Komiya, “Community safety maps for children in Japan: An analysis
from a situational crime prevention perspective,” Asian Criminology,
vol. 6, no. 131, 2011, pp. 131–140.
19
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 15 no 1 & 2, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

