Combining Aggregates of Synthetic Microscale Nanorobots with Swarms of 
Computer-controlled Flagellated Bacterial Robots to Enhance Target Therapies 
Through the Human Vascular Network 
Sylvain Martel 
NanoRobotics Laboratory, Dept. of Computer and Software Engineering, and Institute of Biomedical Engineering, 
École Polytechnique de Montréal (EPM), Campus of the Université de Montréal, 
Montréal, Canada 
E-mail: sylvain.martel@polymtl.ca 
 
 
Abstract—The 
field 
of 
medical 
nanorobotics 
exploits 
nanometer-scale components and phenomena to enable new or 
at 
least 
to 
enhance 
existing 
medical 
diagnostic 
and 
interventional procedures. The best route for such miniature 
robots to access the various regions inside the human body is 
certainly the vascular network which is constituted of nearly 
100,000 km of blood vessels. The variations in blood vessels 
diameters from a few millimeters in the arteries, down to ~4 
µm in the capillaries with respective important variations in 
blood flow velocities, lead to significant challenges in the 
development of a robot relying on a singe type of propulsion 
method while being trackable in the human body. This 
tracking feasibility in a living body was realized experimentally 
by integrating magnetic nanoparticles (MNP) capable of 
creating a net field inhomogeneity that could be detected by 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In such an environment, 
dipole-dipole 
interaction 
between 
synthetic 
microscale 
nanorobots encapsulating MNP can be used to achieve higher 
magnetophoretic velocities when subjected to a 3D magnetic 
gradient force generated by an upgraded MRI platform to 
allow such aggregated nanorobots to travel in the blood 
circulatory network. Nonetheless, the potential limitations of 
using an artificial approach especially in the human 
microvasculature suggests that a biological system such as the 
molecular motors  capable of flagellar propelling thrust force 
exceeding 4 pN provided by each MC-1 MRI-trackable 
magnetotactic bacteria swimming as swarms under computer 
control in blood vessels could enhance targeting efficacy in 
regions such as tumors. Presently, such artificial and natural 
approaches are unique and very different from any other 
methods proposed elsewhere. In this paper, these approaches 
are described with examples of implementations with the goal 
of demonstrating the potential advantages of combining them 
for targeting regions deep in the human body. 
Keywords-Magnetic 
nanoparticles; 
medical 
nanorobots, 
magnetic resonance imaging, magnetotactic bacteria, target 
therapy 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
This paper is based on [1] where synthetic microscale 
nanorobots were compared to flagellated bacterial robots for 
target intervention in the human vasculature. Here, not only 
the main differences in both types are compared but there 
are described in more details with the goal of demonstrating 
the potential advantages of combining artificial or synthetic 
microscale robots with natural or biological microscale 
robots for specific target interventions in the human body. 
But first, as we refer to such untethered entities or agents as 
robots, the readers must be aware of what this term means in 
the context of navigable microscale entities in the blood 
vessels, considering present technological limits. 
 There are many opinions of what would define a robot. 
For instance, several organizations including the Robotics 
Institute of America (RIA) define a robot as a re-
programmable multi-functional manipulator designed to 
move materials, parts, tools, or specialized devices through 
variable programmed motions for the performance of a 
variety of tasks. Accordingly, an untethered entity or device 
capable of programmable motion for the performance of a 
variety of tasks such as the delivery of therapeutic agents at 
a specific location in the human body could be viewed as a 
robot under such a definition. In turn, this definition could 
be extended to include a microscale robot if its overall 
dimension would be in the micrometer-range and ideally 
below 100 µm across. Unlike a nanorobot which can be 
viewed as a nanometer-scale robot, a microscale nanorobot 
is defined here as a robot with overall dimensions in the 
micrometer range that depends on nanometer-scale 
components (typically less than 100 nm across) to embed 
characteristics allowing such robot to accomplish its assign 
tasks. Embedded magnetic nanoparticles (MNP) can be 
considered as one type of these components allowing 
propulsion/steering, tracking, and hyperthermic functions to 
name but the main ones made possible. 
Indeed, MNP can be manipulated by an external 
magnetic field gradient with the capability of disrupting a 
high intensity local magnetic field creating a net field 
inhomogeneity that can be picked up by magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI). Such signals can then be fed back to an 
external computer as tracking data to be processed to 
perform closed-loop navigation or trajectory control along a 
pre-planned path. 
But present implementations for target interventions 
using MNP alone have major limitations due to the fact that 
the approach relies on a permanent (or an electro-magnet) 
that must be located near the targeted region. The higher 
92
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

field intensity towards and very near the external magnet 
restrict targeting to regions near the skin and when the target 
is located deeper in the human body, a significant reduction 
of targeting efficacy is expected. When coupled with the 
fact that the approach relies on trapping the MNP without 
trajectory servo-control based on tracking information from 
the release site and towards the target, the approach seems 
extremely limited. This observation becomes more evident 
when we look at the distance between the reachable limits 
of catheterization and targets reachable through complex 
microvasculature networks such as the ones near a tumor.  
Therefore, when operating in the human vascular 
network, 
untethered 
microscale 
robots 
capable 
of 
performing such tasks must be capable of directional 
propulsion and/or steering in a 3D volume while being 
trackable in the body by a suitable imaging modality such as 
MRI. When these conditions would be met, effective 
navigation along pre-planned paths through real-time 
closed-loop control from the release site typically at the 
catheterization boundaries to as close as possible to a 
specific 
target 
possibly 
reachable 
through 
the 
microvasculature, would be feasible. 
II. 
TRACKING METHOD 
Unlike in the cases of most robotic systems, a tracking 
approach based on direct-line-of-sight is not possible when 
operating in the vascular network. Among the few imaging 
techniques available for such application, X-ray or 
computed tomography (CT) scan, and MRI stand as the two 
main potential and widely accepted imaging modalities that 
are presently widely used in clinics and hospitals.  
Since the blood vessels represent the routes to be 
navigated by these microscale robots, it becomes important 
to image as many blood vessels that are along the planned 
path using angiography. Presently, X-ray digital subtraction 
angiography (DSA) still has the best spatial and temporal 
resolution for imaging blood vessels. However X-ray has 
poor soft-tissue information and a high radiation exposure, 
two disadvantages that do not apply with MRI. As such, 
substantial research efforts attempt to replace X-ray 
angiography by magnetic resonance angiography (MRA). 
Despite the recent progresses in MRA, presently DSA is 
still the preferred and most appropriate technique to image 
the vascular network. 
The fact that DSA could be used to gather data for the 
pre-navigation/planning phase of the microscale robots does 
not means that X-ray is the most appropriate imaging to 
gather real-time tracking information of the robots 
navigating in the blood vessels. This is a critical issue since 
the spatial resolution of X-ray although better that MRI is 
still not sufficient to detect such microscale robots when 
traveling in smaller diameter vessels (e.g. from the small 
diameter arterioles to the capillaries). On the other hand, 
MRI-tracking deep in the human body can be achieved with 
a proper MRI sequence if the magnetic components 
embedded in such microscale robots create a sufficiently 
large local distortion of the magnetic field inside the bore 
(tunnel) of the MRI scanner. Indeed, the local magnetic field 
distortion from a magnetic spherical particle for instance 
can be found at a point P of coordinate r(x, y, z) by that of a 
magnetic dipole as 
 
( )
(
)
0
5
3
.
'
3
4
m r r
m
B
P
r
r
µ
π


=
−




r r r
r
r
. 
(1) 
 
where µ0 = 4π×10-7 H·m-1 is the permeability of free space 
such that for a uniformly magnetized object, the dipolar 
magnetic moment (A·m2) depends on the magnetization 
saturation of the material and is given by 
 
3
4
3
SAT
m
πa M
=
r
r
 
(2) 
 
where a here represents the radius (m) and MSAT being the 
magnetization saturation of the material used. 
Indeed, in [2] we showed that the susceptibility-based 
negative contrast in MRI can be used to track such magnetic 
microscale robots with dimensions as small as 15 µm in the 
human body. In this case, the same ferromagnetic material 
with high susceptibility and used for propulsion was used to 
induce a perturbation in the main magnetic field 
homogeneity of a 1.5T clinical MRI scanner. This 
perturbation can be set during the synthesis process of the 
microscale robots to reach a level much larger than the robot 
itself. By creating an artifact from the magnetic material 
embedded in the microscale robot with a size equivalent or 
slightly larger than a typical MRI voxel (~0.5 × 0.5× 0.5 
mm3), the microscale robot will become MRI-trackable. 
One method is to use the intra-voxel de-phasing in the 
Gradient Echo (GE) sequence. This method aims at 
amplifying the effect of a microscale magnetic object such 
as a robot that is too small to be visualized in the MR-image 
or with any other medical imaging modalities. 
 
Tumoral
Lesion
Arteriole
Large Capillaries
20 µm
4-5 µm
150-50 µm
Small Capillaries
Artery
15 µm
40 µm
15
20
40
 
93
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 1 – Experimental coronal images of a stainless steel bead with an 
overall diameter of 15 µm imaged using a 1.5 T scanner with a Time Echo 
(TE) of 30 ms. 
 
III. 
PROPULSION AND STEERING 
A. Single Synthetic Microscale Nanorobot 
Even if tracking information is gathered from a modern 
medical imaging modality such as MRI, propelling and/or 
steering (when blood flow is used for propulsion) MNP 
sufficiently to direct them effectively along a pre-planned 
trajectory is not possible or at least extremely challenging 
due to the amplitude of magnetic gradients being required. 
Such required gradient amplitude is presently well beyond 
technological limitations when operating in some regions of 
the body of a human adult (e.g. inside the torso) because of 
the distance separating the MNP from the source generating 
the directional magnetic gradient field. This is also in great 
part due to the small volume of MNP even when 
synthesized with materials having the highest magnetization 
saturation. This is depicted in Eq. 3. 
 
(
)
FM
R V M
B
=
⋅
⋅∇
r
r
r . 
(3) 
 
The induced magnetic force (N) (Eq. 3) produced by 
magnetic gradients (T m-1) and acting on a ferromagnetic 
core with a volume V (m3), depends on the duty cycle R, i.e. 
the percentage of time per navigation closed-loop control 
cycle being dedicated to propulsion (dimensionless) which 
can be reduced due to longer MRI-tracking acquisition time 
and/or to allow time for cooling of the coils in particular 
cases, and the volume magnetization of the core material (A 
m-1). When such magnetization reaches a saturation level 
(MSAT), the highest induced propulsion force per unit volume 
can be reached for a given ferromagnetic material. This 
would typically be the case when placed in a high intensity 
magnetic field such as in the bore or tunnel of a standard 
1.5T or higher field clinical MRI system. Furthermore, such 
gradient force unlike the use of an external magnet is 
constant within the 3D working space inside the bore of 
MRI systems. 
Nonetheless, our initial studies [3] for the development 
of what we are referring to as a double-insert, i.e. a set of 
propulsion coils (to increase gradients beyond the 40 mT/m 
limitation as found in typical clinical MRI systems) that 
allow MR-imaging to be performed in a time-multiplexed 
fashion and designed to be installed inside the bore of a 
clinical MRI system, would still have limited capabilities. 
This is mainly due to limitation of modern technologies to 
dissipate the heat generated by such coils. With an inner 
diameter capable to accommodate a human adult, our initial 
studies suggest that the maximum gradient amplitude that 
could be generated would be ~400-500 mT/m. It is then 
obvious as stated earlier and as depicted in Eq. 3 that a 
directional force sufficient to influence the path of 
independent MNP for achieving efficient targeting, cannot 
be generated for human subjects unless being restricted only 
to some body’s regions such as the legs or arms for instance. 
For operating in all regions of the human’s body (but 
without transiting through the blood brain barrier (BBB)), 
this suggests that a cluster or aggregate of MNP with a 
sufficiently high magnetization saturation level must be 
encapsulated within a material as to form an entity or robot 
that could be sufficient to increase effectively V. This would 
provide an induced magnetic force (Eq. 4) for each robot 
that would be made of n embedded ferromagnetic cores or 
superparamagnetic MNP, each with a volume V where n V ≤ 
VR being the volume of each robot, assuming that all 
embedded MNP are identical. 
 
(
)
,
MR
R
n
F
R
V
M
B
nV
V


=
⋅
⋅∇
≤




∑
r
r
r
. 
(4) 
 
Except for transiting through the BBB for targeting 
inside the brain, such entities do not need to be smaller than 
approximately half the diameter of the tiniest blood vessels 
found in humans, i.e. untethered entities should not have an 
outer diameter much greater than 2 µm and much smaller 
than 
2 
µm. 
Larger 
diameters 
would 
decrease 
magnetophoretic velocities of such entities in the tiniest 
vessels due to wall retardation effects while smaller ones 
would typically lead to a lower charge of magnetic material 
being embedded. Hence, in order to increase the effective V, 
a relatively large quantity of MNP can be encapsulated 
within a non-magnetic material. Such synthetic entity or 
microscale 
synthetic 
robot 
would 
then 
have 
a 
magnetophoretic velocity expressed as 
 
MR
M
F
v
f
=
ur
uur
. 
(5) 
 
In Eq. 5, f is the friction factor. The value of the friction 
factor depends on the geometry of the entity being 
navigated. As stated earlier, the high magnetic field 
provided by a clinical MRI platform allows us to achieve 
maximum propulsion force density through magnetization 
saturation of the MNP while providing an image modality 
capable of feeding back tracking information to a servo-
controller. But when inserted in a high magnetic field, MNP 
will align to the lines of the magnetic field and maintain the 
same orientation while operating in such magnetic field. In a 
clinical MRI system, this homogeneous magnetic field with 
typical values of 1.5 T or 3.0 T is known as the B0 field. A 
spherical shape (lack of anisotropy) would then be a good 
choice since it would provide a constant friction factor that 
would be independent of the direction of any navigated 
blood vessels relative to the B0 field. As such, the friction 
factor for such untethered microscale spherical synthetic 
robot with embedded MNP would be computed as 
 
94
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

3
R
f
= π η d
. 
(6) 
 
In Eq. 6, where η is the viscosity of the medium (e.g. 1.0 
mPa·s in water at 20 oC), and dR is the diameter (m) of the 
spherical robot. Hence assuming that the synthetic 
microscale robots would have a spherical shape, Eq. 4 can 
be re-written as 
 
(
)(
)
3
(4/ 3)
MR
R
F
R
p
d
M
B
π
=
⋅
⋅∇
r
r
r . 
(7) 
 
where 
p 
is 
the 
percentage 
of 
ferromagnetic 
or 
superparamagnetic material in each untethered microscale 
spherical robot. 
B. Aggregated Synthetic Microscale Nanorobots 
Considering the aforementioned equations, one can 
easily deduct that a larger untethered robot based on such 
method of propulsion will have a higher magnetophoretic 
velocity (if charged with the same percentage of the same 
type of MNP) than a smaller robot if the diameter of the 
blood vessel is large enough to avoid wall retardation 
effects. But smaller robots would be required to travel in 
smaller diameter vessels. 
One solution to this issue is the use of an aggregation of 
smaller robots. Indeed, the effective V can also be increased 
with an aggregation of such microscale robots. The level of 
propulsion/steering force for such aggregation will depend 
on the coupling force between neighboured robots or 
untethered entities. When in a high intensity magnetic field, 
each untethered microscale robot generates a local magnetic 
dipole. It is this dipole-dipole interaction between 
neighboured robots that maintains such aggregation. A 
strong attracting force through strong dipole-dipole 
interactions between the microscale robots will help 
maintaining the entities agglomerated while effectively 
increasing the volume of magnetic material, leading to 
higher magnetophoretic velocities. But more loosely 
coupled interactions caused by a lower level of dipole-
dipole interactions and/or the use of surfactants or a surface 
acting like a surfactant (potentially caused by the addition of 
some types of functionalized molecules), will allow such 
aggregate to reconfigure when transiting between various 
vessels geometries such as transiting from larger to smaller 
diameter vessels. But such lower interactions may result in 
unexpected or unwanted breakages when encountering 
obstacles or forces such as the ones created by vortices, 
which may result in several smaller aggregates, each having 
lower magnetophoretic velocities than what would be 
possible with a single larger aggregate. On the other hand, 
when the interacting forces are too high, an unwanted 
embolization may occur when transiting from a larger 
diameter vessel to a smaller one, preventing such aggregate 
to pursue its course. Therefore, the right compromise in the 
level of dipole-dipole interacting forces must be set during 
the synthesis of such microscale robots, taking into account 
both physiological and technological characteristics. To help 
in the design or synthesis of such aggregated microscale 
synthetic robots, Eq. 8 is used to calculate the dipole-dipole 
interaction energy ED between two neighboured robots A 
and B with respective dipoles µA and µB. Such interaction 
depends on not only on the relative orientations of the 
dipoles but also on their orientation with respect to the 
vector rAB joining the center of the two dipoles. 
 
0
5
3
(
)(
)
,
4
A
AB
B
AB
A
B
D
AB
AB
AB
AB
r
r
E
r
r
r
r
µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
π


⋅
⋅
⋅
= −
−
=




 
(8) 
Since the lowest energy configuration corresponds to the 
two magnetic moments aligned head-to-tail, neighboured 
(i.e. closed enough for ED to be non-negligible) microscale 
synthetic robots when in a MRI system, will tend to form 
needle-like aggregates with an elongated axe being oriented 
in the direction of the B0 field. This phenomenon is taken 
into consideration with regard to the angle between the B0 
field and directional motion of the aggregate. 
C. Self-propelled  Bacterial Nanorobots 
A self-propelled entity refers here as an entity that can 
propel itself without any propulsion force produced by an 
external source. Flagellated bacteria and more specifically 
magnetotactic bacteria (MTB) [4] acting under computer 
control can be described as self-propelled nanorobots [5] 
since they rely on nanometer-scale components to act as a 
robot. One example is the chain of magnetite nanoparticles 
(magnetosomes) embedded in the cell of the MTB. Such 
chain can act as a miniature magnetic compass needle [6]. 
When a directional torque is induced on such a chain from 
an electro-magnetic field under computer control, precise 
directional control of polar MTB can be achieved. This is 
referred here to as magnetotaxis [7] control. Our studies 
showed that the MC-1 MTB is presently the most 
appropriate bacteria for such target applications. The same 
magnetosomes can also be used for tracking purpose as 
explained in Eq. 1. The self-propulsion system of each 
bacterium in the form of two flagellar bundles allows 
efficient propulsion in low Reynolds regime without the 
limitation of gradient forces generated from an external 
source. 
IV. 
BACTERIAL PROPULSION – EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
The advantage of bacterial propulsion over the gradient-
based propulsion mentioned earlier becomes evident in low 
Reynolds regime and in the microvasculature. Again, from 
Stokes equation, we have a thrust force (N) provided by the 
two flagellar bundles on the back of the spherical cell with a 
radius aB (m) being calculated from observed terminal 
velocities as 
 
95
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

3
T
T
B
v
F
π η a
=
uur
uur
. 
(7) 
 
From swimming velocities of the MC-1 cells recorded in 
water at room temperature, the thrust force was estimated at 
more than 4.0 pN (~10 times the thrust force provided by 
other well known species of flagellated bacteria). To reach 
the tumoral lesion, capillaries with a diameter as small as ~4 
µm can be expected. Hence, the maximum radius of a 
spherical synthetic microscale robot would be limited by the 
wall retardation effect being expressed as 
 
4
.0 475
1
1






−
−
=
∞
λ
λ
ν
ν
 
(8) 
 
where v and v∞ is the velocity of the spherical synthetic 
robot or the MC-1 bacterium in the capillary and in open 
space respectively, and λ = d/dC which is the ratio between 
the diameter of the synthetic robot or the cell of the MC-1 
bacterium and the inner diameter of the capillary 
respectively. In the capillaries, the optimal ratio for an 
untethered synthetic microscale robot propelled by magnetic 
gradient is ~0.5. Hence, for the smallest diameter capillaries 
dC = 4×10-6 m, the largest synthetic microscale spherical 
robot would have aR = 1×10-6 m. To maximize the effective 
volume of magnetic material being embedded, VR needs to 
be maximized while maintaining the ratio at ~0.5, which 
suggests that min aR = 1×10-6 m since nothing is gained with 
a smaller volume except for transiting through the BBB. 
Considering Eq. 7, when loaded with 100% FeCo MNP for 
achieving maximum magnetization saturation level, it is 
obvious that a single synthetic nanorobot with a diameter of 
2 µm for travelling in the tiniest blood vessels with the 
limitation in generating magnetic gradients at the human 
scale would be much less effective than the minimum thrust 
force of 4 pN provided by a single 1 to 2- µm in diameter 
MC-1 MTB. But our preliminary results suggest that when 
operating in the vascular network at body temperature, 
unlike for a synthetic version, their motility after a period of 
time t (in minutes) and hence their swimming speed will be 
affected according to Eq. 9. 
  
MTB
B
v
t
t
v
+
−
=
.8 10
.0 09
2
37
. 
(9) 
 
where the initial average swimming velocity vMTB = 187.85 
µm/s prior to be injected in blood. Hence, the advantage of 
this particular type of bacterial propulsion is true but of a 
limited time (approx. 40 minutes) especially in the 
microvasculature where V is limited due to space constraints 
and where the formation of aggregates is not possible. On 
the other hand, our studies showed that in larger vessels 
especially in arteries and in larger arterioles, synthetic 
microscale nanorobots will perform better since thrust force 
above the bacterial thrust force can be achieved. 
V. 
BACTERIAL STEERING 
Unlike the synthetic microscale robots that require higher 
gradients as their volume decreases in order to induce a 
sufficiently high propulsion/steering force for targeting or 
navigation purpose, the fact that the magnetic field for a 
polar MTB is only used for directional control and not to 
provide a propelling force, translates into the need for a 
much lower magnitude of magnetic field with makes the 
navigation of smaller untethered robots in the human body, 
technologically possible using much less power. Indeed, the 
magnetotactic bacteria of type MC-1 and depicted in Fig. 2 
is an example of a biological microscale robot where the 
flagella bundles are the propulsion (propulsive) system and 
the chain of membrane-based nanoparticles known as 
magnetosomes embedded in the cell implements an 
embedded steering system by acting like a miniature 
magnetic compass needle that can be oriented by inducing a 
torque from a directional magnetic field. 
 
Propulsion
Directional
(Steering)
Control
 
Fig. 2 – Electron photograph of a MC-1 magnetotactic bacterium acting as 
a biological microscale robot with the two flagella bundles and the chain of 
magnetosomes used for propulsion and steering respectively. 
 
Indeed, here directional control is performed by inducing 
a directional torque T by applying a directional magnetic 
field B as described by the following equation: 
 
B
V M
T
r
r
r
×
⋅
=
. 
(10) 
 
Since for a robot with the same volume and 
magnetization, the magnitude of the magnetic field required 
is much less for generating a directional torque compared to 
a directional displacement (propulsion) force, directional 
control of such robot capable of providing its own 
propulsion (propelling) force would require significantly 
less power. 
96
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

VI. 
COMBINING MAGNETIC AND BACTERIAL 
PROPULSIONS 
Many targets such as tumoral lesions located deeper in the 
body can be accessed by travelling through a microvascular 
network including the angiogenesis network. But because of 
the size of the blood vessels, the injection process is 
typically performed in larger diameter vessels, typically in 
an artery. As such, combining magnetic-based propulsion 
with self-propelled bacterial carriers can lead to enhanced 
targeting 
efficacy 
when 
travelling 
through 
the 
microvasculature is essential, which is most often the case 
in tumor targeting. Indeed, since bacterial propulsion based 
on the MC-1 MTB has a minimum thrust force of 4 pN 
which is approximately 10 times the thrust force that has 
been measured for other well known species of flagellated 
bacteria, suggests that it could be used as a complementary 
means of propulsion when targeting deep in the vasculature. 
In other words, such bacterial propulsion may become more 
effective at a location where magnetic propulsion becomes 
ineffective since it does not rely on an external source as 
magnetic propulsion does. The latter can be explained as 
stated earlier by the fact that the smaller diameters of the 
blood vessels prevent the use of synthetic microscale 
nanorobots with a sufficiently large volume of embedded 
magnetic material for sufficient propulsion within known 
technological limitations. 
But there is another important advantage of using such 
flagellated bacteria when operating in the microvasculature. 
Indeed, such bacterial robots have what is referred to here as 
path finding (PF) capability. When a directional magnetic 
field is used (outside the tunnel of a MRI scanner) to point 
in the desired direction of motion for the bacterial robots 
(e.g. towards a target such as a tumor), the latter will move 
under the influence of the induced torque generated by the 
same directional field. When a MTB reaches a sufficiently 
wide 
obstacle 
(which 
is 
often 
the 
case 
in 
the 
microvasculature, e.g. vessel’s walls), it will not typically 
remain at the location where it reached the obstacle as a 
synthetic microrobot will until the direction of the magnetic 
field is changed but instead, it will look for a path that will 
lead toward the direction of the magnetic field. Since the 
small blood vessels found in the microvasculature cannot 
presently be imaged due to a lack of spatial resolution of all 
existing medical imaging modalities, knowing in which 
direction the induced force should be applied to navigate 
synthetic microscale robots in such chaotic maze of blood 
vessels without such image information is practically not 
possible. This is why the use of bacterial microscale robots 
can make a huge difference in targeting efficacy when 
operating in such physiological environments. 
Nonetheless, to take advantage of this PF capability as 
well as the enhanced propulsive force provided by MTB in 
the microvasculature, such bacteria loaded with therapeutic 
agents must be carried from the catheterization boundary in 
an artery to the entry of the microvascular network. As such, 
special micro-carriers based on magnetic propulsion and 
capable of encapsulating such MTB must be used. The 
general concept is depicted in Fig. 3. 
 
 
Tumoral
Lesion
(Target)
Arteriole
Large
Capillaries
20µm
4-5µm
50-150µm
Small
Capillaries
Shell
Fe3O4 or FeCo MNP
MTB or Bacterial Nanorobots
 
Fig. 3 – Diagram showing the general concept of encapsulating MTB to 
transport them towards the microvasculature 
 
The synthesis of such carriers with various diameters 
down to approximately 10 µm and containing MC-1 
bacteria capable of free swimming inside the shell as 
depicted in Fig. 3 has be done successfully by our research 
group. But more experimental data needed to be recorded 
before we can validate the idea of transporting drug-loaded 
MTB. 
Nonetheless, 
preliminary 
experimental 
results 
suggest that this concept is very promising. 
VII. REDUCTION OF THE BLOOD FLOW 
Another complementary strategy that may enhance targeting 
in deep regions is to increase the effective propulsive force 
of MTB in the microvasculature by reducing temporarily the 
blood flow with the use of synthetic polymorphic 
microscale robots. Polymorphic microscale robots have the 
ability to change forms or volumes. For instance, such a 
robot could travel in a specific blood vessel with a lower 
overall volume and use a higher volume to create a 
temporary embolization at a specific site that would 
eliminate or at least reduce the blood flow to help the MTB 
navigating more efficiently. 
Our first prototypes [8] of such polymorphic microscale 
robots were made of biocompatible N-isopropylacrylamide 
(PNIPA) hydrogel. Such hydrogel reduces its size in 
response to an elevation of temperature above a specific 
threshold. This temperature threshold referred to as the 
lower critical solution temperature (LCST) is adjusted 
slightly above 37oC by the addition of several monomers. 
The local heat responsible to trigger the volume change is 
generated by biocompatible ~20 nm single-domain 
superparamagnetic Iron-Oxide (Fe3O4) MNP (the use of 
FeCo MNP could also be envisioned) embedded into the 
97
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

PNIPA structure and are also used for propulsion and 
steering. The characteristics of these MNP are adjusted to 
allow the energy from a magnetic field to drive the magnetic 
moments capable of overcoming the thermal energy barrier 
and to allow a rotation and an alignment with the direction 
of the same magnetic field. After removing the external 
magnetic 
field, 
magnetic 
moments 
do 
not 
relax 
immediately, but after a short delay before returning to their 
original random orientation. During this process known as 
the Néel relaxation, energy is released in the form of heat 
that is used to rise the temperature inside the hydrogel-based 
microscale robot. Several microscale polymorphic robots 
were tested successfully using a 4 kA.m-1 magnetic field 
modulated at 160 kHz. This approach is summarized 
schematically in Fig. 4. 
 
Tumoral
Lesion
(Target)
Arteriole
Large Capillaries
20µm
4-5µm
Small
Capillaries
TE = 96 ms
TE = 125 ms
TE = 135 ms
a
50-150µm
Swarm
MRI
Swarm of MTB
C
 
Fig. 4 – Schematic of the use of polymorphic microscale robots to reduce 
the blood flow in order to enhance targeting using a swarm of bacterial 
microscale robots 
 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
An aggregate of synthetic microscale robots will have 
higher propulsion performance in larger vessels. On the 
other hand, MC-1 bacterial propulsion proves to be superior 
in the microvasculature. Combining both approaches should 
lead to optimum targeting performance in regions located 
deeply in the human vascular network. One promising 
approach presented here is to encapsulate self-propelled 
bacteria acting as biological microscale robots operating 
under the control of an external computer into special 
micro-carriers being propelled by magnetic gradients 
produced by an upgraded MRI scanner. This combination 
allow complementary propulsion methods necessary to 
target more efficiently specific regions located deeper and 
accessible by transiting through the microvasculature after 
being introduced in the body through an artery. Another 
complementary approach is based on polymorphic synthetic 
microscale robots capable of changing volume to produce 
temporary embolization that would allow a reduction of the 
blood flow in smaller diameter capillaries and hence, 
potentially help achieving enhanced targeting efficacy. 
Although more types of microscale robots could be 
envisioned, this paper already showed the potential 
advantages of combining aggregates of synthetic and 
biologic microscale robots for specific medical interventions 
such as in cancer therapies. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project is supported in part by the Canada Research 
Chair 
(CRC) 
in 
Micro/Nanosystem 
Development, 
Fabrication and Validation and grants from the National 
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada 
(NSERC), the Province of Québec, the Canada Foundation 
for Innovation (CFI), and US Grant Number R21EB007506 
from the National Institute Of Biomedical Imaging And 
Bioengineering. The content is solely the responsibility of 
the authors and does not necessary represent the official 
views of the National Institute Of Biomedical Imaging And 
Bioengineering or the National Institutes of Health. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Martel, “Aggregates of synthetic microscale nanorobots versus 
swarms of computer-controlled flagellated bacterial robots for target 
therapies through the human vascular network,” The Fourth Int. Conf. 
on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies (ICQNM 2010), St. 
Marteen, Netherlands Antilles, Feb. 10-16, 2010 
[2] N. Olamaei, G. Beaudoin, G. Cheriet and S. Martel, "MRI 
visualization of a single 15 µm navigable imaging agent and future 
microrobot," 32nd Annual International Conference of the IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Buenos Aires, 
Argentina, Aug. 31 – Sept. 4, 2010 
[3] S. Martel, O. Felfoul, J.B. Mathieu, A. Chanu, S. Tamaz, M. 
Mohammadi, M. Mankiewicz, and N. Tabatabaei, “MRI-based 
nanorobotic platform for the control of magnetic nanoparticles and 
flagellated bacteria for target interventions in human capillaries,” 
International Journal of Robotics Research (IJRR), Special Issue on 
Medical Robotics, vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 1169-1182, Aug. 2009 
[4] R. P. Blakemore, “Magnetotactic bacteria,” Science, 190, pp. 377-
379, 1975 
[5] S. Martel, M. Mohammadi, O. Felfoul, Z. Lu, and P. Pouponneau, 
“Flagellated magnetotactic bacteria as controlled MRI-trackable 
propulsion and steering systems for medical nanorobots operating in 
the human microvasculature,” International Journal of Robotics 
Research (IJRR), vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 571-582, April 2009 
[6] R. B. Frankel and R. P. Blakemore, “Navigational compass in 
magnetic bacteria,” J. of Magn. and Magn. Materials, 15-18 (3), pp. 
1562-1564, 1980 
[7] H. Debarros, D. M. S. Esquivel,  and M. Farina, “Magnetotaxis,” Sci. 
Progr., 74, pp. 347-359, 1990 
[8] N. Tabatabaei, J. Lapointe and S. Martel,"Microscale hydrogel-based 
computer-triggered polymorphic microrobots for operations in the 
vascular network," 3rd IEEE RAS EMBS Int. Conf. on Biomedical 
Robotics and Biomechatronics (BioRob), Tokyo, Japan, Sept. 26-30, 
2010
 
98
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

