297
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The Financial Credit Risk Assessment Model: Three Perspectives 
Eric Mantelaers 
Optimizing Knowledge-Intensive Business Processes 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Sittard, the Netherlands 
eric.mantelaers@zuyd.nl  
 
Martijn Zoet  
Optimizing Knowledge-Intensive Business Processes 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Sittard, the Netherlands 
martijn.zoet@zuyd.nl
 
Abstract—Within 
recent 
years, 
Financial 
Credit 
Risk 
Assessment (FCRA) has become an increasingly important issue 
within the financial industry. Therefore, the search for features 
that can predict the credit risk of an organization has increased. 
Using multiple statistical techniques, a variance of features has 
been proposed. Applying a structured literature review, 258 
papers have been selected. From the selected papers, 835 
features have been identified. The features have been analyzed 
with respect to the type of feature, the information sources 
needed and the type of organization that applies the features. 
Based on the results of the analysis, the features have been 
plotted in the FCRA Model. The results show that most features 
focus on hard information from a transactional source, based on 
official information with a high latency. In this paper, we re-
address and -present our earlier work [1]. We extended the 
previous research with more detailed descriptions of the related 
literature, findings, and results, which provides a grounded 
basis from which further research on FCRA can be conducted. 
Keywords-Financial Credit Risk Assessment; Business Failure 
Prediction; Credit Risk Features; DMN Requirements Diagrams 
(DRD). 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Within the field of the Financial Credit Risk Assessment 
(FCRA) there are two main areas of interest. The first main 
interest, credit rating (or scoring), is used to solve the problem 
to label companies as bad/good credit or bankrupt/healthy. 
Credit rating is used not only internally for screening 
borrowers, pricing loans and managing credit risk thereafter, 
but also externally for calibrating regulatory capital 
requirements [2]. The second main interest, bankruptcy 
(failure) prediction (or business failure prediction or going 
concern assessment) is intended to predict the probability that 
the company may belong to a high-risk group or may become 
bankrupt during the following year(s). Both of them are 
strongly related and solved in a similar way, namely as a 
binary classification task. In this paper, both categories of 
problems are collectively called FCRA, which is a business 
decision-making problem that is relevant for creditors, 
auditors, senior management, bankers and other stakeholders.  
FCRA is a domain which has been studied for many 
decades. According to Balcaen and Ooghe [3], there are four 
main areas with reference to FCRA: (1) Classical paradigm 
(arbitrary definition of failure, non-stationarity and data 
instability, sampling selectivity), (2) Neglect of the time 
dimension of failure (use of one single observation, fixed 
score output/concept of resemblance/descriptive nature,  
 
 
failure not seen as a process), (3) Application focus (variable 
selection, selection of modelling method), (4) Other problems 
(use of a linear classification rule, use of annual account 
information, neglect of multidimensional nature of failure). 
The literature on FCRA and business failure dates back to the 
1930’s [27]. Watson and Everett [4] described five categories 
to define failure: 1) ceasing to exist (discontinuance for any 
reason), 2) closing or a change in ownership, 3) filing for 
bankruptcy, 4) closing to limit losses and 5) failing to reach 
financial goals. When the FCRA is negative, it is called 
business failure, which is a general term and, according to a 
widespread definition, it is the situation that a firm cannot pay 
lenders, preferred stock shareholders, suppliers, etc., or a bill 
is overdrawn, or the firm is bankrupt according to the law [5]. 
There is extensive literature in which this topic has been 
researched from the perspective of auditors or bankers. On the 
other hand, rare literature can be found about related literature 
from an information and decision perspective. The features 
(variables) which are relevant in the field of FCRA will be 
analyzed in this paper. In this paper the focus will be on the 
auditor’s, bankers and crediting rating firms, hence forward 
the term financial industry will be used to describe all three. 
A combination will be made between the financial industry 
and an information and decision perspective.  
 
 
Figure 1. DRD-level Elements 
 
To do so, the DRD model will be used. The reason DMN 
(Decision Model and Notation) is used, is because it is 
currently the standard to model decisions. In September 2015, 
the Object Management Group (OMG) [6] released a new 
standard for modelling decisions and underlying business 
logic, DMN The DMN standard is based on two levels; the 
Decision Requirements Diagram (DRD) level and the 
Decision Logic Level (DLL). The DRD level consists of four 
concepts that are used to capture essential information with 
regards to decisions: 1) the decision, 2) business knowledge, 
which represents the collection of business logic required to 
execute the decision, 3) input data, and 4) a knowledge source, 
which enforces how the decision should be taken by 
influencing the underlying business logic. The contents of the 
DLL are represented by the business knowledge container in 
the DRD level. 

298
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II contains a description of relevant literature 
regarding features, feature selection, and techniques with 
reference to FCRA, from a combined perspective of both the 
financial industry and information and decision analysts, 
followed by the research method in Section III. In Section IV, 
our data collection and analysis will be reported. 
Subsequently, in Section V, a presentation of the results 
derived from the applied data analysis techniques will be 
given. The conclusion (Section VI) closes the article. 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
Feature selection is a critical step in FCRA, which refers 
to the process that reduces the feature space and selects an 
optimum subset of relevant features. Three possible methods 
can be distinguished: 1) human, 2) statistical and 3) hybrid. In 
the human approach, an auditor decides which features are 
important and how they relate to each other. The model in ‘the 
head’ of the auditor is rebuild into the system. For the 
statistical approach several alternative methodologies are 
applied for the feature selection. Tsai [7] compares five well-
known feature selection methods used in bankruptcy 
prediction, which are: 1) t-test, 2) correlation matrix, 3) 
stepwise regression, 4) principle component analysis (PCA) 
and 5) factor analysis. The hybrid approach applies both the 
human and statistical manner. 
 
Statistical techniques: 
1. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) 
2. Multivariate discriminate analysis (MDA) 
3. Quadratic discriminant analysis (QDA) 
4. Logistic regression (LR) 
5. Factor analysis (FA) 
Intelligent techniques: 
1. Neural networks (NN) 
2. Decision trees (DT) 
3. Rough sets 
4. Case-based reasoning (CBR) 
5. Support vector machines (SVM) 
6. Data envelopments analysis 
7. Soft computing (hybrid intelligent systems) 
8. Operational research techniques 
9. Other intelligent techniques 
Figure 2. Statistical and Intelligent Techniques 
 
To apply the selected features from the features selection 
to take the FCRA-decision, different methods are applied. 
Broadly, these methods are dived into two broad categories: 
statistical and intelligent techniques [8] [9]. They exist out of 
multiple sub-categories, see Figure 2. For a detailed 
description of the techniques we refer to Ravi Kumar and Ravi 
[8].  
Based on literature studied, we developed a model that 
exists out of three axes that determine the type of features 
applied. To ground our theory, we first present the end model: 
the FCRA Model. 
 
 
Figure 3. Financial Credit Risk Assessment Model 
 
The first axe describes the type of data that organizations 
retrieve to make a judgement about the financial credit risk. In 
the papers of Berger [21][25], the same distinction is made in 
an information type perspective: hard versus soft (or 
quantitative versus qualitative) data. Different related names 
are used in this field: 
 
 
The second axe describes the manner in which this 
information is retrieved. For example, two manners in which 
information can be collected are: 1) through face to face 
contact between a loan officer and the organization’s owner 
and 2) through a form on a website or any other digital 
manner. The third axe describes the organization size, 
varying from small to big. The loan decision model of small 
banks is known to differ from the loan decision model of 
large banks [12]. According to Berger [10] small 
organizations (organization size), make use of soft 
information (information type), based on the relationship 
with their clients (information source). Bollen et al. [13] 
recognize four categories of business failures: 1) Tadpole 
(company failed because it was a basically unhealthy 
company, 2) Drowned frog (the company is over-ambitious 
or may show signs of extreme growth, 3) Boiled frog 
(companies in this category may be failing as a result of 
external conditions (e.g., disasters), bad economic conditions 
or fundamental changes in the business environment to which 
the company has failed to respond adequately, 4) Bullfrog 
(the companies in this category have drawn a relatively large 
portion of public attention, because they are often related to 
fraudulent activities of managers or employees). 
 
 
 
Quantitative features
Qualitative features
Hard information
Soft information
Financial information
Non-financial information
Accounting information 
Non-accounting information

299
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A. Information Type 
 
Hard 
According to Petersen [14] hard information is almost 
always recorded as numbers and is comparable. The durability 
of information is potentially greater when it is hard. The 
collection method of hard information is mostly not personal. 
Hard information is mostly standardized and easy to 
document and transfer to others [15]. Nemoto et al. [16] also 
recognize the verifiability which normally is higher in case of 
hard information. Decision processes which depend upon 
hard information are easier to automate. Knowing what 
information you are looking for, and why it is valuable, is 
essential if information collection and possibly decision 
making, based on the information is to be delegated. Most 
features are based on data from the financial statements. 
Financial statements are, in most organizations, created once 
or twice a year. Therefore, the data needed to calculate the 
features is available once or twice a year. This causes an 
information 
opacity 
problem, 
thereby 
reducing 
the 
effectiveness of the features. Other organizations that also 
assess the financial credit risk of an organization are banks, 
credit assessors, etc. Both previously also had to trust numbers 
that are published once a year. Since this time period is too 
long for both parties, they searched for solutions to address 
this problem. According to Berger and Udell [17] hard 
information may include, as examples, financial ratios 
calculated from audited financial statements; credit scores 
assembled from data on the payment histories of the small and 
medium sized entities (SME) end its owner provided by credit 
bureaus; or information about accounts receivable from 
transparent, low-risk obligors that may pledged as collateral 
by the SME or sold to the financial institution.  
 
Soft 
Soft information is mostly relationship-based and not 
easily quantified [18]. The replacement of soft with hard 
information inevitably results in a loss of information. The 
early studies for FCRA were univariate (a specific statistical 
method applied) studies which had important implications for 
future model development. These laid the groundwork for 
multivariate studies. Ravi Kumar and Ravi [8] identify 
statistical and intelligent techniques to solve the bankruptcy 
prediction problem. For each type of technique, they describe 
the way they work. Chen, Ribeiro and Chen [9] summarize the 
traditional statistical models and state-of-the-art intelligent 
methods. Auditors can utilize data mining techniques to 
analyze external (soft) data (e.g., census data, social media, 
news articles) in their assessments of client business risk, 
fraud risk, internal controls, going concern [19]. Lu et al. [20] 
explain the possibilities of data mining (text mining) based on 
soft information on websites and in financial reports to predict 
bankruptcy.  
Altman et al. [21] describe the value of qualitative (soft) 
information in SME risk management. They find that 
qualitative data relating to such variables as legal action by 
creditors to recover unpaid debts, company filing histories, 
comprehensive audit report/opinion data and firm specific 
characteristics, make a significant contribution to increasing 
the default prediction power of risk models, built specifically 
for SMEs. Lenders must invest in the production of ‘soft 
information’ to supplement the financial data used in these 
models [22]. Dainelli et al. [23] give a summarization of 
determinants of SME credit worthiness under Basel rules. As 
their model does not include qualitative information, future 
research could aim to set out the qualitative determinants in 
the rating judgment. Petersen [14] concludes that technology 
is changing the way we communicate. One of these changes 
is a greater reliance on hard relative to soft information. 
Despite this, very little research has been published on the 
concept of activities used by lenders to gather soft 
information [24]. Suter [24] studied the collection of soft 
information by small community banks. He built a 
conceptual framework existing of four factors to reduce the 
asymmetric information: 1) Knowledge of business, 2) 
Knowledge of industry, 3) Knowledge of local market, and 
4) Value of the social contract. Angilella and Mazzù [25] 
structured the non-financial criteria hierarchically on the 
basis of the risk areas, specific to an innovative firm: 
development, technological, market, and production. The risk 
areas considered are: Technological risk, Market risk, 
Production risk, Innovation indicators, Financial criteria. 
 
Performance 
To measure performance, there are several metrics [9]. 
One of the most important measures is accuracy. In terms of 
performance, an accuracy rate between 81 and 90% reflects a 
realistic average performance based on the results of the 
analyzed studies [26]. The top five bankruptcy models with 
an accuracy level of more than 80 per cent are [27]: 1) Altman 
[28], 2) Edmister [29], 3) Deakin [30], 4) Springate, [28] and 
5) Fulmer [29]. All of these only use hard features. Chen et 
al. [31] find that the use of soft information significantly 
improves the power of default prediction models. 
The same conclusion is realized by Ju and Sohn [32] who 
proposed to update the credit scoring model based on new 
features like management, technology, marketability, and 
business and profitability. Kosmidis and Stavropoulos [33] 
even got one step further in their conclusion, as they state that 
factors such as economic cycle phase, cash flow information 
and the detection of fraudulent financial reporting can 
evidently enhance the predictive power of existing models. 
Altman, Sabato and Wilson [21] reach the same conclusion as 
they state: “that qualitative data relating to such variables as 
legal action by creditors to recover unpaid debts, company 
filing histories, comprehensive audit report/opinion data and 
firm specific characters make a significant contribution to 
increasing the default prediction power of risk models built 
specifically for SMEs.”. This leads us to the first conclusion 
that the financial industry should not only rely on hard 
features, which have a time delay, but also on soft information 
to assess the financial credit risk; see bottom left side in Figure 
3. Relationship lending is based on soft information and is best 
suited for entities that are more opaque; and transactions-
based lending is best suited for SMEs that are more 
transparent [34].  
To realize proper research in this area, the researchers have 
to go beyond the already cumulative features and look at the 

300
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
base data. E.g., no longer apply the cumulative feature: current 
assets but instead build features on the base information such 
as debtors’ information. 
 
B. Information Source 
In addition to the type of information available, the data 
source and its fluidity are also factors. In financial literature, 
this phenomenon is called “the hardening of soft information” 
[45]. The concept “the hardening of soft information” states 
that because personal contact with financial institutions has 
decreased, therefore they rely more and more on hard 
quantitative 
information. 
Since 
more 
banks, 
credit 
organizations, and accountants rely on non-personal contacts, 
this statement is gaining importance. 
Thereby underlying the fact that the traditional features are 
the most useful features to analyze the financial credit risk. 
The main reason they state to support their claim is the 
adoption rate of technology.  
However, a counter claim can be made that through the 
adoption of technology, soft information can be more easily 
collected. For example, through firehose access to social 
media websites. However, this will depend on the type of soft 
or hard information one wants to retrieve because not all soft 
information can be retrieved through social websites, some 
still might need to be retrieved face to face. Therefore, the 
bottom part of our model, see Figure 3, indicates the lending 
technologies, being the manner in which the information is 
retrieved. A lending technology is “a set of screening and 
underwriting policies and procedures, a loan contract 
structure, and monitoring strategies and mechanisms” [11]. 
Examples of lending technologies they apply are: leasing, 
commercial real estate lending, residential real estate lending, 
motor vehicle lending, and equipment lending, asset-based 
lending, financial statement lending, small business credit 
scoring, relationship lending and judgment lending.  
 
C. Organisation Size 
 
In FCRA literature, from a banking perspective, a 
distinction is made between the manner in which small and 
big banks assess the risk. Small banks apply more of a 
relationship perspective to assess the risk, while big banks 
apply the analysis of transactions to determine the risk. 
Although this specific distinction cannot be found in 
accountancy and lending (firms) literature, the hypothesis is 
that the same basic rules apply. Therefore, the right axe of the 
FCRA Model contains the size of the firms, assessing the risk; 
see Figure 3.  
Loans to small businesses have traditionally been based 
on intimate relationships between borrower firms and 
lenders, because many of these firms are much more 
informationally opaque than large firms. Thus, lenders 
primarily rely on soft information, gathering through long-
lasting transaction relationships. For banks it is difficult to 
obtain detailed information from small firms since the 
financial reports of small firms are mainly for tax purposes 
[35].  
 
III. RESEARCH METHOD 
The goal of this research is to identify and classify features 
that have been applied to assess Financial Credit Risk. In 
addition to the goal of the research, also, the maturity of the 
research field is a factor in determining the appropriate 
research method and technique. Based on the number of 
publications and identified features, the maturity of the FCRA 
research field can be classified as mature. Mature research 
fields should A) focus on further external validity and 
generalizability of the phenomena studied, or B) focus on a 
different perspective on the constructs and relationships 
between identified constructs [36]. Current studies have 
focused on two elements: 1) selecting the best features to 
predict bankruptcy, while other studies have focused on 2) 
comparing the efficiency and effectiveness of the different 
features identified. However, current analysis focuses on two 
viewpoints: 1) a high abstraction level and 2) a high latency 
perspective.  
Summarized, to accomplish our research goal, a research 
approach is needed in which the current features are explored, 
compared and mapped to the FCRA Model.  
To accomplish this goal, a research approach is needed that 
can 1) identify features for FCRA, 2) identify similarities and 
dissimilarities between features, and 3) map the features to the 
FCRA Model. The first two goals are realized by applying a 
structured literature research and the use of a comparison 
table. The last goal is realized by coding the features 
identified, based on a priori coding scheme. 
 
IV. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS 
As stated in the previous section, the goal of this research 
is to 1) identify features for FCRA, 2) identify similarities and 
dissimilarities between features for FCRA, and 3) map the 
features to the FCRA Model. 
The selection of the papers has been conducted via the link-
tracing methodology [37], more specifically via snowball 
sampling. The snowballing was applied to take advantage of 
the social networks of identified respondents to provide a 
researcher with an ever-expanding set of potential contacts 
[38]. Snowballing is an effective and efficient form of contact 
tracing for use in diversity of research methods and designs, 
and apparently well suited for a number of research purposes 
[39] - [40]. For both the hard features and soft features two 
different snowball samplings have been conducted. For the 
hard features this resulted in 238 papers that were included in 
the coding. With respect to the soft features this resulted in 20 
papers to be selected for coding. For a study to be selected for 
coding, the study must explicitly address hard and/or soft 
features for FCRA (see Table II for details). The unit of 
analysis for coding is a single feature, implying that one study 
can contribute multiple units of analysis. For example, Alam 
et al. (2000) contributed five features: 1) “Net loan losses / 
Total assets less Total loans”, 2) “Net loan losses / Total 
loans”, 3) “Net loan losses plus Provision for loan losses / Net 
income”, 4) “Loans past due 90 days plus Nonaccrual loans / 
Total assets” and, 5) “Net income / Total assets”. This 
resulted in the identification of 700 hard features and 135 soft 

301
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
features. Each of the hard and soft features have been added 
to a comparison table, see Table I [2][41][42][43]. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Feature Selection  
 
Data analysis was conducted in one cycle of coding with 
the use of a priori coding scheme. The reason an a priori 
coding scheme was applied, is because the concepts that 
needed to be coded were known upfront, based on the 
previously defined FCRA Model.  
To code the selected items, the following questions are 
asked: 1) is the feature a hard or soft feature? and 2) is the 
feature a relational or transactional feature? For example, the 
feature “net income/total assets” is a hard feature from a 
transactional perspective. A hard feature because the ratio can 
be calculated and transactional, because the figures can be 
derived from a system. An example of a hard / relational 
feature is “the number of times the annual financial 
statements are deposited too late”. A hard feature because the 
number can be calculated and relationship because it’s a proxy 
of a soft feature, for example of management quality.  
“The quality of management” is a soft feature from a 
relational perspective. A soft feature because it cannot be 
calculated directly and the (qualitative) information has to 
gathered via personal contacts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I. SNAPSHOT COMPARISON TABLE 
 
 
 
V. RESULTS 
In this section, the results of the data collection are 
presented. As described in the previous section, first features 
from existing studies have been collected, added to a 
comparison table and coded. Therefore, three separate results 
can be identified: 1) descriptive statistics for hard features, 2) 
descriptive statistics for soft features and, 3) the mapping of 
the hard and soft features to the FCRA Model.  
A. Results from an information type perspective 
As stated in this section, most features are based on data 
from the financial statements. Financial statements are, in 
most organizations, created once or twice a year. Therefore, 
the data needed to calculate the features, is available once or 
twice a year. This causes an information opacity problem 
thereby reducing the effectiveness of the features. Other 
organizations that also assess the financial credit risk of an 
organization are banks, credit assessors, etc. Both previously 
also had to trust numbers that are published once a year. Since 
this time period is too long for both parties, they searched for 
solutions to address this problem. 
Camaco-Miñano et al. [44] show that sector, size, number 
of shareholdings, ROA, and liquidity can explain the 
bankruptcy process outcome and also predict the process for 
still-healthy firms. Three of five features exist of qualitative 
information.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

302
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A1. 
Descriptive statistics for hard features  
The extraction of the features resulted in the registration 
of 700 features from 238 papers. From this sample, the top ten 
features were identified and selected; see Table II.  
 
TABLE II. TOP TEN FEATURES 
 
Feature 01: Net income/total assets                    85 (papers) 
Feature 02: current ratio                                   74 
Feature 03: EBIT/total assets (*)                      65 
Feature 04: retained earnings/total assets (*)   62 
Feature 05: working capital/total assets (*)      60 
Feature 06: sales/total assets (*)                       46 
Feature 07: quick ratio                                      41 
Feature 08: current assets/total assets               39 
Feature 09: total debt/total assets                      39 
Feature 10: cash/total assets                              32 
 
 
Analysis of the hard features show that each of the top ten 
applied features are features that are applied in the financial 
statements of the organization. In addition, each feature lies a 
connection between the three main components of the 
financial statements namely: the cash flow statement, profit 
and loss statement, and the balance sheet. They do so by 
comparing the liquidity (features 02, 05, 07, 08, 09 and 10), 
the solvency (features 03 and 04) and the profitability 
(features 01, 03 and 06). Where the liquidity is primarily 
related to cash flow; the solvency is related to the balance 
sheet; the profitability is primarily related to the profit and loss 
statement. Of course, there is a main interrelationship between 
all these three main components of the financial statements.  
Additionally, results show that our findings are in line with 
statements made in previous research, namely that the Altman 
model for bankruptcy prediction [28] is the most applied one. 
This is indicated by the fact that 4 features in the top 10 
(indicated by an asterisk) are part of the Altman-Z score. And 
the fifth feature by Altman (Market Value of Equity/Total 
Liabilities) ranks thirteenth. 
 
A2. 
Descriptive statistics for soft features  
The extraction of the features resulted in the registration 
of 135 features from 20 papers. Likewise, to the hard features 
a top ten can be derived. However, in contrast to the hard 
features this top ten would exist out of features that are only 
mentioned four, three, or two times. One feature is listed four 
times, namely “management quality”. Four features are listed 
three times, namely: “county court judgements”, “decision to 
check audited accounts”, “decision to issue cash flow 
statements” and, “late filing days”. Followed by twelve 
features mentioned only twice. The remaining 118 features all 
are mentioned once. Therefore, creating a top ten didn’t seem 
useful. In addition, the soft features have been additional 
coded to create a categorization (see Figure 5). The 
categorization has three main differentiations: 1) internal, 2) 
external and 3) social contract. ‘Internal’ is defined as 
qualitative (soft) information about the client; for example, 
about the client’s management and its innovative power. 
‘External’ can be seen as the environment that affects and 
interacts with the client. There are three main sub-categories: 
business (e.g., the number of visits with customer vendors & 
suppliers or visits with customers about business status), 
industry (e.g., the number of reviews of trade journals from 
customer’s industries or the number of memberships in trade 
associations relating to customer’s industries) and economy 
(e.g., the number of attendances at local chamber events or 
number 
of 
memberships 
in 
civic 
and 
community 
organizations). The last differentiation is ‘social contract’, 
which is defined as qualitative (soft) information about the 
lending relationship. ‘Social contract’ is further divided in two 
categories: quality of the credit relationship and value of the 
social contract.  
 
 
Figure 5. Categorization Soft Features 
 
A3. 
Descriptive statistics for techniques  
Based on the 128 papers [8] the frequency of the 
techniques applied to take the FCRA-decision have collected. 
In total 84 techniques have been identified. Seven techniques 
occur more than five times. Out of these seven techniques 
four occur more than 10 times, see Table III. The remaining 
77 techniques occur up to 4, 3, 2 or 1 times. 
 
TABLE III.  TOP 7 TECHNIQUES 
 
Technique 
BPNN (Back propagation trained Neural Network) 
DA (Discriminant Analysis) 
LOGIT 
LDA (Linear Discriminant Analysis) 
Rough Set 
GA (Genetic Algorithm) 
Probit 
# 
28 
18 
18 
10 
08 
05 
05 
 
A4. 
Descriptive Statistics for performance  
Overall can be stated that research on feature identification 
does not clearly report on the (overall) performance of the 
features identified. Off the researched paper, only 16 report 
extensively on the performance of the applied techniques. We 
argue that further research should report on the performance 
of the identified and tested features. To measure the 
performance Chen [9] identified 17 measurements which can 
Soft information about client
External:
Internal:
Business
Industry
Market / Economy
Innovation:
-
Development
-
Technological
-
Market 
-
Production
Management
Quality of the credit relationship
Value of the social contract:
-
Reliance on family history & reputation
-
Reliance on reputation of business principles
-
Reliance on personal relationship
-
Reliance on informal conversations
Social contracts:

303
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
be applied, for example: 1) accuracy, 2) root mean squared 
error, 3) true positive, and 4) true negative. For the detailed 
description of these 17 measurement we refer to Chen [45]. 
 
B. Results from a DMN perspective 
Analyzing the top ten features from a DMN perspective 
shows four results. The first result: decision versus data input 
show that each feature is treated like a decision. The feature is 
derived from one or more conditions. For example, the first 
feature is derived out of two conditions: net income and total 
assets to which a mathematical formula is applied, in this 
specific case, net income divided by total assets. Each feature 
in the 10 retrieves the applied conditions from one data source, 
namely, the financial statements (the cashflow statement, the 
profit and loss account and/or the balance sheet).  
 
 
Figure 6. DRD-level Elements (Hard Features) 
 
From the perspective of the financial statements, the 
conditions applied, e.g., net income, actually are data input 
since all are listed there. However, when analyzing one step 
deeper, each data input on the balance sheet or the profit and 
loss account is actually a decision. For example, total assets, 
is calculated as current assets plus fixed assets; see Figure 6. 
When analyzing all of the quantitative features selected, all 
features are derived from the cashflow statement, the profit 
and loss account and/or the balance sheet. A potential 
explanation of this phenomenon can be that the financial 
industry only looks at formal documents and formal 
statements. However, this raises the question if these 
combined features contain specific sub-decisions or specific 
input data elements that make them suitable for analysis. 
According to the researchers, this would be a subject to further 
investigate. 
In addition, the features only apply information from the 
current financial statements. Formally, the cashflow 
statement, the profit and loss account and the balance sheet 
have to be created once a year. Most companies create this 
information more times a year, voluntarily or obligatory. Also, 
not comparing information from early years, thereby 
indicating that the patterns have no additional information 
value. By analyzing the deeper layers underneath the features 
described previously, the hypothesis is that a better and 
quicker FCRA can be performed.  
 
C. Results from an information source perspective 
The third perspective from which factors can be classified 
is the information source perspective. The concept “the 
hardening of information” states that because personal 
contact with the bank has decreased the banks rely more and 
more on hard quantitative information. However, if the model 
on which they base these conclusions is further dissected, two 
axes can be distinguished: A) the type of data and B) the 
manner in which the data is retrieved. The first axe describes 
the type of data that organizations retrieve to make a 
judgement about the financial credit risk. In the papers of 
Berger [21][25], the same distinction is made in an 
information type perspective: hard versus soft data. The 
second axe described the manner in which this information is 
retrieved. For example, two manners in which information can 
be collected are: 1) through face to face contact between a loan 
officers and the organization’s owner and 2) through a form 
on a website or any other digital manner. Since more banks, 
credit organizations, and accountants rely on the second, the 
statement of “the hardening of information” is that only 
quantitative data is used. Thereby underlying the fact that the 
traditional features are the most useful features to analyze 
going concern assessment. The main reason they state to 
support their claim is the adoption rate of technology.  
 
 
 
Figure 7. DRD-level Elements (Soft Features) 
 
However, a counter claim can be made that through the 
adoption of technology soft information can be more easily 
collected. For example, through firehose access to social 
media websites. However, this will depend on the type of soft 
or hard information one wants to retrieve because not all soft 
information can be retrieved through social websites, some 
still might need to be retrieved face to face. Therefore, the 
bottom part of our model, see Figure 3, indicates the manner 
in which the information is retrieved.  
 
D. Results from an organization perspective 
In FCRA literature, from a banking perspective, a 
distinction is made between the manner in which small and 
big banks assess the risk. Small banks apply more of a 
relationship perspective to assess the risk while big banks 
apply the analysis of transactions to determine the risk. 
Although this specific distinction cannot be found in 
accountancy and lending (firms) literature, the hypothesis is 
that the same basic rules apply. Therefore, the right axe of the 
FCRA Model contains the size of the firms assessing the risk; 
see Figure 3. 

304
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we aimed at finding an answer to the 
following research question: “how to categorize financial 
credit risk features such that an integrative relationship is 
established with the information type applied and information 
sources used?” To accomplish this goal, we conducted a 
literature study to identify features that have been designed 
and applied in previous research followed by coding the 
features based on an a priori coding scheme. The literature 
resulted in a total of 258 selected papers. From the selected 
papers, a total of 835 features were selected. Based on the a 
priori coding scheme, the features were mapped according to 
the following dimensions: A) the type of features applied, B) 
the information source applied and, C) the type of 
organization that applies the features. The results show that 
most features focus on hard information from a transactional 
source from official information with a high latency. In 
addition, the results show that most features still relate to the 
traditional Altman-Z score.  
All the results have been mapped on the FCRA Model, 
which is based on Wand and Weber [46], see Figure 3. The 
insights derived from this study provides a better 
understanding of the level on which the features are applied 
and where they score in the FCRA Model. This will enable 
further exploration and identification of features that have a 
low latency but still have a proper predictive power. From a 
practical perspective, our study provides an overview of 
features that can currently be applied, and which further 
exploration should be considered.  
While we provide an integrative overview of features for 
FCRA, our study is not without limitations. The first 
limitation concerns the sampling and sample size. The sample 
group of features is drawn from the identified paper without 
considering the effectiveness of the features selected. The 
main reason for this choice is the fact that not all papers report 
on the effectiveness of the features applied. While we believe 
that for the purpose of this study this causes no problems, 
further refinement of the features selected is recommended. 
Additionally, our results should be further validated in 
practice.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
E. Mantelaers and M. Zoet, “A New Explorative Model to 
Assess the Financial Credit Risk Assessment,” eKNOW 
2018. 
[2] 
S. Cornee and A. Szafarz, “Vive la Difference: Social 
Banks and Reciprocity in the Credit Market,” J. Bus. 
Ethics, vol. 125, no. July, pp. 361–380, 2014. 
[3] 
S. Balcaen and H. Ooghe, “35 years of studies on business 
failure: 
An 
overview 
of 
the 
classic 
statistical 
methodologies and their related problems,” British 
Accounting Review, vol. 38, no. 1. pp. 63–93, 2006. 
[4] 
J. Watson and J. E. Everett, “Do Small Businesses Have 
High Failure Rates?,” J. Small Bus. Manag., vol. 34, no. 4, 
pp. 45–62, 1996. 
[5] 
B. S. Ahn, S. S. Cho, and C. Y. Kim, “The integrated 
methodology of rough set theory and artificial neural 
network for business failure prediction,” Expert Syst. Appl., 
vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 65–74, 2000. 
[6] 
T. Derriks, “A Business Process & Rules Management 
Maturity Model for the Dutch governmental sector,” no. 
March, 2012. 
[7] 
C.-F. Tsai, “Feature selection in bankruptcy prediction,” 
Knowledge-Based Syst., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 120–127, 2009. 
[8] 
P. Ravi Kumar and V. Ravi, “Bankruptcy prediction in 
banks and firms via statistical and intelligent techniques - 
A review,” Eur. J. Oper. Res., vol. 180, no. 1, pp. 1–28, 
2007. 
[9] 
N. Chen, B. Ribeiro, and A. Chen, “Financial credit risk 
assessment: a recent review,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 45, no. 
1, pp. 1–23, 2016. 
[10] 
A. N. Berger and L. K. Black, “Bank size, lending 
technologies, and small business finance,” J. Bank. 
Financ., 2011. 
[11] 
A. N. Berger et al., “Small Business Lending by Banks: 
Lending Technologies and the Effects of Banking Industry 
Consolidation and Technological Change.” 
[12] 
N. J. Kim and R. Z. Elias, “Financial statements, attestation 
level and lending decision by small banks,” Southwest Bus. 
Econ. J., pp. 63–72, 2008. 
[13] 
L. Bollen, R. Meuwissen, G. M.- Faces, and  undefined 
2008, “Classifying major European business failures,” 
FST. 
[14] 
M. a Petersen, “Information: Hard and Soft,” Northwest. 
Univ. Doc. Trav., no. July, p. 20, 2004. 
[15] 
M. Kano, H. Uchida, G. F. Udell, and W. Watanabe, 
“Information verifiability, bank organization, bank 
competition and bank-borrower relationships,” J. Bank. 
Financ., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 935–954, 2011. 
[16] 
W. W. T. Nemoto., Y. Ogura., “The Decision-Making 
Mechanism of Regional Financial Institutions and the 
Utilization of Soft Information *,” Policy Res. Institute, 
Minist. Financ. Japan, vol. 9, no. January, pp. 87–116, 
2013. 
[17] 
A. N. Berger and G. F. Udell, “A More Complete 
Conceptual Framework for SME Finance.” 
[18] 
D. A. Carter, J. E. Mcnulty, and J. A. Verbrugge, “Do 
Small Banks have an Advantage in Lending? An 
Examination of Risk-Adjusted Yields on Business Loans 
at Large and Small Banks,” J. Financ. Serv. Res., vol. 25, 
pp. 2–3, 2004. 
[19] 
H. Brown-Liburd and M. A. Vasarhelyi, “Big Data and 
Audit Evidence,” J. Emerg. Technol. Account., 2015. 
[20] 
Y.-H. Lu, Y.-C. Lin, and Y.-L. Lin, “資料探勘技術在繼
續 經 營 疑 慮 意 見 診 斷 模 型 之 應 用  (Going-Concern 
Opinion: The Application of Data Mining Technologies).” 
27-Jul-2016. 
[21] 
E. I. Altman, G. Sabato, and N. Wilson, “The value of non-
financial information in small and medium-sized enterprise 
risk management,” J. Credit Risk, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1–30, 
2010. 
[22] 
F. Mccann and T. Mcindoe-Calder, “Firm size, credit 
scoring accuracy and banks’ production of soft 
information,” 2015. 
[23] 
F. Dainelli, F. Giunta, and F. Cipollini, “Determinants of 
SME credit worthiness under Basel rules: the value of 
credit history information,” PSL Q. Rev., vol. 66, no. 264, 
pp. 21–47, 2013. 
[24] 
J. P. Suter and I. ). F. S. of B. Anderson University 
(Anderson, A Quantitative Study of the Collection of Soft 
Information by Small Community Banks: Building 
Sustainable Competitive Advantage. Anderson University 

305
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Falls School of Business, 2007. 
[25] 
S. Angilella and S. Mazzù, “The financing of innovative 
SMEs: A multicriteria credit rating model,” Eur. J. Oper. 
Res., vol. 244, no. 2, pp. 540–554, 2015. 
[26] 
E. Kirkos, “Assessing methodologies for intelligent 
bankruptcy prediction,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 
83–123, 2012. 
[27] 
M. Aruldoss, M. L. Travis, and V. P. Venkatesan, “A 
reference model for business intelligence to predict 
bankruptcy,” J. Enterp. Inf. Manag., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 
186–217, 2015. 
[28] 
E. I. Altman, “The Prediction of Corporate Bankruptcy: A 
Discriminant Analysis,” J. Finance, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 193–
194, 1968. 
[29] 
R. O. Edmister, “An empirical test of financial ratio 
analysis for small business failure prediction,” J. Financ. 
Quant. Anal., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 1477–1493, 1972. 
[30] 
E. B. Deakin, “A Discriminant Analysis of Predictors of 
Business Failure,” J. Account. Res., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 167–
179, 1972. 
[31] 
Y. Chen, R. J. Huang, J. Tsai, and L. Y. Tzeng, “Soft 
Information and Small Business Lending,” J. Financ. Serv. 
Res., vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 115–133, 2013. 
[32] 
Y. H. Ju and S. Y. Sohn, “Updating a credit-scoring model 
based on new attributes without realization of actual data,” 
Eur. J. Oper. Res., vol. 234, no. 1, pp. 119–126, 2014. 
[33] 
K. Kosmidis and A. Stavropoulos, “Corporate failure 
diagnosis in SMEs,” Int. J. Account. Inf. Manag., vol. 22, 
no. 1, pp. 49–67, 2014. 
[34] 
G. F. Udell, “What’s in a relationship? The case of 
commercial lending,” Bus. Horiz., vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 93–
103, 2008. 
[35] 
S. Bhattacharya and A. V. Thakor, “Contemporary banking 
theory,” J. Financ. Intermediation, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 2–50, 
1993. 
[36] 
A. C. Edmondson and S. E. Mcmanus, “Methodological fit 
in management field research,” Acad. Manag. Rev., vol. 32, 
no. 4, pp. 1155–1179, 2007. 
[37] 
M. Spreen, “Rare Populations, Hidden Populations, and 
Link-Tracing 
Designs: 
What 
and 
Why?,” 
Bull. 
Méthodologie Sociol., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 34–58, 1992. 
[38] 
S. K. Thompson, “Adaptive sampling in behavioral 
surveys,” NIDA Res.Monogr, vol. 167, no. 1046–9516 
(Linking), pp. 296–319, 1997. 
[39] 
K. Hjelm, P. Nyberg, Å. Isacsson, and J. Apelqvist, 
“Beliefs about health and illness essential for self-care 
practice: A comparison of migrant Yugoslavian and 
Swedish diabetic females,” J. Adv. Nurs., vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 
1147–1159, 1999. 
[40] 
J. H. Patrick, R. A. Pruchno, and M. S. Rose, “Recruiting 
Research Participants: A Comparison of the Costs and 
Effectiveness 
of 
Five 
Recruitment 
Strategies,” 
Gerontologist, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 295–302, 1998. 
[41] 
J. Grunert, L. Norden, and M. Weber, “The role of non-
financial factors in internal credit ratings,” J. Bank. 
Financ., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 509–531, 2005. 
[42] 
E. I. Altman, G. Sabato, and N. Wilson, “The value of non-
financial information in small and medium-sized enterprise 
risk management,” J. Credit Risk, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1–33, 
2010. 
[43] 
C.-C. Trönnberg and S. Hemlin, “Lending decision making 
in banks: A critical incident study of loan officers,” Eur. 
Manag. J., vol. 32, pp. 362–372, 2014. 
[44] 
M. del M. Camacho-Miñano, M. J. Segovia-Vargas, and D. 
Pascual-Ezama, “Which Characteristics Predict the 
Survival of Insolvent Firms? An SME Reorganization 
Prediction Model,” J. Small Bus. Manag., vol. 53, no. 2, 
pp. 340–354, 2015. 
[45] 
N. Chen, B. Ribeiro, and A. Chen, “Financial credit risk 
assessment: a recent review,” Artif. Intell. Rev., 2016. 
[46] 
Y. Wand and R. Weber, “An Ontological Model of an 
Information System,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., vol. 16, no. 
11, 1990. 
 
 
 
 

