131
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
Quantum Mechanics Needs Interpretation
Louis Marchildon
D´epartement de physique, Universit´e du Qu´ebec
Trois-Rivi`eres, QC, Canada, G9A 5H7
louis.marchildon@uqtr.ca
Abstract—Since the beginning, quantum mechanics has raised
major foundational and interpretative problems. Foundational
research has been an important factor in the development of
quantum cryptography, quantum information theory and, per-
haps one day, practical quantum computers. Many believe that,
in turn, quantum information theory has bearing on foundational
research. This is largely related to the so-called epistemic view of
quantum states, which maintains that the state vector represents
information on a system and which has led to the suggestion
that quantum theory needs no interpretation. I will argue that
this and related approaches fail to take into consideration two
different explanatory functions of quantum mechanics, that of
accounting for classically unexplainable correlations between
classical phenomena and that of explaining the microscopic
structure of classical objects. The epistemic view provides no
answer to what constitutes the main question of interpretation:
How can the world be for quantum mechanics to be true? I will
then review three different approaches to understanding quan-
tum mechanics, namely, Bohmian mechanics, Everett’s relative
states, and Cramer’s transactional interpretation. I will show
that these approaches answer the above question, as well as other
foundational ones. This paper is written from the perspective that
different logically consistent interpretations, far from leading to
confusion, in fact contribute to increased understanding of the
theory.
I. INTRODUCTION
Although the answer was intended to be clear, this paper’s
title was formulated interrogatively in my contribution to the
ICQNM 2009 conference [1]. Explicit consideration of several
interpretative schemes now motivates the positive formulation.
Ever since it was proposed more than 80 years ago, quantum
mechanics has raised great challenges both in foundations and
in applications.1 The latter have been developed at a very rapid
pace, opening up new vistas in most branches of physics as
well as in much of chemistry and engineering. Substantial
progress and important discoveries have also been made in
foundations, though at a much slower rate. The measurement
problem, long-distance correlations, and the meaning of the
wave function are three of the foundational problems on which
there has been and still is lively debate.
It is fair to say that foundational studies have largely con-
tributed to the burgeoning of quantum information theory, one
of the most active areas of development of quantum mechanics
in the past 25 years. Quantum information is dependent on
entanglement, whose signiﬁcance was brought to light through
the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) argument [6]. The real-
ization that transfer protocols based on quantum entanglement
1Relevant reviews and paper collections are, for instance, [2], [3], [4], [5].
may be absolutely secure has opened new windows in the
ﬁeld of cryptography [7]. And the development of quantum
algorithms thought to be exponentially faster than their best
classical counterparts has drawn great interest in the construc-
tion of quantum computers [8]. These face up extraordinary
challenges on the experimental side. But attempts to build
them are likely to throw much light on the fundamental
process of decoherence and perhaps on the limits of quantum
mechanics itself [9], [10].
Along with quantum information theory came also a reem-
phasis of the view that the wave function (or state vec-
tor, or density operator) properly represents knowledge, or
information [11], [12], [13]. This is often called the epis-
temic view of quantum states. On what the wave function
is knowledge of, proponents of the epistemic view do not
necessarily agree. The variant most relevant to the present
discussion is that rather than referring to objective properties
of microscopic objects (such as electrons, photons, etc.), the
wave function encapsulates probabilities of results of eventual
macroscopic measurements. The Hilbert space formalism of
quantum mechanics is taken as complete, and its objects in no
need of a realistic interpretation. Additional constructs, like
value assignments [14], Bohmian trajectories [15], multiple
worlds [16], or transactions [17] are viewed as superﬂuous at
best.
Just like foundational studies have contributed to the de-
velopment of quantum information theory, many investigators
think that the latter can help in solving the foundational and
interpretative problems of quantum mechanics. A number of
proponents of the epistemic view believe that it consider-
ably attenuates, or even completely solves, the problems of
quantum measurement, of long-distance correlations, and of
the meaning of the wave function. These problems will be
summarized brieﬂy in Sec. II, and the way the epistemic view
deals with them will be presented in Sec. III. I will then argue,
in Sec. IV, that the epistemic view and related approaches
fail to take into consideration that quantum mechanics has
two very different explanatory functions: that of accounting
for classically unexplainable correlations between classical
phenomena, and that of explaining the microscopic structure
of classical objects [18], [19]. In Sec. V, I will ask the
question of what it means to interpret quantum mechanics,
or any scientiﬁc theory for that matter. Drawing from the so-
called semantic view of theories, I will argue than interpreting
quantum mechanics means answering the question, “How
can the world be for quantum mechanics to be true?” [20].

132
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
The next three sections will examine how three interpretative
schemes of quantum mechanics, namely, Bohmian mechanics,
Everett’s many worlds, and Cramer’s transactional interpre-
tation, answer the above question and attempt to solve the
foundational problems. Concluding remarks will be made in
the last section.
II. THREE PROBLEMS IN QUANTUM MECHANICS
Although the way to apply quantum mechanics to prac-
tical situations was never a matter of dispute, the meaning
of the formalism has been problematic from the outset.
The ﬁrst problem concerned the

133
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
S

134
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
IV. TWO EXPLANATORY FUNCTIONS
To examine how appropriate the epistemic and related views
of quantum mechanics are, it is important to properly under-
stand the explanatory role of quantum mechanics as a physical
theory. Although all measurements are made by means of
macroscopic apparatus, quantum mechanics is used, as an
explanatory theory, in two different ways: it is meant to explain
(i) nonclassical correlations between macroscopic objects and
(ii) the small-scale structure of macroscopic objects [18],
[19]. That these two functions are distinct is best shown by
contrasting the world in which we live with a hypothetical,
closely related one [20].
Roughly speaking, the hypothetical world is deﬁned so that
(a) for all practical purposes, all macroscopic experiments give
results that coincide with what we ﬁnd in the real world, and
(b) its microscopic structure, if applicable, is different from
the one of the real world. Let us spell this out in more detail.
In the hypothetical world large scale objects, i.e., objects
much larger than atomic sizes, behave just like large scale
objects in the real world. The trajectories of baseballs and
airplanes can be computed accurately by means of classical
mechanics with the use of a uniform downward force, air
friction, and an appropriate propelling force. Waveguides and
antennas obey Maxwell’s equations. Steam engines and heat
pumps work according to the laws of classical thermody-
namics. The motion of planets, comets, and asteroids is well
described by Newton’s laws of gravitation and of motion,
slightly corrected by the equations of general relativity.
Close to atomic scales, however, these laws may no longer
hold. Except for one restriction soon to be spelled out, I
shall not be speciﬁc about the changes that macroscopic laws
may or may not undergo in the microscopic realm. Matter,
for instance, could either be continuous down to the smallest
scales, or made of a small number of constituent particles like
our atoms. The laws of particles and ﬁelds could be the same
at all scales, or else they could undergo signiﬁcant changes as
we probed smaller and smaller distances.
In the hypothetical world one can perform experiments with
pieces of equipment like Young’s two-slit setup, Stern-Gerlach
devices, or Mach-Zehnder interferometers. Let us focus on
the Young type experiment. It makes use of two macroscopic
objects which we label
E and
D. These symbols could stand
for “emittor” and “detector” if it were not that, as we shall
see, they may not emit or detect anything. At any rate,
E
and
D both have on and off states and work in the following
way. Whenever
D is suitably oriented with respect to
E (say,
roughly along the
x axis) and both are in the on state,
D
clicks in a more or less random way. The average time interval
between clicks depends on the distance
r between
D and
E,
and falls roughly as
r
. The clicking stops if, as shown in
Fig. 2, a shield of a suitable material is placed perpendicularly
to the
x axis, between
D and
E.
If holes are pierced through the shield, however, the clicking
resumes. In particular, with two small holes of appropriate size
and separation, differences in the clicking rate are observed for
E
D

135
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
both interpretations are logically consistent and adequate. Of
course, each investigator can ﬁnd more satisfaction in one
interpretation than in the other. The epistemic view of quantum
mechanics corresponds to the instrumentalist interpretation. It
simply rejects the existence of microscopic objects that have
no other use than the one of predicting observed correlations
between macroscopic objects.
In the world in which we live, however, the situation is
crucially different. The electrons, neutrons, photons, and other
particles that diffract or interfere are the same that one appeals
to in order to explain the structure of macroscopic objects.
Denying their existence, as is done in the approach of genuine
fortuitousness, dissolves such explanatory power. Denying that
they have states, as is done in the epistemic view, leaves one
to explain the state of a macroscopic object on the basis of
entities that have no state.
V. INTERPRETING QUANTUM MECHANICS
The epistemic and related views therefore fail to account
for the second explanatory role of quantum mechanics. To
reinforce this conclusion, it is instructive to investigate what
it means to interpret a theory.
With most physical theories, interpretation is rather straight-
forward. But this should not blind us to the fact that even very
familiar theories can in general be interpreted in more than one
way. A simple example is classical mechanics.
Classical mechanics is based on a well-deﬁned mathemat-
ical structure. This consists of constants
m
i, functions
x
i

136
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
Suppose that, for an initial value

137
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
B. Two particles
Bohmian mechanics can be generalized to any number of
particles but, for our purposes, it will be enough to consider
only two. To be explicit, we will consider in this subsection
the case of two spinless particles interacting through a po-
tential
V

138
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
When the measurement interaction is over, the pointer’s
wave functions

j remain orthogonal for as long as one
may care. This, in fact, is due to the myriad of degrees
of freedom of the pointer other than
, whose evolution is
different corresponding to different pointer positions. If the
pointer has entered wave packet

i, therefore, it will never end
up in a different

j. To do so, it would have to go through a
region of conﬁguration space associated with zero probability.
The Bohmian trajectories of both the particle and apparatus
henceforth develop as though only the
ith term was present.
The other ones still are, but they have no effect whatsoever on
subsequent trajectories. Although the wave function has never
collapsed, the system evolves as if it had.
D. Long-distance correlations
As I summarized in [42], one can incorporate spin in
Bohmian mechanics by adding spinor indices to the wave func-
tion, in such a way that


139
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
have been prepared in the singlet state (5), and that Alice and
Bob each have spin-measuring apparatus in initial states
j

140
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
effected through the complex conjugate Schr¨odinger ﬁeld, and
that transactions are established between emittors and speciﬁc
detectors.
Of course these interpretations of quantum mechanics, just
like others that I have not considered explicitly, also have
problems, since none of them has gained universal acceptance.
Bohmian mechanics, for instance, is not easy to reconcile with
the theory of special relativity. The many-worlds view is often
deemed extravagant, while more benign implementation of
Everett’s approach may not be so well-deﬁned. And the notion
of transaction needs to be spelled out more precisely.
Apart from speciﬁc criticisms, the whole program of inter-
preting quantum mechanics has been questioned by adherents
of the epistemic view. Why bring forward interpretations that
add no empirical content to the theory? If, for instance,
Bohmian mechanics exactly reproduces the statistical results
of quantum mechanics, aren’t the trajectories superﬂuous, and
shouldn’t they be discarded? The analogy has been made
between such trajectories and the concept of the ether prevalent
at the turn of the twentieth century [49], [50]. H. A. Lorentz
and his contemporaries viewed electromagnetic phenomena as
taking place in a hypothetical medium called the ether. From
this, Lorentz developed a description of electromagnetism in
moving reference frames, and he found that the motion is
undetectable. Following Einstein’s formulation of the elec-
trodynamics of moving bodies, the ether was recognized as
playing no role, and was henceforth discarded. So should it
be, according to most proponents of the epistemic view of
quantum states, with interpretations of quantum mechanics that
posit observer-independent elements of reality like Bohmian
trajectories. They predict no empirical differences with the
Hilbert space formalism, and should therefore be discarded.
It is true that, just like the ether in special relativity,
constructs like Bohmian trajectories don’t lead to speciﬁc
empirical consequences. I have argued, however, that although
they could be dispensed with in the hypothetical world of
Sec. IV, they cannot in the real world unless, just like the ether
was eventually replaced by the free-standing electromagnetic
ﬁeld, they are replaced by something that can account for the
structure of macroscopic objects.
In all physical theories other than quantum mechanics, there
are straightforward and credible answers to the question raised
above, of “How can the world be for the theory to be true?”
In quantum mechanics there are a number of answers, like the
ones we have reviewed in this paper. None is straightforward,
and none gains universal credibility. Should we then adopt the
attitude of the epistemic or related views, which decide not
to answer the question? I believe that, from a foundational
point of view, this is not tenable. For how can we believe in
a theory, if we are not prepared to believe in any of the ways
it can be true, or worse, if we do not know any way that it
can be true?
The epistemic view of quantum mechanics is an attempt
to solve or attenuate the foundational problems of the theory.
It would succeed if quantum mechanics were used only to
explain nonclassical correlations between macroscopic objects.
But it is also used to explain the microscopic structure of such
objects. Interpreting the theory means ﬁnding ways that it can
be intelligible. I believe that each clear and well-deﬁned way
to do so adds to the understanding of the theory. In many
instances, however, much work remains to be done to achieve
that clarity and precision.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Marchildon, “Does quantum mechanics need interpretation?” Pro-
ceedings of the Third International Conference on Quantum, Nano and
Micro Technologies, D. Avis, C. Kollmitzer, and V. Privman, Eds. Los
Alamitos, CA: IEEE, 2009, pp. 11–16.
[2] T. M. Nieuwenhuizen, B. Mehmani, V. Spicka, M. J. Aghdami, and
A. Y. Khrennikov, Eds. Proceedings of the Beyond the Quantum Work-
shop. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc, 2007.
[3] L. Accardi, G. Adenier, C. Fuchs, G. Jaeger, A. Y. Khrennikov,
J. A. Larsson, and S. Stenholm, Eds. Foundations of Probability and
Physics - 5. AIP Conference Proceedings 1101, Berlin: Springer, 2009.
[4] G. C. Ghirardi, “The interpretation of quantum mechanics: where do
we stand?” Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 174: 012013, 1–16
(2009).
[5] M. Genovese, “Research on hidden variable theories: a review of recent
progresses,” Physics Reports, 413: 319–396 (2005).
[6] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, “Can quantum-mechanical de-
scription of physical reality be considered complete?” Physical Review,
47: 777–780, May 1935.
[7] C. H. Bennett and G. Brassard, “Quantum cryptography: public key
distribution and coin tossing,” Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computers, Systems and Signal Processing. New York:
IEEE, 1984, pp. 175–179.
[8] P. W. Shor, “Algorithms for quantum computation: discrete logarithms
and factoring,” Proceedings of the 35
th Annual Symposium on Foun-
dations of Computer Science, S. Goldwasser, Ed. Los Alamitos, CA:
IEEE, 1994, pp. 124–134.
[9] G. ’t Hooft, “Quantum gravity as a dissipative deterministic system,”
Classical and Quantum Gravity, 16: 3263–3279, October 1999.
[10] A. J. Leggett, “Testing the limits of quantum mechanics: motivation,
state of play, prospects,” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter, 14:
R415–R451, April 2002.
[11] C. Rovelli, “Relational quantum mechanics,” International Journal of
Theoretical Physics, 35: 1637–1678, August 1996.
[12] C. A. Fuchs and A. Peres, “Quantum theory needs no ‘interpretation’,”
Physics Today, 53: 70–71, March 2000.
[13] C. A. Fuchs, “Quantum mechanics as quantum information (and only
a little more),” in Quantum Theory: Reconsideration of Foundations,
A. Khrennikov, Ed. V¨axj¨o: V¨axj¨o U. Press, 2002, pp. 463–543. Also
available as quant-ph/0205039.
[14] P. E. Vermaas, A Philosopher’s Understanding of Quantum Mechanics.
Possibilities and Impossibilities of a Modal Interpretation. Cambridge:
Cambridge U. Press, 1999.
[15] D. Bohm, “A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms
of ‘hidden’ variables (I and II),” Physical Review, 85: 166–193, January
1952.
[16] H. Everett III, “ ‘Relative state’ formulation of quantum mechanics,”
Reviews of Modern Physics, 29: 454–462, July 1957.
[17] J. G. Cramer, “The transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics,”
Reviews of Modern Physics, 58: 647–687, July 1986.
[18] L. Marchildon, “Bohmian trajectories and the ether: where does the
analogy fail?” Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics,
37: 263–274, June 2006.
[19] L. Marchildon, “The epistemic view of quantum states and the ether,”
Canadian Journal of Physics, 84: 523–529, January 2006.
[20] L. Marchildon, “Why should we interpret quantum mechanics?” Foun-
dations of Physics, 34: 1453–1466, October 2004.
[21] M. Jammer, The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics, 2nd
ed. Tomash/American Institute of Physics, 1989.

141
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
[22] L. E. Ballentine, “The statistical interpretation of quantum mechanics,”
Reviews of Modern Physics, 42: 358-381, October 1970.
[23] L. Marchildon, Quantum Mechanics. From Basic Principles to Numer-
ical Methods and Applications. Berlin: Springer, 2002.
[24] J. von Neumann, Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics.
Princeton: Princeton U. Press, 1955.
[25] G. C. Ghirardi, P. Pearle, and A. Rimini, “Markov processes in Hilbert
space and continuous spontaneous localization of systems of identical
particles,” Physical Review A, 42: 78–89, July 1990.
[26] V. Privman and D. Mozyrsky, “Decoherence and measurement in open
quantum systems,” SPIE Proceedings, E. Donkor and A. R. Pirich, Eds.
4047: 36–47 (2000).
[27] M. Xiao, I. Martin, E. Yablonovitch, and H. W. Jiang, “Electrical
detection of the spin resonance of a single electron in a silicon ﬁeld-
effect transistor,” Nature, 430: 435–439, 22 July 2004.
[28] M. Zwolak, H. T. Quan, and W. H. Zurek, “Quantum Darwinism in a
hazy environment,” arXiv:0904.0418v1.
[29] I. Bloch, “Some relativistic oddities in the quantum theory of observa-
tion,” Physical Review, 156: 1377–1384, April 1967.
[30] W. Heisenberg, Physics and Philosophy. The Revolution in Modern
Science. New York: Harper, 1958.
[31] R. Peierls, “In defence of ‘measurement’,” Physics World, 4: 19–20,
January 1991.
[32] O. Ulfbeck and A. Bohr, “Genuine fortuitousness. Where did that click
come from?” Foundations of Physics, 31: 757–774, May 2001.
[33] A. Bohr, B. R. Mottelson, and O. Ulfbeck, “The principle underlying
quantum mechanics,” Foundations of Physics, 34: 405–417, March 2004.
[34] N. D. Mermin, “What is quantum mechanics trying to tell us?” American
Journal of Physics, 66: 753–767, September 1998.
[35] J. A. Wheeler and R. P. Feynman, “Classical electrodynamics in terms
of direct interparticle action,” Reviews of Modern Physics, 21: 425–433,
July 1949.
[36] R. P. Feynman, The Character of Physical Law. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1967.
[37] R. N. Giere, Explaining Science. A Cognitive Approach. Chicago: U. of
Chicago Press, 1988.
[38] F. Suppe, The Semantic Conception of Theories and Scientiﬁc Realism.
Urbana: U. of Illinois Press, 1989.
[39] D. Bohm and B. J. Hiley, The Undivided Universe. London: Routledge,
1993.
[40] L. de Broglie, “La m´ecanique ondulatoire et la structure atomique de la
mati`ere et du rayonnement,” Journal de physique, s´erie VI, 8: 225–241,
May 1927.
[41] C. Philippidis, C. Dewdney, and B. J. Hiley, “Quantum interference and
the quantum potential,” Il Nuovo Cimento, 52B: 15–28, July 1979.
[42] L. Marchildon, “Understanding long-distance quantum correlations,”
in [2], pp. 155–62.
[43] C. Dewdney, P. R. Holland, and A. Kyprianidis, “What happens in a
spin measurement?” Physics Letters A, 119: 259–267, December 1986.
[44] C. Dewdney, P. R. Holland, and A. Kyprianidis, “A causal account
of non-local Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen spin correlations,” Journal of
Physics A: Mathematical and General, 20: 4717–4732, October 1987.
[45] A. Kent, “One world versus many: the inadequacy of Everettian ac-
counts of evolution, probability, and scientiﬁc conﬁrmation,” arXiv:-
0905.0624v1.
[46] B. S. DeWitt, “Quantum mechanics and reality,” Physics Today, 23:
30–35, September 1970.
[47] J. G. Cramer, “Generalized absorber theory and the Einstein-Podolsky-
Rosen paradox,” Physical Review D, 22: 362–376, July 1980.
[48] J. A. Wheeler and R. P. Feynman, “Interaction with the absorber as
the mechanism of radiation,” Reviews of Modern Physics, 17: 157–181,
April-July 1945.
[49] J. Bub, “Why the quantum?” Studies in History and Philosophy of
Modern Physics, 35: 241–266, June 2004.
[50] J. Bub, “Quantum mechanics is about quantum information,” Founda-
tions of Physics, 35: 541–560, April 2005.

