82
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Vibro-tactile Hazard Notiﬁcation for Motorcyclists
Akimasa Suzuki
Dept. of Information Science
Iwate prefectural University
020-0693, 152-52, Sugo, Takizawa, Iwate, Japan
Email:suzuki a@iwate-pu.ac.jp
Yuta Yamauchi
Ad-Sol Nissin Corporation
108-0075, Rivage Shinagawa, 4-1-8,
Konan, Minato, Tokyo, Japan
Email:Yamauchi.Yuta@adniss.jp
Abstract—This paper evaluates the effectiveness of vibro-tactile
notiﬁcations for motorcyclists under external factors. Although
many car manufacturers provide side and rear collision warning
systems with auditory or visual alarms, such notiﬁcations may
confuse a motorcyclist because they already need to be aware
of many visual targets, such as mirrors and monitors, and of
environmental sounds. We propose a vibro-tactile notiﬁcation
system using a vibration speaker installed in a motorcycle helmet
between the outer shell and the cushion. The proposed system
should enable motorcyclists to correctly identify the directions of
ﬁve vibrating motors, three levels of risk, and three obstacle types
(i.e., pedestrians, vehicles, and motorcycles). We evaluate the
system under windy and engine vibration conditions and examine
notiﬁcation accuracy via experiment. Our results indicate that
motorcyclists can correctly detect four directions and three threat
levels using this system.
Index Terms—vibro-tactile notiﬁcations; helmet actuators; vi-
bration speakers; motorcyclists; noise tolerance.
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper is an extension of our paper initially presented at
the Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular
Systems, Technologies and Applications [1]. In this paper, we
conduct additional experiments on several kinds of vibration
pattern, and further demonstrate the effectiveness of our pro-
posed system.
There has been considerable research into accident preven-
tion systems for vehicles, particularly in relation to developing
driving support systems that will transition to autonomous
driving systems. Autonomous vehicles, such as Tesla [2],
have achieved practical four-wheel vehicles with Level 2
autopiloting. Furthermore, the vehicles are collecting train-
ing data for realization of Level 4 autopiloting. However,
to realize autonomous driving systems, we must overcome
problems related to cyber-security measures and trafﬁc laws
(e.g., responsibility for accidents by autonomous cars [3]),
which could take time. Additionally, as many people enjoy
driving, the demand for manual driving as a hobby is unlikely
to fade. Driving support systems will thus remain an important
feature. Moreover, despite the high number of driving support
systems used in Japan, many fatal vehicle accidents are caused
by violations of safe driving practices, such as failing to
keep eyes on the road, careless driving, and failing to make
safety checks [4]. This highlights the need to develop more
techniques that support drivers. Of the 288,995 road accidents
in 2020 in Japan, 208,983 were caused by the violation of safe
driving practices.
A support system for motorcycles is more important for
driving protection than for other vehicles because when a
motorcyclist is in a crash, they are more likely to die, owing
to the reduce protection from the vehicle. Hazard notiﬁcation
is vital for motorcyclists because of their limited visibility,
the diverse sounds they may hear, and their very high risk
of accident. The fatality rate in crashes for motorcyclists
is 1.22%, while it is only 0.35% for drivers of four-wheel
vehicles [5]. Furthermore, motorcycles are small and difﬁcult
for other drivers to recognize. Motorcyclists therefore need
to be highly aware of their surroundings, but this is difﬁcult
because of the blind spots caused by their helmet and small
mirrors. To avoid incidents, an intuitive notiﬁcation system
that can specify direction and threat level would be beneﬁcial.
Therefore, we propose a system that uses haptic sensations to
quickly notify a motorcyclist of possible hazards or obstacles
around the vehicle.
Our proposed hazard notiﬁcation system uses vibro-tactile
actuators installed in a motorcycle helmet. The system no-
tiﬁcations indicate the type of object, direction, and threat
level surrounding the vehicle. We evaluate robustness against
wind and motorcycle engine vibration. We also perform ex-
periments to test the effectiveness of our proposed system.
Section II reviews related research. Section III describes sys-
tem architecture considerations. Section IV presents the system
architecture. SectionV discusses the vibration intensity issue.
Section VI presents the experimental methods and results
under the inﬂuence of motorcycle engine vibration. Section
VII describes the experiment methods and results under the
inﬂuence of driving wind. Section VIII gives the conclusions.
II. PREVIOUS AND RELATED WORKS
For vehicles such as four-wheel vehicles, many practical
driving support systems employ image [6], radar [7], and
ultrasonic sensors [8] to detect pedestrians and other vehicles
with high accuracy. Around-view monitors are increasingly
being used for automatic parking [9] and lane-detection sys-
tems are being applied using three-dimensional (3-D) laser
imaging detection and ranging (LIDAR) [10]. Despite their

83
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
weakness to noise, ultrasonic sensors can now be installed
in driving support systems for a low cost, and the cost of
3-D LIDAR is also dropping. These devices can be used to
detect not only the presence of an obstacle, but also the type
of obstacle (e.g., pedestrian, vehicle, or motorcycle). In the
current study, we focus on creating a notiﬁcation method to
alert drivers to potential hazards, rather than the development
of a sensor system.
For preventing accidents on motorcycles, there are two
main approaches: motorcyclists are assisted in checking their
surroundings or drivers around a motorcycle are assisted in
recognizing motorcyclist locations. For the latter approach, a
helmet with brake lights has been investigated for practical use
[11]. However, we focus on the former approach in this study.
Hazard notiﬁcation systems have been proposed for four-wheel
vehicles [12] [13].
In addition, sensor systems, such as collision [14] or ground
[15] detection methods, have been investigated for detection
around a motorcycle. Many systems have focused on the sen-
sor, however, we aim to not only sense issues, but also method
for providing information more correctly to the motorcyclist.
One study [16] proposed a smart helmet using a multimedia
Internet of Things (IoT) sensor device and visual notiﬁcations.
Many conventional notiﬁcation methods for motorcycles rely
on visual images in the motorcyclist’s view [17] [18], such
as front view, mirror, tachometer, speedometer, navigation
system, and indicators. Therefore, there is the potential that
excessive visual information may instead impact the motorcy-
clist’s capacity to adhere to safe driving practices.
We focus on vibro-tactile notiﬁcation as an option for
non-visual information. Vibro-tactile notiﬁcation is a possible
candidate for providing information because early motorcycles
conveyed engine failure to riders via irregular vibration. Some
systems vibrate a motorcycle’s steering, but this approach is
limited to notiﬁcations in front of or behind the motorcycle
[19]. We previously proposed a system for four-wheel vehicles
that used haptic sensations to quickly notify drivers of pos-
sible hazards or obstacles surrounding the vehicle [20]. We
examined the system’s robustness against different material
types and layers used for the driving seat cushions of four-
wheel vehicles [21]. In this study, we also discussed vibrating
waveforms by using a real 4-wheel vehicle, and illuminated
higher accuracy on notiﬁcation by using category-deformed
and normalized waves between each actuator than real and
certain vibration waves, respectively. Moreover, we discussed
notifying accuracies of our system from an experiment com-
bined with conventional notiﬁcation system with a display
and a sound speaker. From this experiment, we also discussed
whether our system is obstructive or useful to driving.
The motorcycle seat is vibrated by the engine, although
this may make it more difﬁcult to notify the rider through
vibration. In this study, we perform experiments under wind
and engine vibration conditions to consider the viability of a
highly intuitive notiﬁcation system for motorcycles.
Figure 1. Proposed installation positions for actuators in a motorcycle helmet.
III. MOUNTING POSITIONS OF ACTUATORS FOR
MOTORCYCLES
In this section, we detail the system architecture.
A. Locations of vibro-tactile actuator for notiﬁcations
The proposed system aims to help motorcyclists correctly
identify the directions of ﬁve vibrating motors, three intensity
settings to indicate the level of risk, and three obstacle types
(i.e., pedestrians, vehicles, and motorcycles). The position
of vibration is important for giving critical notiﬁcations. We
considered vibro-tactile actuators on the motorcyclist’s arms,
shoulders, or waist within a motorcyclist’s suit or on the
motorcyclist’s head within a helmet. For locations on the
body, the motorcyclist must use a wearable device. There
are different types of suits for different motorcycles types
(e.g., Cruiser or Sport) because the riding posture is different.
Drivers may also experience limited mobility in a suit, which
would impact accurate notiﬁcation.
In contrast, helmets are usually ﬁtted to the motorcyclist’s
head, and vibration positions are not affected by varying
postures, although they are limited to facing forward. Helmets
are also required in many countries. Therefore, we choose
helmets for our proposed system. Figure 1 shows the possible
installation positions within a motorcycle helmet. We cannot
mount an actuator inside the helmet itself, as at (a), because
direct contact with the driver’s head would be unsafe. We
considered the helmet’s outer surface, as at (b), but our
attempts showed that a very strong vibration would be needed.
Therefore, we mount the actuators at the bottom of the cushion
in the helmet, as at (c), so that the actuators vibrate vertically
to each cushion.
We considered three types of vibration mechanisms: vibra-
tion motors, haptic reactors, and vibration speakers. Vibration
motors can only produce sine waves and it is difﬁcult to
distinguish different categories, although they can achieve
strong vibration. Although haptic reactors can realize a variety
of vibrations, such as clicking, their vibration is too weak
to produce notiﬁcations. We therefore propose a vibro-tactile
notiﬁcation system using a vibration speaker, which can realize
the vibration with strong and varied expression. For our pro-
posed system, we utilized a vibrating speaker with an Acoustic

84
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I
SPECIFICATIONS OF THE ACOUSTIC HAPTIC™ACTUATOR
Shape inch method
20x27.6 mm
Weight
39.29 g
Acceleration
6.1 m/s2
Rise time
34.5
msec (0 to 90 %)
Drop time
34.5
msec (100 to 10 %)
Resonance Frequency
55 Hz (700 g, 2.83 V)
Impedance
8 Ω
Inductance Le
0.66 mH
Power consumption
0.144 W (700 g, 2.83 V, 55 Hz)
Haptic™actuator developed by Foster Electric Company. The
actuator, whose speciﬁcations are shown in Table I, is a type
of woofer that comes into direct contact with the driver’s
helmet. The resonance frequency is 55 Hz, which makes it
possible to generate strong vibrations in the low frequency
range. To achieve uniform signal strength in any waveform, it
is important to focus on the resonance frequency.
B. Mounting positions of actuators on a helmet
Motorcycle helmets have shields that can reduce visibility.
They may also become fogged with weather and temperature,
which further limits the motorcyclist’s visibility. Motorcyclists
also have blind spots behind the motorcycle where the mirror’s
ﬁeld of view does not reach. Therefore, we consider the need
for both backward and forward alerts. Figure 2 shows the
planned layout of actuators in the helmet. This helmet has four
cushions (i.e., front, rear, right, and left), as shown in sections
(1) to (4) in Figure 2. To explore the vibro-tactile directional
sense at the motorcyclist’s head, we installed eight actuators
as shown in Figures 2 (a) to (h). We mounted actuators (a),
(b), and (h) on cushion (1), (c) and (d) on cushion (2), (e) on
cushion (3), and (f) and (g) on cushion (4).
We conducted an experiment to evaluate the resolution of
vibration on the human head. By determining the resolution
of human-perceivable locations, we aimed to determine which
directions are identiﬁable. We performed the experiment with
the engine in idle at 1500 ± 300 rpm, which is frequently
used as a typical speed range, on a Yamaha MT-01 motorcycle
equipped with a V-twin cylinder 1670 cc engine. We had ﬁve
participants (students), aged between 19 and 22 years old.
We conducted four trials with each participant. We randomly
induced vibrations at each position with strengths ranging from
−2 dB to −12 dB and participants estimated the position in
the helmet.
Figure 3 shows the correct answer rates for direction using
all eight or only four actuators (one on each cushion: (a),
(c), (e), and (g) in Figure 2). The vertical and horizontal
axes denote correct answer rates and installation positions,
respectively, and the green and orange bars indicate results
for respectively all eight or only four actuators. The results
demonstrate that there was confusion when multiple actuators
were installed on a single cushion, leading to lower accuracy.
Figure 2. Experimental arrangement of mounted actuators.
Figure 3.
Correct answer rates according to the number and position of
actuators.
By contrast, all participants had a 100% correct answer rate
when four actuators were used. We therefore decided to utilize
only one actuator per cushion.
IV. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE FOR OUR PROPOSED SYSTEM
In line with the aforementioned experiment shown in Fig-
ures 2 and 3, we propose a vibro-tactile helmet as illustrated in
Figure 4. Figure 4 (A) shows the positions of the actuators (or
vibration speakers) on the helmet. Figure 4 (B) shows pictures
of the different actuators in place; note that (b) and (d) are in
the same position on the left and right sides of the helmet, so
only one is shown.
The actuators shown in Figure 4 vibrate by transmitting
sound data via the ampliﬁers. The sound data are deformed
waves for three categories (i.e., pedestrian, four-wheel vehicle,
and motorcycle) the same as in our previous study for four-
wheel vehicles [21].
A. Waveforms for Categories
From our previous study [21], pedestrian notiﬁcations
achieved higher correct answer rates than other obstacle types,
owing to the more easily recognized notiﬁcations of the
obstacle type than for other vibration waves. Thus, we aim to
improve accuracy for the motorcycle and four-wheel vehicle
obstacle types by making their waveforms more contrasting.
Therefore, we utilize deformed waves for these obstacle types.

85
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 4. Overview of our proposed system.
Figure 5. Waveforms for each category of object.
Figures 5(a), (b), and (c) show deformed waves based on the
sound of a V6 engine revving up [22], the idling sound of
a Suzuki GSX-S1000 motorcycle [23], and a real recording
of footsteps with leather shoes [24], respectively. Note that,
while a motorcycle is expressed by an intermittent deformed
waveform, as in Figure 5(b), the interval is shorter than
the waveform of the pedestrian shown in Figure 5(c). By
contrast, the four-wheel vehicle is given a constant waveform
to increase the contrast with the motorcycle waveform.
V. VIBRATION STRENGTH
In this section, we discuss the strength of the vibrations for
our proposed system.
A. Determination of optimum base sound level of each cate-
gory
Our previous study in four-wheel vehicles [20] had three
vibration strength levels (i.e., large, medium, and small) to
indicate the level of risk. However, when riding a motorcycle,
there is additional noise, such as from engine vibration or
wind. Furthermore, we have not yet applied the vibration
strength level concept to a helmet. Therefore, we consider the
vibration strengths of the three levels.
We conducted an experiment with ﬁve participants aged
between 19 and 22 years old, using an idle Yamaha MT-01.
TABLE II
NORMALIZED VIBRATION STRENGTH LEVELS ON PATTERN B.
Category
large
medium
small
Four-wheel vehicle
−3 dB
−8 dB
−12 dB
Motorcycle
−2 dB
−8 dB
−12 dB
Pedestrian
−2 dB
−8 dB
−12 dB
The strength pattern is deﬁned by the difference in the sound
pressure. We considered two strength patterns. Pattern A has
a small difference between the three levels. We can utilize
a fourth level if we can detect the differences in Pattern A.
Pattern B has larger differences than Pattern A, with the larger
vibration for four-wheel vehicles adjusted so as not to prevent
the motorcyclist from driving.
The strength levels of Pattern A, denoted large, medium,
and small, were respectively −6 dB, −10 dB, and −12 dB
from the original sound data based on the previous experiment
[20], for all categories. The strength levels of Pattern B were
different according to the category based on the normalization
method [21], as shown in Table II.
We conducted this experiment using random directions,
categories, and vibration strengths. Test participants answered
”large”, ”medium”, ”small”, or ”insensitive” as the levels of
strength. In this experiment, we conducted the test in a stable
room, and large, medium, and small strengths were randomly
vibrated 51, 64, and 64 times, respectively, for 5 to 10 seconds.
The experiment was conducted with the helmet shield closed.
The test participants were taught three levels of vibration
intensity (large, medium, and small) beforehand at actuator
(d) in Figure 4, and then the experiment was conducted.
Figure 6 shows the experimental results for both patterns.
The vertical and horizontal axes denote correct answer rates
and strength levels, respectively. The blue and brown bars
respectively indicate Patterns A and B. Pattern A had low
correct answer rates for medium and small, and as well as
instances of ”insensitive” shown as 0 percent in6(a). Pattern B
had correct answer rates of over 69% for each strength level.
Figure 6(b) and (c) show the percentage of correct answers
for each pattern A and B in the comparison experiments for
pedestrians and motorcycles, respectively. Figure 6(b) shows
that 80%, 52%, and 83% of the participants rated the vibration
intensity as ”large”, ”medium”, and ”small”, respectively,
for Pattern A. Figure 6(b) shows that the percentages of
correct responses for large and medium were much higher
for Pattern B than for Pattern A. Figure 6(c) also shows that
the percentages of correct answers for medium and small were
much higher for Pattern B than for Pattern A. Thus, we adopt a
notiﬁcation method of three strength levels with large intervals
like Pattern B.
B. Normalization by head sense
In this study, we apply normalized and exaggerated waves
to improve notiﬁcation accuracy because many motorcyclists
pointed out that the vibration strength felt uneven depending

86
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(a) Fourwheel
(b) Pedestrian
(c) Motorcycle
Figure 6. Correct answer answer rates for strength patterns A and B.
on the installation position. Here, we normalize the vibration
strength for the different parts of the head via an experiment
on the motorcycle, in addition to normalization by category
with Pattern B in Figure 6.
For normalization, we utilized three actuators, (a), (b), and
(c), on the front, rear, and left cushions, respectively, in Figure
4. Actuator (d) in Figure 4 is considered to have the same
tendency as actuator (b). First, via a questionnaire, we de-
termined the maximum and minimum strengths motorcyclists
can detect with no effort. The results indicated that the gap
between the maximum and minimum strengths for actuator
(b) was greater than that for the other positions. Thus, we
used the maximum and minimum strengths that participants
felt for (b) for all the actuators. We denoted the maximum
and minimum strengths as large and small, respectively. We
deﬁned the medium strength level not as the midpoint value
TABLE III
VIBRATION STRENGTH LEVELS AT EACH POSITION.
position
large
medium
small
a
−6 dB
−10 dB
−14 dB
b
−8 dB
−12 dB
−19 dB
c
−6 dB
−10 dB
−13 dB
(in decibels) between large and small, but instead according to
how participants identiﬁed“medium”between large and small
vibrations. In this normalization, we utilized the vibration of
the four-wheel vehicle category [21]. Finally, we adjusted for
strength as shown in Table III, which presents the strength
levels for each actuator position, noting that the side position
is more sensitive than the front and back positions.
VI. EXPERIMENT OF IDLING SCENARIO
We conducted an experiment to verify the correct answer
rates when using actuators mounted on a helmet when there
are external factors, including wind and engine noise.
A. Experimental Trials by t-test
We used t-tests to determine statistically signiﬁcant results.
We conducted an independent t-test for each strength level
on actuators (a), (b), and (c) to compare the differences in
correct answer rates under different wind and idling noises.
We adopted a signiﬁcance level of 5%, a moderate effect size
of 0.5, and a detection rate of 80%. Possible answers were
”large”, ”medium”, ”small”, and ”insensitive”. Sample sizes
for the answer of ”large” and the other strength levels were
determined from one-sided and two-sided tests, respectively.
From the t-test, sample sizes from which we could obtain a
signiﬁcant difference were 51, 64, and 64 samples for ”large”,
”medium”, and ”small” answers, respectively.
B. Correct answer rates during idling
We conducted an experiment in the idling state to evaluate
the robustness under engine vibration, as illustrated in Figure
7. Six test participants on the motorcycle answered when
they felt a vibration. This experiment was conducted with the
engine off, at 0 rpm, and rotating at 1000 rpm, 1500 rpm,
and 2000 rpm. In the case of 0 rpm, the experiment was
considered a situation of engine stopped. For each engine
speed, including 0 rpm, we performed 51, 64, and 64 trials
for large, medium, and small, respectively, at random. The
vibration categories used were those applied to four-wheel
vehicles in our previous study [21].
Figure 8 shows the correct answer rates during idling rpm
at 0 rpm, 1000 rpm, 1500 rpm, and 2000 rpm, respectively.
The blue, red, and yellow bars respectively indicate ”large”,
”medium”, and ”small” as answered by the participants. The
vertical and horizontal axes of each ﬁgure denote the correct
answer rate and the three levels of signal strength, respectively.
For example, 10% of participants answered ”medium” for the
”large” strength level given by an actuator at 1000 rpm, as
shown in Figure 8(b).

87
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 7. Overview of the experiment during idling.
We deﬁned the correct answer rate as the percentage of
matches between the answers of participants and the actual
level of vibration strength. For example, in Figure 8(b), the
correct answer rates for ”large”, ”medium”, and ”small” were
90%, 72%, and 83%, respectively. Let us focus on the medium
strength level in Figure 8(b). We conﬁrmed that participants
experienced stronger vibration at this level because they an-
swered ”large” more often than ”small”. The correct answer
rates were lowest in the case of Figure 8(d). This may be
due to the high engine rotation causing stronger vibration and
noise from the motorcycle, obscuring the vibration from the
actuators.
VII. EVALUATION OF DRIVING SCENARIO
We conducted an experiment with six participants using a
car to evaluate accuracy degradation due to wind. We used
a car for safety and because of the difﬁculty in collecting
answers. Although the strength of the traveling wind is little
different between cars and motorcycles, the effect of the wind
can be measured. We compared the wind noise between the
car and the motorcycle, and found that the wind noise on the
motorcycle was almost the same as on a car with all windows
open.
A. Experiment on the vibration categories of a four-wheel
vehicle
First, we experimented with the vibration categories of a
four-wheel vehicle. Each participant performed the experiment
at the four speeds of 0 km/h, 60 km/h, 80 km/h, and
100 km/h. At each speed, we performed 51, 64, and 64 trials
with large, medium, and small strength levels, respectively, at
random. The actuator vibrated for 5-10 s at random for each
trial. In the case of 0 km/h, we conducted the experiment in a
situation with engine stopped, as in Section VI-B. In the other
cases, we used a highway. Figure 9 shows the experimental
highway route. This route has two lanes in each direction
limited to 100 km/h, and three entrances and exits shown
(a) 0 rpm
(b) 1000 rpm
(c) 1500 rpm
(d) 2000 rpm
Figure 8. Correct answer rates for different strength levels at (a) 0 rpm, (b)
1000 rpm, (c) 1500 rpm, and (d) 2000 rpm.

88
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 9. The course of the experiment on a highway.
as
1⃝,
2⃝, and
3⃝. We set up sections of 11.1 km between
1⃝
and
2⃝, 20.3 km between
2⃝ and
3⃝, and 9.2 km between
3⃝
and
1⃝.
The experiment was conducted at speeds of 80 km/h,
100 km/h, and 60 km/h between
1⃝ and
2⃝,
2⃝ and
3⃝,
and
3⃝ and
1⃝, respectively. Figure 10 shows the seating
positions of the participant in this experiment. All windows of
the car were open and the helmet shields were closed. Before
the experiment, participants were provided with examples of
the three strength levels at position (b) of Figure 4. We
limited the experiment to the four-wheel vehicle category. The
experimental results were saved as movie ﬁles and evaluated
via post-processing.
Figure 11 shows the correct answer rates at driving speeds
of 0 km/h, 60 km/h, 80 km/h, and 100 km/h. The vertical
and horizontal axes of each ﬁgure denote the correct answer
rate and the three levels of signal strength, respectively. In
Figure 11(a), the correct answer rates were in 94%, 73%,
Figure 10. Seating position of participants in the vehicle.
and 74% for large, medium, and small vibration strengths,
respectively. Figure 11(b) indicates a high correct answer rate
for large vibration. Test participants tended to be more likely to
select strong vibrations. In the case of Figure 11(c), the correct
answer rates were increased and decreased, respectively, for
medium and large vibrations as compared to Figure 11(b). In
Figure 11(d), a high correct answer rate was obtained even
for small vibrations. From Figures 11(c) and (d), the medium
strength level showed only small differences in the incorrect
answer rate compared with large and small. Therefore, we
consider the medium strength level to be appropriate in the
high-speed case. We expect a higher notiﬁcation accuracy can
be achieved by adjusting the strength automatically depending
on outside noise. We also found that notiﬁcation accuracy was
more degraded by engine rotation than by wind noise, which
should be a consideration for practical implementation.
B. Experiment on the other categories
Next, we performed the experiment for other vibrations
for motorcycle and pedestrian categories. The experimental
settings were the same as Figures 9 and 10. However, each
participant evaluated the experiment at the speeds of 0 km/h,
60 km/h, and 80 km/h, because the speed limit had been
changed on the target highway by the time of the experiment.
Figures 12 and 13 show the correct answer rates in the vi-
bration patterns for pedestrians and motorcycles, respectively,
at the different driving speeds. In the case of pedestrians, the
percentage of correct answers for medium and small increased
as the wind speed increased from Figures 12(a) to (c). On the
other hand, the percentage of correct answers for large was
the lowest in Figure 12(c). A lower medium strength might
be required, because the number of incorrect ”large” answers
was higher than the number of ”small” answers for the medium
vibration, as shown in Figure 12(a). However, Figures 12(b)
and (c) show that the difference in the number of ”large” and
”small” answers in the evaluation of the medium vibration was
slight. Thus, the medium intensity is suitable for 60 km/h and
80 km/h as vibrations for the pedestrian category.
For the motorcycle category, the percentage of correct
answers for small increased as the traveling wind became
stronger, as shown in Figures 13(a), (b), and (c). These results

89
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(a) 0 km/h
(b) 60 km/h
(c) 80 km/h
(d) 100 km/h
Figure 11. Correct answer rates for strength levels at each speed (four-wheel
vehicle).
(a) 0 km/h
(b) 60 km/h
(c) 80 km/h
Figure 12. Correct answer rates for strength levels at each speed (pedestrian).
also show that the percentage of correct answers for large
remained high in all speed ranges. Figure 13(c) has the lowest
percentage of correct answers for medium. The difference in
the number of ”large” and ”small” answers for the medium
vibration was smaller than that for the small vibration in the
case of Figures 13(a) and (b). Furthermore, in Figure 13(c), the
difference between the number of ”large” and ”small” answers
in the evaluation of the medium vibration was small, indicating
that the medium intensity is suitable only for 80 km/h.
We expect a higher notiﬁcation accuracy can be achieved
by adjusting the strength automatically depending on outside

90
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(a) 0 km/h
(b) 60 km/h
(c) 80 km/h
Figure 13. Correct answer rates for strength levels at each speed (motorcycle).
noise, as in the case of a four-wheeled vehicle.
VIII. CONCLUSIONS
It is difﬁcult for motorcyclists to recognize objects in their
surroundings because of the many blind spots from their
helmets and their smaller mirrors. Furthermore, accidents are
more serious and have higher mortality rates for motorcycles
than for four-wheel vehicles. We therefore proposed a noti-
ﬁcation system for motorcycles based on previous works for
four-wheel vehicles. In our system, parts of the helmet vibrate
corresponding to the direction of a hazard, the category of an
object, and the level of risk. We used the strength of vibration
to indicate three strength levels. We evaluated the accuracy of
our proposed notiﬁcation method for motorcycles using haptic
actuators in windy and idling situations. We demonstrated the
effectiveness of our notiﬁcation method even for winds of
80 km/h on each waveform category. We expect improved
notiﬁcation accuracy can be achieved by adjusting vibration
strength according to the motorcycle ’s speed. Various helmet
types will be studied by quantitative assessment in future
works.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by MEXT KAKENHI Grant
Number JP 16723884 and Foster Electric Company, Limited.
We would like to thank Uni-edit (https://uni-edit.net/) for
editing and proofreading this manuscript.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Yamauchi and A. Suzuki, “Vibro-tactile notiﬁcation in different
environments for motorcyclists,” in The Ninth International Conference
on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications
(VEHICULAR 2020), 2020.
[2] M. Dikmen and C. Burns, “Trust in autonomous vehicles: The case of
tesla autopilot and summon,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), 2017, pp. 1093–1098.
[3] A. Hevelke and J. Nida-R¨umelin, “Responsibility for crashes of au-
tonomous vehicles: an ethical analysis,” Science and Engineering Ethics,
2015.
[4] e-Stat
(Japanese
Government
Statistics),
“Statistics
about
road
trafﬁc
/
annual
report,”
Feb.
2020,
[accessed:
2021-07-13].
[Online]. Available: https://www.e-stat.go.jp/en/stat-search/ﬁles?page=
1&layout=datalist&toukei=00130002&tstat=000001027457&cycle=7&
year=20200&month=0
[5] ——,
“Statistics
about
road
trafﬁc
/
annual
report,”
Feb.
2018,
[accessed:
2021-07-13].
[Online].
Available:
https://www.e-stat.go.jp/en/stat-search/ﬁles?page=1&layout=datalist&
toukei=00130002&tstat=000001027457&cycle=7&year=20180&
month=0&stat inﬁd=000031800894
[6] Subaru of America, “Subaru eyesight,” Jun. 2019, [accessed: 2021-07-
13]. [Online]. Available: https://www.subaru.com/engineering/eyesight.
html
[7] B. Major, D. Fontijne, A. Ansari, R. Teja Sukhavasi, R. Gowaikar,
M. Hamilton, S. Lee, S. Grzechnik, and S. Subramanian, “Vehicle detec-
tion with automotive radar using deep learning on range-azimuth-doppler
tensors,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV) Workshops, Oct. 2019.
[8] L. Alonso, V. Milan´es, C. Torre-Ferrero, J. Godoy, J. P. Oria, and
T. De Pedro, “Ultrasonic sensors in urban trafﬁc driving-aid systems,”
Sensors, vol. 11, no. 1, 2011, pp. 661–673. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/11/1/661
[9] J. K. Suhr and H. G. Jung, “Fully-automatic recognition of various park-
ing slot markings in around view monitor (avm) image sequences,” in
2012 15th International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, 2012, pp. 1294–1299.
[10] Q. Li, L. Chen, M. Li, S.-L. Shaw, and A. N¨uchter, “A sensor-fusion
drivable-region and lane-detection system for autonomous vehicle nav-
igation in challenging road scenarios,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 63, no. 2, 2014, pp. 540–555.
[11] Indiegogo, “Brake free helmet light. digital image. indiegogo,” 2020,
[accessed: 2021-07-13]. [Online]. Available: https://www.indiegogo.
com/projects/brakefree-the-smart-brake-light-for-motorcyclists#/
[12] W. Chang, W. Hwang, and Y. G. Ji, “Haptic seat interfaces for driver
information and warning systems,” International Journal of Human-
Computer Interaction, vol. 27, no. 12, Dec. 2011, pp. 1119–1132.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2011.555321
[13] Y. Gaffary and A. L´ecuyer, “The use of haptic and tactile information
in the car to improve driving safety: A review of current technologies,”
Frontiers in ICT, vol. 5, Mar. 2018, p. 5. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.3389/ﬁct.2018.00005

91
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[14] M.
Muzammel,
M.
Z.
Yusoff,
and
F.
Meriaudeau,
“Rear-end
vision-based collision detection system for motorcyclists,” Journal of
Electronic Imaging, vol. 26, no. 3, May. 2017, p. 033002. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1117/1.jei.26.3.033002
[15] G. Gil, G. Savino, S. Piantini, and M. Pierini, “Motorcycles that
see: Multifocal stereo vision sensor for advanced safety systems in
tilting vehicles,” Sensors, vol. 18, no. 2, Jan. 2018, p. 295. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.3390/s18010295
[16] M. I. Tayag and M. E. A. D. V. Capuno, “Smart motorcycle helmet:
Real-time crash detection with emergency notiﬁcation, tracker and
anti-theft system using internet-of-things cloud based technology,”
International Journal of Computer Science and Information Technology,
vol.
11,
no.
03,
Jun.
2019,
pp.
81–94.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.5121/ijcsit.2019.11307
[17] V. H. Tran, D. Muscat, J. R. Cruz, A. M. Carrillo, D. A. A. Alonso,
and E. Chavez, “Motorcycle and helmet providing advance driver
assistance,” U.S. Patent Application No. 13/897,570, 2013.
[18] Crosshelmet, “Cross helmet x1 - transform your riding experience,”
2020, [accessed: 2021-07-13]. [Online]. Available: https://crosshelmet.
com/
[19] C. Inc., “Blind spot detection & lane change assist,” 2020, [accessed:
2021-07-13]. [Online]. Available: https://www.continental-automotive.
com/en-gl/2-Wheeler/Safe-Mobility/ARAS/Blind-Spot-Detection
[20] A. Suzuki, Y. Murata, and M. Hayashi, “Notiﬁcation of hazards around a
vehicle using seat actuators,” in 25th ITS World Congress. Copenhagen,
Denmark: ERTICO, Sep. 2018, pp. AP–TP1335.
[21] A. Suzuki, K. Horie, S. Otobe, Y. Murata, and S. Fujimura, “Hazard
notiﬁcations around a vehicle using seat actuators,” The International
Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol. 13, no. 1 and 2, 2020,
pp. 59–68, iSBN:978-1-61208-720-7,ISSN:1942-2679.
[22] GYANTARO, “Vellﬁre v6 3.5l 0-138km/h full acceleration test (alphard
30 series),” Jan. 2016, [accessed: 2021-07-13]. [Online]. Available:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WI4voS7YF6Y
[23] ahotakuro, “Suzuki gsx-s1000 normal idling sound, motorcycle,”
Dec. 2016, [accessed: 2021-07-13]. [Online]. Available: https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=c6pK2z9ANRk
[24] M. studio ofﬁcial Channel, “Recommended sound effects, human
sound foot and leg, footstep, leather shoes 04,” Apr. 2014, [accessed:
2021-07-13]. [Online]. Available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
A5fGVbsHOfI

