1
PCB Integration of Dye-sensitised Solar Cells for
Internet of Things Applications
Jens Eliasson∗, Jerker Delsing∗, Simon J. Thompson†, Yi-Bing Cheng†, and Peter Chen‡
∗Dept. of Computer science, space and electrical engineering
Lule˚a University of Technology, SE-971 87 Lule˚a, Sweden
Email: jens.eliasson@ltu.se
†Dept. of Materials Engineering, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
Email: yibing.cheng@monash.edu
†Dept. of Photonics, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan
Email: petercyc@mail.ncku.edu.tw
Abstract—Internet of Things is envisioned to drastically
chance the way sensor data from physical phenomena can
be utilized by users on the Internet. However, one concern
in deploying and maintaining a large number of sensor
nodes is that replacing spent batteries will not be feasible.
One solution to this issue may involve utilising energy
harvesting technologies, e.g. solar, heat, or vibration, with
solar being the most promising for general applications.
However, using solar panels is currently a relatively ex-
pensive approach as they require a time-consuming and
therefore costly assembly process. As an alternative, this
paper suggests a new approach to powering networked
sensors: the direct integration of a solar cell onto a sensor
nodes printed circuit board. This approach eliminates
the need for manual assembly and the use of expensive
connectors.
Keywords-Dye sensitised solar cells, energy harvesting,
Internet of Things, wireless sensor networks
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper, based on previous work from Eliasson
et al. [1], presents new results and outlines applica-
tion areas for the proposed approach. A wireless
sensor and actuator network (WSAN) is composed
of a large number of heterogeneous sensor nodes, or
sources, that both sense phenomena in the physical
world but also provide some control of the physical
world [2]. A wireless sensor and actuator network
also includes one or several gateways, or sinks,
which forward sensor data from nodes in the internal
network to an external network [3]. Research on
WSAN technology originally focused on military
applications, such as battleﬁeld surveillance, land
mine detection, and soldier monitoring [4]. Current
wireless sensor network research is additionally
motivated by an increasing number of civil usage
scenarios, such as environmental and habitat mon-
itoring, seismic and volcanic monitoring, structural
monitoring, and industrial applications [5], [6].
Wireless sensors are expected to have a drastic
impact on how measurements of the physical world
will be presented to users on the Internet [7]. A
vision, in which Internet-connected wireless sensors
are deployed in the vicinity of users, named the
Internet of Things [8] is also projected to enhance
both safety and quality of life for future generations.
For this vision to be realized, a number of issues
must be resolved. Two of these issues, addressed
by this paper, are:
• Enabling wireless power
• Lowering the cost of the sensor nodes
Reducing power consumption can be achieved
using a number of methods, such as using more
efﬁcient components, integrating more intelligent
routing protocols [9], or developing energy-aware
computing. Wireless power requires power harvest-
ing, power storage, and an appropriate power usage
architecture at the sensor node; see for example
[10], [11], [12]. A node’s cost will be reduced
with the use of more integrated components, and
the price of printed circuit boards (PCB), integrated
circuits (ICs), and other components will drastically
decrease with increased production volumes. How-
ever, the costs of certain node components, such
45
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

2
as batteries and power supplies, do not scale as
effectively as circuit board production volumes. The
cost of packaging a complete node with a circuit
board, batteries, solar panels, and enclosure will
not be reduced by the same order of magnitude
as that of the electronics. This is a major obstacle
for realizing the vision of massive wireless sensor
networks.
This paper presents a novel approach aimed
at further reducing manufacturing and integration
cost for solar cells for powering wireless sensor
nodes. The approach is to manufacture a solar
panel directly onto a sensor node’s circuit board,
thus reducing the cost of manufacturing the cell
separately and eliminating the assembly cost. This
has several beneﬁts, as the resulting device consists
of an integrated solution that effectively eliminates
cables and connectors, and an additional integration
step. The proposed approach also increases the
system’s robustness because there are no connectors
or cables that can disconnect due to mechanical
phenomena, e.g., vibrations or impacts. The ultimate
aim of this research is to develop a holistic method
for producing complete low-power systems, where
assembly of the PCB, components, and an energy-
harvesting device can be completed as a single
process. The ﬁrst steps have been taken - we have
integrated a solar cell module with a PCB - and the
authors envision that, in the future, a solar cell can
be directly printed on a PCB using sequential build-
up (SBU) techniques. For example, Blackshear et al.
reported in 2005 [13] the advantages of using SBU
for chip assembly onto circuit boards.
The paper is outlined as follows: this section has
presented related work and a background of wire-
less sensor networks and solar cell technologies.
The next two sections give an overview of some
related work, application areas, and DSCs. Section
V presents the new method of integrating a DSC
directly onto a circuit board, and Sections VI and
VII show the experimental setup, and results from
real-world tests, respectively. Finally, conclusions
and suggestions for future work are presented in
Section VIII.
II. RELATED WORK
One consideration for energy harvesting relates
to the energy density from different sources. It is
clear that solar cells are superior to other energy
harvesting approaches such as vibrations and ther-
moelectric power, as reported by Yang et. al [10].
When comparing different solar cell technologies,
both power efﬁciency and cost must be considered.
Two main candidate technologies: silicon based so-
lar cells and dye sensitised solar cells (DSC), some-
times called Gr¨atzel cells [14], have been selected
for further investigation. A comparison between
silicon based solar cells and DSC can be found
in [15]. Regarding energy capability a traditional
silicon-based solar cell offers about 43mA/cm2 at
0.7V, whereas current DSCs offer about 22mA/cm2
at about 0.6V [16]. Regarding cost, DSCs have po-
tential to be lower cost due both cheaper feedin ma-
terials and inexpensive manufacturing techniques.
In [17], Usman showed by simulation that the use
of DSC technology in close integration with modern
electronics, i.e. PCB integration, is an interesting
technology and emerging trend. In [1], Eliasson et
al. showed the world’s ﬁrst working prototype of
a device where a PCB and a DSC cell was suc-
cessfully integrated. This paper further elaborates on
application areas where this is feasible, and extends
the conclusions by supplying new measurements
and results.
III. AREAS OF APPLICATION OF PROPOSED
APPROACH
The use of energy scavenging in real-world ap-
plications is becoming more and more common. By
harvesting energy in the form of solar, wind, vibra-
tion, heat, etc, the need to replace or charge drained
batteries can be avoided. In some cases, for example
industrial applications, changing batteries might not
be feasible due to a hazardous environment. Below
are three different sensor networking applications
identiﬁed, with their characteristics:
A. ITS
Intelligent transport systems (ITS) are believed
to be an important tool for tomorrow’s road infras-
tructures. ITS can help reducing the trafﬁc’s carbon
dioxide foot print, improve safety and increase the
trafﬁc ﬂow. ITS systems are usually composed of
three main components: sensors for vehicle detec-
tion, actuators for informing drivers, and a back-
end system. Sensors for vehicle detection are used
to feed the back-end system with information about
the trafﬁc, with number of vehicles, thier speed, etc.
46
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

3
Vehicle detection has traditionally been performed
using magnetic sensors, cameras, lasers and other
expensive and power consuming devices. A road
surface network (RSN) is a new type of ITS solu-
tion, where low-cost sensors are deployed directly
onto a road’s surface. This enables vehicle detection
and classiﬁcation, not only in cities, but also in rural
areas. Since the sensors are solar-powered, there is
no need for installing power cables, which further
reduces the installation cost. The use of a wireless
sensor and actuator network (WSAN), as suggested
by Hostettler et al. [18] enables new possibilities
of how modern, solar-powered electronics can be
embedded in the physical world. The iRoad project
[19] conducted at Lule˚a University of Technology
aims at developing these types of systems. In these
types of devices, it is important that both component
and assembly costs are minimized.
B. Healthcare
Most western countries have an aging popula-
tion. This will drastically increase costs for each
country’s healthcare and elderly care systems. Using
for example e-Health, where electronics and ITS
systems [20] are used as tools for reducing health-
care costs, travel costs and increase the quality of
life. With e-Health, people which can be treated
in the comfort of their own homes can have the
option to do so, thus minimizing hospital time.
However, this requires that some sort of monitoring
be used. With the use of (wireless) sensors, patients
can have their medical status monitored remotely
while maintaining mobility, and if some anomaly
is detected by an e-Health device, an alarm or
alert can be transmitted to the hospital. Figure 2
shows an example of an Internet-connected sensor
platform, i.e. the Mulle. The Mulle is a low-power
sensor node, measuring only 24x26x4 mm. This
small size combined with the Mulle’s support for
Internet communication, enables the Mulle to be
well suited for use on patients or elderly. The Mulle
can be equipped with GPS, heart rate monitor, fall
sensors, motion sensors and other types of sensors
that can be used to monitor patients. Figure 1 shows
a Body area network (BAN) architecture capable
of monitoring various medical properties such as
body temperature, posture, pulse, location, physical
activity, etc. A number of sensor nodes would be de-
ployed on a human user, and use the patients mobile
Fig. 1.
Body area network
Fig. 2.
Mulle v3.1 Embedded Internet System (EIS)
phone to transmit sensor information to backend-
systems for data analysis and alarm generation.
In e-Health applications, users expect not to
change drained batteries more than a few times
per year. If an e-Health device must be recharged
daily or weekly, people will simply not use it, or
forget to charge it resulting a health hazard. There-
fore, e-Health devices must be very low power,
and optionally use energy scavenging in order to
prolong system lifetime. The Mulle’s sleep current
consumption is only 4 µA, which enables it to be
used in combination with (solar) energy scavenging,
as shown in [12].
One aspect of e-Health applications is that the
users will spend a substantial time indoors. It is
therefore beneﬁcial if the solar panel used to power
the sensor and actuator devices can provide some
power output even in low light conditions i.e. from
lamps and ambient sun light.
C. Home automation
Home automation using wireless sensor and actu-
ator networks have the possibility to reduce energy
47
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

4
usage [21] and thus CO2 emissions [22], increase
safety and security while enhancing the users quality
of life. By enabling different systems to exchange
information and thus allow ﬁne control of heating,
ventilation, lighting etc, substantial savings can be
accomplished. As an example, the building’s se-
curity system can inform other systems that no
one is present. Heating and ventilation can then
be reduced, lighting switched off etc. Temperature
sensors outdoors and indoors can help ensure that
a comfortable temperature is provided in each in-
dividual room. Smart appliances, such as washing
machines, can start during night when the electricity
is cheap.
IV. DYE SENSITISED SOLAR CELLS
The dye sensitised solar cell (DSC) is currently
being investigated as a low cost method of harvest-
ing the abundant energy of sunlight into electricity
[14]. It offers the possible advantages of low cost
and better light harvesting in low and/or diffuse
lighting, which are more realistic conditions than
those which are optimal for other photovoltaic de-
vices, such as silicon-based cells.
The DSC operates by light exciting an electron
in a dye molecule adsorbed onto a mesoporous
semiconductor to an energy level above the con-
duction band of the semiconductor. The electron is
quickly transferred to the conduction band of the
semiconductor and transported through the network
of interconnected nanoparticles to the electrode.
The electron passes through the external circuit and
then reduces an electrolyte at the counter electrode
which in turn reduces the dye, returning it to its
ground state. This type of solar cell has exhibited an
efﬁciency of over 11 %, as shown by Han et. al [23].
The operation of the DSC allows for cheap, abun-
dant materials to be used for device components,
combined with less energy-intensive processes used
during manufacture. This offers the potential for
signiﬁcantly lower production costs compared to
more traditional silicon solar cells, in turn reducing
the energy and cost payback times signiﬁcantly.
These factors make the DSC an attractive renewable
energy source for the future.
The drawbacks for DSCs are, lower performance
compared to silicon devices and a corrosive volatile
electrolyte that limits material selection options and
shortens device lifetimes. The most problematic of
these is device lifetime, as it is difﬁcult to construct
devices with long lifetimes when encapsulation of
a volatile, corrosive electrolyte is required. To this
end alternative electrolytes have been investigated -
generally highly viscous, non-volatile ionic liquids.
Solid state hole conductors have also been consid-
ered and are a more elegant solution, as they also
remove corrosive iodine from the system, expanding
materials selection options within the cell as well
as eliminating any solvent leakage issues, due to
being a solid. The leading organic hole conductor
is 2,2,7,7-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxypheny-amine)-
9,9-spirobiﬂuorene (spiro-MeOTAD) [24], with re-
ported device efﬁciencies up to 7.2% [25]. A solid
state device is typically constructed onto ﬂuorine
doped tin oxide (FTO) glass with a titania (TiO2)
layer coated on top, which is dyed and then inﬁl-
trated with the hole conductor. The counter elec-
trode is a gold layer evaporated onto the coated
titania layer and connected to an electrically isolated
section of the FTO glass. This architecture is ideal
for integration with circuit boards, which has been
realised by the authors and is shown in Figure 3.
The circuit board was physically contacted to the
gold contacts on the back of the DSC module, as
shown in Figure 5. The connections was made such
that each cell is independently measurable and thus
can be bipassed if necessary, e.g. due to damage or
during cell characterization.
V. PCB WITH INTEGRATED DYE SENSITISED
SOLAR CELL
DSC modules were created here using the screen
printing technique, on pre-etched 100 mm × 100
mm 13 Ω/square FTO coated conducting glass
(Nippon) masterplates. The etching to separate the
contacts for the individual cells was performed
using a laser engraving system, a Versa laser VL3.50
unit, which produced ﬁne lines (∼150µm) with high
spacial precision. Following this procedure the glass
was cleaned and a dense blocking layer of TiO2
was deposited by spray pyrolysis, with the areas for
electrical contacts by solder or the gold layer being
masked by ﬂattened aluminum rods.
The screen printing paste for the active layer con-
tained 18 nm particles of anatase titania (obtained
from JGC Catalysts and Chemicals Ltd) and was
diluted by terpineol at a ratio of 2:1 paste (Fluka).
The thickness of the titania layer was determined
48
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

5
Fig. 3.
Layout of the PCB with integrated dye-sensitised solar cell
by a Veeco Detak 150 stylus proﬁlometer, to be ∼2
µm. The titania layer was incrementally heated to
450◦C for 30 min and then to 500◦C for 15 min.
The master plates were cut into 50 mm × 50 mm
modules and reheated to 500◦C for 30 mins before
being placed into the dye solution of 30 mM Z907
(Dyesol) in an acetonitrile/tert-butanol 1:1 mixture.
for approximately 24 hours. The electrolyte was a
solid state hole conductor, namely Spiro-MeOTAD,
which was deposited by spin-coating using a solu-
tion that consisted of 180mg/mL of Spiro-MeOTAD
(Merck) in chlorobenzene (Sigma) with additives of
4-tertbutylpyridine (TBP) (Sigma) (17.6ul/mL) and
Li-TFSI (Sigma) (19.5mM). Chlorobenzene was
used on a cotton bud to remove excess Spiro-
MeOTAD from the glass were series interconnects
were to be formed. The gold charge collecting
layer was deposited onto the module via thermal
evaporation, and the areas not to be coated with
gold were masked with Kapton tapeTM (3M).
An attempt was made to integrate these devices
onto a PCB using conductive epoxy however, this
had a detrimental effect on the DSC leading to dye
desorption. Therefore, this approach was abandoned
in favour of using a soft compressible conductor.
The material used was a polymer mesh substrate
with copper deposited onto it. The copper mesh was
cut into pieces of the same width as the pads, but
slightly longer such that they could be laid over the
pads and adhered using Kapton tape. The module
was placed on top of the PCB such that the gold
contacted the copper mesh and no shorting occurred
between cells. The PCB and DSC module where
then clipped into place using bulldog clips. During
these alignment and clipping processes care was
taken not to damage the fragile gold layer. Wires
Fig. 4.
Prototype board layout
Fig. 5.
PCB DSC solar panel prototype board, ready for integration
with sensor node, the DSC module is 50 mm × 50 mm
were soldered onto the board such that the entire
module could be used or individual cells could
be measured and/or bypassed if faulty. Figure 4
shows the PCB that serves as the base for the new
solar cell. The board, which is composed of four
copper stripes each 49 mm wide and 6 mm long,
was manufactured using a milling machine from
an Eagle CAD design. In the next version of this
prototype board, a modern maximum power point
tracker (MPPT) will be integrated in the system.
By using a MPPT, the cell’s power output can be
increased up to 15-20% [26].
Figure 5 shows a board produced with a DSC on
a PCB. The module created was tested before and
after integration with the PCB, using alligator clips
to make the electrical connections for tests prior to
the connection to the PCB was made, with wires
soldered to the PCB used after connection. The
module was also tested 5 months after construction.
During storage the cell was placed in a drawer in
ambient atmosphere and generally in the dark.
49
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

6
VI. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Several experiments were performed to investi-
gate the performance of the PCB-based cell. To
evaluate the performance of the module under stan-
dard conditions a solar simulator was used. The
modules were tested under 1 Sun illumination, 100
mWcm−2 AM1.5G, using a 1000 W solar simulator
xenon lamp (Oriel) ﬁtted with an appropriate ﬁlter to
achieve spectral match and a Keithley 2400 source
meter. Illumination intensity was varied by the use
of ﬁne wire mesh and calibrated using a silicon
diode. The active area was 10.5 cm2, while the
size of the glass was 25 cm2, this shows a poor
active area to device area ratio. In future work will
attempt to increased this to over 90% coverage, as
a challenging, yet achievable, target for an intercon-
nected module of this size. No masking was used;
efﬁciencies may therefore be over estimated due to
light piping within the glass.
To investigate the real world performance and
feasibility for practical use, tests were performed
both indoors and outdoors using different light
sources.
A. Measurement system
A measurement system was created to capture
characterization measurements for the PCB solar
cell. The measurement system, shown in Figure
6, consists of a 24-bit analog-to-digital converter
(ADC) that measures the voltage drop over a 5Ω
resistor, which is used to measure current. To obtain
an I-V curve, a digitally programmable potentiome-
ter was also used so that different loads could be
presented to the cell. A Mulle v3.1 networked sensor
node equipped with a Bluetooth 2.0 transceiver was
connected to the measurement system. Using this
approach, the PCB cell can be tested outdoors by
having a wireless connection to a laptop or PC,
which can be placed indoors. The measurement
system will be used also to measure the temper-
ature dependency of the cell during winter tests. In
addition, the measurement system also serves as a
building block in the power supply unit (PSU) that
may be used together with the PCB-cell. The PSU
includes a boost converter that generates a 5.0V
output used to charge a super capacitor. A switch is
used to select whether the Mulle should be powered
by the super capacitor or by a battery. The Mulle
v3.1 also features a battery monitor chip, capable
Fig. 6.
Measurement system overview
Fig. 7.
Measurement system implementation
of measuring battery voltage, power consumption,
available energy, and estimated lifetime. Combined
with the Mulle’s on-board features, the PSU can
enable true energy- and power-aware operation.
Figure 6 shows the measurement system. The
system can measure voltages up to 6.5V, and current
with a resolution around 20µA. The load can be
programmed to any value between 100Ω and 100kΩ
in 256 steps. Its realisation is shown in Figure 7.
The measurement system is completely wireless,
which allows remote monitoring of the PCB cell. A
dedicated software written in C was used to retrieve
data from the Mulle and store the results to ﬁle on
a computer.
B. Performed measurements
The following experiments were performed in
order to test the cell’s performance under in a real-
world setting. The different tests that the cell was
tested in are typical application locations where a
networked embedded system can be deployed.
50
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

7
TABLE I
MULLE V3.1 CURRENT CONSUMPTION
Mode
Delay
Current
All systems sleep
-
0.004 mA
MCU 10.0 MHz, BT off
-
7.6 ma
MCU 5.0 MHz, BT off
-
5.1 mA
MCU 2.5 MHz, BT off
-
3.1 mA
MCU 1.25 MHz, BT off
-
2.2 mA
MCU sleep, BT listen
2-12 s.
1.0 mA
MCU sleep, BT active
-
40.3 mA
MCU sleep, BT sniff (210 slots)
131 ms.
8.4 mA
MCU sleep, BT sniff (2010 slots)
1256 ms.
2.8 mA
MCU sleep, BT parked (18 slots)
13 ms.
7.5 mA
MCU sleep, BT parked (200 slots)
130 ms.
2.7 mA
MCU sleep, BT parked (4094 slots)
2560 ms.
1.8 mA
1) Measurement of the PCB DSC module’s per-
formance initially and after 5 months
2) Measurement of the PCB DSC’s current re-
sponse at various light incident angles
3) Measurement of the effect of varying light
intensity on the current output of the PCB
DSC module.
4) Tests of power generation at indoor and out-
door locations and different lighting condi-
tions
The cell was tested for long term degradation
effects and different light sources at different an-
gles. However, no temperature tests were performed
during the work.
C. Real-world energy usage
The feasibility of using the prototype solar cell,
with the power characteristics presented in the pre-
vious section, for a real-world networked sensor
is presented here. The Mulle node [27] has been
used in a number of WSAN and BSN applications
[28], which will be used as an example for cal-
culating operational lifetimes when combined with
the PCB cell. Table I shows examples of the current
consumption of a Mulle v3.1 in different operating
modes.
VII. RESULTS
The initial performance of the PCB DSC mod-
ule was 1.4% prior to integration with the PCB,
and was improved to 1.5% after integration. The
performance degraded to approximately 1% after
5 months, as shown in Figure 8. It can be seen
that integration with the PCB has improved device
performance by increasing the short circuit current,
although this could be partially explained by a
change in the testing methodology, brought about by
how the module is placed under the light beam due
to the bulky PCB causing the device to be placed
in a slightly different position in the light beam.
The improvement in the electrical connection of the
module to the testing apparatus by connection to the
PCB would also account for some of the improve-
ment, with sections not previously in electrical con-
nection due to breaks or scratches in the gold layer
being connected via the PCB. It is also possible that
the increase in current is due to reﬂection from the
metal surfaces associated with integration with the
PCB. The overall device performance is not high,
but as a prototype solid-state module it has sufﬁcient
performance to be a starting point for considering
future applications. Over the course of 5 months it
can be seen that the performance of the DSC module
decreased by about 30%, which is quite good for a
DSC with no encapsulation and stored under open
circuit conditions in ambient atmosphere. The short
circuit current reduction over the time was most
likely due to the degradation of the dye molecules
through interaction with atmospheric water, which
may also explain the reduced ﬁll factor as the water
will have also degraded the Spiro-MeOTAD thus
increasing series resistance.
Varying illumination angle was performed by
the use of a rotating stage with a 360◦ protractor
attached to its center to determine the angle. The
modules were attached to the center of the freely
rotating protractor and a mark on the board was
used to determine the incident angle, where 0◦ cor-
responds to the light beam from the solar simulator
being perpendicular to the surface of the module. A
spirit level was used to determine when the modules
were perpendicular to the light beam and all other
angles were calculated from this calibration. From
the data in Figure 9 the DSC module appears to have
a reasonably low angular dependence, following the
cosine law [29], where the cosine of the angle of
illumination predicts the fraction of current being
produced compared to perpendicular for collimated
light sources such as the sun, due to its distance,
or nominally the solar simulator. Comparing the
experimental results with the cosine law shows that
the currents produced are higher than expected for
the DSC module. Possible reasons for this are, as
the modules were rotated half approaches the light
source, if the light beam is not properly collimated
51
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

8
then the light will have higher intensity for the
closer portion and thus the current will increase,
alternatively it could be due to light piping effects
through the glass from the edge of the device (4
mm) playing a role in capturing more light into
the device. The important point to take from this
experiment is that at 45◦ the DSC still produced
about 80% output current, which shows for most
of a given day the DSC will be performing with
relatively good output regardless of the angle of
incidence of solar illumination. The silicon module
follows the theoretical curve more closely until
around 60◦, where it begin to perform below the
curve. The comparison of these devices shows that
the DSC has a lower angular dependence than the
silicon module tested here, thus demonstrating a
possible advantage for this technology for use in
sensor nodes.
Figure 10 shows the variation of the output cur-
rent with varied input light intensity, which remains
linear for lower light intensities, but slightly de-
creases upon approaching full illumination, show-
ing the cell is approaching it’s photocurrent limit.
This limiting would not be an issue for real world
applications where the input light intensity would
generally be lower than the standard 1 sun consid-
ered here, and in the context of Mulle sensor nodes
then times of peak light intensity will typically be
uninteresting as the device should have had the
opportunity to fully charge by the time this level
of irradiation is present. Meaning that the device
will likely be charged during the morning before
the peak light of the day in an outdoor application.
This data may also be used to estimate the illumi-
nation intensity from the photocurrent produced by
the module although this will exhibit a signiﬁcant
spectral mismatch for artiﬁcial light sources.
To evaluate the module’s output in real world
scenarios the short circuit current was measured at a
number of locations that reﬂect typical applications
for the sensor node which can be placed either
outdoors or indoors.
The resulting data is in Table III. For a number
of practical usage scenarios assuming no real-time
radio communication, a small dye solar cell should
be sufﬁcient to provide the necessary power for
making low-cost wireless power a reality.
When comparing the current output from the PCB
DSC cell with Table I, it is clear that the generated
current is sufﬁcient for powering a Mulle sensor
Fig. 8.
PCB DSC current-voltage performance, initially and after 5
months
Fig. 9.
PCB DSC short circuit current response for different light
incident angles
Fig. 10.
Short circuit current response for the PCB DSC with light
intensity varying between 1 and 100%
node as long as low-power modes are utilized.
Since the peak power of a Mulle is higher than the
maximum power output of the PCB DSC cell, some
energy storage will always be required. A super
capacitor, a rechargeable battery, or a combination
of both can be used for energy storage. Performed
52
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

9
TABLE II
TEST LOCATIONS
ID
Description
1
Ofﬁce with ceiling ﬂuorescence lightning and ambient light
from shaded windows; cell horizontal
2
Corridor with ceiling ﬂuorescence lightning and no ambi-
ent light from windows, cell horizontal
3
Workshop well lit with with ceiling ﬂuorescence lightning
and some ambient light from shaded windows; cell hori-
zontal
4
Ofﬁce desk with 23W desk ﬂuorescent lamp; cell horizon-
tal
5
Near a closed window with no direct sunlight; cell hori-
zontal
6
Near an open window with no direct sunlight; cell hori-
zontal
7
Near a closed window with some direct sunlight; cell
horizontal
8
Near a closed window with direct sunlight; cell horizontal
9
Near a closed window with no direct sunlight; cell tilted
for maximum illumination
10
Outside in full sun light; cell horizontal
11
Outside in full sun light; cell tilted for maximum illumi-
nation
TABLE III
CURRENTS FROM PCB DYE SOLAR CELL IN TYPICAL USAGE
SCENARIO LOCATIONS.
Test location
distance to source [m]
Current [µA]
1
2
6
1
0.3
60
1
0.1
220
2
1
6
2
0.1
90
3
2
50
4
0.2
240
4
0.01
3000
5
-
220
6
-
330
7
-
800
8
-
2650
9
-
3700
10
-
6800
11
-
8000
tests indicates that the presented approach is feasible
for powering low-power electronics such as sensor
nodes.
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper has presented a novel approach for
powering low-power electronic devices, such as
networked embedded systems and sensor nodes.
The approach integrates a dye sensitised solar cell
directly onto a device’s circuit board thereby reduc-
ing the material and assembly costs. A prototype
device has been manufactured to demonstrate the
feasibility of this approach and to enable the cells’
real-world performance to be evaluated. Test results,
both initial and after ﬁve months of degradation,
have been presented to support the claims. Note
that the performed tests only show the feasibility
of the system, more tests are needed in order to
fully characterize the cell’s true performance.
By integrating the power supply directly onto a
circuit board, the authors envision that networked
sensors may be manufactured at a greatly reduced
cost in the future. When combined with new tech-
nologies for energy storage and transparent encap-
sulation, the presented approach can be an enabling
technology for future low-cost, large-scale wireless
sensor networks, in support of the vision of the
Internet of Things.
The ﬁrst steps towards an integrated manufac-
turing process for solar-powered embedded systems
have been successfully completed. The authors are
now working on techniques to print a dye sensitised
solar cell directly onto a printed circuit board using
mass production techniques. The ultimate aim is to
develop a method for assembling and manufacturing
a complete system that includes a PCB, components,
and a solar cell, using a single process.
Another issue that needs further investigation
is how the system should be encapsulated in a
transparent package. One method is to the embedd
the entire system in optically transparent glue, as
shown in [30]. How low temperatures are affecting
the cell’s performance must also be investigated.
Finally, the use of a more low powered device, such
as the Mulle v5.2 with an IEEE 802.15.4 radio,
combined with a maximum power point tracker
(MPPT) should be used to test the true performance
in a wireless sensor and actuator network used in for
example ITS applications, e-Heath or smart homes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Parts of this work have been conducted within
the iRoad project that is hosted at Lule˚a University
of Technology. Funding provided by Geveko ITS
A/S, the Gunnar och M¨artha Bergendahl foundation
and VINNOVA are hereby gratefully acknowledged.
The authors would like to thank Mikael Larsmark
for help with the manufacturing of the circuit
boards.
53
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

10
REFERENCES
[1] J. Eliasson, J. Delsing, S. Thompson, and Y.-B. Cheng, “PCB
Integration of Dye-sensitised Solar Cells for Low-cost Net-
worked Embedded Systems,” in SENSORCOMM, Nice, France,
July 2011.
[2] D. Culler, D. Estrin, and M. Srivastava, “Overview of sensor
networks,” Computer, vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 41–49, Aug 2004.
[3]
¨Ozg¨ur B. Akan and I. F. Akyildiz, “Event-to-sink reliable
transport in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 1003–1016, 2005.
[4] T. Bokareva, W. Hu, S. Kanhere, B. Ristic, N. Gordon,
T.
Bessell,
M.
Rutten,
and
S.
Jha,
“Wireless
sensor
networks for battleﬁeld surveillance,” 2006. [Online]. Available:
http://www.cse.unsw.edu.au/∼tbokareva/papers/lwc.html
[5] N. Xu, S. Rangwala, K. K. Chintalapudi, D. Ganesan, A. Broad,
R. Govindan, and D. Estrin, “A wireless sensor network for
structural monitoring,” in SenSys ’04: Proceedings of the 2nd
international conference on Embedded networked sensor sys-
tems.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2004, pp. 13–24.
[6] A. Mainwaring, D. Culler, J. Polastre, R. Szewczyk, and J. An-
derson, “Wireless sensor networks for habitat monitoring,” in
Proceedings of the 1st ACM international workshop on Wireless
sensor networks and applications.
ACM Press, 2002, pp. 88–
97.
[7] “IPSO Alliance,” http://www.ipso-alliance.org/, 2010, [Online;
accessed 11-June-2012].
[8] L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The internet of things: A
survey,” Comput. Netw., vol. 54, no. 15, pp. 2787–2805, Oct.
2010. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.
2010.05.010
[9] K. Zeng, K. Ren, W. Lou, and P. J. Moran, “Energy aware
efﬁcient geographic routing in lossy wireless sensor networks
with environmental energy supply,” Wireless Networks, vol. 15,
pp. 39–51, Jan 2009.
[10] R. Moghe, Y. Yang, F. Lambert, and D. Divan, “A scoping study
of electric and magnetic ﬁeld energy harvesting for wireless
sensor networks in power system applications,” in Energy
Conversion Congress and Exposition, 2009. ECCE 2009. IEEE,
sept. 2009, pp. 3550 –3557.
[11] V.
Raghunathan,
A.
Kansal,
J.
Hsu,
J.
Friedman,
and
M.
Srivastava,
“Design
considerations
for
solar
energy
harvesting wireless embedded systems,” IPSN ’05: Proceedings
of the 4th international symposium on Information processing
in sensor networks, vol. 64, p. 64, 2005, cited By (since
1996): 9. [Online]. Available: www.scopus.com
[12] J. Eliasson, P. Lindgren, J. Delsing, S. Thompson, and Y.-
B. Cheng, “A power management architecture for sensor
nodes,” in Wireless Communications and Networking Confer-
ence, 2007.WCNC 2007. IEEE, march 2007, pp. 3008 –3013.
[13] E. Blackshear, M. Cases, E. Klink, and S. Engle, “The evolution
of build-up package technology and its design challenges,” IBM
journal of research and development, vol. 49, pp. 641–661,
2005.
[14] B. O’Regan and M. Gr¨atzel, “A low-cost, high-efﬁciency solar
cell based on dye-sensitized colloidal tio2 ﬁlms,” Nature, vol.
353, no. 6346, pp. 737–740, 1991.
[15] B. A. Gregg and M. C. Hanna, “Comparing organic to inorganic
photovoltaic cells: Theory, experiment, and simulation,” Journal
of Applied Physics, vol. 93, no. 6, pp. 3605–3614, 2003.
[Online]. Available: http://link.aip.org/link/?JAP/93/3605/1
[16] M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, and W. Warta, “Short
Communication Solar cell efﬁciency tables,” Progress in Pho-
tovoltaics: Research and Applications, vol. 17, 2009.
[17] M. A. U. Usman, “Integrating dye-sensitized solar cell technol-
ogy for implementation in modern day electronics,” in SOLAR
2010 Conference Proceedings, Piscataway, NJ 08855-1331,
United States, 2010.
[18] R. Hostettler, W. Birk, and M. Nordenvaad, “Feasibility of road
vibrations-based vehicle property sensing,” Intelligent Trans-
port Systems, IET, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 356 –364, December 2010.
[19] “The iRoad project,” http://www.iroad.se, April 2011, [Online;
accessed 19-May-2012].
[20] A. Dohr, R. Modre-Opsrian, M. Drobics, D. Hayn, and
G. Schreier, “The internet of things for ambient assisted living,”
in Information Technology: New Generations (ITNG), 2010
Seventh International Conference on, april 2010, pp. 804 –809.
[21] O. Asad, M. Erol-Kantarci, and H. Mouftah, “Sensor network
web services for demand-side energy management applications
in the smart grid,” in Consumer Communications and Network-
ing Conference (CCNC), 2011 IEEE, jan. 2011, pp. 1176 –1180.
[22] N.-H. Nguyen, Q.-T. Tran, J.-M. Leger, and T.-P. Vuong, “A
real-time control using wireless sensor network for intelligent
energy management system in buildings,” in Environmental
Energy and Structural Monitoring Systems (EESMS), 2010
IEEE Workshop on, sept. 2010, pp. 87 –92.
[23] L. Han, A. Fukui, N. Fuke, N. Koide, and R. Yamanaka, “High
efﬁciency of dye-sensitized solar cell and module,” in IEEE 4th
World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion.
IEEE,
2006, pp. 179–182.
[24] U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissortel,
J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer, and M. Gr¨atzel, “Solid-state dye-
sensitized mesoporous tio2 solar cells with high photon-to-
electron conversion efﬁciencies,” Nature, vol. 395, pp. 583–558,
2009.
[25] J. Burschka, A. Dualeh, F. Kessler, E. Baranoff, N.-L. Cevey-
Ha, C. Yi, M. K. Nazeeruddin, and M. Grtzel, “Tris(2-(1h-
pyrazol-1-yl)pyridine)cobalt(iii) as p-type dopant for organic
semiconductors and its application in highly efﬁcient solid-state
dye-sensitized solar cells,” Journal of the American Chemical
Society, vol. 133, no. 45, pp. 18 042–18 045, 2011. [Online].
Available: http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/ja207367t
[26] F. Simjee and P. Chou, “Efﬁcient charging of supercapacitors
for extended lifetime of wireless sensor nodes,” Power Elec-
tronics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1526 –1536,
may 2008.
[27] “Eistec AB,” http://www.eistec.se, 2010, [Online; accessed 11-
June-2012].
[28] J. Eliasson, P. Lindgren, and J. Delsing, “A Bluetooth-based
Sensor Node for Low-Power Ad Hoc Networks,” Journal of
Computers (JCP), pp. 1–10, May 2008.
[29] J. Balenzategui and F. Chenlo, “Measurement and analysis of
angular response of bare and encapsulated silicon solar cells,”
Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, vol. 86, no. 1, pp. 53
– 83, 2005. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S092702480400265X
[30] J. Eliasson and W. Birk, “Towards road surface monitoring:
Experiments and technical challenges,” in Control Applications,
(CCA) Intelligent Control, (ISIC), 2009 IEEE, july 2009, pp.
655 –659.
54
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/systems_and_measurements/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

