1
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Joint Demand Regulation and Capacity Management for Multi-cellular Clusters - a
Stochastic Meanﬁeld Control Approach
Abheek Saha
Hughes Systique Corporation
Email: abheek.saha@hsc.com
Abstract—Mean-ﬁeld theory is a signiﬁcant recent develop-
ment in the ﬁeld of stochastic optimal control. By allowing the
optimal control functions to take into account not only the state
of the individual agent, but also the common state of an entire
ensemble of mutually inter-dependent agents, mean-ﬁeld theory
allows us to model ensembles of autonomous agents pursuing
individually optimal trajectories in a shared environment. In
this paper, the application of stochastic optimal control has
been shown for a very standard problem of cellular networks,
the optimum resource allocation problem. In modern cellular
networks, the optimal resource assignment for individual cells
has to take into account the loading of the entire network, since
user stations are free to adjust transmission rates and migrate
among cells and cells, while cells can also trade bandwidth
between themselves. The problem is to achieve an optimal
matching of available resources to the individual demands for
capacity, taking into account the temporal and spatial variation
in demand. By modelling the demand and capacity and their
mutual interaction using mean-ﬁeld theory, it has been shown
that the matching problem can be cast as a distributed optimal
control function. We have used a novel method to solve the
corresponding mean-ﬁeld game and demonstrated that the
solution provides an effective mechanism for demand regulation
and capacity assignment.
Keywords—mean-ﬁeld games; stochastic control; distributed
resource allocation; distributed optimization; adaptive rate control.
I. INTRODUCTION
Stochastic optimal control is a powerful technique to
control time-varying systems with a random component in
the inputs. Developed over the last ﬁfty years from the base
of variational inequality and dynamic programming, it has
been applied in multiple disciplines ranging from ﬁnance
to oil exploration and medical trials. By leveraging the
fundamental strength of stochastic calculus and optimization
theory, stochastic optimal control can help in developing the
control law which is used to control live processes in the face
of unknown, time varying inputs.
Wireless cellular networks have to deal with the problem
of efﬁcient resource allocation, and it is well known that
this can be modelled as an optimal control problem [1].
In modern cellular networks the network resource allocation
function has to deal with varying adaptive user demand as
well which is also a stochastic processes. Application of
stochastic optimal control to wireless networks, however, has
been sporadic [2][3][4]. The immediate reason for this is
that optimal control problems do not easily yield analytic
solutions. In fact, most of the work in optimal control theory
is limited to linear and linear quadratic state equations.
Wireless protocol stacks are based on more complex laws.
However, there is a second, more difﬁcult problem to solve.
In the cellular wireless world, there is the problem of inter-
node interdependence. This was recognized even in the 2nd
generation wireless networks, which were designed to be
interference constrained. Wireless networks of the 4th and
5th generation have taken this one step further. They are
built around the principles of dynamic inter-cell coordination
and cooperation for managing resources and matching them
to demand. The need for cooperative resource management
protocols is driven by two factors. The ﬁrst is the ability
of individual user terminals to use larger and larger bands of
spectrum, while the overall network is spectrum-conservative;
hence network nodes must be able to deploy spectrum
ﬂexibly in response to hotspots of demand, while minimizing
the overall spectrum deployment. The second is the need for
networks to dynamically adapt to large variations in demand,
both spatially and temporally. Cellular networks are being
moved towards newer and newer business cases such as wide-
area connectivity for cellular networks supporting Internet
Of Things, connected vehicles, etc. Most of these use cases
are dependent on network nodes being able to ﬂexibly adapt
to new patterns in user behaviour. Hence, the paradigm of
dynamically shared resources and network node cooperation
is here to stay. There is wide-spread theoretical and practical
interest in Coordinated Multipoint networks in 4G, Hetnets
and Inter-Cell Interference Coordination (ICIC/eICIC). In-
deed, the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3gPP) has
introduced the X-interface between network nodes as an
explicit means of inter-node coordination in real-time, in
order to make coordinated network operation possible.
A. Optimal Control for Wireless Networks
Network nodes are independent, yet coexisting agents,
tied together by the constraints of shared resources and
shared environments. In this situation, an optimal control
law which treats the network node or cell as an individual
agent and optimizes its performance in an isolated manner is
not very useful and can result in severely degraded network
performance. To apply optimal control theory to wireless
network resource allocation problem, one would need to
model the impact of resource usage by one node on the
rest of the network. One solution is to try to solve the
problem simultaneously by constructing as a N-dimensional
control equation for all network nodes, i.e., the network state
becomes a vector of states, one for each agent. This however
leads to the dimensionality problem as the number of degrees
of freedom increase as O(n2). It also requires a degree of

2
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
simultaneous coordinated control that is not feasible in most
wireless networks.
A strictly adversarial approach (such as used in game the-
oretic techniques) has also been used with interesting results.
In reality, network nodes cannot afford to be completely
adversarial, since they are not operating in cooperation,
not competition of each other. For example, it may make
sense for a given node to hand over load to another node
or to take over load from another node cooperatively. In
these situations, the objective is to optimize overall network
capacity, not individual node capacity. However, it is still
possible to solve this problem as a game, by writing the utility
function to take this into account. A second problem is that
game theoretic approaches require inter-node negotiation,
which requires a very large amount of signaling between
nodes and their neighbours. This makes the game-theoretic
solutions analytically difﬁcult and hard to scale to a large
number of nodes.
What is needed then, is a way to abstract the bulk state
of the network and construct a common model for demand
and capacity and their mutual interaction. The model should
take into account both the effect of the network state on the
individual agent, as well as the effect of the independent
actions of the nodes and how it impacts the bulk network
state in turn. As shall be seen below, the mean-ﬁeld model
provides exactly that.
B. The Mean-Field Extension to Stochastic Optimal Control
Mean-ﬁeld theory originated in particle physics, where it is
used to model the behaviour of a large number of particles
within a single ﬁeld. The states of the individual particle
follows statistical laws, which is controlled by the ﬁeld itself.
However, its application to optimal control theory is relatively
recent. It was only in the ﬁrst decade of the 2000s that Lasry
and Lions [5] and independently, yet nearly simultaneously,
Minyi Huang and his team [6] kicked off a concerted
research effort on optimal control of multiple interacting
stochastic processes by modeling their interactions through a
shared global variable called a mean-ﬁeld constraint. Optimal
control problems of this nature are called Mean-Field Games
(henceforth MFG). The term ﬁeld here is similar to the use of
ﬁeld in classical physics; a common, network-wide inﬂuence
which modulates individual nodes in the ﬁeld and is also
modulated by them, under the control of a universal ﬁeld
equation.
The authors above showed that MFGs can be modelled as
an extension to stochastic optimal control theory, by allowing
the empirical distribution of individual network node states
to be included in the transition and cost functions. This
provides us a mechanism for incorporating the network state
variables into individual node decision control algorithms.
For example, Huang et al. in [7] use mean-ﬁeld stochastic
control as a way of optimal power control in wireless
networks. Wireless nodes have to set transmission power
so as to maximize the Signal to Interference Ratio (SIR),
yet minimize cross-neighbour interference. In this case, the
latter is modelled in terms of the empirical power distribution
across the network.
C. Objective and Structure of the paper
In this paper, stochastic control with mean-ﬁeld constraints
has been applied to the problem of cellular resource al-
location. The focus is to model the demand capacity gap
in a multi-cellular environment and how this has to be
incorporated into a dynamic model for aggregate demand in
the per-cell level. By using rate adaptation models from the
existing literature, this interaction and the resultant demand-
capacity allocation problem has been modelled as a stochastic
game, which can be solved to get a common optimal control
law. A closed-form analytic solution has been worked out for
a non-linear stochastic MFG which, to our knowledge is the
ﬁrst that has been presented in the existing literature.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we introduce the problem in more detail. In the next Section
III, we review the existing state-of-the-art in the area of
cellular resource management and establish the contribution
of this paper in contrast to the current literature. In Section
IV a mathematical model has been deﬁned for modelling
adaptive user trafﬁc, which is going to be the basis of the
theoretical model. Section V contains an introduction to
stochastic optimal control and its extension to the mean-ﬁeld
constrained game, along with the adjoint equation technique
that shall be used as a basis for the solution of this game.
In Section VI, the model demand regulation problem is
introduced as a mean-ﬁeld stochastic game and a closed form
solution is presented. The success of the demand regulation
algorithm is established through simulations in SectionVII.
Finally, Section VIII contains the conclusion, analysis and a
roadmap for future work in this area.
II. PROBLEM STATEMENT - DYNAMIC RESOURCE
MANAGEMENT IN WIRELESS CELLULAR NETWORKS - A
SURVEY OF EXISTING LITERATURE
The resource management problem of cellular networks
has been studied as part of dynamic network optimization
since a long time and is seen as a fundamental component of
the Self Optimizing Network (SON) [8],[9]. The problem is
brieﬂy described as follows: there is a network consisting
of (possibly overlapping) cells in a given coverage area.
Each cell is controlled by a network node (base-station).
Within each cell, there are a number of active UEs (User
Equipment), which have a requirement for network capacity;
they communicate these resource requests to the base-station
on a frame by frame basis. Each individual network node
aggregates these per UE requests for capacity, into an ag-
gregate demand which is the state variable of the network
node, Xi
t, appropriately normalized. This term is frequently
referred to the demand or the load of the cell. The network
nodes also have a certain amount of capacity to handle this
load, based on the resources available to it. A scheduling
algorithm distributes the capacity to the individual UEs on a
frame-by-frame basis.
The resources available in each cell are a combination
of various different physical and computational resources,
such as spectrum, power and backhaul capacity. All of these
combine to determine the overall load handling capacity Ck
t

3
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
of a given cell. Clearly, one would like to minimize the gap
between the available resources Ck
t and the resources which
would be required to service the aggregate demand. The task
of the resource optimization algorithm is to ensure an optimal
deployment of resources per cell, so that the demand-gap
(difference between capacity demand and capacity available)
is minimized for all the cells in the network.
Since loading patterns vary dynamically in both temporal
and spatial dimensions, the network has to be load-following.
It must be able to use the reported aggregate load from
each cell as a basis for spectrum allocation, reallocation and
cooperative load-balancing. There are multiple mechanisms
for this as has been reported in the literature. For example,
in a dynamic network, real-time trading of spectrum may be
possible within cells belonging to a group or cluster, under
the control of a central controller. Alternately, cells may use
power as a resource; in [10], the authors use a strategy of
adjusting the transmit power of individual cells so as to let
less loaded cells expand their coverage area to take more
load. More cases shall be discussed in Section III-A. In a
cellular network, the bulk of the cell-level resources (if not
all) are shared resources, with either soft or hard constraints
on their deployment in the network. No individual node can
unilaterally change its deployment without affecting others.
In many cases, the impact of reconﬁguration of an individual
resource may be network-wide. For example, a network node
increasing its transmit power will cause interference among
its immediate neighbours, whereas a network node deploying
additional spectrum will cause co-channel interference with
other nodes reusing that spectrum. Thus, a cell can only add
spectrum or increase transmit power if other cells are willing
to reduce the one or the other. Thus, adapting to load involves
cooperation between network nodes.
However, solutions to the resource allocation problem are
inadequate unless they are extended to incorporate the prob-
lem of modelling of behaviour at the user-level. This is a cru-
cial, yet often overlooked factor. User applications, especially
the data-hungry applications which dominate modern cellular
usage, are autonomously adaptive, seeking to optimize their
utility from the network by adapting to the environment that
they experience. They continuously sense the ability of the
network to service their requirements, and adapt their service
requests to this, both at the micro and the macro level. At
the macro level, they will move from heavily loaded cells to
lightly loaded cells by initiating handovers. The handover
triggering decision traditionally only used signal power;
however, with the increased density of cells, actual network
load is being increasingly used as an input. At the micro
level, they implement sophisticated rate control algorithms
so that the demand they generate will rise and fall based on
the capacity available as measured by them individually. The
mechanism for rate control is based on standard congestion
control algorithms deployed in the transport layer. There is
a near universal consensus, in modern congestion control
theory on end-to-end congestion control algorithms similar
to TCP or equivalents (Dynamic Adaptive Streaming over
HTTP (DASH), TCP Friendly Rate Control (TFRC), etc.).
This family of algorithms have widespread deployment in
transmission stacks and have proven themselves over a long
period of time extensively in a vast variety of environments
[11]. While the basic algorithm is simple (computationally)
to implement, its rather challenging to model; this shall be
discussed further in Section IV-A.
In conclusion, the resource allocation problem can be
cast as a dynamic optimization problem, but two separate
issues have to be considered. The ﬁrst is the problem of
allocation of resources in a fair manner, which has been
addressed in the literature. The second, relatively unsolved
problem, is that of anticipating user behaviour, both in terms
of mobility as well as in terms of demand variation in
response to this allocation. In general, user behaviour is
hard to model and takes time to converge to an equilibrium.
On the other hand, capacity-allocation/de-allocation on the
ﬂy (by moving spectrum from one cell to the other, for
example) is also complex problem with unexpected impacts
network-wide. When the two occur together, they can have
signiﬁcant impacts on network stability and user perceived
QoS. In this paper, the two variables, demand (load) and
capacity are mutually interdependent. Only by considering
the ones impact on the other and vice-versa, can a stable
operating equilibrium be achieved and an optimal control law
be derived. The need, then, is for a joint model of capacity
allocation and demand regulation, which shall be described
in subsequent sections.
III. PREVIOUS WORK
The existing literature in multi-cellular resource manage-
ment in wireless networks is focussed around the problem
of resource allocation and load balancing. A relatively recent
survey of the problem and analysis of the current status and
open areas is given by Andrews et al. [12]. In this work, the
authors also discuss the myths surrounding cell loading and
QoS. One of the myths identiﬁed by the authors is that the
capacity of a cell is rarely a property of the link SIR, but
also has to take into account the loading of the cell itself.
This underlies the need to do real-time resource planning as
a network management strategy.
A. Survey of existing research in multi-cellular resource
management
The approaches to multi-cellular resource management, as
found in the existing literature, can be divided broadly into
two categories. One set of research tends to focus on user
distribution, using intra-cellular and inter-cellular handovers
[13][14]. While handover optimization has been an area of
study for a long time, the use of handovers as a strategic
tool for resource optimization is somewhat more niche area.
In these papers, the handover decisions are typically taken at
the endpoints with the network nodes providing information
about current loading. In [15], the authors provide a complete
mathematical framework for this kind of re-direction, inte-
grating both the equilibrium loading as well as the resources
required for re-direction in the general analysis.
The second category focusses on dynamic resource deploy-
ment between cells. In some cases, the network nodes con-
trolling the cells operate autonomously to learn the optimal

4
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
loading limit individually and then act to achieve this, without
needing any active inter-node coordination. For example, in
[16], the authors propose reinforcement learning techniques
for network nodes to tune speciﬁc conﬁguration parameters
to achieve the optimal load. The cooperative approach using
explicit coordination between cells is discussed in a series
of papers by Bigham and Lin [10],[17,[18], where coverage
is used as a metric for load and power is the resource
variable to be optimized. The authors formalize a method
of structured direct negotiation between a network node
and its neighbours. The decision function optimizes the
allocation of coverage to individual network nodes by jointly
selecting the appropriate transmission signal power for each
network. The coverage area, broken into tiles is treated as
the resource. The equivalent, but more modern challenge of
coverage optimization for the multi-antenna case is treated
in the work of [19],[20]. Other approaches to the dynamic
resource planning problem involve migration of spectrum
[21]. This work is interesting because it allows both hard
and soft channel blocking strategies (channel blocking with
and without locking). The approach is extended in [22]
by incorporating support for variable demand multi-media
trafﬁc. In this paper, the cells with multimedia trafﬁc are
marked in terms of their potential peak trafﬁc, not just the
current demand. By marking a cell in this state, it is taken
out of the borrowing/lending pool of cells, since this may
cause thrashing between peak and safe states. Finally, there
is a fair amount of literature, where resource management
is not cooperative, but adversarial. For example, a game
theoretic approach is found in papers such as [23]. Here the
authors model the negotiation process as a game between an
individual loaded cell and underloaded neighbour cells, with
each cell autonomously trying to maximize its own utility.
B. Contribution of this paper
Optimal resource planning in cellular networks is about
matching capacity to demand. Looking at a cluster of cells,
which are under a common optimization framework, it is
desirable to ﬁnd those cells which have surplus capacity
and match them against cells which have excess demand.
Algorithms as available in the existing literature typically
tend to focus on optimization of this demand-capacity gap
and balancing it, either by moving demand to where capacity
is available (handover) or by moving capacity to where
demand exists (spectrum/power redeployment).
As discussed earlier, our focus, in this paper is on a
different problem; that of demand regulation at the cell-level
and how it interacts with optimal resource planning at the
cluster or network level. The motivation for this arises from
the fact that the demand for resources in a cell is not merely
a function of the coverage or the number of UEs (above a
certain limit), but the availability of capacity in the cell. In
other words, while capacity follows demand, demand adapts
to existing capacity (see the simulation results in Figure 3).
Hence, the need for a closed-form model which incorporates
the dynamics of both.
To this end, a demand-regulation algorithm has been pro-
posed that operates at individual cells, yet takes into account
the availability of capacity within and without the cell, at
the cluster and possibly the network level. The algorithm has
two simultaneous purposes. One is to provide feedback to the
users within the cell optimally and the other is to model the
true demand of each cell and incorporate it into higher level
resource optimization algorithms. It has been then shown how
this demand-regulation algorithm can ﬁt into existing models
of resource allocation to provide a seamless whole which
manages a cluster of cells at one time.
The problem of demand regulation vis-a-vis capacity lim-
itations has been studied for many years in the context of
the Internet and there are well- understood models of rate
adaptation, which have been used for many years in the
wired world. There are also existing models for modelling
the aggregate behaviour of bandwidth adaptive TCP based
applications as a stochastic process, which has been used in
this paper. The key novelty in our paper is the incorporation
of network-wide capacity and adaptive demand as part of a
single demand management algorithm, and the solution of
the resultant optimal control problem as a stochastic mean-
ﬁeld game. By using the outcome to drive both user-level
rate-adaptation as well as macro resource management, it
will be shown that it is possible to deliver stable, con-
trollable capacity levels in a multi-cellular cluster which
adapts automatically to the available capacity. Further, this
algorithm works smoothly with macro-resource optimization
and UE initiated optimal network attachment strategies (such
as handovers) to smoothen demand and allow load-balancing
over an ensemble of cells.
A key term that that shall be using repeatedly through
this paper is congestion. Congestion, in our approach is a
key metric of the twin problems of demand management and
resource allocation problem. It is equally applicable to the
end-point users as a metric of the ability of the network
to respond to variations in demand, as well as external
network management or resource allocation functions, as a
metric of utilization of resources. In other words, its scope
is both local (within the cell) and global (across a cluster of
cells). Our demand management algorithm provides a way
to compute the congestion level which is both globally and
locally applicable.
A model for solving the multi-cell resource management
as a mean-ﬁeld game has been described in a previous paper
[1]. Using a simple linear model for demand and capacity,
this previous work has shown how cells could choose a
stable operating point for resource utilization, both at the
network level as well as the cell-level, which would take
into account both the variations in resource allocation, as
well as the variations in demand. In this paper, the existing
approach is extended by providing a practical usable close-
form solution to the coordinated resource management prob-
lem. The solution moves from the simpliﬁed static demand
models to widely used models for dynamic data trafﬁc, which
dominates wireless trafﬁc today. To this end, the bandwidth
adaptive endpoints have been modelled as demand generating
agents using TCP-like bandwidth hunting algorithms and the
solution framework has been reformulated as a mean-ﬁeld
stochastic optimization problem. The mean-ﬁeld game solved

5
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
in this paper is not of the standard linear quadratic form; to
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst paper to provide an analytical
solution for a non-linear mean-ﬁeld game in the available
literature.
IV. MODELING OF USER LEVEL DEMAND
Modern communication networks are dominated by data-
trafﬁc. Analysis depends on an understanding of how data
connections behave in a dynamic environment. Our task is
simpliﬁed by the fact that the majority of modern data-
based applications use the Internet Transport Control Protocol
(TCP) as the backbone transport protocol. This is true for
Internet browsing, as well as video streaming using Dy-
namic Adaptive Streaming over HTTP (DASH). To accu-
rately model the trafﬁc patterns seen in a modern wireless
system, one has to start by understanding how TCP protocol
stacks work. It is well known that TCP connections are
explicitly designed to be simultaneously bandwidth hunting
and bandwidth-conservative. A TCP data source constantly
increases demand as its current demand is met and it senses
that there is surplus bandwidth in the network. On the
other hand, if it detects a lack of bandwidth, it reduces its
bandwidth demand aggressively. The combined behaviour is
approximated by Additive Increase and Multiplicative De-
crease (AIMD). The multiplicative decrease ensures that TCP
behaviour is cooperative. The success of the TCP bandwidth
hunting algorithm is such that even non TCP connections
are nowadays required to maintain TCP like transmission
rate management protocols. For example, the TCP Friendly
Rate Control [24] is now an Internet standard for bandwidth
control of media ﬂows such as those proposed in Web real-
time communication (WebRTC).
A. Modelling TCP dynamics at the cellular level
In order to model the load balancing problem mathemat-
ically, there is a need to select a suitable model for TCP
connection dynamics, which incorporates both the trafﬁc
model, as well as its reaction to network feedback. It would
be preferable to have a model which can aggregate a number
of TCP ﬂows, approximating the aggregate demand seen by
a single cell. After the landmark work done by Paxson et
al [25], there has been a large amount of interest in the
modeling of the kind offeedback-sensitive trafﬁc seen in
TCP and there is now a large corpus of work available for
modelling both TCP [26],[27],[28],[29] and TCP like trafﬁc
[30],[31]. These models are complicated by the asymmetric
nature of the AIMD algorithm and are much too complex for
us to use directly. Further, most of these models are time-lag
systems, because individual TCPs are crucially dependent on
the round-trip time. Analysis requires transformation to the
Laplace domain, and is highly complex.
However, if one switches to modelling aggregate be-
haviour, then the job becomes easier. In the modelling of
the collective behaviour of a number of independent TCP
connections, the discontinuities tend to smoothen out; further,
the effect of round-trip time in the aggregate can be abstracted
out. These are known as mul-TCP models [32],[33],[34],
which aim at modeling bulk-trafﬁc reacting independently
to congestion signals.
1) Kelly’s model for aggregate TCP ﬂows: The rest of the
paper shall use the model proposed by Kelly in his landmark
work [32]. The Kelly model is simple enough to be used
in analysis and has an intuitive structure. What it proposes
is simply this. At any given point of time t, the demand
is measured as an aggregate variable Xt, which reacts to a
congestion state Ut of the network (which is treated as the
control variable). At any instance of time, a fraction Ut of
the members of the ensemble of users in the cell are given a
congestion signal; these react by multiplicatively decreasing
their transmission rate. The rest of the users, who do not
receive a congestion signal, increase their transmission rate
additively, by a single segment. If the total number of users
is W, the resultant dynamics is given by (1).
d ˜Xi
t =

W i ∗ (1 − U i
t) − ˜Xi ∗ U i
t

dt + σidBt
=

W i − U i
t(W i + ˜Xi)

dt + σidBt
(1)
It is to be noted that W i is also a cell speciﬁc term (because
each cell may have a different number of active users) and
captures the elasticity of demand within the cell. ˜Xi can be
replaced by Xi = W i + ˜Xi to simplify the notation above.
dXi
t =

6
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
congestion. The primary among these are packet drops and
variations in round trip time for acknowledgements from
the receiver, which feed into its sliding window mechanism
for controlling transmission rate. These mechanisms were
introduced in TCP Reno and are universally acknowledged as
having successfully solved the network congestion problem.
The algorithms have been ﬁne-tuned over the years and more
modern versions of TCP (such as Vegas and Westwood)
use more sophisticated functions of the round-trip time and
other indicators to augment the basic feedback. However,
selective packet dropping using dynamic buffer management
has been the tool of choice for congestion signaling in the
wired internet. Routers and switches in the WAN routinely
use probabilistic packet dropping as a way of controlling end-
point trafﬁc; for example, Random Early Dropping (RED)
is an Internet standard which selectively drops packets at a
given target drop rate in order to force end-users to use rate-
control on the incoming interfaces to stay below the capacity
of its outgoing links.
In the wireless world, queue management is typically
done in the core network, but it is directly effected by the
bandwidth deployed in a cell and the manner of allocation.
If there is a large amount of destination trafﬁc di
t for a
given cell, whereas the bandwidth deployed results in a
capacity ci
t, over-time the queue builds up as the accumulated
difference of the two qi
t = R t1
t0

7
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
stochastic process Bk
t , which is a Brownian motion. Further,
b() and σ() are Lipschitz continuous bounded functions as
required for the standard deﬁnition of a Wiener process.
The system governed by this equation has a long term cost
function as in (7), and the initial value of Xt is known.
Φ

8
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The second associated problem is that of robustness. Recall
that the underlying assumption is that all N agents are execut-
ing the same optimal control function u∗
t . But this assumption
only holds if the optimal solution itself is deviation proof. In
other words, no individual agent can get better results by
executing a separate strategy at any time-period 0 ≤ t ≤ T .
This is the Nash equilibrium or Nash Certainty Equivalence
principle described in [6]. The authors demonstrate that NCE
solutions are possible in mean-ﬁeld games, which can be
solved by taking the limiting value of N (N → ∞) and
converting the empirical distribution of the ensemble to the
expected distribution of Xk
t for each k as the stochastic game
evolves. It shall be shown in the case of the solution technique
in the HJB-KFP approach Section V-C1 below. The NCE
has very interesting properties. For example, the robustness
property holds even in the case where the number of agents
are small as long as the agents cannot track the individual
states of other agents. In this case, it has been shown that
it is the optimal strategy for each agent to follow the Nash
equilibrium strategy, because deviation is punished as long
as the others are following the same strategy.
C. Solution techniques for the Stochastic Mean-ﬁeld Game -
overview and comparision
Due to the above issues, solutions for stochastic optimal
control problems with mean-ﬁeld games are more complex
than the standard stochastic control problem. There are two
main techniques, both of which depend on solving Forward
Backward Stochastic Differential Equations (FBSDE). To
date, most of the research in solutions of MFGs pertain
to a special class of MFGs, the so-called Linear Quadratic
MFG [38][39][40]. There two main approaches that shall
be discussed below, which have been studied mostly in the
context of LQMFGs. Recently, a paper has been published by
Pham and Wei [41], which discusses a dynamic programming
solution to these games. However, it is not covered here.
Of the two widely used methods for solving general mean-
ﬁeld games, this paper shall focus more on the adjoint
approach. A brief description of the HJB technique in Section
V-C1 is provided for completeness. In both cases, the solution
is in the form of an FBSDE. This is due to the afore-
mentioned essential difference between the deterministic and
stochastic problems, that a deterministic differential equa-
tion is time-reversible, but a stochastic one is not. For a
deterministic differential equation, the backward equation can
be re-cast as a forward equation, simply changing the sign
of the variable. The resultant solution holds true for either
case. However, the stochastic optimal control law cannot
be anticipatory, i.e., it can only use the information about
Xt upto the time t and no further [42]. Hence the forward
and backward versions of the same stochastic differential
equation may have different solutions.
1)
The HJB-KFP approach: The classic way to solve
a stochastic optimal control problem is to construct the
Hamilton Jacobi Bellman (HJB) equation, which, for the
above problem is given in (9).
∂φ
∂s (y, u) + b (y, u) ∇xφ + σ2 (y, u)
2
∇2
xφ + f (y, u) = 0
⇒ ∂φ
∂s (y, u) + H (b, ∇xφ, f, u) + σ2
2 (y, u) ∇2
xφ = 0
φ (Y ) = g (Y )
(9)
The value of u = u∗ which solves this equation for all y
gives the optimal value of u. Note the second derivative
term, which makes the solution rather complex. The function
H(y, b, f, x, u) = ⟨y(x, u), b(x, u)⟩ + f(x, u) is called the
Hamiltonian; the solution to the above equation depends, to
a very large extent, on the structure of the Hamiltonian.
To extend the HJB technique for the stochastic mean-
ﬁeld case, one makes the fundamental assumption that as
the number of agents becomes large, the empirical distribu-
tion for the states of the individual agents approaches the
probability distribution for the state of each of the individual
agents, i.e., instead of taking an empirical distribution over
N players, the distribution of Xk
t can be modelled directly,
based on the known starting distribution of the agents. In
[6], Huang et al. have shown that this assumption leads to a
Nash equilibrium. The probability distribution of the state
variable Xt for an individual agent evolves according to
the Kolmogorov Backward equation (sometimes called the
Kolmogorov Fokker Planck or KFP equation). By combining
this together with the HJB equation, as shown below (10),
together with the probability distribution of the starting state,
the optimal control u∗ can be derived so as to drive the two
equations into a mutual equilibrium. In a stable equilibrium,
the long term probability distribution of Xk
t under the Fokker
Plank equilibrium should match the empirical distribution of
Xk
T as T → ∞, leading to a stable solution for the HJB
equation and thereby making the equilibrium self-sustaining.
In this situation, it is postulated that Xk
T
→ c
Xt as the
distribution evolves, for large values of T .
dφt = σ2
2 ∇2φ + H(∇xφ, b, f, Xk
t , ut, c
Xt)
dc
Xt = −b()∇xc
Xt + 1
2σ2(x)∇2 c
Xt, c
Xt|0 = E

Xk
0

φT = g (XT )
c
Xt = E

Xk
t

, Xk
0 = x0
(10)
The HJB equation is a backward stochastic differential equa-
tion, whereas the KFP is a forward equation. Once again,
the value of u which solves both equations simultaneously
is the optimal control function. The KFP-HJB technique has
been used successfully for LQMFGs in many papers; a good
example is that of Bardi [38].
2) The Adjoint Equation Approach: A second method is
the direct analogue of the Stochastic Maximum Principle
[43], which in turn is conceptually similar to the Pontrya-
gin maximum principle for solving deterministic optimal
control problems. The approach requires us to convert the
constrained optimization problem into a generic optimization
problem involving the state variable and its dual. In the SMP
case, there are two duals, one for the drift term and the other

9
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
for the diffusion term. Hence, two stochastic variables Yt, Zt
have to be found such that the equation pair (11) holds.
− dYt= ∇xH

10
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
arbitrary function of Xt, as long as the expectation of
the terms on the right hand side of (14) is deﬁned and
computable.
VI. APPLICATION TO THE DEMAND REGULATION
PROBLEM
The analysis can now return to the original demand-
regulation model, by casting it as an MFG. The overall
system model is as follows. There is a cluster of cells, which
are integrated into a common resource management unit as
seen in Figure 1. The initial analysis is restricted to the single-
cell case. Here, each cell has a set of active, independent
end-users Nk of dimensionality Nk. These end-users are
continuously requesting the network node within the cell
for bandwidth allocations, so as to make forward or reverse
transmissions. In this paper, the focus is on the forward link,
which represents the bottleneck in most cellular systems. The
results hold with appropriate modiﬁcation, for the reverse
link as well. The network node controlling the cell allocates
resources based on an algorithm that adjusts measures the
aggregate demand and provides congestion feedback to the
end-users within the associated cell. The congestion feedback
is automatically used by the end-user rate control algorithms
to adjust their resource requirements. The purpose of the
proposed algorithm is to ensure that the aggregate demand
in the cell reaches a stable equilibrium at a set point relative
to the capacity available to that cell.
Figure 1. Cluster of cells under a common resource management
framework
In the multi-cell case, external resource allocation algo-
rithms can compare the congestion in different cells to iden-
tify over-loaded and under-loaded cells and then reconﬁgure
the resources appropriately. Thus, if capacity is suddenly
made available to one cell, the congestion metric in all
cells will reﬂect the change and can be used to trigger
handovers or resource reallocation. The core aspect of the
proposed algorithm is the common function, which computes
the congestion metric at the cellular level. As seen from
the literature survey in Section III-A, this kind of joint
optimization that takes into account the user behaviour as
well as the availability of resources, is novel in the published
literature.
A. Demand regulation as an optimal control problem
The aggregate demand in each cell is due to the collective
dynamics of a large number of TCP connections, coexisting
in a shared channel of ﬁxed capacity. This is modelled at
the cell-level by the state variable Xk
t for the kth cell. The
TCP and TCP-like connections enter and leave at various
times; however, since they share the same resources, their
collective behaviour is affected by the overall capacity of the
system. The coupling between the endpoints and the system
comes through packet drops. The packet drop rate is under
the control of the cell-level demand regulation mechanism.
The objective is to create an algorithm for regulating
aggregate demand as the cell level by setting the optimal
packet drop rate as a function of aggregate demand Xk
t
and cell-capacity Ck
t . The packet dropping is a congestion
signal, which acts to expose the state of network resources
to the UEs. By adjusting it as needed, and knowing how
the endpoints react to this signal, the aggregate demand (and
consequent throughput) Xk
t is driven to its desired value. It
is to be noted that packet dropping is processed individually
at each endpoint. However, it is still possible to control it so
as to inﬂuence the aggregate behaviour, as shall be shown.
The optimal level of Xk
t
is a function of how much
capacity Ck
t is available and how close the aggregate demand
is allowed to come to it, i.e., the cell-level load factor. Ideally,
it should be allowed to be as close to the available capacity
as possible, without exceeding it, so as to keep utilization
high. However, allowances have to be made for the variation
in demand. The variation in demand is based on two parts.
One is the natural variation (connections terminating and new
ones arriving), captured through a random diffusion term. The
second is the variation of demand due to packet dropping; this
is captured in the model in (2). High level of packet dropping
can cause signiﬁcant oscillations in Xk
t due to simultaneous
back-off by a number of endpoints; this is something to be
avoided by appropriate algorithm design.
1) Setting an optimal reward function: For a TCP connec-
tion, the instantaneous bandwidth is not of interest. Rather,
the total number of bytes transferred is what counts, which
is the integral of the instantaneous bandwidth variable. How-
ever, the cost of the deployed resources has also to be
incorporated. The optimization problem, as given in (15),
hence becomes choosing the optimal congestion response
u(Xt) to the current state, so as to minimize the integrated
cost function Φ(Xt, u(Xt)). The cost function will have
two parts, one of which handles the capacity demand gap
and the second the congestion signal. It is to be noted
that congestion signaling is a real cost, in the sense that it
comes from the deliberate packet drops in the core. Hence,
it has real consequences in terms of resource utilization. The
termination cost g(Xt) is of relatively little signiﬁcance and
can be selected so as to enable us to solve this FBSDE, while
still being intuitively valid.
dXi
t=

11
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The variable rt is a set-point that is used as the target
capacity, and as of now, it is assumed that it is an independent
external variable supplied by the network management func-
tion. It has to be incorporated into φ() in such a way that cost
rises with |Xt−rt| . In the mean-ﬁeld case, this variable will
contain the mean-ﬁeld term, as shall be seen in Section VI-D.
The selection of the appropriate form Φ(x, u, r) is deferred,
till the form of the differential equation to be solved has been
established.
B. Existence of a solution - independent cells with target
congestion
The analysis starts with the non mean-ﬁeld case, and is the
resultant solution is then extended to the mean-ﬁeld case,
as suggested by [45]. The initial algorithm starts with the
standard form of the stochastic Hamiltonian (16). The sufﬁx
i is dropped in the rest of this section, because the entire
analysis is only in the context of a single cell.
H(x, u, y) = y.b + f = y(W − XtUt) + φ(XtUt, rt)(16)
There are two conditions that have to be fulﬁlled by the
optimal control function u. The ﬁrst one, in (17), simply
requires that the derivative of the Hamiltonian is zero.
∂uH = 0⇒ −YtXt + Xt∂zφ(z)|z=XtUt = 0
⇒ Yt = −∂zφ(z)|z=XtUt
(17)
The second one is the condition for the dual of Xt. Specif-
ically, it dictates that the optimization problem in (15) can
be solved if the variables Yt, Zt can be found such that (18)
holds [42].
dYt= −∂xH(Xt, Ut) + ZtdBt
= − (YtUt + Ut∂zφ(z)|z=XtUt) dt+
∂xψ(Xt, rt) + ZtdBt
YT = ∂xh(Xt)|t=T
(18)
Substituting the value of y from (18) in (18), we get (19).
dYt = −∂xψ(Xt, rt)dt − ZtdBt
(19)
Our method takes a novel approach in the search for so-
lutions of Yt, Ut. Instead of solving the stochastic PDE
directly, it is converted to the equivalent functions in Xt, i.e.,
Yt = y(Xt), Ut = u(Xt), By Ito’s formula, y(Xt) can be
differentiated directly as given in (20). The advantage of this
approach is that it moves from derivatives in t to derivatives
in terms of Xt and it is possible to choose appropriate forms
of y() and u(). Direct solution of the FBSDE is not required.
dYt= ∂xy(Xt)dXt + 1
2∂2
xy(Xt)(dXt)2
= ∂xy(Xt) ((W − Xtu(Xt)) dt + σdBt) + σ2
2 ∂2
xy(Xt)dt
=

∂xy(Xt) (W − Xtu(Xt))) + σ2
2

dt + (σ∂xy(Xt)) dBt
(20)
Comparing the terms with dBt from (19) with the above,
Zt = σ∂xy(Xt). Collecting the terms for dt from (20) and
(19), we get the identity in (21).
∂xy(x) (W − Xtu(Xt)) + σ2
2 ∂2
xy(x) = −∂xψ(x, r)
(21)
1) Appropriate solutions for Yt: First, it is to be empha-
sized that the expression in (21) has no direct dependence on
t. Hence, it is only necessary to solve Yt and Ut as a function
of Xt. For this purpose, the previous relation between Yt and
U ∗
t can be used, as y(x) = −∂zφ(Xt, u(Xt))|z=Xt.u(Xt)
from (17). There is another consideration, however, that
needs to be taken care of. The chosen solution should
degenerate to the non-stochastic case as σ ↓ 0. One way
of achieving this is to ensure that ∂2
xy(x) to be of the
same form as ∂xy(x) (W − xu). Essentially, this means
that the expression on the left hand side of (21) becomes

12
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
2) Analytic solution of the FBSDE: It is now necessary
to use the forms of φ() and ψ() as given in (22) and (23) to
solve the stochastic PDE equation in (21). The deterministic
case is solved ﬁrst and then the stochastic case is solved as
an extended form of the deterministic case. Hence the ﬁrst
step to propose a form of y(x) such that ∂2
xy(x) is of the
same form as ∂xy(x) or y(x)∂xy(x).
In this article, the latter approach is chosen; y(x) =
−β

1 − e− x
rt

as given in (24). Recall that rt is an inde-
pendent, but deterministic variable with known values at each
time t. By the second equation in (22), Yt = −Xtu(Xt). By
taking Yt as proposed in (24), the value of u(x) = y(x)/x
is well deﬁned for small values of x. In fact, as x → 0, the
congestion term becomes ≈ β/rt.
Yt = −β
h
1 − e− xt
rt
i
∂xYt = − β
rt
e− Xt
rt
∂2
xYt = β
r2
t
e− Xt
rt
(24)
Substituting this against the identity in (21), and taking
advantage of the fact that Xtu(Xt) = −Yt, the expression
in (25) are derived.
−∂xψ(Xt, rt)
=

W − β

1.0 − e− Xt
rt
 
− β
rt
e− Xt
rt

+ σ2
2
β
r2
t
e− Xt
rt

= − β
rt
e− Xt
rt

W − β − σ2
2rt
+ βe− Xt
rt

⇒ ∂xψ(Xt, rt) = β2
rt
e− Xt
rt
" 
β − (W − σ2
rt )
β
− e− Xt
rt
!#
(25)
By taking the corresponding form of ψ(Xt, rt) as given in
(23), the relationship between the operator supplied control
factor η and the corresponding values of β, α is as in (26).
η=

β + σ2
2rt − W

β
,
β=

W − σ2
2rt

1 − η
, α = β2
(26)
Hence, the appropriate form of the optimal control function
for the stochastic optimal problem as posed in this section,
as given in (27).
u∗
t = β
Xt
h
1 − e− xt
rt
i
β=

W − σ2
2rt

1 − η
(27)
C. A practical justiﬁcation of the proposed model
While there exists a solution to the given problem, it is still
necessary to justify the solution in practical terms. Starting
with the form of u∗
t as given in (27) above, the original
state equation as given in (2) is examineded by taking the
computed form of yt and substituting the optimal value of
Xtu∗
t (Xt) = −Yt. On doing this operation, we get the
transition function as given in (28).
dXi
t =

W i − β

1.0 − e−
Xit
rt

dt + σdBt
(28)
It is to be noted that the term W i − β(1.0 − exp − Xi
t
rt ) is
just W i for Xi
t = 0 and reduces gradually, till it changes
sign for a particular value of Xi
t, the transition value ((29)).
If the capacity available in a cell is known, it can be used in
the formula in (29) to set the appropriate value of β. Even
though W i can usually not be directly controlled, it can be
estimated from the number of UEs in the cell, since each UE,
in the uncongested case, simply increases transmission rate
by 1 segment per round trip time. Equilibrium in a cell can
be maintained simply by controlling the transition point, at
which the capacity change term in (28) turns negative. This
in turn gives us the practical capacity limit per cell (29).
Xc,i
t
= rt log

β
W − β

= rt log

1
1 − η

(29)
In other words, the terms W i and β play no role in the
equilibrium; they only control the elasticity of demand as
congestion changes. This is very important for the subsequent
analysis, because each cell will have a different combination
of users and the value of W i will vary from cell to cell.
Let us now consider the form of the optimal congestion
function u∗(Xi
t) as given in (27). For small values of Xt/rt,
u∗
t ≈ β/rt and the transition function starts behaving like a
standard Ornstein-Uhlenbeck diffusion problem.
Once again, η turns out to be the crucial external param-
eter that controls the equilibrium operating point. From the
expression of φ() and the relation between β and η in the
second equation in (26), it can be seen that η is a measure of
how close the current load Xt can be allowed to approach the
effective capacity rt. Adjusting this value means adjusting
value of β, which in turn controls the discounting of the
congestion term in (27) to the growth term W.
D. Extension to multiple cells - the mean-ﬁeld problem
The control problem is extended in this section to incor-
porate the multi-cell case. The multi-cell case works on a
cluster of cells Nc whose capacity allocations are integrated
with each other, and allocations/deallocations of capacity are
done for the cluster as a whole. Further, the cells in the
cluster are geographically close to each other, and all users
have visibility of all the cells in the cluster; this is frequently
how hotspots are conﬁgured in urban areas. This assumption
allows us to implement joint allocation of resources and allow
movement of users between cells within the cluster. There is
no restriction to the size of the cluster, or the number of cells
in it, as long as the above restrictions hold.
Within the cluster, the demand regulation algorithm must
ensure that the cells are utilized evenly (load balancing) and
the congestion metric uk
t gives both the UEs and the resource
management algorithm a good approximation of the overall
utilization within the cluster as well as the utilization within

13
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
each cell. This is necessary to provide appropriate feedback
both to the UEs and to the resource management operating for
the cluster as a whole. The individual UEs freely move within
the cluster to optimize their QoS, based on the congestion
feedback. External resource management in turn uses the
congestion metric to compare relative utilization of capacity
and urgency of demand within the cells of the cluster.
Mathematically, the demand regulation algorithm has to
be modiﬁed so that the congestion metric tracks both the
cell-speciﬁc resource loading as well as the average loading
within the cluster. A cell with high load, but relatively less
metric is a signal to the UEs that there is surplus capacity
in some other cell within the cluster. On the other hand, a
cell with high load and a high metric indicates to UEs that
there is no surplus capacity in the entire cluster and that UEs
should pull back their demand so as to reduce loading within
the immediate cell. It is proposed to make this happen by
adding a cluster average term to the reward function. Recall
that the consolidated stochastic control problem is given as
in (30), for each jth cell in the cluster, and the corresponding
optimal congestion function is given in (31).
Minimize
Z T
0
f(Xj
t , rt, uj
t)dt + g(Xj
T , rj
T )
where dXj
t =

W − Xj
t uj
t

dt + σdBt
f(Xj
t , rj
t)= β2
 
η − e
−
Xj
t
rj
t
!2
− 1
2(Xj
t uj
t)2
(30)
g(Xj
t , rj
t)= β2
 
η − e
−
Xj
t
rj
t
!2
Xt|t=0= x0
u∗,j
t = β
Xj
t

1 − e− Xt
rt

(31)
The term β

η − exp{− Xj
t
rj
t }

penalizes the deviation of the
fraction Xj
t /rj
t from the target value η, where rj
t denotes a
kind of threshold level of resource usage within the cell. A
second factor is now introduced into rj
t , which is the ratio
between the empirical average of Xt among all the cells in
the target cluster C, as shown in (32).
c
Xt=
1
NC
NC
X
k=1
Xk
t
rt= C1C2
c
Xt
c
Xt= 1
N

X
j∈C
Xj
t


⇒ Xj
t
rj
t
= Xj
t
C1
c
Xt
C2
(32)
Effectively, problem has been converted in to a mean-ﬁeld
optimization problem, with the mean-ﬁeld term being the
Figure 2. Evolution of the empirical mean for different values of W , η
and C
empirical average c
Xt. For any individual jth cell, the con-
gestion signal uj
t is then affected by both the cell’s own
bandwidth level Xj
t /rj
t and the empirical average value.
Since rt is a part of the reward function, this turns the Nc
separate optimization problems (one per cell) into a game.
It is clear that the game has to be solved cooperatively.
For example, any individual cell raising Xk
t will cause the
empirical average to rise; this, in turn may cause one or more
of the other cells to cross the threshold term in the term ψ(),
which will force it to reduce its own Xj
t , j ̸= k.
1) Solving the mean-ﬁeld demand regulation problem:
The next step in the mean-ﬁeld analysis is to compute
the function c
Xt∀t. To do this, it is necessary to solve the
expectation of the original diffusion (2), substituting the
optimal value of ut as computed in (31). The corresponding
deterministic differential equation is given in (2). Note that
the diffusion term is no longer present; however, rt is also
no longer an independent variable.
dc
Xt =

W − β
c
Xt
c
Xtu(c
Xt)

dt
=
 
W − 1
c
Xt
 
W
1 − η −
σ2c
Xt
2
2C1C2 (1 − η)
!
c
Xtu∗
t (c
Xt)
!
dt
= Wdt −
 W
1 − η −
σ2
2CtC2 (1 − η)
c
Xt
 
1 − e−
ˆ
X2
t
C1C2

dt
(33)
The differential equation in (33) can be solved numerically.
However, it is easy to see that a stationary point exists, where
dc
Xt → 0. For small values of σ2, the stable point should
be at ˆX ≈
p
(C1.C2. ln(1/η)). The parameter W dictates
the rate of convergence. This is demonstrated in Figure 2,
which shows the evolution of ˆX for different combinations
of W, η and C. As noted earlier, the value of W has no impact
on the ﬁnal equilibrium achieved, only the equilibrium rate.
Hence, one can also model heterogeneous populations within
cells, where different cells have different numbers of UEs
and further, different UEs have different trafﬁc generating

14
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
patterns facing different round trip times. At the top level,
the combination of these just add up to different values of
W for each cell. Since the value of W plays no part in the
optimal control term given in (27), it is also not something
that needs to be estimated.
In the ﬁnal step, the mean-ﬁeld term is inserted back
into optimal transition function to get the mean-ﬁeld optimal
control law. The optimal control thus occurs in two steps
at each time t at each cell. First the current value of c
Xt is
estimated, either by directly sampling it from all cells within
the cluster, or by each cell computing the current value from
(33). It is then inserted back into (27) so as to get the optimal
congestion metric ut for each cell. The congestion metric is
used to set the buffer value based on the dynamic given in
(4) and (5).
VII. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, the performance of the mean-ﬁeld demand
regulation algorithm through simulation is shown. There are
two primary purposes to the simulation. One is to show
how the simulation stabilizes the performance of the entire
system by providing appropriate feedback in each cell. The
second is how the simulation allows cooperative resource re-
distribution to take place, by providing the appropriate signals
to the end-user and the network resource allocation function.
The mean-ﬁeld based demand regulation algorithm has
been simulated on a six-cell cluster, each cluster being
allocated a set of UEs and a set of resources Each UE
is downloading data using a simpliﬁed TCP-Reno protocol
stack, with a Maximum Segment Size (MSS) of 1200 bytes
and a maximum window size of 64. It is assumed that the
round-trip time is approximately 50ms, which means that
each UE has a saturation transmission rate of 12.3 Mb/s.
The cells each have a capacity of about 50Mb/s. Congestion
signalling is performed by each cell by fair dropping (as used
in RED), using the dropping rate computed by the demand
regulation algorithm. In the case where there is no dynamic
congestion signaling, a buffer of approximately 1MB is avail-
able to each cell, subject to Random Early Dropping. The
base stations/eNodeBs use a simple fair-sharing scheduling,
using Scott Shenker’s fair sharing protocol, with bandwidth
delay trade-off. There is a baseline packet drop rate of 10−5,
with minor or no impact on the system.
A. Comparison against the default situation - no demand
regulation
The ﬁrst scenario compares the performance of the pro-
posed algorithm against the situation where there is no
demand regulation algorithm working. The ﬁrst three cells
start out with 24 active UEs each and the second three cells
with 12 active UEs each. Each cell is allocated capacity
equivalent to 100Mb/s. The comparative results for aggregate
bandwidth utilization are presented in Figure 3. There are
three congestion cases presented with operator supplied η
value of 0.3, 0.5 and 0.6 corresponding to the graphs in
Figures 3b, 3c and 3d respectively.
Two things stand out very clearly from the above. First,
it is clear that bandwidth hunting TCPs operating in a cell
with limited capacity will drive the bandwidth utilization
to saturation, regardless of the number of users [Figure
3a]. Second, congestion feedback is an effective tool to
regulate the behaviour of TCPs in this regard. Recall from the
discussion in VI-B that the parameter η regulates the impact
of the mean-ﬁeld term on the generic control function. For
small values of η, mean-ﬁeld demand regulation is switched
off. As η approaches 1, the effect of mean-ﬁeld demand
regulation starts dominating overall performance. The result
can be seen in the demand regulation cases shown in the
Figures 3b, 3c), 3d. As the value of η rises, sharply rising
congestion feedback forces users in congested cells to back-
off in order to avoid saturating the cell. Further, recall that
β is approximated by W/(1 − η). Hence, for larger values
of W, the demand regulation algorithm is more aggressive
in communicating congestion to the end-users as is expected
from the model.
An alternative scenario is given in the second set of graphs
in Figure 4, where the number of users in each cell is
the same (20 users per cell), but the capacity allocation is
different. The ﬁrst three cells have 50Mb/s capacity each,
whereas the last three cells have 36Mb/s. The unregulated
demand case and the case where demand is regulated by
setting η to 0.3 is presented in Figures 4a and 4b respectively.
The congestion metric for the second case is presented in
Figure 5. It is clearly seen how the congestion metric clearly
separates out the two different cells, so that the lower capacity
cells see a higher congestion metric, even though the capacity
utilization value is the same. This allows the system to
handover cells from lower to higher capacity cells, using the
congestion metric as a guide.
B. Performance in conjunction with macro level resource
management
In this section, it is shown how the demand regulation
algorithm works when coupled with external resource man-
agement. The simulation is extended to include both user
initiated network assisted handover (based on congestion)
and dynamic resource swapping between cells. The macro-
resource management entity is treated as an external module,
which has visibility into the basic runtime statistics of each
cell; number of UEs, allocated channels and (in the cases
where demand regulation mechanism is active) the computed
congestion metric. The resource management as well as
handover is continuously active. At each frame it selects pairs
of cells and moves a unit of spectrum from one to the other
with a probability proportional to the gap between the load
metrics. The load metric for a cell is either the computed
congestion metric, if available, or the number of UEs in
the cell. The same metric is communicated to UEs that are
considering handover, by network signaling. The UEs use the
same probabilistic approach to choose when to handover. It
may be argued that this is an overly simplistic mechanism
for macro-resource management. Our position is that the
speciﬁcs of the mechanism may be kept simple, because the

15
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(a) No demand regulation
(b) Regulated demand, η = 0.3
(c) Regulated demand, η = 0.5
(d) Regulated demand, η = 0.6
Figure 3. Simulation results - six cell cluster, comparative capacity utilization, variable users per cell, no handovers
focus is on how useful the proposed demand regulation is in
working with this or any other macro-resource management
algorithm.
For the simulation, the six cell scenario is retained, but
now each cell start with a variable number of users and
a variable amount of bandwidth per cell. To make matters
interesting, the cells with the maximum capacity available
have the minimum number of users to start with. The
ﬁrst three cells have 100 Mb/s of capacity and 10 users
each. The last three cells have 50Mb/s of capacity and 20
users each. The comparison is between the default case (no
demand regulation) and the cases where the proposed demand
regulation algorithm is running with η values of 0.3 and
0.5. The simulation starts off with the macro level resource
management disabled for the ﬁrst 4000 frames and then is
switched on. The transition can clearly be seen in the two
ﬁgures.
Figure 6 shows the comparative bandwidth utilization
between the default and the demand regulation algorithm. It
can be seen that macro-resource optimization is working in
both the cases; however, whereas the default case still shows
different levels of utilization in the cells after rebalancing
(Figure 6a), the managed demand/congestion cases provide
an extremely tight balancing with respect to the default case.
In both the η = 0.3 case (Figure 6b) and η = 0.5 (Figure
6c) cases, the capacity utilization stabilizes to a similar level
of 90% after the rebalancing takes place.
To understand the reason for the difference, note how the
congestion signal is computed in Figure 7a and Figure 7b
below, corresponding to the η = 0.3 and η = 0.5 cases
respectively. The default case does not use the congestion
metric for feedback; rather it uses the number of UEs in
each cell. In this situation, the number of UEs per cell is
quickly balanced. However, each UE has its own rate-control
and when one moves to another cell, it takes a long time
to adjust its current state based on the new environment.
Hence, even within the same cell, there is large variation
in the performance between UEs. On the other hand, the
congestion-metric computed by the demand regulation metric
already takes network state into account. This means that

16
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(a) No demand regulation for variable capacity cells
(b) Demand regulation for variable capacity cells, η = 0.3
Figure 4. Simulation results - six cell cluster, comparative capacity utilization with variable spectrum allocation per cell
Figure 5. Congestion metric value, η = 0.3
all UEs have similar rate-control states once equilibrium
is reached and they tend to have very similar performance
subsequently. One of the purposes of demand regulation is
provide fair allocation of capacity. The fairness of allocation
is measured in terms of a metric γ that measures the spread
of allocations (achieved throughput) per UE in a given cell.
The metric is computed as in the equation (34) where t(m)
measures the throughput of the mth UE and Nk is the set of
UEs in the kth cell.
γk = maxj∈Nk t(j) − minj∈Nk t(j)
maxj∈Nk t(j)
(34)
Figure 8 shows the allocation fairness for each of the
simulated cases. Since fair scheduling has been implemented
within each cell, the difference is purely because of the dis-
balance between allocated capacity and per-cell demand. This
simulation shows the difference in the starkest terms. Because
the congestion metric takes into account the global state, it
forces the per-UE allocation into a tight band, with complete
fairness between cells.
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have demonstrated the application of
mean-ﬁeld stochastic optimal control to the problem of
optimal resource management in a wireless cellular network,
one of the most demanding problems of wireless network
control. We have demonstrated that we can apply mean-
ﬁeld control to regulate demand within individual cells, in
keeping with cell-speciﬁc and network wide capacity levels.
Consequently we have demonstrated that an integrated load-
balancing and resource deployment solution can be achieved,
with signiﬁcantly superior performance, as opposed to the
standard case where demand is not regulated and resource
allocation uses external metrics such as the number of UEs
in a cell. As part of the theoretical framework, we have also
derived a closed form analytical solution for a non-linear
mean-ﬁeld model, which is novel in the MFG literature.
As we have shown, this algorithm is implementable by
incorporating it directly the dynamic buffer management at
the cellular and system level. This is sufﬁcient to provide the
appropriate feedback to the end-users. We also show how
the same dynamic buffer management algorithm works with
macro-resource optimization algorithms to achieve stability
and fair load-balancing, across multiple cells. The application
of stochastic control techniques, and stochastic games in
general, has rich potential application in the wireless and
cellular domain.
In future work, this shall be extended to more advanced
problems, such as coordinated multi-point, multi-user Multi-
Input Multiple Output (MIMO) and dynamic network slicing
for 5th generation networks. Here, a key extension will be
to track the UE when it is a member of more than one
cell at any point of time. In this situation, the mean-ﬁeld
control will apply not just to the cell, but to the UE as
well. A second possible area of work is in application to

17
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(a) No demand regulation
(b) Regulated demand, η = 0.3
(c) Regulated demand, η = 0.5
Figure 6. Simulation results - six cell cluster, comparative capacity utilization with handovers and channel swapping
heterogeneous environments, such as leader-follower envi-
ronments, as studied in [7]. This kind of environment occurs,
for example, when there is a single macro-cell and multiple
small-cells; the macro-cell follows its own individual control
law, to which the small cell has to adapt. This gives rise
to interesting one-sided equilibriums, which are not readily
solved using the Nash Certainty Equivalence principle. These
shall be considered in future work.

18
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(a) Regulated demand, η = 0.3
(b) Regulated demand, η = 0.5
Figure 7. Simulation results - six cell cluster, congestion metric feedback to macro resource controller
(a) No demand regulation
(b) Regulated demand, η = 0.3
(c) Regulated demand, η = 0.5
Figure 8. Simulation results - six cell cluster, allocation fairness with handovers and channel swapping

19
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
REFERENCES
[1] A. Saha, “Dynamic resource allocation and balanced cell loading - a
stochastic meanﬁeld approach,” in Proceedings of the 14th Advanced
international conference on Telecommunications.
IARIA, July 2018,
pp. 69–74.
[2] L. Georgiadis, M. J. Neely, L. Tassiulas et al., “Resource allocation
and cross-layer control in wireless networks,” Foundations and Trends
in Networking, vol. 1, no. 1, 2006, pp. 1–144.
[3] M. J. Neely, E. Modiano, and C.-P. Li, “Fairness and Optimal Stochas-
tic control for Heterogeneous Networks,” IEEE/ACM Transactions On
Networking, vol. 16, no. 2, 2008, pp. 396–409.
[4] T. Holliday, A. Goldsmith, N. Bambos, and P. Glynn, “Distributed
power and admission control for time-varying wireless networks,” in
Proceedings of the International Symposium on Information Theory.
IEEE, 2004, pp. 352–352.
[5] J.-M. Lasry and P.-L. Lions, “Mean ﬁeld games,” Japanese journal of
mathematics, vol. 2, no. 1, 2007, pp. 229–260.
[6] M. Huang, R. P. Malhamé, P. E. Caines et al., “Large population
stochastic dynamic games: closed-loop McKean-Vlasov systems and
the Nash certainty equivalence principle,” Communications in Infor-
mation & Systems, vol. 6, no. 3, 2006, pp. 221–252.
[7] M. Huang, P. E. Caines, and R. P. Malhamé, “Individual and mass
behaviour in large population stochastic wireless power control prob-
lems: centralized and Nash equilibrium solutions,” in Proceedings of
the 42nd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control.
IEEE, 2003,
pp. 98–103.
[8] O. G. Aliu, A. Imran, M. A. Imran, and B. Evans, “A survey of
self organisation in future cellular networks,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 15, no. 1, 2013, pp. 336–361.
[9] D. Liu, L. Wang, Y. Chen, M. Elkashlan, K.-K. Wong, R. Schober,
and L. Hanzo, “User association in 5G networks: A survey and an
outlook,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 2,
2016, pp. 1018–1044.
[10] L. Du, J. Bigham, L. Cuthbert, P. Nahi, and C. Parini, “Intelligent
cellular network load balancing using a cooperative negotiation ap-
proach,” in IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking, March
2003, pp. 1675–1679 vol.3.
[11] J. Widmer, R. Denda, and M. Mauve, “A survey on tcp-friendly
congestion control,” IEEE network, vol. 15, no. 3, 2001, pp. 28–37.
[12] J. G. Andrews, S. Singh, Q. Ye, X. Lin, and H. S. Dhillon, “An
overview of load balancing in hetnets: old myths and open problems,”
IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 21, no. 2, April 2014, pp. 18–25.
[13] H. Kim, G. De Veciana, X. Yang, and M. Venkatachalam, “Distributed
alpha-optimal user association and cell load balancing in wireless
networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 20, no. 1, Feb. 2012, pp. 177–
190. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TNET.2011.2157937
[14] K. Son, S. Chong, and G. D. Veciana, “Dynamic association for load
balancing and interference avoidance in multi-cell networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 8, no. 7, July 2009,
pp. 3566–3576.
[15] O. K. Tonguz and E. Yanmaz, “The mathematical theory of dynamic
load balancing in cellular networks,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile
Computing, vol. 7, no. 12, Dec 2008, pp. 1504–1518.
[16] P. Muñoz, R. Barco, J. M. Ruiz-Avilés, I. de la Bandera, and
A. Aguilar, “Fuzzy rule-based reinforcement learning for load bal-
ancing techniques in enterprise lte femtocells,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 62, no. 5, 2013, pp. 1962–1973.
[17] J.
Bigham
and
L.
Du,
“Cooperative
negotiation
in
a
multi-
agent system for real-time load balancing of a mobile cellular
network,” in Proceedings of the 2nd International Joint Conference
on Autonomous
Agents
and
Multiagent
Systems.
New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2003, pp. 568–575. [Online]. Available: http:
//doi.acm.org/10.1145/860575.860666
[18] L. Du, J. Bigham, and L. Cuthbert, “Towards intelligent geographic
load balancing for mobile cellular networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews),
vol. 33, no. 4, 2003, pp. 480–491.
[19] A. K. Gupta, H. S. Dhillon, S. Vishwanath, and J. G. Andrews,
“Downlink multi-antenna heterogeneous cellular network with load
balancing,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 62, no. 11,
Nov 2014, pp. 4052–4067.
[20] D. Bethanabhotla, O. Y. Bursalioglu, H. C. Papadopoulos, and
G. Caire, “User association and load balancing for cellular massive
mimo,” in Information Theory and Applications Workshop (ITA), Feb
2014, pp. 1–10.
[21] S. K. Das, S. K. Sen, and R. Jayaram, “A dynamic load balancing
strategy for channel assignment using selective borrowing in cellular
mobile environment,” Wireless Networks, vol. 3, no. 5, Oct 1997, pp.
333–347.
[22] S. Kim and P. K. Varshney, “Adaptive load balancing with preemption
for multimedia cellular networks,” in IEEE Wireless Communications
and Networking, March 2003, pp. 1680–1684 vol.3.
[23] A. Awada, B. Wegmann, I. Viering, and A. Klein, “A game-theoretic
approach to load balancing in cellular radio networks,” in Personal
Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), IEEE 21st In-
ternational Symposium on.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 1184–1189.
[24] M. Handley, S. Floyd, J. Padhye, and J. Widmer, “TCP Friendly
Rate Control (TFRC): Protocol Speciﬁcation,” Internet Requests
for Comments, RFC Editor, RFC 3448, January 2003. [Online].
Available: http://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3448.txt
[25] V. Paxson and S. Floyd, “Wide area trafﬁc: the failure of poisson
modeling,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking (ToN), vol. 3,
no. 3, 1995, pp. 226–244.
[26] J. Padhye, V. Firoiu, D. Towsley, and J. Kurose, “Modeling tcp through-
put: A simple model and its empirical validation,” ACM SIGCOMM
Computer Communication Review, vol. 28, no. 4, 1998, pp. 303–314.
[27] S. H. Low, “A duality model of tcp and queue management algorithms,”
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking (ToN), vol. 11, no. 4, 2003,
pp. 525–536.
[28] J. Padhye, V. Firoiu, and D. Towsley, “A stochastic model of tcp reno
congestion avoidence and control,” University of Massachussetts, Tech.
Rep., 1999.
[29] R. Shorten, F. Wirth, and D. Leith, “A positive systems model of tcp-
like congestion control: asymptotic results,” IEEE/ACM transactions
on networking, vol. 14, no. 3, 2006, pp. 616–629.
[30] J. Padhye, J. Kurose, D. Towsley, and R. Koodli, “A model based tcp-
friendly rate control protocol,” in Proceedings of NOSSDAV. Citeseer,
1999.
[31] X. Yin, A. Jindal, V. Sekar, and B. Sinopoli, “A control-theoretic
approach for dynamic adaptive video streaming over http,” in ACM
SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review. ACM, 2015, pp. 325–
338.
[32] F. Kelly, “Mathematical modelling of the internet,” in Mathematics
unlimited, 2001 and beyond.
Springer, 2001, pp. 685–702.
[33] F. Paganini, J. Doyle, and S. Low, “Scalable laws for stable network
congestion control,” in Proceedings of the 40th IEEE Conference on
Decision and Control, Dec 2001, pp. 185–190 vol.1.
[34] S. H. Low, F. Paganini, and J. C. Doyle, “Internet congestion control,”
IEEE Control Systems Magazine, vol. 22, no. 1, Feb 2002, pp. 28–43.
[35] F. P. Kelly, “Effective bandwidths at multi-class queues,” Queueing
systems, vol. 9, no. 1-2, 1991, pp. 5–15.
[36] A. I. Elwalid and D. Mitra, “Effective bandwidth of general marko-
vian trafﬁc sources and admission control of high speed networks,”
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking (TON), vol. 1, no. 3, 1993,
pp. 329–343.
[37] C.-S. Chang and J. A. Thomas, “Effective bandwidth in high-speed
digital networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected areas in Communications,
vol. 13, no. 6, 1995, pp. 1091–1100.
[38] M. Bardi, “Explicit solutions of some linear-quadratic Mean ﬁeld
games,” Networks and heterogeneous media, vol. 7, no. 2, 2012, pp.
243–261.
[39] A. Bensoussan, K. Sung, S. C. P. Yam, and S.-P. Yung, “Linear-
quadratic Mean ﬁeld games,” Journal of Optimization Theory and
Applications, vol. 169, no. 2, 2016, pp. 496–529.
[40] O. Guéant, “Mean ﬁeld games - equations with quadratic Hamiltonian:
a speciﬁc approach,” Mathematical Models and Methods in Applied
Sciences, vol. 22, no. 09, 2012, p. 1250022.
[41] H. Pham and X. Wei, “Dynamic Programming for McKean-Vlasov
dynamics,” Control and Optimization, SIAM Journal on, vol. 55, no. 2,
2017, pp. 1069–1011.
[42] J. Yong and X. Y. Zhou, Stochastic controls: Hamiltonian systems and
HJB equations.
Springer Science & Business Media, 1999, vol. 43.
[43] S. Peng, “A general stochastic maximum principle for optimal control
problems,” SIAM Journal on control and optimization, vol. 28, no. 4,
1990, pp. 966–979.
[44] R. Carmona, F. Delarue et al., “Forward–backward stochastic differen-
tial equations and controlled McKean–Vlasov dynamics,” The Annals
of Probability, vol. 43, no. 5, 2015, pp. 2647–2700.
[45] R. Carmona, F. Delarue, and A. Lachapelle, “Control of McKean–
Vlasov dynamics versus Mean ﬁeld games,” Mathematics and Finan-
cial Economics, 2013, pp. 1–36.

