173
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
An Analytical Model and an Efficient Tool to Predict the Availability  
of IPTV Services in Vehicle-to-Infrastructure Networks  
Bernd E. Wolfinger 1), Nico R. Wilzek 1), Edgar E. Báez 2) 
 
1) Department of Computer Science,  
Telecommunications and Computer Networks 
University of Hamburg 
Hamburg, Germany  
e-mail: wolfinger@informatik.uni-hamburg.de, 
4wilzek@informatik.uni-hamburg.de 
 
2) Superior School of Computing  
National Polytechnic Institute ESCOM-IPN,  
Mexico City, Mexico 
e-mail: ebaeze0700@alumno.ipn.mx
 
 
 
Abstract— Entertainment services such as IP television (IPTV) 
are becoming increasingly important in vehicular ad-hoc 
networks (VANETs), which implies a strong need for quality of 
experience (QoE) studies. Therefore, in this paper we 
introduce analytical models to predict QoE of IPTV in VANET 
scenarios. Unlike earlier QoE research for IPTV, which has 
been mainly related to audio/video quality, our focus is on 
IPTV service availability. To evaluate our analytical models we 
offer a tool (ACTIVE) that can be used in a flexible and 
efficient manner. The paper also describes the architecture and 
the main components of the tool as well as its graphical user 
interface. Case studies based on our ACTIVE tool demonstrate 
how our models can be applied by a provider of IPTV services 
in order to satisfy QoE requirements regarding the service 
availability as given by the IPTV users. Moreover, some of the 
results are also of interest to the individual IPTV users. 
Keywords- 
Vehicular 
networks; IPTV; 
QoE; 
service 
availability; analytical model; model evaluation tool; validation. 
 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Current predictions for the car market claim that, in 2016, 
more than 80 % of all new cars sold will have access to the 
Internet (e.g., FOCUS Online [9]). Therefore, one can expect 
that the usage of Internet services by car passengers will 
become more and more wide-spread in the near future. 
Besides search-, information- and communication services 
also entertainment services (such as IPTV or Video-on-
Demand) will probably play a significant role [5]. For that 
reason, quality assessment of Internet services with real-time 
requirements (as they are present, e.g., in IPTV services 
offered in vehicular ad-hoc networks – or VANETs for 
short) is getting increasingly important. Therefore, this topic 
is in the main focus of this paper.  
Quality of service provisioning is relevant, in particular 
as it is experienced by the (human) end-users and thus it is 
denoted by Quality of Experience (QoE) [16]. In case of 
IPTV services, on the one hand, QoE refers to the quality of 
the received audio/video stream as perceived by the end-
user. So, most of the existing studies concerned with QoE in 
the context of audio/video communications with real-time 
constraints have been related to audio-visual quality, which 
is judged by well-known QoE measures, such as 
PESQ/PEAQ/PEVQ (perceptual evaluation of speech/audio/ 
video quality) [7] or by means of MOS (mean opinion 
score), a method that directly relies on the subjective 
judgement of the human end-users [25]. Belyaev et al. [6] 
propose an interesting approach for a dynamic adaptation of 
the video bit rate in order to maintain a certain level of video 
quality in a scenario of a vehicular video surveillance system 
(based on IEEE 802.p [12]). Here, QoE is evaluated in terms 
of visual quality and its impairment by packet losses.  
Of course, the audio-visual quality is also relevant in the 
context of vehicular networks, more so, because the TV 
channels are offered to the corresponding car passengers via 
wireless access networks. And this may have a strongly 
negative impact on the quality of the stream delivered to the 
IPTV users. 
Zhou et al. [28] measure user-satisfaction when users 
access 
media 
services 
via 
peer-to-peer 
(P2P)-based 
VANETs. In particular, they propose a scheme that solves 
content dissemination, cache update and fairness problems 
for P2P-based VANETs. However, unlike our studies 
presented in this paper, Zhou et al. do not consider IPTV 
services, nor do they assume multicast for the provisioning 
of the media services. 
Besides the audio/video quality of the delivered TV 
channels, QoE is also influenced strongly by the delay it 
takes to switch from one channel to another, which usually is 
called channel switching delay. Several studies try to reduce 
these switching delays, cf. [2].  
Last but not least, QoE in vehicular networks also 
comprises the degree of availability with which the user is 
able to access the IPTV service [15]. From the users’ point of 
view the availability of TV channels may be even more 
important than the audio-visual quality of the IPTV service. 
As a measure of availability, we will take the probability that 
a desired TV channel can indeed be provided to the 
corresponding user though the bandwidth in the (access) 
network may be quite limited. Availability studies for IPTV 
services have been done in the past (by means of simulation 
models) in particular for DSL based access networks [14] as 
well as for WiMAX based access networks [2]. 

174
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
As currently no vehicular networks offering IPTV 
services are available to us for carrying out measurements, 
the only alternative for corresponding service availability 
studies is the use of models. To the best of our knowledge, 
up to now, only very few models exist, which allow one to 
predict the availability of IPTV services in VANETs. 
Detailed simulation models – and not analytical models as in 
the current paper – have been elaborated and applied in case 
studies by Momeni et al. [17]. Moreover, in recent past, first 
successful trials have been undertaken to predict IPTV 
availability in VANETs by means of analytical models, cf. 
Wolfinger et al. [27]. Other existing analytical models to 
predict QoE for IPTV, such as [11], [19], and [21], have a 
completely different emphasis: they are again concerned 
with audio-visual quality and not with channel availability. 
Moreover, in [11], users are watching TV via home networks 
and are not mobile at all and, in [19] the emphasis is on (low 
level) QoS and not on QoE, and finally, in [21], an 
architecture of an IPTV system is suggested for mobile 
devices, which is shown to satisfy some basic QoS/QoE 
requirements. Even most of the simulation tools that exist for 
studying vehicular networks [23] are quite useless as a basis 
for doing availability analyses, because they include very 
detailed submodels for the network services used but, on the 
other hand, user behavior is reflected in a rather superficial 
manner.  
In a recently published paper [1], we significantly 
extended the results of [27] as we carried out an in-depth 
validation of the analytical model and, as a major new 
contribution, we presented a generalized procedure that 
allows us to predict the IPTV availability in a straight-
forward manner for very different traffic scenarios and 
network technologies. We also applied our procedure in 
various comprehensive case studies. The current paper is a 
thoroughly revised and considerably extended version of our 
earlier publication [1]. We now not only present a class of 
analytical models but also various upper bounds for the 
unavailability of requested TV channels. Moreover, the 
newly developed ACTIVE tool is introduced, which is able 
to predict the availability of an IPTV service in vehicular 
networks in a very flexible and highly efficient manner. The 
ACTIVE tool not only provides the values for availability 
measures being of interest to providers of IPTV services but 
also those ones that are related to the channel availability as 
experienced by individual IPTV users. The availability 
measures cover both, blocking of TV channels during 
handover as well as during switching events. 
The paper is structured as follows: Section II will give a 
short overview on IPTV services offered via VANETs 
including the availability measures that we will apply. The 
analytical model used will be introduced in Section III 
followed, in Section IV, by a thorough validation of this 
model.  Our analytical models will be embedded in a model 
evaluation tool (ACTIVE), the architecture and user interface 
of which will be described in detail in Section V. A 
generalized procedure for a highly efficient usage of our 
models and the ACTIVE tool then is presented in Section VI. 
Application of the generalized procedure will be illustrated 
in the case studies of Section VII. These studies also show 
how our model can support a provider of an IPTV service 
(offered via a VANET) in dimensioning and configuring a 
network that satisfies the given QoE requirements of the 
IPTV subscribers.  
 
II. 
IPTV SERVICES IN VANETS AND AVAILABILITY 
MEASURES FOR THEIR ASSESSMENT  
A. Provisioning of IPTV Services in VANETs 
Two main classes of vehicular networks [20] are 
typically distinguished: networks supporting vehicle-to-
vehicle (V2V) and those supporting vehicle-to-infrastructure 
(V2I) communication. V2V infrastructures are mainly used 
to improve vehicular safety [4]. For our studies, only V2I 
configurations are relevant because communication between 
vehicles is not of interest to us. V2I communication can be 
achieved in two variants that differ in the way how users in 
the vehicles can get access to the Internet: in the first variant 
(V1), the mobile station (e.g., a smart phone) could be 
communicating via a non-IP-based public mobile network 
and from there get access to the Internet. In the second 
variant (V2), the mobile station would access a dedicated 
road-side unit (RSU) via the base station (BS) / the access 
point (AP) of its local cell and from there get direct access to 
IP based routers (cf. proposal and prototype for so-called 
road-side backbone networks using RSUs to interconnect the 
Internet with the vehicles as described, e.g., by Gladisch et 
al. [10] and Krohn et al. [13]). In this paper, we assume that 
the IPTV services we analyze are provided in networks in 
which Internet access is established according to variant V2. 
Different network technologies (such as WLAN, LTE, 
WiMAX) can be used in principle to achieve communication 
between the mobile stations (in the vehicles) and the base 
station resp. access point in the corresponding cell. From 
point of view of IPTV service, provisioning different 
network technologies in the access network can have a 
strong impact on the service quality because they will 
typically support very different data rates and lead to very 
different cell sizes. 
In the vehicular networks, we investigate the fact that ad-
hoc networking is possible between vehicles is not really 
important for us. On the contrary, we are mainly interested in 
the delivery of IPTV services to the vehicles by means of 
vehicle 
to 
infrastructure 
(V2I) 
communications. 
Nevertheless, we argue that the IPTV service delivery 
studied in this paper does not only cover vehicular networks, 
but also VANETs and, accordingly, we use the formulation 
“IPTV Services in VANETs” throughout this paper. 
 
If an IPTV service [26] is offered in a network with V2I 
communication, where Internet access is achieved by means 
of RSUs (as assumed in our studies), the basic network 
architecture will comprise the main components as depicted 
by Fig. 1: 
• the IPTV Head-end, where all the TV channels are 
available that can be demanded by the IPTV users, 
• that part of the Internet that is used to make 
communication between the Head-end and the set of 

175
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
RSUs possible (this subsystem could be the IP based 
network of an ISP providing the IPTV service), 
• the access network representing the infrastructure for 
communication between an RSU and the mobile 
stations within the cells for which RSU is responsible. 
 
Provisioning of IPTV services typically makes use of 
multicast (e.g., IP multicast [22]) leading to the advantage 
that a TV channel having been desired in an access network 
has only to be provided once by the corresponding RSU even 
in the case that the TV channel is currently watched by more 
than one user in this cell. A TV channel is no longer 
transmitted in a cell as soon as the last user watching this 
channel releases the channel (e.g., because he/she switches to 
another channel or is involved in a handover thus leaving the 
cell or the user may temporarily terminate usage of the IPTV 
service). 
As a consequence of the limited data rate (bandwidth) of 
the cells representing the access networks, it is, of course, 
possible that a TV channel newly desired by a user cannot be 
provided at that moment when the request for the channel is 
issued. This happens exactly in the case that the desired 
channel currently is not yet delivered in the cell AND the 
total transmission capacity available for IPTV is completely 
exhausted currently because of having to transmit other 
channels. If a request for channel delivery has to be denied, 
we say that the channel is “blocked” for the user and call this 
event a “blocking (event)”. 
So, we see that studies of IPTV service availability in 
VANETs that are based on detailed models will require that 
the corresponding models reflect 
 the bandwidth utilized for IPTV at any instant, 
 the list of TV channels currently being multicast in the 
corresponding cell, 
 the behavior of the IPTV users in terms of the time 
instants at which TV channels are switched/changed 
and in terms of the id. (e.g., channel number) of the 
channel newly demanded. 
 
Former investigations with respect to a realistic 
characterization of IPTV user behavior [2] [3] have shown 
that the popularity of TV channels can be approximated quite 
well by Zipf distributions [18]. 
In particular, the probability pi that the i-th popular 
channel is requested is determined by the Zipf distribution as 
follows: 
𝑝𝑖 = 
1
𝑖𝜃
  𝑁

𝑘 = 1
( 1
𝑘𝜃)
                                                     (1) 
 
 
 
where N denotes the total no of different channels offered, k 
is their rank and θ is the Zipf parameter reflecting the degree 
of popularity skew. A value of θ = 1.3 is realistic according 
to measurements of IPTV user behavior [2]. 
B. Measures for IPTV Availability 
 
The following two reasons exist that an IPTV user will 
demand a TV channel within a cell: 
(1) A channel-switching event: Here, the user will 
demand a new channel to which he currently 
switches to (e.g., because he is “zapping” 
through a sequence of channels at time 
durations of just a few seconds or after he 
terminates a “viewing phase” with duration of 
several minutes or even hours during which he 
has received and watched just a single TV 
channel). 
(2) A handover event: Here, the car will change the 
cell and, as a consequence, the channel currently 
received by a user in this car will no longer be 
needed by him in the “old” cell left but it will be 
needed in the “new” cell reached now. 
In both cases, blocking of the desired channel may occur. 
Thus, we distinguish: 
 
switching-induced or switching-related blocking, 
and 
 
handover-induced or handover-related blocking. 
 
Therefore, three channel blocking probabilities are of 
interest to us: 
 
Channel Blocking Probability (CBP) referring 
to all blocking events 
 
Switching-induced Blocking Probability (SBP) 
referring only to blockings being a consequence 
of channel switching 
 
Handover-induced Blocking Probability (HBP) 
referring only to blockings being a consequence 
of handover events. 
As it is usual, we can approximate the three probabilities 
by the relative frequencies of the corresponding blockings 
choosing an observation interval that is sufficiently large. 
Let T = [t1, t2] denote the observation interval and 
|T|=t2-t1 its length. 
Let further denote: 
 
#r(T): no of all channel requests issued by all users in 
T 
 
#rh(T): no of all handover-related requests in T 
 
#rs(T): no  of all switching-related requests in T 
RSU
BS/AP
BS/AP
Celli
Celli+1
Internet
(Core & 
Backbone 
Network)
motorway
IPTV
Head-end
Figure 1. Basic architecture of an IPTV system for users of vehicular  
                       networks 

176
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
#b(T): no of all blocked requests (blockings) in T 
 
#bh(T): no of all handover-related blockings in T 
 
#bs(T): no of all switching-related blockings in T. 
Based on these variables, we can now define the 
following channel blocking frequencies for the interval T:  
 
CBF(T)  ≜
#𝑏(𝑇)
#𝑟(𝑇)   denoting the overall channel 
blocking frequency 
 
HBF(T) ≜
#𝑏ℎ(𝑇)
#𝑟(𝑇)
 denoting 
the 
relative 
frequency of handover-related blockings 
 
SBF(T) ≜
#𝑏𝑠(𝑇)
#𝑟(𝑇)
 denoting 
the 
relative 
frequency of switching-related blockings. 
Evidently, 
HBF(T) + SBF(T)  =  
#𝑏ℎ (𝑇)
#𝑟(𝑇)   +  
#𝑏𝑠 (𝑇)
#𝑟(𝑇)   =   
#𝑏ℎ(𝑇) + #𝑏𝑠(𝑇)
#𝑟(𝑇)
  =  
#𝑏(𝑇)
#𝑟(𝑇)  =  CBF(T)   (2) 
and – as the relative frequency converges to the 
probability for an interval length |T| tending to infinity:  
CBP = lim|T|   CBF(T) 
HBP = lim|T|   HBF(T) 
SBP = lim|T|   SBF(T) 
 
which implies that also CBP = HBP + SBP holds.  
 
Instead of CBP we can alternatively use  
CA  ≜ 1 - CBP  
denoting the overall channel availability.  
 
III. 
AN ANALYTICAL MODEL TO PREDICT TV CHANNEL 
AVAILABILITY 
In [27], an analytical model was elaborated, which is the 
basis of this paper. This analytical model is used to 
determine CBP and it is able to take into account various 
traffic scenarios, access network technologies and IPTV 
service characteristics. 
To present this model in this section and in the following 
sections, we use the variables and model parameters as 
introduced in Table I.  
The basic ideas underlying the analytical model are the 
following ones:  
 
 
(1) Calculate the probability that, for a given cell c, 
currently all bandwidth BWc available for IPTV 
service is used to distribute required TV 
channels. In such a situation of lacking free 
bandwidth, the demand for a new channel 
(which is currently not yet transmitted in cell c) 
may have to be denied. This means that the 
transmission of the newly demanded TV 
channel may become blocked. Therefore, we 
call the cell as being in a “potential blocking 
state”. 
(2) Calculate the probability that a currently 
unavailable channel is demanded when the cell 
is in a “potential blocking state”.  
TABLE I.  LIST OF PARAMETERS AND VARIABLES USED 
 
 
 
 
Calculation of CBP in our analytical model is based on 
the following four steps: 
 
STEP 1:  
Determine the probabilities Pi 
that, for given N and Nc, exactly i different 
channels are needed to satisfy the channel 
requests of Nc users, if N different channels are 
offered. Pi can be estimated by the relative 
frequency fi that Nc users require exactly i 
different channels, where fi can be determined in 
a straight-forward manner by means of Monte 
Carlo simulation [8], [24]. Throughout this 
paper, all of our Monte Carlo experiments are 
repeated one million times and, therefore, the 
size of the sample to calculate fi  is 106. 
 
STEP 2: 
Assume a certain cell bandwidth 
BWc available for IPTV and determine P* as 
probability that Nc users require more than BWc 
different TV channels. So, P* denotes the 
probability that the system is in a “potential 
blocking state”. 
 
STEP 3: 
Assume that an IPTV user will 
require a new channel (channel number 
determined according to Zipf distribution) and 
determine the probability that the number of the 
channel demanded is larger than BWc, which 
happens with probability  
∑
pi                                 
N
i > BWc
(3) 
 
STEP 4: 
We determine the probability 
(CBP) that a newly requested channel cannot be 
delivered, which happens with probability 
 
 
 
CBP =  P∗    ∑
pi 
N
i>BWc
,          (4)
 
 
 

177
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 2. Determination of P* for N = 50 and BWc = 30 according to STEPs 
1 and 2 of our calculation algorithm for the analytical model (Nc = 150). 
 
if we make the favorable assumption that, in 
case of a “potential blocking situation (state)”, 
exactly those channels are transmitted in the 
corresponding cell, which are the BWc most 
 popular ones. 
Remark: It should be noted that, astonishingly, 
the (favorable) assumption that “if the system is 
in a potential blocking state then just the most 
popular channels are transmitted” is quite 
realistic indeed. This has been observed by us in 
simulation experiments based on detailed 
models of IPTV services in VANETs (cf. 
simulation models described in [17] and also 
used during our model validation in Section IV).      
 
 
Fig. 2 illustrates STEP 1 and STEP 2, by way of 
example, if we assume N = 50, BWc = 30, Nc = 150. This 
figure depicts the histogram for Pi  , i  {1, 2, …, 50}.  
 
IV. 
MODEL VALIDATION  
What is left is the validation of our analytical model. We 
validate it by means of simulation and care mainly about the 
late (stationary) phase and situations where CBP  0.1, 
because we assume that if CBP > 0.1 this means that QoE is 
too low anyway and, therefore, model accuracy is not really 
important for those cases.  
 
We validate the model by means of two series of 
experiments and observed rather good agreement between 
the analytical model and the simulation results. Therefore, 
we consider the analytical model as being sufficiently 
realistic. 
Of course, our validation phase is limited by the fact that 
we do not have any access to measurements regarding IPTV 
service availability in vehicular networks because those 
systems currently do not yet exist. So, we find it acceptable 
to rely on IPTV service availability predictions based on a 
detailed and (hopefully) sufficiently realistic simulation 
model. 
Comparisons with alternative analytical models for CBP 
predictions related to IPTV services in VANETs, developed 
by other researchers, have not been possible for us as, to the 
best of our knowledge, no such models do yet exist. 
 
A. Series I of Validation Experiments  
In Series I, we changed Nc (the number of users in the 
cell) and kept N (the number of channels available) and BWc 
(the maximum number of channels that can be broadcasted 
at the same time) constant per set of experiments, with N = 
50 and BWc = 30 for set 1 of Series I and N = 100 and BWc = 
40 for set 2. As can be seen in Table II, the analytical model 
and the simulation model are matching quite well with a few 
outliers at Nc = 200 in both sets. Also, the values of the 
analytical model in set 1 do not increase as fast as the values 
of the simulation model (with increasing Nc).  
 
B. Series II of Validation Experiments  
In Series II, we kept the number of users per cell 
constant (Nc = 300 for set 1 of Series II and Nc = 400 for set 
2 of Series II). We changed N (the number of channels 
available) and BWc (the maximum number of channels that 
can be broadcasted at the same time). Again, we observe a 
rather good agreement between the analytical model and the 
simulation results, with a few outliers at higher values for N, 
where the analytical model is a close upper bound; for 
details regarding the deviations, see Table III. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
TABLE II. SERIES I OF VALIDATION EXPERIMENTS 

178
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
V. 
THE ACTIVE TOOL TO EVALUATE OUR ANALYTICAL 
AVAILABILITY MODELS  
In this section we will introduce our recently developed 
tool, the „Availability Calculator of TV Channels for IPTV 
Services in Vehicular Networks“, or for short: ACTIVE. 
 
ACTIVE is a means to simply and quickly calculate 
CBP and other IPTV related availability measures, with 
high precision and high efficiency. 
 
A. Requirements to the Tool 
The requirements we asked of this tool included: 
(1) A simple and intuitive graphical user interface. 
(2) The tool should be flexibly applicable, calculating 
the results for a great number of combinations of 
parameter values with low expenditure. 
(3) In addition to CBP, these results should include the 
most important IPTV related availability measures 
for 
a. the total of all IPTV users. These QoE measures 
are especially interesting for the IPTV service 
provider. 
b. an individual user, taking the speed of the 
vehicle into consideration. These QoE measures 
are especially interesting for IPTV users and 
those (e.g., the IPTV service provider) who 
need the users’ view.  
There were a few ways we ensured that these requirements 
were met: 
1. The tool has two different modes: one for high 
precision – the simulation mode – and one for high 
efficiency – the approximation mode.  
2. The simulation mode takes - just as the name implies - 
the input and runs a new Monte Carlo simulation with 
106 iterations for highest precision. To increase 
efficiency, if the exact values / value combinations for 
(Nc. N) and (BWc , N) are saved, then the results are 
calculated directly without the need of a simulation. 
3. The approximation mode uses a priori saved 
intermediate results of the simulations to calculate the 
results, which is done instantly, thus with maximum 
efficiency. To increase precision, every time the 
program runs the 106 Monte Carlo simulations in 
simulation mode, the new intermediate results will be 
saved, thus making the – already very precise –  
approximation mode more and more precise. 
4. To keep the GUI simple and intuitive, the tool is a 
single window application, with all the settings on the 
left side, allowing a simple and flexible, parallel input 
of the parameters as well as the choice of mode. All 
results are shown on the right side of the same window 
at a glance. In approximation mode, the results of the 
next lower saved Nc and next higher saved Nc 
(corresponding to the Nc value that was asked for) are 
shown at the same time. If the difference of 
corresponding values (e.g., the “lower” CBP and the 
“higher” CBP) exceeds 20% the values will be shown 
in maroon. 
5. To maximize flexibility, the tool accepts the input of 
the 8 parameters already introduced in Table I, with pi 
and 𝑑̅ not being input parameters but being calculated 
in the simulation and based on the di respectively. Also 
the input for both Nc as well as di are optional. Nc can 
easily be given directly or be calculated by the 
program, the value is shown directly below the 
parameter and updated “live” during parameter input 
for maximum clearness. Nc is then a function of k, Cr, 
α, di (or vi). Same goes for di, if no di values are given, 
the tool will calculate values using the vi. 
6. The tool will show the results for 24 IPTV related 
availability measures in total. 
The input data, which is used by the ACTIVE tool to 
produce the TV service availability results, is shown in 
TABLE III. SERIES II OF VALIDATION EXPERIMENTS 

179
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
detail by Fig. 6 (cf. “Parameter input” section, left-side 
bottom part of the “Settings”). 
The main intermediate data computed by ACTIVE 
comprises in particular P*, cf. eq. (4), and the probabilities 
pi, i  {1, 2, …, N}, cf. Table I. 
 
In particular, the following results are provided by the 
ACTIVE tool:  
a) For the total of all IPTV users, there is CBP 
(Channel Blocking Probability), SBP (Switching-
induced 
Blocking 
Probability) 
and 
HBP 
(Handover-induced Blocking Probability) and  
b) For an individual user, there is bphs (blockings per 
hour, switching-induced), bphh (blockings per 
hour, handover-induced) and bph (blockings per 
hour in total). 
c) These results are all given  
1. for the next lower saved Nc and next higher 
saved Nc (corresponding to the Nc value that 
was asked for) and also 
2. for the “late” model, when the traffic evens out, 
which is the model discussed in this paper and 
the “early” model right after the lanes were 
empty and the traffic for this road started (cf. 
model presented in [27]). So, ACTIVE actually 
exceeds the model discussed in this paper and 
implements also a second one. 
 
B. Tool Architecture and Internal Process Flows 
With Fig. 3 we would like to present a brief overview on 
the architecture and the internal mechanics of the tool. 
The user specifies the mode of operation and the 
parameters, which will be received by the evaluation 
module.  
This module will give Nc, N and BWc to either the 
database module - if approximation mode was selected - or 
the simulation module - if simulation mode was selected - 
and will get the corresponding intermediate results (“vector 
P”, “zipf”: the vector with the popularities for the N 
channels and “Z*”, a value used exclusively by the early 
model) as return. It will then calculate the results and 
display them in the GUI. 
If the simulation module is asked for the intermediate 
results, it will start a new Monte Carlo simulation with 106 
iterations, by creating a new java thread from SwingWorker. 
This new thread calls the external program “runSimulation”, 
which is written in python but compiled as an .exe. The new 
intermediate results will be given to the evaluation module 
for further processing and to the database module for 
storage. 
If the database module is asked for the intermediate 
results, it will just return the corresponding results it either 
read from the database at program start-up or got from the 
simulation module. At program termination it will write all 
values back to the database. This database consists of three 
XML files: “vectorP.xml”, “zipf.xml” and “zStars.xml”, 
which save their values, respectively. 
Remark: The authors plan to provide their ACTIVE tool 
to interested researchers as an open source product as soon 
as it is completely finalized, i.e., before spring 2016 (cf. 
TKRN Web pages at the University of Hamburg). 
 
C. Graphical User Interface 
Fig. 4 shows the GUI in its entirety, as it looks on start-
up. On the left side you see the settings panel. On top is the 
choice between approximation and simulation mode, as 
discussed.  If you choose “Approximation” the results will 
be shown instantly, if you choose “Simulation” a new 
Monte Carlo simulation with 106 iterations will start and 
may take up to an hour, depending on the input of Nc and 
BWc (on a 3 GHz processor core). The start button will 
change to a cancel button, the progress will be shown in the 
progress bar below the settings and the result panels, as 
shown in Fig. 5 and at the end of the simulation you will 
hear a “beep” sound for convenience. Below the choice of 
mode is the area for parameter input. 
The variables N, BWc, k, Cr, vi are obligatory, di is 
always optional and below di you see a drop-down menu 
where you can choose between setting a value to Nc directly 
(“Set Nc manually”) and setting a value to α, letting Nc be 
calculated (“Calculate Nc”). If you choose “Calculate Nc”, 
the calculated value for Nc will be shown just below the 
value for α and will automatically update while you change 
the values for k, Cr, vi, di or α. 
On the right side is the result panel. 
Figure 3. The internal mechanics of ACTIVE 

180
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Fig. 3: The internal mechanics of ACTIVE 
Figure 4. The GUI of ACTIVE at start-up 
Figure 5. Change in GUI during simulation 
Figure 6. The (logical) partitioning of ACTIVE’s GUI 

181
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
If you split the result panel into left and right, you would 
find the results for the total of all users to the left and for an 
individual user to the right; if you split into top and bottom, 
you would find the results for the next lower saved Nc on 
top and the next higher saved Nc on the bottom.  
 
Furthermore, you can split the halves for next higher/ 
lower saved Nc into top and bottom again, and you would 
find the results for the “early” model (additionally 
implemented to the model of this paper) on top and the 
results for the “late” model (discussed in this paper) on the 
bottom. 
The complete (logical) partitioning is shown in Fig. 6. 
 
D. A Sample Session 
Let us use the tool for a specific scenario. We are 
interested in getting the results fast – if the given results are 
not close enough to the given scenario, we can still change 
our opinion. The scenario is a motorway with three lanes 
each direction. The cars drive faster on the inner lane, but 
not by a lot, let us say they drive 90 km/h on the outer lane, 
100 km/h on the middle lane and 120 km/h on the inner 
lane. There is no easy way for us to measure the distances of 
the cars, traffic situation is dense (i.e., there is no unused 
space without cars), but they seem to have normal distances 
for their speed (that is the speculation of ACTIVE if no di is 
given).  
We know that the IPTV service provider offers 100 
channels in cells with 5 km radius, but can only stream 30 
different ones at a time. Also, we assume that about every 
20th vehicle will make use of the IPTV offer (but do not 
know the total number of users who make use of it). 
 
To use the tool we just follow these 3 easy steps:  
1. Keep/ change the mode setting to “Approximation”. 
2. Set input parameters by 
a. 
entering all values we have (except α, if α is 
hidden behind the drop-down menu), ignoring 
di and Nc, because we do not know the values 
for these parameters (the distances between 
adjacent vehicles and the total number of 
users), 
b. choosing “Calculate Nc” in the drop-down 
menu (since we do not know the total number 
of users, but the amount of IPTV users relative 
to all vehicles: every 20th), 
c. 
entering the value for α in % (every 20th = 
5%), the number of users will be updated 
while we type, directly below our input. 
3. Press the start button. 
 
The results will be displayed immediately on the right 
side of the GUI. 
 
Fig. 7 shows all steps and the corresponding results. 
Since all results are maroon in color it means the difference 
in results between the next lower saved Nc and the next 
higher saved Nc is more than 20%. We can now either 
choose to run the simulation by clicking on “Simulation” 
and then on “Start” to get more precise results, or say the Nc 
value that we asked for is close enough to one of the saved 
results. We would recommend the latter, since 78 is really 
close to 77. 
 
 
Figure 7. The 3 steps of the sample session 

182
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VI. CBP BOUNDS AND PARAMETER STUDIES  
 
In the following, our goal will be to use our analytical 
model, presented in Section III, to predict with only very 
little expenditure the availability of IPTV services in 
VANETs. In particular, our approach should cover a broad 
spectrum of traffic situations and of network technologies 
used to establish the access network for vehicle to RBU 
communication and, last not least, it should also cover 
numerous characteristics of the IPTV service offered.  
Calculation of CBP based on our analytical model yields 
to the following formula: 
CBP = P∗  ∑ pi
N
i>BWc
 ,                        (5) 
and this shows that CBP can be seen as a product of only 
two terms T1 and T2 with 
T1  ≜  P∗   and    T2  ≜  ∑ pi              (6)
N
i>BWc
 
If we fix the value of the parameter  in the Zipf 
distribution used to model IPTV user behavior, it becomes 
evident that  
T1 = T1 (N, Nc , BWc)     and     T2 = T2 (N, BWc). 
Therefore, it is possible to characterize T1, as well as T2 
by means of elementary sets of curves.  
Moreover, T1 is a general upper bound for CBP because 
T1   =   P∗  >  P∗  ∑ pi
N
i > BWc
 =  CBP            (7)  
 
This is why the sets of curves related to term T1 (resp. 
P*) are of particularly strong interest.  
Similarly, T2 is an upper bound of CBP, too, because 
 
T2   = ∑ pi
N
i>BWc
 >  P∗  ∑ pi
N
i > BWc
 =  CBP           (8) 
 
Consequently, this also implies that 
 
 
min (T1, T2) > CBP 
 
is a third and, in general, an even tighter upper bound of 
CBP. 
A. Characterization of Upper Bound T1 , i.e., P*  
Here, we want to investigate the influence of the 
available bandwidth BWc on P* assuming that a certain 
number N of channels is offered and that the number Nc of 
IPTV users in the cell varies. In this study of P*, we assume 
N  {20, 50, 100} because N = 20 presents a small, N = 50 a 
medium and N = 100 a quite large number of channels 
offered. 
Moreover, we suppose Nc  {50, 100, 200, 300, 400} 
because in realistic scenarios (e.g., for  = 0.05) one nearly 
always will have no more than 400 IPTV users in a single  
cell (cf. below). Evidently, variation of BWc only makes 
sense in the interval [1, N]. 
For example, Fig. 8 directly shows that if N = 100 
channels are offered, spending a bandwidth BWc = 70 for 
IPTV will lead to a negligible value of P* and, therefore, 
also to a negligibly small CBP for all realistic cell 
populations considered by us (Nc  400). And even a 
bandwidth BWc = 65 reserved for IPTV will ensure that 
CBP < 10 % holds, if again Nc  400 can be assumed.  
 
B. Characterization of Upper Bound T2  
As T2 is no longer dependent on Nc , investigations 
concerning this term become even more straight-forward 
than for T1. In particular, the dependency of T2 on the 
         Figure 8. P* as a function of BWc for different values of N and different cell populations Nc of IPTV 
users 

183
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
bandwidth BWc reserved for IPTV can be directly depicted 
for a given value of N.  
Fig. 9 shows those dependencies for N  {20, 50, 75, 
100, 150}. This figure provides in-depth insight regarding 
the difficult decision of how much bandwidth should be 
spent for a given number N of offered channels. As 
examples, let us look at the case of N = 20 where it seems to 
be a good idea to choose BWc  18 (at least), for N = 75 a 
bandwidth of at least BWc = 50 seems to be desirable and for 
N = 150 a chosen bandwidth of BWc  80 seems to be quite 
risky.  
 
C. Characterization of Upper Bound  min (T1, T2) 
So far, we have discussed about how we can use the 
terms T1 and T2 as upper bounds of CBP separately. 
However, we are now interested in investigating the tighter 
upper bound min (T1, T2). So, we might ask the question: 
When does T1 fit the best as upper bound of CBP and when 
does T2? In order to avoid this uncertainty, we can define 
the function min (T1, T2) as a general and tighter upper 
bound as we stated before. 
 
Fig. 10 depicts the behavior of the min (T1, T2) function. 
In this figure it becomes evident in which situations one 
term applies as upper bound and when the other one does, 
since we can see the inflection point at every curve.  
From this figure, we can claim that when the resources 
are extremely scarce (w.r.t. the users in the system), T2 fits 
the best as upper bound of CBP, however, when the 
resources are not that scarce, T1 fits the best. 
 
D. Expected Number of IPTV Users in a Cell  
The number Nc of IPTV users to be expected in a cell 
will just depend on:  
Figure 10. The upper CBP bound min (T1, T2)  as a function of BWc 
for different values of N and different cell populations Nc 
 
 
average  distance d between two adjacent vehicles 
(driving in the same lane), where the avg. is taken 
over all lanes  
 
the no  of lanes per direction (k) 
 
the probability that in a vehicle IPTV is used ()  
 
the cell radius (Cr).  
In particular, Nc can be easily determined as follows: 
 
Nc =   2k  2Cr / d                               (9) 
 
If we set  = 0.05 and k = 3 to be constant and if we 
vary d  {5m, 10m, 20 m, 50 m, 100 m} and assume cell 
radiuses of Cr  {1 km, 3 km, 5 km, 10 km}, we get Nc  
values as depicted by Table IV. We see that with our 
assumptions, which we consider to be quite realistic, the 
value of Nc varies between 6 and 1200. We also can observe 
that rather different combinations of parameter values will 
lead to the same value of Nc, which facilitates the 
characterization of P* and thus also of CBP. 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE IV. Nc AS A FUNCTION OF d AND Cr 
 
1 km
3 km
5 km
10 km
5 m
120
360
600
1200
10 m
60
180
300
600
20 m
30
90
150
300
50 m
12
36
60
120
100 m
6
18
30
60
Cr
d
 
Figure 9. T2 as a function of BWc for different values of N 
 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
BWc
Upper Bound, min(T1, T2)
 
 
50 Users, 20 Channels
100 Users, 20 Channels
200 Users, 20 Channels
300 Users, 20 Channels
400 Users, 20 Channels
50 Users, 50 Channels
100 Users, 50 Channels
200 Users, 50 Channels
300 Users, 50 Channels
400 Users, 50 Channels
50 Users, 100 Channels
100 Users, 100 Channels
200 Users, 100 Channels
300 Users, 100 Channels
400 Users, 100 Channels

184
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
E. Straight-forward Calculation of CBP for Numerous 
Scenarios of IPTV in VANETs  
Combining the results achieved in this section up to 
now, we are able to propose a generalized proceeding that 
allows us to predict CBP for nearly any scenario of interest 
with nearly negligible expenditure (if we compare this with 
a CBP prediction based on simulation models for assessing 
IPTV availability in VANETs). 
In particular, Table IV showed us what Nc values to 
assume to be realistic and the results of Figs. 8 and 9 can be 
directly combined (i.e., T1 and T2 can be multiplied) to 
determine CBP. Table V contains CBP predictions based on 
our analytical model for numerous scenarios of IPTV in 
VANETs. The results of Table V cover a broad spectrum of 
traffic situations (low, medium and high traffic load up to 
traffic jam), of access network technologies used having an 
impact on Cr and BWc and of characteristics of the IPTV 
service (e.g., number N of channels offered). 
 
To summarize, the results obtained in this section can 
allow one to significantly improve the understanding of the 
main factors and their mutual dependencies, which 
influence IPTV availability in VANETs.  
 
VII. CASE STUDIES  
In the previous section, we have shown how it is 
possible to determine CBP just as a function of N, Nc and 
BWc, where, of course, Nc itself is a function of  d, Cr, k and 
. We now want to indicate how the handover- and the 
switching-induced blocking probabilities HBP and SBP can 
be determined based on CBP.   
 
A. Handover-induced Blockings: Calculation of #hoph 
Let #hoph denote the total number of handovers per hour 
of all vehicles using IPTV and leaving a given cell. We 
assume a mean speed of those vehicles of v and a mean 
distance between adjacent vehicles of d, a cell radius Cr, k 
lanes per direction, as well as an IPTV watching probability 
of . With these assumptions we can directly calculate Nc 
(cf. Section VI.D.).  
#hoph can be determined in a straight-forward manner as 
follows: 
#hoph =   2k  
𝑣 [𝑘𝑚
ℎ ]
𝑑  10−3 [𝑘𝑚] =   2k  
𝑣 
𝑑  10−3  [
1
ℎ] (10) 
For single IPTV users we thus obtain: 
bphh(v) = #hoph(v)  CBP,   
 
   (11) 
if bphh(v) denotes the number of handover-induced 
blockings per hour experienced by a single user in a vehicle 
driving with speed v. 
 
B. Switching-induced Blockings: Calculation of #swph  
Let #swph denote the total number of switching events 
per hour of all Nc vehicles using IPTV in a given cell. Let us 
assume a mean time t [min] between two successive 
channel switching events, where t = 3 [min].  
 
Then, #swph can be determined as follows: 
 
 
#swph =  
60
𝑡    Nc [
1
ℎ]  
 
   (12) 
For single IPTV users we thus obtain: 
bphs = #swph  CBP, 
 
 
   (13) 
if bphs denotes the number of switching-induced blockings 
per hour experienced by a single user. 
And, evidently, the total number of blockings per hour 
experienced by a single user in a vehicle driving with speed 
v is expected to be 
  
bph(v) = bphh(v) + bphs .    
 
   (14) 
 
C. Calculation of HBP and SBP 
HBP can be determined based on #hoph , #swph and CBP 
as follows: 
 
HBP  = (CBP  #hoph)/( #hoph + #swph)             (15) 
   
Correspondingly: 
 
SBP  = (CBP  #swph)/( #hoph + #swph) 
   (16) 
 
which again confirms that:       HBP + SBP = CBP.        (17) 
                  TABLE V. CHANNEL BLOCKING PROBABILITY (CBP) FOR DIFFERENT COMBINATIONS OF N, BWc VALUES AND DIFFERENT Nc VALUES 

185
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 11. Case study results obtained based on the ACTIVE tool 
D. Case Studies 
We will now use the ACTIVE tool to study different 
scenarios of interest in three case studies, switching our 
focus to the results for individual IPTV users for the first 
two of our studies. We will keep our focus on the model for 
the „late phase“, which are highlighted in Fig. 11.  
 
The first two case studies will both be about a traffic 
jam. In the first study we will explore how much the IPTV 
service provider would need to increase the bandwidth for 
the TV channels, if the provider wishes to keep a certain 
level of QoE during a traffic jam (for example for places 
well known for their frequent traffic jams). The second case 
study will explore when the QoE will raise to an acceptable 
level while the traffic jam slowly dissolves and the speed of 
the users increases. We suggest a bph  2 as an „acceptable 
level“ (i.e., on average 1 blocking every 30 min). The third 
case study shows how to use the tool to gain information 
about highly fluctuating traffic scenarios. 
 
We assume a traffic scenario with three lanes per 
direction on a motorway, which makes it likely enough to 
create traffic jams frequently: N = 100, k = 3, Cr = 5 km, v = 
0 km/h (since traffic jam), α = 0.1. These parameters imply 
that Nc = 1200 (which is an huge increase from the expected 
Nc  320 we would have with v = 50 km/h). With v = 0 
km/h the program assumes d = 5m, if no value for d is 
given. Let us assume this value is realistic in a traffic jam.  
 
Case Study 1: During Traffic Jam 
 
Since v = 0 km/h, bphh will obviously stay 0, which 
results in bphs = bph. So, for the rest of the case study we 
will only talk about the relationship between BWc and bphs. 
This relationship is shown in Fig. 12 as a graphical 
representation. We observe that for BWc  30 the decrease 
of bphs is approximately linear.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figures like that are very useful for IPTV service 
providers and users alike, because they show in a simple 
manner, what bandwidth you need for a certain QoE or what 
QoE to expect given a certain bandwidth, e.g., that you need 
about a bandwidth of 35 TV channels to drop under a bphs 
of 2 blockings per hour. That is surprisingly low for such a 
huge increase in number of users. 
 
Case Study 2: During Traffic Jam Termination 
 
Assuming v slowly increases at the end of a traffic jam 
phase, we expect that bphh will increase and bphs will 
decrease in such a manner that bph will decrease. 
Using the information learned from the first case study, 
we investigate those influences in detail for the three 
scenarios BWc ϵ {40, 50, 60}. The results are shown in 
Tables VI - VIII and Fig. 13 summarizes the dynamic 
evolution of bphs, bphh and bph for all three scenarios in 
Case Study 2. Since v changes exactly the same in every 
lane, the values for all three lanes will be identical and, 
therefore, will be shown only once. 
 
 
 
Figure 12.  Corresponding bphs to given BWc 
 
 
Figure 13. Corresponding bph to given v 
 
 
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
3
3,5
BW_c
bph_s

186
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE VI. Results for scenario 1 of the traffic jam termination 
 
 
 
TABLE VII. Results for scenario 2 of the traffic jam termination 
 
 
 
TABLE VIII. Results for scenario 3 of the traffic jam termination 
 
 
 
Surprisingly enough, the results of Case Study 2 show 
that different traffic situations lead to very similar numbers 
of blockings, but there is always one speed where both bphs 
and bphh significantly drop (BWc = 40: 80 km/h, BWc = 50: 
50 km/h, BWc = 60: 40 km/h). These figures are very 
valuable to IPTV service providers, because you can easily 
answer a number of questions, including 
 
How long after a traffic jam will the QoE actually 
decrease, since the handover-induced blockings 
increase and the switching-induced blockings have 
not decreased yet? 
 
To which degree will the traffic jam need to 
dissolve for the QoE to become acceptable? 
 
What bandwidth will be needed to keep both, the 
QoE decrease after the traffic jam and the time for 
the QoE needed to increase to a certain level, 
acceptably small? 
 
Case Study 3: Highly Fluctuating Traffic Scenario 
 
This case study pays tribute to the fact, that the traffic 
situation can fluctuate strongly over time and will show how 
to use the ACTIVE tool accordingly. 
Let us assume a traffic fluctuation over a day as shown 
in Fig. 14. As you can easily see, the traffic fluctuates over 
the course of the day, but is nearly constant for a few hours 
during several time intervals, so in our example scenario we 
get seven different levels of load. 
Let Nc,i be the mean number of IPTV users in cell c 
while the load is at level Li. 
 
We now use our analytical model to predict CBP for the 
dynamic fluctuating traffic scenario at the marked times, 
which represent the end of the level of load Li.  
We keep assuming N = 100 (and BWc = 30) for this case 
study, too.  
With ACTIVE we can easily and quickly get the CBP of 
all Nc,i by entering successively the values for each Li. The 
results of CBP as a function of Nc are shown in Table IX as 
well as in Fig. 15. And these results have been directly used 
to illustrate the daily CBP variation in Fig. 16. 
 
Results as those shown by Fig. 16 are valuable for IPTV 
service providers, because they give answers quickly to a 
variety of questions, including but not limited to: 
- 
What is the worst CBP/ QoE to be expected during 
the observed time interval (and when will it 
occur)? 
Figure 14. Example traffic fluctuation for case study 3 
Figure 15. CBP values of the Li from case study 3 
 
 

187
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE IX. Resulting CBP for the seven Nc,i 
 
- 
Which changes in Nc have what kind of impact on 
CBP? 
- 
How does the watched time interval partition into 
time slots with different QoE? In our example we 
see (cf. Fig. 16) that the day is basically partitioned 
into a night part with better QoE and a day part 
with worse QoE. The two rush hours do not seem 
to have a big impact on QoE. 
 
VIII. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK 
In this paper, we have tackled the challenging and 
difficult problem to predict the availability of IPTV services 
in vehicular networks. In particular, we have elaborated a 
class of analytical models that have been successfully 
validated by means of existing simulation models. The 
analytical models indicated that it is possible to obtain a 
quite realistic prediction of IPTV service availability by 
means of using just a few elementary parameters 
comprising, e.g., number of TV channels offered, number of 
active IPTV users in the corresponding vehicular network 
cell and total bandwidth available for IPTV in the cell. We 
also have presented a tool (ACTIVE) that allows us to 
determine IPTV service availability in a straight-forward 
and very efficient manner. The tool is based on our class of 
analytical models and it makes heavy use of a repository of 
partial results having already been calculated in advance to 
lay these results in stocks. Later, upon demand, the a priori 
determined partial results can be combined in a flexible 
manner to obtain an overall availability result for a new set 
of system parameters (regarding traffic situation, user 
behavior and IPTV service characteristics). Numerous case 
studies show how the ACTIVE tool can be used and they 
prove our claim that availability prediction by means of our 
analytical model and the new calculation method is highly 
efficient. What could take hours to be determined by 
executing simulation experiments can now be calculated in 
only a few seconds – and this can be done without loss of a 
significant amount of prediction accuracy as has been 
shown by our validation experiments. It is worth to be 
mentioned that our analytical modeling approach also 
directly covers the situation, that the watching probabilities 
pi of the TV channels are not determined by means of a Zipf 
distribution but have been measured in an existing IPTV 
system as relative frequencies of channel accesses. This 
makes our model even more realistic. 
 
In our future research related to IPTV in vehicular 
networks, we plan to investigate scenarios assuming IPTV 
in vehicles on rural roads (instead of motorways). An 
additional interesting research topic will be how IPTV user 
behavior will change if the users are passengers in cars 
instead of watching TV as “coach potatoes” being at home.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] B. E. Wolfinger, E. E. Báez, and N. R. Wilzek, “A Generalized 
Approach to Predict the Availability of IPTV Services in Vehicular 
Networks Using an Analytical Model,” 14th Internat. Conf. on 
Networks, ICN 2015, Barcelona, Spain, 2015, pp. 163-170.  
[2] A. Abdollahpouri, “QoS Aware Live IPTV Streaming Over Wireless 
Multi-hop Networks,” Shaker Verlag 2012. 
[3] A. Abdollahpouri, B. E. Wolfinger, J. Lai, and C. Vinti, “Modeling 
the Behavior of IPTV Users with Application to Call Blocking 
Probability Analysis,” Praxis der Informationsverarbeitung und 
Kommunikation 2012, 35 (2), pp. 75-81.  
[4] F. Ahmed-Zaid, H. Krishnan, M. Maile, L. Caminiti, S. Bai, and S. 
VanSickle, “Vehicle Safety Communications – Applications: System 
Design & Objective Testing Results,” SAE Int. J. of Passeng. Cars – 
Mech. Syst., 2011, 4 (1), pp. 417-434. 
[5] A. Baiocchi and F. Cuomo, “Infotainment services based on push-
mode dissemination in an integrated VANET and 3G architecture,” 
Journal of Communications and Networks, April 2013, 15 (2), pp. 
179-190. 
[6] E. Belyaev, A. Vinel, A. Surak, M. Gabbouj, M. Jonsson, and K. 
Egiazarian, “Robust Vehicle-to-Infrastructure Video Transmission for 
Road Surveillance Applications,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., 2014, 
64 (7), pp. 2991-3003.  
[7] T. Chen and R. R. Rao, “Audio-visual Integration in Multimodal 
Communication,” IEEE Proc. 1998, 86, pp. 142-149. 
[8] W. L. Dunn and J. K. Shultis, “Exploring Monte Carlo Methods,” 
Elsevier Science 2011. 
[9] FOCUS Online: “80 Prozent der Neuwagen mit Internet,” 
www.focus.de/auto/news/revolution-im-auto-bis-2016-haben-80-
prozent-der-neuwagen-internet_id_4216763.html  (last access: Nov. 
9, 2015). 
[10] A. Gladisch, R. Daher, M. Krohn, and D. Tavangarian, OPAL-VCN: 
“Open-Air-Lab 
for 
Vehicular 
Communication 
Networks,” 
WiMob’10, 2010, pp. 555-561. 
Figure 16. Variation of CBP during the example day. 
 
 

188
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[11] T. Guo, C. H. Foh, J. Cai, D. Niyato, and E. W. M. Wong, 
“Perfomance Evaluation of IPTV Over Wireless Home Networks,” 
IEEE Trans. on Multimedia, 2011, 13 (5), pp. 1116-1126. 
[12] D. Jiang and L. Delgrossi, “IEEE 802.11p: Towards an International 
Standard for Wirelesss Access in Vehicular Environments,” 
Vehicular Technology Conf., 2011, pp. 2036-2040. 
[13] M. Krohn, R. Daher, M. Arndt, and D. Tavangarian, “Aspects of 
roadside 
backbone 
networks,” 
1st 
Internat. 
Conf. 
Wireless 
Communication, Vehicular Technology, Information Theory and 
Aerospace & Electronic Systems Technology, Wireless VITAE 2009, 
pp.788-792. 
[14] J. Lai, “Evaluation and Improvement of TV Channel Availability for 
IPTV Services,” Shaker Verlag 2012. 
[15] S. Malkos, E. Ucar, and R. Akdeniz, “Analysis of QoE key factors in 
IPTV systems: Channel switching,” 5th Internat. Conf. on Application 
of Information and Communication Technologies (AICT2011), 
October 2011, Baku, Azerbaijan, pp. 1-5. 
[16] S. Möller and A. Raake, (eds.), “Quality of Experience: Advanced 
Concepts, Applications and Methods,” Springer 2014, pp. 11-35.  
[17] S. Momeni and B. E. Wolfinger, “Availability Evaluation of IPTV in 
VANETs with different types of access networks,” EURASIP Journal 
on Wireless Communications and Networking, Springer Open 
Journal, 2014: 117 (15 July 2014). 
[18] M. E. J. Newman, “Power Laws, Pareto Distributions and Zipf’s 
Law,” Contemporary Physics 2005, 46 (5), pp.1-3. 
[19] M. Oche, R. M. Noor, and J. I. Aghinya, “Network Centric QoS 
Performance Evaluation of IPTV Transmission Quality over 
VANETs,” Computer Communications, 2015, 61, pp. 34-47. 
[20] S. Olariu and M. C. Weigle, “Vehicular Networks: From Theory to 
Practice,” Chapman & Hall / CRC Press 2009. 
[21] S. Park, J. Jeong, and C. S. Hong, “QoS-guaranteed Mobile IPTV 
Service in Heterogeneous Access Networks,” Computer Networks, 
2014, 69, pp. 66-81. 
[22] RFC 1112: “Host Extensions for IP Multicasting,” August 1989. 
[23] F. J. Ros, J. A. Martinez, and P. M. Ruiz, “A Survey on Modeling and 
Simulation of Vehicular Networks: Communications, Mobility, and 
Tools,” Computer Communications, 2014, 43, pp. 1-15. 
[24] R. Y. Rubinstein and D. P. Kroese, “Simulation and the Monte Carlo 
Method,” 2nd ed., Wiley 2007. 
[25] J. P. Urrea Duque and N. Gaviria Gomez, “Quality assessment for 
video streaming P2P application over wireless mesh network,” XVII 
Symposium of Image, Signal Processing, and Artificial Vision 
(STSIVA2012), September 2012, Antioquia, Colombia, pp. 99-103. 
[26] B. Veselinovska, M. Gusev, and T. Janevski, “State of the Art in 
IPTV,” 
37th 
Internat. 
Convention 
on 
Information 
and 
Communication Technology, Electronics and Microelectronics 
(MIPRO 2014), Opatija, Croatia, 2014, pp. 479-484. 
[27] B. E. Wolfinger, A. Hübner, and S. Momeni, “A Validated Analytical 
Model for Availability Prediction of IPTV Services in VANETs,” 
Electronics 2014, 3, pp. 689-711; doi: 10.3390/electronics3040689. 
[28] L. Zhou, Y. Zhang, K. Song, W. Jing, and A. V. Vasilakos, 
“Distributed Media Services in P2P-Based Vehicular Networks,” 
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., 2011, 60, pp. 692-703. 
 

