Towards Optimized Performance in Military Operations 
 
Major Tapio Saarelainen, PhD; IARIA Fellow 
Army Academy 
Research and Development Division 
Finland 
tapio.saarelainen@mil.fi 
 
 
Abstract—Succeeding in military operations requires that the 
available resources be timely assessed and optimized. 
Sustaining combat performance asks for suitable tools for 
organizing services and resources that allow drawing from 
Situational Awareness, Common Operational Picture and 
utilizing Graphic User Interfaces. When aiming at maximum 
impact with the resources available, Service Oriented 
Architecture (SOA) can be used as a tool in the process of 
organizing the services. This paper presents an idea-phase 
introduction of how to facilitate military decision-making 
process with the assistance of the systems described here. The 
objective involves increasing the performance capability to 
allow time-efficient execution of military operations. The paper 
examines the optimization of services requested by means of 
SOA when viewing a military maneuver as a Business Process 
(BP) and sketches a preliminary Grid for Interface Assisted 
Decision Making (GIADM) to facilitate timely and accurate 
data processing. GIADM exploits the data offered by means of 
SOA, the Resource Manager (RM), and BP, and aims at 
facilitating the decision making process of a military 
commander at the planning stage of a given operation 
including evaluating Courses of Action (COA). The paper sets 
out to identify how to utilize the collected data from the 
battlespace to empower the process of decision-making and 
how to benefit from SOA in the creation process of Grid for 
Interface Assisted Decision Making. 
Keywords-Grid for Interface Assisted Decision Making, 
Business Process, military operation, Resource Manager,  
Service Oriented Architecture. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Requiring the optimization of the resources available, 
any military maneuver, including the dismounted company 
attack, serves as an example of a military operation in which 
the optimization of resources is the key to success [1]. This 
paper uses dismounted company attack as an example of a 
process that requires the constant ability to transmit relevant 
data and allocate requested services. In military operations, 
the destruction of mechanical and electrical adversaries 
continues to be necessary. Material destruction focuses on 
the enemy’s manpower and machinery, when electronically 
performed destruction can be understood as deleting the 
adversary’s capability to use electronic devices. 
The asymmetric nature of war requires improved 
capabilities in allocating the resources available. This sets 
increasing demands for Situational Awareness (SA), the data 
necessary for commanders executing operations in the battle 
space: precise data concerning location information, updated 
data involving performance capabilities of own troops and 
their current operation status.  
This paper examines the optimization of services 
requested by means of SOA when viewing a military 
maneuver as a Business Process and discusses a possible 
method for organizing the distribution of requested services 
in light of the set of assisting tools available real-time. 
Although these types of systems tend to be based on 
classified data, this paper exclusively relies on public domain 
sources. 
This paper argues that even though the requested services 
can be processed with the described tools (Resource 
Manager and Scheduler) and outlined methods of organizing 
services (Business Process –like actions assisted with SOA), 
the system still remains incomplete because it lacks a key 
tool, a field-tested grid that would take into account all the 
relevant and constantly changing variables, such as the 
planned duration of an operation, the type of terrain where 
the operation is taking place, the expected troop performance 
and the capabilities of a specific military unit. None of the 
expected performance or capability values have been 
determined, evaluated or inserted as part of any Battle 
Management System. This paper sketches the idea of a Grid 
for Interface Assisted Decision Making (GIADM) to 
facilitate timely and accurate data processing. 
Military commanders depend on 
automatic 
data 
collecting processes and tools to simplify complicated 
military maneuvers. To optimize performance, a military 
operation, an attack, can be simplified in the form of a 
Business Process (BP) by means of Service Oriented 
Architecture (SOA). The element named Resource Manager 
is a tool to be used in managing and allocating the existing 
resources. A BP -like orchestration of systems and services 
may improve the overall performance of military operations 
executed. This may result in improved overall performance 
capabilities while executing missions in the battlespace 
benefitting from SOA, the RM and the Scheduler [1]. 
Comparing modeling war as a process assisted with 
Service Oriented Architecture with other types of approaches 
would be difficult, as these types of models tend to be 
labeled as classified data. Hence, comparing different models 
remains outside the scope of this paper. Consequently, the 
details concerning network topology and energy supply are 
excluded from this paper as well. 
The military objectives concerning digitizing dismounted 
soldiers, sensing their environment and sharing information, 
will likely require as much as twice the power required by 
82
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

soldiers today [2]. Issues related to power usage remain 
outside the scope of this study for the reasons stated above. 
This paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces 
the related work, Section III discusses the Military Operation 
as a process, Section IV deals with Service Oriented 
Architecture and the allocation of requested services, and 
Section V examines a maneuver, a dismounted company 
attack, as a Business Process. Section VI combines the 
Business Process and the Resource Manager. Section VII 
explains the significance of communication and networks in 
the process of war, and Section VIII discusses the use of 
Unmanned Vehicles (UVs) and Section IX introduces a Grid 
for Interface Assisted Decision Making (GIADM). Section X 
concentrates on the Graphic User Interface (GUI). Section 
XI discusses on security and the Scheduler and Section XII 
concentrates on benefits and drawbacks of the introduced 
system. Section XIII concludes the paper with Section XIV 
suggesting further work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Since the existence and utilization of military troops, the 
necessity to improve the performance of soldiers and overall 
military performance has loomed large. This translates into 
the survival of the fittest. As we speak, in the era of 
Information Technology and beyond, the need to use 
advanced electrical devices to gain increased military 
performance 
has 
become 
a 
military 
research 
and 
development stable. When different types of Battle 
Management Systems have been applied to assist in using 
weapon 
systems, 
the 
performance 
of 
these 
Battle 
Management Systems have been linked to command and 
control systems to facilitate automated decision making.  
In the field of command and control, the need for 
Artificial Intelligence has been recognized from the 
perspective of modeling command and control [3].  As noted 
in [4], command and control increasingly necessitates the use 
of automated decision assistants and automated decision 
makers to aid in executing the complex and dynamic 
operations performed in the battlespace. The presented 
blueprint in [4] also provides design guidance for resource 
management.  
As explained in [5], a new method of firepower 
allocation is presented, which uses the structure of Multi-
Agent system to boost the firepower application as a process.  
Also a Multi-Agent System (MAS) in Computer Generated 
Forces (CGF) has been discussed in [6] in an environment of 
Tank combat unit. In [6] the hierarchical CGF agent model is 
designed to support the planning and execution of different 
tasks. Furthermore, a modeling method of agent-based 
Computer Generated Forces is discussed in [7] and a 
flowcart 
of 
simulation 
process 
has 
been 
created 
complemented by architecture on the combat simulation 
model.  
As discussed in [8], it is necessary to support 
commanders’ continuous access to information and to 
automate the Military Decision-Making Process (MDMP). 
As [8] describes, with the use of the computational model R-
CAST, 
cognitive 
agents 
can 
effectively 
assist 
the 
commander and thus bring about improved cognitive 
performance in military decision making tasks. 
Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) can be identified as 
a central factor in military environment, especially in 
creating capabilities. As identified in [9], SOA can be useful 
in providing required capabilities for the military in the 
needs concerning command, control, communications, 
computers, intelligence, information, surveillance and 
reconnaissance (C4I2SR). SOA can assist in gaining 
increased capabilities in Situational Awareness, improved 
Qulity of Service (QoS) and in decision making process. 
Soldier’s overall performance remains critical. As described 
in [10], soldiers’ performance has been studied by means of 
creating a map featuring a Bayesian Soldier Performance 
Model. The importance of the performance of a single 
soldier can never be over emphasized from the perspective of 
a military operation.   
The papers referred to above leave outside their scope the 
orchestration and allocation of services in the battlespace, 
such as processing fire support orders, requesting evacuation, 
and gaining information from designated areas. Moreover, 
these papers leave outside their scope the military 
performance capability offered for both a soldier and a 
military unit with the assistance of SOA. This requires that 
SOA be properly connected with the executing processes of 
a military operation. In addition, thre is room in the existing 
discussion for examining the use of Unmanned Vehicles as 
robotic platforms for communication purposes. 
This paper views a military operation as a Business 
Process. The use of SOA has been introduced together with 
possible services to be orchestrated and allocated as listed in 
the previous paragraph. Also, a Resource Manager and its 
functions have been introduced and combined with Business 
Processes and SOA. This paper emphasizes the significance 
of ubiquitous communication services and a reliable, 
operationally secure network system in executing military 
operations. Soldiers’ performance has been evaluated with 
the assistance of Psycho Physical Factor. The formula used 
is linked to commanding troops (identified as nodes) in a 
military operation. A new tool to assist commander’s 
decision making process has been introduced. The tool is 
named Grid for Interface Assisted Decision Making 
(GIADM) The paper offers a perspective for comprehending 
the complexity of executing a military process. 
III. 
MILITARY OPERATION AS A PROCESS 
Operating in military settings relies on the existing 
resources available real-time. These existing military 
resources can be understood as comprising troops or units 
(personnel), logistics (resupply materiel, medical supplies) 
and heavy machinery (tanks, armored vehicles), ammunition 
(cartridges, shells) and services (transportation, resupply, 
evacuation). These resources have to be available and 
accessible when executing a military operation. War can be 
modeled as a Business Process and Service Oriented 
Architecture (SOA) can used as an assistant in military 
operations, as described in [11]. Military operations are 
composed of parts, such as Information Management, which 
is linked with Network operations connected to Network 
83
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Centric Warfare (NCW). NCW adopts the characteristics of 
modern age into the military battlespace, especially when 
applying SOA in issues concerning battlespace Situational 
Awareness [12]. As communication systems remain vital in 
executing military processes of any kind, a functional and 
reliable communication network system ensures that issues 
related to Situation Awareness (SA) and Common 
Operational Picture (COP) can be tackled. The following 
Figure 1 displays communication systems related to 
Information Management and Network Operations. 
 
Figure 1.  Relation of Information Management and Network Operations. 
When applying the Business Process approach to Service 
Oriented Architecture, the services available are viewed as 
corresponding with existing real resources. These real 
resources can be more easily understood as services 
produced by the military troops themselves or by 
neighboring troops or services being served from the higher 
echelon. These services can be seen, for instance, as 
maintenance of machinery, close-air support (CAS), 
evacuation and resupply.  
The typical military operation carried out by a 
dismounted company is an attack maneuver. A dismounted 
company attack is composed of the actions performed by the 
company itself, as well as services offered by a higher 
echelon. A dismounted company attack is performed by 
using personnel (soldiers) equipped with personal weapons 
and heavy machinery (trucks, armored personnel carriers, 
artillery). A dismounted company attack is illustrated in 
Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2.  Dismounted Company attack as a process. 
A planned dismounted attack usually starts from the 
assembly area, moves on to the dismount line, via a line of 
departure, advances to engagement, results in close combat 
and ends when the set objective is reached. The SOA BP 
approach can increase the probability of success of an attack 
by empowering the human-based decision-making process 
with computers. This can enable an optimal use of resources, 
and thereby improve overall performance in operations. 
A successful military operation requires coordination and 
timing of existing resources. The availability of real 
resources in a given place and time is limited and needs to be 
meticulously scheduled. Usually, SOA services are assumed 
to be independent of each other but this assumption is no 
longer valid if SOA services represent real existing 
resources. The Resource Manager is a necessary element in 
SOA architecture as discussed in [1]. In the case of a 
dismounted 
company 
attack, 
successful 
performance 
requires that the requested services, for instance, processing 
a fire support order, are allocated timely and accurately. This 
sets demands for enhanced Situational Awareness. In the 
utilization of SOA in military operations, challenges of real-
time SOA must be solved [1]. To successfully execute BPs, 
the Business Process Execution Language (BPEL) is 
required, as argued in [13]. 
Organizing of troops and making decisions concerning 
weapon selection equals a process, in which automation is 
needed. Situations alter rapidly in the battlespace. Human 
capabilities are very limited as regards simultaneously 
monitoring different sensors, a number of screens and 
communicating with all the decision makers while executing 
commands. 
All 
the 
matters 
concerning 
Computers, 
Command, 
Control, 
Communication, 
Intelligence, 
Information, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (C4I2SR) and 
involving targeting and weapon systems by default value 
tend to change rapidly and, obviously, any change in one 
system can result in an immediate change in another system. 
An example of this would be a weapon system with the 
effective range of 5000 meters. When a targeting system 
recognizes the potential target at 7000 meters, locks into the 
potential target at this distance and transmits the data to the 
decision maker, the target has already travelled possibly 
several kilometers before the command for executing the 
firing mission arrives. By the time the firing order is 
executed, the target can be out of range of the weapon 
system (which was the set 5000 said), depending on the 
target’s pace. Therefore, automation is needed, but only to an 
extent; otherwise, own or friendly aerial targets may get 
annihilated. This decision making process when applying 
targeting and weapon systems is also affected by matters 
concerning Situational Awareness and Common Operational 
Picture as described in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3.  Decision making in applying targeting and weapon systems. 
84
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

IV. 
SERVICE ORIENTED ARCHITECTURE AND SERVICES 
To utilize Service Oriented Architecture in a military 
operation, 
its 
capabilities 
and 
nature 
need 
to 
be 
comprehended and to be aware of the services available to 
organize the system to support a military operation, such as a 
dismounted company attack. 
When needing to affect the sequencing and pace of 
events in the name of increasing efficiency, SOA is needed 
as an accelerator. In a successful military operation assisted 
with SOA, the end result can be seen as an operation with a 
minimum amount of collateral damage and fratricide. 
Moreover, a successful operation can be seen as efficient use 
of resources (ammunition, troops, vehicles, medical support 
and time). Thereby SOA is viewed as an aid for a military 
commander in the decision making process, for instance, 
when choosing Courses of Actions (COAs). Figure 4 depicts 
an example of two different types of COAs in the 
battlespace. In the first COA, the objective is to stop an 
armored enemy, whereas in the second COA, the objective is 
to destroy a Command Post. 
 
Figure 4.  Different types of Courses of Actions. 
SOA enables organizations and entities to operate 
complicated 
systems 
and 
enhance 
interoperability, 
collaboration, see [1], and foster the reusing of components 
and interfaces. SOA can be used in service collaboration. 
With the correct framework, SOA allows publishing services 
in a service registry and exchanging data through the Simple 
Object Access Protocol (SOAP) [13]. SOA offers an 
adjustable solution for systems integration, applications, 
protocols, data sources and processes to form a cohesive 
system that supports the execution of critical BPs [2]. SOA 
can be used as a collaboration tool in crises management and 
military environments if the challenges of real-time SOA 
[14] are solved. 
In order to successfully execute BPs, the Business 
Process Execution Language (BPEL) is required, as argued 
in [11]. In military systems, the adoption of SOA principles 
can beneficially result in the overall improvement of system 
flexibility and maintenance. SOA provides the user with 
richer information sets via the ability of Web Services to 
reach out through the networks, see [15]. In the process of 
achieving greater interoperability, SOA can be used by 
utilizing service oriented migration and reuse technique, 
described in [16]. 
In Network Centric Warfare contexts, SOA has been 
recognized to act as an enabler of services. SOA is an 
architecture style that encourages loose coupling between 
services to facilitate interoperability and the reuse of existing 
resources as described in [17]. SOA is seen as a tool in 
enabling agility to handle the changing dynamic evolution 
needed in network enabled capability, see [18]. The concept 
of NCW can be viewed as an integration of assets to meet a 
mission objective, as discussed in [18]. NCW fosters SOA to 
achieve flexible forces, which are constantly ready and 
deployable, capable of dynamic changes and evolution to 
achieve realizable effects. To benefit from SOA in an 
optimal way, organizations require a comprehensive and 
applicable SOA governance framework to implement the 
management and control mechanisms in the system, as 
argued in [19]. 
It has been pointed out [20] that Shared SA is in central 
role for network-enabled capabilities, as described in [20]. In 
NEC, SOA is most commonly realized through Web 
Services’ GUIs, as discussed in [21], using Extensible 
Markup Language (XML) formatted documents, see [20]. As 
evident, XML WS have been recently used to implement 
SOA enabling the building of BPs by dynamically calling 
services from the World Wide Web. 
SOA is an open concept and supports plug-and-play 
capabilities of heterogeneous software and hardware 
components, with the implementation of Web Services, 
which is probably so far the most popular implementation of 
SOA, as discussed in [22]. For this reason, SOA has been 
selected as the architectural solution for the C4I2SR systems 
for the Finnish Defence Forces [23]. SOA is seen as an 
enabler in crises management organizations for delivering 
data and services across political, organizational and cultural 
boundaries as well as addressing the issues of information 
sharing regardless of where required data is stored, as 
concluded in [24]. The global information grid is an essential 
vehicle in the execution of SOA and for the transformation 
of data. 
In tactical operations, the significance of the real-time 
location data plays an important role. The tools available 
include different types of Tactical Battle Management 
Systems (BMS) for dismounted combat to produce the 
location information of own troops and precise target 
designation. The tools for target designation and air-land 
coordination are necessary requirements for success in 
operations as described in [25]. Furthermore, air-to-ground 
communications are described in [26]. 
Requirements related to improved Situational Awareness, 
communications and networks are described in [27], grid 
computing in the battlespace plays an important role as 
described in [28], and enhancing squad communications with 
the assistance of smart phones is described in [29]. Lastly, 
multiplication of various technologies is introduced in [30]. 
Their overall purpose is to increase the performance of a 
Future Force Warrior. The inputs of all these tools and 
networks can be calculated with the assistance of tools used 
in Business Processes and with the assistance of Service 
Oriented Architecture. 
There has to be a carefully defined military operation 
before SOA can be adopted in a specific process. The 
planning sequence requires modeling the military operation 
into small fragments and the relations and functions between 
85
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

different fragments have to be planned. Moreover, parts and 
functions of Business Processes have to be opened and 
studied before embedding SOA into BP by examining the 
necessary services and their features. 
The variety of services used in BPs may be in the 
operational use of a single unit or several units at the same 
time. This requires an efficient orchestration of services to 
maintain service control. SOA can be seen as an enabler in 
the process of executing military operations as BPs.  
The offered services during an advancing dismounted 
attack are listed in Table I. Most of these services can be pre-
programmed to concern the wanted product-line Future 
Force Warrior (FFW) level. The company commander 
utilizes various services (fire support orders, location 
services, medical care, resupply, evacuation, geographical 
information system -map-service, Blue Force Tracking) 
while executing the commanded attack from the assembly 
area to the objective. Table I illustrates possible services 
available for a dismounted company attack. 
TABLE I.  
LIST OF PRE-PROGRAMMED AND ADDITIONAL SERVICES IN 
A DISMOUNTED COMPANY ATTACK. 
 
Fulfilling a requested service asks for the requested 
service to be available and within range. When dealing with 
Fire Support Orders (FSO), the range limitations of artillery 
units are critical. An artillery unit has to be located within 
appropriate range, and it has to be ready to intake Fire 
Support Orders and execute them in the required time frame, 
precisely as ordered. 
In a military operation, it is important both to optimize 
the resources and also minimize collateral damage. SOA can 
act as a functioning part of the weapon selection process, 
especially in offering the weapons available for the use of a 
company commander. Figure 5 indicates the caption from a 
Battle Management System from a target rich environment. 
The mission is to destroy the enemy and simultaneously 
minimize fratricide and collateral damage. 
 
Figure 5.  Challenges in weapon selection process. 
Battle Management Systems are strongly linked to 
Command and Control systems. Typically Command and 
Control systems provide support for Battle Management 
Systems in various tasks, such as operational planning, 
obtaining 
Situational 
Awareness, 
creating 
Common 
Operational Picture and sustaining the decision making 
process. The goal of Command and Control systems is to 
increase the operational capabilities of the operating units 
from the battalion level to a single platform and soldier level 
[31]. 
When we observe the possibilities to fuse the 
information, Battle Management Systems are usable to an 
extent. Battle Management Systems use Battle Management 
Language (BML), which also enables automatic information 
fusion, as discussed in [32]. As BML represents an 
unambiguous language for military communication, it is a 
usable tool in a digitized battlespace environment. As 
described in [32], the vocabulary of BML is based on a Joint 
Consultation, Command and Control Information Exchange 
Data Model (JC3IEDM). Several versions of BML are 
available to meet the requirements of a consumer for 
different purposes. 
Military commanders need to process a vast amount of 
data for decision making purposes. The formula to calculate 
the cumulative uncertainty can be found in [32]. This 
formula produces a result, which still has to be evaluated by 
a human being. The significance of a human-being in a 
decision loop continues to be indispensable. Digitized tools 
need to be utilized especially in the planning stage of an 
operation. 
V. 
BUSINESS PROCESS 
The orchestration of Business Processes requires a tool 
for allocating resources, the Resource Manager (RM). The 
tool has been described in [33]. The RM sorts out and lines 
up the requested services. These requested services can be 
understood as service actions performed or produced by 
humans or machines, involving transportation, issuing Fire 
Support Orders or evacuation. Furthermore, a single service 
can be understood as a data exchange process. As militaries 
implement the framework of Network Centric Warfare with 
a continuing need to automate the command and control (C2) 
tools utilized in military, the tempo of operations must be 
taken into consideration. The collected data need to be 
processed, analyzed, verified, transmitted, and finally stored. 
SOA can be identified as a technology that can satisfy these 
needs of network centric operations. The starting point in the 
BP approach to SOA is that the main business operations of 
the organization are described by SOA BPs. The Business 
Processes are chains of logic that request SOA services. In 
the case of a military setting, the Business Processes 
represent military operations as depicted in Figure 6. 
86
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 6.  Busines Process Platform as a service enabler. 
SOA can be utilized in reorganizing the military 
organization when casualties affect the command chains of 
the military organization. This is described in [34]. In 
Network Centric Warfare one key aspect is to offer a valid 
and accurate Common Operational Picture (COP) for the 
operating troops in the battlespace. A basic requirement for a 
combat leader is to have a possibility to lead the troops and 
gain good COP. An important aspect in distributing 
information in the battlespace is the amount and quality of 
information shared at different levels. A squad leader needs 
only basic information of the task while the battalion leader 
needs the information in a much wider scope and rearranged. 
The amount of information allocated needs to be set to a 
level where the person responsible for making decisions is 
able to perform timely and make accurate decisions. 
SOA offers a way to organize this system in the form of 
versatile and varying types of processes and services. One 
terminal can use a number of services over a network to gain 
the information needed. All the terminals also act as services 
themselves and this creates a network of various services.  
The strong point of this system is that it is not dependent on 
any node of the system and in ideal case every terminal can 
change the current level. Each Warrior type has to be able to 
act as a leader at the next hierarchy level. For example, a 
Basic Warrior has the capability to act as a squad leader if 
needed. The terminals are also able to discover the services 
dynamically, which is an important aspect in a versatile and 
changing system in the form of databases and UDDI -
registries to each node. 
A constructive idea in SOA is its process ideology. In a 
military system the composition of the unit together with its 
performance are in a key role in executing the operations. 
Military units suffer from casualties and their performance 
value tends to change in an unpredictable manner. A military 
organization can be described at different abstraction levels 
seen in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7.  Overall view of Dynamic Hierarchy in a military organization. 
Psycho Physical Factor can be calculated by using 
varying and measured variables of individuals’ physical 
state. These values can be identified as, for example, heart 
rate, sweep of sweat and hormonal activity. Creating this 
factor is described in [26] and the formula can be useful in 
calculating the performance of a military unit. Varying 
variables can be measured via a wrist embedded computer. 
Obviously, to gain reliable values of each soldier and his or 
her current state of health, a monitoring period of at least six 
months is required in advance before starting field tests. 
Figure 8 features the formula created in [34], which describe 
calculating Psycho Physical Factor and accounts for 
command and control relations in a military organization. 
As demonstrated in [9], human variables are important in 
the quest for answers to improve the soldier performance, 
including the measuring of stress, sleep deprivation, fatique 
and mental and physical trauma together with information 
overload, mission duration and overall energy balance. In [9] 
the Bayesian network model of Soldier performance was 
utilized. In addition, the formula for Psycho Physical Factor 
is relevant when calculating the performance values for 
military units and organizations varying in size (team, 
platoon, company, battalion). Here the Dynamic Battlefield 
Hierarchy plays an important role. 
Figure 9 represents the increasing abstraction level in 
Dynamic 
Battlefield 
Hierarchy. 
Dynamic 
Battlefield 
Hierarchy is utilized in organizing and re-organizing military 
units. The performance of soldiers can be calculated, and as a 
result, the performance level of a whole military unit can be 
determined. When the performance is calculated, this value 
can be inserted as a mathematical value into different types 
of decision making processes. The following Figure 9 
introduces a simplified view of the performance of a single 
military unit. In this figure the stress level of each soldier has 
been taken into consideration as well as the number of battles 
they have encountered and participated. Their recovery times 
have been calculated together with the stress level and the 
level of missing soldiers from the organization. As a result, 
each military unit (team, platoon, company, and battalion) 
can be identified with a performance value. The required 
power for each attack can be calculated beforehand once the 
enemy has been assessed first (the number of soldiers and 
amount of weaponry). The system described in Figure 8 was 
validated and laboratory tested as described in [34]. 
 
Figure 8.  Calculating the performance of a military unit [27]. 
VI. 
BUSINESS PROCESS AND RESOURCE MANAGER 
The orchestration of Business Processes requires a tool 
for allocating resources, the Resource Manager (RM). The 
87
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

tool has been described in [33]. The RM sorts out and lines 
up the requested services. As militaries implement the 
framework of Network Centric Warfare with a continuing 
need to automate the Command and Control (C2) tools 
utilized in military, the ever-increasing tempo of operations 
must be taken into consideration. The collected data need to 
be processed, analyzed, verified, transmitted, and finally 
stored. SOA can be identified as a technology that can satisfy 
these needs of network centric operations. The starting point 
in the BP approach to SOA is that the main business 
operations of the organization are described by SOA BPs. 
The Business Processes are chains of logic that request SOA 
services. As regards military settings, the Business Processes 
represent military operations as explained earlier and 
depicted in Figure 6.  
SOA-technology 
involves 
assisting, 
planning 
and 
executing events performed in military operations. Business 
processes are executed on a specific Business Process 
platform. Services and platforms, including geographical 
information-services, 
weapons 
platforms, 
and 
Battle 
Management Systems, are linked to the Business Process 
Platform to obtain optimal results. When a Future Force 
Warrior can benefit from the possibilities offered by a 
successful adoption of BP and SOA, the result can be 
improved overall performance in military operations. 
Figure 9 describes how the Business Process approach 
can improve the performance of an FFW. Several battlefield 
sensors gather data from the battlespace. The collected data 
are then automatically transmitted to be analyzed in a 
command post. Various battlefield sensors transmit data to a 
context-aware reasoning layer. In this layer, data are 
converted to context and an inference engine transmits the 
data to a ubiquitous main layer for analyzing purposes. The 
data are verified, analyzed and transmitted as information for 
the execution of the operation. 
 
Figure 9.  Increased FFW Performance can be gained via successful data 
utilization and analyzing processes. 
Several of the needed services require real-time 
resources. These services can be identified, for example, as 
collecting SA data and issuing Fire Support Orders. Thus, 
the services and their use must be scheduled and sequenced 
to sustain the processes. The RM sorts out and lines up 
simultaneous requests concerning the requested service. The 
RM serves as the element, which provides the needed 
services for User Groups (UGs). Services can be either pre-
programmed on demand or be available on request basis. 
The RM as a tool is located at the battalion level. The user 
groups send a request for the demanded service. The UGs are 
then authenticated, their privileges verified, after which the 
request is transmitted to the RM. The key functions of the 
RM are: 1) to receive the request of a required service, 2) to 
organize the line of user groups in the correct order 
depending on the UGs’ privileges and battle-situation, 3) to 
check whether the service is available and within range, 4) to 
provide the User Groups with the answer, which is either the 
requested service or a rejection of the service. 
The RM functions as a fully automated chain of functions 
in certain processes [33]. The key function of the person in 
the loop is to monitor the flow of events and to interfere with 
the chain of events if an unpredicted anomaly occurs in the 
process. As the RM is a critical resource, it must be 
physically protected against enemy actions. 
The role of the RM is central in the allocating of 
resources in the BP. The RM communicates with four 
intermodules. The RM graphical user interface provides the 
core interface between all the presented modules and the 
Local Area Network (LAN), as shown in Figure 10. The 
LAN is utilized as a battlefield network or a community 
network as it can be used in a wide area of networks. 
However, the sharing of networking environment and its 
resources remains challenging in that searching for 
information and asking for resources turn out to be 
challenging when lacking proper search mechanisms. Each 
module has pre-defined and precise functions. First, the file 
and resources sharing module communicates with the RM 
GUI in conjunction with the sharing and the download 
module. The file and resource transfer and download module 
supports and enables the transfer or download of the 
searched file or resource from the other node connected to 
the network. The shared files and resources are listed on the 
RM GUI, where the listed and downloaded files can be 
examined. It is obvious that the same identified services are 
requested simultaneously. Therefore, the composition of the 
RM needs to be stable and reliable. Figure 10 illustrates the 
composition and function of the RM. 
 
Figure 10.  The composition and function of the RM. 
The fire support system is essential in the battlespace. 
The fire support system requires an algorithm to support its 
optimized function as mentioned in [31]. The algorithm is 
used in the evaluation process of executing the firing 
88
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

mission. The critical features include the availability of the 
weaponry in question, its range, and its effect on a specific 
target and the status of the weaponry (i.e., in use/waiting for 
a fire support command).  The example presented in Figure 
11 depicts the processing of fire support order requests inside 
the RM as an informal Specification and Description 
Language (SDL) diagram. This action performed by the RM 
is essential to proceed in the process of offering requested 
service/s [33]. 
 
Figure 11.  The processing of Fire Support Order requests in RM in an 
informal SDL diagram. 
In a Fire Support Order the decision to execute the 
requested action, to fire, is made by a human being, an 
officer. In the future, when fire support decision algorithms 
are more fine-tuned, the decision to execute the mission can 
be forwarded to a Battle Management System. The BMS will 
then select the weapon and suitable ammunition for a 
specific fire mission. The BMS can also pre-evaluate the 
amount of ammunition type needed (how many shells it 
takes to destroy the target).  
Each request comes with a time-stamp and own 
identification, contains route data and is traceable whenever 
tracking data are required. Each request is categorized 
according to an urgency class and its execution process is 
continuously monitored and evaluated. Once the request has 
been executed, it will be filed as a completed task in the 
common database. The tracking data of the completed 
request can be retrieved for analyzing purposes at any time 
by the system operator. 
From the perspective of SOA and the Resource Manager, 
the described systems enable improved capability to align the 
listed and noticed services. When necessary services can be 
recognized and their state and phase have been identified, it 
may be possible to efficiently utilize own resources, for 
example, in a dismounted company attack. The process of a 
dismounted company attack was depicted earlier in Figure 2. 
Operating in a military setting requires organizing 
matters related to command and control. It is mandatory to 
be able to sustain the composition of troops while soldiers 
get killed, wounded and missing in action. Dynamic 
hierarchy and performance value calculation were described 
earlier in Figure 7 and Figure 8. The orchestration of 
command chains and troops require reliable performance 
from SOA and the RM, but also a reliable means of 
communication and ubiquitous communication networks to 
support selected frequencies and used waveforms and 
bandwidths. 
Although the requested services can be processed with 
the listed tools (Resource Manager and Scheduler) and 
outlined methods of organizing services (Business Process –
like actions assisted with SOA), the system still remains 
incomplete because it lacks a key tool, a grid that takes into 
account all the relevant and constantly changing variables,  
such as the planned duration of an operation, the type of 
terrain where the operation is taking place, the expected 
troop performance and the capabilities of a specific military 
unit. None of the expected performance or capability values 
have been determined, evaluated or inserted as part of any 
Battle Management System.  
VII. COMMUNICATION AND NETWORKS 
The significance of functional communication systems 
and appropriately planned networks is substantial. To 
execute effective military operations as part of Network 
Centric Warfare, communication and network systems have 
to be carefully tailored in order to ensure that the services 
used can be located, identified and orchestrated together with 
SOA and with the assistance of the RM. Allocating and 
resourcing services becomes impossible without ubiquitous 
and secured network and communication systems. 
The primary function of a communication system is to 
support Command and Control and support those actions. 
The main objectives of the systems involve providing 
Common Operational Picture of the battlespace in near-real 
time and sharing data among the battlespace systems. The 
systems utilized facilitate the fusion and display of 
intelligence information to commanders at all levels and 
handles the exchange of targeting data from sensor to 
weapon systems. This loop is called a loop from sensor-to-
shooter-loop; the shorter the loop, the more effective the 
weapon system. Communication systems used have to 
support various waveforms, frequencies, transmission 
protocols, offer adequate bandwidth and Quality of Service 
(QoS). SOA can be seen as an organizing tool of systems 
utilized. Figure 12 explains the network system from sensor 
to shooter. 
89
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 12.  Network from sensor to shooter. 
The speed and versatility of military operations keeps 
increasing unpredictably. Asymmetric and hybrid warfare set 
challenges for maintaining the ubiquitous networks in 
battlespace. If the Resource Manager does not identify the 
existing service, it can neither offer nor allocate it to any 
consumer (soldier).  
The amount and versatility of collaboration tools also 
increases in the battlespace. Commanders’ digital assistants 
of several types require constant and reliable connectivity to 
a functional network system with adequate bandwidth and 
the possibility to transmit data in different formats and also 
live footage from the battlespace. Different collaborating 
entities benefit from various tools and programs. Interfaces 
between military organizations can be challenging. A 
battalion commander and Company Commander use 
different tools for command and control. The used tools may 
rely on different frequencies and waveforms. The user 
challenges that surface are versatile when military units 
cooperate 
with 
civilian 
authorities 
or 
with 
Non-
Governmental Organizations, when waveforms and tools 
may vary to a great extent. These challenges have been 
discussed in [35]. 
The concept of Network Centric Warfare has been 
created to support agile and versatile military operations in 
rapidly altering battlespace. To offer, allocate and trace 
services requires a comprehensive network system to ensure 
the ability to use these services. Without a ubiquitous and 
reliable communication network system, the execution of a 
successful military operation is endangered and likely to fail. 
In modern warfare communication services cannot be 
constantly produced by the performance of military satellites. 
Ubiquitous network systems require simple and local 
solutions in military operations executed in a low level 
(company and below).  
Recent developments in modern military battlefield 
systems greatly influence today’s military commanders and 
their performance. Modern devices such as smartphones are 
today supported by a complex infrastructure that enables 
high-speed communications and access to voice and data 
services anywhere, anytime. This is true only in theory. 
Constant communicating capability is hampered by latencies, 
disrupted connectivity in electromagnetic spectrum. Typical 
tactical operations benefit from the systems based on Local 
Area 
Communications 
(LAN). 
These 
systems 
are 
increasingly being employed to keep platoon and company 
level soldiers and assets connected with one another and 
their battle-group commander. Voice communications are 
being replaced with secure data connections as latest 
developments in the technology sphere indicate [2]. 
Moreover, communication systems based on Internet 
Protocol (IP) suite of products can be used to create a 
complete Wide Area System (WAS) with a number of Local 
Area Networks (LAN) in order to provide the required 
services 
for 
the 
consumer 
of 
a 
modern 
tactical 
communication network system. The maximum number of 
users in this type of network system is claimed to be 300 [2]. 
An example of typical soldier-worn personal radios are 
compact, cost effective and military graded transceivers that 
ensure secure and reliable voice and data communications 
for squad teams and higher echelons in many tactical 
scenarios, such as dismounted, vehicular, naval and 
amphibious operations. New radios are embedded with 
GPS/GLONASS receivers for automatic position reporting. 
Personal radios offer lightweight and low consumption 
transceivers operating in the frequency of 2.4 GHz Industrial, 
Scientific and Medical (ISM) band with a very low Radio 
Frequency (RF) signature modulation scheme based on 
spread spectrum technology (DSSS) and providing a robust, 
reliable and low probability of detection time division 
multiple access (TDMA) waveform. Radios typically feature 
advanced encryption standard (AES) encryption providing a 
very high security level on the transferred audio and data 
systems, while security keys can be downloadable. Personal 
tactical radios can provide several tactical communication 
services, such as full-duplex voice conferencing, GPS 
reporting, e-mail, chat, file transfer, as well as real-time 
video streaming [2]. On top of these systems, some of these 
can be seen as a wireless extension for an Intercom System 
and Combat Net Radios; they allow users to be connected to 
the vehicles and their main radio equipment via independent 
push-to-talk (PTT) selection. Software Defined Radios 
(SDRs) are on their way to tactical military environment. 
Typical SDRs’ features include: Multiband 30 – 512 MHz, 
multimode, 
multi-mission, 
software 
programmable 
architecture, Low Probability of Detection (LPD) and Low 
Probability of Identification (LPI), simultaneous voice and 
data, near-real time data transfer for sensor to shooter 
applications 
and 
lastly 
integration 
to 
Strategic 
Communication Systems [2]. 
VIII. THE USE OF UNMANNED VEHICLES 
The possibilities to benefit from Unmanned Vehicles 
(UVs) as relay-stations and sensor nodes deserve to be 
considered. Issues such as Low Probability of Detection and 
Low Probability of Identification have to be taken under 
close study and evaluation. When communication systems 
and services can produced with the assistance of UVs, they 
are easier to replace and the re-routing of the lost connection 
or connectivity can be arranged with a better probability 
compared to a satellite-based communication system of a 
higher echelon. 
A typical UV can be a dispensable robot capable of 
overcoming the communications problems that soldiers 
90
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

encounter in built-up areas. Robots are usable in land and at 
sea, or air-borne, representing Unmanned Aerial Systems 
(UAS) or Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) [36], [37]. 
Robots 
are 
utilized 
to 
reconfigure 
the 
prevailing 
communication infrastructure enabling the soldiers to stay 
connected with their lines of communication in versatile and 
altering urban communication battlespace. Throwable robots 
can act as an assisting tool in gathering data from the harsh 
and hostile battlespace [2]. It is crucial to understand the 
challenges posed by network connectivity constraints in the 
formation and reconfiguration of the network system in the 
environment, which UVs operate. The problem of formation 
control with network connectivity is discussed in [38]. 
SOA can serve as a tool in military operations in 
organizing and orchestrating networks and their topologies 
and in the process of re-routing the connection between 
users. Challenges related to Persistent Tactical Awareness 
(PTA) and Persistent Tactical Surveillance (PTS) [2] can be 
more easily solved if SOA and UVs can be utilized in 
gathering data and transmitting these data from the sensor to 
the shooter in an agile manner. Moreover, Command Posts 
create and update their Situational Awareness and Common 
Operational picture on the basis of the raw data produced by 
sensors embedded in the battlespace. Functional and reliable 
communication remains critical in Network Centric Warfare. 
And lastly, communication networks have to be pre-
planned to support sensor-throwable and sensor-shootable 
elements in different types of sensors. An example of the 
latter ones is described in [38]. Figure 13 depicts the 
functions of the Sensor Element Munition divided in 
different phases. When the data can be gathered beyond the 
horizon discreetly, the possibility of a success of own 
dismounted company attack is increasing. 
The data collected with the assistance of Sensor Element 
Munitions can be used as real-time data to be inserted in the 
decision making process after the significance and reliability 
of these data have been evaluated and verified.  
 
Figure 13.  The usage of Sensor Element Munition. 
IX. 
GRID FOR INTERFACE ASSISTED DECISION 
MAKING (GIADM) 
As noted, neither the expected performance values nor 
the capability values of any military units have so far been 
calculated, assessed or inserted in any Battle Management 
System. The following discusses a preliminary idea 
concerning how to account for expected troop performance 
as a determined value together with time and terrain. The 
sketched Grid for Interface Assisted Decision Making 
(GIADM) exploits the data offered by means of SOA, the 
RM, and BP, and does so by using only one solution, which 
maximally exploits the results of all the systems. This type of 
an assisting tool needs to be algorithm-based because of the 
infinite number of affecting variables in a given military 
setting. For end-user purposes, the tool needs to be screen- or 
GUI-embedded, depending on the level of operation and that 
of a given military commander in an organization.  
The proposed tool, a GIADM, aims at facilitating the 
decision making process of a military commander and can be 
benefitted in all types of military operations (defensive, 
offensive, special and Military Operations Other Than War), 
and is calculated on the basis of gathered data to support an 
existing military operation during its early planning stage. As 
an assisting tool, IADM serves the planning phase of an 
operation at all the army levels and draws on critical 
information based on the gathered knowledge on both own 
forces and the adversary, its actions and strength. Critical 
information includes time, distances between objects and 
troops, weapons available and the variety and amount of 
different types of supplies. In addition, features related to the 
prevailing weather, type of troops used, number and type of 
vehicles, type and nature of terrain and the capability of 
troops to execute a commanded mission are identified and 
quantified to determine the possibilities to execute a 
commanded mission. The levels of varying set objectives or 
actions can be marked on GIADM as depicted in Figure 14. 
To utilize GIADM, Graphic User Interfaces have to support 
its use. GUIs and their performance capabilities are 
discussed in Section X. 
 
Figure 14.  Set objectives marked on Grid for Interface Assisted Decision 
Making (GIADM). 
When SOA is utilized to calculate the relative strength 
between military entities, the resources at hand may be 
optimized. This optimization means timing the usage of own 
resources, the amount of military force (troops, weapons, 
transportation, evacuation) available and its placement. 
When utilizing SOA and the Resource Manager in the 
planning process of organizing a military operation, the 
probability of a successful operation of a military maneuver 
may increase. This means saving own troops, fuel, 
ammunition, transportation vehicles and medical supplies. 
91
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

These resources can be seen as services in SOA, the 
Resource Manager, and a resource or service in a Business 
Process. When all the parameters of the attack terrain, 
relative strengths of the entities (own, opposite force), 
amount of troops, different types of capabilities in 
performing operations are set in GIADM as variables, 
GIADM displays the results as suggestions on how to 
perform the commanded operation, as depicted in Figure 15, 
which visualizes only the pace of an operation from the 
perspective of a single soldier. Moreover, the use of friendly 
artillery fire can be presented in Graphic User Interface as a 
factor a single soldier has to take into account when 
performing a commanded task. This feature of the GIADM 
may aid in attempting to minimize instances of fratricide. 
 
Figure 15.  Suggestion of an operation, as visualized in GIADM. 
X. 
GRAPHIC USER INTERFACE 
Graphic User Interfaces are vital visualization platforms 
in the digitized military battlespace, in which military 
operations are executed speedily in constantly changing 
situations. Graphic User Interfaces can be identified as 
organic tools in command and control systems in 
contemporary warfare at all the levels of command and 
control systems; the higher the level in an organization, the 
more sophisticated the GUI.   
The utilization of SOA in Network Centric Environments 
requires that the usability of Graphic User Interfaces be 
taken into consideration. GUIs have to be simple tools that 
assist the execution of a commanded military operation as 
visualization platforms of Battle Management Systems. 
When everything functions as planned, BMS can be seen as 
a system used to combine all the sensors, entities and devices 
to be used by higher echelon. BMS enables C2 processes 
executed in the battlespace. BML can be used in the 
interaction between Command and Control systems and as 
tools for course of action planning and analysis. When BPs 
can be embedded together with the assistance of an 
appropriate Scheduler, a Graphic User Interface of a Future 
Force Warrior may look as depicted in Figure 16. 
 
Figure 16.  A view displayed by a Graphic User Interface. 
GUI can serve both as a display and end-user device of a 
GIADM, especially at the lower command levels (company 
and below).  
XI. 
SECURITY AND SCHEDULER 
To account for operational security, there are protocols to 
identify the credentials of the requester entity by applying a 
security, authentication and agreement tool embedded in the 
RM. Before any tasks are ordered to be executed or 
resources allocated for use, the task or resource request is 
processed via the described system, as presented in Figure 
17. An incoming task passes through a preliminary phase, in 
which it is checked and identified. Once the task has been 
verified and approved and transmitted from a trusted and 
secure cooperation entity, it will be processed via a series of 
approval and authorization policies. 
Security issues remain critical also when dealing with 
unmanned aerial vehicles utilized in Network Centric 
Warfare at tactical level as described in [30]. The collected 
data have to be secured to remain intact and coherent when 
passing through different interfaces from the sensor to the 
shooter. 
The described process ends with a phase in which the 
common language and tools are selected and then the given 
request moves forwards inside the RM. The overall 
description of the whole concept consists of three major parts 
and functions: 1) SA comprehending the existing solutions 
and tools, 2) command and control tools, and 3) information 
repository. These three together enable the command and 
control process and saving of logdata for further analyses. 
These functions presuppose the RM and the Scheduler to 
share and distribute the tasks and resources. 
92
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 17.  Security, authentiction and agreement system. 
To provide the requested service, the RM requires one 
more component [34]. This critical component for the 
military use of SOA, which relies on the utilization of the 
RM is called the Scheduler. The role of the Scheduler is to 
coordinate processes to maximize the performance of 
resources and to reduce fratricide and collateral damage. The 
Scheduler enables militaries to execute various operations 
simultaneously but still under a strict command and control. 
The issue of simultaneously operations is solved by the 
element named Battlefield Secure Scheduler (BSS). This 
component uses two different methods of sharing calendar, 
Pre-Shared Scheduler (PSS) and Dynamic Schedule Update 
(DSU). The Scheduler functions together with the RM and 
utilizes SOA as a process. These elements can be recognized 
in Figure 18, which introduces the process from an incoming 
command/task to an outgoing command/task. 
 
Figure 18.  The elements inside the scheduler and the permeable command 
and control -process. 
XII. BENEFITS AND DRAWBACKS 
The delicate system introduced, the sketched Grid for 
Interface Assisted Decision Making exploits the data offered 
by means of SOA, the RM, and BP, but it does this by using 
only one solution, which exploits the results of all the 
systems. This means that the system can malfunction for 
various reasons. Challenges related to sustained energy 
supply have to be solved to enable the function of different 
processes. The orchestration of the system can also fail 
because of intentional enemy action (jamming, a virus, a 
worm). The system needs to be equipped with an analyzing 
program, which indicates when the system functions 
properly. If the system malfunctions and retrieving the 
capabilities becomes impossible, the system becomes useless 
for an FFW. This asks for an easily replaceable and fault-
tolerant system with inbuilt check-in routines. Otherwise, 
traditional methods in orchestrating services need to be 
adopted. 
By adopting SOA and embedding business processes into 
the existing command and control -system, the overall 
performance of military operations may be improved. With 
the assistance of the RM, limited military resources may be 
allocated more efficiently to the users requiring for services. 
When the Scheduler is implemented together with the RM 
into the BPs, it may be possible to increase the speed of 
decision making process together with the execution 
capability. The allocated resources available may then be 
used optimally. This means shorter execution times, and an 
increased amount of data for improved decision making. The 
overall system performance may be optimized with the 
assistance of these tools. 
Offering a service of ubiquitous computing to battlespace 
commanders increases the possibility to utilize the resources 
available. This may foster a rapid decision making process 
especially when SOA can be embedded in the decision-
making systems. As described in [22], SOA must deliver a 
solution that crosses existing boundaries as well as addresses 
the issues of information sharing regardless of where that 
information is stored.  
By adopting these introduced elements into BMS 
together with SOA, it may be possible to gain improved 
capability to execute operations. This may also mean 
reduction in time needed for allocating resources and result 
in improved overall performance with minimized operations’ 
execution times. Besides, with the improved level of SA, 
fratricide and collateral damage may possibly be reduced. 
The system presented here is free to be adopted and 
tested. To create a functioning, automated business process 
applicable 
for 
future 
battlespace 
purposes 
requires 
development and testing, which accounts for matters related 
to adequate bandwidth, transmission power, connectivity, 
and operational security. 
XIII. CONCLUSIONS 
The introduced tool, GIADM, represents a follow-up 
idea-phase development stage in the quest for 
a 
comprehensive assisting decision making tool. GIADM 
combines gathered information from the existing resources 
and platforms connected to the Battle Management System. 
GIADM functions on top of BMS, SOA, RM and other 
possible tools for assisting in the decision making process 
and location of troops.  
Synchronizing a sustainable performance of military 
troops, achieving the set objectives, optimizing the use of 
unmanned vehicles and timing of operations remain 
necessary. These in turn affect planning the resources to be 
orchestrated and allocated to minimize casualties and ensure 
short recovery times. 
A commander has to be able to use an optimum amount 
of force. Because of the inevitable casualties, troops must be 
reorganized periodically in an unpredicted manner. SOA can 
be benefitted in the action of reorganizing the composition of 
troops and their resources. Resource Manager is integrated 
into SOA and Business Processes in order to assist the 
93
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

commander to target the reinforcement of troops and 
services to the area of operation in which they are mostly 
needed. The functions of Resource Manager take the use of 
Unmanned Vehicles into consideration. The data collected 
by robotic vehicles in inserted in the command and control 
system via Battle Management Systems of various types. 
The data collected are then inserted in the tool labeled 
Grid for Interface Assisted Decision Making. After the 
analysis, a commander receives a suggestion how to execute 
an operation in relation to time, troops, terrain and the type 
of an operation with the objective to minimize the needed 
amount of supplies and services and thus save resources for 
the follow-up action.  
The timely reorganizing of troops requires that the data 
collected have to be presented in an appropriate manner 
depending on the level of a military troop commander 
(platoon 
leader, 
company 
commander, 
battalion 
commander). Simple to use, affordable Graphic User 
Interfaces are in essential role in low level operations. 
Militaries adopt digital systems created for assisting the 
process of decision making and operational planning. These 
systems continue to need further development in order to be 
fully adopted in operational use. When militaries continue to 
aim at optimized performance with the assistance of Service 
Oriented Architecture, the systems embedded in SOA and 
Business Processes have to be properly organized and 
orchestrated. The amount of interference between different 
systems has to be minimized with careful planning 
sequences already when systems are being designed and 
built. This ensures that the relevant data remain intact and 
uncorrupted. Unfortunately, neither the technical readiness 
level of these systems nor the capability to link these systems 
together is currently at an implementation level. Some of the 
challenges have been identified in this paper to contribute to 
the process of embedding digitalized automated systems in 
the battlespace.  
XIV. FURTHER WORK 
When the process of war has been modeled to resemble a 
Business Process, the performance of Future Force Warriors 
may be optimized with the assistance of processes assisted 
with SOA. The result of this may be seen as an agile and 
modular military performer with improved capabilities and 
improved Situational Awareness, and the capability to utilize 
ever diminishing resources more optimally with decreased 
instances of fratricide. 
Further work related to modeling a war as a Service 
Oriented Architecture assisted business process must 
concentrate on the orchestration of systems. Challenges 
posed by operational security cannot be neglected, as they 
continue to disrupt digitized battlespace. Issues related to 
sustaining an adequate level of constant energy flow and 
protection against violations caused by electronic warfare 
must be studied, tested and solved before adopting GIADM 
in operative use. 
Both extensive funding and considerable human 
resources are required to run the extensive number of 
validity tests necessary, which would result in getting all the 
systems up (i.e., BP, RM, Scheduler) running synchronized 
with GIADM. Firstly, tens of thousands of simulation laps 
involving 
each 
operational 
scenario 
type, 
including 
defensive, offensive, and Special Operations, are required 
before implementing the introduced system/prototype into 
any real-time military exercise performed. Secondly, once 
any resources have been allocated for and invested in 
implementing a GIADM type of approach to complete a 
functional command and control tool that assists in decision 
making, the system design can no longer be accessed in any 
public domain data sources. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Saarelainen, “Modeling war as a business process with the 
assistance of service oriented architecture,” ICDT 2014, The 
Ninth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Digital 
Telecommunications, February 23 – 27, 2014 Nice - France, 
pp. 1 – 7. 
[2] M. Abdullah and D-P. Merklinghaus, “Mobile battlefield 
systems,” Vol XXXVIII, Issue 6/2014,  Military Technology, 
ISSN 0722-3226, pp. 54 – 62. 
[3] L. Jianying and L. Xiaolong, “Artificial intelligence in 
modeling command and control,” Second International 
Conference on Computer Modeling and Simulation, 22 – 24 
January. 2010, Sanya, Hainan, pp. 383 – 386, Print ISBN: 
978-1-4244-5642-0, doi: 10.1109/ICCMS.2010.449. 
[4] J. Scholz, D. Lambert, D. Gossink, and G. Smith, “A 
Blueprint for command and control: automation and 
interface,” 15th International Conference on Information 
Fuison (FUSION), 9 – 12 July 2012, Singapore, pp 211 – 217, 
Print ISBN: 978-1-4673-0417-7. 
[5] J. Du, Q. Liang, R-J. Xu, and Y-c. Xia, “Research of 
firepower allocationbase on battlefield situation perceive in 
aggregated CGF,” International Conference on Computer 
Science and Electronics Engineering (ICCSEE), 22 – 25 
March 2012, Hangzhou, pp. 523 – 526, Print ISBN: 978-1-
4673-0689-8, doi: 10.1109/ICCSEE.2012.337. 
[6] S. Shaobin, L. Xiehua, P. Jun, and Z. Yingchun, “Decision-
making and planning of computer generated forces,” 2012 
IEEE International Conference on Computer Science and 
Automation Engineering (CSAE), 22 – 27 May 2012, 
Zhangjiajie, pp. 476 – 480, Print ISBN: 978-1-4673-0088-9, 
doi: 10.1109/CSAE.2012.6272641. 
[7] S. Guojun, M. Xiaodong, and Z. Haijing, “Research on 
behavior modeling method of agent-based CGF,” Journal of 
Software, Vol 7, No 4 (2012), 913-918, April 2012, pp.913 – 
918, doi:10.4304/jsw.7.4.913-918. 
[8] J. From, P. Perrin, D. O´Neill, and J. Yen, “Supporting the 
commander’s information requirements: automated support 
for 
battle 
drill 
processes 
using 
R-CAST,” 
Military 
Communications Conference 2011 (MILCOM2011, 7 – 10 
November 2011, Baltimore, MD, U.S.A., pp. 1523 – 1528, 
ISSN: 2155-7578, doi: 11.09/MILCOM.2011.6127523. 
[9] C. Ortega, T. Brown, J. Ibbotson, and R. Hancock, 
“Improving WSN application QoS and network lifetime 
management 
using 
SOA 
strategies,” 
Military 
Communications Conference 2011 (MILCOM2011, 7 – 10 
November 2011, Baltimore, MD, U.S.A., pp. 1580 – 1585, 
ISSN: 2155-7578, doi: 11.09/MILCOM.2011.6127534. 
[10] K. A. McFarland, “A performance map framework for 
maximizing soldier performance,” Doctoral Dissertation, 
Dept. of Mechanical Engineering, United States Army, 
http://hdl.handle.net/2152/ETD-UT-2011-05-3201, accessed 
on November 5th 2014 at 8.32 am. 
[11] W. T. Tsai, Q. Huang, J. Xu, Y. Chen, and R. Paul, 
“Ontologybased dynamic process collaboration in Service-
Oriented Architecture,” in Proceedings of IEEE International 
94
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Conference on Service-Oriented Computing and Applications 
(SOCA'07), 19-20 June 2007, Newport Beach, CA, pp. 39 –
46, doi10.1109/SOCA.2007.35. 
[12] P. Lalbakhsh, N. Sohrabi, and M. N. Fesharaki, “The role of 
Service Oriented Architecture in battlefield situational 
awareness,” International conference on Computer Scientific 
and Information Technology, pp.476 – 479, ISBN 978-1-
4244-4519-6. 
[13] M. Panahi, W. Nie, and K-J. Lin, “The design and 
implementation of service reservations in Real-Time SOA,” 
in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on e-
Business Engineering (ICEBE2009), 21-23 October 2009, 
Macau, pp. 129 – 136, doi 10.1109/ICEBE.2009.26. 
[14] A. Gravel, X. Fu, and J. Su, “An analysis tool for execution of 
BPEL services,” in Proceedings of the 9th IEEE International 
Conference on E-Commerce Technology and the 4th IEEE 
International Conference on Enterprise Computing, E-
Commerce, and E-Services (CEC-EEE2007), Tokyo, pp. 429 
– 432, doi 10.1109/CECEEE.2007.19. 
[15] M. Jiang and A. Willey, “Service-Oriented Architecture for 
deploying and integrating enterprise applications,” in 
Proceedings of 5th Working Conference on Software 
Architecture (WICSA 2005), Pittsburg, PA, pp. 272 - 273, doi 
10.1109/WICSA.2005.60. 
[16] G. Lewis, E. Morris, and D. Smith, “The Service-Oriented 
Migration and Reuse Technique (SMART),” Technical report 
CMU/SEI-2005-TN, Software Engineering Institute, in 
Proceedings of 13th International Workshop on Software 
Technology and Engineering Practice, September 2005, 
Budapest, pp. 222 – 229, doi 10.1109/STEP.2005.24. 
[17] M. Medlow, “Extending Service-Oriented Architectures to the 
deployed 
land 
environment,” 
Journal 
of 
Battlefield 
Technology, vol. 13, No. 1, March, 2010, pp. 27 – 33. 
[18] L. Liu, D. Russell, N. Looker, D. Webster, and J. Xu 
“Delivering 
sustainable 
evolutionary 
Service-Oriented 
Architecture for network enabled capability,” in Proceedings 
of International Workshop on Verification and Evaluation of 
Computer and Communication Systems (VECoS2008), pp. 1 
– 11. 
[19] F. Hojaji, M. Reza, and A. Shirazi, “Developing a more 
comprehensive and expressive SOA governance framework,” 
in Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE International Conference on 
Information Management and Engineering (ICIME), 16-18 
April 
2010, 
Chengdu, 
pp. 
563 
– 
567, 
doi 
10.1109/ICIME.2010.5478046. 
[20] K. Lund, A. Eggen, D. Hadzic, T. Hafsoe, and F.T. Johnsen, 
“Using web services to realize service oriented architecture in 
military 
communication 
networks,” 
Communications 
Magazine, 
vol 
45, 
Issue 
10, 
pp. 
47 
– 
53, 
doi 
10.1109/MCOM.2007.4342822. 
[21] J. He, I-L. Yen, T. Peng, J. Dong, and F. Bastani, “An 
adaptive user interface generation framework for web 
services,” in Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Congress on 
Services Part II, 2008. SERVICES-2, Beijing, 23 – 26 
September 2008, pp. 175 – 182, doi 10.1109/SERVICES-
2.2008.23. 
[22] E. Zeeb, A. Bobek, H. Bohn, and F. Golatowski, “Service-
Oriented Architectures for embedded systems using devices 
profile for web services,” in Proceedings of IEEE 21st 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced 
Information 
Networking and Applications Workshops (AINAW '07), 21-
23 May 2007, Niagara Falls, Ont., pp. 956 – 963, doi 
10.1109/AINAW.2007.330. 
[23] J. Jormakka and J. Lucenius, “Possibilities for improving 
dependability of C4I2SR systems based on Service Oriented 
Architecture,” in IEEE Transctions 2009 Computation World: 
Future 
Computing, 
Service 
Computation, 
Cognitive, 
Adaptive, 
Content, 
Patterns, 
pp. 
315 
– 
324, 
doi 
10.1109/ComputationWorld.2009.74, 
ISBN: 
978-1-4244-
5166-1. 
[24] B. Farroha and D. Farroha, “SOA as a catalyst to empower 
the warfighter through improved enterprise data access over 
the 
GIG,” 
3rd 
Annual 
IEEE 
Systems 
Conference 
(SYSTEMS2003), 23-26 March 2009, Vancouver, BC, pp. 48 
– 53, doi 10.1109/SYSTEMS.2009.4815770. 
[25] Sagem: “Showcasing systems for demanding infantry forces 
mission,” www.soldiermod.com, Vol 11 Summer Autumn 
2013, pp. 42 – 43. 
[26] M. 
Phillips, 
“Air-to-Ground 
and 
ground-to-air 
communications,” Military Technology, Vol XXXVII, Issue 
6/2013, pp. 66 – 67. 
[27] P. Donaldson, D-P. Merklinghaus, and S. Nitschke,  
“Technology enablers for global special forces capability,” 
Military Technology, Vol XXXVII, Issue 5/2013, pp. 65 – 74. 
[28] P. Cordwainer, “Grid computing on the battlefield,” Military 
Technology, Vol XXXVII, Issue 4/2013, pp. 74 – 75. 
[29] J. Antal, “Enhancing squad communications – seven 
considerations for the militarisation of COTS smartphones,” 
Military Technology, Vol XXXVII, Issue 5/2013, pp. 58 – 61. 
[30] D. Alexander, “Toward NATO forces 2020: Combat 
Multiplication Technologies for Smart Defence,” Military 
Technology, Vol XXXVII, Issue 10/2012, pp. 84 –86. 
[31] C. Colakoglu, “Tactical command and control systems and 
network centric warfare,” Journal of Military and Information 
Science Vol 2, No 3/2014, pp.70 – 76. 
[32] K. Rein, U. Schade, and M. R. Hieb, “Battle Management 
Language (BML) as an enabler,” IEEE International 
Conference on Communications, pp. 1 – 5, ISBN 978-1-4244-
3435-0, doi 10.1109/ICC.2009.5198779. 
[33] T. Saarelainen, “Improving the performance of a dismounted 
future force warrior by means of C4I2SR,” Doctoral 
Dissertation, ISBN 978-951-25-2457-0. 
[34] T. Saarelainen and J. Timonen, “Tactical management in near 
real-time systems,” IEEE International Multi-Disciplinary 
Conference on Cognitive Methods in Situation Awareness 
and Decision Support, (CogSIMA2011), Miami Beach, 
Florida, 22.–24 February 2011, U.S.A., pp. 240 – 247, 
10.1109/COGSIMA.2011.5753452. 
[35] T. Saarelainen and J. Jormakka, “Interfacing collaboration 
and command tools for crises management military command 
and control systems,” International Journal of Electronic 
security and Digital Forensics, vol 3, No. 3, 2010, pp. 249–
264. 
[36] J. Jormakka and T. Saarelainen, “UAV-based sensor networks 
for future force warriors,” International Journal On Advances 
in Telecommunications, vol 4, numbers 1 and 2, 2011, ISSN: 
1942-2601, pp. 58–71. 
[37] L. Navarovong, Z. Kan, J.M. Shea, and W. E. Nixon, 
“Formation reconfiguration for mobile robots with network 
connectivity constraints,” IEEE Network, July/August 2012, 
pp. 18 – 24. 
[38] T. Saarelainen, “Targeting situational awareness beyond the 
event horizon by means of sensor element munition,” ICDT 
2012, The Seventh International Conference on Digital 
Telecommunications, April 29 – May 4, 2012, Chamonix / 
Mont Blanc, France, pp.8 – 14. 
 
 
95
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

