40
International Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
Mobile TV Research Made Easy: The AMUSE 2.0 Open Platform for 
Interactive DVB-H/3G Services 
 
 
Raimund Schatz, Andreas Berger, Norbert Jordan 
Telecommunications Research Center Vienna – ftw. 
A-1220 Vienna, Austria 
{schatz, berger, jordan}@ftw.at 
 
 
Abstract 
 
With the convergence of telecommunications and 
media, Mobile TV has become an intensively 
investigated and hotly debated new service class. 
While the different Mobile TV bearer technologies 
such as DVB-H have been extensively tested and 
standardized, the focus of attention is shifting towards 
advanced concepts that go beyond pure re-broadcast 
of television. In order to explore the possibilities of 
advanced interactive Mobile TV, the research 
community 
requires 
an 
open 
environment 
for 
prototyping technology on the network and service 
layer. However, required key components such as 
open, programmable TV-enabled phones and flexible 
white-box broadcast tools are still not available to the 
community. As one solution to this fundamental 
problem, we present our open source platform for 
mobile interactive TV for early stage technology and 
application prototyping, with a focus on mobile client, 
broadcast network and service aspects. Furthermore, 
we illustrate the utilization of the system and outline 
future development directions. 
 
Keywords: Mobile TV, DVB-H, Interactive TV, 
Mobile Service Platforms, Service Prototyping. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Mobile TV services are widely considered as major 
future growth driver in mobile multimedia markets. 
According to market research analysts such as 
Datamonitor, the mobile television market is set to 
grow exponentially – by 2010, 65.6 million people 
worldwide are expected to subscribe to mobile 
television services, growing up to 155.6 million 
subscribers in 2012 (Datamonitor, 2006). Such 
prospects have triggered a number of technological 
and commercial Mobile TV trials in Europe. 
Furthermore, it is expected that interactive content and 
services will add significant value to mobile broadcast 
service offers in terms of differentiation opportunities 
and new revenue streams (UMTS Forum, 2006). 
Common examples are quizzing, voting, chat as well 
as personalized ESG and advertisements. Mobile 
phones are prime candidates for delivering such 
interactive mobile TV experiences, since they natively 
provide the required back-channel via the cellular 
network. Concerning mobile TV technology R&D and 
standardization, 
much 
work 
has 
been 
already 
accomplished in the fields of media encoding and 
delivery, transport protocols for content delivery, 
service/content protection and basic ESG description. 
Nonetheless, there is a need for intendified research on 
advanced 
interactivity 
support 
and 
rich-media 
integration. 
However, 
advanced 
research 
on 
infrastructures 
for 
mobile 
interactive 
broadcast 
services remains difficult for two major reasons: a lack 
of versatile, programmable DVB-enabled mobiles and 
the lack of open, affordable and modular testbeds.  
This article presents our approach to a mobile TV 
research platform and is structured as follows: In 
Chapter 2 we present the research project AMUSE 2.0, 
envisaged demo services and requirements for a hybrid 
DVB-H research platform. In Chapter 3 we briefly 
discuss the most relevant issues and standards 
concerning interactive broadcast services. In Chapter 4 
we discuss different approaches towards extending 
Mobile TV with interactivity as well as related work 
on hybrid infrastructures. In Chapter 5 we present the 
AMUSE hybrid test platform with a focus on broadcast 
network, service framework and DVB-H client issues. 
We then discuss its application to our research use 
cases in Chapter 6 as well as our conclusions and 
planned future work in Chapter 7. 
 

41
International Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2. Project Background and Requirements 
 
2.1 
AMUSE Project Background 
AMUSE 2.0 (Advanced Multimedia Services)1 is 
an applied research project conducted at ftw., the 
Austrian competence centre for telecommunications 
research2. Within a consortium including partners such 
as mobilkom austria, Kapsch CarrierCom and Alcatel-
Lucent, the project investigates mobile convergent 
services which we see as ‘Mobile TV 2.0’ – mobile 
TV beyond the currently rolled-out first generation of 
broadcast services which offer little or no interactivity. 
Upcoming 
next-generation 
TV 
services 
are 
characterized by advanced interactivity, user-to-user 
interaction, pervasive service access and made-for-
mobile content formats (see Figure 1). 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Mobile TV Generations Timeline (Schatz et al. 
2007a). 
In order to investigate the impact of such upcoming 
service generations and the enabling technologies 
required, our activities focus on the following aspects:  
Hybrid mobile service platform architectures 
and 
clients 
that 
integrate 
broadcast 
and 
3G/UMTS/WLAN connectivity. Key aspects are the 
tight integration of mobile services and IP-Datacast as 
well as the generation of interactive broadcast/unicast 
clients for mobile Symbian and Linux handhelds.  
Interactive 
mobile 
broadcast 
services 
that 
leverage the potential of hybrid unicast/broadcast 
architectures. A particularly focus lies on the 
investigation of advanced interactivity, push-services, 
and person-to-person interaction. 
Extensive user involvement throughout the 
project. Since real-world deployment is the only way 
to fully investigate the complex interactions between 
mobile applications, their users, and the environment, 
user testing in field settings using real-world telecom 
clients are an essential part of the project and thus need 
to be supported by its infrastructure.  
 
                                                           
1 Project Homepage: http://amuse.ftw.at 
2 http://www.ftw.at 
2.2 
Mobile TV Platform Requirements 
The 
given 
project 
profile 
and 
consortium 
necessitated the development of a custom research test 
environment for hybrid Mobile iTV services with the 
following requirements (Schatz et al., 2007a). 
General requirements: a mobile interactive 
broadcast research platform must be highly modular, 
easily extensible and flexible enough to cover new 
mobile convergent service scenarios. Flexibility also 
demands for programmable components with open, 
well-documented APIs. As research projects tend to 
face major budget constraints (particularly concerning 
high-end equipment) system components should be 
low-cost, i.e. off-the-shelf hardware or open-source 
software at best. Nonetheless, components as well as 
architectures used must be compliant to common 
broadcast and telecommunications standards (such as 
TCP/IP, 
HTTP, 
MPEG, 
DVB-H, 
3G/UMTS). 
Nonetheless, while accepting below carrier-grade 
equipment quality, the overall platform must be robust 
enough for performing user trials in the wild in a pre-
commercial context. 
Flexibility on bearer-level is another general key 
requirement for three reasons: on a pragmatic level, 
service prototyping and evaluation are facilitated by 
the option to bypass the DVB-H transmission by 
means of directly feeding multimedia packet-streams 
to the client by e.g. WLAN. Secondly, in the long run 
the user should be shielded from the prevailing 
diversity of standards (DVB-H, DMB, MBMS) and 
access networks (broadcast, unicast). The overarching 
goal here is providing seamless user experience across 
services and networks. Thirdly, the provision and 
seamless hand-over between different transmission 
paths is a hot research topic: broadcast-technologies 
such 
as 
DVB-H 
will 
exhibit 
coverage 
gaps, 
particularly in early roll-out stages. Handover to 
alternative bearers such as 3G/UMTS aids in 
maintaining quality of service, particularly in deep-
indoor scenarios.  
Specific requirements: project context (Europe) 
and 
consortium 
(telecommunications 
companies) 
demand for a focus on DVB-H (which in Europe at the 
moment is the mobile broadcast standard the strongest 
industry) as well as on using mobile 2.5G/3G smart-
phones or comparable devices for the client side. The 
necessity to use standard platforms for mobile phones 
(and not PDAs or other larger, bulky mobile clients) 
such as J2ME or Symbian results from the project 
requirement to deliver results to telecommunications 
stakeholders, which favor a MNO-centric (Mobile 
Network Operator) operational model for Mobile TV. 
2nd Generation 
Peer-to-peer 
Interaction 
Content 
reformatted-for-
mobile 
3rd Generation 
Content Made-
for-mobile 
Full interactivity 
and acess 
   2006 
                 2008  
     
2010 
1st Generation 
Non-interactive  
Re-broadcasts 
Service Interactivity & Complexity 

42
International Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
This requirement is still non-trivial: at the time of 
writing, the only available DVB-H phones were closed 
feature phones with proprietary operating systems or 
Symbian-phones (such as Nokia N92, N77 and N96) 
which lack an open, documented DVB-H API3. 
 
2.3 
Demo Service Scenarios  
In order to guide the R&D process within our project, 
we developed a number of scenarios that feature the 
possibilities of advanced interactive Mobile TV 
services. Based on these scenarios we focused on the 
development of the following three demo services that 
we considered as most attractive from a commercial 
and technological perspective: Mobile Social TV, Live 
Sports, and CRM/Advertising. 
 
Service 1 – Mobile Social TV. The remarkable 
success of the mobile phone as communication device 
suggests a fusion of entertainment features with 
person-to-person interaction. Similar to triple-play 
Social TV applications such as AmigoTV (Coppens et 
al., 2004), broadcast content (i.e., the currently aired 
TV show) can serve as context for social user-to-user 
interaction. The social interaction is enabled by IM 
(instant messaging via text and emoticons) and 
advanced presence (answering questions such as: Who 
is watching TV? Who watches the same programme?). 
To this end, the Mobile TV functionality is extended 
with public and private chat-rooms for mobile viewers 
(see 
Figure 
2). 
Further 
features 
include 
ShareMarks which are “See-what-I-see” TV-content 
bookmarks and invitations exchanged among users via 
MMS and JointZapping, the synchronization of 
channel switching among peers (Schatz et al., 2007b).  
 
 
Figure 2: Mobile Social TV with Chat. 
                                                           
3 
See 
for 
example 
the 
Aug 
2008 
discussion 
on 
http://discussion.forum.nokia.com/forum/showthread.php?p=449105, 
[last access 12th Jan 2009] 
Service 2 – Live Ski Race. This service enhances live 
TV sports coverage with interactivity features in the 
context of a ski race. It enriches streamed AV content 
with additional information such as current athlete and 
results. Parallel to watching the ski race, the user can 
browse the starting list, current rankings, and the list of 
not qualified runners. This information is regularly 
updated 
as 
the 
race 
goes 
on. 
In 
addition, 
personalization features allow for marking favorite 
athletes. In turn, notifications are sent to the user when 
one of them is about to start so that the runs of favorite 
athletes are not missed. 
Service 3 – CRM/Advertising. Our third scenario 
addresses customer relationship management and 
click-through advertising. It utilizes the different 
enablers 
of 
the 
AMUSE 
platform 
to 
push 
advertisements to clients. When an advertisement is 
displayed the user can react to it (see Figure 3 below). 
For example, the service allows users to register with 
one-click for an SMS info channel, which the operator 
then uses to address users directly with relevant 
information about special offers, coupons, etc.  
 
 
Figure 3: Advertising Banner with One-click Registration. 
3. Interactive Broadcast: Standards and 
Related Work 
This section discusses the most relevant standards and 
technologies that provide the foundation for interactive 
Mobile Broadcast TV. 
 
3.1 
DVB-H: 
Digital 
Broadcast 
for 
Handhelds 
DVB-H (Digital Video Broadcasting – Handheld) is 
the digital broadcast standard for the transmission of 
broadcast content to handheld terminal devices, which 
was developed by the international DVB-Project4 and 
                                                           
4 http://www.dvb.org 

43
International Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
published in November 2005 by ETSI (European 
Telecommunications Standards Institute). DVB-H is 
based on the DVB-T standard for digital terrestrial 
television but is tailored to the special requirements of 
the pocket-size class of receivers (ETSI, 2004). 
Furthermore, the DVB-H data stream is fully 
compatible with DVB transport streams carrying 
legacy DVB-T streams. These properties guarantee 
that the DVB-H data stream can be broadcast in both, 
dedicated DVB-H and DVB-T networks. 
As a transmission standard, DVB-H specifies the layer 
from physical up to network layer level. It uses a 
power-saving 
algorithm 
based 
on 
temporally 
multiplexed transmission of different services. The 
technique, called time-slicing, enables considerable 
battery power-saving. Additionally, time-slicing allows 
soft handover if the receiver moves from network cell 
to network cell. 
Figure 4 shows the DVB-H protocol stack and 
characteristic extensions such as time-slicing. For 
reliable transmission under poor signal reception 
conditions, DVB-H introduces an enhanced error-
protection scheme on the link layer. This scheme is 
called MPE-FEC (Multi-Protocol Encapsulation – 
Forward Error Correction). MPE-FEC performs 
additional coding on top of the channel coding 
included in the DVB-T specification in order to 
increase reception robustness for indoor and mobile 
contexts.  
Main 
Extensions 
by DVB-H 
 
Figure 4: Protocol Stack Overview highlighting the main 
Extensions by the DVB-H Standard (based on ETSI 2004). 
3.2 
IP Datacast (IPDC) 
In order to use DVB-H for delivering complete 
services to the end-user, protocols of the higher OSI 
levels on top of DVB-H are required. In addition to 
supporting the standard DVB applications like TV, 
radio and MHP, support for all kinds of services 
including 
the 
use 
of 
complementary 
cellular 
communications systems is required. To this end the 
DVB Project has introduced IP Datacast (IPDC) for 
an end-to-end system approach around DVB-H. The 
IPDC specification (ETSI TR 102 468; ETSI, 2006) 
defines the electronic service guide (ESG), service 
access 
management, 
delivery 
protocols, 
bearer 
signaling, QoS, mobility, roaming, and will further 
provide information on the terminal capabilities to 
make them suitable for IP Datacast. 
IP Datacast specifies two transport protocols based on 
IP (RTP and FLUTE/ALC), since the IP protocol on its 
own does not serve all required use cases of service 
delivery. Services may be sent via RTP (Real Time 
Protocol) for real-time streaming content (for example 
a live TV channel). Non-real-time data (e.g., file 
downloads) is delivered by a FLUTE/ALC5 (Paila, 
2004) data carousel. For selecting the services, IPDC 
foresees an XML-based ESG6 that contains metadata 
and access information about the available services 
(i.e., 
mostly 
TV-programmes), 
transmitted 
via 
FLUTE/ALC. Note, that a return-channel is not 
mandatory for IPDC which therefore specifies the 
UDP7 protocol for connectionless transport.  
 
3.3 
Return-channel Interactivity for Mobile 
TV: Hybrid Architectures 
Since 
IP 
Datacast 
via 
DVB-H 
constitutes 
a 
unidirectional transmission path, it enables only ocal 
interactivity. This means that viewers can only interact 
with e.g., ESG information or content previously 
downloaded to the terminal such as teletext, also 
known as enhanced TV (Jensen, 2005). However, more 
complex services such as chat and presence require a 
two-way 
return-channel 
to 
carry 
the 
viewer’s 
commands and responses back to the service provider. 
This step actually allows for the evolution of Mobile 
TV towards complete interactive Mobile TV services 
in the sense of Jensen (2005).  
 
In the context of Mobile TV the most suitable option 
for realizing the return-channel is the use of a packet-
switched wireless 3G network. The advantages of this 
approach are threefold: bandwidth is sufficiently high 
(starting from 384kbit/s for base UMTS packed data 
service level), packet delay is low (<250 ms) and 3G is 
the standard connectivity offered by smartphones, the 
                                                           
5 FLUTE/ALC = File Delivery over Unidirectional Transport / 
Asynchronous Layered Coding 
6 ESG = Electronic Serivce Guide, which in general also includes the 
EPG (Electronic Programme Guide) 
7 USP = User Datagram Protocol 

44
International Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
main platform for Mobile iTV (UMTS Forum, 2006). 
The combination of both DVB-H and 3G for service 
delivery is described by the hybrid network reference 
model depicted in Figure 5 below. A hybrid network 
consists of a broadcast and a unicast path being jointly 
used in order to exploit their complementary 
advantages (cf. Hartl el al., 2005; ETSI, 2006). 
Cooperative
Mediation
Platform
DVB-H
Transmitter
UMTS
Core
Network
UMTS
Radio 
Access
Mobile 
Terminal
DVB-H / UMTS
Broadcast Network
Mobile Cellular Network
Multimedia
Object
Carousel
Broadcast
Service
Provider
Interactive
Service
Provider
DVB-H
UMTS
Data
Control
 
Figure 5: Hybrid Network Architecture applied to Mobile 
TV combining DVB-H Broadcast and Cellular Unicast.  
From a purely theoretical perspective, the broadcast 
network as well as the mobile network can be used for 
multimedia content and interactivity data transmission 
to the mobile. Nonetheless, the most common scenario 
is the delivery of mass TV-content and EPG-
information by DVB-H broadcast while interactivity 
and personal content are handled by the cellular 
network, thus taking the strengths of each bearer type 
into account. Furthermore, the hybrid reference 
architecture foresees system control and coordination 
between the two paths. This task is performed by the 
Cooperative Management Platform (CMP) and its 
interfaces (Hartl, 2005; Baldzer, 2005). The CMP 
handles interaction between the interactive service and 
the broadcast playout, for example when user voting 
determines the next TV clip to be played. In addition, a 
CMP may optimize the load distribution in the network 
and including proposals for load balancing between the 
DVB-H and UMTS transmission path to the mobile 
end-terminals. One example are videostreams, that the 
CMP routes over broadcast and unicast depending on 
overall popularity and number of users requesting it. 
 
4. Extending Mobile TV with Interactive 
Multimedia: General Approaches 
 
Mobile TV technology is still at an early stage of 
diffusion with standardization activities having mostly 
focused on the detailed specification of broadcast 
delivery of non-interactive TV content. In contrast, the 
mechanisms for interactivity and value-added services 
have only been addressed on a highly abstract level. 
For example, standardization within IPDC and OMA 
BCAST8 does not specify triggers for elementary 
actions on the terminal (such as invoking an URL or 
menu choices) like for example the open source 
standard 
HisTV 
(Skrodzki, 
2006). 
These 
circumstances have led to a highly fragmented 
landscape 
of 
proprietary 
approaches 
towards 
interactive Mobile TV (Petrovic, 2006; Baier & 
Richartz, 2006; Setlur et al., 2006) and a fragmented 
standardization landscape (Martinez,  2006). This 
heterogeneity is contrasted by a lack of standardized 
Mobile 
iTV 
approaches 
and 
open 
reference 
implementations, an issue that constitutes a major 
challenge for Mobile TV research and development 
(Kumar, 2007; Högg et al., 2007).  
 
This section compares existing approaches and 
introduces a generic approach that takes advantage of 
established mobile service technologies and allows for 
rapid prototyping of Mobile iTV services on video-
enabled smartphones. In general, the spectrum of 
currently investigated approaches to mobile interactive 
TV and Video can be divided into three categories: 
generic browser, rich media and download applications 
(Baier & Richartz, 2006).  
 
4.1 
Approach 1: Generic Browser 
Generic browser approaches are characterized by the 
usage of a lean, universal software runtime as thin-
client for rendering the statically declared content. This 
approach is ideal for application prototyping as well as 
large-scale deployments, since services do not rely on 
local code that needs to be adapted for each terminal 
platform. If only broadcast is used for content delivery, 
pre-defined scenes or pages are rendered locally, for 
example when DVB-H ESG service guide information 
is transmitted via FLUTE and locally browsed using 
the Mobile TV player. If the runtime is an HTML- or 
XHTML-browser, standard web-applications accessed 
via the unicast back-channel serve as the basis for 
Mobile iTV services. A representative usage example 
is a hypertext side-information browser to complement 
                                                           
8 
See 
also 
http://www.openmobilealliance.org/Technical/ 
release_program 

45
International Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
the current news coverage currently presented on the 
screen. This approach has considerable advantages, 
particularly for prototyping and development: since the 
majority of existing mobile multimedia services are 
web-applications (Ofcom, 2006), this approach takes 
advantage of mature web technologies and application 
server platforms (e.g., J2EE) that are widely supported 
in 
the 
telecommunications 
and 
web 
domain. 
Furthermore, service deployments and updates only 
need to be made on the server side. Nonetheless, a 
major drawback of this approach is its dependency on 
connectivity to the server. Applications that depend on 
frequent page-changes or a high number of images per 
page are vulnerable to wireless network latency or 
drops in bandwidth, since web-browsers issue separate 
HTTP-requests for each media element (Sullivan & 
Connors, 2008).  
 
4.2 
Approach 2: Rich Media 
Rich-Media services are based on dynamic, interactive 
collections of multimedia data such as audio, video, 
graphics, and text. Applications range from movies 
enriched 
with 
vector 
graphics, 
overlays 
and 
interactivity to complex services with real-time 
interaction and different media types per screen, 
delivering a user experience as known from e.g., 
Adobe Flash9 applications on the Internet. For the 
mobile domain Rich-Media yields the following 
advantages according to (Dufourd et al., 2005): 
 
1. Graphics, animations, audio, video and scripts are 
packaged and streamed altogether. Rich-Media 
technologies 
are 
based 
on 
well 
defined 
and 
deterministic scene- and container-components that 
integrate the media content. This integration improves 
the fluidity and quality of the end user experience. 
2. Full screen interactivity with multiple media 
streams. With the use of vector graphics, content can 
easily be made to fit the screen size, allowing the 
design of user interfaces similar to native mobile 
applications.  
3. Real-time content delivery. Rich-Media allows for 
efficient delivery over constrained networks. Content 
can be delivered as streamed packages, allowing 
display of content as soon as the first packet is 
received. As such, services can be designed with 
reduced perceived delays and waiting times. 
Unfortunately, because of these qualities, Rich-Media 
runtimes put very high demands on the capabilities of 
the device, particularly in terms of CPU-load and 
graphics processing. Therefore, the usage of Rich-
Media in the context of Mobile iTV on current 
                                                           
9 http://www.adobe.com/flash 
smartphone platforms is problematic, since the device 
also has to cope with the reception and display of the 
broadcasted video (Cazoulat & Lebris, 2008). 
Furthermore, the lack of open mobile player runtime 
components and server engines constitutes a major 
roadblock for the application of Rich-Media to Mobile 
iTV prototyping. 
 
4.3 
Approach 3: Download Applications 
Download 
applications 
represent 
a 
thick-client 
approach that allows for the execution of complex, 
performance-intensive logic (e.g., games) locally on 
the mobile terminal. Typically, such applications are 
based on the J2ME10 platform or they are native, i.e., 
specifically developed for an operating system such as 
Symbian S60. Unfortunately, these dependencies also 
narrow compatibility to very specific platforms and 
handsets 
which 
makes 
portability 
of 
native 
applications 
difficult. 
However, 
cross-platform 
portability and compatibility are also problematic for 
applications based on J2ME which is supposed to 
realize the vision of “write-once-run-anywhere” for 
mobile software development (Blom et al., 2008). 
J2ME suffers from several complications, including a 
large set of options as well as buggy and inconsistent 
virtual machines and package implementations (cf. 
Coulton et al., 2005). Nonetheless, the recently 
standardized JSR 272 Mobile Broadcast Service API 
for Handheld Terminals11 for J2ME which uses an 
approach similar to MHP12 Xlets has the potential to 
drive a broad uniform support of Java download 
applications by future Mobile TV handsets that 
implement this API. Table 1 overleaf compares the 
three approaches along with relevant projects and 
standards. 
 
                                                           
10 J2ME = Java Micro Edition, see http://java.sun.com/javame 
11 The JSR 272 Mobile Broadcast Service API for Handheld 
Terminals is a standard effort lead by Nokia and Motorola to define a 
middleware-level API enabling the development of Mobile TV 
applications on J2ME. See also http://jcp.org/en/jsr/detail?id=272  
12 MHP = Multimedia Home Platform, see www.mhp.org  

46
International Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
Approach 
Capabilitie
s and 
complexity 
Properties 
Advantages (+) /  
Disadvantages (-) 
Projects and Standards relevant to 
Mobile iTV 
1. Generic 
Browser 
Low 
Generic browser client pre-
installed on terminal 
 
Interactivity using static 
declarations of scene-
description or pages 
+ Portability 
+ Limited demands concerning 
device capabilities 
+ Simple deployment 
+ Leverages established mobile 
service technologies and platforms 
- Limited multimedia features 
- Access to mobile device not 
standardized 
- Network dependencies 
HisTV (www.histv.org), misc. 3G-
Videostreaming Portals (e.g. 
Vodafone Live Mobile TV) 
 
XHTML, HTTP, IP-Datacast ESG  
 
2. Rich-
Media 
Medium 
Generic Rich-Media Player 
pre-installed 
 
Multimedia streaming or 
discrete content access 
 
Dynamically generated 
Scene-descriptions 
+ Versatile multimedia and GUI 
capabilities  
+ Enables asynchronous 
client/server communication and 
modular services 
- Complex technology 
- High demands on mobile device 
hardware/software 
- Fragmentation of standards and 
specifications 
- Only closed, proprietary runtimes 
available 
MORE (Setlur et al. 2007), Ikivo, 
Streamezzo 
 
Flash, SVG-T, MPEG-LASeR 
(www.mpeg-laser.org), OMA-RME 
3. Download 
Applications 
High 
Complete applications 
executed on the client 
Broadcast channel mainly 
used for application 
download, return-channel 
mainly for user feedback 
+ High performance 
+ Enables complex applications 
that leverage device capabilities 
- Portability and cross-platform 
service provisioning problematic 
- High development effort 
- On proprietary solutions available 
HSP (Steckel,2006), Vodafone DVB-H 
Trial Client (Baier et al. 2006a)  
 
Java JSR 272 Mobile Broadcast API 
Table 1: Comparison of the Three Main Approaches for Mobile Broadcast Interactivity (based on Baier & Richartz, 2006). 
4.4 
The AMUSE Approach to Interactivity: 
An Enhanced Generic Browser Client 
Given the requirements stated in section 2.2, using a 
generic browser client emerges as the most suitable 
approach for a Mobile iTV R&D system. In line with 
the guidelines and recommendations for mobile and 
ubiquitous computing systems by (Greenhalgh et al., 
2007), this approach is optimal for rapid prototyping of 
interactive 
services 
by 
shifting 
business- 
and 
presentation logic to the server. This is an important 
design feature, since despite recent advances in mobile 
operating 
systems, 
mobile 
phone 
application 
development is still an arduous and slow endeavor.  
Main 
reasons 
are 
limited 
debugging 
support, 
inconsistencies and errors in virtual machines and 
libraries, as well as long development cycles (Coulton 
et al., 2005; Huebscher et al., 2006). This general 
approach of using the generic browser as the mobile 
application’s main UI component yields the following 
three key advantages (cf. Zucker et al., 2005):  
 
1. Flexibility and easy authoring. Using markup 
allows for rapid development and customization, 
facilitating prototyping and the integration of new 
features, even if they are orthogonal to other services. 
The latter is important for features such as chat that 
have to be accessible also when the user interacts with 
other iTV services like side-information browsing. 
2. Dynamic updates. Our approach also leverages the 
browser’s inherent capabilities to dynamically update 
content from local and remote sources. This capability 
is particularly required for deployments in field 
evaluation settings where the application need to be 
managed remotely. 
3. Platform independence. The player can be 
extended with additional GUI features without having 
to rely on OS-specific GUI programming, which 
increases portability e.g., between Symbian and 
Mobile Linux. 
 
Concerning end-user experience, the chosen web-
based approach allows for visual and navigational 
qualities similar to iTV set-top boxes, since mobile 
smartphone platforms such as Symbian S60 and Nokia 
Maemo13 offer XHTML microbrowser components 
that can be integrated with video-based applications. 
This way, video and interactive content can be 
simultaneously presented in a split-screen fashion (see 
Figure 6). In addition, the presentation capabilities of 
                                                           
13 Maemo is a Linux-based Mobile OS, used for Nokia N770, 800, 
810 devices, see http://www.maemo.org 

47
International Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
contemporary CSS-enabled XHTML microbrowsers 
have sufficiently matured to enable industry-grade 
Mobile TV information and entertainment services 
(Kumar, 2007; Liebermann, 2007). The key reason is 
that – compared to standard mobile application 
interfaces and web pages – mobile iTV services 
impose additional constraints in application design due 
to the fact that multiple content elements have to share 
the same screen. Mobile iTV application interfaces 
therefore are considerably simpler, since interaction 
designers have to severely limit visual and navigational 
complexity of services in order to avoid attention and 
size conflicts with the simultaneously displayed main 
video (Roibás, 2004; Trefzger, 2005; Knoche & 
McCarthy, 2005).  
 
 
Figure 6: Split-screen Concept for the Mobile TV Client 
featuring a Live Sports Information service with Push and 
Pull Content. 
Furthermore, the increasing capabilities (scripting, 
DOM14 tree access) of mobile microbrowser runtimes 
such as the Nokia S60 WebKit15 allow for the 
utilization of AJAX16 (Asynchronous JavaScript and 
XML). AJAX constitutes a set of techniques that 
mitigate the shortcomings of purely HTML-based 
applications 
(such 
as 
page 
reloads, 
limited 
responsiveness) 
with 
mechanisms 
such 
as 
asynchronous event-processing and local partial 
updates which considerably improve the mobile user 
experience (Garrett, 2005).  
 
                                                           
14 DOM = Document object model 
15 The S60 WebKit is a component used by Noka to equip its current 
range of Smartphones and has been pu into open source.  See also the 
S60 
WebKit 
Project 
Homepage, 
http://trac.webkit.org/projects/webkit/wiki/S60Webkit 
16 AJAX refers to the usage of a bundle of web standards 
(XML/XHTML, DOM, CSS, JavaScript, XMLHTTP-Request 
Object) in order implemenet web-applications with richer GUIs and 
improved user interaction similar to Rich-Media applications. Since 
updates and communication between client and server can happen 
asynchrously in the background, AJAX considerably lowers demand 
for page reloadsing and return-channel bandwidth. 
4.5 
Related Work 
In the field of hybrid architectures for interactive 
broadcast services, the following projects are related to 
our work: 
Hartl et al. (2005) have reported upon a system 
setup for a German DVB-H trial and implemented 
prototype application and some initial results of 
coverage measurements and service application 
feedback by friendly test users. The trial focused on 
the general technical feasibility of a hybrid DVB-H 
and GSM mobile multimedia broadcast system. 
Ollikainen and Peng (2006) go another step further and 
switch between the DVB-H and the UMTS networks 
without doing any frequency scans. They tested service 
handover approaches with almost no packet loss 
during the handover process. This, however, was only 
achieved by keeping the UMTS IP connection open all 
the time, which in practice means very high battery 
consumption. In the ‘Podracing’ project (2005-2007), 
which tested Mobile TV in 3G, DVB-H and WiFi 
networks, an interactive Mobile TV J2ME client and 
servier infrastructure was developed by Ollikainen et 
al. (2008). Similar to our approach, they used a 
browser run-time for interactivity. However, the 
project suffered common limitations of the J2ME 
runtime environment (i.e., no DVB-H API access, 
limited video integration) and thus focused less on 
parallel interactive service but rather on the evaluation 
of different content delivery mechanisms such as on-
demand, 
download, 
and 
broadcast. 
Finally, 
Klinkenberg and Steckel (2006) introduced an 
approach to modularize interactive services in 
broadcast-only and respectively hybrid networks. Their 
work focuses on Java-applications complemented by 
XML-media descriptions, delivered to PDAs via DVB-
H and the IP Datacast framework on top. 
 
In addition to the demonstration of the general 
technical feasibility of hybrid network architectures by 
above projects, the AMUSE project features a 
browser-based 
thin-client 
approach 
on 
existing 
smartphones, true DVB-H reception, and a modular 
open source implementation.  
 
5. The AMUSE Platform 
 
The following discussion of the system architecture 
focuses on three key pars: broadcast chain, unicast 
path and mobile iTV client. The AMUSE platform 
includes an open extensible Mobile TV broadcast 
subsystem well as a J2EE framework for developing 
advanced interactive Mobile TV services. It is based 
on the requirements, technology choices and standards 

48
International Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
discussed in the previous sections of this chapter. 
Figure 7 overleaf presents an architectural overview of 
the AMUSE system and the communication networks 
used. Modeled according to the hybrid reference 
architecture discussed in section 3.3, the platform 
consists of a broadcast path and a unicast path 
operating in a coordinated fashion. Furthermore, the 
environment includes an open mobile terminal client 
for interactive Mobile TV based on microbrowser 
runtimes. In this sense, the AMUSE Mobile iTV 
environment serves four major Mobile TV R&D 
purposes:  
 
1. AMUSE enables the operation of plain Mobile TV 
services, since its components comply with the DVB-
H and OMA BCAST standards. This means that DVB-
H enabled phones such as the Nokia N92 can display 
the platform’s broadcast output, while the MiVIBES 
player is also able to receive (unencrypted) DVB-H 
from other broadcast sources.  
2. The platform allows for extensive Mobile TV 
technology prototyping since all components are 
open, white-boxed and easy to modify. For example, 
the broadcast path can be reconfigured down to the 
transport stream protocol level in order to evaluate new 
service types and content transmission schemes 
(Berger et al., 2008). 
3. The AMUSE approach enables rapid service 
prototyping for Mobile iTV since the unicast 
subsystem is based on a service framework for 
developing applications based on J2EE technology. 
This means that new iTV services are developed as 
web-applications fully on the server-side based on 
SOA components and enablers, thus avoiding the 
difficulties and steep learning curve of mobile client 
development.  
Finally, the AMUSE environment supports reliable 
user testing of Mobile iTV services in laboratory and 
in field settings, since users can interact with the 
applications on the same networks and terminals that 
are also used for real-world deployments in mobile 
communications contexts. Furthermore, platform and 
client support flexible switching between live and local 
simulation configurations and provide a mobile user 
experience that is not affected by unwanted, system-
related usability issues (e.g., high latency, GUI 
rendering errors) caused by technical limitations of the 
platform itself.  
The following paragraphs present a brief overview of 
the main subsystems of the AMUSE environment.  
 
5.1 
Broadcast Path 
In essence, the platform’s broadcast subsystem is a 
chain of open components that transform a bouquet of 
TV-channels and additional content (such as ESG, 
EPG and interactivity data) into a DVB-H compliant 
MPEG transport stream which is then transmitted to 
Mobile TV clients.  
 
5.1.1 
Broadcast Subsystem Overview 
The broadcast subsystem constitutes an open end-to-
end DVB prototyping platform that consists of the 
following main functional components: 
 
1. The content server is a standard fileserver that 
hosts looped TV channels and optional unicast 
multimedia content as MPEG files. Furthermore, it 
provides access to a set of TV tuners used for feeding 
live TV into the system. 
 
Figure 7: Architectural Overview of the AMUSE Mobile TV Platform.

49
International Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2. Media-encoding and playout. This component 
manages the conversion of streamed of file-based A/V 
material into MPEG-4 streams, controlled by an active 
playlist for each TV channel. It is based on the Apple 
Darwin17 streaming server and the VideoLAN client18. 
 
3. The data-carousel and ESG generates additional 
IP data-streams (carrying e.g., ESG/EPG information, 
public chat-messages, alerts and other events) by 
means of an object carousel based on the DVB-H 
FLUTE standard (ETSI 2004). This added content can 
be of static nature or is dynamically added by the 
application server of the interactive platform. 
 
4. The DVB-H IP-Encapsulator receives the different 
A/V- and other data IP-streams and transforms them 
into a DVB-H broadcast stream via multi-protocol 
encapsulation (ETSI 2004). This process involves the 
computation of Forward Error Correction (FEC), 
additional headers and time-slicing to create a DVB-H 
compliant MPEG-2 transport-stream optimized for 
mobile reception (details regarding the encapsulation 
are discussed in the following subsection).  
 
Finally, the DVB-H MPEG-2 transport-stream is 
processed by a Dektec DVB-T/H Modulator card and 
broadcasted via a custom DVB UHF radio frontend. 
 
5.1.2 
Software IP-Encapsulation – FATCAPS 
As already mentioned, one of the key components 
of the DVB-H broadcast chain is the IP-Encapsulator 
which transforms the incoming content and metadata 
streams into an MPEG-2 transport stream ready for 
transmission. 
In general, the priorities behind our design of the 
broadcast chain were compliance to DVB standards 
and maintaining full openness of all components. 
Consequently, also for the IP-Encapsulator we opted 
against 
carrier-grade 
black 
box 
solutions 
and 
implemented the required functionality in software. 
The resulting contribution to the research community 
is the DVB-H encapsulator FATCAPS (Freakin’ 
Advanced Tremendously Useful enCAPSulator). The 
software 
performs 
all 
the 
encapsulation 
and 
multiplexing 
necessary 
to 
generate 
a 
DVB-H 
compliant MPEG transport stream (Berger et al., 
2008). Its execution platform is a standard PC running 
the Linux operating system. FATCAPS was developed 
within AMUSE and put into open source19.  
                                                           
17 Apple Darwin Streaming Server, 
http://developer.apple.com/opensource/server/streaming/index.html 
18 VideoLAN - VLC media player. http://www.videolan.org  
19 
FATCAPs 
can 
be 
freely 
downloaded 
under 
http://amuse.ftw.at/downloads/encapsulator  
FATCAPS accepts arbitrary IP/UDP data as input. 
Hence, it can also handle the FLUTE20 protocol for 
reliable file transmission over unidirectional channels, 
a mandatory requirement in the DVB-H standard 
(ETSI, 2006). As the latter enforces stringent timing 
characteristics of the transmitted signal due to its 
timeslicing feature, the implementation of FATCAPS 
faced significant challenges concerning ensuring real-
time behavior. Fortunately, the flexibility of the Linux 
operating system and its mature real-time capabilities 
allowed 
us 
to 
meet 
the 
DVB-H 
standards’ 
requirements and keep burst jitter below 10ms. 
Figure 8 shows the basic functionality of FATCAPS at 
a glance. The Content Server streams arbitrary data to 
the DVB-H transmitter. For each DVB-H channel, an 
instance of FATCAPS’s data-aggregator tool runs on 
the transmitter box. It collects the data stream received 
from the Content Server and hands it further on to the 
Encapsulator. This component organizes the data in 
DVB-H compliant MPE frames, adds several header 
fields, and optional additional error correction 
information (MPE-FEC). Subsequently, the sec2ts tool 
splits the generated frames in a stream of MPEG-2 TS 
packets of 188 Bytes size each. The Timeslicer tool 
takes care of maintaining the time-multiplexing 
features, a mandatory requirement in DVB-H. It 
outputs channel bursts at distinct moments in times, 
adhering the maximum burst jitter discussed above. A 
multiplexer component finally periodically adds PSI/SI 
service information before the stream is written to the 
Dektec modulator for transmission. 
 
 
Figure 8:  FATCAPS DVB-H Tools Schematic Overview. 
5.1.3 
Validation – Measurements in the Field 
We verified the robustness and versatility of our 
broadcast tools during a measurement campaign on in-
building transmission of DVB-H. During a large trade 
fair in Vienna, we evaluated critical transmission 
parameters like burst jitter, forward error correction 
                                                           
20 We used the MAD Project FLUTE implementation from Tampere 
University of Technology. For documentation and download see 
http://mad.cs.tut.fi 
 

50
International Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
computation, and the correctness of mandatory DVB-
H service information (PSI/SI). Our end-to-end setup 
proved to function in real-world settings with adverse 
propagation characteristics (obstructions, reflections) 
with many sources of transmission errors such as a 
great variety of obstacles (exhibition stands and 
visitors moving around). As a key result, we found that 
a low-cost amplifier with an output power of 1W was 
sufficient to cover an entire square-shaped 17.000 m² 
exhibition hall. Our results, which we will report on in 
a future publication, do not only demonstrate the high 
robustness of DVB-H transmission, but also the ability 
of our platform to cover small- to medium-scale testing 
sites and interoperate with mobile DVB-H standard 
and measurement receivers.  
 
5.2 
Unicast Path 
The main purpose of the unicast subsystem is to extend 
the broadcast Mobile TV path with return-channel 
interactivity and communication features. The central 
component is a service framework for prototyping 
interactive web-applications that provides the 3rd party 
interfaces and enablers that are necessary for turning 
standard web-applications into iTV services. These 
services communicate with the Mobile iTV clients via 
the wireless UMTS/3G back-channel using different 
push and pull channels (HTTP, TCP/IP sockets, 
MMS/SMS). The unicast path consists of the following 
main elements: 
 
1. The cellular 3G/UMTS network provides packet-
switched wireless connectivity to the clients as well as 
mobile network specific communication gateways for 
messaging and voice telephony. The network also 
exposes certain interfaces (e.g., for sending/receiving 
SMS) to the AMUSE service-platform and is usually 
provided by a Mobile Network Operator21.  
 
2. The J2EE Service Framework has a dual role: as a 
framework, it provides a skeleton of an iTV service to 
be customized by application developers as well as a 
set of reusable business objects for standard tasks such 
as persistence, event-based messaging, server-side 
push, user-identity and subscription management as 
well as device-specific UI adaptation and formatting 
(Johnson, 1997). As a service platform running on a 
Jboss22 J2EE application server, it manages and 
provisions these services and components. The 
platform also hosts the CMP components that 
                                                           
21 In the context of the AMUSE 2.0 project the consortium partner 
‘mobilkom austria’ provided the cellular network infrastructure, see 
www.mobilkom.at  
22 The JBoss Foundation, http://www.jboss.org 
coordinate the unicast and the broadcast subsystem, 
e.g., to let the FLUTE object carousel inject additional 
data such as EPG-XML fragments or public chat 
message objects into the DVB-H stream. 
 
3. The Chat and Presence Server extends the 
platform with instant-messaging (IM) and presence 
which are elementary functions for Mobile Social TV 
services. It is a representative example of how the 
platform integrates 3rd Party components and offers 
them as resource to interactive TV services. The 
decision for using an external component for 
messaging, chat and presence functions was made 
since interoperability with existing infrastructures is a 
strong requirement for Social TV: instant-messaging 
protocols such as Jabber/XMPP23 and SIP/SIMPLE24 
have become widely adopted standards and a number 
of mature, open IM clients and servers exist that are 
available for integration (Chatterjee, 2005). In the case 
of the AMUSE platform, an open-source Jabber 
server25 is interfaced by the application server so that 
iTV services can provide chatrooms, buddy-lists and 
presence-awareness to their users. Moreover, the 
Jabber server can be accessed by any XMPP-
compatible client and federated with other Jabber 
servers in order to join a larger instant-messaging 
network. Therefore this approach presents a sensible 
way to ameliorates one of the currently most 
problematic issues of Social TV: interoperability with 
existing communication infrastructures and other 
Social TV platforms. 
 
5.3 
Mobile iTV Terminal Client 
The requirement for the AMUSE testbed to support 
flexible service prototyping and reliable evaluation in 
field on current smartphones in conjunction with the 
problem of the availability of only closed, proprietary 
Mobile TV solutions such as Streamezzo26 or HisTV27 
has necessitated the development of an custom 
software client: MiVIBES. MiVIBES28 is an open 
Mobile iTV player for Symbian and Linux-based 
mobiles that integrates streaming video/TV with 
additional services displayed via multiple side-frames 
in a split-screen view (Figure 9). For back-channel 
interactivity, the client uses generic microbrowser 
components to access and render web-based services 
                                                           
23 http://www.jabber.org 
24 http://www.softarmor.com/simple/  
25 
Ignite 
Realtime: 
Openfire 
Server, 
see 
http://www.igniterealtime.org/projects/openfire 
26 http://www.streamezzo.fr 
27 http://www.histv.org 
28 MiVIBES = Mobile interactive Video Browser Extended Software, 
see also http://amuse.ftw.at/downloads/aitv-client/MIVIBES  

51
International Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
according to the thin-client approach described in 
Section 4.  
 
Figure 9: iTV Split-screen View on a Nokia E61 Symbian 
Device based on two Browser- and one Video Panel. 
5.3.1 
Key Features 
Like the AMUSE platform, MiVIBES is designed for 
prototyping and evaluation of Mobile iTV offering 
choice different network and service configurations. 
Key features of the client are:  
1. Tight integration between video, broadcast data and 
interactive browser components (e.g., clicked links 
referencing video content are automatically caught and 
with the media presented in the main window). 
2. Flexible switching between different screen layouts 
(e.g., full-screen, one- and two-panel) 
3. 
Support 
of 
the 
different 
bearer 
types 
(UMTS/WLAN/DVB-H) relevant for video-streaming 
and interactivity 
4. Live DVB-H channels (relayable via WLAN) and 
simulated offline channels 
5. Support for push via TCP/IP sockets, SMS and 
MMS (as necessary for messaging/chat, event 
notifications, updates of additional content) 
6. High performance and low-level system access 
enabled by native C++ implementation on Symbian 
S60 (Nokia E61i, N92, N95) and Mobile Linux (N800, 
N810 Maemo) devices. 
Finally, a general handicap in prototyping new ideas in 
the context of broadcast Mobile TV is the current lack 
of open handsets with an API that enables access to the 
received DVB-H stream. To address this issue, we 
have developed a basic receiver platform using the 
Linux-based Nokia N800 Internet Tablet. A standard 
DVB-T adapter29 connected via USB enables the N800 
to receive and display both, AV content and FLUTE 
data (Figure 10). Together with the AMUSE 2.0 
platform, this setup constitutes the world’s first fully 
open, end-to-end testing platform for DVB-H. 
 
 
Figure 10: N800 device extended with DVB-H reception. 
5.3.2 
Client Architecture 
The MiVIBES system architecture features the 
abstraction of the different mobile networking and 
communication channels available on the device 
(WLAN, UMTS, SMS/MMS, etc.) as well as a tight 
integration between media rendering and the user 
interface (UI), including the microbrowser-based 
service presentation component (see Figure 11). This 
approach enables a seamless presentation of iTV 
services on mobiles as well as flexible adaption to 
different runtime environments.  
 
Mainly two components in the overview above 
constitute the player’s thin-client player approach, 
which differentiates MiVIBES from related work: the 
Interaction Manager and the Service Presentation 
Manager. The Interaction Manager aggregates and 
routes the different user- or system-events and network 
connections to components for Service- and A/V-
Content Presentation. This tasks also includes 
processing and dispatching push-events and -content 
(received e.g. via TCP/IP, SMS or DVB-H/FLUTE) so 
that e.g., public chat messages are displayed in the 
correct window.  
The Service Presentation Manager (SPM) hosts the 
generic runtime components such as an XHTML 
microbrowser through which the user accesses the iTV 
                                                           
29 Note that a standard DVB-T adapter (like the AVerMedia AVerTV 
DVB-T Volar) is not able to pick up a DVB-H signal using the 4k 
OFDM mode. However, for most use cases the supported 2k and 8k 
modes are fully sufficient. 

52
International Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
 
Figure 11: MiVIBES Mobile iTV Client Architecture. 
web-applications provisioned on the service-platform. 
The SPM manages the integration of such components 
with the player’s overall UI so that for example, the 
click on an URL that references an RTP-stream gets 
intercepted and then rerouted to the A/V-player. The 
SPM also abstracts away the hosted components’ 
interfaces, so that additional runtimes (e.g., a SMIL30 
player) can be used to extend the range of supported 
interactive service types and standards. Furthermore, 
the SPM uses the microbrowser not only for 
interfacing and displaying iTV services, but also for 
local GUI functions such as rendering contextual 
menus and application settings dialogues.  
 
5.3.3 
Bearer Agnostic Network Access  
We address the requirement for bearer-agnostic access 
by using an intermediary All-IP access layer, which 
allows for flexible acquisition of the video stream via 
3G/UMTS, WLAN and DVB-H. This feature makes 
the streamed media source transparent to application 
modules located at higher levels. Bearer independence 
also allows Mobile TV reception even on smartphones 
without TV reception capability. In order to receive 
DVB-H streamed content on such clients, we use the 
following workaround: a small DVB-T enabled 
                                                           
30 Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language, see also 
http://www.w3.org/AudioVideo/ 
notebook operates as gateway and relay between the 
broadcast air interface and mobile phone. Multiplexed 
video channels and the additional services including 
multimedia data of the incoming DVB-H stream are 
de-multiplexed on the notebook and redistributed to 
the phone client as separate streams via WLAN, as 
illustrated in Figure 12 below. 
 
 
Figure 12: DVB-H via a Notebook as Relay to WLAN. 
Utilizing a small laptop still guarantees sufficient 
mobility of the reception setup. We use a suite of 
Linux open source tools for analyzing, demultiplexing 
and relaying the DVB streams to the mobile phone. To 
decode the DVB video content, we use the open source 
Video LAN Client (VideoLAN, 2008) because of its 
versatility and its native support for re-streaming. In 
addition, we have developed the multicast reflector 

53
International Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
MCREFLECT31 that relays a multicast connection 
(e.g., the video of a specific channel in the DVB-H 
Stream) 
to 
multiple 
unicast 
connections. 
This 
conversion is necessary, since many clients (such as 
Symbian phones) only support TCP/IP unicast but not 
multicast connections. IP Datacast content other than 
video (such as ESG fragments) is directly passed on to 
the mobile phone via an additional TCP/IP connection. 
 
6. Research Use Cases 
 
In addition to prototyping interactive Mobile TV 
and DVB-H measurement campaigns, the AMUSE 
platform has been successfully applied to the following 
research use cases: 
 
6.1 
Mobile TV User Studies 
For the purpose of user studies, the AMUSE test 
environment allowed us to evaluate Mobile iTV 
service concepts on behalf of high-fidelity prototypes. 
On top of the AMUSE platform, we developed the 
three demo services (Sports, Mobile Social TV, 
Advertising) described in Section 2.3 as J2EE web-
applications. We then set out to evaluate our 
prototypes with end-users under realistic conditions, a 
highly common and essential step within R&D projects 
that investigate new services. This means that 
applications have to be tested in situ on mobile 
handsets. To achieve this goal, we used the framework 
of combined lab and field user studies designed as 
controlled experiments, allowing in-depth observation 
of participants’ interactions and behaviors (Schatz & 
Egger, 2008). Test users were asked to engage with the 
iTV services and features in different contexts such as 
living room, café or at the bus stop. Thanks to the 
presence 
of 
our 
mobile 
DVB-H/WLAN-relay 
(described in the previous section) that was carried by 
one observer, participants could test mobile iTV with a 
variety of Symbian devices (Nokia N92, N95, E61) 
without any constraints. 
 
                                                           
31 
Further 
information 
and 
download 
under 
http://amuse.ftw.at/downloads/dvbh-relay/ 
 
Figure 13: Study Participant in the Café filmed by Cameras 
mounted on a Hat of our LiLiPUT system. 
In addition, we used our custom-designed LiLiPUT 
(Reichl et al. 2007) system to capture user behavior 
(see Figure 13). LiLiPUT is a mobile observation 
system based on a wireless camera-equipped hat that 
captures the end-user’s reactions and immediate 
context. This is achieved by recording the subject’s 
facial expressions, the mobile device screen status, as 
well as any sounds involved. As such, LiLiPUT 
enabled us to gather behavioral data from mobile 
conditions with the same fidelity as in indoor settings. 
For further details on our Mobile TV user studies 
please refer to (Schatz & Egger, 2008). 
 
6.2 
EPG Recommender  
The second research use case features the extension of 
the broadcast path and EPG subsystem of the AMUSE 
platform in order to prototype accelerated access to the 
‘right’ Mobile TV channel by means of a content-
based recommender system. The recommender utilizes 
text 
mining 
and 
NLU 
(Natural 
Language 
Understanding) to extract key features from the EPG 
metadata of TV shows32 and match them with user 
preferences (Bär et al., 2008). Figure 14 shows the 
interface of the recommender service. The four sliders 
specify the user's mood preference (action, thrill, fun, 
erotic) while the text field allows for alternative verbal 
input of keywords. The result is a ranked list of best 
matching programs links ordered by a match score. 
 
                                                           
32 For accessing EPG metadata we used the XMLTV system. See 
also http://www.xmltv.org 

54
International Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
 
 
Figure 14: Recommender interface (top) and integration of 
SEDs in broadcast stream (bottom). 
The recommender system is deeply integrated in to the 
DVB-H broadcast path and features a two-stage 
processing cycle: SED-generation/transmission and 
on-device recommendation generation. Firstly, when 
new content metadata is imported into the system, each 
EPG metadata entry is preprocessed in terms of 
extracting recommendation-relevant features (i.e., 
topics and moods). Each entry is then stored in the 
AMUSE platform’s EPG database which we extended 
store the feature data as so-called Semantically 
Enriched EPG Dataset (SED). The enriched EPG 
information itself is delivered as OMA BCAST 
compliant XML fragments: the programme entries are 
encapsulated by the complex element ’Content’. We 
use the child element ‘TargetUserProfile’ to carry the 
additional semantic information of the SEDs. The 
enhanced EPG data is then multiplexed with the video 
streams by the platform’s DVB-H IP-Encapsulator 
(FATCAPS) and transmitted to the clients. Secondly, 
upon user request, the MiVIBES player generates a 
recommendation based on local processing of the 
SEDs previously received. This approach has several 
advantages: It only requires a unidirectional broadcast 
link, avoiding the roundtrip latency of a wireless 
backchannel. Secondly, the user does not have to 
perform any registration and profiling steps before 
using the system. Thirdly, the user's privacy is 
protected since no personal information leaves the 
client device. This example demonstrates how the 
openness and flexibility of the AMUSE platform 
enables the rapid integration of new features and 
protocol extensions. For further details on our Mobile 
TV recommender please refer to (Bär et al., 2008). 
 
7. Conclusion and Outlook 
 
We consider a flexible open-source testbed as a 
vital enabling platform for the research community for 
experimentation 
with 
hybrid 
broadcast/unicast 
architectures and related multimedia services. In this 
paper we presented our open-source platform that 
allows for flexible prototyping and evaluation of 
interactive 
hybrid 
multimedia 
services 
and 
technologies.  
After an evaluation of existing approaches, we 
chose an All-IP SOA using standard J2EE components 
and frameworks for advanced interactivity via unicast 
as well for mediation platform functions. For the 
broadcast path we used a suite of open source tools for 
encoding and streaming in conjunction with standard 
DVB-H/T equipment, with an optional bypass of the 
DVB-H air interface. This approach has proven 
economic, bearer-agnostic and flexible enough for 
research purposes. On the client side, a major result is 
the integration of video display with browser 
functionality to realize a unified rich media player for 
the S60 mobile platform as well as Mobile Linux. This 
architecture allows for rapid prototyping of mobile 
iTV concepts by shifting business logic and 
presentation authoring from the client to the server.  
 
The AMUSE platform and service framework 
enables any research group to become a digital TV 
broadcast operator en miniature without having to 
strain their project budgets with the procurement of 
carrier-grade equipment. Even more important, due to 
the openness of all components, the platform serves as 
a perfect tool for research purposes. It lays the 
foundation for prototyping new broadcast/unicast 
services such as interactive advertisement and program 
recommender systems. Furthermore, the AMUSE 
platform and service framework can be used to support 
experimentation on the lower layers of the OSI stack, 
for instance for the development of new error 
correction schemes, improvements on channel coding 
algorithms, statistical multiplexing (cf. Jacobs et al., 
2008) as well as the investigation of synchronization of 
AV content with supplementary data (cf. Leroux et al., 
2007). Plenty of ideas for future improvements of our 
open source components exist and we cordially invite 
the community to work with us on them together. 
 

55
International Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
8. Acknowledgement 
 
This research has been performed within the 
projects M2 AMUSE 2.0, U0 and N0 at the 
Telecommunications Research Center Vienna (ftw.) 
supported by the Austrian Government and by the City 
of Vienna within the competence center program 
COMET. We would like to thank our AMUSE 2.0 
team members Sebastian Egger, Arian Bär, Thomas 
Ebner, Erwin Wittowetz and Siegfried Wagner for 
their hard and fruitful work.  
 
9. References 
 
Baldzer, J., Thieme, S., Boll, S., Appelrath, H.-J. and 
Rosenhager, N. (2005) Night Scene Live: A Multimedia 
Application for Mobile Revellers on the Basis of a Hybrid 
Network, Using DVB-H and IP Datacast. IEEE International 
Conference on Multimedia and Expo ICME’05, 6-6 July 
2005, pp.1567-1570. 
Baier, A. and Richartz, M. (2006) Mobile TV - From pure 
Broadcast 
to 
Interactivity. 
Workshop 
on 
Multiradio 
Multimedia Communications MMC’06, Berlin, 19-20 Oct, 
2006. 
Bär, A., Berger, A., Egger, S. and  Schatz, R.  (2008) A 
Lightweight Mobile TV Recommender: Towards a One-
Click-to-Watch Experience. In Proc. of the 6th EuroITV 
Conference on Interactive Television, Salzburg, Austria, July 
3-4, 2008. 
Berger, A., Pallara, L. and Schatz, R. (2008) An Open 
Source Software Framework for DVB-* Transmission. ACM 
International Conference on Multimedia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada, 27-31Oct, 2008. 
Blom, S., Book, M., Gruhn, V., Hrushchak, R. and Kohler, 
A. (2008) Write Once, Run Anywhere A Survey of Mobile 
Runtime Environments. The 3rd International Conference on 
Grid and Pervasive Computing, GPC Workshops'08. pp.132-
137, 25-28 May 2008. 
Cazoulat, R. and Lebris, T. (2008) An efficient multimedia 
system for J2ME mobile device. IEEE International 
Symposium 
on 
Broadband 
Multimedia 
Systems 
and 
Broadcasting (ISBMSB), pp.1-5, March 31 - April 2, 2008. 
Chatterjee, S., Abhichandani, T., Haiqing Li, TuIu, B. and 
Jongbok, B. (2005) Instant messaging and presence 
technologies for college campuses. IEEE Network, vol.19, 
no.3, pp. 4-13, May-June 2005. 
Coppens, T., Trappeniers, L. and Godon, M. (2004) Amigo 
TV: towards a social TV experience. 2nd European EuroITV 
Conference on Interactive Television: Enhancing the 
Experience, March 31-April 2, 2004, Brighton, UK.  
Coulton, P., Rashid, O., Edwards, R., Thompson, R. (2005) 
Creating entertainment applications for cellular phones. 
Computer and Entertainment, 3(3). 
Datamonitor (2006) Technology developments in the 
European digital TV Sector, London, 7 July 2006. 
http://www.datamonitor.com/~1ec12699c5a6421c85765060f
baeccd1~/industries/research/?pid=BFTC1363&type=Brief 
Dufourd, J.C., Avaro, O. and Concolato, C. (2005) An 
MPEG Standard for Rich Media Services, IEEE MultiMedia, 
12(4), 60-68. 
ETSI (2004) Digital Video Broadcasting; Transmission 
System for Handheld Terminals (DVB-H), ETSI standard, 
EN 302 304 V 1. I. 1, 2004. 
ETSI (2006) Digital Video Broadcasting; IP Datacast over 
DVB-H: Electronic Service Guide (ESG), ETSI standard, 
ETSI TS 102 471 V1.1.1, 2006. 
Ftw (2007) AMUSE 2.0 project site, http://amuse.ftw.at  
Garret, J.J. (2005) Ajax: A New Approach to Web 
Applications. 
February 
18, 
2005, 
http://www.adaptivepath.com/publications/essays/archives/0
00385.php 
Greenhalgh, C., Benford, S., Drozd, A., Flintham, M., 
Hampshire, A., Oppermann, L., Smith, K., and von 
Tycowicz, C. (2007) Addressing mobile phone diversity in 
ubicomp experience development. In L.J. Krumm, G. D. 
Abowd, A. Seneviratne, & T. Strang (Eds.) Ubicomp, LNCS 
vol. 4717, pp. 447-464. Springer, Berlin-Heidelberg. 
Hartl, M., Rauch, C., Sattler, C., Baier, A. (2005) Trial of a 
Hybrid DVB-H / GSM Mobile Broadcast System. 14th IST 
Mobile and Wireless Communications Summit, Dresden, 
June 2005. 
Högg, R., Martignoni, R. and Stanoevska-Slabeva, K. (2007) 
The impact of interactivity on mobile broadcasting value 
chains, 16th IST Mobile & Wireless Communications 
Summit, 1-5 July 2007, Budapest, Hungary. 
Huebscher, M., Pryce, N., Dulay, N., Thompson, P. (2006) 
Issues in developing ubicomp applications on Symbian 
phones. In: Proc. Future Mobile Computing Applications, 
International Workshop on System Support, 17 Sept 2006, 
pp. 51–56 
Jacobs, M., Barbarien, J., Tondeur, S., Van de Walle, R., 
Paridaens, 
T. 
and 
Schelkens, 
P. 
(2008) 
Statistical 
multiplexing using SVC. IEEtE International Symposium on 
Broadband 
Multimedia 
Systems 
and 
Broadcasting 
(ISBMSB), April 6-7 2006, Las Vegas, USA. 
Jensen, J.F. (2005) Interactive Television: New Genres, New 
Format, New Content. In Proc. of the Second Australasian 
Conference on Interactive Entertainment 2005,  ACM 
International Conference Proceeding Series,  23-25 Nov 
2005, Volume 123,  Sydney, Australia, pp. 89-96. 
Johnson, R.E. (1997) Frameworks = (components + 
patterns). Communications of the ACM, 40(10), Oct 1997, 
39-42.  
Klinkenberg, F. and  Steckel, P. (2006) A Modular Approach 
for a Java-based Service Framework in Hybrid Networks, 

56
International Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, vol 1 no 1, year 2008, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
IEEE International Symposium on Broadband Multimedia 
Systems and Broadcasting (ISBMSB), April 6-7 2006, Las 
Vegas, USA. 
Knoche, H. and McCarthy, J. D. (2005) Design requirements 
for mobile TV. 7th international Conference on Human 
Computer interaction with Mobile Devices & Services 
(MobileHCI'05), Salzburg, Austria, 19-22 Sept 2005, vol. 
111. ACM, New York 
Kumar, A. (2007) Mobile TV: DVB-H, DMB, 3G Systems 
and Rich Media Applications. Focal Press Media Technology 
Professional, ISBN: 9780240809465. 
Leroux, P., Verstraete, V., De Turck, F. and Demeester, P. 
(2007) Synchronized Interactive Services for Mobile Devices 
over IPDC/DVB-H and UMTS. 2nd IEEE/IFIP International 
Workshop on Broadband Convergence Networks (BcN'07), 
21-21 May, 2007. 
Liebermann, L. (2007) Mobile Ajax and Application 
Adaptation. Paper at the W3C/Open Ajax Alliance Workshop 
on Mobile Ajax, September 2007, Silicon Valley, California, 
USA. 
Martinetz, G. (2006) DVB/CBMS and OMA/Bcast CBMS 
Standardisation. 
Workshop 
on 
Multiradio Multimedia Communications MMC’06, Berlin, 
Oct 19-20, 2006. 
Ofcom 
(2006) 
The 
Communications 
Market 
2006. 
http://www.ofcom.org.uk/research/cm/cm06/main.pdf 
Ollikainen, V. and Peng, C. (2006) A Handover Approach to 
DVB-H Services. IEEE International Conference on 
Multimedia & Expo (ICME), July 9-12 2006, Toronto, 
Canada. 
Ollikainen, V. (2008) Mobile TV Should Be More Than a 
Television, The final report of the Podracing project. VTT 
Research Notes 2439, Espoo, Finland. 
Paila, T. Luby, M. Lehtonen, R. Roca, V and Walsh, R. 
(2004) FLUTE - File Delivery over Unidirectional 
Transports, IETF RFC 3926. 
Petrovic, O., Fallenböck, M., Kittl, Ch. and Langl, A. (2006) 
Mobile TV in Österreich. Schriftenreihe der Rundfunk und 
Telekom Regulierungs-GmbH (RTR-GmbH) Österreich, 
Band 2/2006. 
Reichl, P., Froehlich, P., Baillie, L., Schatz, R. and 
Dantcheva, A. (2007) The LiLiPUT Prototype: A Wearable 
Lab 
Environment 
for 
User 
Tests 
of 
Mobile 
Telecommunication Applications. Extended Abstracts of 
CHI2007, Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, San José, CA, USA. 
Roibas, A.C. (2004) Ubiquitous media at the intersection: 
iTV meets mobile communications. In Proceedings of HCI 
2003, Bath. BCS conference series, 2. Springer-Verlag, 
London, UK. ISBN 1852337664. 
Schatz, R., Jordan, N. and Wagner, S. (2007a) Beyond 
Broadcast – A Hybrid Testbed for Mobile TV 2.0 Services. 
The 6th International Conference on Networking (ICN’07), 
Martinique, 
April, 
2007. 
IEEE 
Computer 
Society, 
Washington, DC. 
Schatz, R., Wagner, S., Egger, S. and Jordan, N. (2007b) 
Mobile TV becomes Social - Integrating Content with 
Communications. Proc. of The International Conference on 
Information Technology Interfaces (ITI’07), Dubrovnik, 
Croatia, June, 2007. IEEE, Washington, DC. 
Schatz, R. and Egger, S. (2008) Social Interaction Features 
for Mobile TV Services. In Proc. of IEEE Broadband 
Multimedia Systems and Broadcast Symposium, April 2008, 
Las Vegas, USA. 
Setlur, V. Capin, T. Chitturi, S. Vedantham, R. and  
Ingrassia, M. (2006) MORE: Mobile Open Rich-Media 
Environment. IEEE International Conference on Multimedia 
and Expo (ICME’06), Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
Skrodzki, S. (2006) HisTV Air Interface Draft Version 1.3. 
GMIT GmbH, 07. Nov 2006, http://www.histv.org  
Sullivan, B. and Connors A. (2008) Mobile Web Application 
Best Practices. W3C Working Draft 29 July 2008, 
http://www.w3.org/TR/2008/WD-mwabp-20080729 
Trefzger, J. (2005) Mobile TV-Launch in Germany – 
Challenges and Implications. Working paper of the Institut 
für Runfunkökonomie, Universität Köln, Nov 2005, ISBN 3-
938933-07-0. 
UMTS Forum (2006) Joint Mobile TV Group Whitepaper – 
Mobile TV: The Groundbreaking Dimension. The UMTS-
Forum, Nov 2006, http://www.umts-forum.org 
VideoLAN (2008) VideoLAN project homepage, 
http://www.videolan.org  
Zucker, D.F., Uematsu, M. and Kamado, T. (2005) Content 
and Web services converge: a unified user interface. IEEE 
Pervasive Computing, 4(4), pp. 8-11, Oct.-Dec. 2005
 

