32
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The Impact of Regulatory Frameworks on Competition and Penetration of 
Telecommunication Markets 
Analysis of the European and Asian Broadband Markets 
Erik Massarczyk, Peter Winzer 
Faculty of Design – Computer Science – Media 
RheinMain University of Applied Sciences 
Wiesbaden, Germany 
Email: erik.massarczyk@hs-rm.de, peter.winzer@hs-rm.de 
 
Abstract—Based on the rising numbers of broadband Internet 
users and the resulting higher importance of broadband 
infrastructures, previous analyses often focused on the relation 
between competitive market behaviors and the development of 
customer broadband penetration rates. Additionally, some 
prognoses also consider the relation between the development of 
market concentration and customer prices. In both methods, 
researchers have started to implement some different regulatory 
variables, which measure the difference between 
the 
competition within an infrastructure and between different 
infrastructures. Here, there is either a simple binary variable 
(regulation implied: yes or no) or the variable expresses how 
many connection lines (in relation to the overall market) are 
affected by regulatory intervention. The target of this and 
further research will be to expand the current status of 
knowledge. Besides the analysis of the influence of regulatory 
frameworks as single (binary) variable on the development of 
market concentrations, penetration rates and customer prices, 
two further approaches will be discussed.  In the first step, the 
regulatory variable is changed so that the duration of the 
implemented regulation is included in this variable. Then, in a 
second step, regression analyses will examine the relationship 
between (a) the market and regulatory variables and (b) the 
broadband connection speed development variables. Chiefly, 
this paper gives insights about the telecommunication market 
developments depending on the degree of regulation. 
 
Keywords—broadband development; market concentration; 
regulatory frameworks; Hirschmann-Herfindahl-Index; Linda-
Index; broadband penetration rates. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Previous researches indicate the rising importance of the 
worldwide Internet and the increased usage of Internet 
services within broadband infrastructures in daily business 
and private life [1]. Here, especially the availability of 
Internet services like (a) cloud computing, (b) video on 
demand, (c) online telephony, (d) social media networks and 
(e) email services describes the importance of the Internet 
nowadays. The availability/implementation of broadband 
infrastructures and high broadband connection speeds are 
becoming increasingly important as location factors to 
guarantee the accessibility of Internet services [2]-[5]. The 
increased usage and rising importance of broadband 
infrastructures/connection speeds underline the significance 
of future communication/data transport for entertainment and 
work. Therefore, broadband access lines are one of the main 
indicators for economic growth [2]. 
In the world and particularly in the following considered 
European and Asian broadband markets, different standards 
for the provision of broadband infrastructures subsist [4], 
which are beside other factors responsible for the various 
broadband developments in the past years. On this account, 
in each regional/national telecommunication market different 
regulatory obligations and technical standards for broadband 
infrastructures can be observed, which result in different 
market situations and broadband penetrations [3]-[5]. These 
differences result by the following reasons: (a) customer 
broadband demand, (b) prices for broadband services, (c) 
quality and technologies providing broadband infrastructures 
(availability of wires and ducts), (d) implementation costs, (e) 
competition 
policy 
and 
regulatory 
obligations, 
(f) 
competition, and (g) demography and culture [3]-[6]. 
Most publications on this topic focus on the analysis of 
the relationship between: (a) regulatory and governmental 
frameworks, (b) competition, (c) broadband diffusion and 
adoption, (d) coverage and (e) penetration 
[7][8]. 
Furthermore, various papers deal with considerations 
regarding (a) the relations between implementation costs and 
customer prices, (b) operators and different broadband 
infrastructures, and (c) demand and supply of broadband 
Internet services [9]-[11]. Yet, the development of broadband 
does not only depend on the customer adoption and diffusion 
of broadband infrastructures. Broadband developments 
include all services and benefits, which are targeted to 
strengthen the following factors: (a) higher broadband 
coverage and penetration, (b) higher broadband connection 
speeds, (c) more services, (d) higher technical standard for 
infrastructures, and (e) measures to create acceptable prices 
for customers and to induce customer broadband demand. 
The following relations have been rarely considered in terms 
of their influence by the competition: (a) the influence of 
competition (market concentration) on the development of 
broadband access speeds, and (b) the influence of 
competition on the development of customer prices for 
broadband services. In addition, the extent to which the 
following regulatory provisions influence market factors will 
be examined: (a) the impact of regulatory obligations and 
regulatory frameworks on the market concentrations in 
broadband networks, (b) the impact of regulatory frameworks 
on the development of broadband penetration rates, and (c) 

33
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the influence of regulatory behavior on the customer prices 
are not considered in detail until the current point of time. As 
mentioned, the other impacts are not considered. In the past 
research approaches, regulatory obligations and frameworks 
are only estimated as binary variables or by number of 
regulatory used.  It examined the influence of different types 
of competition on the development of broadband penetration 
rates. 
This study will firstly examine the impact of market 
concentrations on the fixed-line broadband development to 
prove if the achieved data could present the past research. 
Next to the consideration of market concentrations, we have 
also measured the disparity in the broadband markets and 
have estimated this disparity in the relation to the named 
broadband developments. Based on this measurement, we 
have analyzed the different types of regulatory obligations for 
fixed-line broadband markets and their influence on 
competition. In the further steps, we have focused on the 
influences of the aforementioned factors with the focus being 
on the implementation of regulatory obligations. For the 
evaluation, we have collected secondary data of fixed-line 
broadband markets in Europe and Asia to conduct a 
combined cross-sectional and longitudinal panel data 
analysis with pooled ordinary least square regressions. The 
chosen time range of said data will include the years between 
2004 and 2015 in order to reflect on the reasons for the 
different country-specific broadband developments, levels of 
competition/market concentration and regulatory behaviors 
over time. Apart from the different regression models, the 
intensity of competition will be – in a first step – measured 
through the usage of different economic concentration 
models. Following this approach, we will discuss how the 
regulatory frameworks can be examined. The major aim of 
this study is the analysis and the determination of the country 
specific different broadband developments. 
The paper proceeds as follows: based on the introduction, 
Section II presents the literature review and the hypotheses. 
Section III includes the research methodology. Section IV 
gives the first results of the investigations regarding the 
development of competition and market penetration. In 
Section V, we discuss first insides of the regression analysis. 
After all, we conclude the paper in Section VI. 
 
 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
A. Influence of Competition on Market Developments 
Due to the various influence factors described, the term of 
broadband development includes: the development of 
coverage and penetration of the existing broadband 
infrastructures, the expansion of new and upgrade of old 
infrastructures, the customer prices for broadband services 
and the quality of the broadband networks (broadband 
connection speeds). 
Based on liberalizations of the fixed-line broadband 
markets in developed and emerging countries, various 
network operators and service providers compete in the 
provision of broadband Internet accesses and services. In 
order to get a quick return for their investments, operators 
often focus on broadband developments in regions with 
potentially large customer base and, high population densities 
and low implementation costs [10][12], which count as 
economic efficient areas [11]. This approach reduces 
significantly the incentives for investments, implementations 
and upgrades of the existing broadband infrastructures in 
rural regions with lower population density. 
However, when competitors get access to the broadband 
infrastructure of the incumbent or when the competitors have 
their own broadband access infrastructure (cable or fiber), the 
customer prices for broadband services, the broadband 
diffusion and provision respectively are influenced. 
Especially in cases of providing access for new entrants and 
controlled prices, regulatory decisions and behaviors by the 
governmental authorities could strongly influence the 
existing market situations. 
The opening of existing broadband infrastructures creates 
an intense price competition, which strengthens the 
broadband adoption by customers [7][8]. 
In case of competitive situations in broadband markets, 
the prices for broadband services decrease and the broadband 
diffusion and provision increase heavily [7][8]. The 
competition of different network operators and service 
providers exert a positive influence on customer adoption of 
broadband access networks and can be named as one of the 
key drivers to reach high broadband penetration rates [8]. 
Despite the fact that competition induces more broadband 
adoption, Gruber and Koutroumpis (2012) have figured out 
that competition within an infrastructure would be quite more 
effective for the customer broadband adoption than the 
competition between different broadband infrastructures [8]. 
Although the competition between different broadband 
infrastructures can stimulate stronger market behaviors 
because of the increased rivalry for market shares, the 
implementation of further broadband infrastructures is also 
quite more expensive than the wholesale of an existing 
broadband infrastructure. 
To sum up the previous findings, the first hypothesis will 
examine the relationship between broadband diffusion and 
the development of market concentrations. 
 
H1: A stronger competition (higher intensity of 
competition) leads to higher broadband penetration rates. 
 
In consideration of the available data and the status of the 
work in progress, we focus on the further considerations of 
the influences between competition, regulatory frameworks 
and penetration rates. The estimations of customer broadband 
prices and broadband connection speeds will be addressed, 
but not finally concluded. 
As mentioned with the first hypothesis, we assume that an 
existing competitive market structure in broadband markets 
could 
positively 
affect 
broadband 
penetration. 
As 
additionally addressed by Distaso et al. [7], Gruber and 
Koutroumpis [8], a higher intensity of competition leads to 
lower prices for the lease of an unbundled line and lower 
customer prices for broadband services in general. The 

34
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
opening of the existing broadband infrastructures by 
regulatory obligations tackles directly the current market 
structure, the new market players have to encounter a price 
competition [9][10][13]. An increased competition with 
reduced prices could lead to a better acceptance of 
(broadband) accesses by the customers, because prices are 
most important driving indicators for the customers´ decision 
[9][10][13]. Following Distaso et al. and Gruber, there is a 
negative relationship between customer prices and the 
adoption of broadband accesses [7][14].  Moreover, Katz & 
Berry [10] also mention that a weak competition with high 
market concentrations would induce higher customer 
broadband prices. 
On this account, the market entry is quite difficult for new 
market entrants, because a business on the boarder of price 
competition leads to lower sales on the base of constant costs 
for the use of the infrastructure of the incumbent [6]. 
Consequently, the incentives to get into the market, to 
compete with existing market players, and to get only low 
revenues are quite weak. 
However, currently the prices are above the level of 
marginal costs and thus, new market entrants have the 
possibility to achieve revenues to stay successfully in the 
market. The main target is here: Do customer prices have an 
impact on broadband developments in regional markets?  
Nonetheless, a former monopolist with an existing 
infrastructure has the advantage that he gains revenues and 
do not have the same investment costs like the entrants, 
because the network usually is already (mostly) depreciated. 
Therefore, the incumbent in the cases can (a) gain more 
usable resources, (b) react more flexible on market behavior 
and (c) longer survive in a price competition. 
In competitive market situations, provider decrease their 
prices to reach a broader customer base [13]. Therefore, the 
broadband adoption can be positively influenced and will 
increase over time. The influence of competition on customer 
revenues may cause problems if the network operators have 
difficulty to provide the financial resources for new 
investments in broadband infrastructures. Furthermore, 
companies try: (a) to differentiate their products and (b) to 
invest in the broadband infrastructure to get into a better 
market position than competitors [10]. Generally, it can be 
ascertained that prices for broadband services and the 
adoption of accesses are negatively related [7][14]. However, 
the prices also depend on the customer’s willingness to pay 
and the demand for broadband services. Since customers are 
price sensitive and their behavior is very price elastic, a 
declining price induces a higher willingness to adopt and use 
broadband access [15]. Based on the presented literature 
background, the following two hypotheses could be 
developed. 
 
H2: A stronger competition leads to lower monthly 
customer prices for broadband access. 
 
H3: Lower customer prices relates positively to higher 
broadband penetration rates.  
 
The hypotheses H2 and H3 figure out how the behavior 
of the market players regarding the market shares and 
customer prices influence the broadband development and 
the adoption of broadband accesses.  
However, previous studies do not consider the 
relationship between (a) competition, broadband and 
broadband penetration, and (b) available broadband 
connection speeds [9]. So far, researchers have often 
considered the relationships between competition and 
broadband penetration rates and between competition and 
customer prices. Additionally, some studies have focused on 
the influence of broadband prices on the development of 
penetration rates.  
Normally, the assumption would be that more 
competition leads to faster broadband connection speeds, 
lower prices and higher penetration rates. If this expectation 
turns out to be true, it can be concluded that in broadband 
markets 
with 
higher 
concentrations 
usually 
strong 
monopolists and/or oligopolists try to hold and increase their 
market shares instead of investing into new infrastructures 
and push further broadband developments. Based on the 
missing pressure (potential market entry of a new 
competitor), the incumbent has no incentive to develop a new 
or better broadband infrastructure. 
Only if the (former) monopolist fears a competitor’s 
market entry or the incumbent is forced to grant the network 
access for new market entrants, it will have an incentive to 
upgrade the current infrastructure in order to improve the 
quality of its broadband networks and services [11][12]. 
Here, with a strong competition it can be assumed that on the 
one hand, the providers try to find new ways to win customers 
from competitors, and therefore, they have incentives to 
invest in new infrastructures [29][30]. On the other hand, if 
competition is not that strong, the (former) monopolist may 
(by owning the sole broadband infrastructure) be able to 
generate better margins and to invest in a better quality of his 
own infrastructure. 
As mentioned before, the focus of this study will be the 
analysis of the relationships between regulatory behaviors 
and the market developments in specific countries. 
Nonetheless, some insides about the relations of broadband 
connection speeds will be given too. 
Since the dependency between (a) market conditions and 
(b) customer pricing and broadband connection speeds has 
not been considered so far, it is considered that competition 
is a key driver for the development of broadband 
infrastructure and broadband services. It can be expected that 
a competitive broadband market structure leads to higher 
connection speeds, since competitors invest financial 
resources in new infrastructures and equipment in order to 
differentiate from existing market players and to get in a 
better market position in comparison to the incumbent.  
 
H4: In regional telecommunication markets with a higher 
level of broadband competition the average connection 
speeds are higher. 
 
H5: Lower customer prices for broadband access lead to 
a faster development of broadband connection speeds. 

35
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Actually, the customer willingness to pay does not 
increase heavily in terms of a rising broadband connection 
speed [6]. Furthermore, the customer willingness to pay 
determines the demand for broadband accesses. Because 
customers are only willing to pay higher prices if there is a 
substantial improvement of quality and availability of the 
broadband services [11][16][17]. 
New entrants usually have to pay access charges if they 
are willing to use existing infrastructures of other operators 
[6].  
Despite the high significance of the customer part in this 
topic, the focus will be further in the analysis of the regulatory 
impact on market developments. 
 
B. Influence of Regulatory Frameworks on Market 
Developments 
Following the introduction of the presented competitive 
considerations, 
the 
relationships 
of 
the 
regulatory 
frameworks on the development of (a) market concentrations, 
(b) customer prices, (c) penetration rates, and (d) broadband 
connection speeds need to be analyzed too. 
It can be almost confirmed that the huge range of 
governmental initiatives, involvements and regulatory 
instruments lead to different market conditions in the 
considered countries [18]-[24]. 
For example, the European Union forced the member 
states to liberalize the fixed telecommunication markets and 
to open up the past monopolistic state-owned infrastructures 
between 1985 and 1998. Liberalization should normally 
strengthen the forces of the market [20][21]. If the market 
forces 
are 
not 
strong 
enough 
to 
develop 
the 
telecommunication markets, the political and regulatory 
authorities have to intervene [18][19]. Based on the vast 
range of governmental initiatives and regulatory instruments, 
it is normally intended that the market regulates itself [18]-
[21]. 
Kiesewetter et al. [22], and Waverman and Koutroumpis 
[23] found out that regulations (especially access regulations) 
directly influence the market concentration in broadband 
markets. Regulations are able to force the incumbent to open 
the networks for competitors [20]. Which means, the existing 
market structures and especially the market position of the 
incumbent can be influenced by the implementation of 
regulations. In this situation, the regulations shall remove 
burdens and constraints and may overcome the lack of 
competitive behavior [8][20][24]. A possible change of 
market structures allows new entrants to enter the market. 
However, regulations could only determine the competition 
within a network. Here, the access regulations are 
differentiated 
between 
regulations 
for 
intra-platform 
competition and service-based competition. The competition 
between operators with different broadband infrastructures is 
normally not targeted by regulations [6]. 
Nonetheless, regulations usually prescribe existing and 
dominating network operators to open their networks for new 
entrants [24]. On the one hand, the mandatory access allows 
competitors to join the broadband markets with only few 
investments in the provision of broadband services and 
without any investment in sunk costs assets [6]. On the other 
hand, the regulatory authority can improve the competitive 
situation and help to overcome possible competitive deficits 
[8][24]. Hence, the acceleration of competition should induce 
a stronger competition with a higher rate of broadband 
adoptions [7]. 
 
H6: Regulatory behavior and mandatory access 
regulations will positively enhance competitive market 
behaviors. 
 
Furthermore, regulations also depend on the market 
power of the incumbent and existing network operators, 
because they try to avoid or overcome regulations with own 
behaviors or investments. Incumbents (and big operators) 
generally would not allow that a new provider could use their 
networks (without making investments for own broadband 
infrastructures) [24]. In this case, the regulatory authority has 
to pay attention that an incumbent (or other big/dominant 
operator) would not able to offer higher prices to hold the 
market position, to hinder further market developments and 
to foreclose other companies to join the market. The 
regulatory opening of infrastructures for entrants should (a) 
remove burdens and constraints, (b) allows the creation of 
retail competition, and (c) ensures that the incumbent cannot 
foreclosure (new) competitors [20][24].  
On the other hand, access regulations for existing 
infrastructures allow operators to hold their power with their 
infrastructures and they are able to overview the competitors 
[7]. One intension of the regulatory authority could be that 
entrants get a market access and later, when they have had 
gained enough financial resources, they will invest in own 
infrastructures (so called “Ladder on Investment”). But, in 
several countries a couple of enterprises are quite comfortable 
with the access on an existing network. Consequently, 
regulations can open the market for further competition, but 
an infrastructure competition does not necessarily result. 
Based on the literature regulatory measures influence 
competitive market behaviors. Furthermore, it would be 
necessary to analyze how these regulatory measures affect the 
development of the coverage and adoption of broadband 
infrastructures. 
Besides the opening of accesses for existing broadband 
infrastructures by regulations, the offering of grants and 
subsidies could be regulatory or governmental interventions 
too. These funds should stimulate operators to invest in 
further broadband infrastructures and to enhance the quality 
of 
existing 
broadband 
infrastructures 
and 
services. 
Furthermore, the subsidies should support the operators in 
their investments to overcome possible investment gaps and 
to make investments quite reasonable [20][25]. 
Supporting the previous explanations, Gruber and 
Koutroumpis [8], and Wallsten [26] mention the fact that the 
implementation of regulations (especially unbundling) 
stimulate higher broadband penetration rates. However, 
Briglauer and Gugler [6] found that only few regulatory 
decisions influence broadband penetration rates directly. 
Possibly, regulations can also negatively influence the 
development 
of 
broadband 
penetration 
rates 
[4]. 

36
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Nevertheless, the assumption here is that governmental 
interventions want to enhance the broadband penetration and 
therefore, the following hypothesis indicates a positive 
relationship between regulatory behaviors and broadband 
penetration. 
 
H7: Regulatory behavior and mandatory access 
regulations will positively relate to broadband penetration.   
 
Furthermore, regulatory authorities are able to set price 
regulations. Therefore, they have to check if the incumbent is 
trying to misuse his market power to set higher prices than a 
market with competitive structures. If the incumbent cannot 
force higher prices, the gained revenues, financial resources 
and the incentives for further broadband investments will 
decrease. Also, the new entrants are not willing to invest high 
amounts, because they would not be able to set higher prices 
as the incumbent [8][24].  
As introduced, regulations are able to offer the 
opportunity for new market entrants to enter the broadband 
market. However obviously, the entrants have to pay charges 
for the usage of existing infrastructures. These fees represent 
additional costs for the competitors and tend to secure the 
(dominant) position of (incumbent) network operators [6][7]. 
Therefore, regulators need to ensure that network access 
charges are close to marginal costs. 
Nonetheless, the entrance of the new competitors 
normally lead to a stronger competitive market situation 
which results in lower customer prices [6]. Due to the 
induction of competition by regulatory measures, it can be 
hypothesized that regulatory obligations reduces customer 
prices. 
 
H8: Regulatory behavior and mandatory access 
regulations reduce to customer prices. 
 
Regulations are able to change previous market 
structures, especially in the case of non-transitory barriers 
and a non-existent competition. Due to the implementation of 
regulations, incumbent could be limited to set higher prices, 
which normally lead to decreasing revenues. Falling revenues 
discourage the operators to invest in future infrastructures. 
Due to the high implementation costs (which are mainly sunk 
costs), operators and governmental authorities have to take 
into account the high investment risks [6]. Due to high 
investment requirements in network infrastructures, entrants 
have high market entry barriers. In contrast, the resale of 
broadband 
services 
(based 
on 
existing 
broadband 
infrastructure) is a relatively risk-free alternative for making 
profits [8][24]. Mandatory access regulations reduce 
incentives to invest in infrastructure; furthermore, strict cost-
based/ex-ante regulatory approaches are suspect and hinder 
further broadband developments [4][24][25]. However, the 
providing operator (usually the incumbent) has to be 
compensated for release of broadband capacities [24].  
The literature review does not provide a clear picture of 
how broadband developments could be supported by 
regulatory intervention with regulatory commitments and 
decisions. On the one hand, regulatory interventions reduce 
investment incentives of companies and operators to develop 
broadband. On the other hand, the regulatory authorities 
enable the possibility to enter the market and to offer several 
funds to support possible new market players that they could 
develop their own broadband services [6]. 
 
H9: Regulatory behavior and mandatory access 
regulations will positively affect stronger broadband 
developments and higher broadband connection speeds. 
 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
As the previous explanations indicate, we will analyze 
relationships 
between 
broadband 
developments, 
the 
respective market concentrations and broadband market 
regulations in particularly Western European and Southeast 
Asian markets.  
The focus lies on countries of the European Union 28 
(EU28) and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
(ASEAN), as well as additional countries such as 
Switzerland, Norway, Japan, China, Hong Kong, and the 
Rep. of Korea. The reason why said regions of the world were 
selected are as follows: (1) EU28 and ASEAN are regions 
with (a) multiple countries, (b) a comparable number of 
inhabitants, and (c) national territories. (2) Like the EU28, the 
ASEAN system is also developing to get in the position of a 
central commission for economic, social, regulatory and 
juridical resolutions. The comparison of the countries of the 
two systems and the additional ones will be presented for 
period between the years 2004 and 2015. To limit the scope, 
some of the countries (Laos, Cambodia, Myanmar and 
Indonesia) in the named two analyses are excluded from the 
analysis due to the lack of data. 
The evaluation of the competitive intensities follows 
different concentration models, Hirschmann-Herfindahl-
Index (HHI) and Linda-Index (LI), which measure the 
intensity and disparity of the operators in the specific national 
broadband markets’ competition and compare the market 
shares of the operators [27]-[30]. 
The HHI, as one of the most popular models to evaluate 
market concentrations, will be used to measure the intensity 
of competition based on key figures. In the economic theory, 
the HHI is signified as the total concentration measure, which 
analyzes the share of sales in comparison to the total market 
volume [27][28]. Here, the HHI will be measured with the 
customer share of one provider in relation to the whole 
number of the customers in the market. The collected market 
shares illustrate the number of customers of each of the 
biggest three providers in relation to the total number of 
customers in the specific national broadband market [27][28].  
The possibly non-observance and non-implementation of 
all network operators base on the issue that there are some 
countries with only three network operators, which provide 
broadband accesses. To generate a comparable base over all 
countries, we choose to consider only the three biggest 
network operators for all countries. 
The HHI describes the weighted average of concentration 
and squares the collected market shares (see (1), S describes 

37
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the market share of each specific network operator, i 
describes the considered operator) [28]-[30]. 
 
HHI = ∑
Si
2×10.000
m
i=1
 = ∑
(100 × Si)2
m
i=1
  
   (1) 
 
 
The HHI follows the subsequent classification in Table I 
[28]-[30]. 
 
TABLE I. BOUNDARIES FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF THE HHI 
HHI < 1.000 
 
HHI = 1.000 - 1.800 
 
HHI > 1.800 
non concentrated market 
 
moderately concentrated 
 
highly concentrated 
 
The LI does not reach the same usage and awareness level 
but the results show how much the market varies from perfect 
competition (LI-value of 1). Generally, the LI is used to 
examine the disparity between the biggest and following 
companies. Therefore, the disparity measures an existence of 
market dominance and describes if the inequalities between 
the operators lead to significant changes in the competitive 
behavior [28]. The LI value is based on a two times 
calculation and presents a double average index (see (2) and 
(3), CR stands for the Concentration Ratio, which is the single 
sum of the market shares of the considered number of 
network operators, i describes the considered operator) [26], 
which differentiates companies that are relevant to the market 
because of their size from less relevant companies. In general, 
the index compares the average market shares of the 
dominant enterprises in relation to the market shares of the 
insignificant enterprises.  As mentioned before, only the three 
biggest operators are included in the further competition 
examinations. 
 
Vi,m= 
CRi
i
CRm- CRi
m-i
  
 
 
(2) 
 
Lm= 
1
m-1 × ∑
Vi,m
m-1
i=1
 
 
 
(3) 
 
Both indicators are good measures to estimate the current 
existing market power situations in respective broadband 
markets. 
Furthermore, we will only examine the developments in 
the fixed-line broadband markets, in which smaller network 
operators is of secondary importance for the competition 
situation. 
As introduced in Section I, more and more people use the 
Internet and especially the mobile Internet, which is not 
considered in this study. Nonetheless, the mobile Internet 
needs also the connection with cable-bound infrastructures 
(mostly fiber) to deliver the high broadband connection 
speeds per mobile transmission. Based on this connection and 
for the reason that the most of the considered countries have 
already 
strong 
implemented 
fixed-line 
broadband 
infrastructures, the treatment of cable-bound broadband 
infrastructures is further important and present. 
For the cross-sectional and longitudinal panel data 
analysis of the described relationships, we have collected 
secondary data from: (a) the regulatory authorities of the 
considered 
countries, 
(b) 
the 
International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU), (c) the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), (d) the 
European Union, (e) the World Bank, (f) telecommunication 
authorities and ministries, (g) telecommunication providers 
and suppliers, and (h) national institutions and governments. 
Due to the different sources, the elicitation of the data can 
vary. To take all sources into account, average values from 
all available data are used. Moreover, we test the data validity 
and reliability with exploratory factor analysis and 
Cronbach’s Alpha to verify the trust in the collected 
secondary data [32]-[34]. As mentioned in the introduction of 
this section, for some countries, the data do not exist and 
therefore, these countries are not considered in detail. 
Nevertheless, some discrepancies between the collected 
data and the anticipated time trend of the data cannot be 
excluded. It should also be pointed out that the time in the 
presented model is an important variable with a high 
influence. 
The longitudinal analysis, which spans a time range from 
2004 to 2015, will also cover some cross-sectional elements 
to conduct comparisons between the various countries in 
consideration. The needed data is composed of the network 
operators’ market shares, introduction of regulations and 
regulatory frameworks for broadband markets, broadband 
penetration rates, broadband connection speeds, customer 
prices and some basic economic facts like Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP), exchange rates, price parities, households 
and population densities. The hypotheses will be analyzed 
and estimated using various econometric and panel data 
techniques. Generally, each hypothesis will be tested by a 
pooled ordinary least square regression to figure out if the 
results are significantly able to present the named 
relationships. For each hypothesis, we define the following 
regression equations, which can be seen in Table II. The 
different stated equations indicate that we try to differentiate 
the analysis of the equations and the effects between the 
dependent and independent variables. Furthermore, the 
application of the different equations for each hypothesis 
would be necessary to deal with possible autocorrelation and 
endogeneity effects. The approaches will be utilized to get a 
broader understanding of the collected data and the possible 
relationships. 
Regarding the consideration of the regulatory measures, 
the implementation of regulations normally started with the 
conduct of the liberalization processes, which were applied, 
e.g., in the European Union in 1998 (and later). The 
regulations, which are able to limit the market behaviors by 
obligations, are needed to be investigated. Definitely, current 
market structures and concentrations are the result of the 
regulatory decisions of the past. This indicates that further 
regulatory decisions and regimentations will build up the 
future market structures [4][6][35]. 

38
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Nevertheless, it is necessary to define how the regulatory 
measures will be examined in this study. From the literature, 
we already know that some of the researches have chosen a 
simple binary coding if a regulation is implemented or not 
[7][8][14]. Other approaches have focused on the estimation 
of regulatory measures regarding on the share of the lines, 
which are used through regulations, in comparison to the total 
number of sold lines [4][6][36]. From our point of view, both 
approaches have still weak points in the consideration. 
The binary coding gives a good introduction to deal with, 
because the directly impact of a regulation on market 
behaviors can be analyzed. However, if the period between 
the moment of regulation implementation and the current 
moment becomes longer, the impact of the sole regulation 
introduction gets weaker, because the existing operators can 
estimate quite better the competitors, because the existing 
operators are better able to assess the competitors who use 
regulated access to lines. Therefore, the impact of a 
regulatory action (through the above-mentioned "learning 
effects") is expected to decrease significantly over time. The 
regulated network operators could still estimate very well the 
market and will use their market power. 
The second approach, which covers the implementation 
of the variables, includes the share of the total lines which are 
reached by regulated obligations. Here, the problem arises 
that existing network operators can also stipulate access 
conditions for the access on broadband infrastructures with 
new entrants/competitors without any regulations. As a 
matter of principle, it should be noted in the quantitative 
assessment of regulated access lines that, of course, on a 
contractual basis (for example, unbundling or bitstream) are 
possible. Due to these potential problems, we arrange a 
double analysis approach.  
Generally, the binary coding if a regulation is 
implemented or not is a good introduction, because this 
approach gives an overview about the several national 
markets, which regulations work in the market. As we have 
carried out, the single implementation does not illustrate 
possibly correct the influence of the regulations over time. 
Therefore, we consider how long the regulations are 
implemented in the markets and so, we are able to map, how 
the regulations work over time. Here, we use as variable for 
each regulation, the years since the regulation is 
implemented. However, there is only the problem that in 
specific broadband markets (e.g., in the Netherlands and 
Romania) the regulations were implemented in the past and 
later the regulatory authorities have decided to completely 
deregulate these markets. For this situation, it is quite difficult 
to measure the past impact of implemented regulations and 
therefore, we choose to present the results of the impact of 
the duration of already implemented regulations.  
In this situation, the regulations have no impact in the 
market anymore. Due to the assumption that regulations 
affect the market developments over time, the previously 
implemented regulations continue to have an effect in the 
market behaviors of the operators. However, when the market 
is fully deregulated then the variables will be estimated with 
a zero. Here, we have to acknowledge that this treatment 
could lead to slightly discrepancies in the analysis. Contrary, 
we have to do this estimation in this way, because other 
reflected approaches do not lead to a better result. 
Currently, the most studies just differentiate between 
infrastructure competition (by access regulations) and 
service-based competition [4][6][7]. Here, the researches 
often imply the regulations of unbundling and resale as 
measures. With the considerations of fiber lines, more and 
more studies also implement the kinds of regulations of fiber 
and bitstream [4][6][36]. However, line sharing and the 
virtual unbundled local access (VULA) are not considered in 
detail. Here, we want to consider all of the different kinds of 
access regulations, the previous considered and especially the 
currently unconsidered ones. 
Based on the different approach in the assessment of the 
regulations and the inclusion of different kinds of regulations, 
our approach will deepen the insight of the impact of 
regulatory frameworks on the market developments over 
time. 
Due to the status of the work in progress, the analysis of 
the influences of the regulatory frameworks on the broadband 
market developments is not completed. Here, we do the 
analysis of variances (ANOVA) to figure out, how the 
implementation and non-implementation of regulations affect 
in average (a) the competition between the network operators, 
(b) the adoption of broadband accesses, (c) customer prices, 
and (d) broadband connection speeds. 
 
 
IV. 
DESCRIPTIVE RESULTS 
A. Competition Analysis 
In order to analyze the relationship between competition, 
broadband 
connection 
speeds, 
customer 
broadband 
penetration rates and prices, the intensity of competition 
(HHI) and the disparity (LI) between the market players will 
be examined. 
For the analysis of the broadband market concentrations, 
the considered values of the HHI will be separated into the 
three parts: (1) HHI below the value of 2,000 (low 
concentration), (2) HHI between the values of 2,000 and 
4,000 (moderate concentration), and (3) HHI above the value 
of 4,000 (high concentration), based on [27]-[30].  
Ideally, the fixed-line broadband markets should have 
stable HHI market concentration values, which do not exceed 
1,800 overt time. 
Apart from Japan (divided consideration of NTT East and 
West), all countries with low HHI-values below 2,000 are 
European countries situated in the continent’s Northern or 
Eastern parts (Lithuania, Denmark, Sweden, UK) (see 
Figures 1, 3, and 4). These countries are also in the Global 
top ten of highest average broadband connection speeds [37]-
[41].  
In general, most fixed-line broadband markets of the 
EU28 and ASEAN now reach HHI-values between 2,000 and 
4,000 and are moderately concentrated.  

39
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE II. REGRESSION EQUATIONS 
H1: a) PEt = α + β1CIt + β2TIt + β3PDt + β4GDPCt + β5HHt + β6DMt +  ε 
       b) TPEt = α + β1CIt + β2PDt + β3GDPCt + β4HHt +  β5DMt +  ε 
       c) PECHRt = α + β1CIt + β2TIt + β3PDt + β4GDPCt + β5HHt + β6DMt +  ε 
PE – value of the broadband penetration 
TPE – trend based value of the broadband penetration 
PECHR – yearly change rate of broadband penetration 
CI – values of the competition index (HHI, LI ) 
TCI – trend based values of the competition index  
SF – monthly subscription fee 
PD – population density 
BS – broadband connection speeds 
TF – termination fees (regulated) 
GDPC – Gross Domestic Product per Capita 
RI – regulatory index 
DM – years of membership in EU28 or ASEAN 
TI – time variable – capture the influence of time 
HH – number of households 
β – changing variable term 
ε – error term 
α – constant  
t – year of consideration 
 
H2:     SFt = α + β1CIt + β2GDPCt + β3TFt + β4TIt  + β5DMt + ε 
H3: a) PEt = α + β1CIt + β2TIt + β3PDt + β4GDPCt + β5HHt + β6DMt + β7SFt +  ε 
       b) TPEt = α + β1CIt + β2PDt + β3GDPCt + β4HHt + β5DMt + β7SFt + ε 
       c) PECHRt = α + β1CIt + β2TIt + β3PDt + β4GDPCt + β5HHt + β6DMt + β7SFt + ε 
H4:     BSt = α + β1CIt + β2PEt  + β3TIt  + β4DMt +  ε 
H5:     BSt = α + β1SFt + β2GDPCt  + β3TIt  + β4DMt + ε 
H6: a) CIt = α + β1RIt +  β2TIt + β
3DMt + ε 
       b) TCIt = α + β1RIt +  β2DMt + ε 
H7: a) PEt = α + β1CIt + β2TIt + β3PDt + β4GDPCt + β5HHt + β6DMt + β7RIt  +  ε 
       b) TPEt = α + β1CIt + β2PDt + β3GDPCt + β4HHt +  β5DMt + β6RIt + ε 
       c) PECHRt = α + β1CIt + β2TIt + β3PDt + β4GDPCt + β5HHt + β6DMt +  β7RIt + ε 
H8:     SFt = α + β1RIt + β2GDPCt + β3TFt + β4TIt  + β5DMt + ε 
H9:     BSt = α + β1RIt + β2PEt  + β3TIt  + β4DMt + ε 
 
 
Figure 1. Market concentration of the three biggest fixed broadband 
network providers in Northern Europe from 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: years; y-
axis: HHI values) 
When considering the named period, it can be concluded 
that market concentrations in most countries have decreased 
from HHI-values above 4,000 (high concentrated) to 
moderate concentrated market structures. 
This development presents diminished market forces and 
the change of strong monopolistic into rising competitive 
market structures. Generally, the considered broadband 
markets are moderately concentrated (e.g., Ireland, Germany, 
Portugal, South Korea) (see Figures 1, 2, 3, and 4). 
Nevertheless, some countries (Croatia, India, Philippines) 
still have HHI-values above 4,000, which implies that the 
biggest operators were able to hold their market powers and 
avoid strong competitive structures (see Figures 1, 3, and 4). 
Generally, the moderate or high market concentrations in 
the broadband markets suggest that national regulatory 
authorities should review the current market behaviors of the 
existing network operators. To create better competitive and 
network access opportunities, regulatory authorities could 
introduce access regulations, which secure possible market 
entries by competitors. 
 
 
Figure 2. Market concentration of the three biggest fixed broadband 
network providers in the biggest four Western European countries (except 
UK) from 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: years; y-axis: HHI values) 
Nevertheless, there are two main developments. (1) 
During the last ten years, the intensity of competition in the 
most considered broadband markets increased and the 
previous monopolistic structures could be diminished.  
0
1.000
2.000
3.000
4.000
5.000
6.000
Ireland
UK
Sweden
Iceland
Denmark
0
1.000
2.000
3.000
4.000
5.000
6.000
7.000
8.000
Germany
France
Spain
Italy

40
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 3. Market concentration of the three biggest fixed broadband 
network providers of further European countries from 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: 
years; y-axis: HHI values) 
 
 
Figure 4. Market concentration of the three biggest fixed broadband 
network providers of Asian countries from 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: years; y-
axis: HHI values) 
(2) In the developed countries, the reduction of the power 
of the monopolistic incumbent is stronger than in the 
developing countries and the developed countries also have 
stronger competitive broadband market structures. 
The used Linda-Index describes the disparity between the 
biggest three operators. In general, higher market 
concentrations translate into higher disparities between the 
operators. The disparity can be measured in two different 
ways. On the one hand, the LI examines the discrepancy 
between the biggest and second biggest companies in the 
market and on the other hand, the LI can evaluate the 
discrepancy between the biggest, the second biggest and third 
biggest companies in the considered market. Based on the 
evaluation of the three biggest operators in the broadband 
markets, we will consider the second option with the 
inclusion of the second and third biggest companies. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Market concentration of the three biggest fixed broadband 
network providers in Northern Europe from 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: years; y-
axis: LI values) 
 
 
Figure 6. Market concentration of the three biggest fixed broadband 
network providers in the biggest four Western European countries (except 
UK) from 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: years; y-axis: LI values) 
The consideration of the European and Asian fixed-line 
broadband markets yields LI-values between 2 and 5 for the 
most countries (see Figures 5, 6, and 8), which indicates that 
discrepancies between the operators still exist. Nevertheless, 
the declining trend of the LI-values shows that in most 
countries the differences between the incumbents and the new 
market entrants decrease (e.g., Germany, Italy, Slovenia, see 
Figures 6 and 7). In the future, these broadband markets could 
0
1.000
2.000
3.000
4.000
5.000
6.000
7.000
8.000
9.000
Lithuania
Austria
Portugal
Switzerland
Croatia
0
2.000
4.000
6.000
8.000
10.000
12.000
China
India
Hongkong
South Korea
Japan
Phillipines
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
UK
Sweden
Iceland
Ireland
Denmark
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Germany
Spain
Italy
France

41
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
reach a nearly equal distributed market power. However, the 
results also show that the disparities between the network 
operators in some markets increase (e.g., Austria, 
Switzerland, see Figure 7). 
 
Figure 7. Market concentration of the three biggest fixed broadband 
network providers of further European countries from 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: 
years; y-axis: LI values) 
 
 
Figure 8. Market concentration of the three biggest fixed broadband 
network providers of Asian countries from 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: years; y-
axis: LI values) 
Only in the British market the LI-value is close to 1 and 
indicates a nearly equal distributed broadband market 
(between the different market operators, see Figure 5). 
Combining this result with the fact that the British market has 
the oldest history of liberalization, it can be concluded that 
longer open access market could lead to more equally 
distributed market shares. This issue needs verification by 
hypothesis testing and we will include this in the evaluations. 
Furthermore, a couple of countries show nearly the same LI-
values over the whole-time frame (e.g., France, South Korea, 
see Figures 6 and 8). The reasons why, on the one hand, the 
disparities are very stable and, on the other hand, they vary, 
will be investigated in the future. 
The variations between European and Asian markets are 
quite low, but nonetheless the LI-values of a couple of 
countries present higher values. These discrepancies are not 
sufficiently to draw conclusions from since the results of the 
LI-values also vary too strongly among network operators in 
a couple of countries. In general, the disparity (difference in 
market power and influence) between the incumbent and the 
competitors cannot be taken as reason for the different 
broadband connection speeds and developments. It can be 
just estimated that a more equal distribution of market power 
could lead to higher broadband connection speeds. 
 
B. Penetration Analysis 
Following the statements to the relations of the intensity 
of competition, we will also consider how the broadband 
penetration rates have been developed between 2004 to 2015. 
For the individual national markets, the data were used to 
provide appropriate average values. Based on these average 
values, a (unweighted) average was calculated and 
agglomerated in the overall considerations. [41]-[47] (and 
several national regulatory authorities).  
In Figure 9, the agglomerated average broadband 
penetration over the considered countries in our model 
demonstrates that within the time period from 2004 to 2015 
the penetration rate increased from 8 to 28 lines/inhabitant. In 
relative numbers, the score of the penetration in 2015 is 3.5 
times higher than the score of the year 2004. The yearly 
growth of the broadband penetration level per inhabitant for 
the considered countries is 12.06%. Based on the 
considerations on the European and Asian countries, the 
reached broadband penetration rates differs quite heavily. On 
the one hand, some developed countries like Switzerland, 
Denmark, the Netherlands and South Korea reach broadband 
penetration rates per inhabitant between 40% and 50%, where 
Switzerland is the world leader with over 50% [49]-[51]. On 
the other hand, for example, the emerging economies of India 
(1%) and the Philippines (5%) have very low broadband 
penetration per capita, although it is not entirely due to the 
poorer economic data compared to the developed economies. 
Rather, the development of broadband penetration depends 
on several factors. Some of them, like competitive behavior, 
regulations and social economic basics (GDPC), we have 
already introduced in Section II. However, not all factors 
relevant to the evolution of broadband penetration rates can 
be fully captured. Also, cultural values and network effects 
influences 
the 
growth 
of 
broadband 
penetration. 
Furthermore, in the following regression analyses we also 
find a time effect. The time effect describes the fact that, in 
addition to the innovators, other market participants also 
consider the technology to be useful and adapt over time.  
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Austria
Switzerland
Lithunia
Slovenia
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
India
Japan
South Korea

42
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 9. Average development of the broadband penetration of the considered broadband markets from 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: years; y-axis: access lines per 
100 inhabitants) 
 
 
Over time more and more people see the usefulness of this 
technology and will adopt this technology (in our case the 
broadband access). Normally, this behavior follows the 
distribution curve of Rogers [48]. We conclude here that 
more and more will adopt broadband accesses because they 
recognize their usefulness. This development we will cover 
with the so named time effect. 
In the following, we will compare the results of the 
broadband penetration values of the considered countries in 
our model. Generally, in all countries the rising adoption of 
broadband accesses per inhabitants can be comprehended. 
However, in the consideration of Figures 10 to 13, the 
regional differences need to be addressed. All of the 
Scandinavian countries and the UK widely reach broadband 
penetration rates over 30% and therefore, all of them are quite 
above the calculated mean, which we have already visualized 
in Figure 9. Therefore, the Scandinavian countries and the 
UK can be seen as pioneers in broadband penetration. As 
mentioned above, Denmark is one of the leading providers, 
with broadband penetration of almost 42% per inhabitant (in 
2015). Figure 10 shows that the United Kingdom and Iceland, 
with a broadband penetration rate of 37% in 2015, are close. 
In Figure 10, it can be followed that the big European 
countries like Germany, France, Spain and Italy reach 
broadband penetration rates between 25% and 40%. In 
average, these four countries present a quite good status of 
broadband penetration. Germany (37%) and France (40%) 
have nearly the same broadband coverage status as seen by 
the above-mentioned broadband frontrunners Denmark, 
South Korea and the Netherlands. However, in Spain (27%) 
and Italy (23%), broadband penetration is below average. For 
further economic development, it would be necessary for 
these countries to improve their broadband coverage.  
 
 
 
Figure 10. Average development of the broadband penetration rates of the 
Northern European countries of 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: years y-axis: 
penetration values per 100 inhabitants) 
 
Figure 11. Average development of the broadband penetration rates of the 
“Big Four” European countries of 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: years y-axis: 
penetration values per 100 inhabitants) 
8
11
15
18
20
21
23
24
25
26
27
28
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
UK
Iceland
Denmark
Finland
Sweden
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Germany
France
Spain
Italy

43
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 12. Average development of the broadband penetration rates of the 
Western European countries of 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: years y-axis: 
penetration values per 100 inhabitants) 
Figure 13. Average development of the broadband penetration rates of the 
Eastern European countries of 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: years y-axis: 
penetration values per 100 inhabitants) 
 
Figure 12 illustrates that Switzerland and the Netherlands 
reach both broadband penetration rates over 40%. From the 
market review, it can be noted that both countries are counted 
as the world leaders in broadband penetration per inhabitants 
[49]-[51]. In 2015, Austria and Portugal, with 28% 
broadband penetration, have average broadband penetration 
in the range considered. 
The Western and Northern European countries reach at 
least medium broadband penetration rates and some of them 
are the broadband penetration forerunners. 
Regarding the situation in the Eastern European and the 
considered Asian countries, the broadband provision and 
adoption are quite divers. Figure 13 demonstrates that most 
of the Eastern European countries present a huge growth in 
the broadband penetration rates. However, only the Czech 
Republic reach a broadband penetration level quite above the 
average, which we have presented in Figure 9. Poland is one 
of the few considered European countries in the analysis, 
which does not reach a 20% fixed broadband penetration 
level. In average, the Eastern European countries vary in their 
broadband penetration between 21% and 28%, which present 
a lower level of broadband penetration in comparison to the 
Western and Northern European countries. Poland, with a 
penetration rate of only 19% (in 2015), is one of the 
broadband "laggards". Due to the different economic and 
socioeconomic developments, it can be assumed that the 
Eastern European countries do not reach the same broadband 
coverage as the Western and Northern European countries.   
Despite that, all of the considered European countries are 
estimated as developed countries, the differences regarding 
the broadband penetration are the results from the past 
developments. It is necessary to mention that the Western and 
Northern European countries firstly reach the status of 
developed countries. The Eastern European countries reach 
this status in later stage of time. The fundamentals of the 
broadband infrastructure and broadband provision base on 
the 
developments 
and 
the 
implementation 
of 
the 
telecommunication networks in the past. Due to Eastern 
European countries begin on a later stage of the 
implementation of broadband infrastructures, the differences 
between the considered European countries can be 
comprehended. 
The development of the broadband penetration rates and 
broadband networks in the Asian countries depends on the 
status of the whole country. The developed economies of 
Japan, South Korea, Singapore and Hong Kong have fairly 
high broadband penetration rates of between 25% and 40% 
(see Figure 14), with South Korea leading the pack with a 
penetration of 40% (in 2015). Overall, these four countries 
have a broadband penetration similar to Western and 
Northern European countries. 
 
 
Figure 14. Average development of the broadband penetration rates of 
the emerging Asian countries of 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: years y-axis: 
penetration values per 100 inhabitants) 
Figure 15. Average development of the broadband penetration rates of the 
developed Asian countries of 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: years y-axis: 
penetration values per 100 inhabitants) 
 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Austria
Netherlands
Portugal
Switzerland
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Poland
Czech Republic
Croatia
Hungary
Slovenia
Bulgaria
0
10
20
30
40
50
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Singapore
Japan
South Korea
Hongkong
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Philippines
Thailand
India
China

44
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
However, the emerging countries in Asia do not reach a 
comparable level of fixed broadband penetration (see Figure 
15). The considered countries Thailand, China and India 
fluctuate between 2% and 15% in terms of their broadband 
penetration. From the literature, it is already known that the 
level of broadband penetration depends on the economic 
situation of the country. We assume that if the named 
emerging countries would increase in their economic 
situation, they will also achieve a better broadband provision 
and better broadband penetration rates. For example, a very 
positive economic development has been observed in China 
over the past 10 years. In the same period, broadband 
penetration in China increased from 2% to nearly 15% (per 
capita). Looking at the other emerging economies in East and 
Southeast Asia, none of the countries considered reach the 
same development as China. At the end of the said 10-year 
period, only clearly low penetration rates were observed in 
India (1%), the Philippines (5%) and Thailand (8%). In 
Thailand, broadband penetration was in part even declining. 
As mentioned above, most of the recently developed and 
emerging countries do not have the same status of fixed 
broadband networks, and therefore supply is lacking. 
However, most countries are addressing this problem by 
introducing large and faster mobile broadband networks. 
 
C. Price Analysis 
Finally, we conclude the descriptive section with the 
consideration of the development of customer prices. Here, 
the data we gain mostly from the ITU [41] and OECD 
(Broadband Portal) [43]. In Figure 16, the development of the 
prices symbolizes that the monthly subscription fees 
decreased from an average fee of 27 Euro per month to nearly 
18 Euro (including value added taxes) per month. This means 
in 2015, the level of the monthly subscription fees was only 
two thirds in comparison to the level of 2004.  
 
 
Figure 16. Average development of the monthly subscription fee in Euros 
from 2004 to 2015 (x-axis: years; y-axis: price values in Euros and price 
parity cleaned) 
 
 
Combining the trends of the three considerations, we can 
conclude that the competition intensified, the penetration 
raised and customer prices decreased over the considered 
period. In addition to the achieved research hypotheses, the 
descriptive results give enough indications, which we will 
examine in the following section with the regression 
analyses. 
 
V. 
REGRESSION ANALYSIS 
A. Reliability and Validity Analysis 
As introduced above, we proceed with a pooled ordinary 
least square regression. In the first step, the used concepts of 
regulations, competition and broadband penetration will be 
tested if the data can be trusted and if the data is reliable. 
The results of the reliability analysis are visualized in 
Table III. For the further analysis, we use the following 
concepts: (a) regulations with a binary coding, (b) regulations 
with a year coding, (c) competition indexes, (d) broadband 
penetration rates, (e) prices, and (f) broadband connection 
speeds. 
Following Cronbach, the Alpha values higher than 0.7 
(0.6) stand for a good (acceptable) reliability [32][52][53]. 
Based on the results in Table III, 4 of the named concepts 
reach a good and 2 acceptable reliability. 
After the testing of the reliability, the exploratory factor 
analysis includes the assessment of Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin 
criterion (KMO), the significance test from Bartlett, and the 
examination of the cumulative variances to evaluate the 
validity of the collected data [33][34][54]-[56]. To reach a 
good validity, the concepts should reach significant p values 
(p<0.05) in the Bartlett-Test and KMO values above 0.7 
[33][34][54[56].  
Table IV shows KMO-values above 0.6 (except the 
concept of competition indexes). Following Field [33] and 
Hair et al. [24], KMO-values above 0.6 describe an 
acceptable validity. For the concepts of the duration of the 
regulations, customer prices and broadband connection 
speeds, the KMO-values are even above 0.7, which indicate 
a good validity of the collected data/aspects. For the concept 
of the competition indexes, the validity of the achieved data 
could not be proved. The good validity scores (except 
competition indexes) are also supported by the significant 
results of the Bartlett-Test and the results of the cumulative 
variances higher than 50%, which indicate high explanation 
rates of the variances of the collected data [54]-[56]. Mostly, 
the reliability and validity of the collected data are proved. 
B. Analysis of Variances 
The consideration of the results of the analysis of 
variances (ANOVA) presents how the implementation of 
regulations affects in the mean, the developments of market 
concentrations, disparity and broadband penetration rates. 
Furthermore, we also implement a dummy variable if there is 
any influence if the specific country is a member of the 
European Union or the Association of Southeast Asian 
Nations (ASEAN). In the next steps, we present for the 
regulations displayed in Table V the model fit of the 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

45
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
ANOVA, the significance analysis if there would be a 
difference in means and how much would be the difference 
in average. 
 
TABLE III. RELIABILITY ANALYSIS 
 
TABLE IV. VALIDITY ANALYSIS 
Research 
Concepts 
KMO 
Bartlett-
Test 
Cumulative 
Variance 
Regulations 
(binary coding) 
0.664 
p< 0.000 
60.24% 
Regulations 
(duration coding) 
0.780 
p< 0.000 
62.81% 
Competition Indexes 
0.526 
p< 0.000 
81.73% 
Penetration Rates 
0.651 
p< 0.000 
66.69% 
Prices 
0.713 
p< 0.000 
55.06% 
Broadband 
Connection Speeds 
0.702 
p< 0.000 
68.10% 
 
Unbundling 
Table V shows that the implementation of unbundling 
would lead to a significant difference in means of the 
development of broadband penetration. In comparison with 
the countries, which do not have implemented unbundling, 
the implementation of unbundling causes a five times higher 
broadband penetration per inhabitant in average. The F-Ratio 
is above the value of 3.87 [33] and therefore, a good model 
fit and a systematic variation is identified. 
Furthermore, unbundling would lead to a significant 
difference in means in the consideration of the market 
concentration of the three biggest network operators. In 
average, countries, which have already implemented the 
unbundling regulation, have reduced market concentration 
values by HHI3 = 1,600 in mean. The systematic variation is 
better described than the unsystematic ones and due to a F-
Ratio of 26.72 a good model fit is assumed. 
Lastly, the examination of the difference in means in the 
consideration of the disparity of operators shows that in 
average, the implementation of the unbundling regulation is 
not significant. Consequently, there is no significant 
difference in means and a poor model fit. Due to the not 
existing difference in means, we possibly assume that 
unbundling would not affect the disparity of the network 
operators in a national broadband market. 
 
Line Sharing 
In Table V, we can also see that the implementation of 
line sharing would lead to a significant difference in means 
of the development of broadband penetration. Contrary to the 
countries, which do not have implemented line sharing, line 
sharing has averagely a 1.75 times higher broadband 
penetration per inhabitant. The F-Ratio is 44.58 and due to a 
value above 3.87 [33] a good model fit and a systematic 
variation can be concluded.  
Additionally, line sharing is also a cause for the 
significant difference in means in the examination of the 
market concentration of the three biggest network operators. 
An implementation of line sharing would result in a 1,400 
lower Herfindahl value. This indicates that the line sharing 
regulation could be an indicator for decreasing market 
concentrations. A systematic variation and a F-Ratio of 57.20 
describe a good model fit. 
The mean analysis of line sharing as influence factor for 
the development of disparities between the network operators 
illustrates no significant differences in means. The F-Ratio of 
0.051 describes also a bad model fit. Consequently, we 
predict that line sharing would not possibly affect the changes 
in the disparity. 
 
Bitstream 
The implementation of bitstream lead also to significant 
differences in means for the development of broadband 
penetration. In comparison to the previously considered 
regulations of unbundling and line sharing, bitstream 
describes a slightly weaker effect, because countries, which 
have implemented bitstream, have only 1.4 times higher 
broadband penetration than countries, which did not 
implement bitstream as regulation for the broadband market. 
The F-Ratio is quite above the value of 3.87 [33] and 
therefore, a good model fit and a systematic variation can be 
concluded. 
In comparison to the previous considered regulations of 
unbundling and line sharing, the results of the competition 
analyses are quite reversed. The implementation of bitstream 
do not imply a significance in means. The F-Ratio describes 
with a value of 0.92 a poor model fit [33]. Hence, we expect 
that bitstream does not change the relations of market 
concentrations in the considered broadband markets. 
Oppositely, we identify a significant difference in means 
in the consideration of the implementation of bitstream. 
However, countries, which have implemented the bitstream 
regulation, possess in average a 1.2 times higher LI-value 
than countries, which did not implement this kind of 
regulation. Thus, bitstream would lead in average to a bigger 
disparity between the biggest network operator and the two 
following ones. The mean analysis describes a F-Ratio of 
49.15, which covers a good model fit. The systematic 
variation is better than the unsystematic ones. 
 
Research Concepts 
Cronbach’s Alpha 
Regulations (binary coding) 
Regulations (duration coding) 
Competition Indexes 
Penetration Rates 
Prices 
Broadband Connection Speeds 
0.662 
0.774 
0.726 
0.787 
0.764 
0.698 

46
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE V. RESULTS OF THE ANALYSIS OF VARIANCES 
 
ANOVA 
Penetration per Inhabitant 
HHI – Market Concentration 
LI - Disparity 
Unbundling 
F-Ratio = 64.68 
p < 0.05 
good model fit 
difference in means 
 
F-Ratio = 26.72 
p < 0.05 
good model fit 
difference in means 
 
F-Ratio = 3.83 
p > 0.05 
bad model fit 
no difference in means 
 
Line Sharing 
F-Ratio = 44.58 
p < 0.05 
good model fit 
difference in means 
 
F-Ratio = 57.20 
p < 0.05 
good model fit 
difference in means 
 
F-Ratio =0.051 
p > 0.05 
bad model fit 
no difference in means 
 
Bitstream 
F-Ratio = 24.18 
p < 0.05 
good model fit 
difference in means 
 
F-Ratio = 0.92 
p > 0.05 
bad model fit 
no difference in means 
 
F-Ratio = 49.15 
p < 0.05 
good model fit 
difference in means 
 
Resale 
F-Ratio = 0.06 
p > 0.05 
bad model fit 
no difference in means 
F-Ratio = 28.03 
p < 0.05 
good model fit 
difference in means 
 
F-Ratio = 0.105 
p > 0.05 
bad model fit 
no difference in means 
 
VULA 
F-Ratio = 16.11 
p < 0.05 
good model fit 
difference in means 
 
F-Ratio = 7.20 
p < 0.05 
good model fit 
difference in means 
 
F-Ratio = 0.267 
p > 0.05 
bad model fit 
no difference in means 
 
Fiber Regulation 
F-Ratio = 17.36 
p < 0.05 
good model fit 
difference in means 
 
F-Ratio = 28.03 
p < 0.05 
good model fit 
difference in means 
 
F-Ratio = 0.211 
p > 0.05 
bad model fit 
no difference in means 
 
Membership 
F-Ratio = 0.20 
p > 0.05 
bad model fit 
no difference in means 
F-Ratio = 4.33 
p < 0.05 
good model fit 
difference in means 
 
F-Ratio = 1.034 
p > 0.05 
bad model fit 
no difference in means 
 
 
 
 
Resale 
Compared to the other regulations, the implementation of 
resale does not lead significant differences in means of 
broadband penetration rates. The F-Ratio of 0.06 describes 
nearly no change in means and the value illustrates a bad 
model fit [33]. 
However, the implementation of resale lead in average to 
a change of market concentration. The ANOVA is 
significant, which covers a significant difference in means. 
The value of the F-Ratio is 28.03, which implies a good 
model fit. National broadband markets, which have 
implemented resale as regulation, have averagely a 1,000 
lower Herfindahl value than the countries, which have not 
implemented this kind of regulation. Consequently, we 
assume here that the resale regulation would lead to a reduced 
market concentration and a higher intensity of competition. 
Finally, the implemented resale regulation does not lead 
to a significant difference in the mean analysis and the F-
Ratio is quite poor, which indicates a bad model fit. We 
expect here for the further analysis that the resale regulation 
does not lead to significant changes in the development of the 
disparity between the operators. 
 
VULA 
Additionally, there is also a significant difference in 
means in the consideration of the average broadband 
penetration per inhabitant. Averagely, the implementation of 
VULA would lead to 1.38 times higher broadband 
penetration in comparison to the countries, which refuse the 
implementation of the VULA regulation. The F-Ratio is 
above the value of 3.87 [33] and therefore, a good model fit 
and a systematic variation is identified. 
Considering the influence in the developments of the 
means in market concentration and penetration regarding the 
implementation of VULA, the means of the regarded market 
concentrations are significantly lower in the case, when the 
regulatory authority have decided to implement the VULA 
regulation. An implementation of VULA results in a 700 
lower Herfindahl value.  In average, the Herfindahl values are 
700 less when VULA is implemented. In comparison to the 
previously considered significant model fits, the F-Ratio with 
a value of 7.20 indicates a quite weak significant model fit. 
Generally, the implementation of the VULA regulation lead 
to a higher intensity of competition and a lower market 
concentration. 
In consideration of the impact of the implementation of 
VULA on the development of the disparity between the 

47
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
network operators, there is no significant difference in means 
and a poor model fit. Due to the not existing difference in 
means, we possibly assume that the VULA regulation would 
not affect the disparity of the network operators in a national 
broadband market. 
 
Fiber Regulation 
Lastly, there will be now considered how would be the 
impact of possible implemented fiber regulation on the 
development of the broadband market. Unlike the other 
regulations, fiber regulation means different kind of access 
regulations in general and do not itemize a specific 
regulation. Based on the analysis of variances, we can see that 
fiber regulation could be also positive for the development of 
broadband penetration rates. On average, countries, which 
have implemented several fiber regulations, indicate a 1.28 
times higher broadband penetration in comparison to 
countries, which do not have implemented them. The value 
of the F-Ratio is 17.356 and illustrates a good model fit. 
Also, the implementation of fiber regulation reduces the 
market concentration in the considered broadband markets on 
average. There is a significant difference in means that 
countries, which have implemented fiber regulations, 
exhibits a 800 lower Herfindahl value than the countries, 
which refuse to implement fiber regulations. The systematic 
variation is better described than the unsystematic ones and 
due to a F-Ratio of 28.03 a good model fit is assumed. 
The assessment of the difference in means in the 
consideration of the disparity of operators averagely shows 
that the implementation of fiber regulation is not significant. 
Concluding, there is no significant difference in means and 
the value of the F-Ratio is below 1 and describes a poor model 
fit. Due to the not existing difference in means, we possibly 
assume that fiber regulations do not lead to significant 
changes in the disparity of the network operators in a national 
broadband market. 
 
Membership 
In the last row, we have implemented the consideration of 
the influence of membership. We did this approach, because 
especially the European Union stipulates many regulatory 
approaches 
and 
the 
most 
countries 
follow 
these 
specifications. The consideration of the mean analysis 
regarding the impact of membership on the development of 
broadband penetration, no significance of the difference in 
means can be concluded. The value of the F-Ratio with 0.20 
is also quite poor. Due to the broadband penetration 
development depends often on the national conditions, our 
expectation was here that the membership does not lead to a 
significant impact. 
Contrary, membership leads to a significant difference in 
means when the market concentration values are considered. 
In average, countries, which are member in the EU or 
ASEAN, have a reduced Herfindahl value of 400. The F-
Ratio of 4.33 is weakly above the critical bound of 3.87. 
However, the assumption can be hold and the model fits. 
Lastly, membership does not lead to a significant 
difference in the mean analysis. The F-Ratio in Table V is 
below the above named bound and therefore, a poor model fit 
can be concluded. Despite the membership in a community 
can reduce the market concentration and would lead to more 
intense competition, the disparity between the operators exist 
further. 
 
C. Further Approach 
The first results of the regression analyses show that the 
calculated market concentrations correlate significantly (p-
values below 0.05 [57]) with the development of the 
broadband connection speeds. The result supports the 
assumption that a stronger competition could lead to higher 
broadband connection speeds. 
In addition, the same significant correlations between 
broadband penetration rates and market concentrations exist 
(p-values below 0.05 [57]). The correlations imply that 
higher competitive intensities and stronger competitive 
behaviors lead to rising broadband penetration rates. 
Due to the focus on the impact of the regulatory behaviors 
on the market developments, we also find significant 
correlations (p-values below 0.05 [57]) between the single 
regulations unbundling, line sharing, bitstream, resale, fiber 
regulation, VULA (binary coding), and the development of 
market concentrations, broadband penetration rates and 
prices. Regarding the duration, how long the regulations are 
implemented in the specific broadband markets, the same 
significant correlations can be found.  
However, the correlations between the regulations and the 
calculated market concentrations are negative (except for 
bitstream). Generally, regulations are able to reduce the 
concentration in a broadband market and increase the 
intensity of competition. Only the bitstream regulation 
correlates significantly positive with market concentrations. 
This indicates that the implementation and persistence of 
bitstream would strengthen the market power of the biggest 
network operators. If this relationship does really exist this 
kind of regulation does not fulfill the target of regulatory 
intervention. The governmental and regulatory intervention 
is performed to create better competitive market conditions 
and entrance possibilities for competitors. If a regulation 
strengthens the market power of one network operator (often 
the incumbent), then this kind of regulation should not be 
implemented. 
Concerning the influence of the regulations on the 
development of broadband penetration rates, all different 
kinds of regulations support the growth of the broadband 
adoption and lead to a positive impact on broadband 
penetration. We will test this possible connection using also 
the pooled ordinary least square regression approach. The 
different regulations open various access possibilities to enter 
the broadband infrastructure, which means, new entrants 
come into the market with their own customers who may not 
yet have had access to these broadband structures.  As a 
result, additional customers tend to be connected to the 
existing broadband infrastructure. In addition, the service 
providers are intensifying their customer acquisition 

48
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
measures. Overall, the broadband penetration is thereby 
increased. 
Finally, the implementation and the implemented 
duration of the regulations correlate significantly positive 
with the monthly subscription fees. This indicates that 
regulations would lead to increased prices.  
Due to the status of a work in progress, the analyses are 
in an ongoing status and the results of the regression analyses 
are not finally completed. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
As aforementioned, the status of the paper is a work in 
progress and therefore, improvements in the results and in 
ongoing research will be necessary. Currently, we have 
collected the secondary data and have started to analyze the 
competitive intensities, broadband penetration rates and 
customer prices. Furthermore, we tested the reliability and 
validity of the collected data and we examined the data in the 
analysis of variances (ANOVA). Following this first 
overview, we will evaluate the above-mentioned hypotheses 
using the pooled ordinary least square regressions to test the 
established regression equations. 
Despite the named conditions and the different 
developments in the national broadband markets, the general 
trend presents increasing competitive structures in fixed 
broadband markets. Combining the results of the HHI and LI 
analysis, the incumbents in each national broadband market 
have lost market shares and the disparity between the 
different providers is decreasing. As shown in the results, few 
countries (especially in Asia) still have very powerful 
incumbents and a general statement concerning all 
considered countries cannot be done at this status of work.  
We have indicated that in all considered broadband 
markets, the fixed broadband penetration and adoption 
increase.  
Finally, overall the customer prices decrease from 2004 
to 2015. However, the examination over the recent years 
(2015 to 2017) shows that the monthly subscription fees are 
quite on a stable level. 
At this time in evaluation work, the results are on an 
advanced but not final stage. For the concluding remarks in 
this topic, the ongoing research has to be deepened. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Massarczyk and P. Winzer, “The Impact of Regulatory 
Frameworks and Obligations on Telecommunication Market 
Developments – Analysis of the European and Asian 
Broadband Markets and Regulatory Frameworks”, In K. Daimi 
& S. Semenov (Eds.), The Thirteenth Advanced International 
Conference on Telecommunications (AICT 2017, IARIA) [25. 
- 29. June 2017, Venice]. Conference Proceedings and 
Thinkmind Library, pp. 56-64 (ISSN: 2308-4030, ISBN: 978-
1-61208-562-3) 
[2] P. Koutroumpis, “The economic impact of broadband on 
growth: A simultaneous approach”, Telecommunications 
Policy, Volume 33 (9), pp. 471-485, 2009. 
[3] International Telecommunication Union,  “The state of 
broadband 2014: broadband for all”, Report from the 
broadband 
commission, 
pp. 
16-23, 
2014. 
(http://www.broadbandcommission.org/Documents/reports/bb
-annualreport2014.pdf), [retrieved: 02.2018] 
[4] W. Briglauer, “The impact of regulation and competition on the 
adoption of fiber-based broadband services: recent evidence 
from the European Union member states”, Springer Verlag, pp. 
450-468, 2014. 
[5] Monopoly 
Commission, 
“Special 
Report 
61 
– 
Telcommunication 2011: Strengthen investments and secure 
the 
competition”, 
in 
German: 
Monopolkommission 
“Sondergutachten 
61 
– 
Telekommunikation 
2011: 
Investitionsanreize stärken, Wettbewerb sichern“, pp. 24, 40-
41, 
55, 
76-86, 
2011.  
(http://www.monopolkommission.de/sg_61/s61_volltext.pdf), 
[retrieved: 02.2018] 
[6] W. Briglauer and K. Gugler, “The deployment and penetration 
of high-speed fiber networks and services: Why are EU 
member states lagging behind?”, Telecommunications Policy, 
Volume 37, pp. 819-835, 2013. 
[7] W. Distaso, P. Lupi, and F. M. Maneti, “Platform competition 
and broadband uptake: Theory and Empirical evidence from 
the European Union”, Information Economics and Policy, 
Volume 18 (1), pp. 87-106, 2006.  
[8] H. Gruber and P. Koutroumpis, “Competition enhancing 
regulation and diffusion of innovation: the case of broadband 
networks”, Springer Science + Business Media, New York, 
Volume 43 (2), pp. 168-195, 2013. 
[9] R. L. Katz, “The present and future of the telecommunication 
in Costa Rica”, in Spanish: "El presente y futuro de las 
telecommunicaciones de Costa Rica”, 4ta Expo-Telecom Costa 
Rica – Telecom Advisory Services, LLC, pp. 14, 2011. 
[10] R. L. Katz and T. A. Berry, “Driving demand for broadband 
networks 
and 
services, 
signals 
and 
communication 
technology”, Springer Verlag, pp. 5-40, 135-200, 2014. 
[11] U. Stopka, R. Pessier, and S. Flößel, “Broadband study 2030 – 
Prospective services, broadband adoption and demand”, in 
German: “Breitbandstudie 2030 – Zukünftige Dienste, 
Adoptionsprozesse und Bandbreitenbedarf“, pp. 42-50, 60, 
166-164, 2013. 
[12] T. Tjelta et al., “Research topics and initial results for the fifth 
generation (5G) mobile network”, 1st International Conference 
on 5G Ubiquitous Connectivity (5GU), pp. 267-272, 2014. 
[13] R. L. Katz and F. Callorda, “Mobile broadband at the bottom 
of the pyramid in Latin America”, Telecom Advisory Services, 
LLC, pp. 23-25, 2013. 
[14] H. Gruber, “European sector regulation and investment 
incentives: European options for NGA deployment”, In I. 
Spiecker and J. Krämer (Eds.), Network neutrality and open 
access Baden-Baden: Nomos, pp. 191-202, 2011. 
[15] C. D. Piros and J. E. Pinto, “Economics for investment decision 
making: Micro, Macro, International Economics”. CFA 
Institute – Investment Series, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New 
Jersey, pp. 41-51. 
[16] P. Winzer and E. Massarczyk, „Obstacles of fiber roll-out“, in 
German: “Viele Faktoren – Was hemmt den Glasfaserausbau 
in Deutschland?“ In: NET, 2015, 69. Jg., H. 3, p. 38-41  
[17] P. Winzer and E. Massarczyk, “How Does Improving the 
Existing DSL Infrastructure Influence the Expansion of Fiber 
Technology?” Paper presented at the 17. International 
Conference on Broadband Communications, Networks, and 
Systems (ICBCNS) [28. - 29. June 2015, London], Conference 
Proceedings (eISSN: 1307-6892), p. 3934-3941 
[18] Bundesnetzagentur, “Annual Report 2013 – Strong networks – 
consumer protection”, in German: “Jahresbericht 2013 – Starke 
Netze im Fokus – Verbraucherschutz im Blick”, pp. 70-81, 
2013. 
(http://www.bundesnetzagentur.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/D
E/Allgemeines/Bundesnetzagentur/Publikationen/Berichte/20

49
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
14/140506Jahresbericht2013Barrierefrei.pdf?__blob=publicat
ionFile&v=4), [retrieved: 05/2017]  
[19] Bundesnetzagentur, “Definition of market regulation”, in 
German: 
“Definition 
von 
Marktregulierung“, 
2013. 
(http://www.bundesnetzagentur.de/DE/Sachgebiete/Telekom
munikation/Unternehmen_Institutionen/Marktregulierung/mar
ktregulierung-node.html) [retrieved: 05/2017] 
[20] I. Cava-Ferreruela and A. Alabau-Munoz, “Evolution of the 
European broadband policy: Analysis and perspective”, pp. 1-
17, 2005. 
[21] W. Kerber, “Competition Policy – Vahlens compendium for 
economic theory and economic policy”, in German: 
“Wettbewerbspolitik. 
Vahlens 
Kompendium 
der 
Wirtschaftstheorie und Wirtschaftspolitik”, Volume 2 (8), p. 
302, 2003.  
[22] W. Kiesewetter, L. Nett, and U. Stumpf, “Regulation and 
competition in European mobile telecommunication markets”, 
in German “Regulierung und Wettbewerb auf europäischen 
Mobilfunkmärkten”, WIK – Wissenschaftliches Institut für 
Kommunikationsdienste, 2002.  
[23] L. Waverman and P. Koutroumpis, “Benchmarking telecoms 
regulation – The Telecommunications Regulatory Governance 
Index (TRGI)”, Elsevier – Telecommunications Policy, 
Volume 35, pp. 450-468, 2011. 
[24] J. Bouckaert, T. van Dijk, and F. Verboven, “Access 
regulation, competition, and broadband penetration: An 
international study”, Elsevier – Telecommunications Policy, 
Volume 34, pp. 661-671, 2010. 
[25] O. Falck, J. Haucap, and J. Kühling, “Economic growth 
oriented telecommunication policy: intentions and options“, in 
German: “Wachstumsorientierte Telekommunikationspolitik 
Handlungsbedarf und -optionen”, Studie im Auftrag des 
Bundesministeriums für Wirtschaft und Technologie, 2013. 
(http://www.bmwi.de/BMWi/Redaktion/PDF/Publikationen/S
tudien/wachstumsorientierte-telekommunikationspolitik-
handlungsbedarf-und-
optionen,property=pdf,bereich=bmwi2012,sprache=de,rwb=tr
ue.pdf) (retrieved 02.2018) 
[26] S. Wallsten, “Broadband and unbundling regulations in OECD 
countries”, AEI-Brookings Joint Center Working Paper No. 
06-16, pp. 1-28, 2006. 
[27] T. Apolte et al., “Vahlens compendium for economic theory”, 
in German: “Vahlens Kompendium der Wirtschaftstheorie und 
Wirtschaftspolitik”, Verlag Franz Vahlen, Volume 9 (2), pp. 
404-411, 2007. 
[28] I. Schmidt, “Competition Policy and law”, in German: 
“Wettbewerbspolitik und Kartellrecht“, Volume 7, Stuttgart, 
pp. 49-55, 2001. 
[29] M. Motta, “Competition policy – theory and practice”, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 
2004. 
[30] W. K. Viscusi, J. E. Harrington Jr., and J. M. Vernon, 
“Economics of regulation and antitrust”, MIT Press, Volume 4, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, pp. 155-162, 2005.  
[31] S. Bicheno, “South Korea to add fourth mobile operator”, 
Telecoms, 2015.  (http://telecoms.com/423611/south-korea-to-
add-fourth-mobile-operator/), [retrieved: 02.2018] 
[32] L. J. Cronbach, “Coefficient Alpha and the internal structure of 
tests. Psychometrika, Volume 16, pp. 297-334, 1951. 
[33] A. Field, “Discovering statistics using SPSS”, Sage 
Publications Ltd., Volume 4, 2013. 
[34] J. F. J. Hair, R. E. Anderson, R. L. Tatham, and W. C. Black, 
“Multivariate data analysis”, Macmillan, New York, NY, 
Macmillan, Volume 3, 1995. 
[35] W. Hugentobler, “Liberalization of the telecommunciation 
market“, 
in 
German: 
„Liberalisierung 
in 
der 
Telekommunikation“, 
1999. 
(http://www.bundesnetzagentur.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/E
N/BNetzA/PressSection/ReportsPublications/AeltereDaten/T
KLiberalisationId2053pdf.pdf?__blob=publicationFile) 
13/09/2016 (retrieved 02.2018) 
[36] T. Ovington, R. Smith, J. Santamaría, and L. Stammati, “The 
impact 
of 
intra-platform 
competition 
on 
broadband 
penetration“, Telecommunications Policy 41 (2017), pp. 185-
196. 
[37] D. Belson, “Akamai’s State of the Internet”, Akamai 
Technologies Q1 2012 Report, Volume 8 (1), pp. 5-32, 2012. . 
[38] D. Belson, “Akamai’s State of the Internet”, Akamai 
Technologies Q1 2013 Report, Volume 8 (1), pp. 5-32, 2013. 
[39] D. Belson, “Akamai’s State of the Internet”, Akamai 
Technologies Q1 2014 Report, Volume 8 (1), pp. 5-32, 2014. 
[40] D. Belson, “Akamai’s State of the Internet”, Akamai 
Technologies Q3 2015 Report, Volume 8 (1), pp. 5-32, 2015. 
[41] International Telecommunication Union, “Yearbook of 
Statistics 2014 – Telecommunication/ICT Indicators 2004-
2013”, 2014.   
[42] World Bank, Data Bank World Development Indicators to 
Price Parities, Gross Domestic Product per Capita, Internet and 
telecommunication 
indicators. 
(http://databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=worl
d-development-indicators) (retrieved 02.2018) 
[43] OECD, Broadband Portal – broadband penetration rates, 
broadband statistics. 
(http://www.oecd.org/sti/broadband/) 
(retrieved 02.2018) 
[44] International Telecommunication Union,  “The state of 
broadband 2015: broadband as a foundation for sustainable 
development”, Report from the broadband commission, pp. 12-
21, 
39-44, 
2015. 
(http://www.broadbandcommission.org/Documents/reports/bb
-annualreport2015.pdf), [retrieved: 02.2018] 
[45] International Telecommunication Union,  “The state of 
broadband 2012: achieving digital inclusion for all”, Report 
from 
the 
broadband 
commission, 
pp. 
16-32, 
2016. 
(http://www.broadbandcommission.org/Documents/reports/bb
-annualreport2012.pdf), [retrieved: 02.2018] 
[46] International Telecommunication Union,  “The state of 
broadband 
2016: 
broadband 
catalyzing 
sustainable 
development”, Report from the broadband commission, pp. 16-
32, 
2016. 
(http://www.broadbandcommission.org/Documents/reports/bb
-annualreport2016.pdf), [retrieved: 02.2018] 
[47] International 
Telecommunication 
Union, 
World 
Telecommunication Database ICT Indicators 2015. 
[48] E. M. Rogers, “Diffusion of Innovations”, Vol. 3,  
New 
York / London 1983, p. 247. 
[49] OECD, “OECD Communications Outlook 2007 – Information 
and 
Communications 
Technologies”, 
Organisation 
for 
Economic Cooperation and Development.   
[50] OECD, “OECD Communications Outlook 2011 – Information 
and 
Communications 
Technologies”, 
Organisation 
for 
Economic Cooperation and Development.   
[51] OECD, “OECD Communications Outlook 2013 – Information 
and 
Communications 
Technologies”, 
Organisation 
for 
Economic Cooperation and Development.   
[52] C. Fornell and D. Larcker, “Evaluating Structural Equation 
Models with Unobservable Variables and Measurement Error,” 
Journal of Marketing Research, vol. 18, issue 1, 1981, pp. 39-
50. 
[53] R. Hossiep, “Cronbachs Alpha,” [German] “Cronbachs 
Alpha,” In Wirtz, M. A. (editor): Dorsch – Lexikon der 
Psychologie, vol. 17. Verlag Hans Huber, Bern, 2014.  
[54] S. Fromm, “Data Analysis with SPSS Part 1,” [German] 
“Datenanalyse mit SPSS für Fortgeschrittene,” Arbeitsbuch, 

50
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
vol. 2, VS Verlag 
für Sozialwissenschaften, GWV 
Fachverlage, Wiesbaden, 2008. 
[55] S. Fromm, “Data Analysis with SPSS Part 2,” [German] 
“Datenanalyse mit SPSS für Fortgeschrittene 2: Multivariate 
Verfahren für Querschnittsdaten,”  Lehrbuch, vol. 1, VS Verlag 
für Sozialwissenschaften, Springer, Wiesbaden, 2010. 
[56] N. M. Schöneck and W. Voß, “Research Project,” [German] 
“Das Forschungsprojekt – Planung, Durchführung und 
Auswertung einer quantitativen Studie,” vol. 2. Springer 
Wiesbaden, 2013. 
[57] F. Brosius, “SPSS 8 Professional Statistics in Windows,” 
[German] “SPSS 8 Professionelle Statistik unter Windows,” 
Kapitel 21 Korrelation, International Thomson Publishing, vol. 
1, 1998. 
 

