264
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
An Effective Usage of Transmitted Directivity Information
for Target Position Estimation Algorithm
Hiroyuki Hatano
Faculty of Engineering,
Shizuoka University
3-5-1 Johoku, Naka-ku,
Hamamatsu-shi, Shizuoka
432-8561, JAPAN
thhatan@ipc.shizuoka.ac.jp
Tomoharu Mizutani
Graduate School of Engineering,
Shizuoka University,
3-5-1 Johoku, Naka-ku,
Hamamatsu-shi, Shizuoka
432-8561, JAPAN
f0930142@ipc.shizuoka.ac.jp
Yoshihiko Kuwahara
Faculty of Engineering,
Shizuoka University
3-5-1, Johoku, Naka-ku,
Hamamatsu-shi, Shizuoka
432-8561, JAPAN
tykuwab@ipc.shizuoka.ac.jp
Abstract—We consider localization systems for targets be-
cause information of the targets position, such as human, cars,
dangerous objects, is very meaningful. Especially, we focus
on the estimation of targets that exist in near wide area. In
order to cover the wide area, the system, which has multiple
networked ranging sensors, is useful. Such networked systems
are often called as radar network systems or sensor network.
The straight arrangement of the sensors is very useful because
of easy setting and installing. Previously, receivers arranged in
a straight line would generate a large positioning error in the
same direction of the line, that is horizontal direction. In this
paper, for reduction of this error, we propose a novel estimation
algorithm using the directivity information of the transmitter.
The proposed system has a electrical directional antenna in
a transmitter. So the transmitter can emit signals to intended
directions. In this paper, the error characteristic, which must
be solved, is introduced ﬁrstly. Then, the proposed algorithm
is presented theoretically. Finally, through the results of the
computer simulations, the examples of the error reduction are
demonstrated under various situations such as different target
positions or type of sensors. The obtained results indicate the
estimation characteristics that our proposal achieves the some
reduction of the horizontal error even the sensors are arranged
in a straight line.
Keywords-position estimation; localization; directivity of array;
sensor network; radar network.
I. INTRODUCTION
Information of target positions, such as human location,
suspicious person detection and dangerous objectives, is very
meaningful and attractive. On the basis of these demands,
interest in position estimation systems has been growing. For
far targets, it is relatively easy because the sensors can be
allowed to using a narrow sensing area. However, for near
targets, the sensing area is needed as the wide cover area.
It is difﬁcult to realize because wide covered antenna has
received unintended signals easily. Then we have focused
on the estimation of the position of targets in the near wide
area before now [1].
To extract the unintended signals and derived information,
the multiple sensors, which generate redundancy, is effective
solution (Figure 1). So one of potent position estimation
systems are built with the multiple sensors that are connected
with networks. These sensors achieve reliable detections
and accurate position estimation. Even inexpensive devices
such as ultrasonic radars, will be able to achieve good
performance. Moreover, networked sensors can obviously
cover a wide detection area. Several attractive applications of
position estimation systems have been suggested, including
indoor monitoring systems (Figure 2(a)) and near-range
automotive radars (Figure 2(b)) [2], [3].
The multiple sensor networks can be realized by any
devices such as laser radars, radio radars, ultrasonic radars.
We assume that the sensors in the network can output only
measured ranges (a measured range list) to the targets. The
reason is that the only ranging function can be realized
with low cost and simple components which are used to
construct the sensors The estimator must calculate target
positions with high accuracy from only measured range lists
provided by multiple sensors. For accurate positioning, it is
important to discuss data processing of position estimation,
which deals with measured range data from all of the
sensors. Because the assumed sensors can have only the
range function, we call the multiple sensor networks as radar
network in this paper.
The system has the multiple sensors. So it is important
about how to arrange the sensors. For easy setting within a
limited space with simple wiring, a straight-line arrangement
is usually preferred. Now we focus on the error of position
estimation. The estimation errors depend on the layout of the
receivers. In particular, for the case in which the receivers
are arranged in a straight line, large errors are generated
in the same direction of the line. Because a straight-line
arrangement is useful and preferred very much, thus, a novel
technique to reduce the estimation errors is needed.
The goals of the presented paper are as follows:
• Introduction of the conventional algorithm (EPEM)
theoretically and particularly,
• Clariﬁcation of the error performance depending on the

265
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 1.
Concept of position estimation system by sensor networks
(a) Indoor monitoring system
(b) Automotive radar system
Figure 2.
Example of multiple sensing network systems
sensor arrangement and description of the problem,
• Proposal of the existence probability estimation method
with directivity information (EPEMD) algorithm,
• Evaluation of the error reduction through various com-
puter simulations.
• Presentation of the example performance through above
evaluations under different conditions.
The proposed radar network in this paper has cooperative
transmitter. The transmitter has the function of the variable
directivity by electrical array antennas. On the processing of
positions estimation, our proposal EPEMD calculates the tar-
get existence probability. Especially, the EPEMD algorithm
uses the transmitted directivity information effectively. In
the case of radar network systems, transmitters often use a
directivity scan in order to reduce misdetections and expand
detectable ranges for limited power [4]. Moreover, the con-
struction of electrical directivity antennas is advantageous
because the sensor device requires a long deliverable range
with low power. Therefore, it is meaningful to propose an
estimation algorithm that considers the directivity pattern.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, related estimation algorithms, which use the mul-
tiple sensors, are introduced. And problems and advantages
of our EPEM and EPEMD are described. In Section III, we
present the system model and assumptions of the present
study. In Section IV, we introduce the EPEM algorithm,
which is a position estimation algorithm. The algorithm
is explained theoretically, and the error performance and
problems are presented. In Section V, the proposed EPEMD
algorithm is presented in detail. In Section VI, the perfor-
mance of the error reduction is demonstrated and evaluated
under various situations. Finally, Section VII summarizes the
present study and presents suggestions for further research.
II. RELATED RESEARCH
In this section, we introduce related researches, which
estimate the target position by multiple sensors. Over the
past few years, researchers around the world have developed
several algorithms. The related estimation algorithms with
multiple sensing devices are growing on the research area
of sensor network systems or radar network systems. Here,
some works about sensor networks are presented in the
following literatures [5]–[9]. Also, radar network systems
have been discussed in [10]–[12].
The typical estimation algorithms are summarized as
below:
• Trilateration technique
• Stochastic approach
For estimating target positions, the trilateration techniques
using geometric operations are most popular. The accuracy
of these techniques is not optimum. Moreover they may
also detect “ghost targets”, which are falsely detected about
non-existent targets. This often occurs when the measured
ranging errors are large [2], [11]. These lacks are generated
because the trilateration techniques does not consider the
inﬂuence of the measurement error.
In other techniques, measured ranges are treated as
stochastic variables [13]–[15]. That is, by treatment of the
stochastic variables, the inﬂuence of the measurement error
can be considered. Typical techniques are, for example,
estimation algorithms using minimum mean square error
(MMSE) and maximum a posterior probability (MAP). The

266
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
accuracy of these techniques is high compared to the above
popular trilateration techniques. Among the stochastic meth-
ods, the accuracy of the MAP method is optimum. However,
the calculation amount is high because data processing of the
MAP method is very complex. Moreover the pre-knowledge,
such as number of targets, is needed. Therefore, we proposed
a novel estimation algorithm, namely, the existence probabil-
ity estimation method (EPEM) [16]. The EPEM calculates
the existence probability of targets and estimates the target
positions. In the proposed method, the measured ranges are
also treated as stochastic values. Moreover, the proposed
method has approximately the same estimation accuracy
and a lower calculation cost compared to optimum MAP
methods.
However, problems are still remaining. One of the prob-
lems is the estimation error, which depends on the layout
of the receivers. As mentioned in Sec. I, for the case in
which the receivers are arranged in a straight line, large
errors are generated in the same direction of the line.
Usually, a straight-line arrangement is useful because such
an arrangement is easy to build and can be set up within
a limited space with easy wiring. Thus, a novel technique
to reduce the estimation errors is needed. In this paper, we
will try resolving this problem. That is, we will propose the
reduction algorithm by using the directional information of
the transmitter effectively.
III. ASSUMPTION AND SYSTEM MODEL
In this paper, we will ﬁrstly point out the problem
clearly. This section is described about the system model
for explanation the conventional estimation and the problem.
Figure 1 shows the system model. The assumed system has
a transmitter and multiple receivers. First of all, for easy
understanding, we explain using our radar network model
with 4 radars and 2 targets. This is simple case. In Section
IV-B, we introduce a more complicated case.
Figures 3 and 4 show the system model and the ﬂow
of data processing. Figure 4 also indicates the necessary
parameters for the estimation. Figure 3 shows the sensor
layout and the targets which are estimated. The numbers of
receivers and targets are 4 and 2, respectively. The origin
of the coordinate system is the center of the receivers. The
target positions are given as (x1, y1), (x2, y2). We note that
each receiver is assumed to be located on the x-axis because
the straight line layout is useful for setting and wiring to
variable applications. The x positions of the receivers are
α1, α2, α3, α4.
The kth receiver outputs a measured range list composed
of the ranges to the targets, namely, ˜Rk = (˜rk1, ˜rk2). We
assume the existence of a only direct path between the target
and the transmitter/receiver. Subscript (˜) indicates measured
values.
Each measured range ˜rkn in the list includes a measure-
Figure 3.
Layout of sensors and targets (4 receivers and 2 targets)
Figure 4.
A data ﬂow (4 receivers and 2 targets)
ment error:
˜rkn = rkn + ϵk,
(1)

267
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
where rkn is the true range between the nth target and the
transmitter / the kth receiver, and ϵk is a stochastic variable,
the variance of which is denoted as σ2
k. Using the measured
range lists obtained from all receivers and the positions of
the receivers, the target positions are estimated as shown in
Figure 4.
IV. ESTIMATION ALGORITHM AND ITS PROBLEM
The popular estimation algorithm of a target position is
trilateration method which uses geometric operations [2],
[11]. This is not optimum accuracy because the measurement
errors are not considered. It may also detect “ghost target”
that the detector outputs false position even there is no tar-
gets. This may happens in case of large measurement error or
multipath environment. In order to address these problems,
the proposed estimation method, which is described below,
deals with the measured rages as stochastic variables.
In the ﬁrst half of this section, we introduce the position
estimation algorithm based on the existence probability
which is named as the conventional in this paper. The
estimation characteristics are then summarized, and the
problem is pointed out. The estimation method, which is
presented below, is called as EPEM(Existence probability
estimation method).
A. Existence probability estimation method (EPEM)
For estimation of the target positions from the measured
range lists provided by the receivers, we consider the fol-
lowing existence probability:
P(ˆx, ˆy| ˜R1, ˜R2, ˜R3, ˜R4).
(2)
The Equation (2) includes the conditional probability. The
above probability is the conditional probability of the
target existence at (ˆx, ˆy) when the measured range lists
˜R1, ˜R2, ˜R3, ˜R4 are obtained. Next, by using Bayes’ theorem,
Equation (2) can be written as follows:
P( ˜R1, ˜R2, ˜R3, ˜R4|ˆx, ˆy)
P( ˜R1, ˜R2, ˜R3, ˜R4)
· P(ˆx, ˆy).
(3)
In Equation (3), the denominator does not depend on the es-
timated parameter (ˆx, ˆy). Then, when P(ˆx, ˆy) is distributed
uniformly, Equation (3) may have the same distribution
shape to the following:
P( ˜R1, ˜R2, ˜R3, ˜R4|ˆx, ˆy).
(4)
Each receiver is assumed as independent. Because the mea-
sured range is an independent Gaussian variable, Equation
(4) can be expressed as follows.
4
∏
k=1
P( ˜Rk|ˆx, ˆy).
(5)
There are the relationships between the targets ans ranges.
With considering the combinations of targets and ranges,
Equation (5) may be expressed as follows:
4
∏
k=1
[
Bk,1P(˜rk1|ˆx, ˆy) + Bk,2P(˜rk2|ˆx, ˆy)
]
(6)
where Bk,n is the probability that the nth measured range
in the measured range list of the kth radar, that is ˜rkn,
means the range to the focused target. Next, the estimated
parameters (ˆx, ˆy) can be transformed with the distance from
the transmitter/kth receiver to the target, that is, ˆrkn as
follows:
ˆrkn =
√
(ˆx − αk)2 + ˆy2 +
√
ˆx2 + ˆy2
(for all n).
(7)
By using the above relational expression, Equation (6) can
be converted to the following:
4
∏
k=1
[
Bk,1P(˜rk1|ˆrk) + Bk,2P(˜rk2|ˆrk)
]
.
(8)
In this paper, we assume that there is not pre-knowledge
at all. It is most difﬁcult case. Hence, the value Bk,n
is equal value respectively. And the the value Bk,n does
not also depend on the estimated parameter (ˆx, ˆy). So, the
distribution of Equation (8) is the same shape to:
4
∏
k=1
2
∑
n=1
P(˜rkn|ˆrk).
(9)
The probability of P(˜r|ˆr) indicates the error characteristic
of the receiver. The characteristic of the measurement error
must be known as the speciﬁcations of the own receivers.
Using Equations (7) and (9), the distribution of the existence
probability of the target at position (ˆx, ˆy) can be calculated
from the measured range lists ˜R1, ˜R2, ˜R3, ˜R4, which can be
obtained by the receivers. By selecting the local maximums
of the distribution of Equation (9), the target positions
can be estimated. For the multiple targets, the estimator
may select multiple candidates, which have high probability.
The distribution of Equation (9) is called as Existence
probability of the targets. The example distribution of the
existence probability is presented as Figure 5. Figure 5
shows the probability in case that the position of the target
is (x, y) = (0.5, 9)[m].
B. Case of N targets and K receivers
The simple case, which is the number of the receivers
K
= 4 and the number of the targets N
= 2, was
presented. Next we introduce more complicated case. That
is the number of the receivers K and the number of the
targets N. Figure 6 shows the system model. Figure 7 also
shows the ﬂow of the data processing.
Figure 6 shows the sensor layout and the targets. The
numbers of receivers and targets are K and N, respectively.

268
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 5.
Example of the existence probability (1 target)
The target position is given as (xn, yn), 1 ≤ n ≤ N. The x
positions of the receivers are α1, α2, α3, · · · , αK.
The kth receiver outputs a measured range list composed
of the ranges, namely, ˜Rk = (˜rk1, ˜rk2, ..., ˜rkNk). Here,
Nk(≤ N) is the number of ranges included in the measured
range list ˜Rk.
For estimation of the target positions, we consider the fol-
lowing existence probability, which includes the conditional
probability:
P(ˆx, ˆy| ˜R1, ˜R2, ˜R3, · · · , ˜RK)
(10)
which is the same to Equation (2). The probability of Equa-
tion (10) is the conditional probability of the target existence
at (ˆx, ˆy) when the measured range lists ˜R1, ˜R2, ˜R3, · · · , ˜RK
are obtained.
By the transformations which are the same to Equation
(3)-(9), above Equation (10) has the same shape of the
distribution to:
K
∏
k=1
N
∑
n=1
P(˜rkn|ˆrk).
(11)
The probability of P(˜r|ˆr) indicates the error characteristic
of the known receiver. Using Equations (7) and (11), the
distribution of the probability of the target existence at
position (ˆx, ˆy) can be calculated when the measured ranges
˜R1, ˜R2, ˜R3, · · · , ˜RK are obtained.
The EPEM has approximately the same estimation accu-
racy as the MAP method, which is optimum in terms of
maximum a posteriori probability [16].
C. Estimation characteristics and problems
In the following, we present the estimation characteristics
of the EPEM algorithm described in the previous section.
The simulation parameters are shown in Table I. In the
simulations, we assume the measurement error as 0.3 m,
Figure 6.
Layout of sensors and targets (K receivers and N targets)
Figure 7.
A data ﬂow (K receivers and N targets)

269
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 8.
Distribution of estimated target positions (EPEM)
Table I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Number of receivers: K
3
Number of targets: N
2
Target positions
#1 (x1, y1) = (0, 2)[m]
#2 (x2, y2) = (0, 9)[m]
Array width of receivers
2 m
Distribution of
Gaussian distribution
measurement error ˜r
(σk = 0.075)
Number of iterations
50,000
Table II
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE ESTIMATED TARGETS (EPEM)
Target 1
Target 2
Var[ˆx]
0.014
0.240
Var[ˆy]
0.002
0.002
which is typical [17]. According to this value, we set the
standard derivation σk of the measured ranges (4σk = 0.3
[m]). The estimation trials of the targets are simulated. The
trials generate the distribution of estimated positions. The
results are shown in Figure 8. Moreover, the variance of the
distribution for each of the targets position in Figure 8 are
summarized in Table II. Figure 8 and Table II show that the
error in the x-direction is larger than that in the y-direction.
The reason for this is that the receivers are arranged along
the x-axis. That is, large errors are generated in the same
direction to the receivers’ arrangement. In order to reduce
the x-axis errors, we propose an estimation algorithm that
uses the directivity of the transmitter.
V. PROPOSAL OF ESTIMATION ALGORITHM USING THE
DIRECTIVITY OF THE TRANSMITTER
In this section, we introduce our proposal. The proposal
solves the problem of the large error described in the pre-
vious section. The proposed algorithm is named as EPEMD
(the existence probability estimation method with directivity
information).
Figure 9.
Image of the proposed system
Figure 10.
A data ﬂow (Proposal EPEMD)
We illustrate the image of our proposal in Figure 9. And
Figure 10 also shows the ﬂow of the data processing, which
also indicates the necessary parameters for the estimation.
The difference between Figures 1 and 9 is the transmitter
of Figure 9 has a directivity. So, as seen in Figure 10, the
directivity information can be used.
The system model is the same to Section III. That is, a
signal is radiated from the transmitter, which is composed
of two or more devices to achieve directivity. The reﬂected

270
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 11.
Structure of the transmitter array
signal from the target is received by the receivers, which are
placed along a straight line (x-axis).
As shown in Figure 11, a transmission array is composed
of L transmitters. The transmitters in the array are arranged
symmetrically. The center of the array is the origin of the
coordinate. The variables (β1, 0), (β2, 0), . . . , (βL, 0) mean
the positions of the transmitter. The variables Al indicate the
amplitude coefﬁcient, and sl(t) also indicate the radiated
signal from the lth transmitter. The total signal in the θ
direction can be expressed as follows:
Ssum(θ, t) = s(θ, t)
L
∑
l=1
Al exp{j2πf0(βl
c sin θ)}
(12)
where f0 is the center frequency of the signal, and c is the
speed of wave. The based signal and common characteristics
of the transmitters, such as the directivity pattern of the
element, is substituted as s(θ, t). In the present study,
|Ssum(θ, t)|, which indicates the gain generated by the array,
is named as the directivity response pattern.
In the proposal, the directivity response pattern can be
used effectively when the existence probability is calculated.
We try to reduce the horizontal estimation errors using
this directivity response pattern. The electrical directivity
antenna, such as Figure 11, can change the directivity
response pattern arbitrarily. However, for the purpose of
clarity, we explain the EPEMD method using an example
of a directivity pattern. The example is shown in Figure 12.
Considering this directivity response pattern, the signal can
be reﬂected only from targets that exist in the area within the
beam, such as Target #1. In contrast, Target #2 cannot reﬂect
the signal. Then, the function to specify the reﬂectable area
is as follows:
Dp(x, y) =
{
1
(area that can be reﬂected)
0
(area that cannot be reﬂected) . (13)
That is, Equation (13) means the area in which the target can
reﬂect the signals or not. So, in this paper, the Equation (13)
is called as reﬂectable area function. The above reﬂectable
area function can be derived from the directivity response
pattern.
From now, we explain the derivation of the reﬂectable area
function. The directivity response pattern can be converted
to the reﬂectable area of the x − y plane by way of the
following radar equation:
S = γPt
R4 .
(14)
The parameter S means the electric power of the reﬂected
signal, that is, the signal received at the receiver. The
parameter γ is determined on the basis of, for example, the
antenna gain and the effective reﬂection area of the targets.
In addition, Pt is the power of the transmitter, and R is the
range from the transmitter/receivers to the target.
Then, if S is deﬁned as the minimum detectable power
at the receiver, the R means the maximum reﬂectable range
obviously. Equation (14) can be rewritten as follows:
R =
4
√ γ
S
4√
Pt
(15)
Next, we assume that the transmitting power becomes δPt,
that is δ times. Then, maximum reﬂectable range R′ can be
rewritten in terms of R as follows:
R′ =
4
√ γ
S
4√
δPt =
4√
δR
(16)
As mentioned above, the absolute value |Ssum(θ, t)| in
Equation (12) means the gain of the array. The gain of the
array is related to δ. The maximum reﬂectable range R′
can be calculated from Equations (16) when the gain of the
transmitted power is |Ssum(θ, t)|. As a result, the reﬂectable
area function, that is Equation (13), can be calculated.
In the proposal EPEMD, the reﬂectable area function is
considered into the existence probability of the targets. From
Equations (13) and (9), we obtain the following equation:
[ K
∏
k=1
N
∑
n=1
P(˜rkn|ˆrk)
]]
· Dp(x, y)
(17)
Equation (17) gives the existence probability considering the
directivity of the transmission signal. The EPEMD estimates
the target positions by searching the high values of the
above existence probability. This search is the same to the
conventional EPEM algorithm in the description of Section
IV-A.
The directive antenna also generates null directions. In
order to avoid null directions and cover a wide area, the

271
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 12.
Directivity response pattern and targets
Figure 13.
Designed directivity response pattern (Simulation I)
transmitter has to compensate the direction of the nulls. In
the case of Figure 11, it is possible to change the directivity
electrically, such as beam scans. So, in practice, the direction
of the main lobe of the directivity has to be changed a small
number of times to compensate the nulls and cover the wide
area in a trial.
VI. NUMERICAL EXAMPLES AND EVALUATION
We demonstrate and evaluate the estimation characteris-
tics of the conventional algorithm and the proposed EPEMD
algorithm from the viewpoint of error reduction. In this
paper, we will present the characteristics in the case of two
different types of the sensors. One is the radar sensors and
the other is ultrasonic sensors. The results of these sensors
are described as below. Especially, in the case of the radar,
we simulate various situations which are different about the
position of the target.
A. Simulation I
We designed the directivity pattern as shown in Figure
13. The simulation parameters are shown in Table III.
Considering that targets exist in the near ﬁeld, the width
of the transmission array is set to 0.1 m. We then converted
Figure 14.
Reﬂectable area (Simulation I)
the directivity pattern into the reﬂectable area function using
Equations (12) and (16). The reﬂectable area is shown
in Figure 14. In the simulations, the maximum value of
the |Ssum(θ, t)| is 2 and we assume that the maximum
detectable range R′ is 10 m. As mentioned in Section V,
it is necessary to change the directivity in a detection trial
such as beam scanning in order to detect targets over a wide
area. However, for the evaluation of the position estimation
characteristics of the algorithms, only one ﬁxed directivity
pattern is simulated. The parameters of the receivers are
shown in Table IV.
We simulate three cases. In Case 1, the target is located
at (0,9) [m], which is a relatively long distance from the
sensors. In Case 2, the target is located at (0,2) [m], which is
short. In Case 3, the target is located at (0.5,5.2) [m], which
is middle range. For the evaluation of the estimation errors,
we use the variance of the distribution of the estimated po-
sitions, which are used in Section IV-C, as the performance
measure. The variance is calculated from 50,000 estimation
trials.
The results of the variance are shown in Table V. These
variances are derived from the distribution of the estimated
positions. The obtained distributions in Case 1 are shown in
Figure 15. The results of the Case 2, 3 are also shown in
Figures 16 and 17, respectively. From Table V, in the case
of the EPEMD algorithm, the variance of both the x- and
y-directions can be reduced compared to the conventional
algorithm. Moreover, in the case of a long distance, the
reduction in variance is large compared to the case of a short
distance. In particular, the variance in the x-direction, which
is the same direction of the arrangement of the receivers, can
be decreased signiﬁcantly.
B. Simulation II
We evaluate our proposal in terms of the use of ultrasonic
radar networks. Ultrasonic radars are useful because the

272
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Table III
PARAMETERS OF TRANSMITTER (SIMULATION I)
Frequency: f0
24 [GHz]
Number of transmitters: L
3
Width of array [m]
0.1
Element positions [m]: Bl
-0.05, 0, 0.05
Amplitude control: Al
0.5, 1, 0.5
Table IV
PARAMETERS OF RECEIVERS (SIMULATION I)
Number of radars K
3
Total width of receivers [m]
2m
Element positions [m]:
-1.0, 0, 1.0
Distribution of measurement error ˜r
Gaussian distribution
Standard variation σk
0.075
Number of iteration
50,000
Table V
CHARACTERISTICS OF ESTIMATED TARGET (EPEMD, SIMULATION I)
Target
Method
Var[ˆx]
Var[ˆy]
position [m]
Case 1
(0,9)
Conventional
0.240
0.00237
EPEMD
0.0339
0.00179
Case 2
(0,2)
Conventional
0.0139
0.00216
EPEMD
0.0115
0.00227
Case 3
(0.5,5.2)
Conventional
0.271
0.0507
EPEMD
0.0932
0.00313
Table VI
PARAMETERS OF TRANSMITTER (SIMULATION II)
Frequency:f0
40[kHz]
Number of transmitters:L
3
Element positions[m]:Bl
-0.03 , 0 , 0.03
Amplitude control:Al
1 , 1 , 1
devises are very low cost. In this simulations, we simulate
the estimation by using the speciﬁcation of the real devises.
We assume the real devices as MA40S4S and MA40S4R
which are made by MURATA corporation [18]. The direc-
tivity of the devices is shown as Figure 18. Figure 18(a) is
the directivity of the transmitter and Figure 18(b) is that of
the receiver.
Using the above directivity, we design the directivity
response pattern of the transmitter array. The speciﬁcation of
the array is summarized in Table VI. The directivity response
pattern which is designed empirically is presented at Figure
19. And the reﬂectable area function, which is converted
from the directivity response pattern using Equation (16),
is also shown at Figure 20. In this conversion, we assume
that the maximum value of the |Ssum(θ, t)| is 3 and the
maximum detectable range R′ is 3 m.
The estimation performance of the target position is
evaluated when the transmitter is the above array. The
simulation parameter is summarized in Table VII. The
performance measure is variances of the estimated positions.
The variances are calculated in terms of x-direction and y-
direction respectively. The statistics are derived from 10,000
(a) Conventional
(b) Proposed EPEMD
Figure 15.
Distribution of estimated positions (Case 1)
Table VII
PARAMETERS OF RECEIVERS (SIMULATION II)
Number of receivers:K
4
x-position of receivers
-0.3, -0.1, 0.1, 0.3
Distribution of ˜r
Gaussian Distribution
Standard variation σ
0.025m
Number of iteration
10,000
Observation area
x: -1m ∼ 1m
y: 0m ∼ 3m
Target position
(0, 1.8) [m]
Table VIII
CHARACTERISTICS OF ESTIMATED TARGET (EPEMD, SIMULATION II)
Var[x]
Var[y]
Conventional
0.241
0.072
Proposal
0.188
0.029
estimation trials. The variances are shown in Table VIII.
From the table, the variance of the proposal EPEMD is lower
than that of the conventional method. That is, the proposal
can reduce the estimation error. However the reduction

273
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(a) Conventional
(b) Proposed EPEMD
Figure 16.
Distribution of the estimated positions(Case2)
amount is not so large compared to the case of the results
in Table V. This is because the target exists in short range.
Compared to the conventional method, our proposal needs
the additional complexity such as the electrical directional
antenna and the calculating processing. In case of the short
range targets, the improvement is small. That is, the nearer
the target exists, the smaller the reduction effect becomes.
However the problems, which is large errors in case that the
target exists in far range (See. Fig. 8), can be reduced by
our proposal effectively.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we considered the localization algorithm for
the targets, which exist in near wide ﬁeld. In order to cover
the wide area, the networked multiple sensors can make
sense very well. In our assumption, these sensors has only
ranging function because of low cost and simple compo-
nents. The position of the targets needs to be estimated by
only range information. Such networked systems are often
called as radar network systems.
The error of the estimation depended on the arrangement
of the radars. The straight arrangement of the radars is very
(a) Conventional
(b) Proposed EPEMD
Figure 17.
Distribution of the estimated positions(Case3)
useful because of easy setting and installing. However, the
radars arranged in a straight line would generate a large
positioning error in the same direction of the line, that is
the horizontal error. In this paper, for the reduction of this
error, we proposed a novel estimation algorithm using the
directivity information of the transmitter.
In the ﬁrst half on the paper, to point out the problem
clearly, we ﬁrstly describe the conventional system model
and some estimation performance. After the recognition
about the error problem, we introduced our proposed es-
timation method EPEMD theoretically.
Our system model used the transmitter which had the
array component for changing directivity electrically. So
the proposed EPEMD algorithm was effectively able to use
not only the target existence probability which is calculated
based on range but also the directivity information of the
transmitter. Later in the paper, we tried various simulations
which are different about the type of radars and the target
positions for the demonstration and evaluation about our

274
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(a) Transmitter(MA40S4S)
(b) Receiver(MA40S4R)
Figure 18.
Directivity of real devices [18]
Figure 19.
Designed directivity response pattern of the array (Simulation
II)
estimation performance. By the computer simulations, we
presented the reduction effect. That is, the proposal can
reduce the horizontal errors compared to the conventional
method. Moreover, the error in the direction of the receivers
arrangement was effectively reduced as intended. However,
the nearer the target exists, the smaller the reduction effect
becomes.
As presented by the results of the computer simulations
such as Table V, the position of y-direction can be esti-
mated with very low variance, that is very high accuracy.
This means that the radar network systems have signiﬁcant
Figure 20.
Reﬂectable area (Simulation II)
potential for various applications. However the error in the
x-direction is still relatively large compared to the small
error in the y-direction. This is still the problem.
As the future work, we will continue to solve this problem.
Firstly, we will research suitable directivity pattern of the
EPEMD algorithm. This is because the sharper beam will
be able to reduce the horizontal error. However, the sharper
beam maybe generates the large components and compli-
cated signal processing of the transmitter. So we need to ﬁnd
the suitable directivity pattern. As other challenges for the
error reduction, we will apply the reﬂected signals, which
are often dealt with as multipath signals, to the EPEMD
algorithm. The reason is that the multipath can surround the
target even if the radars cannot surround the target, that is
the radars are set as a straight line.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The present study was supported in part by a Grant-in-
Aid for Young Scientists (B) and by the Telecommunications
Advancement Foundation.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Hatano, T. Mizutani, and Y. Kuwahara, “An error reduction
algorithm for position estimation systems using transmitted
directivity information,” IARIA International Conference on
Networks (ICN), pp. 267–272, Jan. 2011.
[2] M. Klotz and H. Rohling, “A high range resolution radar
system network for parking aid applications,” International
Conference on Radar Systems, May 1999.
[3] H. Rohling, A. Hoess, U. Luebbert, and M. Schiementz,
“Multistatic radar principles for automotive radarnet appli-
cations,” German Radar symposium 2002, Sep. 2002.

275
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[4] H. Hatano, T. Yamazato, and M. Katayama, “Automotive
ultrasonic array emitter for short-range targets detection,”
IEEE international symposium on wireless communication
systems, pp. 355–359, Sep. 2007.
[5] V. Ramadurai and M. L. Sichitiu, “Localization in wireless
sensor networks: A probabilistic approach,” Proceedings of
the International Conference on Wireless Networks, ICWN
’03, pp. 275–281, June 2003.
[6] A. Boukerche, H. Oliveira, E. Nakamura, and A. Loureiro,
“Localization systems for wireless sensor networks,” Wireless
Communications, IEEE, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 6 –12, dec. 2007.
[7] N. B. Priyantha, A. K. Miu, H. Balakrishnan, and S. Teller,
“The cricket compass for context-aware mobile applications,”
Proceedings of the 7th annual international conference on
Mobile computing and networking, pp. 1–14, July 2001.
[8] S. Simic and S. S. Sastry, “Distributed localization in wireless
ad hoc networks,” no. UCB/ERL M02/26, 2002.
[9] D. Niculescu and B. Nath, “Ad hoc positioning system (aps)
using aoa,” INFOCOM 2003. Twenty-Second Annual Joint
Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications.
IEEE Societies, vol. 3, pp. 1734–1743, April 2003.
[10] Y. Chengyou, X. Shanjia, and W. Dongjin, “Location accuracy
of multistatic radars (TRn) based on ranging information,”
CIE International Conference of Radar, pp. 34–38, oct. 1996.
[11] R. Mende, “A multifunctional automotive short range radar
system,” German Radar Symposium 2000, Oct. 2000.
[12] A. Hoess, H. Rohling, W. Hosp, R. Doerﬂer, and M. Brandt,
“Multistatic 77GHz radar network for automotive applica-
tions,” ITS World congress 2003, Nov. 2003.
[13] H. Hatano, T. Yamazato, H. Okada, and M. Katayama, “Target
position estimation using MMSE for UWB IPCP receiver,”
The 5th international conference on intelligent transportation
systems telecommunication, no. 45-3963283501, Jun. 2005.
[14] D. Oprisan and H. Rohling, “Tracking system for automotive
radar networks,” RADAR 2002, pp. 339–343, Oct. 2002.
[15] M. Klotz and H. Rohling, “24 GHz radar sensors for automo-
tive applications,” International Conference on Microwaves,
Radar and Wireless Communications, vol. 1, pp. 359–362,
Sep. 2000.
[16] H. Hatano, T. Yamazato, H. Okada, and M. Katayama, “A
simple estimator of multiple target positions for automotive
short range radar networks,” IEEE vehicular technology con-
ference 2007-spring, pp. 2511–2515, Apr. 2007.
[17] M. E. Russell, C. A. Drubin, A. S. Marinilli, W. G. Wooding-
ton, and M. J. D. Checcolo, “Integrated automotive sensors,”
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques, vol. 50,
no. 3, pp. 674–677, Mar. 2002.
[18] Murata
Manufacturing
Co.,
Ltd.,
“Ul-
trasonic
sensor
application
manual,”
http://www.murata.com/products/catalog/pdf/s15e.pdf,
retrieved: Jan. 2012.

