Transmitter Based Look-Up Tables for Optical Wireless IR-UWB Systems 
 
Mohammed Al-Olofi, Andreas Waadt, Guido H. Bruck, and Peter Jung  
Department of Communication Technologies  
University of Duisburg-Essen  
Duisburg, Germany  
Email: info@kommunikationstechnik.org  
 
 
Abstract—This paper investigates a design for impulse radio 
ultra-wideband communication over optical wireless link using 
optical front-ends. The migration between IR-UWB and 
optical wireless communications introduces a solution for radio 
spectrum congestion and limited IR-UWB transmission power 
governed by spectrum mask. Nevertheless, the nonlinear 
effects of light emitting diodes (LED) limit the power dynamic 
range that modulates signal pulses. In this work, a transmitter 
based digital look-up table (LUT) is proposed. This transmitter 
allows of storing pulse samples values in form of binary 
codewords. The LUT’s binary output switches LEDs groups 
and hence controls transmission power. This parallel switching 
enables power-efficient optical representation of pulses and 
avoids the nonlinear effects caused by LED operation 
characteristics. The utilization of LUT excludes the necessity of 
digital to analog converter (DAC) or transconductance 
amplifier (TCA) employed in common optical transmitters to 
perform the electrical-optical conversion. The selection of 
codeword length and LUT size are done based the BER 
performance generated by computer simulations. Moreover, 
the channel effects in presence of line of sight (LOS) and 
diffuse links are simulated and analyzed. The system 
simulations are described for a mobile user in indoor office 
environment. The BER performances for different mobility 
scenarios will be discussed. 
Keywords-Hybrid Optical/Radio systems, IR-UWB, LUT, 
OWC. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The optical wireless communications (OWC) is an 
alternative technology to radio communications, which 
suffers from congested frequency bands as the number of 
mobile users increased significantly. The OWC offers a 
broad unlicensed free spectrum that enables high data rate, 
low cost, high speed, and ease of development systems. 
These advantages make the optical solution attractive for 
short range communications applications, such as smart 
homes, smart offices, wireless LANs, and sensor networks.  
Currently, the ultra-wideband systems are the best 
technology choice for short range communication, since they 
offer a large bandwidth (3.1-10.6 GHz), high speed, immune 
to multipath fading, multi access capabilities, and low cost 
transceivers. The fractional bandwidth of UWB is defined by 
FCC as a signal with 20% of its center frequency or 
500 MHz bandwidth, when the center frequency is above 
6 GHz with a limited power levels regulated by authorities. 
The frequency and power regulations are different from 
region to region, which make the standardization of such 
technology a difficult task. Also, the different emission 
power levels increase the interference levels from UWB 
devices on other wireless devices operates in the same 
frequency band.  
On other hand and a solution to these limitations, the 
optical link is a promising media for short range wireless 
communications since its offer an unlicensed free spectrum. 
The evaluations of using an optical media in IR-UWB 
systems will overcame the limitations in emission power and 
bandwidth and/or introduce a new radio/optical IR-UWB 
system that exploit the advantages of both configurations. In 
[1], we had proposed a design for optical IR-UWB system 
design to solve the problem of radio interference and enlarge 
the transmission power and frequency spectrum. However, 
the current optical sources introduce a low modulation 
bandwidth, which does not exceed 20 MHz in case of using 
LEDs and hence limit the data rate and available broadband 
spectrum. This limitation is caused by the characteristics of 
LEDs available in the market, which have a slow response to 
the feeding current. The 3dB frequency and hence the 
modulation bandwidth depends on minority carrier lifetime, 
which define the rise and fall time of LED. Nevertheless, a 
higher frequency modulation bandwidth LEDs in the range 
of 200–300 MHz was proposed in [2]. In this literature, a 
GaN-based blue LED with a higher optical output power of 
1.6 mW at bias current of 35 mA and a high electrical-to-
optical 3dB bandwidth of 225.4 MHz was reported. These 
LEDs have a smaller chip size and exhibited a lower optical 
output power. Commonly, a lot of solid state electronics 
researches focus on LED designed for OWC applications, 
which gives a sign that we will see high-speed low-cost 
LEDs in the next decade.  
Another limitation factor in optical wireless transmitters 
based LED is the nonlinearity caused by thermal aspects. 
The LED has a threshold voltage, which is the minimum 
voltage to flow current across the LED and light emission. 
Below this voltage, the LED operate in cut-off region and 
above it, the current is increased exponentially as well as the 
light intensity toward saturation region. The LED current 
versus light power relation is nonlinear due to the thermal 
characteristic and the nonlinear transition into saturation 
region. This nonlinearity causes a drop in electrical to optical 
conversion and affects the modulated baseband signal 
represented by light intensity and hence, restricts the 
dynamic range and power transmission of optical transmitter. 
In conventional optical transmitter, a pre-distortion equalizer 
and post-equalization methods are used to decrease the signal 
distortion [3].  
45
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In RF communication system, a similar nonlinear effect 
was addressed. The power amplifier is a main source of 
nonlinearity when it operates near the saturation region 
causing a distortion in signal phase and amplitude [4]. 
Several linearization techniques are proposed to linearize the 
PA operation and increase the power efficiency such as, 
adaptive predistortion using LUT [5][6]. The LUT is an 
array of values, which are calculated based on linearization 
function needed to scale the amplitude and phase of the input 
signal and stored in memory. The creation of the LUT is 
done in a calibration mode. However, the updating could be 
done in real time to adjust to changing PA characteristics, 
such as a change in the temperature. For example, a cartesian 
LUT was proposed in [7] to eliminate the need for cartesian-
to-polar conversion and modulator correction and reduces 
the power consumption of feedback path by allowing the use 
of low-speed low-SNR ADCs. In optical wireless systems, a 
look-up table coding method has been proposed to convert 
the information bits into the M-PPM codewords using a 
specially designed coding table. The utilization of M-PPM 
with forward correcting coding method increases system 
performance through constant power transmission. However, 
an exhaustive search using computer optimization method 
had to be done to find a subset of M-PPM codewords that 
satisfies the minimum hamming distance that defined 
according to system environment and the system purpose [8].   
The OWC conventional transmitters employ DAC to 
transform the data bits into voltage and TCA to drive the 
optical source. The literature in [3] introduced a discrete 
power level stepping optical wireless OFDM transmitter, 
which consists of several LEDs groups that emit speciﬁc 
stepped optical intensities using switches driven by input 
data. This transmitter improves the system performance and 
reduces power consumption since DAC and TCA are no 
longer needs. This idea can be extended in our system to 
transmit an optical version of IR-UWB pulses.  
In this paper, the employment of optical media to 
transmit a signal designed for IR-UWB radio system is 
investigated. To reach this goal, the electrical to optical 
conversion of pulse shapes using LUT is proposed. The 
proposed transmitter omits the DAC and quantization 
process needed for each pulse transmission as proposed in 
[1]. For a given modulation scheme, the signal pulse is stored 
in LUT and hence there is no need to repeat the same steps to 
convert the electrical Gaussian pulse to optical power. Also, 
the BER performance related to the size of LUT and 
quantization bit depth are presented. The IR-UWB structure 
of transmitter and receiver are discussed to elaborate system 
modification in seeks of optical link utilization. Moreover, 
the simulation of system is carried out to show the BER 
performance.  
The reminder of the paper is organized as follows. In 
Section II, the system design describes the optical transmitter 
operation and quantization effects are presented. In Section 
III, the design of optical transmitter based LUT is introduced 
and in Section IV the system model including the optical 
channel impulse response regarding the environment and 
SNR are explained and analyzed. The system simulation is 
introduced and the results are discussed in Section V. 
Finally, Section VI concludes the paper. 
II. 
 SYSTEM DESIGN 
Optical wireless systems consist of transmitter and 
receiver that employ optical parts mounted in front-ends as 
shown in Fig. 1. The transmitter modulate data information 
using one of single modulation schemes such as, (OOK, 
PAM, PPM, etc.) or multi modulation schemes such as, 
(OFDM, MPPM, M-PAM). These modulated symbols 
convert to analog signal that control the intensity of light 
emitted from an optical source such as LED or LD. The LD 
is preferred than LED, since it provides higher power, larger 
bandwidth, and linear electrical to optical characteristics at 
expense of eye safety limitation and higher cost. In the same 
manner, LEDs are low cost, higher lamination but limited 
bandwidth and suffer from nonlinearities of optical to 
electrical conversion characteristics. Table I summarizes the 
comparison of the two sources. Consequently, the receiver 
detects the optical light impinging on the surface and 
converts it to electrical current. Normally, the detector is p-
intrinsic-n (PIN) photodiode or avalanche photodiode 
(APD). After the detector, low pass filter and amplifier are 
used to remove the higher frequency components and 
amplify the signal.  
In the same manner, the IR-UWB transmitter sends the 
modulated symbol on a stream of short pulses shaped by 
pulse shape filter without carrier. One of modulation 
schemes (OOK, PPM, PAM, PSK, etc.) can be performed. 
After that, a Gaussian pulse or one of its derivatives is used 
to represent the modulated symbol. Also, multiple access 
methods such as, time hopping (TH) and direct sequence 
(DS) might be used along with modulation to increase the 
symbol power and range as well as enables multiple users. 
At the receiver, a correlation receiver or rake receiver 
employs to correlate signal shape with a local generated 
replica of pulse and hence obtain the detected bit using a 
decision rule. 
To gain the benefits of these two systems, a modified IR-
UWB over optical wireless links was proposed in [1]. This 
section illustrates the structure of system and introduces a 
solution for LEDs nonlinear effects. 
 
Figure 1.  Optical IR-UWB system 
46
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
COMPARISON OF LED AND LD 
TABLE I. 
Characteristics 
LED 
LD 
Output power 
Low 
High 
Modulation bandwidth 
10x-100x MHz 
10x-100x GHz 
Beam 
Broad 
Narrow 
Coherence 
Noncoherent 
Coherent 
Cost 
Low 
High 
Harmonic distortion 
High 
Less 
 
A. Transmitter Design 
In a symbol time 𝑇𝑠, every data symbol is transmitted in 
form of 𝑁𝑓 frames with frame duration 𝑇𝑓. In each frame, the 
information bits are modulated on short pulses 𝑝(𝑡) with 
pulse width 𝑇𝑝 and 𝑇𝑝 ≪ 𝑇𝑓. The transmitter in Fig. 1 uses 
Pulse Position Modulation (PPM) with Gaussian shape 
pulse. The transmitted signal is represented as: 
 
𝑥(𝑡) = 𝑝(𝑡 − 𝑘𝑇𝑠 − 𝑎𝑘𝜀) 
(1) 
In this modulation scheme, the transmitted pulse 𝑝(𝑡)  is 
delayed for  𝜀 time shift, when the transmitted bit is one. In 
case of zero bits, the transmitter applies no delay to pulses. 
After signal modulation, the pulses enter pulse shaper that 
converts UWB pulses to be adequate for optical 
transmission. To transmit IR-UWB pulses over optical 
wireless link, the feed signal operates LED should be 
positive and above bias level. This means that any negative 
amplitude will bias light source reversely. Unfortunately, 
most of IR-UWB pulses are bipolar with negative and 
positive amplitudes. Nevertheless, the bipolar signal can be 
converted to unipolar by adding certain DC-bias that 
provides signal positivity as proposed in [1]. Although, large 
DC-bias increases signal power for a given BER while small 
DC-bias increases clipping noise causing signal distortion. 
Therefore, selection of DC-bias is tradeoff between signal 
power and clipping noise. 
 
B. Optical pulse shaping 
The signal pulse 𝑝(𝑡) is used to drive the LED by convert 
it to a set of quantized current levels as shown in Fig. 2. The 
pulse is quantized to 𝐿 current level and every level is 
mapped to a defined brightness level. The current levels 
represent the intensity power should be non-negative to 
ensure that LED is not reversely biased. 
 
𝐼(𝑡) = 𝐼0 + 𝑝(𝑡) 
(2) 
A dc-bias is chosen to boost the negative part of pulse in 
order to keep the LED in the ‘ON’ state and illuminance a 
10% of full brightness. The constant forward current (𝐼0) will  
 
Figure 2.  Quantization of the monocycle pulse. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Efffects of quaintazition on BER performance. 
keep LED operating even if the pulse time end and hence the 
LED remains working in the active region. Consequently, 
the modulation bandwidth should be increased since the 
LED switching times is minimized. 
To create a different emission power according to current 
levels, we suggest the white-LED lnGaN/GaN to transmit the 
optical pulses. This white-LED as proposed in [9] shows that 
emission power in the blue spectrum portion is increased 
relative to the injected current. Nevertheless, a blue filter at 
the receiver front-end should be used to gain the blue 
spectrum power.  
C. Quantization effects 
The quantization of pulse plays important factor in 
system performance. The resolution of quantization defined 
by number of bits used to represent the quantization levels. 
Fig. 3 shows the BER performance of system employs a 
quantized pulse 𝑝𝑜(𝑡) at different bit resolution. The effect 
of channel is neglected to distingue the quantization effects 
and therefore, only optical noise is considered as additive 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
x 10
-8
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Time [s]
Normailzed Power
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
10
-6
10
-5
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
10⋅log10(Eb/N0)/[dB]
BER
 
 
BER, CR
BER,2-bit
BER, 3-bit
BER, 5-bit
BER, AWGN
47
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

white Gaussian noise (AWGN). The simulation shows BER 
of Optical system at resolution of 2-bit, 3-bit, 5-bit, and 
analog signal (computer resolution). The result in Fig. 3 
shows that every incremental bit reduces BER. After 5-bit, 
the error rate is close to that simulated with analog signal. 
In the proposed transmitter in [1], the modulation is 
performed on bit level using PPM and IM is used to optically 
represent the signal shape in order to control the optical 
power derived by input current. However, this operation has 
to be carried out each time, which is power dissipative and 
time consume. Thus, we introduce a solution by storing the 
pulse samples values as binary codewords using LUT. 
III. 
LOOK-UP TABLE TRANSMITTER 
 In this section, a look-up table is proposed to digitally 
store the quantized pulse in form of binary codewords that 
represents samples values. This design aims to increase the 
LED dynamic range and decrease the nonlinearities caused 
by transition to saturation region. Moreover, the transmitter 
complexity and electrical power consumption are expected to 
be minimized.  
A. Transmitter structure 
The proposed transmitter based LUT in Fig. 4 consists of 
PPM modulator, counter, and LUT connected to LED groups 
via resistors and switches. The LUT contains a number of 
codewords equal to pulse samples. The LUT input is 
connected to counter output, which address the LUT index. 
The counter is activated upon receiving modulated unit pulse 
from modulator. The modulator modulates zero bits as unit 
pulse with zero delay. Otherwise, the modulator shifts unit 
pulse by delay time 𝜀. The counter feeds LUT with address 
of codeword that controls the total optical power of LEDs 
groups. The number of groups is defined by bit resolution 
specified in LUT design phase as will be discussed in the 
next subsection.  
The output of LUT is digital binary vector that switch 
each group of LEDs (On/Off) based on the state of vector 
element (0/1). Also, each of these groups input current is 
scaled by a resistor 𝑅𝑁 to emit different power levels 𝑃𝑁. 
Each group consists of number of LEDs 𝑁𝐿𝐿𝐿 to increase the 
optical power. The first group 𝐷1 connected to most 
significant bit (MSB) and emits a maximum intensity power 
𝑃0 while 𝐷1 emit half of 𝑃0  and so on. The total emitted 
power is summation of power emitted by all active groups. 
𝑃𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑡 = 𝑁𝐿𝐿𝐿 ෍ 𝑃𝑛
𝑁
𝑛=1
 
(3) 
𝑃𝑛 = 𝑃𝑚𝑡𝑚
2𝑛−1 
(4) 
For example, the codeword (10100) activates the first and 
third LED groups, while second; fourth and fifth remain in 
off state. The total optical power calculated using (3) and (4). 
R0
 RN
 R1
 R2
a1
1
a2
2
3
a3
 n
 an
 b0
 b1
 b2
 bN
 0
 1
0
 0
LUT
D0
D1
 D2
 SN
S0
S1
 S2
 DN
Counter
Modulator
Data 
source
 
Figure 4.  Optical IR-UWB transmitter based LUT. 
B. Design of LUT 
The LUT is used to store samples values as binary 
codewords. Fortunately, most of pulse shapes are symmetric, 
which minimize the LUT size to be adequate for only half of 
the pulse. This LUT design process is done in offline mode 
using computer simulations. However, a recalibration 
mechanism can be adopted to mitigate optical power 
nonlinearities and fluctuations as explained in next 
subsection. A digital representation of 5-bit quantized 
Gaussian pulse consists of 41 samples is sufficient to 
maintain a good performance as shown in Fig. 3. Table II 
illustrates a 5-bit binary codewords for half Gaussian pulse 
used in IR-UWB systems. The codeword length is optimized 
based on quantization bit depth that gives minimum SNR for 
a given BER. For example, a 5-bit codeword requires 
slightly less SNR compared to a 4-bit for BER of 10-4 at 
expense of large codeword length and hence LUT size that is 
determined by number of bits and number of samples.  
Although, the 4-bit codeword LUT transmitter needs four 
groups of LEDs and hence draws less power than 5-bit 
transmitter. The tradeoff between power consumption, size, 
and BER performance should be considered based on 
application. Also, several parameters should be taken in 
account in order to gain best performance such as, switching 
speed, resistors values, and maximum allowable LED input 
current, which are not discussed in this work. 
C. LED Nonlinear effects 
As mentioned in Section I, the LED suffers from limited 
dynamic range and nonlinear effects. For most of LEDs, the 
V-I curve has a limited linear range that can be used to 
modulate the signal power. This range can be extended 
further for a small range using predistortion techniques. 
However, the gain from this extension is not worthwhile, 
since only a small portion is achieved before the LED 
reaches the maximum allowable AC/pulsed current. In the 
proposed transmitter, the LED input current is fixed and 
scaled by resistors to keep LED operating in the linear region 
and controlling the total optical power by parallel switching 
of LEDs groups rather than direct current-power relation. 
However, the LED thermal behavior decreases the power 
conversion efficiency causing a drop in light intensity. To 
mitigate the thermal effects, the LUT should be recalibrated 
in the real-time to maintain constant optical power.  
48
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
FIVE-BIT BINARY CODE REPRESENTATION OF GAUSSIAN 
TABLE II. 
PULSE. 
Counter  
Codeword 
1 
01111 
2 
01111 
3 
01111 
4 
01110 
5 
01110 
6 
01101 
7 
01100 
8 
01011 
9 
01010 
10 
01001 
11 
01000 
12 
01001 
13 
01001 
14 
01011 
15 
01110 
16 
10001 
17 
10101 
18 
11001 
19 
11101 
20 
11111 
 
The emitted optical power is generated according to digital 
codewords, and hence can be digitally adjusted or corrected 
to emit more or less power. This can be done by adding one 
more bin to the output of LUT connected to an extra LED 
group for intensity correction. This additive group 
compensates the optical power in case of power fluctuations 
using real-time measurements for the emitted power via 
optical sensor. The data is sent back through feedback as a 
digital codeword to compare it with the current values. 
Moreover, the LUT values can be also updated based on the 
measurements to obtain more power efficiency. As a result, 
the nonlinear effect from LED whether thermal or electrical 
can be mitigated and constant optical power will be 
achieved.  
IV. 
SYSTEM MODEL  
For any wireless communication system, the multipath 
channel differentiates the transmitted and received signal. 
The path loss and dispersion determines the system design 
parameters. This section describes the modeling of optical 
wireless system in indoor environment. A simulation of 
channel impulse response and SNR in an office room will be 
discussed. Also, the receiver design for the proposed system 
including the optical front-end will be presented.  
A. Optical Multipath Channel 
The optical multipath channel is characterized by an 
impulse response ℎ(𝑡), which describes the propagation of 
optical signal between the transmitter and receiver. The 
propagation pattern is approximated by lambertian radiation 
pattern, which state that the light intensity emitted from a 
source has a cosine dependence on the angle of emission 
with respect to the surface normal [10][11]. The luminous 
intensity in angle 𝜙 is given by 
 
𝐼(𝜙) = 𝐼(0)𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑚(𝜙) 
(5) 
where ( )
I 0
is the center luminous intensity of the LED and 
𝜙 is the angle of irradiance, m is the order of lambertian 
emission and is given by the semi angle at half illuminance 
of the LED 𝜙1/2 as 
 
𝑚 =
−ln (2)
ln൫cos 𝜙1/2൯ 
(6) 
and the horizontal illuminance 𝐼ℎ𝑜𝑜 at a point (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) on the 
working plane is defined as 
𝐼ℎ𝑜𝑜(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) = 𝐼(0)𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑚(𝜙)
𝑑2 cos(𝜓)  
(7) 
where 𝑑 is the distance between the transmitter and receiver 
and 𝜓 is the angle of incidence. 
In an office room environment, the light arrive receiver 
directly (LOS link) or after number of reflections (diffuse 
link). The impulse response at zero reflection is given as: 
ℎ𝑡𝑜𝑠 = 𝐴𝑜(𝑚 + 1)
2𝜋𝑑2
𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑚(𝜙)𝑇𝑠(𝜓)𝑔(𝜓)
∙ cos(𝜓)𝛿 ൬𝑡 − 𝑑
𝑐൰ . 0 ≤ 𝜓 ≤ 𝜓𝑐𝑜𝑛 
(8) 
where 𝑇𝑠(𝜓) is the filter transmission, 𝑔(𝜓)and 𝜓𝑐𝑜𝑛are the 
concentrator gain and field of view (FOV), respectively. The 
gain of the optical concentrator at the receiver is defined by: 
𝑔(𝜓) = ቐ
𝑛2
sin2𝜓𝑐𝑜𝑛
,
0 ≤ 𝜓 ≤ 𝜓𝑐𝑜𝑛
0,                    0 ≥ 𝜓𝑐𝑜𝑛  
 
(9) 
where 𝑛 is the refractive index. To model the reflections, 
every wall is partitioned to a number of small areas. Each 
one acts as new lambertian source when light incident on it. 
The impulse for the first reflection is given by: 
49
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑓(𝑡) =
⎩
⎪⎪
⎨
⎪⎪
⎧𝐴𝑜(𝑚 + 1)
2(𝜋𝑑1𝑑2)2  𝜌 𝐴𝑤𝑡𝑡𝑡 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑚(𝜙𝑜) cos(𝜓𝑜) 
cos(𝛼𝑖𝑜) cos(𝛽𝑖𝑜) 𝑇𝑠(𝜓) 𝑔(𝜓𝑜)            
𝛿 ൬𝑡 − 𝑑1 + 𝑑2
𝑐
൰ ,          0 ≤ 𝜓𝑜 ≤ 𝜓𝑐𝑜𝑛
 
0,                                         𝜓𝑜 ≥ 𝜓𝑐𝑜𝑛 
 
(10) 
where 𝑑1 and 𝑑2 are the distances between the LED and a 
reflective point, and between a reflective point and a receiver 
surface, 𝜌 is the reflectance factor, 𝐴𝑤𝑡𝑡𝑡 is a reflective area. 
The angles 𝛼𝑖𝑜  and 𝛽𝑖𝑜  represent angle of incidence to a 
reflective point and angle of irradiance to a receiver, 
respectively, 𝜙𝑜 and 𝜓𝑜 are the angle of irradiance from LED 
to a reflective point and angle of incidence from reflective 
point to a receiver.  
The optical channel is characterized by the room 
dimensions, reflectance indices of walls, and transmitter and 
receiver orientation. Table III describes the parameters used 
to simulate the channel impulse response. The optical 
impulse response is used to calculate the channel gain, which 
is important to estimate the influence of channel on the 
received power. The power contained in a LOS component 
ℎ𝑡𝑜𝑠  is larger than the power contained in first reflection 
components ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑓 as shown in Fig.  5. The long distance and 
reflection from the surfaces introduce power loss and longer 
delay. The received power in NLOS case can be calculated 
as sum of LOS and NLOS pathlosses multiplied by 
transmission power. The received power can be expressed as  
                 𝑝𝑜 = ൫𝑝𝑡𝐻𝑡𝑜𝑠(0) + ∫ 𝑝𝑡𝐻𝑜𝑟𝑓(0)൯  
(11) 
where 𝑝𝑡 represents transmitted power, and 𝐻𝑡𝑜𝑠(0), 𝐻𝑜𝑟𝑓(0) 
represent power in direct and reflected paths, respectively. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Optical channel impulse response. 
Another important future is the root mean squared (RMS) 
delay, which describes how much delay added by the 
channel. A large delay led to ISI, which make the detection 
of transmitted signal complicated. The RMS delay calculated 
from the channel impulse response as 
𝜏𝑜𝑚𝑠 = ඨ
(𝑡 − 𝜏0)2ℎ2(𝑡)𝑑𝑡
∫ ℎ2(𝑡)𝑑𝑡
 
(12) 
 
where 𝜏0 is mean delay time defined by: 
𝜏0 = ∫ 𝑡 ℎ2(𝑡)𝑑𝑡
∫  ℎ2(𝑡)𝑑𝑡  
(13) 
Using equations (12), (13) and parameters in Table III, 
RMS delay time can be calculated in case of LOS and 
NLOS channel as shown in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7. This 
parameter determines the upper bound of transmission rate. 
For the proposed system, the symbol time is more than the 
simulated RMS delay time in case of LOS scenario. Hence, 
equalization stage is not necessary. 
 
THE CHANNEL PARAMETERS. 
TABLE III. 
 
Parameter 
Value 
Room 
Room size 
5×5×3 m3 
ρwall 
0.8 
Transmitter 
Location 
(2.5, 2.5, 3) 
M 
1 
Elevation 
-90° 
Azimuth 
0° 
Power 
1 
Receiver 
Location 
(0.5,1,0) 
Ar 
1 cm2 
FOV 
60° 
Elevation 
90° 
Azimuth 
0° 
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
τ [ns]
  h(τ) [s-1]
 
 
 
50
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 6.  RMS delay for LOS configuration. 
 
Figure 7.  RMS delay for  NLOS configuration 
B. SNR 
In optical systems, SNR is defined by received power 𝑝𝑜, 
photodiode responsivity [A/W], and noise variances of the 
shot noise 𝜎𝑠ℎ
2  and thermal noise 𝜎𝑡ℎ
2  as [12] 
𝑆𝑁𝑅 =
(𝑅𝑝𝑜)2
(𝜎𝑠ℎ
2 + 𝜎𝑡ℎ
2 ) 
(14) 
The noise sources are classified into two types namely 
shot noise and thermal noise. The shot noise is a time-
varying process generated by external light sources like 
background noise and quantum noise or internal source as 
intensity radiation, dark noise and excess noise. These 
sources are independent Poisson random variables and their 
photoelectron emission follows the distribution of Poisson 
distribution with mean equal to the sum of the individual 
processes. The variance of any shot noise process associated 
with photodetection is represented as [12]: 
 
𝜎𝑠ℎ
2 = 2𝑞𝑞〈𝑖〉 
(15) 
where 𝑞  is the electronic charge, and 𝑞 is the equivalent 
bandwidth, and 〈𝑖〉 is the mean current generated by 〈𝑛〉 
electron. However, if the photoelectron count is large, the 
generated signal current probability distribution can be 
approximated as Gaussian process [12]. 
 
𝑝(𝑖) =
1
ඥ2𝜋𝜎𝑠ℎ
2 𝑒𝑥𝑝 ቆ
[𝑖 − 〈𝑖〉]2
2𝜎𝑠ℎ
2
ቇ 
(16) 
In addition to the shot noise, the thermal noise caused by 
thermal fluctuation of electrons in receiver circuit generates a 
random current, which is modeled as Gaussian process has a 
zero mean and its variance described as 
 
𝜎𝑡ℎ
2 = 4𝜅𝑇𝑘𝑞
𝑅𝐿
 
(17) 
where 𝜅 is Boltzmann’s constant, 𝑇𝑘 is absolute temperature, 
and 𝑅𝐿 is the equivalent resistance. The total generated 
current probability distribution of thermal noise and shot 
noise can be represented as in [12] 
 
𝑝(𝑖) =
1
ඥ2𝜋[𝜎𝑠ℎ
2 + 𝜎𝑡ℎ
2 ]
𝑒𝑥𝑝 ቆ
[𝑖 − 〈𝑖〉]2
2[𝜎𝑠ℎ
2 + 𝜎𝑡ℎ
2 ]ቇ 
(18) 
To evaluate channel variations, the room is partitioned to 
small areas equal to 225. The channel power is simulated 
using parameters in Table III. The received power in any 
place in room of size (5m×5m×3m) is estimated as shown in 
Fig. 8. The minimum received power is -2.3dBm at corners 
while maximum received power reaches 2.6dBm in room 
center. The utilization of large number of LEDs provides 
high received power that is required for good quality 
communications. However, multiple sources results in path 
difference that leads to ISI at the receiver and degrade the 
performance [13].  
The received power needed to achieve a BER of 10-6 in 
PPM modulation is to be calculated as [13]: 
 
𝑞𝐵𝑅 = 𝑄൫√𝑆𝑁𝑅൯ 
(19) 
As shown in Fig. 9, the range of SNR is between 11dB and 
40dB for a total power summation of LOS path and NLOS 
paths. The noise parameters required to calculate shot noise 
and thermal noise are illustrated in [13]. The SNR is 
obtained using received power shown in Fig. 8 and 
calculated noise power. The proposed system can achieved 
the required low data rate at minimum data errors. In absence 
of LOS power, the received power is reduced dramatically.  
 
-2
-1
0
1
2
-2
-1
0
1
2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
 X[m]
 Y[m]
τrms (ns)
-2
-1
0
1
2
-2
-1
0
1
2
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
 X[m]
 Y[m]
τrms (ns)
51
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 8.  Received optical power. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Simulation of SNR. 
C. Receiver Design 
The receiver of optical wireless system shown in Fig. 10 
is based mainly on photodiode (PD) employing the direct 
detection. The detector area and the orientation play 
important role in the receiver design and performance. The 
PD generates an output photocurrent relative to the incident 
light power pinging on the surface, i.e., the changes 
produced in intensity modulation at the transmitter are 
detected by direct detection at the receiver. The 
photocurrents induced by PD form a replica of the 
transmitted pulse. At the receiver front-end, the received 
signal is defined as 
  
𝑦(𝑡) = 𝑅 𝐼(𝑡) ∗ ℎ(𝑡) + 𝑛(𝑡) 
(20) 
The transmitted current signal 𝐼(𝑡) is convoluted with optical 
multipath channel ℎ(𝑡), and added to AWGN  𝑛(𝑡). After 
conversion of optical signal to electrical signal in receiver, 
the correlation between the mask of transmitted pulse and the 
Rx Optical
signal
Photo-
detector
Pulse
corrlation.
Pulse
restore.
template
 decsion
 r(t)
m(t)
 I(t)
Z
 
Figure 10.  Optical IR-UWB Receiver 
received signal is performed as: 
 
𝑚(𝑡) = 𝐼(𝑡 − 𝜏 − 𝑘𝑇𝑠) − 𝐼(𝑡 − 𝜏 − 𝑘𝑇𝑠 − 𝜀) 
𝑍 = න
𝑦(𝑡)𝑚(𝑡)𝑑𝑡
𝑇𝑠+𝜏
𝜏
 
(21) 
 
The detector compares the power of correlation to a 
threshold and decides whether the received bit is ‘0’ or ‘1’ 
[14]. 
 
𝑎ො = ൜𝑍 > 0,
𝑎ො = 0 
𝑍 < 0,         𝑎ො = 1   
(22) 
 
V. 
SIMULATION AND RESULTS 
In this section, we simulate system design presented in 
[1] and the proposed system using transmitter based LUT. 
Both systems are simulated using Monte Carlo simulation in 
Matlab program.  
The system design represented in Fig. 1 is simulated 
using MATLAB program. In this design, the transmitter 
based LUT method substitutes the former one presented in 
[1]. The Monte Carlo simulations were carried out to 
generate the bit-error-ratio (BER) versus 𝐵𝑏/𝑁0 results. The 
information bits are modulated by 2-PPM modulator with 
symbol time  𝑇𝑠 = 240𝑛𝑐.  The sampling frequency 𝑓𝑐 =
1𝐺𝐻𝑧 and shift time 𝜀 = 120𝑛𝑐, 𝑁𝑓 = 1. The monocycle 
Gaussian pulse is used with width 𝑇𝑝 = 41𝑛𝑐. The pulse 
samples are quantized to 𝐿 = 32 current levels and stored in 
LUT as binary codeword. These code words drive five LED 
groups each consists of eight LEDs. Each of these groups 
emits a different power level that contributes in evaluation of 
the intended pulse sample value as explained earlier. The 
optical channel impulse response in Fig. 5 is simulated in a 
room with dimensions of (5m×5m×3m) and a fixed 
transmitter and receiver are assumed. The optical pulse is 
convolved with the channel and added to the noise. 
 On the receiver side, the photodiode is percepts the 
incident light and converts it into current. We assume that 
the detector responsivity 𝑅 equal to one. The received pulse 
constructed from current levels is correlated with the mask of 
transmitted pulse and the peak power is compared to the 
threshold in time window. This system is assumed to be 
synchronized and no equalization stage is performed. 
In OWC systems, a unit rectangular pulse is used to 
transmit the power of modulated binary bits with duration 
52
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

𝑇𝑠 as proposed in [15][16]. In Fig. 11, the same system 
design was simulated using rectangular pulse and monocycle 
pulse to compare the BER performances of using the shaped 
pulse used for wireless system and rectangular pulse used in 
OWC systems. Fig. 11 shows that the BER for both signals 
are equal because of power direct detection, which is evident 
that other pulses shape could be used without loss of 
performances. Although rectangular pulse evaluation is 
simpler than Gaussian pulse, the later introduces capability 
for utilizing advantages of a designed UWB radio wireless 
system communicating on optical link in sensitive 
environments. Nevertheless, effects of LEDs nonlinearities 
and shot noise are expect to disfigurement the transmitted 
Gaussian pulse at transmitter and receiver front-ends. These 
effects will be studied experimentally in the future work to 
find the performance degradation for the proposed design. 
Fig. 12 compares the BER performance of the proposed 
systems operate on LOS optical wireless channel with that 
on diffuse channel in the absence of LOS link. The direct 
path between transmitter and receiver delivers higher power 
than paths reach the PD after reflections. This explains why 
the BER in the presence of LOS channel is lower than that in 
diffuse channel by ~2dB. Also, the influences of optical 
wireless channel gain and delay on the proposed system 
increase the BER by ~4dB compared to the AWGN bound. 
The second simulation determines BER performances for 
the proposed design in case of channel variation during data 
transmission. In this case, the mobile user changes her/her 
location inside office environment with dimensions listed in 
Table III. Therefore, we simulate channel impulse responses 
for 2500 points that represent possible receiver’s location in 
X-Y plane. The channel is simulated between fixed 
transmitter and receiver locations. 
 
Figure 11.  BER of the system with rectangular and Gaussian Pulses. 
 
 
Figure 12.  BER of the system with LOS and diffuse link configurations 
Moreover, we have distinguished two scenarios for each 
observation. First, the LOS link is not blocked by obstacles 
and both of direct radiation and reflected radiations are 
present. In the second scenario, NLOS link was established 
and only reflected radiation is received regardless receiver’s 
position. In Fig. 13 and Fig. 14, the channel impulse 
responses are depicted. As seen from figures, the channels in 
second scenario experiences a larger pathloss than in first 
scenario due to diffusion phenomena in NLOS case and 
absence of LOS power contribution, which contain largest 
portion of received signal. Nevertheless, the system 
simulation for first scenario is done over 2500 channels.  We 
assume that a channel response changes once within frame 
time duration 𝑇𝑠 = 240𝑛𝑐. The user’s location number is 
determined as uniform random variable. 
 
Figure 13.  Channel impulse responses for LOS and NLOS links. 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
10
-6
10
-5
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
10⋅log10(Eb/N0)/[dB]
BER
 
 
 
BER, Rectangular
BER, Gaussian
BER, AWGN
AWGN,bound
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
10
-6
10
-5
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
10⋅log10(Eb/N0)/[dB]
BER
 
 
 
BER, channel LOS
BER, channel diffuse
BER, AWGN
AWGN,bound
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
1
2
3
4
5
6 x 10
-6
 τ (ns)
h(τ)
53
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 14.  Channel impulse responses for NLOS links 
.  
 
Fig. 15 shows system’s BER under channel response 
composed of LOS and NLOS radiations. Likewise, the 
system is simulated for second scenario where LOS link is 
shadowed over transmission time. Fig. 15 shows larger BER 
than presented by first scenario due to larger channel 
pathloss and delay. A third case is simulated, when channel 
changes over 5000 channel observations simulated in first 
and second scenarios. The channel configuration and user’s 
location is determined as uniformly-distributed random 
variable. This case is more realistic where channel response 
varieties between two scenarios presented above. During 
user mobility, the user moves in an office where some 
positions are shadowed by obstacles or sudden obstacle is 
taken place.  The system BER is closely better to that 
presented in second scenario as shown Fig. 15. These 
scenarios summarized system’s BER performance for mobile 
user situation. It worthwhile to recall that, the user’s location 
is randomized as uniform-distributed random variable.  
 
Figure 15.  BER of proposed system in mobility scinarios 
  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this paper, an optical wireless transmitter based LUT 
was introduced. The radio system pulse was translated to 
binary codewords stored in LUT. The needs for ADC and 
TCA were excluded as well as pulse reformation for each 
symbol time. The utilization of LUT enables more linear 
characteristics of LEDs. The transmitter complexity and 
power consumption were reduced as compared with 
transmitter employing DC-bias and direct quantization. The 
optical multipath channel was investigated and the system 
performances using Monte-Carlo simulations have been 
obtained and analyzed. Also, the BER performances for 
fixed and mobile user in office environment were simulated 
and analyzed. This design will be suitable for non-radio 
environment like hospitals or for systems that operate in both 
optical/radio configurations. This work will be continued to 
evaluate better performance using predistortion techniques to 
adapt the LUT and hence more linearity for LEDs power. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Al-Olofi, A. Waadt, G. H. Bruck, and P. Jung, “Design of 
optical wireless IR-UWB wystems for Low Data Rate 
applications,” Proc. of the Ninth Advanced International 
Conference on Telecommunications AICT 2013, pp. 7-12, 
Rome 2013, ISBN: 978-1-61208-279-0 
[2] C. L. Liao, Y. F. Chang, C. L. Ho, and M. C. Wu, “High-
Speed GaN-Based Blue Light-Emitting Diodes with Gallium-
Doped ZnO current spreading layer,” Electron Device Letters, 
IEEE , vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 611-613, May 2013 doi: 
10.1109/LED.2013.2252457. 
[3] T. Fath, C. Heller, and H. Haas, “Optical wireless transmitter 
employing 
discrete 
power 
level 
stepping,” Journal 
of  Lightwave Technology, vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 1734,1743, 
June, 2013 doi: 10.1109/JLT.2013.2257984 
[4] Z. Zhu and X. Huang, “Design of an LUT-Based predistorter 
for power amplifier lnearization,” Advances in Satellite and 
Space Communications, 2009, pp. 113-116, July 2009, doi: 
10.1109/SPACOMM.2009.13 
[5] J. K. Cavers, “Amplifier linearization using a digital 
predistorter 
with 
fast 
adaptation 
and 
low 
memory 
requirements,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 
374-382, Nov. 1990. 
[6] K. J. Muhonen, M. Kavehrad, and R. Krishnamoorthy, 
“Look-up table techniques for adaptive digital predistortion: 
A development and comparison,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., 
vol. 49, no. 9, pp. 1995-2002, Sep. 2000. 
[7] S. W. Chung, J. W. Holloway, and J. L. Dawson, “Energy-
Efficient Digital Predistortion With Lookup Table Training 
Using Analog Cartesian Feedback,” IEEE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 2248-
2258, Oct. 2008, doi: 10.1109/TMTT.2008.2003139 
[8] H. F. Rashvand, Y. Zeng, R. J. Green, and M. S. Leeson, 
“Look-up table error correcting multiple pulse PPM codes for 
wireless optical communication channels,” IET , vol. 2, no. 1, 
January 2008, pp. 27-34, doi: 10.1049/iet-com:20060386 
[9] J. Grubor, S. C. J. Lee, K. D. Langer, T. Koonen, and J. W. 
Walewski, “Wireless high-speed data transmission with 
phosphorescent white-light LEDs,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. 
Optical Communications (ECOC 2007), Berlin, Germany, 
Sept. 2007, pp. 1-2. 
[10] J. R. Barry, J. M. Kahn, W. J. Krause, E. A. Lee, and D. G. 
Messerschmitt, “Simulation of multipath impulse response for 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5 x 10
-7
 τ (ns)
h(τ)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
10log10(Eb/N0)[dB]
BER
 
 
LOS
NLOS
RANDOM.
AWGN-th
54
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

wireless optical channels,” IEEE J. Select. Areas in 
Communications, vol. 11, no. 3, Apr. 1993, pp. 367–379, doi: 
10.1109/49.219552. 
[11] H.Q. Nguyen, J. Choi, M. Kang, Z. Ghassemlooy, D. H. Kim, 
S. Lim, T. Kang, and C. G. Lee, “A MATLAB-based 
simulation program for indoor visible light communication 
system,” CSNDSP 2010 Proceedings, July 2010, pp. 537-541. 
[12] Z. Ghassemlooy, W. Popoola, and S. Rajbhandari, Optical 
wireless communications: system and channel modelling, 
CRC Press, 2012, pp. 66-74. 
[13] T. Komine and M. Nakagawa, “Fundamental analysis for 
Visible-Light Communication system using LED light,” IEEE 
Transaction on Consumer Electronics, Vol. 50, No. 1, 
February 
2004, 
pp. 
100-107, 
doi: 
10.1109/TCE.2004.1277847. 
[14] M. G. Di Benedetto, Understanding Ultra Wide Band radio 
fundamentals, Pearson Education, 2008, pp. 241-252.  
[15] M.D Audeh, J.M Kahn, and J.R. Barry, “Performance of 
pulse-position modulation on measured non-directed indoor 
infrared channels,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, 
vol. 
44, 
no. 
6, 
Jun. 
1996, 
pp. 
654-659, 
doi: 
10.1109/26.506380. 
[16] J. Zhang, “Modulation analysis for outdoors applications of 
optical wireless communications,” International Conference 
on Communication Technology Proceedings, 2000. WCC - 
ICCT 2000, vol. 2, no. 2000, pp. 1483-1487, doi: 
10.1109/ICCT.2000.890940. 
55
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

