Microarea Selection Method for Broadband Infrastructure Installation Based on 
Service Diffusion Process 
 
Motoi Iwashita, Akiya Inoue 
Dept. of Management Information Science 
Chiba Institute of Technology 
Chiba, Japan 
email:{iwashita.motoi, akiya.inoue}@it-chiba.ac.jp 
Takeshi Kurosawa 
Dept. of Mathematical Information Science 
Tokyo University of Science 
Tokyo, Japan 
email: tkuro@rs.kagu.tus.ac.jp 
Ken Nishimatu 
Network Technology Laboratories 
NTT 
Tokyo, Japan 
email: nishimatsu.ken@lab.ntt.co.jp
 
 
Abstract—Wired/wireless 
information 
communication 
networks have been expanded to meet the demand of 
broadband services as part of information and communication 
technology (ICT) infrastructure. As the installation and 
expansion of ICT infrastructure requires a large amount of 
time and money, the decision on how to select the installation 
area is a key issue. Low-usage facilities can cause problems for 
businesses in terms of investment efficiency. Moreover, it takes 
time to select areas because of the need to estimate the 
potential demand and to manage the installation of the 
infrastructure for thousands of municipal areas across a nation. 
In this paper, we propose an efficient microarea selection 
method for use during the life cycle of broadband services, i.e., 
from early to late stage. This method is developed considering 
consumer segmentation, the broadband service diffusion model 
by consumer behaviour, and area characteristics based on 
employee fluidity. The proposed method is evaluated on 
worldwide interoperability for microwave access (WiMAX) 
and its applicability is ascertained on the basis of the 
infrastructure’s area penetration rate and area characteristics. 
Keywords-broadband services; infrastructure installation; 
data mining; area marketing; area characteristics; demand 
forecast; decision support system; algorithm. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Broadband access services can be rapidly deployed by 
asymmetric digital subscriber line (ADSL) penetration. This 
has enabled consumer-generated media (CGM) such as 
social networking service (SNS) and YouTube to be widely 
used on a broadband access infrastructure. These multimedia 
services have dramatically changed the modern lifestyle and 
made it possible for individuals to obtain and share 
information with ease. The research of broadband 
infrastructure installation has been done [1] for providing 
these services. Some local governments are trying to utilize 
ICT infrastructure for healthcare and nursing among other 
applications in their respective regions [2]. Many companies 
have also introduced ICT elements such as mobile gadgets 
for sales, maintenance, operation, and production to improve 
the efficiency of corporate functions. 
Wired broadband access infrastructure has propagated 
rapidly first by the use of ADSL and then optical fibres in the 
fibre-to-the-home (FTTH) infrastructure. FTTH is an ultra-
high-speed broadband access infrastructure, which is being 
provided in Japan since 2002. Such an ICT infrastructure 
provides a variety of technologies and benefits for corporate 
activity. Although the coverage rate of FTTH as a percentage 
of the total number of households nationwide in 2014 was 
approximately 98% [3], the customer rate (percentage of 
customers using FTTH) in the coverage area was merely 
43%. With respect to wireless broadband access, long-term 
evolution (LTE) for high-speed wireless access is being 
provided in Japan since December 2010. The coverage rate 
of LTE was more than 90%, while the customer rate was 
approximately 42% in 2014 [4]. The other high-speed 
wireless access worldwide interoperability for microwave 
access (WiMAX), which is being provided since 2009, had a 
coverage rate of greater than 90%, and 7 million users in 
2014. 
Because installation of infrastructure is capital intensive, 
business profitability is significantly impacted if the facility 
usage is low. It is difficult to identify low-usage areas when 
we focus on the average data. This demonstrates the 
importance of considering not only macro areas but also 
micro areas when installing the infrastructure. Therefore, 
strategic and economic considerations are necessary for the 
installation of ICT infrastructure, such as broadband and 
wireless access facilities. Such installations greatly depend 
on the potential demand in different microareas. Further, the 
existence of more than a thousand microareas, such as 
municipal areas, necessitates using an efficient estimation 
method. 
The goal of providing an area with ICT services is to 
determine the investment order of microareas, where the ICT 
infrastructure is installed several months prior to the 
60
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

installation. ICT infrastructure installation per area is more 
effective and less expensive than on-demand installation in 
which a facility is installed on a case-to-case basis. 
Furthermore, a method to efficiently select a microarea will 
have a positive impact on the operations and financial 
efficiency of an enterprise. 
In this paper, we propose a microarea selection method 
that is simpler to use than trade analysis [5]. Our target is 
ICT infrastructure installation during the life cycle, which 
covers different stages of ICT infrastructure installation for 
broadband services. The proposed method is based on 
consumer segmentation based on different consumer 
behaviours in the broadband service propagation model and 
area characteristics based on employee fluidity. We verified 
the proposed model with the penetration of WiMAX services. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 
II introduces related works. Section III describes the trend of 
WiMAX demand in Japan. Section IV discusses the 
hypothesis of service diffusion and its model. Section V 
describes the proposed method for the selection of 
microareas. Section VI presents the simulation results and 
evaluates the method. Section VII clarifies the applications 
of the proposed method based on area characteristics. 
Section VIII concludes this paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
The determination of the target area for marketing, such 
as areas to focus on for sales activities and areas to install the 
facility in, is based on trade analysis. Trade analysis is a 
well-known method for the investigation of geographical 
areas for business deals and involves demographic data and 
field surveys. For instance, the setting up of a convenience 
store is decided on the basis of demographic data and field 
surveys. Geographic information system (GIS) [6] is an 
effective tool for area-related decision making. An empirical 
study using GIS for trade analysis has been previously [7] 
reported and many companies uses this method with map 
data. These approaches are effective for deciding whether a 
store should be set up in a given area. 
Application of these methods to ICT infrastructure 
installation requires spending a large amount of time on 
selecting areas. This is because installation in only one target 
area has little effect from the viewpoint of network 
externality [8], which makes it more convenient to have 
more users, if it is carried out in one area rather than in 
several areas simultaneously and nationwide. The idea of 
modelling spatial data that represent a geographical location 
has been proposed earlier [9], [10]. This approach is now 
being practically used to understand geographical features. 
To select the areas, we need to first consider potential 
demand. Previous research [11]-[13] has focused on macro 
demand forecast to provide facility installation principles and 
to not select installation areas. There has been one study on 
microarea forecasting [14]. It describes only the guidelines 
for microarea forecasting by using multiple regression 
analysis. 
To proceed with microarea marketing, we focused on the 
expansion of ICT infrastructure in accordance with service 
reputation in areas where ICT infrastructure has been 
provided as a trial. In such cases, individuals tend to exhibit 
a “go type behaviour” where individuals tend to go to 
issues/people 
when 
forming 
preferences 
[15], 
[16]. 
Therefore, who pushes service forward is an important 
question. An innovative early adopter in the technology 
lifecycle is characterized as an information source affecting 
acquaintances from the viewpoint of innovative diffusion 
[17]. The innovative early adopter is generally reckoned as a 
person who gets stimulated with many contacts through 
his/her mobility. It is difficult to characterise each person in 
an area from the viewpoint of the technology lifecycle (e.g., 
who is an early adopter). Recently, a city planning study that 
uses mobile phones (life log data) to obtain mobility data by 
area has been initiated [18]. The researchers expect to 
analyse human behaviour by utilizing the life log data, and if 
it yields successful results, it can be applied to various fields. 
However, currently, there is no such information available. 
Concerning the diffusion of the broadband infrastructure 
facilities at the moment, the framework of microarea 
marketing is based on commuting flows in terms of 
considering human behaviour [19]. Such a flow-based 
microarea selection method has been developed and been 
compared to the population-based method, which is a simple 
application of the population order in some regions as the 
case study [20]. Although these studies show the efficiency 
of selecting microareas, the results obtained are not stable; 
i.e., setting up the conditions in advance is difficult. The 
condition for the application of flow-based microarea 
selection method is decided empirically and analytically [21]. 
However, the application of this method is limited to only 
the early stage of providing broadband services, which 
means that the area penetration is low. Therefore, a mixed 
algorithm that consists of both the flow-based and 
population-based microarea selection methods is proposed 
that is applicable throughout the life cycle (from early to late 
stage) of broadband services [1]. However, the obtained 
results are not stable, i.e., the cause that the mixed algorithm 
gives the optimal order of microareas depends on the area 
itself. Therefore, conditions considering not only consumer 
behaviour but also area characteristics are needed. 
III. 
WIMAX SERVICES AND TREND IN JAPAN 
WiMAX is a wireless broadband access service that has 
been in place in Japan since 2009. It is defined in IEEE 
802.16-2004 as an international standard with a maximum 
transmission distance of 50 km and maximum transmission 
rate of 70 Mbps. WiMAX network is explained in Fig. 1. 
Mobile gadgets such as smartphones and ultra-mobile PCs 
can access the nearest base station by air in each region. The 
base station transmits signals to the providers’ server through 
the carrier’s network. The user can then make use of wireless 
high-speed internet access services. Table I shows in 
chronological order the events that are related to WiMAX 
service diffusion. In seven months after WiMAX started to 
be commercially available, 5,000 base stations were installed 
nationwide. The pace of base station installation slowed until 
April 2012 when providers achieved 20,000 base station 
installations. The number of customers grew steeply from 
2009 to 2013, and it took only five months for the growth 
61
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

from 2 to 3 million customers. In October 2013, the new 
WiMAX service, which could achieve a much higher high-
speed 
transmission 
rate, 
was 
introduced. 
It 
was 
simultaneously provided by mobile virtual network operators 
(MVNOs). An MVNO is defined as a network service 
operator that does not have a network facility itself, but 
rather borrows the facility from a real network operator. 
Therefore, new MVNOs provide low-priced services and 
value-added services, such as character brand gadgets and 
rich video content. Customers have many options for 
network operators through SIM-free terminals. As for the 
base station installation for new WiMAX service, the 
installation pace is shorter than that of WiMAX. 
 
 
Figure 1.  WiMAX network. 
 
TABLE I.  
EVENTS IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER 
Date 
Event 
Feb/2009 
WiMAX trial (cost-free) service started 
Jul/2009 
WiMAX commercial service started 
Jan/2010 
5,000 base stations installed 
Aug/2010 
10,000 base stations installed 
May/2011 
15,000 base stations installed 
Jun/2011 
1,000,000 customers 
Feb/2012 
2,000,000 customers 
Apr/2012 
20,000 base stations installed 
Jul/2012 
3,000,000 customers 
Feb/2013 
4,000,000 customers 
Oct/2013 
New WiMAX service (ultra-high speed) started/ 
MVNO started 
Feb/2015 
20,000 base stations installed for new WiMAX 
service 
 
The total demand for WiMAX has been increasing, with 
about 20 billion customers in 2015 as shown in Fig. 2. The 
demand increased at a consistent rate until 2014, and then 
increased sharply from 2014 to 2015. This is because 
MVNOs were introduced in mid-2013. MVNO*1 represents 
the demand excluding real mobile network operators, while 
MVNO*2 represents the demand including the results from 
real mobile network operators as MVNOs. These results 
show that the effect of MVNO*1 on the total demand is 
smaller, while the total demand is almost the same with 
MVNO*2. Considering these results, customers who have 
already been WiMAX users do not change their service to 
MVNO, this is because the total demand is almost the same 
as that of MVNO*2. Therefore, newer customers tend to 
choose their MVNO in terms of pricing compared to 2013. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Demand for WiMAX in Japan. 
 
Figure 3.  Trend for number of microareas for WiMAX. 
 
Fig. 3 shows the trend of penetration of microareas for 
WiMAX from August 2010 to November 2015. A microarea 
is defined as the municipal area in this study. The vertical 
axis is the penetration rate of WiMAX services, which 
means the ratio of the number of microareas for a WiMAX 
facility installed against the total number of microareas in 
the prefecture. Thirteen prefectures were considered and 
defined as A to M. The graph shows that many microareas 
were selected and that the facilities were installed from 
August 2010 to April 2012. This time interval corresponds 
62
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

to the early stage of WiMAX diffusion. The demand grew 
inside the areas from 2012 to 2014 since the number of 
installed microareas did not change. In late 2014, the 
number of installed microareas began to increase. This 
situation corresponds to the introduction of MVNO and this 
means that the customers who are interested in the price of 
services are major factors for demand increase. 
IV. 
HYPOTHESIS OF SERVICE DIFFUSION AND ITS MODEL 
In this section, the assumption of how broadband services 
are propagated is explained. Many ICT services are already 
being provided. Therefore, we investigated the features of 
the propagation of such services. For example, analysis of 
the mechanism of word of mouth has been studied [22]-[24]. 
Let us first consider the terminal equipment. The diffusion of 
audio-visual (AV) and digital equipment depends on the 
users’ experiences through their use and the sharing of their 
experience with their friends and families by word of mouth. 
Since many people refer to the site of collecting word-of-
mouth information, consumers tend to be affected by a 
person who has similar preferences. 
Broadband services based on the ICT infrastructure 
become more widespread owing to the sharing of 
information among users of the AV and digital equipment 
such as smartphones and tablet PCs. CGM depends 
significantly on network externality; for example, the ratio of 
users who choose internet video sites on the basis of 
recommendations of friends/acquaintances was found to be 
about 38% [25]. Network externality is defined as the 
phenomenon in which the benefit of the customers is greater 
with a greater increase in the number of customers, 
particularly in terms of networked services. 
If an individual has to pay for a new software application 
or a service upgrade, he/she tends to decide on the basis of 
face-to-face information from friends/acquaintances [26]. 
Since the wired/wireless broadband access infrastructure is 
not a free service, we expect customers to respond to it in the 
same way they respond to software and service upgrade 
purchases. 
There are five types of consumers, namely the innovator, 
early adopter, early majority, late majority, and the laggard. 
An early adopter is a trend-conscious person who collects 
information, makes decisions by himself/herself, and plays 
an important role for service diffusion. It is widely known 
that an early adopter has a considerable influence on general 
consumers as an opinion leader. This implies that he/she 
sends interesting information to his/her acquaintances. We 
made a hypothesis of service diffusion in early stage on the 
basis 
of 
personal 
behaviour 
[21]. 
As 
face-to-face 
communication with friends/acquaintances is the key of 
broadband service diffusion, it is necessary to introduce the 
concept of innovation diffusion [17]. If an individual 
(especially early majority) has many contacts with early 
adopters, the possibility that he/she will demand the service 
is high [27], as shown in Fig. 4 (a). 
Early majority is commonly a person who is easily 
affected by not only the early adopter but also the affected 
majority [28]. This implies that each early majority changes 
his/her 
mind 
based 
on 
the 
advice 
from 
friend/family/acquaintance. 
Therefore, 
face-to-face 
communication in neighbourhood influences the increase in 
early majority, as shown in Fig. 4 (b). 
The late majority tends to be sceptical of the services, 
price-oriented and follow the maturity of the early majority 
after the service has sufficiently penetrated the field. 
Therefore, the late majority is not affected by contact with 
the early majority through face-to-face communication, but 
rather by resonance [29] with early majority, as show in Fig. 
4 (c). 
Next, we explain the mechanism of potential demand 
diffusion physically, i.e., what kind of microareas have quick 
service diffusion. Basically, there are two kinds of service 
propagation conditions. One is population in a microarea. 
Higher the population in an area, higher the possibility of 
increased contacts (face-to-face communication). The other 
is the in-/out-flow such as human fluidity of microarea. 
Higher the flows in an area, higher is the possibility of 
contacts. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Relationship between service diffusion and customer 
segmentation. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Mechanism of potential demand diffusion. 
 
As face-to-face communication is important in the 
diffusion of wired/wireless broadband services, the mobility 
of an early adopter may influence broadband service 
diffusion through contacts with many individuals in Case 1 
63
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(see Fig. 5). Therefore, our hypothesis of Case 1 is that 
demand grows faster in case of high movement among 
microareas compared to the case of high population in a 
microarea, as shown in Fig. 5 (a). 
Although face-to-face communication is still effective in 
Case 2, the contacts among early majority are dominant. 
Therefore, 
the 
service 
is 
diffused 
by 
friends/acquaintances/families 
nearby 
location. 
Our 
hypothesis of Case 2 is that the demand grows with high 
population as shown in Fig. 5 (b). If the differences of 
population among microareas are small, high movement still 
results in service diffusion.  
In Case 3, resonance leads to the increase in late majority. 
This means that diffusion does not depend on face-to-face 
communication. The deeds of early majority decide the 
deeds of late majority. Therefore, the effect of population in 
microareas becomes great when compared to that of 
movement among microareas as shown in Fig. 5 (c). If the 
differences of population among microareas are small, the 
same situation occurs in Case 2. 
Next, the movement between microareas is defined. 
Since the diffusion of ICT infrastructure strongly depends on 
the application (SNS, Net-Game, etc.), it would be desirable 
to identify commuting flow on the basis of attributes 
(employee, student, etc.). In addition, if we could access life 
log data, we could perform an even more detailed analysis. 
For the frequency of collecting commuting flow information, 
we assume that an average commuting flow per day or 
yearly can be used. This is because the interval of ICT 
infrastructure installation is not frequent (no real-time 
installation). Therefore, movement between microareas as 
shown in Fig. 6 (a) is assumed to be modelled applying 
commuting flow between microareas (Fig. 6 (b)). 
 
 
Figure 6.  Definition of movement between microareas. 
 
Now we discuss the relationship between our three cases 
and WiMAX service diffusion. The early stage of service 
diffusion corresponds to the time interval between 2010 and 
2012 according to the results in Figs. 2 and 3. The 
penetration rate grew with a steep slope and the number of 
microareas increased sharply. In this stage, the early majority 
was affected by early adopters as Case 1. The middle stage 
of service diffusion corresponds to the time interval between 
2012 and 2014. In this stage, there was no increase in the 
number of installed microareas. This means that the early 
majority who were affected by early adopters contacted 
others in the early majority in the same microarea. Thus, the 
demand increased inside a microarea as seen in Case 2. The 
penetration rate increased in all areas during the late stage of 
service diffusion after 2014. The new type of services 
provided by MVNO started in this stage, where there was 
potential demand from the late majority. The demand grows 
inside a microarea and this results in addition of new 
microareas, therefore, the number of micoareas increases. 
This stage corresponds to Case 3. 
V. 
MICROAREA SELECTION ALGORITHMS 
Let us introduce three algorithms to select microareas in 
this section. 
A. Flow-based algorithm 
To select microareas on the basis of the movement, we 
created a table of the inflows and outflows to and from 
microareas based on commuting flows among microareas, as 
shown in the table presented in Fig. 7. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Concept of flow-based algorithm. 
 
Let these flows be sorted in the descending order to 
estimate the area selection efficiently. Furthermore, we built 
a graph model in which a microarea is denoted as a node and 
a commuting flow among the microareas is denoted as a link. 
Each link has an arrow to indicate the direction of the 
commuting flow. A link was added among the specified 
areas if the in/outflow was greater than or equal to the given 
threshold, α, penetration rate. In other words, we selected 
links that contained a high average number of commuters as 
shown in the lower part of Fig. 7. 
64
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Thus, a microarea selection method using a flow-based 
algorithm was constructed according to the above procedure, 
as shown in Fig. 8. Its definition and notation are as follows: 
Let G = (N, L) be a graph, where N denotes a finite set of 
nodes i (i ∈ N), and L represents a set of links lij (lij ∈ L, i, j 
∈  N ). 
Let f be a function such that f(lij) = zij in N0 (non-negative 
integer) for lij ∈ L. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Flow-based algorithm. 
 
B. Population-based algorithm 
To select microareas on the basis of population, we 
created a table of the population of each microarea, as shown 
in the table presented in Fig. 9. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Concept of population-based algorithm. 
Let these values be sorted in the descending order to 
select the node with larger values as shown in the lower part 
of Fig. 9. 
Thus, microarea selection method using population-based 
algorithm was constructed according to the below procedure, 
as shown in Fig. 10. Its definition and notation are as 
follows: 
Let G = (N, L) be a graph, where N denotes a finite set of 
nodes i (i ∈ N). 
Let g be a function such that g(ni) = ui in N0 (non-
negative integer) for ni ∈ N. 
Therefore, g gives population in each microarea. 
 
Figure 10.  Population-based algorithm. 
 
C. Mixed algorithm 
The population-based algorithm is defined as the method 
that selects areas by the application of the population order; 
therefore, areas with a large population tend to be selected. 
The flow-based algorithm is defined as a method that selects 
areas on the basis of the inflows and outflows among areas. 
According to the mechanism described in the previous 
subsections, the mixed algorithm is constructed so that the 
flow-based algorithm is used in the early stage while the 
population-based algorithm is used in the middle and late 
stages as shown in Fig. 11. 
Let G = (N, L) be a graph, where N denotes a finite set of 
nodes (i ∈N) and L represents a set of links (lij ∈L). 
There exists a function f: L  N0 (non-negative integer) 
such that f(lij) = zij for any lij  L, and a function g: N  N0 
(non-negative integer) such that g(ni) = ui for ni ∈ N. 
The procedure to construct the mixed algorithm is as 
follows; 
• 
Step 1: Let c be a counter with an initial value ‘1’, 
and n(k) be the k-th element of the array where k = 1, 
2,… Let “p” denote the number of selected areas by 
WiMAX evolution under the penetration rate (α%), 
Set Nt  N. 
Sort links according to flow values f(lij) in the 
descending order. 
Sort nodes according to population values g(ni) in 
the descending order. 
65
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

• 
Step 2: While p ≥  c, then the following steps are 
performed (flow-based algorithm): 
o 
Step 2-1: Define a set K (⊂ L) = arg max 
f(lij), and denote f(l*
ij) = zd ∈ N0 for l*
ij ∈  K. 
o 
Step 2-2: Select nodes ‘i, j’ ∈  Nt, then set 
n(c)  i, c  c+1 and replace Nt with 
Nt\{n(c)}, and set n(c)  j, c  c + 1 and 
replace Nt with Nt\{n(c)}. 
o 
Step 2-3: Replace L with L\K. 
• 
Step 3: c  p + 1. 
• 
Step 4: While | N | ≥ c, then the following steps are 
performed (population-based algorithm): 
o 
Step 4-1: Define a set M (⊂ Nt) = arg max 
g(ni), and denote g(n*
i) = ud ∈ N0 for n*
i ∈ 
M. 
o 
Step 4-2: Select node ‘i’, and set n(c)  i, 
c  c+1, and replace Nt with Nt\M. 
 
 
Figure 11.  Mixed algorithm. 
 
VI. 
EVALUATION OF ALGORITHMS 
Firstly, microareas are classified according to employee 
fluidity, then three algorithms are compared. Moreover, the 
relationship between algorithms and area characteristics are 
described. 
A. Classification of prefectures 
As a microarea usually belongs to a prefecture, it is better 
to target microareas in a specified prefecture. Forty-one 
prefectures are considered to be representative of all the 
prefectures in Japan in terms of the population size. However, 
the following two types of prefectures are considered to be 
exceptions and are excluded from this study: 
• 
Prefectures with a very large population, such as 
Tokyo, Osaka, Kyoto, and Kanagawa, which have 
high fluidity and a high diffusion speed in their own 
region 
• 
Prefectures such as Hokkaido and Okinawa, which 
are islands with low fluidity as compared to the 
other prefectures. 
As employee fluidity (as commuting flows) depends on 
the area selected especially in the early stage [20], the 
attributes of prefectures are considered to be ‘number of 
employees in own microarea’, ‘inflow of employees among 
microareas’, and ‘outflow of employees among microareas’. 
We classified the prefectures into the following five 
categories in terms of employee fluidity according to the 
correspondence analysis shown in Fig. 12. The vertical axis 
represents the occurrence ratio of the in- or outflow among 
the microareas in the prefecture. The horizontal axis 
represents the staying ratio of employees in their own 
microareas. 
• 
Group 1: areas with large inflow; Aichi (A) 
• 
Group 2: areas with large in- and outflows; Ibaraki 
(B) and Shiga (F) 
• 
Group 3: areas with large outflow; Saitama (C) and 
Nara (H) 
• 
Group 4: areas with staying in own area as little 
movement; 
Niigata 
(D), 
Okayama 
(I) 
and 
Hiroshima (J) 
• 
Group 5: balanced areas of average in- and out-
flow; Kagawa (E), Ishikawa (G), Yamagata (K), 
Tokushima (L) and Fukui (M) 
 
 
Figure 12.  Correspondence analysis of employee fluidity. 
B. Comparison with algorithms 
In this section, we compare and evaluate the population-
based, flow-based and mixed algorithms. To determine the 
66
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

difference in results depending on region, thirteen 
prefectures were considered among five groups (A to M). 
Since infrastructure installation takes a large amount of 
time, a yearly plan of the area installation order is necessary. 
The penetration rate is calculated as the ratio of the number 
of areas, where WiMAX has been introduced by the provider 
(WiMAX evolution), to the number for all areas in the given 
prefecture. We take two conditions as penetration rate: 40% 
and 80% corresponding to low and high stage, respectively. 
Table II shows the concordance ratio (CR) comparison 
among flow-based and population-based algorithms when 
the penetration rate is 40%. The CR of the number of 
selected areas between WiMAX evolution and each 
algorithm is defined by the following equation. 
 
TABLE II.  
COMPARATIVE RESULTS AT LOW PENETRATION 
Prefecture 
(Area no.) 
Group 
Population-based 
algorithm 
Flow-based 
algorithm 
A (83) 
1 
0.62 
B (54) 
0.72 
2 
0.6 
F (32) 
0.65 
2 
0.77 
C (87) 
0.85 
3 
0.69 
H (42) 
0.69 
3 
0.81 
D (43) 
0.81 
4 
0.53 
I (32) 
0.71 
4 
0.58 
J (28) 
0.67 
4 
0.71 
E (34) 
0.71 
5 
0.79 
G (20) 
0.79 
5 
0.57 
K (38) 
0.86 
5 
0.73 
L (35) 
0.87 
5 
0.79 
M (27) 
0.79 
5 
0.73 
 
0.82 
 
CR = (Number of selected areas matching WiMAX 
evolution areas /Number of WiMAX evolution areas).    (1) 
 
The underlined values (in Table II) indicate the highest 
CR at each prefecture. Although the CR by population-based 
algorithm is sometimes the highest, the CR by flow-based 
algorithm is always the highest for all Groups. Therefore, 
flow-based algorithm is suitable in the early stage. 
Table III shows the concordance ratio comparison among 
the three algorithms. Table III results are for the penetration 
rate of 80% in each prefecture. The mixed algorithm works 
such that flow-based algorithm is used when the penetration 
rate reaches 40%, population-based algorithm is used beyond 
40%. 
Although the CR by flow-based algorithm is sometimes 
the highest, the CR by population-based algorithm is always 
the highest for Groups 1 to 4. Employee fluidity explains 
well, the behaviour in the early stage by applying the flow-
based algorithm, while the resonant effect well explains the 
demand increase by population in the late stage by applying 
the population-based algorithm. Therefore, the mixed 
algorithm is for use in accordance with the penetration rate 
for Groups 1, 2, 3 and 4 during the life cycle of the services. 
However, the CR by flow-based algorithm is always superior 
to that by population-based algorithm for Group 5. It is better 
to use the flow-based algorithm for the whole penetration 
rate. 
 
TABLE III.  
COMPARATIVE RESULTS AT HIGH PENETRATION 
Prefecture 
(Area no.) 
Group 
Population
-based 
algorithm 
Flow-based 
algorithm 
Mixed 
algorithm 
A (83) 
1 
0.92 
0.94 
B (54) 
0.94 
2 
0.79 
0.79 
F (32) 
0.79 
2 
0.80 
0.80 
C (87) 
0.80 
3 
0.91 
0.93 
H (42) 
0.93 
3 
0.93 
0.97 
D (43) 
0.97 
4 
0.82 
0.82 
I (32) 
0.82 
4 
0.88 
0.92 
J (28) 
0.92 
4 
0.86 
0.91 
E (34) 
0.91 
5 
0.81 
0.81 
0.89 
G (20) 
5 
0.81 
0.81 
K (38) 
0.81 
5 
0.81 
0.81 
0.87 
L (35) 
5 
0.87 
0.87 
0.91 
M (27) 
5 
0.86 
0.86 
0.90 
 
C. Consideration for microarea characteristics 
In this subsection, we consider the differences between 
Group 5 and the other groups to apply the proposed 
algorithm. The differences of population between areas are 
focused and analysed. Figs. 13, 14, 15, 16, and 17 show the 
relationship between the population in a microarea, and 
ranking of microareas for prefectures. The target microareas 
excluded the microareas that were selected by WiMAX 
evolution when the penetration rate was lower than α (α = 
40% in this study) in each prefecture. 
 
 
Figure 13.  Relationship between population in the area and its ranking 
(Group 1). 
 
Three approximation curves and their R-square (R2) 
values are calculated as exponential, logarithmic, and linear 
regressions. The result showed that the approximation by 
exponential regression fits into the scatter diagram at the 
highest R2 (R2 = 0.9921) in A (Group 1), while the 
approximation by linear regression has R2 = 0.9364 as shown 
in Fig. 13. There are many microareas and their population is 
considered to be linearly decreasing according to the 
67
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

regression line, since R2 difference of two regressions is 
small within the given microareas. Therefore, the effect by 
population difference is large because of linearity. Thus, the 
population-based algorithm works well in the late stage. 
Next, the scatter diagrams in C and H (Group 3) are 
shown in Fig. 14. The results showed that the approximation 
by exponential regression also fits into them at the highest R2 
= 0.9834, 0.9493 in C and H, respectively. Their population 
is considered to be linearly decreasing according to the 
regression line, since the R2 difference of two regressions is 
small with the given microareas. Therefore, the effect by 
population difference is large because of linearity. Thus, the 
population-based algorithm works well in the late stage. 
 
 
Figure 14.  Relationship between population in the area and its ranking 
(Group 3). 
 
The scatter diagrams in D, I, and J (Group 4) are shown 
in Fig. 15. The result showed that the approximation by 
exponential regression also fits into it at the highest R2 = 
0.9753 in D, while those by logarithmic regression fit into 
them at the highest R2 = 0.9097, 0.9834 in I and J, 
respectively. Their population is considered to be linearly 
decreasing according to the regression line, since the R2 
difference of two regressions is small with the given 
microareas. Therefore, the effect by population difference is 
large because of linearity. Thus, the population-based 
algorithm works well in the late stage. 
The scatter diagrams in B and F (Group 2) are shown in 
Fig. 16. The results showed that the approximation by 
logarithmic regression fits into them at the highest R2 = 
0.9424, 0.8435 in B and F, respectively. However, the 
difference of two regressions is large, linear regression does 
not fit in B or F. It is understandable that the population 
difference is small for low-ranking microareas in B and F 
according to logarithmic regression, so the effect of fluidity 
is greater than that of population. 
 
 
Figure 15.  Relationship between population in the area and its ranking 
(Group 4). 
 
The scatter diagrams in K, L, and M (Group 5) are shown 
in Fig. 17. The results showed that the approximation by 
logarithmic regression fit into them at the highest R2 = 
0.9645, 0.9513, 0.955, in K, L and M, respectively. However, 
the difference of two regressions is large, linear regression 
does not fit in K, L, or M. It is understandable that the 
population difference is small for low-ranking microareas in 
68
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

K, L, and M according to logarithmic regression, so the 
effect of fluidity is greater than that of population. 
The results with effect by fluidity are significant for 
Group 5, while the same results are obtained for Group 2. 
Note that the effect by fluidity and that by population are 
almost the same in Group 2 because of obtaining the same 
CR by the three algorithms. 
 
 
Figure 16.  Relationship between population in the area and its ranking 
(Group 2). 
 
The R2 difference ratio (DR) is calculated using the 
following equation. 
 
DR = 100 * {(R2 of optimal regression) – (R2 of linear 
regression)} /(R2 of linear regression).     (2) 
 
The calculated results are shown in Table IV. DRs in 
Group 1, 3 and 4 are small, less than 10%. It means that the 
population with low-ranking microareas has linearity. 
Therefore, population difference has a large effect for 
microarea selection. Group 1 shows feature with large inflow. 
Group 3 shows features with large outflow. In addition, 
Group 4 has the feature of staying in its microarea as there is 
little movement. These groups are affected by population in 
the late stage. 
 
Figure 17.  Relationship between population in the area and its ranking 
(Group 5). 
 
DRs in Group 2 and 5 are large, greater than 10%. It 
means that the population with low-ranking microareas does 
not have linearity. Therefore, population difference has little 
effect for microarea selection. Group 2 has the feature with 
large in- and outflows as balanced movement, while Group 5 
has the feature with small in- and outflows as balanced 
movement. These groups are affected by the fluidity even in 
the late stage. 
 
VII. MICROAREA SELECTION METHOD BASED ON AREA 
CHARACTERISTICS 
Summing up the results obtained in the previous section, 
the characteristics of each prefecture is an important factor. 
69
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

These characteristics obtained by correspondence analysis 
are grouped into two types. 
Char-1: 
Prefecture 
with 
biased 
in-/out-flow, 
or 
immobilization 
Char-2: Prefecture with balanced in and outflows 
The framework of the mixed algorithm considering area 
characteristics is constructed as follows. 
• 
Step 1: Let areas be grouped by the correspondence 
analysis as ‘number of employees in own 
microarea’, 
‘inflow 
of 
employees 
among 
microareas’, and ‘outflow of employees among 
microareas’ for inputs. 
• 
Step 2: If the given area belongs to Char-1, then 
mixed algorithm is used at the given threshold value, 
α, i.e., flow-based algorithm is applied when the 
penetration rate is equal to or smaller than α, and 
population-based algorithm is applied when the 
penetration rate is greater than α. 
• 
Step 3: If the given area belongs to Char-2, then the 
mixed algorithm is used under α = 100%, i.e., flow-
based algorithm is applied during the life cycle. 
 
TABLE IV.  
R2-DIFFERENCE BETWEEN OPTIMAL AND LINEAR 
REGRESSIONS 
Prefecture 
(Area no.) 
Group 
R2 value of 
optimal 
regression 
R2 value of 
linear 
regression 
Difference 
ratio: DR 
(%) 
A (83) 
1 
0.9921 
0.9364 
6 
B (54) 
2 
0.9424 
0.7473 
26 
F (32) 
2 
0.8435 
0.5708 
48 
C (87) 
3 
0.9834 
0.9598 
2 
H (42) 
3 
0.9493 
0.9185 
3 
D (43) 
4 
0.9753 
0.9023 
8 
I (32) 
4 
0.9097 
0.8704 
5 
J (28) 
4 
0.9834 
0.9172 
7 
K (38) 
5 
0.9645 
0.8549 
13 
L (35) 
5 
0.9513 
0.7421 
28 
M (27) 
5 
0.955 
0.8631 
11 
 
 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS 
It is significantly important to select an area in which an 
ICT infrastructure should be introduced so as to ensure quick 
and economic development of an advanced information 
society. Area selection strongly depends on the potential 
demand, and one of the main features of the ICT 
infrastructure is network externality; therefore, a great 
amount of time and labour is required to select specified 
areas from among a large number of candidate areas. 
In this paper, we proposed an efficient area selection 
method based on a service diffusion model. We evaluated 
the method using real field data from 13 prefectures, and we 
obtained the application of flow-based and population-based 
algorithms during the life cycle of the services. It is also 
advised that the areas are classified into two types in terms of 
employee fluidity and the application of mixed algorithm 
deeply depends on the microarea characteristics for 
population differences. 
We intend to apply the method to other information 
network infrastructures, such as FTTH, LTE, and energy 
management services for future works. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Iwashita, A. Inoue, T. Kurosawa, and K. Nishimatsu, 
“Microarea selection method based on services diffusion 
process for broadband services,” Proc. of The Eleventh 
International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global 
Information Technology (ICCGI 2016), pp. 30-35, 2016. 
[2] The Ministry of Information and Communications, White 
Paper Information and Communications in Japan, 2009. 
[3] The Ministry of International Affairs and Communications of 
Japan, “Broadband Service Coverage Rate With Respect to 
the Total Number of Households,” [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.soumu.go.jp/soutsu/tohoku/hodo/h2501-
03/images/0110b1006.pdf (accessed 24 May 2017). 
[4] The Ministry of International Affairs and Communications of 
Japan, “Information and Communications in Japan,” White 
Paper, p. 174, 2014. 
[5] K. Yonetaka, Fact of area marketing, Tokyo: Nikkei Pub. Inc., 
2008. 
[6] Y. Murayama and R. Shibazaki, GIS theory, Tokyo: Asakura 
Pub. Co. Ltd., 2008. 
[7] T. Sakai et al., “Use of Web-GIS area marketing and its 
application to the local region,” Bulletin of Global 
Environment Research, Rissho Univ., vol. 6, pp. 125-130, 
2004. 
[8] T. Ida, Broadband economics, Tokyo: Nikkei Pub. Inc., 2007. 
[9] H. Seya and M. Tsutsumi, Spatial Statistics, Tokyo: Asakura 
Pub. Co. Ltd., 2014. 
[10] S. Mase and M. Tsutsumi, Spatial Data Modeling, Tokyo: 
Kyoritsu Pub., 2001. 
[11] R. L. Goodrich, Applied statistical forecasting, Belmont: 
Business Forecast Systems Inc., 1992. 
[12] T. Abe and T. Ueda, “Telephone revenue forecasting using 
state space model,” Trans. on IEICE, vol. J68-A, no. 5, pp. 
437-443, 1985. 
[13] H. Kawano, T. Takanaka, Y. Hiruta, and S. Shinomiya, 
“Study on teletraffic method for macro analysis and its 
evaluation,” Trans. on IEICE, vol. J82-B, no. 6, pp. 1107-
1114, 1999. 
[14] M. Iwashita, K. Nishimatsu, T. Kurosawa, and S. Shimogawa, 
“Broadband 
analysis 
for 
network 
building,” 
Rev. 
Socionetwork Strat., vol. 4, pp. 17-28, 2010. 
[15] M. J. Benner and M. L. Tushman, “Exploitation, Exploration, 
and Process Management: The Productivity Dilemma 
Revisited,” The Academy of Management Review, vol. 28, no. 
2, pp. 238-256, 2003. 
[16] R. W. White, “Motivation Reconsidered: The concept of 
competence,” Psychol. Rev., vol. 66, pp. 297-333, 1959. 
[17] E. Rogers, “Diffusion of innovation,” 5th ed. New York: Free 
Press, 2003. 
[18] S. Nakamichi, “NTT Docomo and The Univ. of Tokyo Have 
Just Started Analysis of Population Movement Using 
Location Information Obtained by Wireless Base Station,” 
[Online]. Available from: http://techon.nikkeibp.co.jp/article/ 
NEWS/20100915/185680/ (accesses 24 May 2017). 
[19] M. Iwashita, “A consideration of an area classification 
method for ICT service diffusion,” Knowl. Intell. Inf. Eng. 
Syst., LNAI, 6883, pp. 256-264, 2011. 
70
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[20] M. Iwashita, A. Inoue, T. Kurosawa, and K. Nishimatsu, 
“Micro area selection framework for ICT infrastructure 
diffusion based on commuting flow,” Int. J. Comp. Inf. Sci., 
vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 10-19, 2012. 
[21] M. Iwashita, A. Inoue, T. Kurosawa, and K. Nishimatsu, 
“Efficient microarea selection algorithm for infrastructure 
installation of broadband services,” Int. J. Comput. Intell. 
Stud., Inderscience publishers, Vol. 5, Nos 3/4, pp. 29-236, 
2017. 
[22] K. Ikeda, “The Diffusion of Innovation Through Word-Of-
Mouth and Social Networks: A social Psychological Study 
Combining Snowball Surveys and Multi-Agent Simulation,” 
Tokyo: Univ. of Tokyo Press, 2010. 
[23] S. P. A. T. Dentsu, “How to Create an Atmosphere to Make 
You Feel Buying,” Tokyo: Diamond Inc., 2007. 
[24] H. Katahira, “New theory AIDEES like big tidal stream,” 
Diamond Visionary, vol. 42, no. 7, pp. 34-37, 2006. 
[25] Macromill, “Field Survey of Using Internet Video Site”. 
[Online]. Available from: http://monitor.macromill.com/ 
researchdata/20070701movie/index.html (accessed 24 May 
2017). 
[26] “The Institute for Information and Communications Policy, 
Research Study of Determinative Factors for Internet Usage 
and Reality of Use” Tokyo: The Institute for Information and 
Communications Policy, 2009. 
[27] S. Shimogawa and M. Iwashita, “Method for analyzing 
sociodynamics of telecommunication-based services,” Proc. 
of 9th IEEE/ACIS International Conference on Computer and 
Information Science, pp. 99-104, 2010. 
[28] G. A. Moor, “Crossing the chasm: Marketing and selling 
high-tech goods to mainstream customers,” New York: 
Harper Business, 1991. 
[29] Y. Ohsawa, M. Matsumura, and K. Takahashi, “Resonance 
without 
Response: 
The 
Way 
of 
Topic 
Growth 
in 
Communication,” Chance Discov. Real World Decis. Making, 
Stud. Comput. Intell., Vol. 30, pp. 155-165, 2006. 
 
71
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

