Digital Sensing Platform with High Accuracy Time Synchronization Function of 
Vibration and Camera Sensors 
 
Narito Kurata 
Faculty of Industrial Technology 
Tsukuba University of Technology 
Tsukuba City, Ibaraki, Japan 
e-mail: kurata@home.email.ne.jp 
 
 
Abstract - The author is conducting research and development 
of different types of sensor systems for the maintenance of civil 
infrastructures, such as aging bridges and highways, and 
buildings. Highly accurate time information is added to 
measurement data, and a set of sensing data that ensures time 
synchronization is acquired and used for multimodal analysis of 
risk. In research so far, as a first step, a sensor device was 
developed that uses a digital high-precision accelerometer to 
perform highly-accurate time-synchronized sensing of civil 
infrastructures and buildings. A vibration table test was 
performed on the sensor device, and its time synchronization 
performance was verified. In this paper, a different type of 
digital sensing platform has been developed that allows a 
camera sensor to be connected in addition to a digital 
accelerometer. By adding a unified time stamp synchronized 
with the absolute time to data from the digital accelerometer 
and the image from the camera sensor when data is acquired, 
the vibration and the image can be measured synchronously. 
First, a Chip-Scale Atomic Clock (CSAC), which is an ultra-
high-precision clock, is mounted on the sensor device, and a 
mechanism is implemented whereby a time stamp is added to 
the outputs of the digital accelerometer and the camera sensor 
with timekeeping precision. A Field-Programmable Gate Array 
(FPGA) dedicated to adding time stamps is prepared. Tests were 
performed on the developed sensor device using a shaking table, 
and the time synchronization performance was checked by 
comparing the measurement results of multiple sensor devices 
and a servo type acceleration sensor. Next, the results of a 
performance verification experiment on a camera sensor 
mounted on the platform, are described.  
Keywords-Time Synchronization; Chip Scale Atomic Clock; 
Earthquake Observation; Structural Health Monitoring; Micro 
Electro Mechanical Systems; Camera Sensor 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As civil infrastructure, such as bridges and highways, and 
buildings deteriorate over time, it has become important to 
automate inspections for maintenance of these structures. In 
addition, since there are many disasters, such as earthquakes 
and typhoons in Japan, it is necessary to detect damage to 
structures immediately after a disaster, and to estimate the 
damage situation. Data collection and analysis by sensor 
groups is effective for automating the detection of such 
abnormalities, but to analyze data sets measured by multiple 
sensors and evaluate structural safety, time synchronization 
between sensors is required [1].  
The authors applied wireless sensor network technology 
to develop sensors for seismic observation and structural 
health monitoring, and demonstrated their performance in 
skyscrapers [2][3]. In this system, time synchronization was 
achieved by sending and receiving wireless packets between 
sensors [2]. However, it is impossible to target multiple 
buildings, long structures, such as bridges, and wide-area 
urban spaces with wireless sensor network technology. On the 
other hand, if sensors installed in various places can 
autonomously retain accurate time information, this problem 
can be resolved. The method of using GPS signals is effective 
outdoors, but it cannot be used inside buildings, underground, 
under bridges, or in tunnels, etc.  
Therefore, the author developed a sensor device that 
autonomously retains accurate time information using a Chip-
Scale Atomic Clock (CSAC) [4]-[6], which is an ultra-high-
precision clock [7]-[9]. In order to apply the developed sensor 
device to earthquake observation, a logic was implemented 
that detects the occurrence of an earthquake and saves data on 
earthquake events, and its function was verified in a vibration 
table experiment [10]. The developed sensor device was also 
installed in an actual building and on an actual bridge, and 
used for seismic observation and evaluation of structural 
health [11]. However, as the developed sensor device had an 
analog MEMS accelerometer, it was difficult to measure 
minute vibrations accurately, and there was a risk of noise 
being mixed with the analog signal. The risk of noise was 
therefore eliminated by making the accelerometer mounted on 
the sensor device a digital type [1]. In this paper, a different 
type of digital sensor platform is further developed wherein a 
camera sensor can be connected to the sensor device. The 
details of the digital sensing platform and a mechanism 
whereby ultra-high-accuracy time information is added to 
sensor data by the CSAC, are described. The results of 
experiments performed to verify the time synchronization 
performance of the camera sensor are also reported. 
In this paper, Section II shows the existing time 
synchronization methods and describes their problems and 
achievement of the development of digital sensing platform 
proposed in this research. Section III describes the mechanism 
for providing ultra-high accurate time information to digital 
sensor data by the CSAC, and explains the configuration of 
digital sensing platform and the development of the actual 
sensor device. Section IV describes the configuration of 
digital sensing platform and the development of the actual 
sensor device. Further, Sections V and VI describe the 
42
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

performance verification tests on the time synchronization of 
developed sensor device and camera sensor device, and it is 
confirmed that time synchronization among the developed 
digital sensor devices with camera is achieved. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
A time synchronization function is indispensable for 
sensor devices used to monitor structural health and make 
seismic observations of civil infrastructure, such as bridges 
and highways, and buildings. This is because time series 
analysis using phase information cannot be performed unless 
a data set is obtained in which time synchronization is 
achieved. Regarding time synchronization of sensing, many 
studies have already been performed, such as the use of GNSS 
signals from artificial satellites and the Network Time 
Protocol (NTP) for time synchronization on the Internet [12]. 
There are also studies where time synchronization is achieved 
by utilizing the characteristic of wireless sensor networks that 
propagation delay is small. For example, time synchronization 
protocols, such as Reference Broadcast Synchronization 
(RBS), Timing-sync Protocol for Sensor Networks (TPSN), 
and Flooding Time Synchronization Protocol (FTSP) are 
being studied [13]-[17].  
However, although time synchronization using wireless 
technology is convenient, wireless communication may not 
always be possible. Particularly, if wireless communication is 
interrupted during an earthquake, it will not be possible to 
perform sensing where time synchronization is guaranteed. A 
technology that realizes highly accurate time synchronization 
in a room includes IEEE1588 Precision Time Protocol (PTP). 
PTP uses an Ethernet cable in a general Local Area Network 
(LAN) as a transmission line, and achieves accurate 
synchronization within one microsecond using time packets. 
However, it has many problems. For example, it is difficult to 
achieve stable synchronization accuracy due to packet delay 
fluctuation and packet loss due to congestion in the LAN. 
Moreover, since the delay is corrected by packet switching, 
the PTP devices that can be connected to the master device are 
limited, and it cannot be deployed in a Wide Area Network 
(WAN) environment where the delay amount varies 
drastically.  
To obtain a set of sensor data that guarantees long-term, 
stable time synchronization even when GPS signals are not 
available, wireless transmission/reception is unstable, and 
wired network connection is not possible, it would be ideal if 
different sensors autonomously retain accurate time 
information. If accurate time information could be added to 
the data measured by each sensor, a sensor data set that 
guarantees time synchronization would be obtained. It was 
therefore decided to develop a sensing system that 
autonomously retains accurate time information by employing 
a CSAC [5]-[7], which is a clock with high timekeeping 
accuracy. The CSAC is a clock that achieves ultra-high-
accuracy time measurement to several tens of picoseconds (5 
x 10-11 seconds), while having an ultra-small external shape 
that can be mounted on a board. Development began in 2001 
with the support of the US Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA), and consumer products were 
launched in 2011.  
Applications include measures against GPS positioning 
interference by jamming signals, high-precision positioning 
by installing on smartphones, etc., and high-level assessment 
of disaster situations, and further price reduction is expected 
as it becomes more widespread. CSAC has a small error of 
about 4 to 8 orders of magnitude less than that of timekeeping 
by a crystal oscillator, and time synchronization by NTP or 
GPS signals. If this CSAC is installed in each sensor device 
and a mechanism is implemented that gives a highly accurate 
time stamp to sampling of the data to be measured, sensor data 
sets that guarantee time synchronization can be collected even 
if GPS signals cannot be used, wireless transmission/reception 
is unstable, and wired network connection is unavailable. In 
development so far, the sensor device had a MEMS 
accelerometer, and the system configuration allowed for any 
analog sensor to be connected via an external input interface.  
However, as the accuracy of the analog MEMS 
accelerometer is not high, noise might still be mixed with the 
analog signal, and it was desired to be able to connect a camera 
sensor, which is a type of digital sensor, it was decided to 
develop a new platform with full digital sensing. Specifically, 
a technology was developed to mount a digital accelerometer 
on the sensor device to enable high-precision acceleration 
measurement without the risk of noise contamination, connect 
a camera sensor, and assign accurate time stamps by CSAC to 
both digital outputs. Data sets obtained by the sensor device 
described in this paper, where time synchronization is 
guaranteed, can be used to analyze the structural health of civil 
infrastructure and buildings, and understand seismic 
phenomena. In addition, although research has been 
conducted on the application of camera sensors to structural 
health monitoring [18][19], time synchronization between 
sensors has not been rigorously studied. 
III. 
TIME STAMPING MECHANISM USING CHIP SCALE 
ATOMIC CLOCK 
A CSAC, shown in Figure 1, has time accuracy equivalent 
to that of a rubidium atomic clock and is very accurate 
compared with crystal resonators [6][8]. The CSAC can 
achieve ultra-precision time measurement at a level of some 
ten picoseconds, consumes low power and is small enough to 
be mounted on a circuit board (Table Ⅰ). The development of 
the CSAC started with the support of Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency, and the commercial product was 
released by an American company in 2011 and is still 
available for purchase. Recently, ultra-small atomic clock 
systems, which can be mounted on general communication 
terminals, such as smart phones, have been proposed, and 
further downsizing and price reduction are expected. If the 
sensor device is equipped with a CSAC and a mechanism that 
adds time stamping for every sample of measured data, the 
sensor device can create data having high-accuracy time 
information. Each sensor device autonomously keeps highly 
accurate time information even if the GPS signals and network 
communication are unavailable. Therefore, by collecting the 
measured data by means, such as 3G, Wi-Fi, Ethernet, etc., a 
data group ensuring time synchronization can be obtained. 
43
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 1.  Chip Scale Atomic Clock (CSAC). 
TABLE I.  
SPECIFICATIONS OF CSAC 
Model 
SA.45s 
RF output 
10 MHz 
1 PPS output 
Rise/fall time: < 10 ns 
Pulse width: 100 µs 
Power consumption 
< 120 mW 
Outside dimensions (mm) 
40 × 35 × 12 
Frequency accuracy 
± 5 × 10-11 
Aging 
< 9 × 10-10/month 
 
To configure a sensing system composed of multiple 
sensor devices equipped with a CSAC, one device is set as a 
master device and other devices as slave devices must be 
synchronized by defining absolute time information. The 
main controller of each sensor device is equipped with an 
input/output connector for 1 Pulse Per Second (PPS) of the 
CSAC. Using this connector, the master device outputs 1 PPS 
signal, and each slave device inputs it to synchronize and 
match the phase of the CSAC in each slave device. The CSAC 
keeps accurate time, but it does not have absolute time 
information. Therefore, it must be defined separately. At 
initial settings, the GPS module installed in the main 
controller is used. Absolute time information is transmitted 
from the master device to the slave device by the IEEE 1588 
standard. Once all the sensor devices are synchronized at the 
beginning, they continue keeping highly accurate time 
information autonomously. It is only necessary to install the 
sensor device in an arbitrary place and collect data. As 
mentioned above, any means of data collection, such as 
Ethernet, Wi-Fi, or 3G, are available as the measured data 
records accurate time stamping. 
IV. 
DIGITAL SENSING PLATFORM AND CIRCUIT 
CONFIGURATION  
An ordinary sensor device consists of a CPU, a sensor, a 
memory and a network interface, and a crystal oscillator is 
used for the CPU. If a CSAC is mounted on such a sensor 
device to correct the time information of the CPU and perform 
measurement, a delay will occur because the timing accuracy 
of the CSAC is too high. Therefore, in order to directly add 
time information by the CSAC to the measurement data of the 
sensor in terms of hardware, a mechanism utilizing a Field-
Programmable Gate Array (FPGA), which is a dedicated 
integrated circuit, was contrived. As a result, the CPU of the 
sensor device is not overloaded, and it became possible to save 
measurement data to which time information is added by the 
FPGA in a memory, and to collect the data via a network. 
Moreover, since the FPGA is programmable, it can not only 
handle CSAC time information, but also incorporate logic, for 
example to detect abnormalities, etc., using the measurement 
data. In this paper, a mechanism is developed whereby 
accurate time stamps by the CSAC are added to the outputs of 
the digital accelerometer and camera sensor. 
 
4.1 System Configuration 
As shown in Figures 2 and 3, the sensor device in this 
research consists of an oscillator board that synchronizes GPS 
Time (GPST) with the CSAC and supplies a stable reference 
signal, a sensor board on which a digital accelerometer and 
external analog sensor input interface are mounted, a signal 
processing board on which a CPU and FPGA are mounted, 
and a camera that captures images. A high-precision 10 MHz 
reference clock and one PPS signal are supplied by the 
oscillator board, and a time stamp and trigger signal for 
acquiring data are generated by the FPGA. The sensor board 
is provided with the digital accelerometer and external analog 
sensor input interface. Any analog sensor can be connected to 
the external analog sensor input interface. The sensor devices, 
which are individually equipped with the sensor board 
containing the digital accelerometer, can be freely combined 
with the other sensor devices having displacement sensors or 
strain sensors via external analog sensor input interface. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  System configuration. 
Oscillator board
Signal processing board
Sensor board
CSAC
GPS
FPGA
Digital
accelerometer
External analog 
sensor input 
interface
Camera 
sensor
CPU
10MHz
1 PPS
Sensor data
Camera data
SSD
LAN
Wi-Fi
Analog sensors
（Servo-type analog 
accelerometer, Displacement 
sensor, Strain sensor, etc.)
44
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 3.  Oscillator board configuration. 
The digital accelerometer outputs data according to the 
trigger signal via a Universal Asynchronous Receiver 
/Transmitter (UART). The data of the sensor connected to the 
external analog sensor input interface is converted by an A/D 
converter according to the trigger signal, and output as a 16-
bit serial value. The camera sensor can release the shutter 
according to the trigger signal, and outputs it as an RGB value. 
The data thus acquired is saved in a connected storage (SSD). 
The sensor device is operated via a wired LAN, Wi-Fi, or USB. 
 
4.2 Oscillator board 
The configuration and external appearance of the 
oscillator board are shown in Figures 4 and 5. The oscillator 
board has a function to synchronize the CSAC with 1 PPS 
output by the GPS module or 1 PPS input from outside. When 
time synchronization is required between multiple sensor 
devices, all the sensor devices are designated as "master", or 
one sensor device is designated as a "master" and the other 
sensor devices are designated as "slave".  
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Oscillator board configuration. 
 
Figure 5.  External appearance of the oscillator board. 
When the sensor device is a master, GPS and the CSAC 
are synchronized by receiving GPS signals, and inputting 1 
PPS obtained from the GPS module to the CSAC. When the 
sensor device is a slave, the master and slave are synchronized 
by inputting 1 PPS output by the master. In addition, 
commands for setting the CSAC synchronization cycle or 
resetting the phase value, as well as signal selection 
commands, are executed by the signal processing board 
through the connector. The 10MHz and 1 PPS output by this 
board are clock sources for this system. 
 
4.3 Sensor board 
The configuration and external appearance of the sensor 
board are shown in Figures 6 and 7. The sensor board is 
provided with a digital accelerometer and an external analog 
sensor input interface. The data obtained by the digital 
accelerometer can be sampled at the timing of the trigger. For 
the external analog sensor input interface, three channels are 
provided assuming that a servo-type analog accelerometer is 
connected for comparison with the digital accelerometer. 
Depending on the measurement purpose, any analog sensor, 
such as a displacement sensor, strain sensor or crack detection 
sensor, can be connected in addition to a servo-type analog 
accelerometer. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Sensor board configuration. 
Oscillator Board 
Signal Processing Board 
45
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 7.  Sensor board. 
The signal input from the external analog sensor interface 
is converted by the A/D converter to output as a 16-bit serial 
value. Note that the signal is split into two paths, and one of 
them is amplified 64 times. Therefore, even with an A/D 
converter having a resolution of 16 bits, a resolution 
equivalent to 22 bits can be obtained. The data obtained by the 
digital accelerometer is output by the UART, and the data 
obtained by the sensor connected to the external analog sensor 
input interface is output by a Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI), 
both to the signal processing board. 
 
4.4 Signal processing board 
The configuration and external appearance of the signal 
processing board are shown in Figures 8 and 9. The FPGA 
shown in Table 2 is mounted on the signal processing board. 
As shown in Table 1, Ubuntu is installed as the OS of the CPU 
and Cyclone V is installed in the FPGA, enabling the use of 1 
GB of SDRAM. Also installed is a USB On-The-Go (USB 
OTG), and it is possible to be connected to an SSD and a Wi-
Fi antenna, which are extension devices. The Samba function 
can be used to acquire and browse built-in data via a LAN, 
and Secure Shell (SSH) allows to perform operations, such as 
settings and starting measurement. In addition, since it has a 
USB slave function, it can be operated via USB even when a 
LAN cannot be used. In addition to the above functions, the 
CPU mainly performs time setting, sorting of acquired data, 
format conversion, and filing. The FPGA adjusts the internal 
RTC (real-time clock), and generates the trigger signal based 
on the clock obtained from the oscillator. It also constitutes a 
data acquisition block for the various sensors and camera. 
 
4.5 Digital accelerometer 
The external appearance and specifications of the digital 
accelerometer mounted on the sensor board are shown in 
Figure 10 and Table 3, respectively. The on-board digital 
MEMS has a built-in 3-axis crystal accelerometer with high 
precision and stable performance manufactured by finely 
processing a crystalline material with superior precision and 
stability. As shown in Table 3, high-resolution vibration 
measurement with low noise (0.5 μG/√Hz) and low power 
(66 mW), is possible. It enables measurement bandwidths  of  
up  to  100 Hz,  and  an  increased  data  output  rate  of  up  to  
1000 Sps. 
 
Figure 8.  Signal processing board configuration. 
 
Figure 9.  Signal processing board. 
TABLE II.  
SPECIFICATIONS OF MAIN FPGA AND DE10-NANO(CPU) 
Model 
DE10-NANO 
OS 
Ubuntu 16.04.6 LTS 
(GNU/Linux 4.5.0-00185-g3bb556b armv7l) 
CPU 
800MHz Dual-core ARM Cortex-A9 
Memory 
1GB DDR3 SDRAM 
LAN 
1 Gigabit Ethernet PHY with RJ45 connector 
USB 
USBOTG×1, USBUART×1 
UART 
UART×2 
FPGA 
CYCLONE V 
FPGAROM 
EPCS64 
Storage 
16GB (MicroSD) 
 
 
 
Figure 10.  Digital Accelerometer. 
46
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE III.  
SPECIFICATIONS OF DIGITAL ACCELEROMETER 
Model 
EPSON M-A351AS 
Range 
±5 G 
Noise Density 
0.5 μG/√Hz (Average) 
Resolution 
0.06 μG/LSB 
Bandwidth 
100 Hz (selectable) 
Output Range 
1000 sps (selectable) 
Digital Serial Interface 
SPI 
Outside Dimensions (mm) 
24 × 24 × 18 
Weight 
12 grams 
Operating Temperature 
-20 ℃ to +85 ℃ 
Power Consumption 
3.3 V, 66 mW 
Output Mode Selection 
Acceleration, Tilt Angle, or Tilt 
Angle Speed 
 
 
4.6 Camera sensor 
The external appearance and specifications of the camera 
sensor are shown in Figure 11 and Table 4, respectively.  
 
 
Figure 11.  Camera sensor. 
TABLE IV.  
SPECIFICATIONS OF CAMERA SENSOR 
Model 
OmniVision OV5642 
Active Array Size 
2592 x 1944 
Power Supply 
core: 1.5VDC±5%, analog: 2.6-
3.0 V, I/O: 1.7-3.0 V 
Temperature Range 
operating: -30 ℃ to +70 ℃ 
stable image: 0 ℃ to +50 ℃ 
Output Formats (8-bit) 
YUV(422/420)/YCbCr422, 
RGB565/555/444, CCIR656,    
8-bit compression data,         
8/10-bit raw RGB data 
Lenz Size 
1/4” 
Input Clock Frequency 
6-27 MHz 
Shutter 
rolling shutter 
Maximum Image Transfer 
Rate 
5 megapixel (2592x1944): 15 fps 
1080p (1920x1080): 30 fps 
720p (1280x720):60fps 
VGA (640x480): 60 fps 
QVGA (320x240): 120 fps 
Scan mode 
progressive 
Maximum Exposure Interval 
1968 x tROW 
Pixel Size 
1.4 μm x 1.4 μm 
Image Area 
3673.6μm x 2738.4 μm 
OmniVision OV5642, which is a CMOS camera module, 
is used as the camera sensor. It is compact, has low power 
consumption, supports digital data (YUV422) output, 
performs very well in poorly lite environments, and can 
acquire images at the timing of a trigger by inputting an 
external trigger. 
V. 
PERFORMANCE CONFIRMATION TESTS ON THE TIME 
SYNCHRONIZATION FUNCTION OF SENSOR DEVICES WITH 
DIGITAL ACCELEROMETER 
Tests were performed using a shaking table to confirm the 
performance of the developed digital sensor device. The 
objective was to confirm the measurement performance and 
time synchronization performance of the digital sensor 
device. Three sensor devices and a servo acceleration sensor 
for comparison were fixed on a shaking table as shown in 
Figures 12 and 13, the same vibrations were applied in one 
horizontal direction, and the results were compared. The 
analog output of the comparative servo acceleration sensor 
was input to the sensor devices via the external input interface. 
In the test, a sweep wave of 2 to 20 Hz as shown in Figures 
14 and 15 was applied to excite the shaking table as an input 
wave, and the measurement sampling frequency of the sensor 
devices was set to 1,000 Hz. 
 
 
Figure 12.  Experimental setup. 
 
Figure 13.  Sensor boards on shaking table. 
Shaking Table 
X direction 
Servo Acceleration 
Sensor 
47
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 14.  Input swept sine wave (2 to 20 Hz). 
 
Figure 15.  Power spectrum of input swept sine wave 
 
Figure 16.  Spectrum ratios of Fourier amplitudes of three sensor modules 
to servo-type acceleration sensor (X direction). 
 
Figure 17.  Spectrum ratios of Fourier amplitude of two slave modules to 
master module (X direction). 
 
Figure 18.  Spectrum ratios of Fourier phase of two slave modules to master 
module (X direction). 
Excitation was applied in the X-direction of the sensor 
devices, and measurement was performed by the sensor 
devices and the comparative servo acceleration sensor. 
Figure 16 shows the results of calculation of the Fourier 
amplitude spectrum ratios of the acceleration time history 
measured by the three sensor devices and the comparative 
servo acceleration sensor. The amplitude of the former three 
devices relative to the latter reflected the low pass filter 
characteristics of the digital sensors, so it can be seen that the 
digital acceleration sensor mounted on the sensor boards have 
good performance. 
Next, Figure 17 shows the results of obtaining the Fourier 
amplitude spectrum ratios for the measured acceleration data 
from two sensor devices (slaves) on the shaking table when 
the other sensor device was used as the master. The amplitude 
of the former two devices relative to the latter was perfectly 
flat over the frequency band 2 to 20 Hz, despite the measured 
results. In addition, Figure 18 shows the results of obtaining 
the Fourier phase spectrum ratios for the measured 
acceleration data from two sensor devices (slaves) on the 
shaking table when the other sensor device was used as the 
master. There is no phase delay between the sensor devices, 
and if the time synchronization was maintained it would be 
expected that it should be about zero over the frequency band 
2 to 20 Hz. From the figure, it can be seen that time 
synchronization has been achieved between the sensor 
devices. 
VI. 
PERFORMANCE VERIFICATION EXPERIMENT ON THE 
TIME SYNCHRONIZATION FUNCTION OF CAMERA SENSOR 
A performance verification experiment was carried out on 
the time synchronization function of the camera sensor. The 
experimental system configuration is shown in Figure 19. 
The trigger signal generated by the signal processing board is 
transmitted to the camera sensor and the FPGA of the LED 
control simultaneously. Since the shutter of the camera sensor 
and the lighting of the LEDs are synchronized, if the image 
can be acquired when the LEDs light up, it is considered that 
the image acquired is synchronized with the trigger. The 
FPGA for LED control shown in Figure 20 is configured to 
control the lighting of the LEDs at the clock timing of the 
trigger signal. As shown in Figure 12, 5×5 matrix LEDs light 
(s) 
48
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

up one by one from upper left to lower right according to the 
rise of the trigger signal. As shown in Figure 21, the matrix 
LEDs are photographed with the camera sensor fixed.  
Figure 22 shows the result of imaging by the camera 
sensor. Time elapses from the upper left to the lower right. 
Since the LEDs in the image light up one by one, images can 
be acquired according to the signal input to the FPGA for 
LED control. In the images, the LEDs light up two at a time, 
and it can be seen that the camera sensor has a certain delay 
with respect to the trigger. As shown in Figure 23, it was 
verified that images could be continuously acquired in 
synchronization with the trigger. 
 
 
Figure 19.  Camera data measurement system. 
 
Figure 20.  FPGA for LED control. 
 
Figure 21.  Matrix LEDs. 
 
Figure 22.  Imaging arrangement. 
The performance verification experiment on the time 
synchronization of developed camera sensor device was 
carried out as shown above. It is confirmed that time 
synchronization among the developed digital sensor devices 
with camera is achieved. The development of this digital 
sensing 
platform 
has 
enabled 
time-synchronized 
measurements between digital accelerometers, camera 
sensors, and many types of external input analog sensors, as 
well as multimodal analysis between measurement data. 
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, research and development relating to a 
digital sensing platform that autonomously retains highly 
accurate time information by applying a CSAC, was reported. 
First, a system based on a digital sensor and autonomous time 
synchronization by a CSAC was described, in which the 
development of a mechanism and a sensor device that add 
ultra-high-accuracy time information to sensor data using the 
CSAC were explained in detail. A function was added to 
assign the same time stamp as that of the output of the built-
in digital accelerometer, to the output of the camera sensor. 
Next, the results of tests performed to confirm the time 
synchronization performance of the sensor device were 
reported. Three sensor devices were mounted on a shaking 
table and tests were performed by applying vibrations 
simultaneously, and by checking the phase properties of the 
measurement 
results 
it 
was 
confirmed 
that 
time 
synchronization was achieved for sampling at 1,000 Hz. 
The results of an experiment carried out to verify the time 
synchronization performance of the camera sensor were also 
reported. In the future, the author plan to apply this new, 
different type of digital sensing platform to actual structures 
to acquire acceleration and video data that retain accurate time 
information. One possible problem is that although the timing 
accuracy of the CSAC is high, aging will occur in the long 
term, so it may be necessary to consider how to operate the 
sensing system according to the purpose and object of 
measurement. Further, as CSAC are currently expensive, it is 
hoped that they will be used more extensively in many fields. 
 
 
 
49
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 23.  Continuous images from the experimental result. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was partially supported by the New Energy and 
Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO) through 
the Project of Technology for Maintenance, Replacement and 
Management of Civil Infrastructure, Cross-ministerial Strategic 
Innovation Promotion Program (SIP). This research was also 
partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP19K04963. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Kurata, “High-precision Time Synchronization Digital 
Sensing Platform Enabling Connection of a Camera Sensor,” 
The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device 
Technologies and Applications (SENSORDEVICES 2021) 
IARIA, Nov. 2021, pp. 98-104, ISSN: 2308-3514, ISBN: 978-
1-61208-918-8 
[2] N. Kurata, M. Suzuki, S. Saruwatari, H. Morikawa, “Actual 
Application of Ubiquitous Structural Monitoring System using 
Wireless Sensor Networks,” 14th World Conference on 
Earthquake Engineering (14WCEE) IAEE, Oct. 2008, Paper 
ID:11-0037, pp. 1-8. 
[3] N. Kurata, M. Suzuki, S. Saruwatari, H. Morikawa, 
“Application of Ubiquitous Structural Monitoring System by 
Wireless Sensor Networks to Actual High-rise Building,” Fifth 
World Conference on Structural Control and Monitoring 
(5WCSCM) IASCM, July 2010, Paper No. 013, pp. 1-9. 
[4] N. Kurata, “Disaster Big Data Infrastructure using Sensing 
Technology with a Chip Scale Atomic Clock,” World 
Engineering Conference and Convention (WECC2015) WFEO, 
Dec. 2015, pp. 1-5. 
[5] N. Kurata, “Basic Study of Autonomous Time Synchronization 
Sensing Technology Using Chip Scale Atomic Clock,” 16th 
International Conference on Computing in Civil and Building 
Engineering (ICCCBE2016) ISCCBE, July 2016, pp. 67-74. 
[6] N. Kurata, “An Autonomous Time Synchronization Sensor 
Device Using a Chip Scale Atomic Clock for Earthquake 
Observation and Structural Health Monitoring” The Eighth 
International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and 
Applications (SENSORDEVICES 2017) IARIA, Sep. 2017, 
pp.31-36, ISSN: 2308-3514, ISBN: 978-1-61208-581-4 
50
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[7] S. Knappe, et al., “A Microfabricated Atomic Clock,” Applied 
Physics Letters, vol. 85, Issue 9, pp. 1460-1462, Aug. 2004, 
doi:10.1063/1.1787942. 
[8] Q. Li and D. Rus, “Global Clock Synchronization in Sensor 
Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 55, Issue 2, 
pp. 214-226, Jan. 2006, ISSN: 0018-9340. 
[9] R. Lutwak, et al., “The Chip-Scale Atomic Clock - Prototype 
Evaluation,” 39th Annual Precise Time and Time Interval 
(PTTI) Meeting, Nov. 2007, pp. 269-290. 
[10] N. Kurata, “Improvement and Application of Sensor Device 
Capable 
of 
Autonomously 
Keeping 
Accurate 
Time 
Information for Buildings and Civil Infrastructures,” The Ninth 
International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and 
Applications (SENSORDEVICES 2018) IARIA, Sep. 2018, pp. 
114-120, ISSN: 2308-3514, ISBN: 978-1-61208-660-6 
[11] N. Kurata, “A Sensing System with High Accurate Time 
Synchronization for Earthquake Observation and Structural 
Health Monitoring of Structures,” 17th World Conference on 
Earthquake Engineering (17WCEE) IAEE, Oct. 2021, Paper 
No. 9a-0008, pp. 1-9. 
[12] D. Mills, “Internet Time Synchronization: the Network Time 
Protocol,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 39, 
Issue 10, Oct. 1991, pp. 1482-1493, doi:10.1109/26.103043. 
[13] M. Maroti, B. Kusy, G. Simon, and A. Ledeczi, “The Flooding 
Time Synchronization Protocol,” Proc. the 2nd International 
Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems (SenSys 
'04) 
ACM, 
Nov. 
2004, 
pp. 
39-49, 
doi:10.1145/1031495.1031501. 
[14] J. Spilker Jr., P. Axelrad, B. Parkinson and P. Enge, “Global 
Positioning System: Theory and Applications,” Vol. I, 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), 
1996, ISBN: 978-1-56347-106-3. 
[15] J. Elson, L. Girod, and D. Estrin, “Fine-Grained Network Time 
Synchronization using Reference Broadcasts,” Proc. 5th 
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation 
(OSDI’02), 
Dec. 
2002, 
pp. 
147-163, 
doi:10.1145/844128.844143. 
[16] S. Ganeriwal, R. Kumar, and M. B. Srivastava, “Timing-sync 
Protocol for Sensor Networks,” Proc. the 1st International 
Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems (SenSys 
'03) 
ACM, 
Nov. 
2003, 
pp. 
138-149, 
doi:10.1145/958491.958508. 
[17] K. Romer, “Time Synchronization in Ad Hoc Networks,” Proc. 
the 2nd ACM International Symp. on Mobile Ad Hoc 
Networking & Computing (MobiHoc’01) ACM, Oct. 2001, pp. 
173-182, doi:10.1145/501436.501440. 
[18] A. Alzughaibi, A. Ibrahim, Y. Na, S. El-Tawil, A. Eltawil, 
“Feasibility of Utilizing Smart-phone Cameras for Seismic 
Structural Damage Detection,” 2020 IEEE International 
Instrumentation and Measurement Technology Conference 
(I2MTC) IEEE, May 2020, pp. 173-182, pp. 1-5, ISSN: 2642-
2069, ISBN: 978-1-7281-4461-0 
[19] S. Yaryshev, L. Li, M. Marinov, T. Djamiykov, “Development 
of a Digital Camera-Based Method for Bridge Deformation 
Measurement,” 
2020 
XXIX 
International 
Scientific 
Conference Electronics (ET) IEEE, Sep. 2020, pp. 1-4, ISBN: 
978-1-7281-7427-3 
 
 
 
51
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

