Radiation Pattern Characteristics of Multiple Band-Notched Ultra Wideband 
Antenna with Asymmetry Slot Reconfiguration 
 
Yusnita Rahayu 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
Faculty of Engineering, University of Riau 
Pekanbaru 28293, Riau, Indonesia  
E-mail: vannebula2001@yahoo.com 
Razali Ngah 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering 
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia 
Johor Bahru, 81310, Malaysia 
E-mail: razalin@fke.utm.my
 
 
Abstract- Radiation pattern characteristics of reconfigurable 
asymmetry slotted ultra wideband antenna with multiple 
band-notched is presented. The proposed antenna is planar 
monopole, consisting of a microstrip feed line and modified L 
and U slots with a pentagonal patch on the front side and half 
ground plane is on the back side of the board. The 
measurements were conducted by using Radio Frequency 
measurement and instrumentation facilities, software tools 
available at the Wireless Communication Center in Universiti 
Teknologi Malaysia. The modified antennas are designed for 
having reconfigurable frequency notched at Fixed Wireless 
Access, High Performance Local Area Network, and Wireless 
Local Area Network. A good agreement is achieved between 
simulated and measured Voltage Standing Wave Ratio results. 
The measured result is approximately less than 2.2 over 3 GHz 
to 10 GHz. It was also observed that the measured radiation 
patterns, H-planes, are omnidirectional with a slight gain 
decreased at boresight direction for measuring frequencies. 
There are also more ripples occurred in the measured pattern 
compared with the simulated one. Comparison measured 
radiation patterns between asymmetry slotted antenna with 
and without notch band characteristic have been done. 
Multiple reflections, rotator alignment, probe rotary joint and 
room scattering are found as primary sources of errors that 
cause degradation in measured radiation patterns. Current 
distribution characteristic of the antenna is also reviewed. 
Keywords- 
reconfigurable 
antenna, 
slotted 
antenna, 
radiation pattern,  ultra wideband, band-notched antenna.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Reconfigurable antenna is defined as the antenna 
capability to reconfigure several parameters such as 
operating frequencies, impedance bandwidth, polarizations, 
and radiation patterns to fulfill operating requirements. The 
development of this antenna posses significant challenges to 
both antenna and system designers. The challenges lie not 
only in obtaining the desired level of antenna functionality 
but also in integrating this functionality into complete 
systems to arrive at efficient and cost effective solution.  
This section reviews the concept of reconfigurable 
antennas that reuse their entire geometry for band-notched 
frequency Applications. Paper [1] is taken as a reference 
paper for this extension works. The concept is that each 
operating band resonates on the portion of the entire antenna 
geometry, therefore there is almost no extra size required to 
create multiband characteristics. A frequency shift can be 
achieved by connecting or disconnecting one or more 
antenna elements. Every configuration of an antenna will 
have a different resonating frequency and different radiation 
pattern. An antenna has to be designed with the objective 
that it should exhibit banding-notched behaviour and has to 
be compact. Various techniques used have been reported in 
literature [1][2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13][14][15].  
In [2], there are two varieties of slotted antennas which 
have a frequency notched reported, a triangular notch and 
elliptical notch. Both antennas have frequency notch 
characteristics where the arc length of slots form a half 
wavelength resonance structure of particular frequencies, 
thus a destructive interference takes place causing the 
antennas to be non-responsive at that frequency. Other types 
of this kind antenna was reported in [5], a band-notched 
UWB (ultra wideband) antenna using a slot-type SRR (split 
ring resonator) was found very effective in rejecting 
unwanted frequency, such as that for WLAN (Wireless Local 
Area Network) service, in terms of its selectivity and small 
dimension. The SRR is composed of two concentric split 
ring slots and proposed for band stop application, since it 
provides a high Q characteristic. The slotted SRR was 
positioned near the feeding point to provide more coupling 
with the field. A multiple band-notched planar monopole 
antenna using multiple U-shape slots for multi band wireless 
system was also presented in [6]. The half wavelength U-
shape slots were symmetrically inserted in the center of the 
planar element. In order to generate the two bands-notched 
characteristics, three U-shape slots were proposed.  
The notch bands were also obtained by inserting an L-
shaped slot in the ground plane [13]. The proposed antenna 
was fed by CPW (coplanar waveguide). By altering the 
length of the L-shaped slot, it can easily adjust the notched 
frequency. The similar techniques were also proposed in 
[14], the reject frequency was obtained by cutting a 
rectangular slot in the CPW ground which reduces the 
potential interference between UWB systems and the narrow 
systems. Thus, it is found that the use of slots for a patch or 
ground 
plane 
significantly 
provide 
band-notched 
characteristics. 
An alternative antenna design without using the slot to 
obtain band-notched characteristic was proposed in [7]. The 
antenna consists of two same size monopoles and a small 
strip bar at the center showing the band rejection 
90
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

performance in the desired frequency bands. The use of strip 
bar leads to high impedance at the notch frequency. The total 
length of strip bar from the ground plane is equal to a 
quarter-wavelength at the notch frequency. 
In this paper, novel reconfigurable UWB antennas are 
designed by adopting the half wavelength slot structure 
technique. This technique has been found and proven in 
[2][5][6][13][14] as a very effective technique in providing 
band-notched characteristics. This paper mainly focuses on 
the reconfigurable notch band through the introduction of 
new slots, L and U slots, on the pentagonal patch antenna. 
This asymmetry couple slot, L and U, creates a  new novelty 
slot design. Most published papers use a uniform and 
symmetry slot structure for their antenna design. In this 
paper, it is shown that the asymmetry slots can be designed 
to form band-notched characteristics with comparable results 
to others. This slot structure chosen is mostly influenced by 
current distribution surrounding the antenna patch.  
Section II will discuss the antenna geometry and its 
current distribution characteristics. The techniques to design 
new reconfigurable slotted antennas having band-notched 
frequencies are also presented. The band-notched operation 
is achieved by incorporating some small gaps instead of pin 
diodes into the slot antenna. The term of small gaps in this 
paper will refer to switches. The switches are used to short 
the slot in pre-selected positions along the circumference. 
The length of the slot antenna can be lengthened or shorted 
by closing or opening the switches, allowing for a change in 
the 
notched 
frequency. 
Then 
the performances of 
reconfigurable antennas, in terms of the VSWR (voltage 
standing wave ratio) and radiation patterns, will be discussed 
and evaluated in Section III. Comparison measured radiation 
patterns between slotted antenna with and without band-
notched characteristic is also discussed. Errors in measured 
radiation patterns are further analyzed and presented. Finally, 
a conclusion will be given in Section IV. 
II. 
ANTENNA DESIGN 
Fig. 1 shows the proposed antenna structure printed on 
the FR4 substrate of εr = 4.6. The pentagonal antenna is 
vertically installed above a ground plane (lgrd) of 11 mm. The 
optimum feed gap (h) to the ground plane is found to be 1.5 
mm. The dimension of substrate is chosen to be 30 x 30 mm2 
(Wsub x Lsub) in this study. The antenna has a pentagonal 
patch with a width (w) of 15 mm and a length (l) of 12 mm. 
This shape is as a variety of rectangular shape with bevel 
techniques. This antenna geometry is similar to the antenna 
geometry presented in [1].  
The slots proposed on patch effectively change its 
electrical length over a very wide bandwidth. Slot 
dimensions of the proposed antenna are listed in Table 1. 
The slot width is 0.5 mm in order to improve the bandwidth 
above 10 GHz. Asymmetry slot design, L and U, on this 
proposed antenna results novelty structure of the slotted 
UWB antenna, this is as one of contribution in this paper. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Current Distribution Characteristics 
The geometry of the antenna implies the current courses 
and makes it possible to identify the active zone in the 
antenna. Active zone is the matching and radiator zone. 
Acting on matching and radiating areas allows controlling 
the bandwidth [12].  
The couple slots, L and U, are designed very carefully 
by studying the current flow distribution which will give 
input impedance improvement. The study of the current 
distribution for bandwidth enhancement has been conducted 
in [16]. The current flows on a planar monopole antenna 
reveals that it is mostly concentrated in the vertical and 
horizontal edges as shown in Fig. 2(a). The current 
distribution on patch surface is disturbed by the introduction 
of new slots, L and U, as presented in Fig. 2(b). 
It is observed that the horizontal current distributions are 
focused on the bottom edge of pentagonal patch. The 
discontinuity occurred from beveling at the bottom side of 
the patch and has enforced the excitation of vertical current 
mode in the structure, which presents a very wide 
bandwidth. 
 
 
Lsub
Wsub
lgrd
Unit
 [mm]
ls1
ls2
ls3
ls4
w
l
h
w
2
 
 
Figure 1. Geometry of L and U slotted antenna 
TABLE I. DIMENSION OF L AND U SLOT 
 
Description 
L and U Slots 
Symbol 
Size [mm] 
Slot length 
Is1 
6 
Is2 
9 
Is3 
3 
Is4 
6.5 
 
91
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Fig. 2(b), the current distribution is less of the area 
between both slots. However, these slots have resulted more 
vertical currents flowing to the patch. The U slot is designed 
to improve the upper dip resonance and the L slot improves 
the lower dip resonance. Individual L and U slot current 
distribution with their simulated results was reviewed in 
[17]. The coupling both slots has shown a good return loss 
with respect to -10 dB over UWB frequency range as 
presented in Fig. 3(a).  
B. Simulated and Measured Return Loss 
The simulated and measured return loss is presented in 
Fig. 3(a). The measured return loss is slightly shifted to the 
simulated one, but they still cover 2.5 GHz to 10.1 GHz as 
what the UWB required. The length of L slot is 14.5 mm 
approximately equal to 0.25λ at 5.3 GHz, and the length of 
U slot is 11.5 mm approximately equal to 0.4λ at 10.3 GHz. 
It is also observed that the width of slots chosen affect to 
the return loss of dip resonance especially at an upper 
frequency as shown in Fig. 3(b). The width of 0.5 mm 
results -28 dB of return loss at 10.3 GHz. 
Frequency (GHz)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Return Loss (dB)
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Simulated L and U slotted antenna
Measured L and U slotted antenna
(a) 
Frequency (GHz)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Return Loss (dB)
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
width 0.5mm
width 1mm
(b) 
 
Figure 3. Simulated and measured return loss 
 
This measurement was done by using a 50-Ω SMA 
connector which is soldered at the bottom edge of microstrip 
line and connected to the network analyzer by an RF (Radio 
Frequency) cable. The RF cable significantly affects the 
performance of the AUT (antenna under test). However, 
some differences in the simulated and measured results are 
expected, since in the simulation model the mismatch due to 
the adapter and connector used are not taken into 
consideration. In reality the coaxial cable has a considerable 
effect, especially the length of its inner conductor, which is 
connected to the input of the antenna, creating an additional 
inductance. In addition, since the antenna is fed by a 
microstrip line, misalignment can result because etching is 
required on both sides of the dielectric substrate. The 
alignment error results degradation to the antenna 
performance.  
 
 
 
 
             (a) 
 
     
                                           (b)     
 
Figure 2. Current distribution characteristics 
92
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

C. Reconfigurable Techniques 
As mentioned in Section 1, the half wavelength slot 
structure technique is used in designing the proposed UWB 
slotted antenna. The main purpose here is how to design the 
reconfigurable UWB slotted antenna without major 
modification from the previous antenna design presented in 
[16][17]. The unique of this proposed reconfigurable UWB 
antenna is the antenna has additional ability in rejecting the 
FWA (Fixed Wireless Access) band, whereas most existing 
papers focusing in rejecting WLAN and HIPERLAN (High 
Performance Local Area Network) bands. Licensed band at 
FWA for point to multipoint radio systems assigned by 
MCMC (Malaysian Communications and Multimedia 
Commissions) for 3.4 to 3.7 GHz is considered giving 
potential interference to UWB application. This is due to the 
allocation frequency for this FWA within the UWB range. 
Therefore, recently the consideration of UWB antennas is 
not only focused on an extremely wide frequency bandwidth, 
but on the ability of rejecting the interference from WLAN 
11.a (5725–5825 MHz) and HIPERLAN (5150–5350 MHz) 
within the same propagation environment. Thus, the 
proposed notched antenna is not only designed to reject 
interference from WLAN, HIPERLAN but also from FWA. 
The basic geometry of L and U slotted antenna will be 
taken as a reference to form a new modified L and U 
reconfigurable slotted antennas. There are maximum six 
switches used to provide the reconfigurable function. No 
especial matching network is used and the matching 
properties are solely determined by the placement of the 
switches.. The number of switches used and their placement 
are based on the notched band required. The on-off switches 
will determine the total slot length at a certain notched band. 
With the notched band characteristic, the antenna allows to 
reconfigurable its frequency that only responds to other 
frequencies beyond the rejection bands within the UWB 
bandwidth. However, the dimensions of the antenna and 
substrate are kept equal to the original model.  
For the simulation purposed, the switches are considered 
as ideal switches and are modeled as small patches that 
connect or disconnect the adjacent slot, changing the 
antenna’s slot length. 
In Fig. 4, the switches have different colors for on and 
off state condition. Blue color represents the on state 
condition and red color for the off state condition. In order 
to provide the UWB characteristic, the switches are placed 
as shown in Fig. 4(a).  Three switches of #2, #3, and #4 are 
in the off state position. Other switches of #1, #5, and #6 are 
in the on state condition. When the switches are in the off 
state condition, the gap between slots occurs and the current 
flowing to the gap. When the switches are in the on state 
condition, there is no current flowing to the slots. Thus it 
forms continuous slots. The switches of #2 and #3 are 
incorporated to the first additional slot (Is20) which is 3.5 
mm of slot length. The switch of #4 is attached to the 
second additional slot (Is21) which is 2.5 mm of slot length. 
The two additional slot lengths, Is20 and Is21, are very 
critically determined by the frequency notched band 
characteristics. 
ls19
ls18
ls17
ls16
ls20
ls21
off
on
ls19
ls18
ls17
ls16
ls20
ls21
off
on
#1
#2
#3
#4
#5
#6
#1
#2
#3
#4
#5
#6
 
               (a)                                        (b) 
ls19
ls18
ls17
ls16
ls20
ls21
off
on
ls19
ls18
ls17
ls16
ls20
ls21
off
on
#6
#5
#4
#3
#2
#1
#3
#2
#1
#4
#5
#6
     
     (c)                                                 (d) 
Figure 4. Switching configuration for L and U slotted antennas: (a) without 
notched, (b) notched at FWA, (c) notched at HIPERLAN, (d) notched at 
WLAN 
To accommodate the notch frequency at FWA band, the 
length of U slot is lengthened than the previous model. Thus, 
six switches are used and placed systematically. The 
frequency notched characteristic antenna at FWA is shown 
in Fig. 4(b). All switches are in the on state position 
(continuous slot). Total slot lengths are 32 mm or 
approximately equal to 0.4λ at 3.7 GHz. The total slot 
lengths mean the sum of slot lengths of L, U and additional 
slots. Fig. 4(c) and Fig. 4(d) present the frequency notched 
characteristic 
antenna 
at 
HIPERLAN 
and 
WLAN, 
respectively. To reject interference from HIPERLAN, the 
switches of #1, #4, and #6 are in the off state position while 
switches of #2, #3, and #5 are in the on state position. It is 
investigated that by inserting those switches in the off state 
condition broke the connection between slots. This break 
connection has reduced the slot length to be 20.75 mm or 
approximately equal to 0.33λ at 5.2 GHz. Thus, the antenna 
has a frequency notched at HIPERLAN. The total slot length 
is measured by the length of connecting slots.  
The configuration of switches in Fig. 4(d) have resulted 
an antenna with frequency notched at WLAN. It is shown 
that the switch of #5 is set in the off state position in order to 
reduce the slot length, while the switch of #6 is set in the on 
93
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

state position. This is the only difference while comparing to 
the HIPERLAN configuration. Total slot lengths are 18 mm 
or approximately equal to 0.33λ at 5.75 GHz and measured 
by the length of connecting slots. 
For prototype development, the gaps are created in the 
UWB antenna pattern, which are represented as switches. 
The dimensions of switches used in these prototypes are      
0.7 mm× 1 mm. Although this model is ideal, it gives a good 
approximation for the commercial pin diode switches. The 
photograph of the antenna prototype that has a band-notched 
at FWA is shown in Fig. 5.  
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL VERIFICATION 
Fig. 6 shows the simulated and measured VSWR for 
reconfigurable modified L and U slotted antennas. By 
varying the slot lengths and break the connection between 
slots using switches, the proposed frequency notched is 
achieved.  
The simulated results show the FWA notched band 
obtained from 3.57 GHz to 3.86 GHz with the total slot 
length of 32 mm at 3.7 GHz, which is the center frequency. 
While the HIPERLAN and WLAN notched bands are from 
4.84 GHz to 5.33 GHz and 5.53 GHz to 6.02 GHz, 
respectively. It is noted that beyond the frequency notched 
bands, the VSWR is kept to be less than 2. 
The measured VSWR is approximately less than 2.2 
over 3 GHz to 10 GHz, except for the antenna with band-
notched at HIPERLAN band. The VSWR beyond 9.5 GHz 
is getting worse. For band-notched at FWA, the rejection is 
in the range of 3.76 GHz to 4.25 GHz, and the rejection of 
HIPERLAN is 5.23 GHz to 5.53 GHz. The antenna with 
band-notched at WLAN band has the rejection in the range 
of 5.72 GHz to 6.1 GHz. Even though the band-notched 
slightly shifted from the required bands, but it still covers 
the rejection bandwidth.  
 
 
 
Figure 5. Photograph of FWA notch band antenna 
 
Frequency (GHz)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
VSWR
0
2
4
6
8
10
Notched at FWA
Notched at HIPERLAN
Notched at WLAN
(a) Simulated 
Frequency (GHz)
0
2
4
6
8
10
VSWR
0
2
4
6
8
10
TL = 29 mm (FWA)
TL = 17 mm (HIPERLAN)
TL = 16 mm (WLAN)
 
(b) Measured 
 
Figure 6. Simulated and measured VSWR for reconfigurable modified L 
and U slotted antennas 
 
A. Spherical Near-Field Testing 
Once the resonance frequencies were identified, 
principal radiation patterns were taken to characterize the 
operational 
performance 
of 
each 
antenna. 
These 
measurements were obtained using the indoor anechoic 
chamber room. For these measurements, the chamber was 
arranged as shown in Fig. 7. 
From Fig. 7, it shows the measurement setup for both 
antenna and probe which were mounted to the vertical 
positioned-holders. The probes available at the chamber are 
in the frequency ranges of 3.95 – 5.85 GHz and 8.95 – 12 
GHz, respectively. 
The existing chamber employed the spherical near-field 
measurement. By definition, near-field tests are done by 
sampling the field very close to the antenna on a known 
surface. From the phase and amplitude data collected, the 
94
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

far-field pattern must be computed in much the same 
fashion that theoretical patterns are computed from 
theoretical field distributions. The transformation used in 
the computation depends on the shape of the surface over 
which the measurements are taken with the scanning probe 
[18]. 
This spherical system acquired a double data set on the 
AUT. The ‘360phi’ data set is taken with full 360o phi 
rotation of the AUT, but with only 0o – 180o motion in theta. 
In this mode, the AUT’s Z axis will only be looking at one 
side of the chamber during the measurement [19]. The AUT 
was swept every 2o increment in the azimuth plane in order 
to reduce the aliasing errors. Data point spacing aliasing 
errors will occur for spherical near-field measurements if 
the data point spacing is not small enough to sample the 
highest spatial frequency components in the measured data 
[19]. 
The radiation patterns were measured at 4 GHz and 5.8 
GHz. The measured radiation patterns were plotted into H 
(horizontal) and V (vertical) cuts. The H-cut is cut for the 
azimuth plane with the fixed elevation angle at 00 and vary 
the azimuth angle. The V-cut is cut for the elevation plane 
with a fixed azimuth angle at 00 and vary the elevation 
angle. 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 7. The radiation pattern measurement setup inside the anechoic 
chamber room 
B. Radiation Pattern Measurement 
Radiation pattern's measurements have been done for 
both proposed antennas with and without band-notched 
characteristic. Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 show the radiation pattern 
results at 4 GHz and 5.8 GHz for antenna without band-
notched characteristic, respectively. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 8. Simulated and measured E and H-planes for the slotted antenna at 
4 GHz (without notched band) 
 
All radiation patterns were measured and examined for 
both E and H-planes. They show acceptable results where 
the overall H-planes for both frequencies providing 
omnidirectional patterns. But, the more ripples occur in the 
measured E-planes radiation pattern. This is due to some 
errors during the measurement process. 
 
 
 
 
95
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 9. Simulated and measured E and H-planes for the slotted antenna at 
5.8 GHz (without notched band) 
 
Measured 
and 
simulated 
radiation 
patterns 
of 
reconfigurable antennas with band-notched characteristic 
are plotted in Fig. 10 to Fig. 15. Comparison radiation 
patterns for both proposed antennas have been done. From 
the results obtained, all H-plane patterns show nearly similar 
patterns, omnidirectional, for all measured frequencies. But, 
the E-plane patterns show the variation patterns for each 
frequency.  
Fig. 10 and Fig. 11 show the radiation patterns of 
antenna notched at FWA for 4 GHz and 5.8 GHz, 
respectively. From both figures, there are slightly back-
lobes present for the E-planes. Both H-planes are 
omnidirectional with a slight gain decreased at boresight 
direction. The H-planes patterns retain a satisfactory omni-
directionality (less than 10 dB gain variation in most 
directions) over the entire bandwidth in both simulation and 
experimental. 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 10. Simulated and measured E and H-planes at 4 GHz for antenna 
notched at FWA 
The E-plane pattern is the radiation pattern measured in 
a plane containing feed, and the H-plane pattern is the 
radiation pattern in a plane orthogonal to the E-plane. 
The results show that the radiation patterns are changing 
as the frequency increases. The patterns resulted from the 
measurements have many ripples in amplitude due to many 
reflections into the field between the AUT and probe. The 
reflections may come from the room (floor and ceiling), 
chamber scattering, antenna holder itself and track inside the 
anechoic chamber. It is shown in previous Fig. 7, the 
antenna size is very small compared to its huge holder, and 
also the floor and the track surrounding the antenna tower 
are not all covered by absorber.  
 
 
 
 
96
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 11. Simulated and measured E and H-planes at 5.8 GHz for antenna 
notched at FWA 
 
Fig. 12 to Fig. 15 shows the radiation patterns for 
antenna notched at HIPERLAN and WLAN. The E and H-
planes are measured at 4 GHz and 5.8 GHz for both testing. 
It is observed that the measured E-planes for antenna 
notched at HIPERLAN broader than the measured E-planes 
for antenna notched at FWA. However, the patterns resulted 
from the measurement are still having many ripples in 
amplitude. Due to the track surrounding the antenna tower 
are not all covered by absorber, if moved sideways about 
half cycle the ripples occur and if moved vertically the 
ceiling and floor reflections are indicated. The most 
significant is probably from improper cable connectors 
allowing excitation of the outside surface [18]. Leakage will 
be added to the measured pattern as degradation. Both H-
planes are omnidirectional.  
 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 12. Simulated and measured E and H-planes at 4 GHz for antenna 
notched at HIPERLAN 
 
The measured radiation patterns demonstrate that at the 
low end of the operating band,  the currents are well 
distributed over the patch antenna plate so the patterns are 
relatively broad. But at the high end of the operating band, 
the currents are concentrated near the slot, thus the fields 
radiate mainly through the slot. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
97
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
   
 
 
                        (a) 
 
 
 
 
              (b) 
 
Figure 13. Simulated and measured E and H-planes at 5.8 GHz for antenna notched at HIPERLAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (a) 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 14. Simulated and measured E and H-planes at 4 GHz for antenna notched at WLAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     (a) 
 
 
 
 
             (b) 
Figure 15. Simulated and measured E and H-planes at 5.8 GHz for antenna notched at WLAN 
98
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

C. Estimating Error Analysis in Radiation Pattern 
Measurement 
Since the measured radiation patterns obtained have 
many ripples and dips for the E-planes, the error analysis 
have been done to estimate the uncertainty and the caused of 
the error. The development of analysis and measurements to 
estimate the error during measurement in spherical near-field 
has been conducted in [19] [20]. 
During measurement process, several requirements are 
needed to take into consideration. It is observed that multiple 
reflections, rotator alignment, probe rotary joint and room 
scattering are shown as primary sources of errors that cause 
degradation in measured radiation pattern. Multiple 
reflections between AUT and probe produce the ripple in the 
measured data. The correction is difficult to do due to the 
need a series of near-field measurement at Z-positions 
separated by λ/8. The far-fields are then calculated for each 
and averaged [21]. In the case of multiple reflections and 
random errors, multiple measurements are required.  
Fig. 16 shows the example of the random errors 
presented during measurement. These measured patterns are 
from repeated measurement at 5.8 GHz for L and U slotted 
antenna. Some corrections on the AUT alignments have also 
been done. From the pattern comparison graphics show the 
random error occurs in amplitude and phase during multiple 
measurements. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When the AUT is not precisely aligned to reference 
coordinate system, vector components or coordinate angles 
may change for some rotation. This correction can be done 
by realigning the AUT position. 
The rotator alignment for spherical is a special case of 
position errors. The orthogonally and intersection of the 
theta and phi axes and the coincidence of the phi and probe 
polarization axes can be checked by measuring and 
comparing near-field cuts at θ = 0 and 180 degrees. The 
misalignment can be corrected by adjustments of the 
mechanical system. However, the difference values still 
present at those near-field cuts of measured data. 
The probe rotary joints associated with the theta and phi 
rotators produce some amplitude and phase variations as it is 
moved and this is as a function of theta and phi. The error 
can be observed from the measured data by comparing the 
amplitudes and phases of the two components at (θ, φ) 
coordinates, (0, 0) and (0,180) [20]. At these points, the 
amplitude should be identical and the phases should be either 
identical or 180 degrees different. This error is more 
important at high frequencies where rotary joints may not be 
as accurate. From the measured data obtained, it is observed 
that the variations have presented in amplitudes and phases 
for those points of both proposed antennas. Thus, this error 
contributes to the uncertainty in far-field results. 
Both probe and room scattering can produce higher 
spatial frequencies in the data. The smaller data point 
spacing is needed to avoid the aliasing errors. The room 
scattering effect can be more severe when low gain AUT’s 
are being measured [20]. In this measurement, the 2o data 
point spacing is used for scanner movement. Scattering from 
structures and absorber introduces an error that is difficult to 
estimate. This is because the procedure is demanding and 
time consuming. The AUT and probe must be translated 
together in a combination of X, Y and Z movements while 
maintaining precise angular alignment. The translations 
should be at least multiple wavelengths in dimension and the 
AUT must be realigned in the new position. Comparison of 
the patterns from the two locations provides an estimate of 
the room scattering but it is difficult to distinguish from 
alignment differences, probe/AUT multiple reflections and 
system drift [20]. 
It is concluded that obtaining true patterns depends 
primarily on accurately positioning the probe, accurately 
measuring the field, and eliminating distortions in the field 
introduced by the room, tracks, or probe. The room 
reflections must be lower than the basic side-lobes level and 
the probe must have low reflections. The probe position must 
be accurate to give better tolerance corresponding to the 
side-lobe level. In a spherical near-field range, the spherical 
measurement surface will be imperfect due to inaccuracies of 
the positioners and misalignment of these positioners [19]. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Novel reconfigurable asymmetry slotted antennas with 
band-notched characteristic at FWA, HIPERLAN, and 
WLAN band have been successfully designed and 
developed. The measured VSWR less than 2.2 is achieved.   
The radiation pattern behaviour for both proposed antennas 
with and without band-notched characteristic has been 
examined. The omnidirectional patterns are obtained for all 
measured H-plane patterns at 4 GHz and 5.8 GHz for both 
antennas. The E-plane patterns show a unique pattern for 
each frequency. It tends to radiate broadly in all directions 
but more ripples occur due to some errors during the 
 
Figure 16. An example of results of random errors for L 
and U slotted antenna at 5.8 GHz 
99
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

measurement process. Current distribution characteristic for 
the asymmetry slotted antenna is presented as well. It is 
shown that the introduction of asymmetry slots has 
disturbed the current flow on pentagonal patch. Six switches 
are attached to the antenna for reconfigurable purpose. By 
varying the slot length, the frequency notched antennas are 
performed at certain frequencies. Errors in measured 
radiation patterns are further analyzed. It is concluded that 
several requirements need to take into consideration during 
measurement process such as rotator alignment, room 
scattering and probe rotary joint. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to thank the Wireless 
Communication Center (WCC) of Universiti Teknologi 
Malaysia for their supporting and facilitating this research.   
REFERENCES 
[1] Yusnita Rahayu, Azlyna Senawi, and Razali Ngah, “Radiation 
Pattern Behaviour of Reconfigurable Asymmetry Slotted 
Ultra Wideband Antenna,” Proc. The Seventh International 
Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications 
(ICWMC 2011), June. 2011, pp. 81-86, ISBN: 978-1-61208-
140-3. 
[2] H. G. Schant, G. Wolenec, and E. M. Myszka, “Frequency 
Notched UWB Antenna,” Proc. IEEE Conference on Ultra 
Wideband Systems and Technologies (UWBST), Nov. 2003, 
pp. 214-218, doi: 19.1109/UWBST.2003.1267835. 
[3] Yongjin Kim and Do-Hoon Kwon, “CPW-Fed Planar Ultra-
Wideband Antenna Having a Frequency Band Notch 
Function,” Electronics Letters, vol. 40(7), April. 2004, pp. 
403-405, doi: 10.1049/el:20040302. 
[4] Saou-Wen Su, Kin-Lu Wong, and Fa-Shian Chang, “Compact 
Printed Ultra-Wideband Slot Antenna with a Band Notched 
Operation,” Microwave & Optical Technology Letters, vol. 
45(2), April. 2005, pp. 128-130, doi: 10.1002/mop.20746. 
[5] J. Kim, C. S. Cho, and J. W. Lee, “5.2 GHz Notched Ultra-
Wideband Antenna Using Slot-type SRR,” Electronics 
Letters, vol. 42(6),  March. 2007, pp. 315-316, doi: 
10.1049/el:20063713. 
[6] Wang-Sang Lee, W. G. Lim, and Jong-Won Yu, “Multiple 
Band-Notched Planar Monopole Antenna for Multiband 
Wireless 
Systems,” 
IEEE 
Microwave 
and 
Wireless 
Components Letters, vol. 15(9),  Sept. 2005, pp. 576-578, doi: 
10.1109/LMWC.2005.855374.   
[7] Seokjin Hong, Kyungho Chung, and Jaehoon Choi, “Design 
of 
a 
Band-Notched 
Wideband 
Antenna 
for 
UWB 
Applications,” Proc. IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society 
International Symposium, July. 2006, pp. 1709-1712, doi: 
10.1109/APS.2006.1710892.  
[8] K. C. L. Chan and Yi Huang, “A Compact Semi-Circular 
Disk Dipole with Notched Band for UWB Applications,” 
Proc. The Institution of Engineering and Technology Seminar 
on Ultra Wideband Systems, Technologies, and Applications, 
April. 2006, pp. 226-230, ISBN: 0-86341-625-X.  
[9] Kyungho Chung, Jaemoung Kim, and Jaehoon Choi, 
“Wideband Microstrip-Fed Monopole Antenna Having 
Frequency Band Notch Function,” IEEE Microwave and 
Wireless Components Letters, vol. 15(11),  Nov. 2005, pp. 
766-768, doi: 10.1109/LMWC.2005.858969.  
[10] Yongjin Kim and Do-Hoon Kwon, “Planar Ultra Wideband 
Slot Antenna with Frequency Band Notch Function,” Proc. 
IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society International 
Symposium, vol. 2,  June. 2004, pp. 1788-1791, doi: 
10.1109/APS.2004.1330545.  
[11] Tamer Aboufoul and Akram Alomainy, “Reconfigurable 
Printed UWB Circular Disc Monopole Antenna,” Proc. IEEE 
Loughborough Antennas & Propagation Conference (LAPC), 
Nov. 2011, pp. 1-4,  doi: 10.1109/LAPC.2011.6114078. 
[12] I. Pele, Y. Mahe, A. Chousseaud, S. Toutain, and P. Y. Garel, 
“Antenna Design with Control of Radiation Pattern and 
Frequency Bandwidth,” Proc.  IEEE Antennas and 
Propagation Society International Symposium, vol. 1, June.  
2004,  pp. 783-786, doi: 10.1109/APS.2004.1329787. 
[13] Luyang Ji, Guang Fu, Jiayue Zhao, and Qiyilu, “CPW-fed 
UWB Antenna with the Design of Controlable Band Notch,” 
Proc. 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Electronics, 
Communications and Control (ICECC), Sept. 2011, pp. 788 – 
790, doi: 10.1109/ICECC.2011.6067554. 
[14] Henan Wang and Ying Song Li, “Bandwidth Enhancement of 
A Wide Slot UWB Antenna with A Notch Band 
Characteristic,” Proc. IEEE 3rd International Conference on 
Communication Software and Networks (ICCSN), May. 
2011, pp. 365-368, doi: 10.1109/ICCSN.2011.6014070.  
[15] R. Movahedinia, M. Ojaroudi, and S. S. Madani, “Small 
Modified Monopole Antenna for Ultra-Wideband Application 
with Desired Frequency Band-Notch Function,” IET 
Microwaves, Antennas & Propagation, Aug. 2011, vol. 5(11),  
pp. 1380-1385, doi: 10.1049/iet-map.2009.0560. 
[16] Yusnita Rahayu, Tharek Abd. Rahman, Razali Ngah, P. S. 
Hall, Numerical Analysis of Small Slotted Ultra Wideband 
Antenna Based on Current Distribution for Bandwidth 
Enhancement, Ultra-Wideband, Short Pulse Electromagnetics 
9 (UWB SP 9), 2010, Springer Publication, Part 4, pp. 215-
223, doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-77845-7_25.  
[17] Yusnita Rahayu, Tharek Abd. Rahman, Razali Ngah, P. S. 
Hall, “Small Printed Ultra Wideband Antenna with Having A 
Coupled Slot,” Proc. IEEE Loughborough Antennas & 
Propagation Conference (LAPC), Nov. 2009, pp. 397-400, doi: 
10.1109/LAPC.2009.5352426.  
[18] Gary E. Evans, Antenna Measurement Techniques, Boston, 
London: Artech House. 1990.  
[19] G. Hindman and Allen C. Newell, “Simplified Spherical 
Near-Field 
Accuracy 
Assessment,” 
Technical 
Paper, 
Nearfield System, Inc. 2004. 
[20] Allen Newell and Greg Hindman, “Planar and Spherical 
Near-Field Range Comparison with -60 dB Residual Error 
Level,” Technical Paper, Nearfield System, Inc. 2004. 
[21] E. Antonino-Daviu, M. Cabedo-Fabres, M. Ferrando-Bataller, 
and A. Valero-Nogueira, “Wideband Double-Fed Planar 
Monopole Antennas,” Electronics Letter, vol. 39(23), Nov. 
2003, pp. 1635–1636, doi: 10.1049/el:20031087. 
 
 
 
100
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

