203
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Dynamic Spectrum Sharing in Cognitive Radio Networks: a Solution based on Multiagent 
Systems 
Usama Mir, Leila Merghem-Boulahia, Dominique Gaïti    
ICD/ERA, UMR 6279, 
Université de Technologie de Troyes,  
12 rue Marie Curie,  10010 Troyes Cedex, France 
{usama.mir, leila.merghem_boulahia, dominique.gaiti}@utt.fr 
 
 
Abstract— In modern day wireless networks, spectrum utilization 
and allocation are static. Generally, static spectrum allocation is not 
a feasible solution considering the distributed and dynamic nature 
of wireless devices, thus some alternatives must be ensured in order 
to allocate spectrum dynamically and to mitigate the current 
spectrum scarcity. An effective technology to ensure dynamic 
spectrum usage is cognitive radio, which seeks the unutilized 
spectrum holes opportunistically and shares them with the 
neighboring devices. Using cognitive radio capabilities, the nodes 
are not restrained to static spectrum utilization, rather they can 
choose it on demand. However, dynamic spectrum usage raises 
several challenges, which need to be addressed in detail. These 
challenges include efficient allocation of spectrum between licensed 
(or primary) and cognitive radio (or secondary) users in order to 
maximize spectrum utilization and to avoid device level 
interferences. To this extend, we develop a novel solution for 
spectrum allocation using multiagent system cooperation that 
enables secondary user devices to utilize the amount of available 
spectrum, dynamically and cooperatively. The key aspect of our 
design is the deployment of agents on each of the primary and 
secondary user devices that cooperate in order to have a better use 
of the spectrum. For cooperation, contract net protocol is used, 
allowing spectrum to be dynamically allocated by having a series of 
message exchanges amongst the devices. Simulation results show 
that our solution achieves up to 80% of the whole utility within the 
span of few messages, and provides an effective mechanism for 
dynamic spectrum allocation. 
 
Keywords- Multiagent Systems; Cognitive Radio; Dynamic Spectrum 
Sharing; Contract Net Protocol; Cooperation; Ad hoc Networks.   
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In most of the modern day applications, radio spectrum 
allocation and sharing is a static function, in which the spectrum 
is assigned to a particular dominant primary (or licensed) user 
[3], for a long period of time in order to avoid interferences and 
collisions. Parallel to this, to deal with increasing user demands, 
dynamic spectrum allocation for new wireless networks is 
necessary. However, since existing wireless networks occupy 
extensive parts of the radio spectrum, there is no sufficient 
spectrum available to all the new unlicensed wireless networks 
[1] [25]. Thus, research has to be done to address this problem 
via dynamic sharing and assignment of spectrum. For example, 
in USA, Federal Communication Commission (FCC) considers 
to allow sharing of unused portions of TV bands to promote 
dynamic use of spectrum [2] [4].  
One effective technology to alleviate the problem of static 
spectrum assignment and to maximize dynamic spectrum usage 
is cognitive radio (CR) [17], a radio in modern wireless systems, 
in which a CR (or a secondary user) node changes its parameters 
(transmission or reception) to share the spectrum dynamically 
and to avoid the interference with the other primary or secondary 
users. The parameter alteration is done by having some 
knowledge about the radio environment factors such as radio 
frequency (RF) signals, device level interferences, etc. To 
achieve efficient and dynamic allocation of spectrum between 
highly distributed CR devices, a balanced, simple and 
cooperative approach is necessary. Research is therefore in 
progress on exploring the cooperative spectrum sharing 
techniques in CR networks. Similar to CR network, a multiagent 
system (MAS) [21] [27] is a system composed of multiple 
autonomous agents, working individually or in groups (through 
interaction) to solve particular tasks. Like CR nodes, agents 
work dynamically to fulfill their user needs and no single agent 
has a global view of the network. Each agent maintains its local 
view and shares its knowledge (when needed) with other agents 
to solve the assigned tasks.  
Recent advances in technology (especially in the domain of 
programmable integrated circuits and distributed artificial 
intelligence) have created an opportunity for us to develop a new 
class of intelligent, autonomous, and interactive CR devices [8]. 
These devices can then be used in a wide variety of network 
domains (WLAN [48], WRAN [49], MANETs [23]).  In 
addition, an efficiently designed CR with a software agent 
deployed on it would be capable of interacting with neighboring 
radios to form a dynamic, loosely-coupled and infrastructure-
less collaborative network. While CR physical architecture and 
its sensing capabilities have received considerable attention [5] 
[28], the question of how to share radio resources in cooperative 
scenarios is also an important research issue for current 
researchers [3] [8] [22].  
Therefore, in this paper, a MAS based strategy is proposed for 
dynamic spectrum allocation. Speciﬁcally, we consider a 

204
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
cooperative MAS [29] [36], in which the agents are deployed 
over primary and secondary1 user devices. By cooperative MAS 
we mean that the primary user agents exchange a tuple of 
messages and help neighboring secondary user agents to 
improve their spectrum usage. Moreover, the cooperation 
mechanism we develop is similar to that of contract net protocol 
(CNP) [10] [30], in which the individual secondary user (SU) 
agent should send messages to the appropriate neighboring 
primary user (PU) agents whenever needed and, subsequently, 
the related PU agents should reply to these agents in order to 
make spectrum sharing agreements. We propose that the SU 
agents should take their decisions based on the amount of 
spectrum, time and price proposed by the PU agents and should 
start spectrum sharing whenever they find an appropriate offer 
(without waiting until the reception of all the neighboring PU 
agents’ responses [14]). Then, after completely utilizing the 
desired spectrum, SU agents should pay the agreed price to the 
respected PU agents. 
In fact, this work is divided into following four parts: 
 
First, we present a brief state of the art on various 
available approaches for spectrum sharing using 
multiagent systems, game-theoretical approaches and 
medium access control solutions. 
 
Second, we detail four different scenarios, in which 
spectrum sharing challenges need to be addressed in 
details. We also propose some initiative measures, 
which are necessary to be taken for efficient utilization 
of the available spectrum in the mentioned scenarios.  
 
Third, we present a cooperative framework with the 
related spectrum sharing algorithms. The proposed 
MAS is cooperative where PU agents exchange a series 
of messages to share their spectrum with the requesting 
SU agents. The more complex scenarios with agents’ 
competitive behaviors will be examined as a part of our 
future study.   
 
Finally, we conduct extensive simulations to verify the 
working of the proposed cooperative algorithms for 
dynamic spectrum sharing in the context of cognitive 
radio networks.  
 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The following 
section briefly presents related works. Section III presents four 
scenarios, in which dynamic spectrum sharing is a vital issue. In 
Section IV, we describe spectrum allocation problem with the 
help of an example. In Section V, we propose our model with 
the interlinked working of various modules and their related 
algorithms. The experimental 
setup, some results and 
discussions are given in Section VI. Section VII concludes our 
work with the future perspectives. 
                                                             
1 The words cognitive, secondary and unlicensed user will be used 
interchangeably throughout the article. 
II. 
PRIOR WORK 
Research has been going around for several years in order to 
apply multiagent systems for decision making process and 
resource sharing. A rather new application of multiagent systems 
is for efficient allocation of spectral resources in CR networks. 
In TABLE I, we give the similarities between an agent and a 
CR. Basically, both of them are aware of their surrounding 
environments through interactions, sensing, monitoring and they 
have autonomy and control over their actions and states. They 
can solve the assigned tasks independently based on their 
individual capabilities or can work with their neighbors by 
having frequent information exchanges.   
 
TABLE I.   
COMPARISON BETWEEN AN AGENT AND A CR 
Agent 
Cognitive radio  
Environment awareness via past 
observations 
Sensing empty spectrum portions and 
primary user signals 
Acting through actuators 
Deciding the bands/channels to be 
selected 
Interaction via cooperation 
Interaction via beaconing 
Autonomy 
Autonomy 
Working together to achieve shared 
goals 
Working together for efficient 
spectrum sharing 
Contains a knowledge base with local 
and neighboring agents’ information 
Maintains certain models of 
neighboring primary users’ spectrum 
usage 
 
In literature, few strands of work have focused on spectrum 
sharing using MAS [13] [37]; but in these works, several 
limitations exist. For example, in [37], a MAS is used for 
information sharing and spectrum assignments. All the 
participating agents deployed over access points (APs), form an 
interacting MAS, which is responsible for managing radio 
resources across collocated WLANs. The authors have not 
provided any of the algorithms and results for their approach. 
The work in [13] considers a distributed and dynamic MAS 
based billing, pricing and resource allocation mechanism where 
the agents work as the auctioneers and the bidders to share the 
spectrum dynamically. The protocol used for radio resource 
allocation between the CR devices and operators is termed as 
multi-unit sealed-bid auction, which is based on the concept of 
bidding and assigning resources. The ultimate aim of using 
auctions is to provide an incentive to CR users to maximize their 
spectrum usage (and hence the utility), while allowing network 
to achieve Nash Equilibrium (a solution concept, where each 
user is assumed to know the equilibrium strategies of the other 
users, and no user has anything to gain by changing its own 
strategy). Auctions have traditional drawbacks of users’ 
untruthful behaviors, which can cause serious drawbacks to the 
working of loyal users.    
Game-theory has also been exploited for spectrum allocations 
in CR networks [6] [11] [18] [19] [39]. In game-theoretical 
approaches, each SU has one individual goal i.e., to maximize its 
spectrum usage and the Nash equilibrium is considered to be the 

205
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
optimal solution for the whole network (or game). Furthermore, 
it incorporates two basic assumptions: ﬁrst, the rationality 
assumption, that is, the participating primary and secondary 
users are rational so that they always choose strategies that 
maximize their individual gain. And, second, the users’ common 
knowledge assumption, which includes the deﬁnitions of their 
preference relationship. These assumptions may behave well by 
allowing each user (or player) to rationally decide on its best 
action, although in most of the competitive games, sometimes 
users can provide false information in order to maximize their 
profits and thus can affect the whole network performance.  
According to some current research works, spectrum sharing 
problems are similar to medium access control (MAC) issues [9] 
[32], where several users try to access the same channel and 
their access should be shared with the neighboring users to avoid 
the interferences. Generally, in MAC-based spectrum sharing 
solutions, when a CR user uses a channel, it sends a busy signal 
to the neighboring users through a control channel in order to 
avoid the interference. To estimate control signals, the authors of 
[20] suggest a fast fourrier transform-based radio design, which 
enables CR users to detect the carrier frequency of a control 
signal without causing any harmful collisions to the neighboring 
users. Others [23] suggest the use of a global plan to exchange 
the control information between CR devices. However, 
maintaining global plans needs a large amount of frequent 
information to be exchanged between CR users causing complex 
device level architectural overheads.  
 
III. 
SPECTRUM SHARING SCENARIOS 
Here, we provide some of the possible scenarios, which need 
the development of new solutions for dynamic spectrum sharing. 
These scenarios are addressed as a part of a Franco-German 
project TEROPP [46]. This project aims at developing various 
efficient spectrum management solutions. Up till now, our 
contribution to this project is the development of a cooperative 
approach for opportunistic spectrum allocation. In these 
scenarios, the current spectrum assignments are static and inter-
device collision is a big issue. Therefore, efficient solutions are 
needed in order to enable dynamic spectrum usage and to avoid 
interferences. The scenarios are divided into four different 
domains as follows: (1) Spectrum sharing and interference 
avoidance in ISM bands, (2) Spectrum sharing in cellular 
networks, (3) Opportunistic spectrum utilization in TV bands, 
and (4) Spectrum allocation in ad hoc networks. After detailing 
and suggesting possible initiatives towards dynamic spectrum 
access, we will describe our cooperative framework as a solution 
to enable spectrum sharing under ad hoc network domain. 
Precisely, multi-hop architectures, topology changes and arrival 
and departure of nodes at any time are the reasons for 
developing a cooperative solution for dynamic spectrum sharing 
under ad hoc network setting.  
A. Spectrum Sharing and Interference Avoidance in ISM Bands 
Recently, WLAN [26] has been adopted as a common 
technology by internet home users and companies. Characterized 
by cheap devices and reasonable data-rates, WLANs can be 
deployed anywhere. Designed to operate over license-free ISM 
(Industrial, Scientific and Medical) bands, WLANs are restricted 
to employ only few orthogonal channels, which is more than 
enough to provide wireless access in a residential area. 
However, the huge increment in the number of WLANs 
operating in the same location introduced a new interference 
level that could be anarchic. This interference is considered to be 
the main limitation for WLANs performance and it introduces 
new challenges to all the neighboring technologies that operate 
in the ISM bands [26]. Similar problems may arise with the 
deployment of LTE femto-cells [40]. These small cells, located 
at a home or a building, can provide better coverage and higher 
capacity in indoor environments. However, they suffer from 
interference caused by the neighboring femto-cells. The 
common point of introducing these two cases is that the 
interference is most of the times unwanted and it needs to be 
avoided.  
As an interference avoidance solution, we foresee a 
cooperative environment where the devices in a WLAN or LTE 
cell can have CR capabilities, which allow them to optimize 
frequency reuse. They can also select an alternative spectrum 
portion, in case of any interference. Then, they can send the 
newly searched spectrum portion information to the neighboring 
devices in order to avoid the possible collisions.  
B. Spectrum Sharing in Cellular Networks 
This scenario explains the spectrum sharing issues for 
cellular networks where the area is administrated by a central 
entity (such as a base station) and it is able to impose basic 
etiquettes to the users [7]. The mobile users (having CR 
capabilities), can perform signal measurements and can apply 
the etiquettes in order to contribute to an efficient use of the 
available spectrum. These etiquettes may be in the form of 
behavioral rules, such as, using correct MAC address, switching 
to a convenient base station and transmitting measurement 
reports. In such a context, distributed operational modes will be 
privileged and different overlay functions may be implemented 
such as rendezvous facilities [16], in order to optimize frequency 
reuse and to enable efficient usage of available bands.  
A hospital can be considered as an application example of 
this scenario, where the number of users cannot be determined in 
a precise way. With the CR capability, a given terminal (a 
doctor’s iPhone or a PDA) might be able to sense the best 
possible spectrum band. This band can then be shared and 
coordinated with the neighboring devices by having a series of 
interactions using multiagent systems and by taking into account 
the number of current users and their priorities. The shared band 
information can then be sent to the BS agent for the 
administrative purposes.   

206
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
C. Opportunistic Spectrum Utilization in TV Bands 
The European countries are working on improving their TV 
services by stopping the broadcast of PAL (phase alternative 
line) signals and using DVB-T (digital video broadcasting- 
transmitter) standards instead [41]. This process will create a 
sufficient amount of unused spectrum resources especially in the 
case of digital dividend [45]. Let us explain the exploitation of 
ultra high frequency (UHF) bands to understand the concept of 
numerical dividend. Generally, UHF bands are split in channels, 
where channels 21 to 69 were originally assigned to TV 
services. These channels are 8MHz in width, and the channel 21 
corresponds to the bands 470-478 MHz. A DVB-T covers a city 
and its neighboring sectors, and uses 6 UHF channels to 
broadcast 36 TV programs. For example, in France, nearly 100 
DVB-transmitters are used for broadcasting TV programs [42]. 
In a given place, we can expect that the TV services use only 6 
among 49 UHF channels, leaving 43 channels as unutilized. 
These huge amounts of empty spectral resources justify the 
world interest for TV bands.   
In 
a 
conference 
held 
under 
WRC’07 
(World 
Radiocommunication Conference) [44], discussions about the 
utilization of the TV bands have already been started. The 
researchers have decided to assign the UHF channels 60 to 69 to 
IMT (International mobile telecommunication) services. Another 
initiative is taken by the European countries with the creation of 
the task group 4 (TG4) [43]. TG4 is responsible for measuring 
the performance of DVB-transmitters in order to utilize the 
unused TV bands opportunistically. These measurements will 
then be compared with the results obtained from mobile devices 
working in WiMAX.  
To summarize, we provide here a few steps to be taken for 
the opportunistic utilization of spectral resources in digital 
dividend as following:  
 
 
At first, DVB-transmitters must have the capabilities of 
cognitive radios for sensing, characterizing and 
monitoring the unutilized TV bands. This is possible 
with the development of efficient signal processing 
techniques.  
 
Then, because DVB-transmitters normally share their 
spectral resources with the radio microphones, 
therefore more precise spectrum sharing techniques 
must be deployed.  
 
Finally, some techniques must be ensured in order to 
differentiate between a DVB-T and a microphone 
signal.   
D. Spectrum Allocation in Ad hoc Networks 
Here, we give an example of an SU equipped with CR 
capabilities and agent functionalities. The user is in a remote or 
an emergency situation, where it does not have direct access to 
radio resources and its access technology requires an energy that 
the user does not own. In this situation (as shown in Figure 1), 
SU senses the nearby signals of primary users PU1 and PU2 
(step 1) and cooperates with the agents deployed on them (step 
2). This cooperation process allows SU to act on primary users’ 
responses by utilizing their available spectrum (step 3). Thus, 
the cognitive radio capability of an SU plays the role of 
interoperability, such that it can receive the information about 
neighboring users’ spectrum bands and their access technology. 
Likewise, the role of the deployed agent is to cooperate and 
modify SU’s software configuration by loading the necessary 
algorithms that fit the best to the current state (step 4). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Description of an ad hoc scenario 
      
 
Figure 2.  Ad hoc WLAN with three primary and six secondary users 
IV. 
PROBLEM STATEMENT 
In the above scenario, we have presented the role of an agent 
and a CR in an ad hoc emergency situation. However, 
considering a more general and practical perspective, we address 
the spectrum allocation challenges in a private ad hoc area or a 
well identified administrated perimeter such as a campus, a 
conference center or a hospital. Note that our proposed 
algorithms can also be easily applied for the emergency ad hoc 
network scenario. 
. In our proposed scenario (Figure 2), there is an ad hoc 
WLAN [15], deployed in the area with sets of primary PU = 
(PU1, PU2 ….. PUn) and secondary SU = (SU1, S2 …… SUm) 
users. To allow nodes to communicate, the agents are deployed 

207
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
at each of them Whenever an SU device detects an empty 
portion of the spectrum as needed by its user, its agent starts 
communicating with the relative PU agent (having that empty 
spectrum part), until a spectrum sharing agreement is been 
made.  
A. Formalization 
Let G = (N, A) be a directed network consisting of a set of 
mobile nodes N such that (SU  PU)N and a set of directed 
arcs A. Each directed arc (i, j) A connects a secondary user 
SUi to a primary user PUj. Similarly, we can denote the directed 
arc (j, i) A to show the direction of connection from PUj to 
SUi. The secondary users are cooperating with the neighboring 
primary users to have a spectrum sharing deal. We assume that 
sij is the amount of spectrum a secondary user ‘i’ is desiring to 
get from a primary user ‘j’. Similarly, tij is the amount of time, 
for which ‘i’ wants to utilize the spectrum and pij is the price it is 
willing to pay to ‘j’. For the primary user ‘j’ on the other hand, 
sji is the amount of spectrum it is willing to share with ‘i’, tji is 
the respected time limit and pji is the price it is expecting to get 
after sharing its spectrum. We can formulate the above model 
for each secondary user ‘i’ as: 
 
Maximize 
j A
i
ijtij
s
, )
(
 
 
(1) 
Subject to  
Minimize 
j A
i
ij
p
, )
(
   SUN  
(2)       
Similarly for primary users: 
Maximize 
i A
j
ji
p
, )
(
 
 
 (3) 
Subject to  
Minimize 
ji
A
i
j
sjit

, )
(
     PU N    (4) 
And 
 
 
lji ≤ sji ≤ uji 
 
where lji and uji are the lower and upper bounds of available 
spectrum of primary user ‘j’. This means that the secondary user 
‘i’ cannot ask for an amount of spectrum above this limit.  
B. An Example 
In static circumstances, the spectrum portions are assigned to 
primary users and in response the internet service providers get 
their spectrum price. As an example consider a primary user 
PUj, who has bought a portion of a spectrum of the size of 8MB 
(Figure 3). During the peak office timings (t0-t1), the assigned 
portion may remain busy (or used) due to high user traffic such 
as for video conferencing and lecturing, but most of the other 
times (t1-t2 and t3-tn) the spectrum can remain unused. Obviously 
at free timings, PUj can utilize its spectrum portion for other 
activities (e.g., watching video songs) but generally people 
prefer these kinds of activities to be performed on week-ends. 
With our proposed solution, a given secondary user SUi will be 
able to choose the best spectrum band/channel dynamically. This 
choice is made in cooperation with the agent embarked on PUj 
[35], by taking into account the amount of spectrum needed, the 
respected time limit and the related price. 
 
Figure 3.  An example of a primary user’s spectrum utilization during a day 
V. 
COOPERATIVE SOLUTION FOR DYNAMIC SPECTRUM 
SHARING 
In this section, we explain the proposed cooperative spectrum 
sharing scheme, with primary and secondary user’s internal 
architectures and their algorithmic behaviors. 
A. 
Agent 
We start here by defining an agent as a dynamic and loosely 
coupled unit, having the capabilities of performing a task 
autonomously, based on the knowledge received from its 
environment and/or through other agents’ interactions.  These  
loosely-coupled  units  then  work  together  to  form  a  multi-
agent system [21] [27]. Generally, an agent is appropriate and 
relevant for an SU node in a sense that it allows the introduction 
of various artificial intelligence (AI) techniques [12] to CR 
networks and helps an SU node to behave more efficiently by 
having frequent interactions with its neighboring devices. Once 
in place, cooperative multiagent systems have the potential of 
increasing the SU capabilities in a variety of ways. For example, 
a single SU agent is limited in its knowledge (and information) 
about spectrum access, but a bundle of SU agents can 
collectively identify spectrum holes and can communicate them 
to other nodes.      
B. 
Contract Net Protocol 
In multiagent literature, several approaches exist for 
cooperation [12]. Amongst these approaches, contract net 
protocol (CNP) [30] [34] is the most simple way for agents’ 
cooperation and decision making. In CNP (Figure 4), the 
collection of agents is called contract net and several agents can 
form these nets in order to solve the assigned tasks. Each agent 
can either be a manager or a contractor. Basically, the manager 
agent initiates a task to the contractor agents by sending Call for 
Proposals (CfPs) messages. As a result, various eligible 

208
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
contractors show their interest (in solving the task) by sending 
their proposals. The manager selects the best proposal (via 
accept) and the contract is then awarded to the selected 
contractor. The selected contractor solves the assigned task as 
agreed with the corresponding manager. Due to its simple and 
efficient nature, our proposed approach is based on bilateral 
message exchange and task allocation mechanisms of CNP.   
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Message exchange in CNP 
C. Working of the Proposed Solution 
The SU based design (Figure 5 and algorithm. 1) consists of 
the following five different interlinked modules. 
 
 
First, the dynamic spectrum sensor (DSS) is used to sense 
the empty spectrum portions (or spectrum holes). Several 
techniques exist for spectrum sensing such as PU’s weak 
signal and its energy detection [28], cooperative centralized 
detection [5], etc. For DSS, it is necessary that the sensing is 
performed by considering a real-time dynamic environment, 
because it is not obvious at what time a spectrum band is 
occupied or when it is free.  
 
 
The 
second 
module 
spectrum 
characterizer 
(SC) 
characterizes the spectrum holes based on the Shannon’s 
theorem [33] to create a capacity based descending ordered 
list of all available PUs.  
 
 
Secondary user interface (SUI), which is the third part sends 
a request message to the SU device agent, whenever a user 
wants to have a portion of spectrum (for internet surfing, 
watching high quality videos, etc).  
 
 
The fourth part, agent’s knowledge module (AKM) gets PU 
characterization information from SC, which serves as a 
motivation for agents that subsets of PUs having vacant 
spectrum spaces are available. This list is not permanent 
rather it is updated and maintained on regular time intervals 
based on the information provided by SC module. 
Moreover, AKM creates a CfP message based on the inputs 
from SUI and SC:  
CfP (SUID, s, t, d) 
where SUID is the secondary user ID (or the secondary 
user’s agent identification) and it is used to help PU to reply 
back to the corresponding SU, s is the amount of spectrum 
needed by the SU, t is the desired time limit (or holding 
time) for the spectrum utilization, and d is the deadline to 
receive the primary users’ proposals. 
 
 
Finally, agent coordination module (ACM) geo-casts the 
CfP to the neighboring (and currently available) PU agents. 
By available PUs, we mean that the PU agents have not yet 
left the one-hop neighborhood and they have some unused 
spectrum to share. Moreover, ACM is also responsible for 
selecting the most suitable received proposal.    
 
Having received the CfPs, the interested PU agents send their 
proposals to the corresponding SU agents. The proposal is in the 
following form: 
 
Proposal (PUID, s, t, p) 
where PUID is the primary user’s agent identification, s is the 
amount of spectrum PU is willing to give to the respected SU, t 
is the proposed spectrum holding time, and p is the price PU is 
willing to receive. Note that the PU agent only contains AKM 
and ACM modules, where AKM manages the neighborhood 
information and ACM selects the most suitable CfP via 
cooperation. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Working of CR and agent modules       
Each PU maintains an ordered list of CfPs in its cache based 
on the values of s and t for the purposes of future cooperation 
(algorithm 2). At the same time, the receiving SU locally sorts 
fetched proposals and an accept message is sent to the most 
suitable proposal. The information of selected PU is also sent to 
AKM (of SU) for future interactions. In case of an accept 
message from the selected SU, the spectrum sharing is started 
based on agreed parameters from both the sides. PU can still 
respond to further CfPs if it wants its other unused spectrum 
portions to be shared. If the PU receives a reject message from 
SU, it continues sending proposals to further available CfPs, for 
which the deadline is not yet expired. 
 
 

209
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Above we have presented a cooperative framework for 
spectrum allocation that can generate highly effective behavior 
in dynamic environments and achieve better utility of the 
participating agents. The proposed solution is based on 
multiagent system cooperation with the deployment of agents 
over primary and secondary users. The experimental evaluations 
presented in the following section will conﬁrm the efficiency of 
our proposal for dynamic spectrum allocations. 
VI. 
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 
  In this section, we present some simulation results, 
conducted in order to validate the working and performance of 
the proposed spectrum allocation algorithms. We start by 
examining the achieved utility of both primary and secondary 
users and then compare the time values, for which the spectrum 
is being utilized. We also present the spectrum gain and loss 
with the amount of messages used for cooperation. The words 
(PU, PU agent, SU, SU agent respectively) are used 
interchangeably throughout the following section. 
A. 
Simulation Setup 
 We perform our simulations under the assumption of a 
noiseless and mobile ad hoc network. By mobile ad hoc we 
mean that the nodes in the neighborhood of each of the SUs 
change. We randomly place a number of primary and secondary 
users in a specified area where each of the devices contains an 
agent deployed over it for cooperation purposes. For simplicity, 
two different fixed values of times (such as T1 and T2) are 
assumed, where “Time 1” (T1) represents the short-term case 
and “Time 2” (T2) is the longer period. When T1 is considered, 
the SU agents can ask for an amount of spectrum within one 
hour limit (i.e., 0  T1  60Minutes) and similarly this limit is 
within two hours, as in case of T2 (i.e., 0 T2 120Minutes). 
These two approximations capture the same amount of time 
values in real wireless environments without delving into 
complex situations. Our simulation starts with the total number 
of 6 SUs and 4 PUs, and for each next round there is an addition 
10 agents (i.e., 6 SUs and 4 PUs). The simulation is conducted 
for 10 subsequent rounds, with a total of 20 hours per day, for 
both T1 and T2 respectively and the average values of 
parameters are taken to draw the graphs. The PU agent’s utility 
is calculated as the price paid by SU agents for spectrum 
utilization divided by the amount of spectrum it has shared for 
the respected time period (holding time) as required by the SUs. 
The SU agent’s utility is represented as its spectrum usage for 
the required time divided by the corresponding price paid to the 
PUs. Thus, by assigning weights or priorities to each of the 
mentioned parameters, the appropriate utility values for both the 
primary and secondary users are chosen.  
 We assume that each PU has random available spectrum 
portions and the neighborhood of SUs and PUs is randomly 
changing. Also, we follow the assumption that once agreed, PUs 
would not be able to withdraw their commitments and they 
Algorithm 1: Behavioral Algorithm for an SU 
 
Init – Let PU be the set of primary users in secondary user agent’s 
one-hop neighborhood and ℓ is the time interval based on the 
information provided by the SC module in order to maintain capacity 
based ordered list of primary users. 
 
/* SU characterizes each primary user on the basis of 
capacity*/  
For each i{ iЄ PU) } do 
 
Eval (SNR(i))  
/* SNR: is the primary user’s signal to noise ratio 
obtained through DSS */ 
 
Eval (B(i))  
/* B: bandwidth of PU given by DSS*/ 
 
C(i)= B(i) log2 [1 + SNR(i)] 
/* 
c: 
capacity 
calculated 
using 
Shannon’s 
theorem*/ 
End For  
/*Sending of CfP message*/ 
 
If PU != {}  
For each i Є PU 
/*Geo-cast CfP*/ 
Send CfP (SUID, s, t, d) to PU(i) 
End for 
End If 
/*L is a list for saving received proposals*/ 
For each received proposal ‘m’ do 
Characterize m using 
)
(
)
(
)
(
m
p
t m
s m

 and add it in L  
 
End For 
If L={} and the deadline to receive proposals has expired 
                            Recreate CfP  
Else If L={i} where i is the only element in L and deadline 
for proposal reception has expired 
Send an accept message to i 
Else  
Send 
accept 
to 
primary 
user 
corresponding to the best proposal 
Send reject to all other primary users 
 
End If 
 
  
 
Algorithm 2: Behavioral Algorithm for a PU 
 
While busyflag = false do 
If received message = CfP 
  
  /*K is a list for saving received CfPs*/         
    For each received CfP ‘n’ do 
Characterize n using 
( )
)
(
)
(
t n
n
s
n
p

and add it in K, 
where p(n) is related price according to required 
spectrum   
    End For 
    For best CfP in K do 
Construct a proposal (PUID,s,t,p) and send it to 
corresponding secondary user 
    End For 
End If 
 
If received message = accept  
Start spectrum sharing with selected secondary user  
End If 
If received message = reject OR some unused spectrum 
parts are still available  
Continue analyzing further CfPs for spectrum 
sharing 
Else 
Set busyflag = true 
  End If 
End While 
 

210
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
should share their spectrum with the corresponding SUs for the 
agreed time period. Further, the total number of cooperation 
messages (CfP, proposal, accept and reject) generated in the 
system, determine the cooperation cost. Thus, the cooperation 
strategy that is better (both between T1 and T2) in terms of less 
number of messages and, which gives good utility values is 
considered as the most cost efficient. The total number of 
resources successfully shared (over the number of resources 
required) presents the success rate, while the number of non-
allocated spectrum portions (due to disagreements between 
primary and secondary user agents) measures the overall 
spectrum loss. All the experiments were realized using JADE 
[47] on a PC with 3GB memory and 2.4 GHZ dual processor. 
B. 
Results 
 In Figure 6, we compare the average utility of each primary 
and secondary user at T1 with those at T2 for different numbers 
of users (10, 20, 30…). The figure depicts that when time limit 
is T2, the utilities are a bit less compared to the results obtained 
at T1. This is because the environment is mobile and some of the 
users are slightly hesitant to share their spectrum for longer 
periods. We observe that when there are 10 agents, the average 
utility values are almost identical for both T1 and T2, showing 
the optimal behavior. But in other cases, the average utility 
values are different, showing that the performance of agents in 
terms of their average utility values has decreased slightly with 
the increased number of agents. 
 Figure 7 illustrates the spectrum resource requirements and 
utilization over time periods T1 and T2. In the beginning (with 
10 required resources), all of them are completely shared; 
whereas when the required spectrum resources arrives at the 
middle values (such as 30 to 40), approximately 90% of them 
are shared. This spectrum sharing trend continues following the 
same pattern reaching bigger values (such as 50 and 60), with 
achieved sum of resources comprised between 45 and 50. Thus, 
the performance degradation in terms of spectrum sharing is not 
high, even with large resource requirements.  
 Our approach is also relative to time, because in CR networks 
the spectrum holding time is one of the most important factors to 
be considered. Again, we run the simulation with several values 
of primary and secondary user agents. Figs. 8 and 9 plot the 
overall mean times (or holding time), for which the spectrum is 
required and utilized for a total of 10 to 120 agents. When time 
limit is T1, the results are almost fully satisfied, for 80 to 120 
agents, while the time values are somewhat lesser at T2. Both 
the results are super linear and coherent with those of Figure 7, 
which displays that the spectrum sharing remains high even with 
the larger number of agents.  
 
 
Figure 6.  Agents’ percentage utilities  
 
Figure 7.  Spectrum resource requirement and utilization by SUs 
   
 Figure 10 depicts the maximum number of supported SUs by 
the neighboring PUs. Supported SUs are those, which have 
completely gained the required spectrum. We observe that when 
there are 10 to 15 PUs, the number of supported SUs is literally 
the same for both T1 and T2. This means, for limited number of 
agents even if the time values are high, the number of supported 
SUs is almost the same. However, with large number of agents 
(more than 50), the number of supported SUs at T2 are slimly 
lesser than T1. Therefore, in ad hoc situations, if we increase the 
time values along with an increment in number of agents, the 
results will be slightly less optimal. 
 
  
 
Figure 8.  Spectrum holding time at T1 

211
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 9.  Spectrum holding time at T2   
  
 
Figure 10.  Supported SUs 
 
 The number of cooperation messages transmitted and received 
in the entire system with the success rate (in percentage) is 
shown in Figure 11 (and Table II). According to Figure 11, the 
values of exchanged messages are almost leveled off for the 
middle periods (from 30 to 70 agents). Further, Table II depicts 
that the average number of messages (per agent) remains 
between 4 to 5 even with the increased number of agents. We 
can also see that the approach is linear in terms of messages and 
success rate. Particularly when time limit is T2 (around 90 to 
120 agents), the performance of the approach substantially 
degrades (reaching below 80%), but nevertheless it remains 
steady.  
 
Figure 11.  Number of messages with success rate 
TABLE II.  
SUCCESS RATE AND NUMBER OF MESSAGES AT 
T1 AND T2 
Number of  
messages 
Success  
rate (in %) 
No of  
agents  
T1 
T2 
T1 
T2 
10 
45 
41 
100 
98.7 
20 
81 
72 
90 
85 
30 
117 
115 
88.23 
84 
40 
159 
161 
87.31 
82 
50 
185 
176 
86 
82 
60 
253 
261 
85 
80 
70 
271 
262 
84.41 
79.3 
80 
325 
366 
82 
80 
90 
388 
392 
82 
78.53 
100 
416 
434 
81 
77.26 
110 
475 
483 
80.5 
78.77 
120 
503 
516 
80 
77.42 
 
Another important aspect of our approach is the analysis of 
how the performance varies as the amount of participating 
agents increases. In this context, Figs. 12 and 13 show the 
overall spectrum loss, which is the loss caused by the unused 
spectrum, due to spectrum sharing disagreements. As the agents’ 
demands augment, the percentage of spectrum loss grows on a 
steady pace. This is because some of the SUs are not able to find 
non-busy PUs or due to the relative change in their 
neighborhood. From the figures, it is also clear that the amount 
of overall spectrum loss (for both the time limits T1 and T2) is 
minimum (10 to 15%), when the number of users are at the 
middle stages (i.e., around 50). Spectrum loss then reaches bit 
higher values (16 to 22%), with increase number of agents, but 
still there is not a rapid degradation in the overall system 
performance. Note that the other factors such as collisions, 
device level interferences and delays are not considered here. 
C. 
Discussion Related to Results 
The above experiments and results prove that our solution is 
an effective one in order to provide dynamic spectrum sharing 
for CR networks and it can provide better utility of agents with 
the exchange of few cooperation messages. However, there are 
some important points related to our results, which need further 
discussion. First, we assume that the ad hoc environment is 
interference free; however, this assumption is not always true. In 
reality, the transmission power of most of the devices is so high 
that they can easily interrupt the working flow of neighboring 
devices, causing interferences. Thus, addressing spectrum 
sharing under interference enabled ad hoc networks is still an 
issue and several researchers are working on solving this issue to 
the modest details [31] [38]. 
Next issue is related to the limited number of agents we have 
used to perform our experiments. Since, JADE only allows a 
maximum of 100 to 120 agents on a single machine; therefore 
we have only shown the behavior of our approach with limited 
number of agents. In order to prove the consistent working of 
our model with large number of agents, we are working on 

212
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
developing mathematical model based on Markov chain. This 
model will also help us to verify other parameters such as 
communication cost and agents’ utility. Though, these 
mentioned issues need to be addressed in detail, still our model 
is ﬂexible enough to replicate the real-world network settings 
where spectrum sharing can be performed in the similar 
cooperative way. 
 
 
Figure 12.   Spectrum loss at T1 
 
Figure 13.   Spectrum loss at T2 
VII. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES 
In this paper, we developed a cooperative framework for 
spectrum allocation that can generate highly effective behavior 
in dynamic environments and achieve better utility of the 
participating devices. The proposed approach is based on 
multiagent system cooperation and implemented by deploying 
agents on cognitive radio and primary user devices. 
Experimental evaluations conﬁrm the efficiency of our 
algorithms for distributed and decentralized environments. The 
results show that the proposed approach can absorb the high 
spectrum sharing demands by introducing the cooperation 
between primary and secondary user devices. Furthermore, the 
proposed approach improves the overall utility and minimizes 
the spectrum loss with a minimum communication cost. The 
spectrum allocation success rate is almost 80% even with large 
number of agents. While we only proposed a speciﬁc 
cooperation strategy to maximize system utility, the proposed 
cooperation framework can be extended towards minimizing 
other key problems such as inter secondary user interferences 
and collisions. We intend to examine this problem as a part of 
our continuing work. We are currently working on a 
mathematical analysis of our approach using Markov chain. In 
addition, the proposed approach assumes that nodes are highly 
cooperative while in real systems, nodes can be selﬁsh or 
competitive, so more precise work is needed to explore the 
competitive behaviors. We will also try to compare the results 
with game-theoretical approaches to have an even better 
validation of our work. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
      This work was co-funded by ANR (French Research 
Agency) via grant ER502-505E ("Technologies for terminals in 
opportunistic radio applications") and by Higher Education 
Commission (HEC) Pakistan. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
“Spectrum policy task force report,” ET Docket No. 02–135, (November 
2002).  
[2] 
“Unlicensed 
Operation 
in 
the 
TV 
Broadcast 
Bands,” 
Federal 
Communications Commission, First Report and Order and Further Notice 
of Proposed Rulemaking. 06-156, October 2006. 
[3] 
B. Canberk, I.F. Akyildiz, and S. Oktug, “Primary user activity modelling 
using ﬁrst-difference ﬁlter clustering and correlation in cognitive radio 
networks,” Elsevier Science Journal on Ad hoc Networks, vol. 7, pp. 810-
836, 2009. 
[4] 
C. R. Stevenson, C. Cordeiro, E. Sofer, and G. Chouinard, “Functional 
requirements for the IEEE 802.22 WRAN standard,” Technical Report, 
September 2005. 
[5] 
D. Cabric, S.M. Mishra, and R.W. Brodersen, “Implementation issues in 
spectrum sensing for cognitive radios,” Proc.  Asilomar Conference on 
Signals, Systems and Computers, pp. 772–776, 2004. 
[6] 
D. Niyato and E. Hossain, “Competitive pricing for spectrum sharing in 
cognitive radio networks: dynamic game, inefficiency of Nash equilibrium, 
and collusion,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 
308, pp. 192-202, 2008. 
[7] 
D. Raychaudhuri and X. Jing, “A spectrum etiquette protocol for efﬁcient 
coordination of radio devices in unlicensed bands,” Proc. IEEE 
International Symposium on Personal Indoor (PIMRC 03), pp. 172–176, 
2003. 
[8] 
E. Jung and X. Liu, “Opportunistic spectrum access in heterogeneous user 
environments,” Proc. IEEE New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access 
Networks (DySPAN 08), pp. 1-11, 2008. 
[9] 
F. Akyildiz, W-Y. Lee, M. C. Vuran, and S. Mohanty, “NeXt 
generation/dynamic spectrum access/cognitive radio wireless networks: A 
survey,” International Journal of Computer and Telecommunications 
Networking, vol. 50, pp. 2127-2159. 2006. 
[10] F-S. Hsieh, “Developing cooperation mechanism for multi-agent systems 
with Petri nets,” Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 
Journal, vol. 22, pp. 616-627, 2009. 
[11] G. Hosseinabadi, H. Manshaei, and J-P. Hubaux, “Spectrum sharing games 
of infrastructure-based cognitive radio networks,” Technical report on 
LCA-REPORT-08-027, 2008.  
[12] G. Weiss, “A modern approach to distributed artificial intelligence,” MIT 
press, 2000, USA. 
[13] H. J. Kloeck and F. Jondra, “Multi-agent radio resource allocation,” ACM 
Mobile Networks and Applications, vol. 11, pp. 813-824, 2006.  
[14] H. M. Kelash, H. M. Faheem, and M. Amoon, “A multiagent system for 
distributed 
systems 
management,” 
Transactions 
on, 
Engineering, 
Computing and Technology, vol. 11, 2006.  

213
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[15] I. Doghri and H.K.-B. Ayed, “Towards fair P2P auctions over MANETs,” 
Proc. International Conference on Computer and Information Technology, 
pp. 658-663, 2008. 
[16] I. Romdhani, M. Kellil, H- Y. Lach, A. Bouabdallah, and H. Bettahar, 
“Mobility-aware rendezvous point for mobile multicast sources,” Proc. 
International Wired/Wireless Internet Communications conference (WWIC 
04), pp. 62-73, 2004. 
[17] J. Mitola, “Cognitive radio: an integrated agent architecture for software 
defined radio,” PhD Thesis, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden, 
2000. 
[18] J. O’Neel, “Analysis and design of cognitive radio networks and 
distributed radio resource management algorithms.” PhD Thesis, Virginia 
Tech, USA, 2006. 
[19] J. Zhang and Q. Zhang, “Stackelberg game for utility-based cooperative 
cognitive radio networks,” Proc. ACM International Symposium on Mobile 
Ad hoc Networking and Computing (MOBIHOC 09), pp. 23-32, 2009.  
[20] K- C. Huang, X. Jing, and D. Raychaudhuri, “MAC protocol adaptation in 
cognitive radio networks: an experimental study.” Proc. International 
Conference on Computer Communications and Networks (ICCCN 09), 
pp.1-6, 2009. 
[21] K. P. Sycara, “Multiagent systems,” Artificial Intelligence Magazine, vol. 
19, pp. 79-92, 1998. 
[22] K.R. Chowdhury, M.D. Felice, and I.F. Akyildiz, “TP-CRAHN: A 
transport protocol for cognitive radio ad hoc networks,” Proc. IEEE 
Conference on Computer Communications (INFOCOM’ 09), pp. 2482-
2490, 2009. 
[23] L. Ma, X. Han, and C-C. Shen, “Dynamic open spectrum sharing MAC 
protocol for wireless ad hoc networks,” Proc. IEEE New frontiers Dynamic 
Spectrum Access Networks (DySPAN’05), pp. 203-213, 2005.   
[24] L. Panait, and S. LukeOn, “Cooperative multi-agent systems learning: state 
of the art,” Proc. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems 
(AAMAS’05), pp. 387–434, 2005.   
[25] M. Mchenry, “Spectrum white space measurements,” New America 
Foundation Broadband Forum, June 2003. 
[26] M. Sawan, H. Yamu, and J. Coulombe, “Wireless smart implants dedicated 
to multichannel monitoring and microstimulation,” IEEE Circuits and 
Systems Magazine, vol. 5, pp. 21-39, 2005. 
[27] M. Wooldridge, “An Introduction to Multiagent Systems,” John Wiley & 
Sons Press, 2002, England.   
[28] N. Sahai, Hoven, and R. Tandra, “Some fundamental limits in cognitive 
radio,” Proc. Allerton Conference on Commonunication, Control and 
Computing, 2004. 
[29] P.J. Denning and C. Martell, “Coordination,“ Springer Verlag, 1998, USA. 
[30] R. G. Smith, “The contract net protocol: High-level communication and 
control in a distributed problem solver,” IEEE Transactions on 
Computation, vol. 29, pp. 1104–1113, 1980. 
[31] S. J. Kim and G. B. Giannakis, “Optimal resource allocation for MIMO ad 
hoc cognitive radio networks,” Proc. International Conference on 
Communication, Control and Computation, pp. 39-45, 2008.  
[32] S. Kumar, V. S. Raghavan, and J. Deng, “Medium access control protocols 
for ad hoc wireless networks: a survey,” International Journal of Ad hoc 
Networks, vol. 4, pp. 326-358, 2006.  
[33] T. C. Clancy, “Dynamic Spectrum Access in Cognitive Radio Networks,” 
PhD Thesis, University of Maryland, USA, 2006. 
[34] T. Sugawara, T. Hirotsu, S. Kurihara, and K. Fukuda, “Effects of 
fluctuation in manager-side controls on contract net protocol in massively 
multi-agent systems,” Proc. IEEE International Conference on Distributed 
Human-Machine Systems (DHMS’08), 2008. 
[35] U. Mir, L. Merghem-Boulahia, and D. Gaïti, “Utilization of a cooperative 
multiagent system in the context of cognitive radio networks,” Proc. IEEE 
International Workshop on Modelling Autonomic Communications 
Environments (MACE’09), pp. 100-104, 2009. 
[36] U. Mir, L. Merghem-Boulahia, and D. Gaïti, “A cooperative multiagent 
based spectrum sharing”. in Proc. Advanced International Conference on 
Telecommunications (AICT’10), pp. 124-130, Barcelona, 2010. 
[37] X. Jiang, H. Ivan, and R. Anita, “Cognitive radio resource management 
using 
multi-agent 
systems,” 
Proc. 
Conference 
 
on 
Consumer 
Communications and Networking, (CCNC’07), pp. 1123-1127, 2007.   
[38] Y. Su and M. Schaar, M, “A new perspective on multi-user power control 
games in interference channels,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless 
Communications, vol. 8, pp. 2910–2919, 2009.  
[39] Z. Ji and K. Liu, “Dynamic spectrum sharing: A game theoretical 
overview,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 45, pp. 88-94, 2007. 
[40] http://mobiledevdesign.com/tutorials/lte-femtocells-0603/, Feb. 03, 2011   
[41] http://www.dvb.org/ , Jan. 12, 2011 
[42] http://www.dvb.org/about_dvb/dvb_worldwide/france/,  Jan. 31, 2011 
[43] http://www.ero.dk/TG4, June. 06, 2010  
[44] http://www.itu.int/ITU-R/index.asp?category=conferences&rlink=wrc-
07&lang=en, Sept. 02, 2007 
[45] http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/policy/ecomm/radio_spectrum/topi
cs/reorg/pubcons_digdiv_200907/index_en.htm, Sept. 04, 2009 
[46] TEROPP,http://era.utt.fr/fr/projets_de_recherche/carnot_teropp.html, Jan. 
11, 2011  
[47] http://jade.tilab.com/, July. 07, 2010 
[48] http://ayman.elsayed.free.fr/msc_student/wlan-tutorial.pdf, June 2002 
[49] http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=4085653, 
Feb. 
08, 2007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

214
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
APPENDIX 
Abbreviations 
 
 
 
ACM  agent coordination module, 6 
AI  artificial intelligence, 5 
AKM agent’s knowledge module, 6 
APs  access points, 2 
CfP  call for proposal, 6 
CNP  contract net protocol, 2 
CR  cognitive radio, 1 
DSS  dynamic spectrum sensor, 6 
DVB-T  digital video broadcasting- transmitter, 4 
FCC  federal communication commission, 1 
ISM  industrial, scientific and medical, 3 
JADE  java application development framework, 8 
LTE  long term evolution, 3 
MAC  medium access control, 3 
MANETs  mobile ad hoc networks, 1 
MAS  multiagent system, 1 
PAL  phase alternative line, 4 
PDA  personal digital assistant, 3 
PU  primary user, 2 
PUID  primary user’s agent identification, 6 
RF radio frequency, 1 
SC  spectrum characterizer, 6 
SU  secondary user, 2 
SUI  secondary user interface, 6 
SUID  secondary user’s agent identification, 6 
TG4  task group 4, 4 
UHF  ultra high frequency, 4 
WRAN  wireless regional area network, 1 
WLAN  wireless local area network, 1 
WRC world radiocommunication conference, 4 
 

