Highly Accurate Location-Aware Information Delivery With PosPush
Zhao Junhui, Wang Yongcai
NEC Laboratories, China
zhao junhui@nec.cn
Abstract—This paper proposes PosPush, a highly accurate
location-based information delivery system, which utilizes the
high-resolution 3D locations obtained from ultrasonic position-
ing devices to efﬁciently deliver the location based information
to users. This system is designed especially for applications
where a 3D space is partitioned into a set of closely neighboring
small zones, and as a user moves into one of the zones, the
corresponding information will be timely transferred to the
user. In order to identify precise zones, PosPush deﬁnes a zone
model by a set of key location points extracted by a location
clustering algorithm, and the zone model is used for online
zone identiﬁcation based on hierarchical searching. In order to
determine the appropriate delivery time, an Adaptive Window
Change Detection (AWCD) method is proposed to detect the
fast change along the location stream. To evaluate the system
performance, a MV (Music Video) shelf demo prototype was
built in which the information of commodities on the shelf
can be delivered based on PosPush. We veriﬁed the feasibility
and effectiveness of our proposed system from objective and
subjective perspectives.
Keywords-Location Based Service, Ultrasonic Positioning,
Ubiquitous Computing
I. INTRODUCTION
Location data can be contextual indexing information that
a system will use to provide services to users, which is
called Location Based Services (LBS)[1-6]. Location based
Information Delivery System (LIDS) is one typical example
of LBS, in which relevant information are predeﬁned for
different zones so that when a user enters one of these zones,
the related information will be delivered automatically to
the user. So far, there are already a lot of research and
engineering efforts focusing on LIDS. These conventional
LIDS always utilized a very coarse location data of user
obtained from either Bluetooth[7,8], Wiﬁ[9-11], RFID[12-
14] or GPS[15,16] to provide proximity based information
delivery service. Generally, in conventional LIDS, the loca-
tion zones are relatively large (over tens of square meters).
Because of the location coarseness, these zones are roughly
deﬁned and have fuzzy boundaries between each other.
In addition, the delivery time in conventional LIDS only
depends on the instant location of user, i.e., the location
based information will be sent to user only if the user is at
one of the location zones.
In this paper, we propose PosPush, a highly accurate
location-based information delivery system, which utilizes
the 3D locations obtained from ultrasonic positioning device
[17] to efﬁciently deliver the location based information
to users. In PosPush, a 3D space is partitioned into a set
of closely neighboring small zones; a user holds a stick-
style ultrasonic tag and moves it into one of zones to get
more related information. PosPush can be used in many
application scenarios. For example, as shown in Figure 1, in
the shopping mall, the commodities on the shelf are placed
so closely that the distance between two commodities may
be just several tens of centimeters. The vicinity of each
commodity forms a small zone. If a customer shows much
interests in one speciﬁc commodity and wants to know more
related information, he/she may approach the commodity
and point at it with a stick-style ultrasonic tag, and then
the information related to the interested commodity will
be pushed to the public display near the commodity shelf.
Another example is the exhibition scenario, where many
exhibits are placed very closely on the booth table. Visitors
can get more information related to one exhibit by moving
the ultrasonic stick close to the interested exhibit. It will be
a fantastic experience for users because user can get what
he/she wants by just pointing a stick towards what he/she
is interested in, so we call such a ultrasonic stick as Magic
Stick.
Customer
Public Display
Figure 1.
PosPush for Shopping Mall Scenario
PosPush is a novel LIDS with ﬁne-grained location zones
and highly accurate location information. Compared with
the conventional LIDS, more complex mechanism is highly
desirable in PosPush. Exactly, there are two unaddressed
problems to the conventional LIDS:
1) Precise zone modeling and identiﬁcation
Since the zones in PosPush are small and closely
neighboring, precise zone identiﬁcation is extremely
necessary, which poses high requirement to the ofﬂine
zone modeling and online zone identiﬁcation.
2) Appropriate delivery time determination
Considering that there are many neighboring small
83
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Accurate 
Positioning Device
㽲
㽳
㽴
Location Server
Information
Server
Delivery Engine
㽵
㽶
Magic Stick
Ultrasonic Positioning System
Figure 2.
System Overview of PosPush
zones in PosPush, user may unconsciously pass these
small zones. If information delivery is triggered when-
ever a user is detected within a small zone, the user
will receive many unwanted information. An appro-
priate delivery time determination method is highly
desired.
To address the above problems, two crucial mechanisms
are designed in PosPush. For precise zone modeling and
identiﬁcation, in ofﬂine phase, we make use of a location
clustering algorithm to precisely calibrate the small zone,
which extracts a set of key location points from the randomly
collected location trajectory inside a small zone, and in
online phase, a hierarchical searching method is used to
accurately and quickly determine which small zone the target
is located in. To determine the appropriate delivery time,
we propose Adaptive Window Change Detection (AWCD)
method to tolerate the zone identiﬁcation error and optimize
information delivery time by monitoring the fast change
along the location stream. We implement PosPush in a
prototypical application for commodity information delivery
in shopping mall. Based on this prototype, we carry out
a number of experiments to evaluate the performance of
PosPush.
The rest of this paper is organized as the follows. we
present the system overview in Section 2. Zone calibration
and identiﬁcation algorithm, and delivery time determination
algorithm are introduced in Section 3 and 4, respectively.
Section 5 presents the prototype implementation and a
privacy-preserving approach is also described. The perfor-
mance evaluation covering not only objective evaluation but
also subjective evaluation is in Section 6. Finally, Section 7
concludes the paper.
II. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
The system architecture of PosPush is illustrated in Figure
2. Such architecture contains several main components:
• Ultrasonic Positioning System
In PosPush, a ultrasonic positioning system is deployed
for locating the mobile targets, which is composed
of Accurate Positioning Device and Magic Stick. The
positioning device is named as Positioning on One De-
vice (POD) that integrates multiple ultrasonic receivers.
POD is mounted, facing downwards, in the room to be
covered. Magic Stick is a ultrasonic transmitter carried
by user for tracking. It works in active transmission
mode and can be located by POD with the accuracy of
less than 10 centimeters. For more information about
the ultrasonic positioning system, please refer to our
prior work [17,18].
• Location Server
The function of Location Server is to collect the ac-
curate location of Magic Stick. In ofﬂine phase, the
model for each small zone is calibrated by clustering a
sequence of location data samples. In online phase, the
real-time location of Magic Stick is used to determine
which small zone the Magic Stick is located in by
searching the location models.
• Delivery Engine
Delivery Engine aims to efﬁciently determine the ap-
propriate time for information delivery. Particularly,
Delivery Engine performs an AWCD based method to
detect the delivery time by sequentially evaluating the
location stream of Magic Stick. At the delivery time,
Delivery Engine will send a query for retrieving the
location based information from Information Server and
then forward the information to the Public Display.
• Information Server
Information Server contains a location based informa-
tion database that stores various information associated
with the small zones.
Based on the system architecture, the work ﬂow of
PosPush is as follows.
x The Magic Stick carried by user emits the ranging
signals to POD.
84
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

y The accurate location of Magic Stick is calculated by
POD and sent to the location server.
z Location server identiﬁes which small zone the Magic
Stick belongs to, and sends the corresponding zone
index to Delivery Engine.
{ Delivery Engine determines the appropriate delivery
time along the location stream and sends it as a query
to Information Server to retrieve the location based
information.
| The location based information is delivered to the
Public Display for rendering timely.
III. ZONE CALIBRATION AND IDENTIFICATION
In PosPush, location server is an important component
that performs both ofﬂine zone model calibration and online
zone identiﬁcation. The zone deﬁned in PosPush refers to a
small 3D space containing a speciﬁc object. For example,
in shopping mall, a vicinity area around a commodity on
the shelf is regarded as a zone. Qualitatively, assume the
distance between two neighboring objects is d cm, such a
small zone can be described as a cubic space with the edge
length of d cm. Figure 3 gives an illustration.
Object 1
Object 2
Zone for Object 2
Zone for Object 1
d cm
Figure 3.
Cubic Space Description for Small Zone
The characteristics of these zones are small and closely
neighboring. As far as the cubic space is concerned, there
are two basic methods for zone calibration and identiﬁcation.
1) Center based method
The coordinate of central point is recorded in ofﬂine
phase, which is taken as the zone model. In online
phase, the distance between the real-time location of
Magic Stick and the central point of the zone is
calculated. The most probable zone can be determined
if such a calculated distance is less than d cm.
2) Boundary based method
In ofﬂine phase, Magic Stick is moved along the
boundary of the cubic space so that the moving
trajectory is recorded as the zone model. In online
phase, the real-time location is compared with the zone
boundary for determining if the tag is located at this
zone.
However, the above methods are not so efﬁcient because
it is difﬁcult to make a correct judgment when Magic Stick
moves between the boundaries of the neighboring zones.
The experiment in Section 6 also conﬁrms it. In addition,
since the Boundary based method requires user to move
Magic Stick strictly along the boundary for calibration, lots
of manual efforts will be needed.
To solve the problems of above methods, we propose a
new method for precise zone calibration and identiﬁcation.
A. Ofﬂine Calibration
Magic Stick
A Random Moving 
Trajectory
Figure 4.
Random Location Collection Inside a Zone
During the ofﬁne phase, we perform location clustering
method to compute the location model for each small zone.
Firstly, we collect a sequence of 3D location data for a small
zone by just moving Magic Stick along a random trajectory
inside the small zone, which is show in Figure 4.
KLP Initialization
Distance
Calculation
Location Data 
Classification
KLP Updating
Location Data Set
Convergent KLP
Iteration
Figure 5.
Block Diagram of Zone Calibration
For users, such a random collection approach is ﬂexible
and convenient. Afterwards, we apply a clustering algorithm
to extract a set of key location points (KLP) form the
collected location data to represent the precise model for
each zone. There are a fair number of research literatures that
85
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

describe various clustering algorithms [19-21]. However, we
choose the classical k-means algorithm [22] to ﬁnd the
location model since it is a simple but efﬁcient way to
classify the collected location data set into n clusters in
which each location data belongs to the cluster with the
nearest distance. The whole process is shown in Figure
5. After an iterative process, n KLP are ﬁnally reﬁned
from the convergent clusters, which are taken as a location
model for each small zone. It can be denoted as Pm =
(xmj, ymj, zmj), j = 1, 2, ..., n, m = 1, 2, ..., M, where n is
the number of KLP in one model and M is the total number
of the zones. It should be noted that at the case of n = 1,
i.e., the number of KLP is 1, the proposed clustering based
method will be reduced into the above mentioned Center
based method.
B. Online Identiﬁcation
During the online phase, a hierarchical searching method
is used to quickly ﬁnd the most probable small zone where
the Magic Stick is located in. In this method, there are two
search stages, which are shown in Figure 6.
Real-time Location Data 
The recognized location zone
Candidate Zone 
Selection
First Stage
Precise Zone 
Selection
Second Stage
Figure 6.
Block Diagram of Zone Identiﬁcation
The ﬁrst stage is Candidate Zone Selection, in which for
each small zone, only one of KLP is randomly selected
for distance calculation to the real-time location data. The
distance data are ﬁltered by comparison with a predeﬁned
threshold so that only Mc zones from all M zones with
minimum distance to the real-time location data are selected
as the candidates for next stage processing, especially,
Mc << M. The second stage is Precise Zone Selection. For
each candidate small zone, the average distance between lo-
cation model of mth zone from Mc candidates and the real-
time location data Xt = (xt, yt, zt) is calculated according
to the following equation.
Distm =
v
u
u
t
nP
j=1
[(xt−xmj)2+(yt−ymj)2+(zt−zmj)2]
n
(m = 1, ..., Mc)
(1)
Finally, the index of the most probable zone will be
obtained using minimum criteria among the Mc distances,
which is depicted as
Loct = arg min
m
Distm
(2)
Through the online zone identiﬁcation to the real-time
location data of Magic Stick, the location stream of Magic
Stick can be mapped into the matched zone index stream.
IV. DELIVERY TIME DETERMINATION
For purpose of providing friendly user experience, it is
important to ﬁnd the appropriate and reasonable time for
information delivery. This is especially true for PosPush
where the small zones are close neighboring so that user
may unconsciously pass through some of the small zones.
If we apply the conventional instant-location based delivery
method, many unnecessary information delivery will be
triggered, which would be rather annoying to the users. So
we deﬁne the time for starting and stopping information
delivery:
Information Delivery Time (IDT): the moment when the
location based information should be delivered to user client
as user is close or inside one of location zones.
Information Stop Time (IST): the moment when the
location based information delivery should be terminated as
user is leaving the location zone.
IDT and IST are detected by sequentially evaluating
the newest location data in the location stream to ﬁnd an
adaptive window whose accumulate departing signiﬁcance
is compared against a IDT-threshold and a IST-threshold re-
spectively. The IDT, IST determination problem is illustrated
in Figure 7. The upper stream is the location stream and the
lower stream is the corresponding zone index stream.
AW
(Adaptive 
Window)
…
A1
A3
A1
A3
AI
time
Ai
Ai
Ai
Newest
IDT
Current IDT
…
xt-1   xt
x1
xw
Location data Stream
Zone Index Stream
…
Figure 7.
IDT Determination from Streaming Data
The total M small zones can be denoted as {Ai, i =
1, 2, ..., I, ..., M}. Suppose the time when the location data
is Xw, which located at zone AI is the current IDT. At
this IDT, AI related information is delivered to user. Our
objective is to ﬁnd a IST to stop the information delivery to
A(I), as the magic stick leaves AI. After the information
delivery stops at IST, we need to ﬁnd the next IDT to
86
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Send request to Information 
Server for Location based 
information
Behavior Change 
Detection
Output is 
IDT or ISC?
Grid Index Stream
No
IDT
Forward the location based 
information to user client
Any ongoing 
information
delivery?
Terminate the ongoing 
information delivery
IST
Yes
Figure 8.
The Block Diagram of IDT and IST Detection
start new information delivery process as the magic stick
enters another zone. Particularly, we focus on detecting the
moving trend within a time window that is started at Xw
and ended at the newly-received Xt. Since the window size
is always adaptive to newly-received location data, we call
the proposed ISC and IDT determination method Adaptive
Window Change Detection (AWCD).
The key idea of AWCD is that we calculate Accumu-
late Departing Signiﬁcance (ADS) in the adaptive window,
which is used as a measurement to online check the trend
of Magic Stick departing from the current IDT zone AI.
Since we have known the last location at IDT, which is AI,
AWCD algorithm tolerates noises by following schemes:
1) if the following location data in the stream departs
from AI only a little, we predict that the location of
Magic Stick has not changed.
2) If the trend that the data in adaptive window departs
from AI is larger than a user deﬁned IST-threshold,
an IST event is detected and the location based infor-
mation delivery should be stopped.
3) If the trend that the data in adaptive window departs
from AI is larger than a user deﬁned IDT-threshold,
A new IDT is detected to inform the new information
delivery.
In details, the AWCD algorithm includes the following
steps.
1) Reset Step
At the time of the current IDT (that is, Xw located at AI
as shown in Figure 7), the ADS to all of zones except AI
are reset to zero.
ADS(Ai, Xw) = 0, ∀Ai, (i = 1, ..., M, i ̸= I)
(3)
2) Update Step
Each time the new location data Xt is received, the ADS
to all of zones except AI are calculated in the adaptive
window from Xw to Xt by a recursive approach.
ADS(Ai, Xt) = ADS(Ai, Xt−1) + DS(Ai|AI, Xt)
∀Ai, (i = 1, ..., M, i ̸= I)
(4)
where DS(Ai|AI, Xt) is Departing Signiﬁcance that is
deﬁned as
DS(Ai|AI, Xt) =



−α,
if Xt ∈ AI
(a)
β,
if Xt ∈ Ai
(b)
0,
Xt /∈ Ai and Xt /∈ AI
(c)
(5)
where α and β are positive values. From the above
equations, we can ﬁnd that if Xt is located at AI, all ADS
will be decreased by α, but if Xt is located at one zone Ai,
the ADS of Ai will be increase by β and all other ADS will
keep unchanged.
3) Maximum Step
As the real-time location data is received continuously, we
can obtain the spatial-temporal distribution of ADS, which
is shown in the following equation.
87
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

ADS(A1, Xw)
ADS(A2, Xw)
.
.
ADS(AM, Xw)
ADS(A1, Xw+1)
ADS(A2, Xw+1)
.
.
ADS(AM, Xw+1)
......
ADS(A1, Xt)
ADS(A2, Xt)
.
.
ADS(AM, Xt)
(6)
Each line represents a temporal trajectory of the ADS of
one zone; and each column represents the ADS distribution
for all zones at one time. According to the update step, the
ADS to Ai will be monotonically increasing if Magic Stick
has an apparent trend of leaving AI and entering Ai; On the
other hand, all ADS will be relatively small if the location
steam of Magic Stick concentrate on the vicinity of AI. So,
for each time, the maximum value of ADS should be picked
out.
M(Xt) = max
z (ADS(Az, Xt))
(7)
4) Judgment Step
Finally, the maximum value of ADS is checked against
the predeﬁned thresholds for IST and IDT. The threshold
of IST is predeﬁned as TIST . It means that when the
accumulate departure trend is larger than TIST , the current
information delivery should be stopped. The threshold of
IDT is predeﬁned as TIDT , which means that when the
accumulate departure trend to another grid is large enough,
a new information delivery process should begin. Generally
TIST is smaller than TIDT .
Figure 8 shows the block diagram of the IDT&IST
detection. If M(Xt) is larger than the IST threshold (i.e.,
TIST ), an IST is detected, the current information delivery
stops.
If M(Xt) is larger than the IDC threshold (i.e., TIDT ),
an IDT is detected, and
the new IDT zone will be found accordingly.
Az = arg max
z
(ADS(Az, Xt))
(8)
V. PROTOTYPE IMPLEMENTATION - INFORMATION
DELIVERY OF MUSIC VIDEO DISC
Based on PosPush, we implemented a prototypical ap-
plication of commodity information delivery in shopping
mall scenario. Particularly, considering that Music Video
(MV) is popular to most people, we choose MV disc as
the commodity in our prototype, in which if customer is
interested in a MV disc, he/she will move the Magic Stick
close to it and soon a video clip from this MV disc will be
rendered on the Public Display. Figure 9(a) illustrates our
prototype.
Basically, the prototype mainly includes:
• Commodity Shelf and MV Disc: In the prototype, a
commodity shelf with eight grids is used. Each grid
contains one MV disc so totally eight discs are placed
POD
Public
Display
Magic Stick
(a) Demonstration
Zone 1
Zone 2
Zone 3
Zone 4
Zone 5
Zone 6
Zone 7
Zone 8
35cm
25cm
35cm
(b) Zone Deﬁnition
Figure 9.
PosPush Prototype
on the shelf. It should be noted that the MV discs
we used are from the popular singers nowadays for
attracting the attentions of the visitors. The grids on
the shelf are closely neighboring and each grid has a
size of 35cm height and 35cm width. Since ultrasonic
signal may be obstructed by the grid board, we deﬁne
a vicinity area outside the shelf but close to a MV disc
as the small zone for information delivery. Exactly, the
zone size is 35cm×35cm×25cm, as shown in Figure
9(b). The zone index is also given.
• POD and Magic Stick: A POD is ﬁxed on the top
of the commodity shelf to cover all zones of eight MV
discs. It has a hexagon shape containing six surrounding
ultrasonic receivers. A stick-style ultrasonic tag is used
as Magic Stick to be held by user. As the user moves
the Magic Stick to the interested MV disc, POD can
calculate the accurate 3D location of Magic Stick and
sent the location data to a server computer. It should
be pointed out here is that the updating rate of Magic
88
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Stick’s location is 5Hz, i.e., the transmission interval of
Magic Stick is 200ms.
• Server Computer: On server computer side, the
video clips of all MV discs are stored at an infor-
mation database, and a Java-based PosPush software
is developed to perform both precise zone calibra-
tion&identiﬁcation and IDT determination. PosPush
software also provides a user-friendly GUI for ease of
use. In ofﬂine phase, PosPush aggregates a sequence
of location data in the vicinity area of a MV disc and
extracts a set of KLP as the zone model. Then, the
location model is associated with the corresponding
video clip of the MV disc. In online phase, PosPush
obtains the appropriate IDT from the location stream
of Magic Stick. At the IDT, the video clip is retrieved
from information database and is played on the Public
Display.
A. User Privacy
A potential problem to Magic Stick mode is user privacy
issue. Considering that public display is used to render the
video clips and there are always many people in shopping
mall, it is unavoidable that the video clip of a user interest
will be seen by others, which leads an uncomfortable ex-
perience. Another problem is that only one public display
is placed in a shelf so that more than two users can not
view the interested information simultaneously. To solve this
problem, we further designed a small USB-style ultrasonic
transmitter, which can be easily plugged into user’s personal
mobile device, such as PDA or mobile phone. As user
want to know more information to the interested commodity,
he/she just move the personal mobile device close to such a
commodity and soon, more information will be delivered to
user’s personal mobile device via wireless connection, e.g.,
Wiﬁ, Bluetooth, etc. Figure 10 gives an illustration to this
scenario.
USB Ultrasonic Tag
Figure 10.
Prototype for User Privacy Preservation
VI. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
Based on the prototype, a number of experiments are
carried out to evaluate the PosPush performance. In addition,
we showed the MV demo in a formal exhibition to visitors
for subjective evaluation.
A. Evaluation of Zone Calibration&Identiﬁcation
In PosPush, zone models are ofﬂine calibrated by ap-
plying k-means clustering to a randomly collected location
sequence with length L, so that n KLP can be extracted as
the zone model. The selection of parameters L and n will
affect the complexity of zone calibration and the accuracy of
the zone identiﬁcation. On one hand, larger value of L and
n can create a more precise zone model. On the other hand,
larger L means more time consumed for location collection
processing. Thus we expect to ﬁnd an optimal combination
of parameter L and n so as to obtain a precise location
model while minimizing the calibration efforts as much as
possible.
In our experiment, the length L of collected location
sequence during ofﬂine calibration phase varies from 30,
to 60 and 90. Considering that the update frequency of
Magic Stick is 5Hz, the corresponding collection time is 6s,
12s and 18s respectively. The number of KLP (n) ranges
from 1 to 20. For each pair of parameter L and n, zone
models are built for all the eight zones of the prototype.
In online phase, we collect a set of real-time location as
the test data. Particularly, most of the test data are collected
near the boundary of zones. The ground truth of zone index
stream is manually labeled. We use the error rate of zone
identiﬁcation for performance evaluation. The results are
shown in Figure 11. From this ﬁgure, we can see that, ﬁrstly,
the length of collected location sequence has little effect on
the zone identiﬁcation accuracy. Especially, when n > 10,
although the length of the location sequence is different, the
identiﬁcation accuracy are almost identical. Secondly, the
identiﬁcation accuracy is improved with the increase of the
number of KLP, but the accuracy will increase very slightly
when n > 10.
Therefore, according to the experiment results, we select
L = 30 and n = 11 as the optimal parameters. With
this parameter setting, a precise zone model can be built
for online identiﬁcation through moving Magic Stick in a
speciﬁc zone for just about 6s.
Next, we perform experiment to compare the error rate
between our proposed clustering based method and the
two baseline methods mentioned in Section 3. In online
identiﬁcation phase, we use the same test data with the above
experiment to evaluate the performance of the three methods.
Figure 12 shows the comparison result. From this ﬁgure, it
is obvious that our proposed method can achieve the best
accuracy compared to the other two methods. We also ﬁnd
that the error rate of Center based method is very close to
89
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
Number of Key Location Points
Error rate in Zone Determination
L=60 
L=90 
L=30 
Figure 11.
Effect of L and n to the Zone Determination Accuracy
the case of n = 1 in the clustering based method as shown
in Figure 11.











Center based
Boundary based
Clustering based
Error Rate
Figure 12.
Comparison between Different Methods
B. Evaluation of AWCD
To evaluate the performance of the proposed AWCD
method, we need a metric to check if there is a good
match between the IDT determined by AWCD and the user’s
true interest. We propose Matching Rate between the user’s
true interest and the actually delivered information as the
evaluation metric. At each time instance, user’s true interest
is manually labeled. If the delivered information is the same
with the user’s true interest, a ”match” is counted; otherwise,
a ”mismatch” is counted. After the user has used the PosPush
system for a period, a sequence of ”match” and ”mismatch”
will be recorded. Matching Rate is deﬁned as the percentage
of the whole sequence occupied by the ”match” number.
For convenience of evaluation, we index all zones. The four
zones on the left column are indexed as Zone 1 to Zone 4
from top to bottom, and the four zones on the right column
are indexed as Zone 5 to Zone 8 from top to bottom.
The experiment result of one test is shown in Figure 13.
The Y-Axis is the zone index, and the X-Axis is time. A user
moves the Magic Stick in the shelf area. His true interest is
the commodities placed in the Zones 1, Zone 6, Zone 3 and
Zone 8. The green dotted line shows the zone determination
results. We can see the trace starts from Zone 1 for a while,
then passes Zone 5 and stays in Zone 6 for a while; next
fast passes Zone 7 and stays in Zone 3 for a while; ﬁnally
fast passes Zone 4 and ends in Zone 8. The true interest
is labeled by the user himself and is shown in the dotted
black curve. According to the zone determination result, the
Magic Stick traveled all of zones considering that there are
fast-pass zone result and error determination result. If the
delivery time is just dependent on the instant location like the
conventional LIDS, the information related to all zones will
be pushed to user. It will bring uncomfortable experience
to users. For comparison, the delivered result generated by
our proposed AWCD is plotted in the solid purple curve. It
can be found that the information delivered by AWCD well
matches the user’s true interest and AWCD can tolerant the
zone identiﬁcation error and fast-pass zone result. Exactly,
the Matching Rate of AWCD based method is as high as
96.5%.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Time 
Index of Location Zone
True Interest of User
Location Zone Determination Result
Delivered Result of AWCD
Figure 13.
Experiment of AWCD based Delivery
We carry out 50 times of above test to compare the
Matching Rate between AWCD and the conventional instant-
location based method. The average Matching Rate are
summarized in Table I. We can see AWCD-based method
can improve Matching Rate over 10% compared with the
conventional method.
Table I
MATCHING RATE COMPARISON
Instant-Location based
Method
AWCD based Method
Matching Rate
86.1%
96.7%
90
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

C. Subjective Evaluation
To better understand user’s subjective affection to Pos-
Push, we showed our MV shelf prototype at NEC Solution
Fair 2008 (as shown in Figure 14).
During this exhibition, we presented the MV informa-
tion delivery demo to many visitors who had never seen
PosPush before. It is worth noting that almost all of the
visitors were from information technology domain, which
means they may have a stronger willing to experience new
applications. Firstly, we introduced the visitors to PosPush
and then explained MV shelf demo to them. Such a live
demonstration attracted the attention of visitors immediately.
Most of the visitors took the Magic Stick or PDA in their
hands and experienced PosPush system by themselves. After
the visitors had experienced the functionalities of PosPush,
they gave us their feedback. One hand, we got some praising
words, such as
1) ”It is really the ﬁrst time for me to see such a
technology.”
2) ”It is an interesting experience for me.”
3) ”It is deﬁnitely high accurate locating system.”
On the other hand, we also got some advice, such as
1) ”If I use Barcode reader to scan the goods ID and
send it to server via wireless, I can also get the more
information of my interested goods.”
2) ”PosPush may just be applied for MV shop, but it is
more common in shopping store that the commodities
(such as shampoo, cookie) are placed very close, so it
is difﬁcult to realize PosPush in such real scenario. ”
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we designed, implemented and evaluated
PosPush - a highly accurate location based information
delivery system, which utilizes the 3D locations obtained
from ultrasonic positioning device to efﬁciently deliver the
location based information to users. To meet the requirement
of practical application, we proposed two key mechanisms.
1) Precise zone modeling and identiﬁcation 2) AWCD based
delivery time determination. Based on PosPush, we imple-
mented a prototypical application of commodity information
delivery in shopping mall scenario. It veriﬁed the feasibility
and effectiveness of our proposed system. In the future, there
are several directions to pursue in order to further improve
PosPush. Firstly, we investigated the PosPush system into the
zone with the size of tens of centimeters in this paper. But
it is common in current supermarket that the commodities
(such as cookie, shampoo etc.) are placed one by one so that
the zone has a smaller size of less than 10cm. So we plan to
apply PosPush system to such smaller zones for performance
evaluation. Secondly, the current PosPush is based on the
ultrasonic positioning system. We will investigate the use
of other 3D positioning system [23-25] for PosPush in near
future.
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank Wang Yanzhe for his
effort and assistance in the testing experiments and in help-
ful discussions regarding system development. The authors
would also like to thank Toshikazu Fukushima and Zhang
Hongming for their valuable support.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Beinat, Location-Based Services: Market and Business
Drivers, GeoInformatics, vol. April, pp. 6-9, 2001.
[2] ABI Research, Location Based Services, Allied Business In-
telligence, 2004.
[3] R. Bharat and M. Louis, Evolution of Mobile Location-based
Services, Journal of Communications of the ACM, Vol. 46, pp.
61-65, 2003.
[4] JOS, R., et al. An Open Architecture for Developing Mobile
Location-Based Applications over the Internet , 6th IEEE
Symposium on Computers and Communications, July, pp.3-
5, 2001.
[5] KAGAL, L. et al. A highly adaptable infrastructure for service
discovery and management in ubiquitous computing, Technical
Report TR CS-01-06, Department of Computer Science and
Electrical Engineering, University of Maryland: Baltimore,
United States, 2001.
[6] Barnes, S. J. Known By the Network: The Emergence of
Location-Based Mobile Commerce. Advances in Mobile Com-
merce Technologies, 171-89, 2003
[7] Anastasi, G., Bandelloni, et al. Experimenting an Indoor
Bluetooth-Based Positioning Service. ICDCSW’ 03: 23rd In-
ternational Conference on Distributed Computing Systems
Workshops 2003, 480-83.
[8] L. Aalto, N. G˜othlin, J. Korhonen and T. Ojala T, Bluetooth
and WAP Push based Location-aware Mobile Advertising
System, Second International Conference on Mobile Systems,
Applications and Services, pp. 49-59, Boston, MA, 2004.
[9] S. Yamada, Y. Watanabe, H. Kitagawa and T. Amagasa,
Location-Based Information Delivery Using Stream Processing
Engine, International Conference on Mobile Data Management
(MDM06), pp. 57-61, 2006.
[10] Anthony Lamarca, Yatin Chawathe, et al.,Place Lab: Device
Positioning Using Radio Beacons in the Wild, In Proceedings
of the Third International Conference on Pervasive Computing
(May 2005)
[11] P. Bahl and V. Padmanabhan. RADAR: An In-Building RF-
based User Location and Tracking System. In Proc. IEEE
INFOCOM (Tel-Aviv, Israel, Mar. 2000).
[12] N. Michiko, O. Naoya, T, Ryuji, Just-in-Time Information
Delivery System for Passenger Assistance, Journal of Q Rep
RTRI, Vol.47; No.4; pp.187-191, 2006.
[13] J. Hightower, C. Vakili, G. Borriello, and R. Want. Design and
Calibration of the SpotON Ad-Hoc Location Sensing System.
August 2001.
91
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 14.
User Experience in Exhibition
[14] L. M. Ni, Y. Liu, Y. C. Lau, and A. P. Patil. LANDMARC:
Indoor Location Sensing Using Active RFID. In Proceedings
of IEEE PerCom 2003, Dallas, TX, USA, March 2003.
[15] N. Marmasse and C. Schmandt, Location-Aware Information
Delivery with ComMotion, International Symposium on Hand-
held and Ubiquitous Computing , pp. 361-370, London, UK,
2000.
[16] A. Hinze and A. Voisard. Location- and Time-based In-
formation Delivery in Tourism, International Symposium on
Advances in Spatial and Temporal Databases (SSTD 2003),
pp. 489-507, July 2003.
[17] J. Zhao and Y. Wang, Autonomous Ultrasonic Indoor Track-
ing System, IEEE International Symposium on Parallel and
Distributed Processing with Applications, pp.532-539, Sydney,
Austrialia, 2008.
[18] Y. Wang and J. Zhao and T. Fukushima, LOCK: A Highly
Accurate, Easy-to-Use Location-based Access Control System,
4th International Symposium on Location and Context Aware-
ness (LOCA’09), Tokyo, Japan, 2009.
[19] J. Hartigan, Clustering Algorithms. Wiley.
[20] MacKay and David, Chapter 20. An Example Inference
Task: Clustering, Information Theory, Inference and Learning
Algorithms, Cambridge University Press. pp. 284-292, 2003.
[21] Luger, George; Stubbleﬁeld, William . Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence: Structures and Strategies for Complex Problem Solving
(5th ed.). The Benjamin/Cummings Publishing Company, Inc.
ISBN 0-8053-4780-1.(2004)
[22] J. Hartigan and M. Wong, Algorithm AS 136: A K-Means
Clustering Algorithm Applied Statistics Vol.28, No.1, pp. 100-
108, 1979.
[23] R. FONTANA, Recent System Applications of Short-pulse
Ultra-wideband (UWB) Technology.IEEE Trans on Microwave
Theory and Techniques, 52(9), pp. 2087-2104, 2004.
[24] W. Chung and D. Ha, An accurate ultra wideband (UWB)
ranging for precision asset location, in Proceedings of IEEE
Conference on Ultra Wideband Systems and Technologies
(UWBST’03), pp. 389-393, Reston, Va, USA, November 2003.
[25] R. Fleming, C. Kushner, G. Roberts, and U. Nandiwada,
Rapid acquisition for ultra-wideband localizers, in Proceedings
of IEEE Conference on Ultra Wideband Systems and Tech-
nologies (UWBST’02), pp. 245-249, Baltimore, Md, USA,
May 2002.
92
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

