Improving Critical Communications in Northern Canada 
 
Paul Labbé 
National Defence 
Defence Research and Development Canada 
Ottawa, Canada 
email: Paul.Labbe@drdc-rddc.gc.ca / Paul.Labbe@forces.gc.ca 
 
 
Abstract—Evolving activities in the Canadian Arctic drive the 
need for increased dependable high-data rate communication 
capabilities 
with 
low 
latencies. 
This 
study 
examines 
performance 
and 
challenges 
of 
past 
and 
current 
communication technologies available in this northern region 
for sensor data, video and voice exchange. Some options for 
operations in the Canadian Arctic are explored accounting for 
adverse conditions, such as atmospheric disturbances (both 
natural and man-made) or adversarial attacks on satellites and 
terrestrial infrastructure. Potential users include Canadian 
Armed Forces (CAF), North American Aerospace Defense 
Command (NORAD), off-grid communities and Public Safety, 
with respective systems requiring machine-to-machine low 
latency 
data 
sharing. 
Technologies 
considered 
include 
satellites, microwave relays, fiber optic links, radios such as 
cellular phones, transceivers in high frequency bands 
(20-30 Mhz), and particularly Unmanned Aerial System (UAS) 
gateways. 
Keywords-communications; satellite; UAS; Arctic; latency. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This invited paper expands from [1] to examine 
telecommunications options for operations in Northern 
Canada accounting for adverse conditions such as 
atmospheric disturbances (both natural and man-made)  as 
well for adversarial attacks on satellites and terrestrial 
infrastructure. While most sections of this paper can be 
highly scientific, some layman analogies have been added 
throughout to reach a broader audience.  
This Defence Research and Development Canada 
(DRDC) study was initiated to address Canadian Arctic 
communication challenges expressed in the new Canada's 
Defense Policy, Strong, Secure, Engaged (SSE) [2], which 
reaffirmed Canada’s commitment to effective operations in 
the Arctic. SSE defines an extended Canadian Air Defense 
Identification Zone (CADIZ), which includes the entire 
Canadian Arctic Archipelago (Figure 1), in respect of overall 
North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) 
modernization efforts towards an improved North Warning 
System (NWS) requiring high-throughput low-latency 
communications.  
Some 
aspects 
of 
current 
Northern 
Canadian 
communication systems of the Canadian Armed Forces 
(CAF), off-grid communities, Search And Rescue (SAR), 
and Public Safety (PS) are identified. A rise in commercial 
interest, research and tourism in this zone brings increased 
safety and security demands to address SAR and natural or 
man-made disasters to which Canada must be ready to 
respond. 
 
Figure 1.  North American Canadian operational areas, new Canadian Air 
Defense Identification Zone (CADIZ), distance vectors and population 
densities for Canada, Northern Canada, Canadian Arctic Archipelago and 
Toronto. 
Section II of this paper describes the geographic context, 
climate, topography and size of the area requiring assured 
communication in all space weather and atmospheric 
conditions. Section III summarizes relevant aspects of the 
communication systems envisaged, deployed and used over 
the last decades in this area, such as Tropospheric Scatter, 
Geostationary Earth Orbit (GEO) satellite relays at 
approximately 37000 km above the equator and Medium 
Earth Orbit (MEO) satellites between 2000 and 36000 km 
altitudes. Section IV introduces an option using a specific 
Highly Elliptical Orbit (HEO), the Three APogee (TAP with 
an apogee around 43000 km altitude over the CADIZ) [3] 
while Section V brings into perspective novel options 
offered by several Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellite 
43
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

constellations at altitudes below 2000 km. Section VI 
proposes a possible terrestrial architecture with the addition 
of base stations using towers and/or Unmanned Aerial 
Systems (UAS) as gateways. Technical considerations begin 
with Section VII, which compares latencies among the 
different satellite systems’ orbits and other communication 
technologies. Section VIII examines the pros and cons of 
some of these options. Section IX explores challenges 
experienced by radio channels in support of the variety of 
relevant operations with results from simulations to conclude 
the scientific analysis. Section X provides a short discussion 
in layman terms of the presented results and relevant 
suggestions for further considerations. Section XI concludes 
with a short summary of findings and recommendations. 
II. 
CONTEXT 
Northern Canada, aka the North, is the vast northernmost 
region of Canada variously defined by geography and 
politics. Politically, the term refers to three Canadian 
territories: Yukon, Northwest Territories, and Nunavut. This 
area includes the Arctic Archipelago and covers about 39% 
of Canada's total land area, and is home to less than 1% of 
Canada's population.  
The Canadian Arctic Archipelago, more succinctly the 
Arctic Archipelago, groups together all islands lying to the 
north of the Canadian continental mainland excluding 
Greenland (an autonomous territory of Denmark). Situated in 
the northern extremity of North America and covering about 
1420000 km2 (550000 sq mi), this group of 36563 (named) 
islands in the Arctic Sea comprises much of Northern 
Canada—most of Nunavut and part of the Northwest 
Territories. This is about 15% of Canada’s geographic area 
and is home to only about 0.04% of Canada's population. 
The Arctic Archipelago is experiencing effects of global 
warming, with some computer models estimating ice melting 
to contribute a 3.5 cm rise in sea levels by 2100. 
CAF’s preparedness training and exercises involve 
several 
thousand 
participants 
and 
observers, 
which 
temporally increase the population density in Northern 
Canada substantially. For example, Operation Nanook is an 
annual series of military CAF exercises in the Arctic. It is 
intended to train different CAF elements (Canadian Army, 
Royal Canadian Air Force and the Royal Canadian Navy) 
along other government organizations, such as the Canadian 
Coast Guard and Royal Canadian Mounted Police in disaster 
response 
training 
and 
Canadian 
sovereignty 
patrols 
throughout Northern Canada. Another series of exercises, 
Maple Flag, is conducted south of Northern Canada near 
CAF Base Cold Lake, which brings about 5000 participants. 
Both exercises place significant demands on information 
exchange interoperability, including: voice, data and video, 
with some telecommunications requiring low latency in 
order to fulfill machine-to-machine requirements. 
A poignant factor in deploying communication systems 
in Northern Canada is the low population density, which 
does not support typical commercial business decisions to 
expand current telecommunications infrastructure the 
metropolitan Canadian population is accustomed to. With 
reference to Figure 1, population densities of Europe and 
India are respectively about 2.3 and 11.6 thousand times 
greater than those of Northern Canada. It is worth noting that 
some aspects of evolving 5G technologies are tuned to 
improve network capacity in high-user density areas like 
cities. Providing improved services in low density areas will 
require careful adaptation of current 5G strategies, standards 
and technologies for deployment in the North.  
Summarizing 
relevant 
environmental 
and 
logistic 
conditions from [4], the North has extreme weather, with 
temperatures ranging from -50 to +20 degrees Celsius and 
wind gusts of up to (hurricane strength) 150 km/h. There is 
very little precipitation in the Arctic, with an average total of 
100 to 200 mm of rain or snow per year. The amount of 
daylight varies with time of year and with latitude. In 
Resolute Bay, for example, the sun does not rise above the 
horizon from early November to early February and does not 
set from early May to late July. 
Permafrost (perpetually frozen ground) is present in most 
of the Arctic and although typically roughly 10 m thick, it 
can extend 1 km below the surface. Construction of stable 
platforms required for large satellite ground stations or 
microwave towers is costly because the necessary support 
pillars must be driven below the permafrost; otherwise the 
platform will shift as the permafrost partially melts during 
the short Arctic summers (for non-scientific audiences, 
permafrost shifts like glacier flows). This requires careful 
site selection to ensure placement where the permafrost is 
acceptably thin to enable installation preferably into the solid 
ground underneath. Furthermore, this type of environment is 
similarly challenging for underground fibre installation. 
Year-round access to all communities high in the Arctic 
is by plane only, increasing the overall cost of travel and 
accommodation for arctic operations and when planning and 
installing communications equipment. Communities use 
seasonal sealifts to transport non-perishable dry cargo (e.g., 
construction material, household goods, vehicles, etc.) and 
bulk fuel to them once or twice per year. Large or costly 
items to transport via air cargo, for example: large aperture 
satellite dishes or microwave towers, and associated 
construction materials, must be shipped by sea. This extends 
the logistic phase of any communication equipment 
deployment and/or exercise. 
III. 
PRACTICAL ARCTIC COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS 
This section summarizes relevant aspects of the 
following communication systems: Tropospheric Scatter, 
High Frequency Ground Wave (HFGW), Point-to-Point 
(P2P) backhaul radio links, Fiber Optic Cable (FOC) and 
GEO satellite relay systems. Skywave propagation modes 
are excluded due to their susceptibility to space radiation and 
atmospheric changes. 
Tropospheric Scatter, or Troposcatter, is a beyond-the-
horizon communications solution using microwave signal 
scatter 
propagating 
through 
the 
troposphere. 
This 
phenomenon allows signals to be successfully received 
around the curvature of the Earth without direct line-of-sight 
between the transmitter and receiver over vast distances, up 
to 500 km. Troposcatter systems have been in use for several 
decades and the technology has seen advances in recent 
44
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

years, including improvements in throughput to 20 Mbps. 
However, for applications in the North it was found to be too 
expensive to sustain due to its power demand and 
infrastructure. 
HFGW was documented as an alternate communication 
network for “nuclear-survivable means of communication 
for land-mobile missile systems in Europe” [5]. HFGW 
appears to be a potential alternative means of communication 
in case of satellite communications disruption, for example 
due to solar activity or other manmade disturbances. 
According to International Telecommunication Union (ITU) 
[6] there are different uses of the terminology and the surface 
wave is often called the ground wave, or sometimes the 
Norton ground wave or Norton surface wave, after Norton 
who developed tractable methods for its mathematical 
treatment. The generic formulaic expression for the ground 
wave is the sum of a direct wave, a reflected wave, and a 
surface wave. When transmitting and receiving antennas are 
close to the ground, the ground reflection coefficient is -1, 
and the direct and reflected waves act to cancel each other 
out, leaving the surface wave as the dominant component. 
Under such conditions, the ground wave is essentially equal 
to the surface wave. Empirical results [5] using broadband 
discone antennas with a cut-off frequency of 19 MHz 
operating over 20 to 30 MHz near the Arctic Circle between 
Norway and Germany showed good link connectivity for 
voice and data communications using narrowband channels 
for paths over irregular terrain across distances ranging 
between 19 and 115 km. Based on the empirical results 
reported, a communication system with its signal spread over 
10 MHz with code division multiplexing and sufficient 
coding gain would offer throughput and fading resilience for 
high-reliability medium-data-rate channels. 
Main challenges in providing microwave backhaul 
throughout the North using towers include the overall lack of 
infrastructure, support and staging, the inaccessibility of 
locations where towers would be built and powering such 
sites. Microwave links have been extensively used in the 
North providing reliable connectivity between communities 
in the Yukon and Northwest Territories that do not have 
direct access to FOC backhaul. Microwave links provide 
high throughput with low latency, a significant advantage 
over GEO satellite systems (below). As microwave 
frequencies require line-of-sight propagation, towers and 
topographic features are exploited to extend the range of 
links beyond the limitations imposed by the curvature of 
Earth and terrain features along the ground path. 
An example of microwave technologies used in remote 
Arctic locations is the High Arctic Data Communication 
System (HADCS) of Ellesmere Island, which links Canadian 
Forces Station Alert (CFS Alert) at latitude 82.5° North 
(beyond line of site of GEO satellites) to Eureka over a 
distance of roughly 500 km. The overall communications 
path includes sending data via a GEO satellite link between 
Eureka (latitude 79.6° North) and Ottawa 4147 km away. 
HADCS was retrofitted in 2003 to run entirely on solar 
power, despite prolonged darkness during winter months. 
Integrated solar irradiance (W/m2) over a certain time period 
and location is called solar radiation, solar exposure, solar 
insolation, or insolation (J/m2 or kWh/m2). Figure 2 shows a 
HADCS station powered by eight 120 W photo-voltaic 
(solar) panels arranged in an octagon (eight vertical panels 
distributed at 45° angular intervals to cover all azimuths).  
 
Figure 2.  HADCS of Ellesmere Island. 
During summer, with 24 hours of daylight, the sun does 
not dip below the horizon, and all of the solar panels 
contribute to charging battery banks [4]. Figure 3 shows CFS 
Alert’s 
mean 
daily 
insolation 
values 
expressed 
in 
kWh/m2/day being quite high (Miami, Florida has a value of 
~5.26 kWh/m2/day), making solar a viable option for CFS 
ALERT during the summer months with sufficient energy 
stored for the long winter. 
 
Figure 3.  Variability of incident solar power for HADCS. 
HADCS comprises seven individual links ranging from 
18 to 121 km in length each. The current system operates in 
bands near 1800 and 2100 MHz, and provides 6.3 Mbps 
throughput. Helicopter transport is the only means of access 
to repeater sites [4] as shown in Figure 4.  
In the North, costs of construction per kilometer for FOC 
and microwave links are about equal (approximately 
$65K/km), when serving a population of roughly 300 people. 
Above this number of end users, year round, fiber is less 
expensive [4]. These networks have at least one point of 
45
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

service provisioned via a satellite terrestrial terminal; in 
practice two or more are used to increase dependability. 
  
Figure 4.  A CH-146 Griffon helicopter slings a battery over a repeater 
site. 
GEO satellite systems are well suited for some 
applications in the North. Given that GEO satellites remain 
at the same apparent point in the sky when viewed from a 
corresponding set of locations on Earth having clear line of 
sight, GEO satellite systems as a whole do not require 
tracking antennas on the ground as MEO and LEO systems 
do. This enables the use of lower-cost stationary antennas at 
ground stations, which is particularly advantageous in harsh 
environments where moving parts are undesirable. GEO 
satellite systems provide much of the broadband Internet 
coverage (including some backhaul connectivity) for 
communities in the North. Coverage in Nunavut is currently 
provided by two GEO satellites, Anik F2 and Anik F3, both 
using the C-band mainly between 4-8 GHz, but also using 
the 3.7-4 GHz range, which overlaps with the IEEE S-band 
[4]. 
However, the use of GEO satellite systems in the North 
has drawbacks. Due to geometry and the curvature of Earth, 
there is no clear line-of-sight between equatorial GEO 
satellites and locations above roughly 80 degrees latitude 
North as GEO satellites appear under the location’s southern 
horizon. In practice, communities at latitudes higher than 
about 70 degrees have elevation-look angles to the GEO 
satellite below ten degrees as rays emanating from GEO 
satellite locations are essentially tangential to the ground. 
This leads to increased absorption and scattering of 
microwave frequency signals by the atmosphere more 
generically referred to as absorption, and as signal 
dissipation at higher frequencies due to precipitation (rain, 
snow and ice) more generically referred to as rain fade. The 
five northernmost communities in Nunavut are above 70 
degrees latitude and the dominating factor is absorption as 
precipitation is low overall in the North. 
Perhaps the greatest disadvantage of GEO satellite 
technology use for broadband applications is signal latency: 
due to the propagation distance to and from the satellite, the 
minimum delay for a round trip is 480 ms with a median 
latency of 600 ms. This is an order of magnitude higher than 
fiber and microwave link latency [4] (details below). 
Tests of Mobile Satellite (MSAT) and Iridium 
capabilities for emergency communications in Northern 
Quebec showed insufficiencies. The Canadian MSAT 
system uses GEO satellites, which requires, at such latitude, 
a high-gain antenna and higher off the ground antenna 
mounting 
(resulting 
in 
larger 
installations, 
location 
constraints and thus greater costs). These conditions make 
(emergency) operations difficult and cost-ineffective with 
very little room to support emergency response.  
The US commercial Iridium system with its current 
handheld, vehicle-mounted and fixed-remote equipment 
demonstrated different logistic problems, including high cost 
and poor performance of the handheld telephone sets, which 
incidentally usually cannot be used inside manmade 
structures [7].  
The Iridium system was designed to be accessed by small 
handheld telephone sets, the size of a cell phone. 
Omnidirectional antennas, which are small enough to be 
mounted on such an Iridium phone, and the low battery 
power provided, are insufficient to allow the set's radio 
waves to reach a GEO satellite. In order for such a handheld 
phone to communicate with them, the Iridium satellites are at 
LEOs closer to Earth, at about 780 km above the surface. 
With an orbital period of about 100 minutes an Iridium 
satellite can only be in view of a handset for about 7 minutes, 
with the call being automatically "handed off" to another 
satellite when the previous one passes beyond the local 
horizon. This requires a large number of Iridium satellites in 
comparison with GEO satellite based solutions, carefully 
spaced out in polar orbits, to ensure that at least one satellite 
is continually in view from every high latitude point on 
Earth's surface. For seamless coverage at least 66 satellites 
are required, in 6 polar orbits containing 11 satellites each 
(with some inactive spares). 
For 
a 
Canadian 
Arctic 
Underwater 
Sentinel 
Experimentation (CAUSE) project, transmission of data over 
a period of 7 months showed that the Iridium Pilot system 
(with an antenna about six meters above ground) did not 
fulfill required expectation [8]. “The Pilot data transfer rate 
for polar transceivers is far less than the advertised rate” [8].  
46
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

IV. 
ENVISAGED HEO/TAP CONSTELLATIONS 
Current GEO communication satellites leave the poles 
uncovered; consequently, Department of National Defence 
(DND) is exploring options of building the capability or 
acquiring services from commercial providers with future 
plans to cover this area. The initial operational capability is 
tentatively scheduled for 2029.  
Quasi-geostationary coverage of Polar Regions can be 
achieved from HEO satellites. HEO/TAP [3] could be 
considered under the Enhanced Satellite Communications 
Project – Polar (ESCP-P) program to provide dedicated, 
secure 
and 
reliable 
Beyond 
Line-Of-Sight 
(BLOS) 
communications 
for 
domestic 
and 
continental 
CAF 
operations in the Arctic.  
In accordance with Kepler’s second law, a HEO satellite 
spends most of the time in the vicinity of apogee (i.e., the 
farthest point from the Earth’s surface, farther than GEO). 
The orbit could be oriented in such a way that the apogee is 
over one of the two Polar Regions, so that only two HEO 
satellites can maintain a continuous view of (presence above) 
an entire polar zone [9]. When satellite A leaves the service 
coverage (optimal viewing) zone and heads toward the 
perigee (i.e., the closest point to the Earth’s surface), satellite 
B rises over the same zone to maintain the same complete 
circumpolar region in sight. Interestingly, there are periods 
of several hours per day of coincident (i.e., stereo-like) 
viewing from the two satellites over most of the circumpolar 
service area. Such a system could provide meteorological 
imaging and communication capacity, similar to GEO 
(including high latency aspects), focused on the polar region. 
The first HEO satellite system with a period of rotation equal 
to 12 h called Molniya was implemented for communication 
purposes in 1965. It established that a two-satellite Molniya 
HEO constellation can achieve continuous coverage of the 
polar region 58°–90°N with a Viewing Zenith Angle (VZA) 
less than 70°. Another HEO system—with a 24-h period—
called Tundra is currently used by the satellite Sirius XM 
Radio service operating in North America. Both orbits, 12-h 
Molniya and 24-h Tundra, require HEO satellites to be 
launched with an orbit inclination equal to 63.4°. This value 
called the critical inclination [9], corresponds to a zero rate 
of apogee drift due to the second zonal harmonic of the 
Earth’s gravitational field, and ensures a stable position of 
apogee over the polar zone. If the HEO orbit inclination 
differs from the critical value, then the apogee gradually 
drifts toward the equator, requiring orbital maneuvers to 
maintain the intended orbit position. The farther the orbit 
inclination is from the critical value, the more resources are 
required to maintain the orbit. A drawback associated with 
the 12-h Molniya orbit is the risk linked to hazardous levels 
of ionizing radiation due to the satellite passing through the 
Van Allen belts. The highest danger originates from high-
energy protons. The Molniya orbit crosses the proton 
radiation belts at the region of maximum concentration of 
energetic protons with energies up to several hundred MeV. 
As an alternative, a 16-h TAP HEO orbit was proposed, 
providing similar polar coverage as the Molniya HEO 
system while minimizing the proton ionizing hazards by 
extending the apogee to 43000 km [3]. The TAP orbit has a 
ground track with three apogee points repeatable over two 
days. Such a constellation of two satellites in TAP orbit still 
revisits ground tracks every 24 h.  
V. 
PERSPECTIVE OF NEW LEO CONSTELLATIONS  
Out of the 11 LEO satellite communications service 
proposals registered (2014 and 2016) with the US Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC), the following three are 
considered based on their maturity [10]: OneWeb, SpaceX 
(Starlink) and Telesat on Ku (12-18 GHz), Ka (27-40 GHz) 
and V (40-75 GHz) bands.  
To ensure access to affordable high-speed Internet 
connectivity across rural and Northern Canada, the 
Government of Canada has invested $85 million and is 
committed to buy up to $600 million of services over 
10 years following launch in 2022 of Telesat’s LEO Satellite 
Constellation [11], which is leveraging Telesat’s worldwide 
rights to ≈4 GHz of Ka-band spectrum. 
The analysis in [10] is summarized as follows: 
 The maximum total system throughput (sellable 
capacity) 
for 
OneWeb's, 
Telesat's 
and 
SpaceX's 
constellations are 1.56 Tbps, 2.66 Tbps and 23.7 Tbps 
respectively. 
 A ground segment comprising 42 ground stations will 
suffice to handle all of Telesat's capacity, whereas OneWeb 
will require at least 71 ground stations, and SpaceX will need 
more than 123. And, in this respect, the considerations 
presented here above regarding ground stations are directly 
relevant for LEO coverage in the North, particularly satellite 
tracking antenna functionality. 
 In terms of satellite efficiency (ratio between an 
achieved average data-rate per satellite and its maximum 
data-rate), Telesat's system performs significantly better 
(∼59% vs. SpaceX's 25% and OneWeb's 22%). This is due 
to the use of dual active antennas on each satellite, and the 
lower minimum elevation angle required in their user links. 
 OneWeb's system has a lower throughput than 
Telesat's, even though the number of satellites in the former 
is significantly larger. The main reasons for this are the 
lower data-rate per satellite that results from OneWeb's low-
complexity satellite design, spectrum utilization strategy, 
orbital configuration, and payload design, and particularly 
the absence of Inter Satellite Links (ISLs) to which the 
analysis presented here will return later. 
 If ISLs were to be used in OneWeb's constellation, 
(even with modest data-rates of 5 Gbps), the number of 
ground stations required could be reduced by more than half 
to 27 ground stations. 
“To conclude, our analysis revealed different technical 
strategies among the three proposals. OneWeb's strategy 
focuses on being first-to-market, minimizing risk and 
employing a low-complexity space segment, thus delivering 
lower throughput. In contrast, Telesat's strategy revolves 
around highly-capable satellites and system flexibility (in 
diverse areas, such as: deployment, targeted capacity 
allocation, data routing, etc.), which results in increased 
design complexity. Finally, SpaceX's system is distinctive in 
47
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

its size; although individually each satellite is not 
significantly more complex than Telesat's, the massive 
number of satellites and ground stations increases the risks 
and complexities of the overall system considerably” [10]. 
However, although the massive number of satellites and 
ground stations increases the risks and complexities of the 
overall system considerably, our experience showed that 
with appropriate intelligent/adaptive designs, this offers a 
desirable high level of redundancy and ensures some self-
healing 
capabilities required 
for dependable critical 
communication systems supporting vital time-constrained 
activities and operations, both civilian and military. Overall, 
employing such massive numbers of satellites might provide 
room for multifactor synergies beyond the scope of this 
paper briefly mentioned in the Considerations section X 
below. 
It is worth mentioning that LEO satellite data collected 
during the 2014-2016 period for the cited 2019 article [10] 
may have changed considerably from the initial application 
through the FCC given the fast evolution of regulations and 
separately of technologies. According to current knowledge, 
SpaceX made several new applications to evolve the Starlink 
system design to a multi-constellation with three different 
orbit layer patterns, in addition to ISLs and a massive 
number of ground stations to increase connectivity to 
existing 
terrestrial 
infrastructure 
and 
creating 
new 
infrastructures where none previously existed. However, the 
current early version of the Starlink satellites do not have 
ISLs but instead they use advanced antenna arrays [12]. 
Given SpaceX linkages with National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA) and United States Department of 
Defense (DoD) (e.g., relative to DARPA’s Blackjack 
program) [13][14], it seems that a possible overarching 
objective is to deploy capabilities for persistent surveillance, 
especially to detect and track hypersonic cruise missiles, 
which provides confidence in considering further synergies 
in the emergency management and preparedness sphere. 
It is worth noticing that Starlink’s beta testing is 
progressing as reported recently by Canada Satellite [15] 
More about Starlink progress could be found on the web as 
per the following references [16][17], as well as reducing 
interference with space observation with SpaceX's Darksat 
[17] which exhibited a 50% reduction although much more is 
required to fulfil the requirement for larger telescopes. 
Several developments since the reference publication 
[10] affect the implementation space. Partly due to COVID-
19 and loss of high-risk funding partners, OneWeb went 
bankrupt in March 2020 while trying to build a satellite 
constellation to deliver broadband. According BBC news, 
the UK is part of a consortium with India's Bharti Global, 
which won a bid to take the company over. Business 
Secretary Alok Sharma said it would help deliver the "first 
UK sovereign space capability". The situation is slightly 
different for Telesat's constellation, which intends to sell part 
of their licensed radio spectrum in order to generate funds for 
building their sophisticated LEO satellite technologies with 
commitments from the Canadian Government [11]. 
VI. 
TERRESTRIAL ARCHITECTURES 
UAS gateways (either aerostats, hot air balloon, buoyant 
gas air balloon, tethered or free-flying, unpowered or 
powered, 
dirigibles 
or 
high-altitude 
high-endurance 
autonomous drones) [4] provide possible communication 
solutions that merit discussion. The Internet.org consortium 
has conducted some research into the feasibility of using 
UAS as communication platforms for remote and 
underserved locations [15]. Such UAS would be deployed at 
an altitude of approximately 20 km. By using solar power, 
UAS systems would be capable of maintaining station above 
a geographic location, thereby reducing complexity and cost 
of ground infrastructure when compared to microwave links, 
without requiring active tracking by the antenna on the 
ground typically used for MEO and LEO satellite systems. 
As the UAS would be relatively close to ground, cheaper 
low-power transmitters could be used, while still enabling 
high-throughput communications with low latency. UAS 
would be more susceptible to atmospheric weather than 
satellites. A previous study [4] assessed that this type of 
UAS range extenders might have an availability up to 80%. 
With intervening technology advances, such UAS might be 
sufficiently reliable today for commercial broadband. 
Architecture options offered by new LEO satellite 
constellations and terrestrial communications, such as UAS, 
FOC and HFGW given advances in signal processing, multi-
beam antennas, spatial diversity and low cost software-
defined radios have the potential to substantially improve 
telecommunication systems availability and reliability in the 
North. Figure 5 illustrates a hybrid-technology architecture 
where ISLs and Inter UAS Links (IUASLs) play important 
roles. Long endurance UAS could use solar with hydrogen 
fuel-cells. UAS requiring refueling every six months would 
be ideal (north passage shipping season, tourist season, etc.).  
  
Figure 5.  Simplified proposed Northern Communications Architecture. 
VII. LATENCY  
Now turning to specific technical aspects, the one way 
propagation delay of a message is the amount of time it takes 
to reach its destination from its source. Latency is the delay, 
usually measured in milliseconds (ms), that occurs in a 
round-trip data exchange. Round-Trip Times (RTTs) for 
FOC in large networks [18] using Content Delivery Network 
(CDN) show useful latency around 18 ms over a distance of 
1400 km. HADCS and HFGW offer low latency in this order 
of magnitude at lower data rates.  
High latency typical of GEO satellite links can be very 
disruptive for some applications, such as video conferencing, 
48
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

and could increase risk in remote health delivery applications 
including emergency response and particularly remote 
surgery. Satellite link latencies can also cause low data 
throughput, 
caused 
by 
the 
default 
behavior 
of 
communication protocols, which are optimized for shorter 
distances. A GEO satellite one-way propagation delay is 
approximately 240 ms due to the large distance between 
Earth surface location and the satellite; round-trip delivery of 
a data packet with acknowledgement is approximately 
480 ms. This does not include a network delay, which can 
generally add 50 to 200 ms, depending on where the server is 
located. GEO satellite systems have a median latency of 
nearly 600 ms, which includes a median delay of 120 ms 
incurred by equipment processing speed and network delays 
in both directions. This makes GEO systems unsuitable to 
replace cable or fiber systems for applications requiring low 
latency, 
particularly 
impeding 
machine-to-machine 
interoperation.  
For HEO TAP, with an apogee of 43000 km, the round-
trip time is increased by 16% over GEO, i.e., 558 ms or a 
median latency of 778 ms. Assuming a MEO median orbit of 
19000 km, that is 51% of GEO latency, then MEO median 
latency would be in the order of 306 ms. 
The lower orbits of LEO satellites, however, result in 
latencies much closer to landline quality. The average orbit 
of the proposed constellations is around 1200 km, an average 
round trip of 2400 km, incurring a latency of about 31 ms. 
This is 93.5% improvement over a GEO round trip latency of 
480 ms. If the processing speed of LEOs equals that of 
GEOs then their total median latency would be 151 ms. 
However, OneWeb tune-up, recorded an average latency of 
32 ms in July 2019. As new LEO satellites are designed for 
high throughput, their overall processing time and network 
delay must be lower than those used in legacy GEO systems 
in order to obtain such low latency. 
In this paper, since no large sets of empirical results are 
available for LEO latency, a conservative approach is to use 
selected simulation results from [19] for an optimal Expected 
Latency Minimization (ELM) algorithm used in the 
Software-Defined 
Networking 
(SDN) 
context, 
which 
addresses more comprehensively the overall network delay 
aspect including fading dependence on atmospherics. An 
interpretation of [19] for its ELM-SDN hypotheses is that 
LEO’s average latency would be around 40 ms with a 
maximum average latency around 90 ms. 
Considering the advantages of LEOs in extending 
telecommunications coverage and throughput of terrestrial 
network communications in the North with appropriate 
gateways, the analysis presented here is extended to include 
experimental findings.  
One challenge of LEO constellations is the frequent 
handover (also known as handoff) between satellites or 
between their multiple spotbeams in a satellite footprint. 
Another challenge stems from terrestrial base station 
tracking antenna pointing limitations not limited to 
temperature dependent non-zero slew. These have a good 
chance to be mitigated for terrestrial base station equipment 
under low energy and cost regimes by the recent and 
expected availability of lower-cost components, such as 
high-speed low-power chip sets and Active Electronically 
Scanned Array (AESA) integrated boards for microwave 
systems in Ka and Ku bands. Use of phased array technology 
is common in satellite radio frequency antennas. 
VIII. PROS AND CONS OF SOME OF THESE OPTIONS 
Next we discuss some radio and LEO channel aspects. 
A. Common radio channel considerations 
Figure 6 illustrates generic terrestrial path loss as 
function of carrier frequency and shows disadvantages of 
transmitting at higher frequencies counterbalanced by higher 
frequencies offering higher throughput. Carrier frequency 
dependence is also present in satellite communications as 
mentioned herein. 
 
Figure 6.  Path loss distance ratio d2/d1 as a function of the carrier 
frequency ratio fc1/fc2 for five base station heights and mobile at one meter 
above ground. 
Many of the problems of poor communications 
performance in remote areas can be alleviated by operating 
communication networks at lower frequencies. Radio-
frequency (RF) passive and active devices, and ancillary 
components, are generally more efficient when operating 
frequencies are reduced from 10 GHz to 10 MHz. A similar 
tendency can be observed in propagation phenomena. 
Interestingly, urban noise increases as the frequency 
decreases but this is of less importance presently in the 
sparsely populated North. Overall, however, effective 
channel capacity and coverage at 150 MHz is superior to that 
at 1.5 GHz, at the same time a frequency allocation problem 
must be addressed (re-allocation of current VHF frequencies 
is required). The gain in energy-transfer efficiency at lower 
frequencies can be illustrated by using a propagation 
prediction model adapted by Hata [20], which estimates the 
power path loss Lp in dB as: 
Lp = 69.55 + 26.16 log10 fc − 13.82 log10 hb − Ahm
+ (44.9 − 6.55 log10 hb) log10 d 
(1) 
where the carrier frequency fc is in MHz, antenna heights h 
are in m and the distance between the antennas d is in km. 
The effective base station height hb range is from 30 to 
300 m: however, in a deployable system for purposes 
49
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

relevant here, mobiles can be used as relays and the lower 
bound of hb may be set to one meter. The correction factor 
A(hm) in dB is a function of the mobile effective antenna 
height hm and size of the city (the Hata model dealt with an 
urban environment); we neglect this term in our model 
because the North is sparsely populated, in addition hm is set 
to one meter. Applying (1) to two frequencies, fc1 and fc2 
with a ratio fr = fc1/fc2 larger than 1, all the other parameters 
of (1) being the same, and equating the path loss Lp1 = Lp2, d1 
and d2 become the dependent variables. With dr = d2/d1, we 
obtain the following equation: 
dr = fr
(
26.16
44.9−6.55og10 hb)
 
(2) 
Equation (2) indicates that, for a given path loss, we can 
increase the distance between the receiver and the transmitter 
by decreasing the operating frequency of the terrestrial 
wireless communication network, if other factors are 
unchanged. In rural areas, foliage and diffraction models for 
other shadowing effects and surface over-the-horizon radio-
propagation allow the derivation of similar equations. 
Figure 6 allows estimating the increase in radio coverage 
when stepping down from 1500 MHz to 150 MHz. Reducing 
the mobile operating frequency by a factor of 10 extends the 
communication range by a factor of about 5 for a base station 
whose effective antenna height is 30 m. If the cell size were 
5 km for normal service, it might adaptively extend to 25 km 
for an emergency temporary service, reducing the logistic 
burden of covering an area affected by a disaster. Currently, 
the frequency of 700 MHz is allocated for emergency in 
Canada. 
Colman et al. [4] present microwave link systems 
examples. One is operating at 1.8 GHz and the other at 
11 GHz, with similar radiating power. The system at the 
lower frequency offers a free space maximum range of 
333 km while the other, at six times the frequency, qualifies 
for a free space maximum range of 30 km, which is 11 times 
shorter. However, the maximum effective throughput rises 
from 65.4 Mbps to 232 Mbps, which is 3.5 times faster.  
Other considerations include the challenge of powering 
terrestrial systems in the North briefly presented above in 
Section III. Sources like solar and wind mill power could be 
combined with sodium-ion batteries, operable at low 
temperatures. 
These considerations apply with due change in 
particulars to generic mobile units, including airborne, and 
equally apply to UAS providing cell phone tower 
functionality. 
B. LEO channel analysis 
Equally, when a satellite is in direct line above a UAS, a 
ground station or a mobile transceiver, this is the shortest 
path, the Doppler effect is null, the signal is at its maximum 
level and usually is less affected by various atmospheric 
phenomena (cloud, rain, snow fall) aside from possible 
multiple ground or nearby structures’ reflections. The signal 
is composed of a main direct ray and several secondary 
reflections. Such a channel displays fades statistics following 
a Rician distribution. 
  
Figure 7.  Moving ground or air terminal and LEO satellites. 
However, when the satellite ascends (rises) above the 
horizon (positive Doppler shift) or descends (sets) toward the 
horizon (negative Doppler shift), i.e., at low elevation angles 
(δ) above the horizon as shown in Figure 7, the slant range 
path of the signal is close to the maximum useable distance 
before being completely shadowed by Earth’s curvature. 
Note that polar orbit LEOs could rise from the North and 
later from the South over their complete orbit cycle since 
during a cycle the orbit path turn around Earth (East-West). 
In the following equations we assume that the mobile 
terminal is at a negligible height altitude. For UAS and 
aircraft at high altitudes these equations need to be modified. 
For a ground terminal, when δ is equal to zero, the slant 
distance sd can be expressed as follows: 
sd = √h2 + 2hRe  
(3) 
with h = 1200 km and Re = 6378 km, sd = 4100 km. In order 
to ensure a sufficient signal strength level, LEO satellite 
constellation designers select a minimum δ large enough to 
ensure a useful workable Quality of Service (QoS). For 
example Telesat set δ to a minimum of 20°. Equation (4) 
[21] provides sd as function of δ: 
sd = Re (√(
h+Re
Re )
2
− cos2 δ −  sin δ), 
(4) 
which for δ = 20° gives an sd of 2453 km. Equation (4) can 
be verified with δ = 90°, which corresponds to the shortest 
distance value, i.e., sd = h as expected where the Doppler 
shift is null. Free space Line of Sight (LoS) path loss for 
each of these distances at 50 GHz (wavelength of 6 mm in 
the V band) are respectively 198.6 dB, 194.2 dB and 188 dB. 
Doubling range distance requires a four-fold increase in 
power for a 6 dB path loss increase at 20° of elevation. It is 
worst at 0° with about 10 dB or a power ratio of 10 just for 
the free space loss. However, as the elevation angle δ 
decreases, more adverse atmospheric phenomena will add to 
the total path loss, e.g., a cloud may add another 7 dB loss at 
that frequency.  
50
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In addition, the weaker (faint) received signal shows 
more Rayleigh fading, and is more prone to adjacent channel 
and jamming signal interference. At small elevation angles, 
sd is larger, the signal level is lower; the main path competes 
with relatively strong multipath reflections in addition to 
being more exposed to atmospheric phenomena over longer 
distances. Such a channel would likely display deeper and 
more frequent amplitude fades departing from the Rician 
distribution, however, following a Rayleigh distribution as 
hypothesized in [22]. 
Amplitude measurements of the received radio signal 
reveal 
time-varying 
characteristics 
resulting 
from 
propagation phenomena. When contributions to the total 
received energy arrive from a large number of reflections, 
giving a uniform distribution of phases each with similar 
amplitude, the resulting signal displays Rayleigh amplitude 
statistics. If a single contribution dominates, the total signal 
displays Rician amplitude statistics. When contributions 
arrive from only a limited solid angle around the receiver, 
the amplitude may follow either a Weibull or a log-normal 
distribution. In real situations, constant configuration 
changes as scenarios evolve lead to amplitude statistics that 
may vary considerably. For example, to address this variety 
of conditions, the Loo distribution offers an adaptation as 
function of the elevation angles [23]. 
The speed of a LEO satellite relative to a fixed ground 
station Vs can be expressed as function of its orbital period 
[24] as follows: 
Vs = √
µ𝐿
h+Re. 
(5) 
where µL is Kepler’s constant 398600 km3/s2. Consequently 
the Doppler shift fds as function of the elevation angle and 
the carrier frequency [24] is: 
fds = √
VsR𝑒f𝑐 cos δ
C(h+Re) . 
(6) 
Using (5) and (6) we find that fds = 1059 kHz for 
h = 1000 km, Vs = 7.35 km/s, and fc = 50 GHz. These values 
represent significant challenges for data links relevant in this 
present study. 
The available time to an initial connection to a LEO 
satellite, or one of its spotbeams, could be shorter than 3 
minutes, hence the frequent need to access a newly visible 
channel. To address this, in view of challenges with Iridium 
presented in Section III above, there are a variety of handoff 
management approaches reported in [25][26]. Some address 
land mobile systems using terrestrial base stations. Here, we 
are more concerned with satellite-to-satellite handover [27] 
and between spotbeams, both inter and intra-satellite 
spotbeam handovers [28] serving terrestrial fixed or mobile 
users, base stations, gateways and UAS.  
Some definitions from [29] for typical cellular 
deployments are reused for relevant purposes here. “A hard 
handover is one in which the channel in the source cell is 
released and only then the channel in the target cell is 
engaged. Thus the connection to the source is broken before 
or 'as' the connection to the target is made—for this reason 
such handovers are also known as break-before-make. Hard 
handovers are intended to be instantaneous in order to 
minimize the disruption to the call. When the mobile is 
between base stations, then the mobile can switch with any 
of the base stations, so the base stations bounce the link with 
the mobile back and forth. A soft handover is one, in which 
the channel in the source cell is retained and used for a while 
in parallel with the channel in the target cell. In this case the 
connection to the target is established before the connection 
to the source is broken, hence this handover is called make-
before-break. The interval, during which the two connections 
are used in parallel, may be brief or substantial. Soft 
handovers may involve using connections to more than two 
cells: connections to three, four or more cells can be 
maintained by one phone at the same time. The latter is more 
advantageous, and when such combining is performed both 
in the downlink (forward link) and the uplink (reverse link) 
the handover is termed as softer. Softer handovers are 
possible when the cells involved in the handovers have a 
single cell site.” 
Problems with hard handover are the possibility of lost 
packets, lost requests to repeat them, cost of packet 
resequencing and consequently additional delays. Soft 
handover may monopolize more channel resources while 
being seamless to end users. As reported in [29], there are 
advanced soft handover approaches that better optimize 
retention of channel resources and reduce latency. 
IX. 
RADIO CHANNELS TO SUPPORT OPPERATIONS 
This section is based on the author’s work [30], to which 
unpublished material is added illustrating the challenges of 
digital communications between collaborating entities for 
deployed operations. It illustrates how difficult it is to 
correctly assess the effective channel capacity in the context 
of several concurrent operations. The channel capacity is the 
most stringent factor affecting the performance of distributed 
information systems made up of mobile-computing nodes 
communicating via digital radios [31][32][33][34]. In the 
following analysis it is assumed that the distributed 
algorithms used are optimal for certain operational loads and 
observe that optimization is rapidly lost below a certain 
information exchange threshold [35]. To estimate the 
performance of such distributed algorithms accurately, 
several analytical and simulation models supported by 
experimental results have been proposed in [36][37]. In the 
majority of cases the models show that spatial and temporal 
statistical distributions of interrelated phenomena cannot be 
replaced by mean values without leading to large errors.  
In operations such as SAR [38], emergency evacuation 
and forest-fire fighting, mobile units can be aircraft, 
helicopters, unmanned vehicles [39], trucks, all-terrain 
vehicles and backpacks. For this section we assume that 
information is shared via the radios in order to develop a 
common operational picture via a distributed database. Each 
mobile unit automatically reports its position to other 
participants on pre-established schedules. Decision makers 
coordinate 
operations 
with 
the 
aid 
of 
computers 
(accumulated information, geodisplay, decision support) and 
51
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

send appropriate control messages to participants via 
respective participant communication network nodes. Digital 
voice competes with the transmission of computer data. 
For mobile computing, where purely digital data are 
exchanged over channels subject to Rayleigh fading, the 
effective channel capacity (throughput) decreases with an 
increase in relative velocity between communicating nodes 
for certain combinations of signal modulation, bit coding and 
error control protocols. This phenomenon is expected to be 
exacerbated when applied from terrestrial deployments, 
where relative velocities are at worst in the 100’s km/h, to 
LEO satellites and UAS gateways where relative velocities 
are at least an order of magnitude greater. 
Next, simulation results are presented illustrating the 
need to take into account the range of relative velocities 
encountered between communicating participating mobile 
computing nodes in order to estimate the performance of the 
associated 
distributed 
systems 
accurately. 
Without 
dismissing other challenges such as tracking the variation of 
the carrier frequency due to high maneuverability, speed and 
acceleration of the mobile computing node platform, 
especially when the Doppler shift changes sign, we focus on 
the problem of what to do when packet errors occur due to 
fast-fade phenomena, despite average Signal-to-Noise Ratios 
(SNRs) being adequate. 
We investigate the performance of two different error-
control schemes combining certain error-control techniques. 
The basic scheme uses error detection in a Selective-Repeat 
(SR) Automatic Repeat-reQuest (ARQ) scheme, SR-ARQ 
[36]. The other, a hybrid error-control scheme, adds forward-
error correction (FEC), SR-ARQ/FEC [40]. For both 
schemes, Rayleigh-fading channels are assumed for 
participating nodes moving at relative velocities between 5 
and 500 km/h (100 to 1 000 km/h in [41]). 
The channel access scheme, a roll-call polling [42][43], 
is an energy efficient scheme employed in some distributed 
mobile applications including NATO tactical data exchange 
LINK-11 and is used here to illustrate aspects of the error-
control protocols when sharing fast-aging information. It 
assumes that a master communication node is trying to 
gather information from other coordinated participating 
communication nodes and is the only node controlling 
channel access. Coordinated nodes wait until they are 
requested to send their updated data; if they have none, they 
return only a control packet with an acknowledgment 
(ACK). If no error-free response is received by the master 
node after a predefined delay, it polls the next participant 
node in its list. Reasons for no response include: 1- loss of 
radio connectivity to the intended participant node, 2- loss of 
radio connectivity from the participating node to the master, 
3- collisions due to a previous loss of radio connectivity, and 
4- radio silence either imposed at the queried participating 
node’s platform or due to a fault. 
A. Motivation 
Assuming that many wireless systems will continue to 
exchange data using existing deployed radios with 
appropriate modified modes of operation, and/or internal or 
external upgrades, until new high-performance digital radios 
become more affordable, it is appropriate to present 
simulation and analysis results that point out the crucial 
tradeoffs to be made in link error control, to make best use of 
the scarce mobile-radio bandwidth. The effective channel 
capacity and error rate are highly variable and dependent on 
a variety of environmental factors. Such modified modes of 
operation, and/or internal or external upgrades, include 
interfaces to current radios, channel access schemes, error 
control, signal monitoring, automatic position reporting and 
interfaces to application computer systems. The selection 
presented takes into account recent interoperability trends 
within the telecommunications industry, where two types of 
circuit-mode services are used for computer-to-computer file 
transfer [44]: 
1. Nontransparent: this service employs a radio link 
protocol that protects data during the mobile radio-
transmission segment (as opposed to transmission over other 
media such as cable and/or satellite) including ARQ, FEC 
and flow control. Because of variable conditions in the 
mobile segment, effective user channel capacity decreases 
and delay increases as more packets received with errors 
must be retransmitted to maintain transmitted data integrity. 
Radio-channel bit-error rate is around 10-2 while most 
applications require data with bit-error rates better than 10-6. 
This demands adherence to tight requirements on signal 
modulation, FEC, ARQ and flow-control combinations of 
such systems. 
2. Transparent: this service employs FEC exclusively, 
i.e., without flow control or ARQ. Users must pre-establish a 
communication data rate and delay. 
Research and development efforts for Asynchronous 
Transfer Mode (ATM) architecture suitable for mobile 
computing (civilian or military) may offer an alternative. 
Figure 8 shows a model of the signal radiated by a 
mobile transmitter moving at velocity v2 and affected by 
multiple reflectors, scatterers, diffraction layers and other 
propagation effects (e.g., free-space loss and shadowing), 
reaching another mobile receiver moving at velocity v1. 
When a transmitter moves, its forward wave experiences an 
increase in carrier frequency and its backward wave a 
decrease; and at a stationary receiver corresponding positive 
and negative Doppler frequency shifts are experienced, 
respectively (∆f1 = ± v1 / carrier wavelength). Similar effects 
occur due to a moving receiver: in the direction of the 
incoming wave front induces a positive Doppler frequency 
and vice versa. Because of multipath propagation due to 
scattering, diffraction and reflection, each received signal is 
represented by a complex vector sum (amplitudes, phases 
and Doppler shifts). In this paper we assume that the 
equivalent maximum Doppler frequency to be used in the 
Rayleigh fading model is the sum of the maximum 
contributions due to the two mobile platform transceiver 
velocities v1 and v2, that is ∆f = ∆f1 + ∆f2. By extension, for 
LEO satellites communicating with a moving air or ground 
platform, the spreading of the received signal is limited to 
this value. For this paper we assume that the fade rate 
depends on the scalar sum of the two mobile (node) 
transceiver platforms’ velocities (v1 + v2) relative to ground. 
52
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 8.  Transmission and reception of wave contributors for moving 
ground or space platforms. 
Free-space path loss, clouds, (rain and/or snow) 
precipitation shadowing and slow fading, as well as the total 
noise, determine the local mean value of the observed 
instantaneous SNR. In the presented model, it is assumed 
that this SNR local mean is constant over the time required 
to transmit either: one bit, word, code word or packet. Path 
losses beyond the Gaussian reference are assumed to be due 
to fast fading following a Rayleigh distribution. 
In [30], we selected a Rayleigh fading model for the fast-
fade process, which is not limited to the case, in which 
adjacent bit errors are independent; the simulation also 
computes dependent bit errors when the in-fade period 
overlaps several bits. It is worth noting that the average fade 
duration is inversely proportional to the combined speeds of 
the mobile nodes, so it is also related to the Doppler shift. In 
addition, the number of bits affected depends on the bit rate. 
In most practical cases this distribution of fades causes 
higher word-, cell- or packet-error rates than if fades 
followed a normal, Gaussian or Rician distribution [45][46]. 
This model also assumes a mobile unit communicating to a 
base station, moving gateway, including UAS or LEO, or 
another mobile unit; consequently, the fade rate depends 
mainly on the mobile unit velocity, or both velocities, and 
the receiver local mean SNR. In such a case, given constant 
signal mean and threshold values, the time intervals between 
fades follow an exponential law and the time duration of 
fades obeys a Rayleigh law. 
B. Error Detection 
For most coding schemes we can use the following 
identification standard: (c, k) NAME-ID, for coding k 
information bits into c code bits with algorithm NAME-ID. 
In coding theory, notion of “perfect codes”, which for binary 
repetition codes, are capable of correcting 0 to (c - 1)/2 
errors, i.e., (c, k = 1) codes with only one bit of information 
since k = 1 (other “perfect codes” include the unique three-
error-correcting (23, 12) binary and two-error-correcting 
(11, 6) ternary Golay codes). In general, these “perfect 
codes” are not suitable in terms of communication efficiency 
with unacceptably low code rates (1/c, for binary repetition 
codes). Error detection in our simulation is assumed to be 
perfect, i.e., all erroneous streams of c bits are detected. This 
is not the case for a real-world decoder, whose error-
detection capability is limited: for large bit-error rates, the 
probability of undetected erroneous codes is not negligible. 
The assumption of perfect error detection suffices for 
practical purposes here, however, and is current practice in 
network simulation except when the performance of error-
control techniques must itself be assessed specifically. 
From simple information theory considerations, for 
independent error probabilities of adjacent bits, the code-
word-error rate [45] without error correction is: 
P(t=0, e=0) = 1- (1-pbe)c 
(7) 
In (7) parameter t is the number of errors that a decoder 
can correct and e is the maximum number of errors 
acceptable in a received code word of c bits to deliver a 
correct code word: for decoders without error correction both 
parameters are zero. The channel bit-error rate is pbe. For 
Binary Phase Shift Keying (BPSK) over Rayleigh fading 
with 30 dB SNR, pbe can be around 0.0003 and for a code of 
330 bits, P is 0.006 [46]. 
In our simulation, perfect error detection capability 
means that the decoder delivers a correct diagnostic with 
probability of one for any error pattern even when e = c. 
The encoding scheme maps k user-information bits onto 
code-words of c bits, with c > k. The c-bit streams are 
designed to be more distinguishable among themselves in 
noisy conditions than the original k-bit streams, but this 
encoding increases the necessary transmitted bit rate by c/k.  
C. Error Correction 
When error probabilities of adjacent bits are independent, 
the code-word-error rate [45] with an error-correction 
capability of t code-word bits is: 
 
(8) 
We maintain the e = c condition for perfect-error 
detection. However, the condition on e for the decoder to 
deliver correct-code words is e  t. Because our simulation 
considers 
the 
possibility 
of 
non-independent 
error 
probabilities of adjacent bits or of any set of bits in a code 
word, we cannot use (8). However, the conditions e  c for 
detection and e  t for error correction are valid. 
Code-word errors are generated in the simulation 
according to the Rayleigh statistical fading model using a 
constant threshold [36]. Given perfect-error detection as 
indicated above, code words with t and fewer bit errors are 
corrected. Otherwise for e > t, the word is not corrected by 
the simulated error-correction decoder; and further actions to 
correct the word rely on the error-control protocols discussed 
in the next section. When e > t, real decoders induce new 
errors with a high probability; and usually the number of 
errors e' in the delivered word is limited as follows: 
P t,e  t

1 1 pbe


c 
c!e! c e

!




e1
t

1 pbe

cepbee
53
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(e - t)  e'  (e + t). We infer from previous work [36] that a 
word is in error if the sum e of all its bits affected by fading 
is larger than the decoder error-correction capability: e > t. 
The highest code rate or code efficiency is 1; this occurs 
only without coding and overhead. Otherwise, code rates r 
are smaller than 1 with a number (bo > 0) of overhead bits 
added to the number k of information bits to give a code-
word length c = k + bo. Consequently the code rate is 
r = k / c, and therefore r  1. The bit rate after coding is 
rc = rs / r = crs / k, where rs (in bit/s) is the rate, at which k 
uncoded information bits can be sent. Consequently, the bit 
rate after coding is larger than before coding for a constant 
transmission time, rc  rs. This means that if zero error is 
experienced by a message of k bits, then the message is 
received correctly at the sink without a need for coding; 
though that fact is not known in advance. Nevertheless 
adding coding means that k + bo bits must be transmitted 
instead of k; a loss in channel “capacity” proportional to the 
inverse of the ratio r, i.e., the inverse of the code rate without 
errors. For clarity, the bit-error rate indicates that only an 
average of 1 - pbe of the bits are correct, without the receiver 
knowing which ones are wrong. 
D. Packet  
A packet in our model can be defined as one code word 
(number of code words nc = 1) or multiple code words 
(nc > 1). The packet length is defined as Lp = Ld + Lo, where 
Ld is the total number of data bits (Ld = nc c) and Lo is the 
total number of overhead bits (Lo = nc bo). More efficient 
coding can be obtained when error detection and correction 
are suitably selected, e.g., Viterbi decoding of short-
constraint-length convolutional codes with a coding gain of 
4.7 dB combined with a high code rate BCH code [46], 
which is beyond the scope of this paper. 
The packet overhead Lo has three overhead components: 
Lop for the protocol, Lod for error detection and control, and 
Loc for error correction alone. In this study, we maintain a 
sufficiently large Lo to satisfy the assumption of perfect error 
detection for the two types of packets used: data packets that 
contain user payload data, and control packets that contain 
information for node control, channel sensing and packet 
sequencing. The addition of training sequences may not be 
necessary since data packets are preceded by one control 
packet for the roll-call protocol. 
According to the above definitions and choice of 
simulation parameters, we find that the code rate cannot 
exceed Ld / (Ld + Lo). The code rate is further limited since 
Lo contains information about the data and some aspect of 
the previous state of communicating nodes. One advantage 
of having Loc, Lod and Lop defined independently in the 
simulator is the ability to account accurately for overhead 
even when one of the parameters is set to zero, e.g., when t is 
zero, there is still some overhead associated with the error 
detection required by the selective-repeat error-control 
protocol. This accurate accounting of overhead is essential in 
measuring the effective channel capacity or user data rate: 
the amount of user information bits accurately transferred 
over a period of time in a given set of conditions, e.g., SNR 
in bandwidth, error-control techniques, modulation, channel-
access protocol, environmental and operational parameters, 
and node load. 
E. Protocols used 
1) Error-Control Protocols 
In the preceding section we discussed two means for 
controlling errors and information accuracy (code-word-error 
detection and correction) that are “forward-error-control” 
techniques, using the forward channel from a source to a sink 
of information. We further consider the possibility of a 
feedback channel from the receiver to the transmitter node, 
permuting these roles in order to feed back cues about 
transmission success(es) to the source. Error-control 
protocols are designed to use results of measurements made 
on immediate and previous observations of information 
accuracy and signal statistics at destination nodes. These 
results are then sent back to the source (feedback) where 
specific outcomes from the perceived accuracy and 
timeliness of delivered information allow automated 
counterbalancing actions to be triggered to correct observed 
situations; actions based on the feedback and based on a 
specific strategy. Here, error detection involves assessing the 
accuracy of the received message based on algebraic and 
probabilistic considerations.  
Communicating 
units—the 
transmitter 
and 
the 
receiver(s)—store packets and node state variables using 
unique identifiers in order to distribute common references 
and to cooperate in the task of transferring user data from 
node to node correctly. When a packet is rejected by the 
decoder, an unambiguous request can be made for its 
retransmission. 
For practical reasons (maximum allowable delay, buffer 
size and sequencing indices) the total number of outstanding 
packets must be limited. Raising this maximum increases the 
overhead needed to maintain coherent, unambiguous packet 
identification among participant nodes in the network. Also, 
it implies a larger total time to complete a full transmission 
cycle (the maximum delay in the case of correct delivery of a 
piece of information after some errors).  
For tactical/fast aging data, the end users are generally 
more concerned with the most recent sensor measurement 
updates. Since both packet overhead and delivery time must 
be minimized for concurrent communication efficiency—
especially for tactical/fast-aging data [35] over digital radios 
(less stringent for passive video playback)—as few as 11 bits 
can be used for sequencing. Other packet overhead bits are 
required for error detection and correction. Control packets 
contain a time-history of a receiver’s perception of 
status/information and signal quality and in our study also 
convey channel-access information.  
The resulting maximum value of latency depends on the 
maximum bit rate and maximum total number of outstanding 
packets. Practical considerations relevant here to fast aging 
data include a similarity between some types of tactical data 
and remote medicine delivery data in the sense that a most 
recent velocity (computed differences from measured 
locations) and a most recent heart beat rate (a time average) 
are important. In each application, the most recent 
measurement (GPS location / heart beat) can be absent, due 
54
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

to packet loss in transport, if the velocity / heart beat rate are 
statistically reliable. Receiver’s perception can be slightly 
variable depending on whether such statistics are transmitted 
from source or computed at receiver. Conversely, in SAR 
operations all possible available real data is invaluable 
regardless of radio telecommunications network delay.  
2) Selective-Repeat without Forward-Error Correction 
ARQ schemes and protocols fall in the feedback-error-
control technique family and are by far the oldest and most 
widely applied error-control protocols in use today [46]. 
ARQ schemes have three important sub-classes: Stop-and-
Wait ARQ (SW-ARQ), continuous per se or Go-Back-N 
ARQ (GBN-ARQ), and continuous ARQ with selected 
repeats or Selective-Repeat ARQ (SR-ARQ). The last 
scheme, SR-ARQ, is more efficient with respect to effective 
channel capacity than the other two [45]. However, it is also 
the most complex of the three sub-classes. 
We selected a basic SR-ARQ strategy with the 
previously defined perfect-error detector for one set of 
simulation parameters. The protocol always tries to identify 
problems with received packets; and a report identifying 
damaged packets is sent back to the sender. As is the case for 
any other transmission, this report itself can be disturbed 
during transmission over the radio channel, the sender may 
not be informed that a transmitted packet never reached its 
destination or that the ACK for this packet was disturbed on 
the return path. We did not limit the simulation to the 
noiseless feedback channel usually assumed in ARQ 
performance analyses [46] in order to account for more 
practical use situations. 
In our protocol, we assume that a source tries to send a 
packet in its queue until the source receives, without error, a 
confirmation that the packet has been received correctly. At 
each transmission opportunity, a source node transmits N 
packets. If Ns of them are not perceived by the source node 
to be correctly received at the destination node, only N - Ns 
new packets are taken off the source queue. This decision is 
made at every transmission opportunity, based on either no 
confirmation whatsoever, so Ns = N, or the correct reception 
of a control packet indicating Ns packets were determined to 
be in error by the destination node at its previous reception 
opportunity. 
3) Selective-Repeat with Forward-Error Correction 
Combinations of FEC with basic SR-ARQ strategies are 
called hybrid SR-ARQs. Some improved combinations use a 
decoding scheme employing multiple copies of a packet that 
were retransmitted because the first copy was in error. We 
elected to use FEC on a single packet copy, though this 
strategy is less efficient than the improved SR-ARQ/FEC, 
which employs multiple copies of a retransmitted packet 
(erasures and multiple copies) [37]; in most practical cases 
the selected scheme is less complex for only a small loss in 
performance. The important distinction is that in addition to 
perfect-error detection we add perfect-error correction, for up 
to t bits of a packet. 
As previously, the protocol always tries to identify 
problems with received packets. If a packet has t or fewer 
errors, its error status is “no error in packet” and an ACK 
report is sent towards the source node. This ACK report is 
piggybacked in a Control Packet (CP in Figure 9) with some 
FEC, not necessarily a packet of the same length as a data 
payload packet. In general, control packets can be shorter 
than data packets. Although shorter packets are less likely to 
be damaged by an in-fade signal, they remain vulnerable 
during their transmission over the radio channel. As 
previously, the sender may not find out that one of its 
transmitted packets never reached its destination or that the 
ACK report was disturbed in transport via the feedback 
channel; with FEC on both types of packets, this happens 
less frequently than without error correction. 
4) Representation of the Simulated Protocols 
The protocols simulated are illustrated in Figure 9. We 
present their process flows by walking through the polling 
cycle over all the participant nodes (or participating unit 
labelled PU in the illustration), taking the following steps for 
each: 
1. Master: select as current PU the next PU in the 
network. 
2. Master: read the ACK from the previous transmission 
opportunity of this PU and send a request based on this ACK 
with an indication of the number of packets the master will 
send after this control packet. 
3. Master: send its packet(s), if any. 
4. PU: send a control packet including an ACK for the 
last master packet if it was received correctly, do nothing 
otherwise. 
5. PU: send packet(s), if there are any and if a control 
packet was sent in the previous step. 
6. Master: listen for a reply just after own transmission; 
if the PU’s control packet is received correctly then record 
an ACK for this PU data packet (it may be a zero data 
packet); otherwise, after waiting one polling period, record a 
null ACK for this PU. 
7. Master: continue cycling (optional end of cycle: pause 
to allow new PUs to join the net), and return to step 1. 
F. Selected parameter values for the cases studied 
We observed the packet-error rate (our dependent 
variable) as a function of the combined velocity of the 
communicating platforms (mobile computing nodes, UAS, 
LEO satellite), our main independent variable. Although, the 
simulation can estimate the effect of packet collision for the 
protocol of Figure 9, we did not select this mode for the 
results presented for concordance with the material presented 
in [47]. For similar reasons, we present participating node 
packet-error rates for a saturated network, that is: when the 
probability of having N packets in each transmitting queue 
converges to one or when the normalized offered traffic is 
equal to or greater than one. For conciseness, we do not 
present results for user message delay and effective channel 
capacity as functions of the relative velocity, since they are 
consistent with the results presented in [47]: they follow the 
packet-error rate. 
55
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 9.  Selective repeat ARQ (with FEC, t  1) with the roll-call control 
protocol. 
We selected three operational control pairs of values of 
packet overhead Lo. The first pair simulates a network 
without error-correction capability, with Lo set to 30 and 20 
bits out of 300 information and 200 control bits respectively. 
In Figure 10, results for this case are labeled t = 0. The two 
other operational control pairs correspond to networks with 
FEC capabilities. The simulation uses extraneous bits in 
addition to the 30 and 20 bits specified previously to increase 
the overhead by the required number of supplementary bits 
for correcting t errors: Loc = 2t. In Figure 10, results for these 
cases are labeled t = 2 and t = 3 respectively. The two pairs 
of Loc for error correction capabilities include one pair with 4 
bits for data and 3 bits for control packets, which provide 2 
bits and one bit of correction respectively, and another pair 
of Loc for 6 bits and 4 bits, which provide 3 bits and 2 bits of 
correction for data and control packets respectively. 
Using the selected Rayleigh fading model, high SNRs are 
associated with small values of the threshold-to-signal ratio 
. Results for  = 0.001 are associated with a SNR of 30 dB 
in [47]. 
We assume binary modulation. The symbol period is 
Ts = 1 / rc = 50 s for a transmission of coded bits at 20 kb/s. 
We set the values for v1 + v2 from 36 km/h to 936 km/h. 
These values are typical of: mobile computing platforms in 
range of a cellular communications tower or in radio 
communication range of a UAS. For a wavelength of 0.5 m 
the carrier frequency is 600 MHz and the maximum Doppler 
frequency ranges between 20 and 520 Hz. Since the mean 
value of the in-fade period can be longer than the symbol 
transmission period, bursts of errors are expected at low 
Doppler frequencies. The largest packet period is 16.8 ms, 
which most of the time is shorter than the no-fade interval 
for  = 0.001. For smaller SNR, packets will be affected by 
multiple fades (multiple bursts of errors); using larger 
symbols than binary will reduce this effect. The number of 
information packets N per error-control protocol cycle is set 
to three for the results presented. However, the model has 
been investigated by setting N as large as 20. The number of 
nodes including the master is three for the results presented. 
The roll-call cycle time has no influence on the results 
presented and will be used in evaluating the performance of 
the distributed system. 
G. Information Packet-Error Rate versus the Effective 
Channel Capacity 
We define the information packet-error rate (PE) as the 
ratio of the number of retransmitted information packets 
relative to the total number of information packets sent 
including retransmissions. The normalized effective channel 
capacity or user’s data rate (U) can be defined as the ratio of 
the number of correctly received information bits divided by 
the total number of bits transmitted: 
U =
(1 − 𝑃𝐸 )(NLdi)
N(Ldi + Lopi + Lodi + Loci) + Ldc + Lopc + Lodc + Locc
 (9) 
The vertical axis on the right of the graph in Figure 10 
shows the resulting effective channel capacity for t = 3, 
which corresponds to 1 - PE multiplied by 0.73. With t = 0 
the multiplier is 0.74. Consequently, there is no need to 
present separate graphs showing the effective channel 
capacities for the three multipliers since differences would 
not be noticeable. The dominant distinctions between the 
three error-control schemes are accounted for in PE. 
Given a fairly high constant mean SNR (30 dB), 
Figure 10 confirms the expected dependence of packet-error 
rates on velocity or Doppler frequency. This commonly 
observed Rayleigh fading channel condition for mobile 
radios is the most severe and difficult to overcome (except 
for Nakagami fading with a parameter smaller than one 
[48]): it usually causes the highest packet-error rate with a 
fade rate that increases with the relative velocities of the 
communicating nodes (mobile units, UAS, LEO satellites, 
gateways, towers, etc.) Similar results for fast-fading 
performance [49] support these findings. 
In Figure 10, we also provide a typical result for packet-
error rate assuming an additive white Gaussian noise 
(AWGN) channel model for the same SNR. This is a typical 
result from mean value analyses and valid for many 
combinations of noise, amplitude variation, modulation and 
coding. In this type of analysis the fading process is not 
velocity dependent. The AWGN performance measurements 
do not display the appropriate distribution statistics for 
mobile computing. 
56
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Information packet-error rate 
Effective channel capacity 
Combined velocity (km/h) 
1000 
800 
600 
400 
200 
0 
0.0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
r1 
r2 
r3 
i1:2 
i2:3 
i1:3 
AWGN 
t  = 3 
t  = 2 
t  = 0 
0.730 
0.585 
0.440 
0.295 
0.150 
 
Figure 10.  Selective repeat ARQ (with FEC, t  1) with the roll-call control 
protocol. 
Figure 10 needs to be adapted for higher carrier 
frequency, bit rate, packet length, code ratio and speed. If all 
these parameters are proportionally increased, one may 
observe similar results, i.e., when LEO is at low elevation, 
the mean SNR will be low (largest slant distance), with the 
perceived speed and Doppler near its maximum, this 
corresponds to higher error rates with no FEC (t=0) in 
Figure 10. While ascending to the shortest distance (equal to 
the orbit altitude) over a participating node location, a 
maximum SNR and lower Doppler shift will be attained, as 
for Figure 10 lowest speed.  
H. Power Required for Equivalent FEC Performance 
Through simulation we found that an increase in transmit 
power, labeled i1:2 in Figure 10, required to bring the 
packet-error rate indicated by r1 in Figure 10 to the level 
indicated by r2 is i1:2 = 5 (to decrease the error rate at r1 to 
that observed at r2 we need to increase the current power 
used by a factor of 5, e.g., from 5 W to 25 W). To obtain the 
same error rate without FEC, five times the power used with 
FEC that can correct two errors is required. The power 
increase, i2:3, required to decrease the error rate from r2 to 
r3 is i2:3 = 332. The power increase, i1:3, from r1 to r3 is 
not equal to i1:2 + i2:3; the requirement is i1:3 = 1250 or 
from 5 W to 6 kW, a generally unacceptable value for typical 
long term operation of mobile and handheld units. However, 
it may be a desirable mode of emergency operation, for 
example in support of SAR, wherein a powered radio 
typically operating continuously is switched to a sporadic 
high power transmission mode to maximize use of an 
emergency power battery. These three values were estimated 
in the same way as all other point estimates used to produce 
the chart in Figure 10 and are consequently based on 
statistics on random variables. The relation between these 
variables 
seems 
to 
be 
i1:2  i2:3 = i1:3 
with 
5  332 = 1660 1250. With more samples of this nature we 
can develop an empirical model expressing the required 
power ratio as a function of system conditions and parameter 
values.  
Increasing the average SNR by increasing the power of 
the transmitters to maintain a sufficient data rate is not 
practical for most mobile applications. A better approach 
would be to use additional coding and processing gain, e.g., 
FEC and power spreading. Here we assume that FEC acts to 
introduce time diversity and spread spectrum as frequency 
diversity, and both alleviate the impact of high fade rates on 
packet-error rates as relative velocities increase. For tactical 
operations, this can provide some level of resistance to 
jamming through coding to mitigate some level of signal 
jamming during adversarial attacks. However, with spread 
spectrum, one can spread the energy of the transmitted signal 
to a point where it is buried in noise, making it less 
detectable by basic/legacy electronic support measures 
systems, although still detectable by more advanced systems. 
The resulting data rate is higher at high relative velocities but 
slightly lower at low velocities, making the achievable 
effective channel capacity more nearly constant over a range 
of velocities. 
The effective channel capacity penalty due to coding is 
merely a small decrease in the maximum data rate available 
at negligible relative velocities. Figure 10 shows the total 
energy saving achievable for the considered system if signal 
processing, 2 or 3 bit FEC capability, is used instead of 
higher transmitted power [48]. Using coding and spreading 
the baseband signal are techniques known to be 
implementation efficient. For lower SNR and to meet some 
mobile computing requirements, more coding and processing 
gain might be required than what is used in our examples. 
I. Distribution of Packet-Error Rate Mean Values 
We selected the point r2 from Figure 10 to explore the 
smoothness of the stochastic processes simulated. As 
presented in the frequency histogram of Figure 11, there is 
indication of a good match to a normal distribution of the 
mean values (point estimates) of the packet-error rate. Note 
that this normal distribution of mean values of the packet-
error rate computed from 600 independent simulation runs 
seems to be expressed naturally from the statistical processes 
at play. The temporal distribution of the packets 
experiencing error(s) cannot be deduced from these results. 
Accurate performance evaluation of distributed algorithms 
requires considering distributional dimensions of the 
underlying systems. 
  
Figure 11.  Statistical distribution of point estimates of the packet-error rate 
found from 600 independent simulation runs. 
J. Asymmetry 
The improvement for a small FEC capability increase on 
packets, from 2 to 3 bits, affects error rates experienced by 
all participant nodes including the master, as indicated by 
Figure 12. The improvement is larger at higher velocities 
Mean            0.362 
Median         0.361
Skewness      0.295 
Kurtosis        0.740 
StdDev          0.030 
Range           0.213 
Min               0.279 
Max              0.492 
Packet-error rate
Occurrence count 
80
60
40
20
0
0.47
0.42
0.37
0.32
0.27
57
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

because of a better match between FEC and error patterns. 
The in-fade period decreases and the rate of fades increases 
with velocity though the SNR is constant. The improvement 
is even larger for the master, since more control packets are 
involved. 
This difference in the packet-error rates between packets 
sent by the master and by other participant nodes is quite 
noticeable. Since we selected to not account for collisions, 
higher master error rates are not due to the larger probability 
of its packets to collide with PU packets caused by the roll-
call protocol asymmetry between a master and participant 
nodes, but are simply due to the conditional error probability 
based on the protocol asymmetry. Packets from a participant 
node are sent to the master only if the appropriate control 
packet from the master is received correctly, since we ignore 
bit streams after an incorrectly received master control 
packet that contains the master reception report concerning 
the last transmission made by a particular  participant node. 
Consequently, the master reception report on participant 
node packets is sent on the master-to-participant feedback 
channel until it finally reaches the concerned participant 
node without error. The participant node does nothing but 
wait. For data packets sent by the master the scenario is 
different. The participant-to-master feedback channel for the 
reception report concerning master packets does not have 
this error-free property because each participant node 
transmits only when it has correctly received an invitation to 
send data. 
 
Figure 12.  Master’s and PUs’ information packet-error rates for two values 
of t. 
Despite relatively high average SNR, we observe that the 
effective rate of correctly transmitted packets drops 
dramatically as the velocity of communicating nodes 
increases. The fade rate increases with the velocity while the 
infade interval is shorter. As the SNR decreases the fade rate 
increases, but, with longer infade intervals. Both cause an 
increase in the probability of packet errors on the channel.  
K. Summary of the simulation observations 
Using mean-value analysis would have precluded 
noticing the effects of this decrease of effective channel 
capacity or increase of packet error rate with an increase in 
relative velocity between all participating nodes. The same is 
expected for performance analysis of distributed algorithms 
based on mean-value analysis; parametric empirical models 
will enable an analyst to visualize the effect of some 
tradeoffs. 
The selected SNR, packet lengths and protocol overhead 
illustrate that if the design were based only on mean-value 
analysis, the resulting system would be insufficient to fulfill 
expected/user operational requirements. Although the 
effective channel capacity is generally adequate at negligible 
velocities, the effective channel capacity drops and becomes 
too small for practical use at relative velocities (ΔV) above 
100 km/h. In air-to-air scenarios relative velocities may 
greatly exceed this range; supersonic speeds often exceed 
330 m/s or 1200 km/h.  
As the packet error rate increases, the power of the 
transmitter needs to be increased by a much greater factor to 
maintain the effective channel capacity and error rate. 
Typical area-coverage requirements, spectrum management, 
cost and technology constraints impose on designers the 
selection of alternatives that combine better modulation, 
error-control techniques, coding and baseband signal 
spreading. 
In essence, the research results presented here above 
encapsulate a particular desirable operational parameter 
space for software defined radios.  
X. 
CONSIDERATIONS 
While the results presented here above address technical 
and scientific aspects of software defined radios, it is hoped 
that perhaps non-technical audiences find confidence in these 
results for situation aware development, deployment and 
coordinated interoperable equipment. In layman terms 
therefore, the solutions supported by the above analysis 
amounts to situation adaptable radios. 
While 
costs 
for 
tactical 
operations/scenarios, 
preparedness exercises and border patrol can be justified in 
individual jurisdiction (Canada, NORAD), global solutions 
(NORAD, NATO) can be hard to justify. However, 
multinational corporations, such as SpaceX and OneWeb 
(new consortium), without excluding Telesat, are welcome 
intermediaries particularly in shared fate scenarios: 
 Extending the reach of general peaceful operation of 
internet services to communities in the North remains 
dominated by commercial factors heavily influenced by 
population densities and the vast distances between/to 
Northern communities. 
 While 
not 
fully 
sufficient 
for 
tactical/border 
patrol/emergency response/SAR and related preparedness 
exercises, GEO, MEO and HEO can and do support 
environmental 
monitoring 
and 
alerting, 
transactional 
banking, some provision for remote medicine virtual visits, 
triage and escalation, while perhaps insufficient for 
emergency response. 
 While typical cellular communications enjoyed in 
Canadian metropolitan areas may not be available in the 
North, cellular mobile communications including mobile 
computing can be employed temporarily in the North in 
support of preparedness exercises, patrol operations and 
58
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

prolonged emergencies by employing cellular tower 
equivalent equipment on airborne platforms including, but 
not limited to: patrol/SAR recon planes, aerostats (tethered 
or untethered), dirigibles and particularly on UAS. 
 The results presented here particularly show sufficient 
support for mobile computing in the North via UAS 
gateways, which when used with the existing terrestrial 
infrastructure can incorporate, reuse and extend reach. Use of 
IUASLs can flexibly extend reach further and beyond 
geographic limitations, at least temporarily (tourist season, 
shipping season in the Northern Passage as the North 
Passage becomes more available both due to manmade 
advances and/or climate change without excluding broader 
uses) as well in justifying communication infrastructure 
build-out in the North. 
 UAS can be further used based on the results 
presented here for interoperability as a middle relay layer 
between LEO satellites and terrestrial infrastructure via 
software defined radios, which account for high relative 
velocities between airborne UAS and LEO satellites in outer 
space. Essentially, by accounting for high Δv, UAS-to-UAS 
links become substantially equivalent to UAS-to-LEO links 
for the duration during which a particular LEO satellite is in 
direct line of sight of a UAS not unlike a cellular mobile set 
moving within a cell served by a cell tower. Both mobile 
computing node-to-UAS and UAS-to-LEO radios need to 
account for corresponding Δv Doppler shifts/fading in 
similar ways although it is understood that the radios on 
UAS serving terrestrial mobile communications below are 
configured differently than the radios enabling space 
communications above the UAS gateways with LEO 
satellites. 
 Use of phased antenna arrays is promising not only in 
ground-to-UAS and particularly in direct ground-to-LEO 
communications to address environmental conditions in the 
North deleterious to antenna tracking to point to UAS/LEO 
satellites, but also in simplified UAS designs to handover 
UAS-to-LEO radio communication channels between UAS 
space pointing spot beams. 
 While low altitude UAS gateway deployments can be 
susceptible to high winds, the treatise presented here shows 
balancing gains from reduced precipitation related signal 
degradation 
typically 
plaguing 
more 
southern 
radio 
communication infrastructure where precipitation is more 
abundant. Certainly, these results permit selection of UAS 
operating altitude and therefore retaining interoperability 
with legacy equipment. 
Services provisioned with appropriate parameters and 
hardware anticipating improvements in coverage, resilience, 
redundancy, dependability, data rate and low latency include:  
 fixed installations like CFS Alert, NWS radar 
networks, and Forward Operating Bases (FOBs); 
 mobiles near fixed installations, airborne or tower 
gateways or their communication relays; 
 short term deployed personnel and platforms for 
military exercises and operations, emergency operations; and 
 off-grid communities of Northern Canada. 
Also, there is a need to investigate how Canada could 
protect space and terrestrial network installation assets. 
Satellite transmissions are more susceptible to radiation, 
jamming and atmospheric disturbances than FOC and over-
the-horizon HFGW transmissions. HFGW at 20 to 30 MHz 
is expected to provide reliable medium throughput for 
terrestrial communications [5]. FOC offers high throughput 
and low latency, is commonly deployed around the world 
and is expanding in Northern Canada [50][51]. However, 
FOC and HFGW do not offer the area coverage of LEO 
satellites.  
While national direct investment into LEO full 
constellation deployment remains hard to justify as each of 
large numbers of LEO satellites spend such a little time over 
any particular geographic area, the results presented here 
point 
to 
promising 
and 
accountable 
research 
and 
development investments. 
Further research in mobile computing must be conducted 
to optimize the sharing of fast-aging data over radio 
networks (including satellites) used in planning operations 
critical to our communities, including search and rescue, ice-
storm or flood evacuation, etc. Solutions to these problems 
must be global so that the various organizations involved in 
such operations—local, national and international—can 
respond to the needs of the threatened population promptly 
and cost effectively. 
It is self-evident that the move from GEO satellite 
supported communications to LEO satellite supported 
communications is a paradigm shift in which: 
 Extremely few purpose built, highly redundancy 
designed, long term operational life expectancy of GEO 
satellites using long term high cost development cycles are 
subject to catastrophic failures. 
 Extremely large numbers of LEO satellites are built as 
generic as possible to serve multiple jurisdictions compliant 
with multiple jurisdictional standards, via software defined 
radios, for term operation following short term agile 
development cycles where redundancy is provided by sheer 
numbers of LEO satellites. 
While redundancy has not been explicitly discussed in 
the technical development in this paper, it bears mentioning 
that just as the Iridium system makes use of passive pre-
deployed Iridium satellite spares, LEO constellations rely on 
the use of LEO satellite spares. In SpaceX’s case, SpaceX’s 
quick low cost turnaround of reusable rocket stages 
demonstrated just recently, the LEO satellite spares do not 
have to all be deployed, but a few. The paradigm shift 
extends from previous hand manufacturing and assembly of 
GEO satellites to assembly line manufactured LEO satellites 
and therefore to ‘relatively abundant’ supply of LEO satellite 
spares. 
Perhaps, beyond the focus of this paper, LEO satellite 
spares can be very interesting, both the large number of 
space deployed spares and on the ground LEO satellite 
spares awaiting launch. Certainly, it can be appreciated that 
due to low life time expectancy of space deployed LEO 
satellites, stand-by LEO satellite spares are wasted leaving 
one to ponder uses for active LEO satellite spares. While 
certainly, LEO satellite spares are required by the operator to 
59
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

protect investment for commercial ends alone, what is the 
value of an active LEO satellite spare orbiting over a 
jurisdiction experiencing a disaster? What is the value of 
such an active LEO satellite spare for public safety? What is 
the value of such an active LEO satellite spare in SAR 
situations regardless of geopolitical borders? 
Equally relevant to immediately related fields, what 
provisions related to the activation of LEO satellite spares 
can be made in communication license approvals for LEO 
constellations? Would investment into LEO constellation 
operations be more palatable, as accountable, for example as 
insurance premium advance payments equivalent to a rocket 
launch for 10 to 60 replacement LEO satellites to relieve 
bandwidth commandeered during extended emergencies? In 
spite of OneWeb’s recent financial troubles, this paradigm 
shift has made these questions possible. 
While the treatise presented here cannot definitely solve 
all communications shortcomings in the North equally in all 
situations and in all scenario, UAS gateways are proposed as 
a middle layer for ground-to-air and air-to-air mobile 
communication nodes. The obvious question is what is the 
development and deployment cost and the time horizon of 
such UAS gateways? The developments presented here show 
an overlap interoperable not only with legacy equipment 
while bridging in LEO satellite radio communications in 
which UAS gateways are no different in radio transmission 
terms than a LEO satellite constellation layer except for 
being airborne under. Perhaps another aspect of the paradigm 
shift in the production of LEO satellites can be appreciated, 
the assembly line manufacturing can, and often does, 
produce 
satellites 
unfit 
for 
space 
launch 
due 
to 
manufacturing shortcomings of space operational essential 
components (punctured fuel tanks etc.) making such 
hardware available for integration into UAS where space 
essential components are completely unneeded. With this in 
mind perhaps investment into multinational LEO satellite 
development and constellation operations can be justified 
through national acquisition of select such LEO satellite 
production fractions, at least for research and co-
development of UAS gateways. 
Aside from tactical considerations supported in this 
paper, success of LEO satellite enabled communications can 
more comprehensively address remote medicine delivery in 
the North including emergency response, perhaps remote 
surgery. As this paper is being submitted, the implications 
presented herein are not just thinkable; SpaceX is gathering 
private interest in LEO internet testing direct to ground. 
XI. 
CONCLUSION 
This 
article 
addressed 
some 
difficult 
remaining 
challenges after many years of communications systems 
research and development for the North. Findings address 
DND/CAF challenges to improving capabilities required by 
future assured communications demands from expected 
developments in the Arctic and for NORAD operations. 
Selected options to improve communications in off-grid 
areas, more specifically in the North, are expected to provide 
timely improved shared situational awareness in support of 
operations where it is currently not well provided, or not 
available. Such solutions would be revolutionary for our 
Defense and Security (D&S) capabilities and would 
progressively provide significant advantages to coalition 
forces and when CAF operates in collaboration with other 
Canadian departments including PS and local police in the 
most demanding emergency and disaster situations. 
In the North, if low latency communications are critical 
for applications or operation objectives, GEO, MEO and 
HEO satellite systems are insufficient. The least expensive 
communications systems with low latency in the North 
should include microwave links, FOC, UAS and LEO 
systems to ensure fast deployment and access to a large 
majority of participants in most pressing situations. UAS 
offers rapid deployment capability on demand in response to 
PS and CAF situations. LEO/UAS hybrid systems could 
most definitely extend capabilities of available legacy 
infrastructure with microwave link and FOC terrestrial 
infrastructure ensuring connectivity with existing Northern 
networks and users. 
As supported by the results presented here, for moving 
computing platforms (LEO, UAS, end user vehicle), system 
designers would have to consider appropriate protocols to 
match end user requirements for operations. Inevitably, a 
balance in processing gain, FEC and error control will need 
to be estimated to match the expected Doppler shift, 
minimum and maximum relative speed, fast change of in 
path length affecting free space path loss and atmospheric 
effects, slow and fast fading, and frequent handovers 
required. 
Overall, the most significant finding is that the advent of 
low-cost high-performance LEO satellite systems, in 
conjunction 
with 
UAS, 
can 
substantially 
improve 
communications in the North supporting sustained research 
and development investment. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We are grateful to Marie-Josée Bureau (now at AEG in 
Montreal) who created the simulation programs critical to 
this research and provided stimulating and constructive 
discussions on the approaches and models. We also want to 
thank Nicholas Bond, one of my former research colleagues, 
(currently a consultant) for his editorial review, comments 
and contributions. Finally we thank DRDC for supporting 
this paper and my wife France Crochetière for her support 
during this challenging period imposed by COVID-19. 
Sensitive to current world events, some typical control 
theory language has been altered herein without loss of 
essence.  
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Labbé, “LEO Satellite Constellations: An Opportunity to 
Improve Terrestrial Communications in the Canadian Arctic,” 
in Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Satellite 
and Space Communications (SPACOMM), Lisbon, Portugal, 
2020: International Academy, Research, and Industry 
Association (IARIA), 2020. 
[2] Canada: Department of National Defence and Canadian 
Armed Forces. (2017). Strong, Secure, Engaged. Canada's 
Defense Policy. 
60
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[3] A. P. Trishchenko, L. Garand and L. D. Trichtchenko, “Three-
apogee 16-h highly elliptical orbit as optimal choice for 
continuous meteorological imaging of polar regions,” Journal 
of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology, vol. 28, no. 11, pp. 
1407-1422, 2011. 
[4] G. Colman et al., “Communications in the North,” 
Communications Research Centre (CRC), Ottawa, 2014. 
[5] J. R. Champion, “An Empirical Investigation of High-
Frequency Ground Wave Propagation,” Johns Hopkins APL 
Technical Digest, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 515-525, 1992. 
[6] ITU, “Handbook on Ground Wave Propagation,” in 
"International 
Telecommunication 
Union; 
Radiocommunication Bureau," R-HDB-59, 2014. 
[7] P. Labbé, “GPS and GIS Integration in Mobile Equipment for 
Improved Mobile Emergency Operations,” in Proceedings of 
the 12th International Technical Meeting of the Satellite 
Division of the Institute of Navigation (ION GPS-99); Session 
A2 - Land Systems & Public Safety, Nashville Convention 
Center, Nashville, Tennessee, 1999, pp. 545-555, 1999. 
[8] G. J. Heard, “Initial report of CAUSE investigated 
technologies for remote system deployment,” Defence 
Research and Development Canada (DRDC) – Atlantic 
Research Centre, August 2019. 
[9] A. P. Trishchenko, L. Garand, L. D. Trichtchenko and L. V. 
Nikitina, “Multiple-apogee highly elliptical orbits for 
continuous 
meteorological 
imaging 
of 
polar 
regions: 
challenging the classical 12-h Molniya orbit concept,” Bulletin 
of the American Meteorological Society, vol. 97, no. 1, pp. 19-
24, 2016. 
[10] I. del Portillo, B. G. Cameron and E. F. Crawley, “A technical 
comparison of three low earth orbit satellite constellation 
systems to provide global broadband,” Acta Astronautica, vol. 
159, pp. 123-135, 2019. 
[11] J. Foust. (2020, 11 November) Telesat remains optimistic 
about prospects for LEO constellation. SpaceNews. Available: 
https://spacenews.com/telesat-remains-optimistic-about-
prospects-for-leo-constellation/, Access date: 12 November 
2020. 
[12] C. Henry. (2019, 15 May) Musk says Starlink “economically 
viable” 
with 
around 
1,000 
satellites. 
Available: 
https://spacenews.com/musk-says-starlink-economically-
viable-with-around-1000-satellites/, 
Access 
date: 
12 
November 2020. 
[13] S. Erwin. (2020, 11 July) Loft Orbital satellite to carry 
experiment for DARPA’s Blackjack program. Spacenews 
[News]. 
[14] S. Erwin. (2019, 26 February) Air Force laying groundwork 
for future military use of commercial megaconstellations. 
Spacenews [News]. Available: https://spacenews.com/air-
force-laying-groundwork-for-future-military-use-of-
commercial-megaconstellations/, Access date: 14 Nov 2020. 
[15] Canada  Satellite, “Starlink Beta Testing Services Terms and 
Conditions,” ed. Calgary, Alberta, Canada: Canada Satellite, 
2020. 
[16] M. Sheetz, “SpaceX prices Starlink satellite internet service at 
$99 per month, according to e-mail,” ed. USA: Consumer 
News and Business Channel (CNBC), 2020. 
[17] J. Tregloan-Reed et al., “First observations and magnitude 
measurement 
of 
SpaceX's 
Darksat,” 
arXiv 
preprint 
arXiv:2003.07251, 2020. 
[18] I. N. Bozkurt et al., “Dissecting Latency in the Internet's Fiber 
Infrastructure,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.10737, 2018. 
[19] W. Cho and J. P. Choi, “Cross layer optimization of wireless 
control links in the software-defined LEO satellite network,” 
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 113534-113547, 2019. 
[20] M. Hata, “Empirical Formula for Propagation Loss in Land-
mobile Radio Services,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular 
Technologies, vol. VT-29, no. 3, pp. 317-325, 1980. 
[21] S. Cakaj, B. Kamo, V. Koliçi and O. Shurdi, “The Range and 
Horizon Plane Simulation for Ground Stations of Low Earth 
Orbiting (LEO) Satellites,” IJCNS, vol. 4, no. 9, pp. 585-589, 
2011. 
[22] N. Okati, T. Riihonen, D. Korpi, I. Angervuori and R. 
Wichman, “Downlink Coverage and Rate Analysis of Low 
Earth 
Orbit 
Satellite 
Constellations 
Using 
Stochastic 
Geometry,” IEEE transactions on communications no. tbd, 
2020. 
[23] S. K. Sharma, S. Chatzinotas and P.-D. Arapoglou, Satellite 
communications in the 5G era. Institution of Engineering and 
Technology, 2018. 
[24] S. Mosunmola  B, A. O. Agboola, A. Felix and A. 
Mohammed, 
“The 
Mathematical 
Model 
Of 
Doppler 
Frequency Shift In Leo At Ku, K And Ka Frequency Bands,” 
Published in International Journal of Trend in Research and 
Development (IJTRD), vol. 4, no. 5, October 2017. 
[25] I. F. Akyildiz, H. Uzunalioğlu and M. D. Bender, “Handover 
management in low earth orbit (LEO) satellite networks,” 
Mobile Networks and Applications, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 301-310, 
1999. 
[26] P. Carter and M. Beach, “Handover aspects for a Low Earth 
Orbit (LEO) CDMA Land Mobile Satellite (LMS) system,” 
1993. 
[27] L. Wood, “Internetworking with satellite constellations,” PhD, 
University of Surrey, 2001. 
[28] R. Musumpuka, T. M. Walingo and J. M. Smith, 
“Performance analysis of correlated handover service in LEO 
mobile satellite systems,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 
20, no. 11, pp. 2213-2216, 2016. 
[29] S. Das et al., “Location Manager based Handover Method for 
LEO Satellite Networks,” International Journal of Computer 
Applications, vol. 44, no. 12, pp. 43-49, 2012. 
[30] P. Labbé, “Mobile Networks: the Effect of Relative Node 
Velocity on Effective Channel Capacity,” in (IEEE) 1999 
International Conference on Telecommunications, ICT ‘99; 
Resource Management, Cheju, Korea, 1999, pp. 147-156: 
IEEE, 1999. 
[31] D. Chirca, “STANDARD TACTICAL DATA LINKS,” Land 
Forces Academy Review, vol. 15, no. 3, p. 393, 2010. 
[32] M. Dinc, “Design considerations for military data link 
architecture in enabling integration of intelligent unmanned 
air vehicles (UAVs) with navy units,” in NATO SCI 
Conference, Germany, 2009, 2009. 
[33] V. Jodalen, R. Otnes and B. Solberg, “Nato standards for HF 
communications: an overview and technical description,” 
2004. 
[34] M. Jovanović and R. Todorović, “Joint tactical radio–aspects 
of standardization,” Scientific Technical Review, vol. 53, no. 
2, pp. 72-79, 2003. 
[35] P. Labbé and R. Proulx, “Model-Based Measures for the 
Assessment of Engagement Opportunities Implementation and 
Test Results,” Defence Research Establishment Valcartier 
(Québec), DREV - R - 9807, November 1998. 
[36] R. Comroe and D. Costello, “ARQ schemes for data 
transmission in mobile radio systems,” IEEE Journal on 
61
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 472-481, 
1984. 
[37] P. Yu, X. Wang and H. Yu, “A novel ARQ scheme applied to 
wireless communication,” in 2014 IEEE 5th International 
Conference on Software Engineering and Service Science, 
2014, pp. 1044-1047: IEEE, 2014. 
[38] R. E. Hundt and L. Irving, “Final report of the public safety 
wireless advisory committee,” Report, PSWAC, September, 
1996. 
[39] G. Bevacqua, J. Cacace, A. Finzi and V. Lippiello, “Mixed-
initiative planning and execution for multiple drones in search 
and 
rescue 
missions,” 
in 
Twenty-Fifth 
International 
Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, 2015, 
2015. 
[40] E. Weldon, “An improved selective-repeat ARQ strategy,” 
IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 
480-486, 1982. 
[41] E. Biglieri, M. Sciuva and V. Zingarelli, “Modulation and 
coding for mobile radio communications: channels with 
correlated Rice fading and Doppler frequency shift,” IEEE 
transactions on vehicular technology, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 133-
141, 1998. 
[42] E. Koski, “Concepts for a reliable multicast data link protocol 
for HF radio communications,” in MILCOM 2005-2005 IEEE 
Military Communications Conference, 2005, pp. 681-687: 
IEEE, 2005. 
[43] S. Medhekar, “Roll-Call: an energy efficient radio frequency 
identification system,” Rutgers University-Graduate School-
New Brunswick, 2007. 
[44] D. Weissman, A. H. Levesque and R. A. Dean, “Interoperable 
wireless data,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 31, no. 
2, pp. 68-77, 1993. 
[45] W. C. Lee, Mobile communications engineering. McGraw-
Hill Professional, 1982. 
[46] A. M. Michelson and A. H. Levesque, “Error-control 
techniques for digital communication,” New York, Wiley-
Interscience, 1985, 483 p., 1985. 
[47] R. Sinha and S. Gupta, “Performance evaluation of a protocol 
for 
packet 
radio 
network 
in 
mobile 
computer 
communications,” IEEE transactions on vehicular technology, 
vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 250-258, 1984. 
[48] U. Svasti-Xuto, Q. Wang and V. Bhargava, “Capacity of an 
FH-SSMA system in different fading environments,” IEEE 
transactions on vehicular technology, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 75-
83, 1998. 
[49] S. L. Ariyavisitakul and G. M. Durant, “A broadband wireless 
packet 
technique 
based 
on 
coding, 
diversity, 
and 
equalization,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 36, no. 
7, pp. 110-115, 1998. 
[50] A. Fiser, “Mapping the long-term options for Canada's north: 
Telecommunications and broadband connectivity,” 2013: 
Conference Board of Canada, 2013. 
[51] M. Levitt, “Nation-building at home, vigilance beyond: 
Preparing for the coming decades in the arctic,” Speaker of 
the House of Commons, Ottawa, 2019. 
   
62
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

