Proposal of Single Sideband Modulation Scheme with Ideal Low Pass Filter 
for Wireless Communication Systems 
 
Hiroaki Waraya and Masahiro Muraguchi 
Department of Electrical Engineering, Tokyo University of Science 
6-3-1 Niijuku, Katsushika-ku, Tokyo, 125-0051, Japan 
E-mail: 4319583@ed.tus.ac.jp, murag@ee.kagu.tus.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract - Recently developed wireless communication systems 
primarily require a modulation scheme with higher spectral 
efficiency and higher quality. In this study, Single Sideband 
(SSB) modulation scheme that transmits two different signals at 
the same carrier frequency is proposed. Additionally, our 
proposed method employs a 4-times oversampled digital filter. 
The distance between the folded spectrum and the carrier 
frequency is quadrupled, and its filter creates a spectrum with 
a roll-off rate of zero on the transmission side. A digital filter 
with such characteristics can help reduce the burden of the 
subsequent analog filter. Under Additive White Gaussian Noise 
(AWGN) channel environment, Bit Error Rate (BER) 
performance of SSB quaternary Amplitude-Shift Keying 
(4ASK) at roll-off rate of zero is superior by 3 dB with respect 
to Carrier-to-Noise Ratio (CNR) to 16 Quadrature Amplitude 
Modulation (16QAM) of the same spectral efficiency, without 
affecting the effect of extra Hilbert components.  
 
 
Keywords - SSB; Hilbert Transform; Multiplexing; Digital 
Filter; Roll-off Rate. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recently, the demand for wireless communication systems 
has been increasing with the spread of smartphones, digital 
terrestrial broadcastings, and wireless Local Area Network 
(LANs). The frequency resources are being depleted in Ultra 
High Frequency (UHF) and Super High Frequency (SHF) 
bands utilized by many wireless systems. So, the high-
priority issue for the subsequent wireless systems is a 
revolutionary modulation scheme with higher spectral 
efficiency and higher quality. This study proposes SSB 
modulation scheme with an ideal digital filter to improve the 
quality of wireless systems.  
The SSB system sends data at half the occupied bandwidth 
when compared to that of the Double Sideband (DSB) system. 
The SSB signal can be produced by combining the Hilbert 
transform and quadrature multiplexing, which causes in-
phase addition of one sideband and cancellation of the 
opposite sideband. However, the SSB system is only 
effective in scalar modulation, such as ASK modulation [1]. 
In contrast, quadrature modulation, which is a typical DSB 
modulation, employs two carrier waves of the same 
frequency that are out of phase with each other by 90°. When 
the SSB modulation is incorporated with quadrature 
modulation, the spectrum efficiency is expected to be twice 
as high as conventional scheme.  
Unfortunately, they are not independent of each other as 
both modulations use the same signal processing for 
quadrature multiplexing. The in-phase component comprises 
the I-data and Hilbert transform of Q-data, and the quadrature 
component comprises Q-data and Hilbert transform of I-data 
on the receiver side. Thus, lossless demodulation cannot be 
performed analytically because of extra Hilbert components. 
In fact, several researchers have recently investigated the 
SSB Quadrature Phase-Shift Keying (QPSK) modulation 
scheme. For example, several researches successfully 
transmitted not only SSB QPSK but also SSB Multivalued 
Quadrature Amplitude Modulation (M-QAM), using turbo 
equalization on the receiver side [2]-[5]. However, there are 
drawbacks that the occupied bandwidth is increased due to 
the addition of the error correction code, and that their 
proposed SSB QPSK is sensitive to the residual phase-error 
under the fading channel because of the effect of extra Hilbert 
components.  
In this study, a single-carrier transmission of SSB 4ASK 
modulation scheme is proposed. It transmits different signals 
in Upper Sideband (USB) and Lower Sideband (LSB) 
without extra Hilbert components, at the same carrier 
frequency. Under AWGN channel environment, BER 
performance of the proposed scheme is superior by 3 dB in 
terms of CNR to the same data rate and the same occupied 
bandwidth of 16QAM signal. Additionally, the proposed 
SSB modulation scheme also maintains the good 
performance in higher order modulation. 
In contrast, our proposed scheme employs a 4-times 
oversampled digital filter to obtain an ideal spectrum. When 
SSB modulation is applied to a QPSK with a raised cosine 
filter, a drawback is that the BER performance at low roll-off 
rate deteriorates even in AWGN channel environment 
because of extra Hilbert components [6]. However, the 
proposed digital filter with oversampling produces the ideal 
Low Pass Filter (LPF) with a roll-off rate of zero, and the 
BER performance does not change when the digital filter is 
applied. Additionally, the burden of a subsequent analog 
filter can be reduced on the transmission side, because the 
alias can be moved to a position that is four times farther 
away by oversampling.  
The remainder of this paper is organized into as follows: 
Section Ⅱ explains about related works. Section Ⅲ explains 
how the SSB modulation is performed, and Section Ⅳ gives 
details on digital LPF. Section Ⅴ presents our proposed SSB 
33
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

4PAM modulation scheme using digital LPF and describes 
how two different data on the same carrier frequency are 
multiplexed. Section Ⅵ presents the performance evaluation 
and simulation results of the proposed scheme. Finally, the 
concluding remarks of the study are mentioned in Section Ⅶ. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS  
In the field of wireless communication, several studies 
have conducted to apply SSB modulation, which is a scalar 
modulation, to a quadrature amplitude modulation such as 
QPSK. This modulation method is called the Quadrature-
Single 
Sideband 
(Q-SSB) 
modulation. 
The 
Q-SSB 
modulation scheme is expected to have twice the spectral 
efficiency. The time-domain signal of the conventional Q-
SSB modulation scheme in the case of USB is expressed as 
follows:  
𝑆𝑢(𝑡) = {𝐼𝑢(𝑡) + 𝑄𝑢
̂(𝑡)} 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡      
      + {−𝐼𝑢̂(𝑡) + 𝑄𝑢(𝑡)} 𝑠𝑖𝑛 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡.  
(1) 
 
On the receiver side, {𝐼𝑢(𝑡) + 𝑄𝑢
̂(𝑡)} is extracted in the in-
phase component, and {−𝐼𝑢̂(𝑡) + 𝑄𝑢(𝑡)} is extracted in the 
quadrature component. For example, Fig. 1 depicts the 
receiving signal {𝐼𝑢(𝑡) + 𝑄𝑢
̂(𝑡)}  in the time domain. 
However, the BER performance deteriorates significantly, 
because extra Hilbert components, i.e., 𝑄𝑢
̂(𝑡) and −𝐼𝑢̂(𝑡), 
cannot be removed analytically. In a previous research, a 
turbo equalizer was employed on the receiver side to suppress 
the degradation of BER performance. In this case, while the 
received signal with extra Hilbert components is corrected by 
the equalizer, the bandwidth is increased owing to the 
addition of the error correction code and it is sensitive to the 
residual phase-error under the fading channel. On the other 
hand, 𝑄𝑢(𝑡) can be extracted via detection of the peak value 
of Hilbert component as depicted in Fig. 1. However, the 
BER performance cannot be improved adequately without an 
error correction code. In this way, when introducing Q-SSB 
modulation scheme, how to solve the problem of extra 
Hilbert components is the important issue [2]-[5]. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Receiving signal of {𝐼𝑢(𝑡) + 𝑄𝑢
̂(𝑡)} 
 On the other hand, when considering a practical Q-SSB 
modulation scheme with the raised cosine filter at low roll-
off rate, the aperture ratio of the eye pattern becomes low due 
to the presence of extra Hilbert components. Therefore, the 
BER performance deteriorate as the roll-off rate decreases in 
not only the fading channel but also AWGN channel, even if 
turbo equalizer is implemented [6]. 
 As can be seen from the related works described above, the 
main issues in the Q-SSB modulation scheme are to remove 
extra Hilbert components and to form a practical spectrum 
with a roll-off rate of zero without the penalty of BER 
performance. 
III. 
SSB MODULATION 
In this section, the performance of the SSB modulation is 
presented, and the characteristics of SSB modulation and 
Hilbert transform are explained. 
A. Characteristics of SSB modulation 
Amplitude modulation (AM) is a technique that multiplies 
the carrier wave with the information signal and changes the 
amplitude of the transmission signal in direct proportion to 
the size of the information signal. The transmission signal 
𝑆(𝑡) in a general AM method can be represented as follows: 
    𝑆(𝑡) = 𝐴[1 + 𝑘 ⋅ 𝑚(𝑡)] ⋅ 𝑐𝑜𝑠(2𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡 + 𝜑),   
(2) 
where, A is the signal amplitude, k is the modulation index 
(0 ≤ 𝑘 ≤ 1), 𝑓𝑐 is the carrier frequency, and 𝜑 is the carrier 
phase. A general envelope waveform of the AM method has 
an 𝑚(𝑡)  waveform centered around ±𝐴 , the amplitude. If 
𝑚(𝑡) = 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋𝑓𝑚𝑡, (2) can be rewritten as follows:  
 𝑆(𝑡) = 𝐴(1 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠2𝜋𝑓𝑚𝑡) ⋅ 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡        
   = 𝐴 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡 + 𝐴
2 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋(𝑓𝑐 − 𝑓𝑚)𝑡           
                                 + 𝐴
2 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋(𝑓𝑐 + 𝑓𝑚)𝑡.      
(3) 
For simplifying (3), 𝐴 = 1, 𝑘 = 1, and 𝜑 = 0. In (3), the first 
term represents the carrier wave component. The second and 
third terms are components of the information signal 𝑚(𝑡). 
The lower frequency component than the carrier wave, in the 
second term, constitutes the Lower Sideband (LSB); and the 
higher frequency component than the carrier wave, in the 
third term, constitutes the Upper Sideband (USB). Fig. 2 
depicts the spectrum of DSB modulation. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Spectrum of DSB modulation 
Carrier Component 
34
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

As depicted in Fig. 2, a spectrum is generated at a location 
separated by ±𝑓𝑚 from the carrier frequency 𝑓𝑐. Thus, DSB 
modulation is a method of transferring an information signal 
to a carrier band and communicating utilizing the LSB and 
USB. As observed from (3), the transmission of information 
is possible either by utilizing the LSB or USB, as they both 
contain the same information. The transmission of 
information utilizing only one sideband is called SSB 
modulation method. 
Fig. 3 depicts the SSB transmission spectrum obtained by 
utilizing the LSB. Here, the negative frequency region is 
shown as an arithmetic expression, but only the positive 
frequency region appears as a real signal. In comparison to 
features of the DSB method, the most prominent feature of 
the SSB method is that the occupied bandwidth frequency is 
halved. 
B. Hilbert transform 
The phase shift method is a way of generating an SSB 
signal using two 90° phase shifters. The Hilbert transform of 
a signal 𝑥̂(𝑡) is defined as the transform in which the phase 
angle of all components of the signal is shifted 90° [7]-[8]. It 
is represented as follows:  
𝑥̂(𝑡) = 𝐻[𝑥(𝑡)] = 1
𝜋 ∫
𝑥(𝜏)
𝑡 − 𝜏 𝑑𝜏 = 𝑥(𝑡) ∗ 1
𝜋𝑡 .
∞
−∞
   
(4) 
Here, the signum function is represented as  
𝑠𝑔𝑛(𝑡) = {   1,         𝑡 > 0
−1,
𝑡 < 0} ⇔ 1
𝑗𝜋𝑓 .  
(5) 
The value of this function in the positive time domain is 1, 
and in the negative time domain it is −1. On application of 
the duality theorem to (5), the frequency response of the 
Hilbert transform 𝐻(𝜔) is represented as follows: 
1
𝜋𝑡 = ℎ(𝑡) ⇔ 𝐻(𝜔) = −𝑗𝑠𝑔𝑛(𝜔) = { −𝑗,     𝜔 > 0
    𝑗,     𝜔 < 0. 
(6) 
From (4) and (6), and on application of the convolution in the 
time domain to the Hilbert transform, the frequency response 
of the signal transformed by the Hilbert transform is 
represented as follows: 
𝑥̂(𝑡) = 𝑥(𝑡) ∗ 1
𝜋𝑡 ⇔ 𝑋̂(𝜔) = 𝑋(𝜔) ⋅ (−𝑗 𝑠𝑔𝑛(𝜔)). 
(7) 
 
As indicated in (6) and (7), the Hilbert transform delays 
by 90° at positive frequencies and advances 90° at negative 
frequencies in the frequency domain. Additionally, the 
amplitude characteristic is constant regardless of the 
frequency. Fig. 4 depicts the characteristics of the Hilbert 
transform. 
 
 
 
(a) Base band signal                             (b) SSB signal     
Figure 3. SSB transmission spectrum using LSB 
 
 
 
(a) Amplitude characteristic          (b) Phase characteristic 
Figure 4. Hilbert transform characteristics  
 
The following explains the repeatability of the Hilbert 
transform. When the Hilbert transform is repeated on the 
signal that has been processed using the Hilbert transform, 
the equation is represented as follows: 
𝑋̂̂(𝜔)   = {−𝑗 𝑠𝑔𝑛(𝜔)} × {−𝑗 𝑠𝑔𝑛(𝜔) ⋅ 𝑋(𝜔)} 
= −𝑋(𝜔),            
(8) 
and the inverted original signal is the output. In contrast, if it 
is a linear transform, the equation is represented as follows: 
𝐻[𝑚(𝑡) ± 𝑛(𝑡)] = 1
𝜋 ∫
𝑚(𝜏) ± 𝑛(𝜏)
𝑡 − 𝜏
𝑑𝜏
∞
−∞
   
          = 𝐻[𝑚(𝑡)] ± 𝐻[𝑛(𝑡)].        
(9) 
Fig. 5 depicts the spectrum transition of the SSB 
modulation [9]-[10]. In Fig. 5, 𝑆𝑈𝑆𝐵(𝑡) 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑆𝐿𝑆𝐵(𝑡) of the 
transmitted signal on the frequency domain is represented as 
follows: 
𝑆(𝑓) = 𝑆𝐼(𝑓) ± 𝑆𝑄(𝑓) = 𝑀(𝑓) ± 𝑠𝑔𝑛(𝑓)𝑀(𝑓),    
(10) 
where, 𝑀(𝑓) is the modulation signal and 𝑠𝑔𝑛(𝑓)𝑀(𝑓) is 
the Hilbert transform of 𝑀(𝑓). In (10) and Fig. 5, when 𝑆𝐼(𝑓) 
and 𝑆𝑄(𝑓) are added, SSB modulation by LSB is performed; 
on the contrary, when they are subtracted, SSB modulation 
by USB is performed.  
On the receiver side, 𝑀(𝑓) is extracted at the in-phase 
component and 𝑀̂(𝑓)  is extracted at the quadrature 
component, as depicted in Fig. 5. As observed from (8), the 
same signal as the in-phase component can be obtained at the 
quadrature component upon performing Hilbert transform 
again. Then, the in-phase and the quadrature components are 
added to the receiver side. 
35
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 5. Generating SSB modulation signal  
 
A modulation scheme with such a demodulation scheme is 
called a Dual Branch SSB (DB-SSB) modulation scheme 
[11], and it is advantageous in that BER performance is 
improved by 3 dB. In the DB-SSB demodulation circuit, the 
variance 𝜎2 is doubled and the average amplitude 𝐸𝑏 of the 
signal is also doubled in AWGN channel environment by 
adding the in-phase and quadrature components. Therefore, 
it can be observed that |𝐸𝑏|2/|𝜎|2 of the DB-SSB scheme is 
superior by 3 dB. 
IV. 
DIGITAL FILTER 
In this section, the optimal transmission filter design of its 
modulation scheme is explained. 
A. Analog LPF filter 
As one of our purposes of this study is to improve the 
frequency efficiency, the extra occupied bandwidth should be  
compressed as much as possible. Typically, a spectrum 
shaping is performed through LPF to prevent the emission of 
unnecessary radio waves outside the transmission band. The 
characteristic of a cosine roll-off filter is often considered as 
a representative of the LPF. The frequency response of the 
raised cosine filter is represented as follows: 
𝐻(𝜔) =
{
  
 
 √1
2 [1 − sin {𝜋|𝜔| − 𝜔1
2𝛼𝜔1
}] , (1 − 𝛼)𝜔1 ≤ |𝜔| ≤ (1 + 𝛼)𝜔1
 1,                                                                          |𝜔| ≤ (1 − 𝛼)𝜔1
 0,                                                                          |𝜔| ≥ (1 + 𝛼)𝜔1
 
(11) 
where, 𝜔1 is equal to 𝜋/𝑇0. Normally, the Nyquist interval is 
set identical to the symbol interval. Fig. 6 depicts the 
frequency response of the raised cosine filter when the roll-
off rate is changed. Fig. 7 depicts the impulse response of the 
raised cosine filter. 
 
 
Figure 6. Frequency response of the raised cosine filter 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Impulse response of the raised cosine filter 
 
As observed from Fig. 6, the transmission bandwidth 
becomes wider as 𝛼 increases, and the bandwidth doubles 
when 𝛼 = 1. 
 The impulse response of the raised cosine filter is 
represented via an Inverse Fast Fourier Transform (IFFT) 
being performed on the frequency response. The equation 
thereof is represented as follows: 
ℎ(𝑡) = 1
2𝜋 ∫ 𝐻(𝜔)𝑒𝑗𝜔𝑡𝑑𝜔
∞
−∞
 
 
     =
1
1 − 16 𝛼2𝑡2
𝑇0
2
[
sin{(1 − 𝛼) 𝜋𝑡
𝑇0}
𝜋𝑡
𝑇0
+ 4𝛼
𝜋 cos {(1 + 𝛼) 𝜋𝑡
𝑇0
}] . 
(12) 
 
As observed from Fig. 7, the vibration of the impulse 
response is large, and its response converges slowly, in the 
case of a steep LPF (α = 0). In contrast, when α is increased, 
the vibration of the impulse response is small, and its 
response converges quickly. 
 If the raised cosine filter, which is a steep LPF (α = 0), is 
used to improve the frequency efficiency, the side lobe of the 
impulse response increases and the aperture ratio of the eye 
pattern decreases. In such cases, the sampling cannot be 
performed adequately. There is a tradeoff between the 
amplitude characteristic of the passband and the blocking 
region of the LPF. Therefore, it is theoretically difficult to 
completely remove the out-of-band radiation using an analog 
LPF. 
B. Digital Filter with oversampling 
 As it is difficult to demodulate the receiving signal, in the 
case of the analog filter of an ideal LPF, the spectrum of the 
proposed scheme is shaped via digital filter processing. The 
Composition 
36
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

digital filter with oversampling produces the ideal LPF, with 
a roll-off rate of zero. Fig. 8 depicts the configuration around 
the digital filter with oversampling. After the information 
signal is mapped, a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) is 
performed to spread the signal in the frequency domain. The 
signal on the frequency domain by the FFT is represented as 
follows: 
𝐹(𝑘) = 1
√𝑁
∑ 𝑓(𝑡) ∙ 𝑒−𝑗2𝜋𝑘𝑡
𝑁
𝑁−1
𝑡=0
.  (𝑘 = 0,1, … , 𝑁 − 1) 
(13) 
where, 𝐹(𝑘) is the frequency-domain signal, and 𝑓(𝑡) is the 
time-domain signal. Then, nulls that are three times FFT 
length, N, are inserted into the information signal in the 
frequency domain. As depicted in Fig. 8, the 3N-nulls are 
inserted, in the middle of the symbol, so that the LSB data 
and USB data are at both ends of the symbol. Such a 
processing method is called oversampling. The spectrum 
thereof is represented in Fig. 9. As observed from Fig. 9, the 
bandwidth can be compressed to half the original frequency 
bandwidth. As a result, the spectrum of the signal obtained 
from the digital filter is in the form of a roll-off rate of zero. 
Additionally, the alias can be kept sufficiently away from the 
main lobe, which facilitates subsequent LPF that attenuates 
the folded spectrum. 
The process of inserting 3N-nulls is equivalent to 
multiplying a rectangular wave in the frequency domain, as 
depicted in Fig. 9. The signal on the frequency domain after 
oversampling is represented as follows: 
𝐹𝑅(𝑓) = 𝐹(𝑓) ∙ 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡(𝑓), 
(14) 
 
 
Figure 8. Configuration of the oversampled digital filter 
 
      
 
Figure 9. Spectrum with the digital filter 
 
 
where,  
𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡(𝑓) = {
 0,   𝑁 < |𝑓| ≤ 4𝑁
   1,     |𝑓| ≤ 𝑁 . 
(15) 
The inverse Fourier transform of (15) is represented as 
∫
𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡(𝑓) ∙ 𝑒𝑗2𝜋𝑓𝑡𝑑𝑡 = 1
𝜋𝑡 𝑠𝑖𝑛 (𝜋𝑡
𝑇 ) ,
𝑁
−𝑁
 
(16) 
where, 𝑁=1/2𝑇, and 𝑇 is the sampling interval. If 𝑓𝑅(𝑡) is 
the inverse Fourier transform of 𝐹𝑅(𝑓), then 
𝑓𝑅(𝑡) = 𝑓(𝑡) ∗ 1
𝜋𝑡 𝑠𝑖𝑛 (𝜋𝑡
𝑇 )                   
 
   = ∫
𝑓(𝑡′)
1
𝜋(𝑡 − 𝑡′) 𝑠𝑖𝑛 {𝜋(𝑡 − 𝑡′)
𝑇
} 𝑑𝑡′
∞
−∞
. 
(17)
  
As 𝑓𝑅(𝑡) is the discrete signal, 𝑡′ = 𝑛𝑇. Then,  
𝑓𝑅(𝑡) = ∑ 𝑓(𝑛𝑇)
1
𝜋(𝑡 − 𝑛𝑇) 𝑠𝑖𝑛 {𝜋(𝑡 − 𝑛𝑇)
𝑇
} .
∞
𝑛=−∞
 
(18) 
where 𝑡 = 𝑘𝑇/4; IFFT size increases to 4N, which is four-
times the oversampled size. As indicated in (18), the time-
domain signal after the digital filter processing is represented 
by the sum of the sinc function. Then, the signal that is 
interpolated between the original signals is generated.  
Fig. 10 depicts the time-domain signal after the digital 
filter processing. The red waveform is the signal before the 
digital filter processing, and the blue waveform is the signal 
after the digital filter processing. As depicted in Fig. 10, the 
oversampling interpolates the part of the transient response 
between the original signal points, i.e., the quadrupled 
oversampling interpolates three points between two signal 
points. 
 Fig. 11 (a) depicts the eye pattern of an analog steep LPF 
and Fig. 11(b) depicts the eye pattern, when an LPF is 
performed after the digital filter processing. 
 
 
   
 
 
 
Figure 10. Time domain signal after the digital filter 
 
Time 
Amplitude 
37
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
(a) Analog steep filter  
  
 
 
(b) Digital filter 
 
Figure 11. Eye pattern of the signal with each steep filter 
 
It can be seen that the aperture ratio of the eye pattern does 
not decrease when the digital filter is applied, while the 
aperture ratio of an analog steep filter, depicted in Fig. 11 (a), 
decreases. 
V. 
PROPOSED METHOD 
In this section, the proposed method that uses the SSB 
modulation is presented, and how two different data of the 
same frequency are multiplexed is described. 
A. The proposed method 
As a new modulation scheme, a method that adds two data 
with different amplitudes of the same component is proposed 
in [1]. The time-domain signal of the SSB method, in the case 
of USB is expressed as follows: 
 
𝑆𝑢(𝑡) = {𝐼𝑢(𝑡) + 1
2 𝑄𝑢(𝑡)} 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡      
      + {−𝐼𝑢̂(𝑡) − 1
2 𝑄𝑢
̂(𝑡)} 𝑠𝑖𝑛 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡.  
(19) 
 
Fig. 12 depicts the amplitude characteristic of the Q-SSB 
expressed in (19). Through this method, the I-data and Q-data 
are extracted on the in-phase component, and Hilbert 
components of the I-data and Q-data are extracted on the 
quadrature component. This method is similar to the DB-SSB 
modulation scheme described in Section Ⅲ. The BER 
performance is improved by 3 dB. Regarding the method of 
separating the I-data and Q-data, the I-data is first obtained 
by determining whether the value is positive or negative with 
zero as a threshold value; and the Q-data is obtained by 
subtracting the I-data from the original signal.  
 
 
 
Figure 12. Amplitude of the Q-SSB signal, as in (19) 
 
 
 
Figure 13. Multiplexed SSB demodulation circuit 
 
 
 
However, the signal depicted in Fig. 12 is equivalent to the 
4ASK modulation scheme, which increases the amplitude 
modulation order. Therefore, the 4PAM-based SSB 
modulation scheme is proposed in this study. 
 In contrast, our proposed scheme utilizes the digital filter, 
described in Section Ⅳ, which creates a spectrum with a roll-
off rate of zero. The burden of the analog filter after the digital 
filter processing can be reduced on the transmission side. 
B. Multiplexing SSB modulation method 
In the proposed scheme, different information on LSB and 
USB is transmitted at the same carrier frequency. From (10), 
the signal generated by multiplexing different information on 
USB and LSB is represented as follows: 
𝑆(𝑡) = {𝑚𝑢(𝑡) + 𝑚𝑙(𝑡)} 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡        
      + {−𝑚𝑢
̂ (𝑡) + 𝑚𝑙
̂(𝑡)} 𝑠𝑖𝑛 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡, 
(20) 
where, 𝑚𝑢(𝑡) is the signal on USB and 𝑚𝑙(𝑡) is the signal on 
LSB. Fig. 13 depicts the demodulation circuit for the 
multiplexed SSB signal. In the upper portion of Fig. 13, 𝑆(𝑡) 
from (20) is multiplied by 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡, and passed through the 
LPF. This signal is represented as in (21). In the lower portion 
of Fig. 13, 𝑆(𝑡) from (20) is multiplied by 𝑠𝑖𝑛 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡, passed 
through the LPF, and transformed by the Hilbert transform. 
That signal is represented as in (22).  
 
𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑡) = 𝑚𝑢(𝑡) + 𝑚𝑙(𝑡) 
 
𝑆̂𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑡) = 𝑚𝑢(𝑡) − 𝑚𝑙(𝑡) 
(21) 
 
(22) 
       
Thus, the USB signal is extracted by adding (21) and (22), 
and the LSB signal is extracted by subtracting (21) from (22). 
Amplitude 
Amplitude 
Symbol 
Symbol 
38
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

VI. 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION BY SIMULATION 
In this study, the spectrum and BER performances of the 
4ASK based SSB signal with a digital filter are confirmed. 
Under the AWGN channel environment, the BER 
performance of the proposed scheme is superior by 3 dB in 
the CNR, where compared to the same data rate and the same 
occupied bandwidth of the 16QAM signal. For accurately 
analyzing the BER performance of the SSB modulation 
scheme, the BER performance was measured using 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 
and CNR. 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 is calculated by; 
𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 = 𝐶𝑁𝑅 + 10𝑙𝑜𝑔10 ( 𝑇𝑠𝑦𝑚
2𝑇𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝
) − 10𝑙𝑜𝑔10(𝑘), 
(23) 
where, 𝑇𝑠𝑦𝑚 is the symbol period, 𝑇𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝 is the sample period, 
and 𝑘 is the number of information bits per symbol. 
A. Simulation specification 
A simulation using MATLAB/Simulink was performed for 
our proposed method. Table Ⅰ illustrates the simulation 
specifications used in this research.  
 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION SPECIFICATION. 
Parameter 
Proposed 
system 
Comparison 
system 
Primary Modulation 
4PAM, 
8PAM, 
16PAM 
 16QAM, 
64QAM, 
256QAM 
Secondary 
Modulation 
SSB 
Modulation 
Quadrature 
Modulation 
FFT Size 
64 
64  
IFFT Size 
256 
256  
Data Rate 
2×2Mbps 
4Mbps  
Carrier Frequency 
40 MHz 
40 MHz 
Data Size 
Single Carrier 
Single Carrier 
Channel Model 
AWGN 
AWGN 
 
 
 
(a) Transmission Side 
 
 
(b) Receiver Side 
 
Figure 14. Block diagram of the proposed system 
As illustrated in Table Ⅰ, the 4 Pulse-Amplitude Modulation 
(4PAM) based SSB modulation is compared with the 16QAM 
for equivalent bandwidths. Similarly, the PAM-based SSB 
modulation is compared with the 64QAM and 256QAM to 
confirm that the advantage of SSB modulation can be utilized 
even when the proposed scheme is high-ordered. Fig. 14 
depicts a block diagram of the proposed system. The 
undersample on the receiver side extracts data only at 
appropriate points of the time-domain signal, as depicted in 
Fig. 10. 
B. Simulation results  
Fig. 15 depicts the spectrum of the Q-SSB signal that 
transmits data only at the LSB. Fig. 16 depicts the BER 
performance in the CNR of the proposed method. Fig. 17 
depicts the BER performance in the 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 of the proposed 
method.  
As observed from Fig. 15, a part of the opposite sideband 
is suppressed by the Hilbert transform. It expresses that the 
Q-SSB signal can be transmitted using only the LSB. As 
observed from Fig. 16, the SSB method has a BER 
performance in CNR of 3 dB superior than the DSB 16QAM 
scheme, which has the same occupied bandwidth. 
Simultaneously, Fig. 17 depicts that the BER performance of 
the SSB method, 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0,  is equivalent to that of the DSB 
16QAM scheme that has the same spectral efficiency.  
Therefore, it is confirmed from Fig. 16 and Fig. 17 that the 
BER performance of the Q-SSB modulation scheme is 
superior by 3 dB to that of the 16QAM scheme, depending 
on the size of the information bit number, 𝑘, according to (23). 
The conventional 4PAM scheme requires only a cosine wave 
when performing the up-conversion, but the SSB 4PAM 
scheme also requires a sine wave. Therefore, the signal power 
of the proposed method on the transmission side is twice as 
large as that of the conventional 4PAM scheme. This means 
that the 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 of the proposed method deteriorates by 3 dB. 
However, the proposed method can improve the 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 by 3 
dB, by implementing the DB-SSB modulation scheme on the 
receiver side. As mentioned in Section Ⅲ, the variance 𝜎2 of 
AWGN is doubled and the signal average amplitude 𝐸𝑏  is 
also doubled in the demodulation circuit of DB-SSB, by 
adding in-phase and quadrature components. As a result, the 
BER performance in |𝐸𝑏|2/|𝜎|2 of the proposed scheme is 
the same as that of the 16QAM scheme with equivalent 
occupied bandwidth. In terms of BER performance in CNR, 
the proposed scheme, which is a 2-bit transmission, is 3 dB 
superior than the 16QAM scheme, which is a 4-bit 
transmission, from the viewpoint of the number of 
information bits, 𝑘. Such advantages can only be obtained 
by the discrete signal processing. 
Fig. 18 depicts the BER performance in CNR for the 
8PAM-based SSB modulation scheme and 16PAM-based 
SSB modulation scheme. The BER performance of SSB 
8PAM is 3 dB superior than that of the DSB 64QAM, which 
has the same occupied bandwidth. The same is true when 
comparing 16PAM and 256QAM.  
39
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

      
  
 
 Figure 15. Spectrum of the Q-SSB system 
 
 
Figure 16. BER performance in the CNR of SSB 4PAM scheme 
 
 
Figure 17. BER performance in the 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 of the proposed scheme 
 
From Fig. 16 and Fig. 18, it can be confirmed that the 
proposed SSB modulation scheme maintains the good 
performance in higher order modulation, in the AWGN 
channel environment. 
Fig. 19 depicts the spectrum of the multiplexed Q-SSB 
signal. Fig. 20 compares the BER performance of the Q-SSB 
signal with data only on the USB and BER performance of 
the multiplexed SSB modulation scheme. As observed from 
Fig. 19, each sideband part suppresses the opposite sideband 
by the Hilbert transform, so that two different 4PAM 
transmissions can be performed simultaneously on the USB 
and LSB. In Fig. 20, the multiplexed SSB modulation scheme 
has the BER performance in 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0  equivalent to the SSB 
modulation scheme that transmits data on only USB or LSB.  
 
 
Figure 18. BER performance of SSB 8PAM and SSB 16PAM 
 
 
 
Figure 19. Spectrum of multiplexing SSB modulation scheme 
 
 
Figure 20. BER performance of multiplexed SSB modulation scheme 
 
The reason why the BER performance does not change 
even when two signals are multiplexed is that the frequency 
bandwidth doubles as the number of information bits changes 
from 2-bit to 4-bit, although the signal power that is added to 
the signal of the USB and LSB bands doubles on the 
transmission side at the same time. 
Fig. 21 depicts the spectrum of the multiplexed SSB 
modulation scheme with the digital filter compared to that of 
the 16QAM modulation scheme. Fig. 22 depicts the folded 
spectrum of the proposed scheme with a digital filter. Fig. 23 
depicts the BER performance of the multiplexed SSB 
modulation scheme with a digital filter compared to that of 
the multiplexed SSB modulation scheme without a digital 
filter. 
 
40
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 21. Spectrum of the SSB scheme with the digital filter 
 
     
 
 
Figure 22. Folded spectrum of the proposed scheme with the digital filter 
 
 
 
Figure 23. BER performance of the SSB scheme with the digital filter 
 
As observed from Fig. 21, two different SSB 4PAM signals 
are transmitted adjacent to each other, after a sharp filter 
processing with a roll-off rate of zero. As a result, the 
proposed scheme realizes the ideal spectrum on the 
transmission side with the minimum required bandwidth 
because the SSB modulation removes the extra band on one 
side and the digital filter halves the occupied band. The 
spectral efficiency of the proposed method is equivalent to 
that of the comparison method, and it is confirmed that it can 
take advantage of the BER performance without lowering the 
spectral efficiency. 
The frequency of the folded spectrum is 4MHz apart from 
the carrier frequency of the main lobe when the digital filter 
is used, as depicted in Fig. 22, and the burden of the LPF that 
reduces the power of the folded spectrum can be reduced. In 
Fig. 22, the cutoff frequency of the analog LPF is actually set 
wide. Without a digital filter, the side lobe adjacent to the 
main lobe must be reduced by an analog LPF, which requires 
an LPF with a low cutoff frequency. Thus, there is a high 
possibility that the data of the main lobe is affected. The 
cutoff frequency can be widened when a digital filter is 
applied, so that the demodulation can be easily performed 
without damaging the signal of the main lobe, as compared 
to the case with a steep analog LPF having a low cutoff 
frequency. 
In Fig. 23, it is confirmed that the BER performance of the 
proposed scheme does not change even if a digital filter is 
applied to the proposed scheme. This is because the proposed 
scheme extracts appropriate sample points as seen in Fig. 11, 
on the receiver side. If a steep analog filter is applied, the 
BER performance deteriorates owing to the signal distortion. 
Additionally, in the case of the Q-SSB modulation scheme of 
previous studies as indicated in (1), the BER performance at 
roll-off rate of zero deteriorates in not only the fading channel 
but also AWGN channel, owing to the effect of extra Hilbert 
components [6]. Therefore, it is a great advantage that the 
BER performance of the proposed scheme with a digital filter 
that functions as an ideal LPF filter does not deteriorate in 
AWGN channel environment. 
 Summarizing the simulation results in Section Ⅵ, the 
multiplexed SSB 4PAM with the digital filter has an ideal 
spectrum with a roll-off rate of zero, and the BER 
performance in the CNR is superior by 3 dB compared to the 
conventional DSB 16QAM, which has equivalent spectral 
efficiency. The advantage of the proposed scheme is that a 
spectrum with roll-off rate of zero can be generated without 
being affected by extra Hilbert components. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
In this study, 4ASK-based SSB modulation scheme with a 
digital filter is proposed. It has been confirmed that under 
AWGN channel environment the BER performance of the 
proposed scheme is superior by 3 dB in terms of the CNR to 
the 16QAM signal for the same data rate and the same 
occupied bandwidth, and maintains the good performance 
even in higher order modulation. Additionally, in terms of 
frequency efficiency, the proposed scheme realizes the ideal 
spectrum with the minimum required bandwidth without 
affecting the BER performance. Therefore, in the case of a 
single-carrier transmission, it is confirmed that the proposed 
ASK-based SSB modulation scheme is superior in the quality 
to DSB QAM scheme. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
H. Waraya and M. Muraguchi, “Proposal of a Quadrature 
SSB modulation Scheme for Wireless Communication 
Systems,” The Nineteenth International Conference on 
Networks (ICN2020), pp. 1-6, 2020. 
[2] 
B. Pitakdumrongkija, H. Suzuki, S. Suyama, and K. 
Fukawa, “Single Sideband QPSK with Turbo Equalization 
for Mobile Communications,” 2005 IEEE 61st Vehicular 
Technology Conference, pp. 538-542, May 2005. 
41
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[3] 
Y. Jiang, Z. Zhou, M. Nanri, G. Ohta, and T. Sato, 
“Performance Evaluation of Four Orthogonal Single 
Sideband Elements Modulation Scheme in Multi-Carrier 
Transmission Systems,” 2011 IEEE 74th Vehicular 
Technology Conference, pp. 1-6, September 2011. 
[4] 
Y. Jiang, Z. Zhou, M. Nanri, G. Ohta, and T. Sato, “Inter-
Signal Interference Cancellation Filter for Four-Element 
Single Sideband Modulation,” 2012 75th Vehicular 
Technology Conference, pp. 1-5, 2012. 
[5] 
A. M. Mustafa, Q. N. Nguyen, T. Sato, and G. Ohta, “Four  
Single-Sideband M-QAM Modulation using Soft Input Soft 
Output Equalizer over OFDM,” The 28th International 
Telecommunication 
Networks 
and 
Applications 
Conference (ITANAC 2018), pp. 1-6, November 2018. 
[6] 
B. Pitakdumrongkija, H. Suzuki, S. Suyama, and K. 
Fukawa, “Coded Single-Sideband QPSK and Its Turbo 
Detection for Mobile Communication Systems,” IEEE 
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, VOL. 57, NO. 1, 
pp. 311-323, January 2008. 
[7] 
X. Wang, M. Hanawa, and K. Nakamura, “Sideband 
Suppression Characteristics of Optical SSB Generation 
Filter with Sampled FBG Based 4-taps Optical Hilbert 
Transformer,” 15th APCC, pp. 622-625, 2009. 
[8] 
C. C. Tseng and S. C. Pei, “Design of discrete-time 
fractional 
Hilbert 
transformer,” 
IEEE 
International 
Symposium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 525-528, May 
2000. 
[9] 
K. Takao, N. Hanzawa, S. Tanji, and K. Nakagawa, 
“Experimental Demonstration of Optically Phase-Shifted 
SSB Modulation with Fiber-Based Optical Hilbert 
Transformers,” OFC/NEOEC, 2007. 
[10] 
J. G. R. C. Gomes and A. Petraglia, “A switched-capacitor 
DSB to SSB converter using a recursive Hilbert transformer 
with sampling rate reduction,” ISCAS 2000, pp. 315-318, 
2000. 
[11] 
S. A. Mujtaba, “A Novel Scheme for Transmitting QPSK 
as a Single-Sideband Signal,” IEEE GLOBECOM 1998, 
pp. 592-597, 1998. 
 
42
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

