12
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 Shared Narratives as a New Interactive Medium: CrossTale as a prototype for 
Collaborative Storytelling 
 
Joaquim Colás, Alan Tapscott, Ayman Moghnieh, and Josep Blat 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra 
C/Tanger 122-140, E-08018 Barcelona, Spain 
{Joaquim.colas, alan.tapscott, ayman.moghnie, josep.blat} @upf.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Through ages, storytelling has been used as one of 
the main ways for sharing knowledge. We envision the use of 
shared narrative spaces as a new kind of media that empowers 
the collaborative creation of vast narrative worlds. We 
identified existing information systems related to storytelling, 
and evaluated how they support multi-authored non-linear 
narratives. A pilot experiment was conducted to understand 
the user interaction model with shared narratives more 
profoundly, and we extracted the main interaction factors 
observed: the different modes of interaction performed 
towards the informative space, the exploration of a non-linear 
medium through linear storylines, and the preservation of 
literary consistency. This model was later transduced into a set 
of design implications for collaborative narrative systems, 
which were used as a premise for designing a prototypical tool 
called CrossTale. Finally, we conducted two experiments to 
evaluate CrossTale’s interaction model and user experience. 
We discuss how the results of these experiments show that 
shared narratives have the potential of becoming a distinct 
type of interactive medium supporting a new genre of user 
experience. 
Keywords-shared narratives; information systems; user 
experience; multi-authored composition; storylines; consistency. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The present article is an extended version of the work 
presented in CrossTale: Shared Narratives as a New 
Interactive Medium [1], which examined the use of shared 
narrative spaces as a collaborative medium through a 
prototype tool named CrossTale. In this article, we deepen 
on our understanding of the interaction aspects of shared 
narrative spaces and their implication on designing systems 
supporting multi-authored storytelling; and also present a 
complementary research on consistency preservation through 
the development of new experiments with CrossTale. 
Traditionally, storytelling (from mythological parables 
through literature classics to modern literary fiction best-
sellers) has been associated with the oral and written media, 
the first two channels of information transmission to appear 
in human history. Since then, different models of cultural 
expression had appeared, and those modalities had taken 
profit of technical advances giving birth to the main 
contemporary narrative vehicles such as novels, cinema, TV 
series or comic-books. All those kinds of narrative mediums 
share the trait of linearity, which suits the temporal causality 
of classic narratives. In spite of that, several experiments 
about experiencing narratives in a non-linear way were done 
(e.g., Moholy-Nagy “total theater” [2] and Borges’ tales [3]). 
With the apparition of digital media, new opportunities arise 
for creating and experiencing narratives in new ways. 
Many contemporary works focus on understanding and 
modeling storytelling as an interactive experience. Mehan’s 
Talespin [4] is a pioneering approach for automatically 
generating stories from atomic parts, and is an instigator of a 
larger body of research focusing on computer-generated 
narratives. On the other hand, other works studied narratives 
from an HCI perspective, placing user interaction at the 
center: Brenda Laurel’s work on interactive fictions, 
impacting HCI as a discipline by underscoring the properties 
human interaction with information [5]; and Chris 
Crawford’s work on interactive storytelling [6], which 
addresses aspects of game design. A wide range of actual 
works focus on models for creating non-linear narratives [7] 
[8], but to the extent of our knowledge they do not address 
this task from the perspective of user experience and the 
study of the user’s understanding of non-linearity and 
narrative consistency. 
In terms of media evolution, interactivity represented a 
change 
from 
the 
mono-directionality 
of 
traditional 
storytelling to a new paradigm better suited for non-linear 
narratives: 
through 
hypertext 
fiction, 
conversational 
adventures or other videogames, users are an active part of 
the system, performing the exploration required by a non-
linear medium. There were also changes concerning the 
human aspects of media authoring and experiencing. The 
“fanzine” movement (magazines created by fiction followers 
who create non-canonical stories) gave way to the apparition 
of internet communities of novel, movie and TV-series fans 
that gathered at forums, shared their stories, and catalogued 
their fiction worlds using tools as wikis. The professional 
production of fiction also benefited from technological 
advances, and software for the development of commercial 
fiction has made appearance, with some examples, as Celtx 
[9], operating in the cloud as a collaborative tool. 
We use the term shared narrative space to address the 
informative spaces concerning vast narratives created, 
developed, and maintained through the collaboration of 
multiple authors. A vast narrative space can be defined as a 
set of narrative information units organically to form a non-
linear story. Those units can have a wide range of granularity 
depending on the nature of the narrative (e.g.,  an issue of a 
comic-book in the informative space of the Marvel Universe, 

13
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
a book in Terry Pratchett’s Discworld literary saga, or a 
chapter in Borges’ The Garden of Forking Paths). It is a ludic 
and cultural medium of expression and communication. As a 
narrative, it is composed of a story and a discourse 
(storytelling). The story consists of a setting in time and 
space, characters, and events (or plots). It is usually 
thematically unified and logically coherent. Its elements are 
connected through cause and effect relations, thus temporal 
order is meaningful [10].  
This non-linear medium is comparable to the real-life 
development of events: multiple stories are happening at the 
same time, and each can be told from different viewpoints. 
This points towards the suitability of non-linear narratives 
not only in developing fiction, but also as a way of sharing 
information like in online networks (e.g., forums, chats, and 
communities of creators). Theoretically, the content of social 
networks could be considered a narrative based on the 
sequential groupings of threads as scenes. Each forum thread 
could be regarded as one linear development inside a bigger 
story, and parts of the same thread could belong to different 
developments as a cause of this inter-relation. However, the 
relations between threads are usually vague or inexistent, and 
there is a need for a global connection between them to 
provide thematic unification and overall coherence.  
Our purpose is to define the adequate system concepts 
and design to represent and interact with non-linear 
narratives. 
Therefore, 
we 
developed 
two 
empirical 
experiments with paper-based and digitally-implemented 
prototypes to extract and understand the user’s mental model 
of interaction with a narrative space, as a basis for the 
development of modern interactive systems for narratives. 
This paper is structured as follows. First, we give an 
overview of some relevant works related to shared narratives 
and point out their common concerns about accessing 
complex 
information 
structures 
and 
preserving 
its 
consistency. Next, we present six major types of information 
systems related to storytelling, and evaluate their support for 
shared narratives as a medium for content generation, 
collaboration and communication. Then, we illustrate a pilot 
experiment conducted to extract the user model of interacting 
with a shared narrative space. This model is explained 
distinguishing its major interaction aspects: First, we detail 
the different approaches taken by the users interacting with 
the narrative information depending on their reading or 
creative tasks; secondly, we describe the “time-space-
development” 
mental 
model 
users 
follow 
when 
comprehending the informative space, and how they search 
for character and plot relations in order to establish linear 
reading paths or “storylines”; finally, we expose how readers 
request consistency to understand the narrative. In the 
succeeding section, the observed interaction factors are 
transduced into design implications for informing the design 
of multi-authored narrative systems, and we present 
CrossTale as a prototype based on these design suggestions. 
The next section describes CrossTale user evaluation 
showing the feasibility of supporting new elaborated user 
experiences with shared narratives. We then discuss how our 
results deepen our understanding of the characteristics of the 
interaction with shared narratives: we consolidate our space-
time-storyline paradigm for exploring and contributing to 
narrative spaces, and point to how implemented rules can 
contribute to maintaining consistency, explaining how this 
affects the user experience. In our discussion, we argue in 
support of the potential of shared narrative spaces as new 
media for collective generation and development of content, 
communication, and human interaction. Finally, we conclude 
by summarizing our work and discussing its limitations, and 
then address their implications on future works. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS ON SHARED NARRATIVE SPACES 
There seems to exist a common problematic when 
approaching the construction of non-linear, interactive 
narrative structures: the linearity of the narrative classical 
dramatic structure (that comes from a one-directional 
medium) seems to be in contradiction with the divergent, 
open structure that interaction needs as a bi-directional 
medium; so it is necessary to find a scheme that facilitates a 
balance between interaction and storytelling. This occurs at a 
large scale in mediums like videogames, where the 
interaction is ontological (the user interaction alters what 
occurs in the narrative world), but it also appears during 
explorative interaction in non-linear storytelling (where the 
user interaction consists on selecting which parts of a 
complex narrative space wants to visit and from which point-
of-view), as different configurations of order and content 
create different narrative structures [3]. 
Several studies have approached the creation of platforms 
for the authoring of interactive stories. One notable example 
is StoryTec [11], a digital authoring tool for interactive 
multi-media storytelling based on the outcomes of the 
INSCAPE project [12]. This system employs an editor to 
model the story as a branching graph, establishing the 
conditions or triggers that let the user to jump from one state 
to another. The work of Tanembaum on cognitive hyperlinks 
for authoring non-linear narratives [13] presented an 
innovative approach on how to deal with the complex 
interconnections between different story parts taking place in 
different moments or places, linking them through 
suggestive concepts. This idea was an inspiration for the 
development of the our “Storylines” device, and we will 
discuss what kind of concepts can be used to establish a 
relationship between two story fragments as part of our 
work. 
However, as far as we are concerned, many of those 
systems were conceived and designed as single authoring 
tools (although they can be used by multiple authors to create 
a single narrative). The end users do not have to understand 
the narrative structure underlying their interactive reading 
experience. Multi-authoring requires those structures to be 
easy to understand and manipulate (expanding, altering, 
etc.), and has also particularities which should by addressed 
by specifically designed mechanisms. 
About those specificities on the side of multi-authored 
experiences, in their work about vast narratives [14] 
Harrigan et al. provide a large compilation of different 
scenarios of shared narrative spaces, as literary and 
television 
fiction 
franchises, 
games, 
or 
creator’s 
communities. Harrigan’s book exposes the problematic 

14
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
arising during the creation and maintenance of those vast 
narratives, and how different systems propose different 
approaches for those problems: the difficulty of making 
accessible, for both creators and audience, those large 
amounts of inter-dependent stories in an understandable way; 
and how to deal with the consistency problems that can 
appear when different authors participate in the same 
narrative space.  
The work of Y. Cao et al. [7] proposes an interesting 
approach to a system for collaboratively generating non-
linear multimedia stories. It employs the traditional approach 
of modeling non-linear storytelling as a node tree, but adding 
the use of story templates. One of those templates is based on 
Campbell’s “heroes journey” stages [15], seeking to ensure 
the narrative quality of the output. This work also puts 
emphasis on describing the different kinds of roles that users 
take in an on-line narrative generation platform. The need of 
a template for constructing stories and the attention to the 
roles show how difficult is to generate a navigable narrative 
structure and maintain its coherence when the narrative space 
is non-linear and shared between different authors. 
Del Fabro et al. [16] approached the theme from a 
different perspective in their work about real-life events 
summarization. 
This 
work 
proposes 
a 
system 
to 
automatically generate the summary of a public event as seen 
through the large quantities of participants that uploaded 
their videos, photos and comments to the Internet, and 
specifically the social networks. Although the output of this 
system is linear and automatically generated (it cannot be 
considered an “authoring” tool), the depiction of real-life 
events from simultaneous and interconnected points of view 
is an application of non-linear collaborative storytelling that 
we consider in our discussion section. Del Fabro’s system 
actually has to face the same problems that most multi-
authored (or in this case, multi-source) narratives seem to 
face: multiple points-of view are difficult to locate in a 
shared narrative space. It is difficult to spatially and 
temporally locate each single event in relation with the rest 
of the narrative, and also consistency problems arise. 
In conclusion, from our point of view most shared 
narrative spaces face a similar problematic inherent to their 
essential nature. First, non-linear storytelling is an 
oxymoron: the non-linearity makes difficult for both authors 
and readers to organize and understand information that is 
subject to the narrative law of cause-and-effect. The “reading 
order” of the events is central to this understanding, and a 
non-linear space implies that this order is not defined. 
Second, the problem of accessing and understanding a 
complex space of interrelated information also contributes to 
the difficulty of maintaining narrative consistency when 
multiple authors expand the same informative space. 
III. 
CONTEMPORARY 
INTERACTIVE 
SYSTEMS 
FOR 
STORYTELLING AND NARRATIVES  
In [3], Ryan proposed a classification of interactive 
narrative types based on the nature of the user participation: 
users can either experience the narrative acting as an internal 
character of the story, or as an external agent; they can either 
alter the ontology of the narrative through interaction, 
ontologically alter the narrative world through interaction, or 
explore the narrative without inducing any change. This 
classification provides a framework to analyze and 
characterize contemporary systems for interacting with 
narrative by reflecting on how the user experience is 
contributing to the narrative, and how the narrative is 
influencing the user experience.  
We have identified six major types of information 
systems directly related to interactive narratives: The first 
type are adventure books, which comprise a tale where the 
reader follows a character and makes choices that lead the 
story towards distinct developments; the second is tabletop 
role-playing games (or RPGs), in which the player creates a 
character and its story, and then devises the character’s 
actions according to a set of rules; adventure videogames are 
the third type, and they put the player in the role of a 
character that resolves puzzles in order to advance in the 
story; the fourth type is role-playing videogames, where the 
player makes navigation decisions to reach one of several 
possible endings; the fifth type is Forum or chat-based 
RPGs, where players collaboratively create a story (usually 
with a few rules of engagement); the sixth and last type is 
web communities of fiction writers (fan-fiction), that create 
stories in the same fiction world, but not always 
collaboratively. A high number of fan-made wikis can be 
found on the web, compiling formation about events, 
characters, and places concerning those worlds. Harrigan 
gives a wide overview of the complications of maintaining 
these vast narrative spaces, and how the different systems or 
communities address them [14]. These systems are described 
in Table 1 according to Ryan’s framework.  
TABLE I.  
CONTEMPORARY SYSTEMS OF INTERACTIVE NARRATIVES 
System 
Example 
Author 
/reader 
role 
Main 
role 
Author 
interaction 
Reader 
interaction 
Adventure 
Book  
Choose your 
own 
adventure 
Separated Reader 
- 
External 
Ontological 
Tabletop 
RPG 
Dungeons & 
Dragons 
Mixed 
Author 
Internal, 
Ontological 
- 
Adventure 
videogame 
Monkey 
Island 
Separated Reader 
- 
Internal 
Exploratory 
RPG- 
Videogame Baldur’s Gate Separated Reader 
- 
Internal 
Ontological 
Forum / chat 
RPG 
Aelyria.com 
Mixed 
Author 
Internal, 
Ontological 
External 
Exploratory 
Fan-Fiction 
community Fanfiction.net 
Mixed 
- 
External, 
Ontological 
External 
Exploratory 
 
Seeing the particularities of the informative structure of 
narratives, we point at differences between existing systems 
and interactive storytelling. In particular, none of these types 
of systems entirely supports shared narratives as a medium 
of social interaction. Three of them (books, adventure 

15
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
videogames and RPG videogames) are unidirectional 
mediums, created by authors and consumed by other people 
as readers. They support a varied degree of interaction with 
the content, but they do not allow users to contribute. 
Tabletop RPGs and forum or chat RPGs, allows user-
generated content to be added to ongoing discussions, which 
together do not constitute a coherent story that can later be 
consumed as part of the user experience. Only fan-fiction 
Internet communities fully support both the addition of user-
generated content and its consumption as part of the user 
experience. But the lack of collaboration and cooperation 
between contributors tends to divide the narrative space into 
distinct and incoherent flows of events, which only share the 
original work as a point of reference, resulting in 
independent narratives.  
The case of fan-fiction communities is the major 
exponent of a multi-authored narrative system in which 
usually no one acts as both reader and author to the same 
shared narrative, but each participant is only the author of his 
narrative sub-space and reader of others. A similar handicap 
exists in forum RPGs, where each contribution is by force 
situated directly after the previous one, and is the only 
possible type of contributions.  
In conclusion, none of these systems fully empowers 
participants to contribute efficiently to the shared narrative 
space, nor to collaboratively organize and maintain its 
overall 
structure 
and 
narrative 
coherence. 
The 
aforementioned problems of finding some “order” to access 
and understand a complex space of interrelated information 
and maintaining its consistency are approached, mostly, by 
having different independent narrative spaces (so not sharing 
one single narrative space) or simply by restricting the 
contributions to that space. Therefore, there is still a need for 
supporting the users’ ability to understand and navigate the 
space, allowing the narrative to grow in an organic way, and 
extending its contents from any desired point in the narrative 
flow.  
 
 
Figure 1.  The settings and development of the pilot experiment 
IV. 
UNDERSTANDING INTERACTION FACTORS 
The first experiment, “Story on a Wall” (Fig. 1), was an 
observation experience designed to allow users to freely 
create both a narrative and the rules that operate it. 20 
subjects (university students) were provided with paper 
templates as a frame to create scenes and a set of elements 
(fairytale characters and objects) that they could use. Scenes 
were crafted creating an image (drawing and pasting 
elements) and a short literary text. The story was developed 
on a large glass wall posting the scenes and drawing arrows. 
Each arrow connected two temporally consequent scenes, 
but aside of this the narrative meaning of the relations (i.e. 
thematic or point-of-view connections) was left for the 
subjects to interpret.  The subjects proceeded one by one to 
read the story on the glass, and then modify or expand it by 
creating new scenes, posting them in the wall, and drawing 
connections. Although subjects were encouraged to expand 
the story, there were no constraints on what the subject was 
allowed to do in the narrative space: they could rearrange, 
modify or eliminate previous scenes. Observations were 
made during this process, and the subjects were later asked 
to fill a questionnaire of 18 questions. The questionnaire 
evaluated the story comprehension and consistency as 
perceived by the subjects (asking them to rate story 
comprehensibility and coherence in a scale), and inquired 
about the reading or navigation paradigm that they used 
(how had they selected the relations between scenes, which 
narrative elements and concepts they followed throughout 
the story, and how the reading order was decided). It also 
asked about their contributions (number, content, location, 
etc.), and if they added scenes to the narratives or contended 
in modifying existing ones. 
The kind of interaction performed is external, as the users 
do not assume the role of any particular character. It is also 
ontological during the creation, and exploratory during the 
reading. The analysis of the resulting story and the 
questionnaire answers revealed several aspects about the 
nature of the user comprehension and interaction with the 
shared narrative space. From these results we will derivate, 
in the next part of our work, a set of design implications to 
develop and study interactive narrative systems. We can 
resume the interaction factors observed as follows: 
A. Three interaction modes 
The subjects’ interaction with the narrative space shows 
that at least three different views for three different purposes 
are needed for a multi-modal interaction with narratives. 
These views are illustrated in Fig. 2.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Viewpoints related to the interactions with the narrative space 

16
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A global view of the space is used to approach and 
comprehend the whole narrative space and its structure, as 
well as when selecting a point in time and place to add a 
new scene. Then, a “zoom-in” view is used for viewing a 
scene inside a storyline and understanding the other 
storylines related to it. Finally, the composition view allows 
users to create and edit scenes focusing on the crafting of a 
single scene. 
B. Navigation through storylines 
The results revealed that subjects project a “time-space-
development” logic on the narrative. Although the story in 
this pilot experiment was mainly developed as a classic 
“choose your own adventure” narrative (this is, a set of 
branching paths), when reading and expanding the story, 
subjects considered higher level relations between those 
branches (e.g., the relations between events that subjects 
considered taking place simultaneously in different, 
unrelated spaces). This can be resumed as the story being 
mentally situated on a space with a temporal and causal 
logic, represented in two axes: the temporal relationship 
between the scenes (time), and the places where these scenes 
occur (space). 
All subjects followed linear sequences (which we call 
storylines) for reading, being a linear sequence of connected 
scenes that track the development of a specific character or 
plot. The relations between scenes were only indicated 
through links, so the concepts that characterized the relation 
between the scenes were mainly determined by the readers’ 
perception. When asking the subjects, all of them coincided 
on the scenes being related by following a character or a plot 
relationship, which also indicates that contributors, although 
maybe unconsciously, established the relations following 
that paradigm. 14 out of 20 followed those storylines 
throughout the narrative space from the first scene to a 
finishing one before backtracking (the others abandoning 
some storylines and jumping to new ones arbitrarily). In 
addition, 12 of them followed character developments, and 
10 of them followed plot relationships.  
Understanding how users navigate the narrative space 
leads us to consider a visualization that copes with this 
“time-space-development” logic and facilitates the creation 
and finding of storylines as the main way of explore and 
contribute to the space, consequently facilitating the user 
interaction.  
C. Preservation of literary consistency 
The results also show that the generated narrative space 
is unitary, coherent, and with a limited divergence. It is 
unitary in the sense that all the scenes are interrelated and are 
part of the same story. In fact, the divergence of the narrative 
space away from the central topic is limited: subjects found it 
easier and socially proactive to expand existing storylines 
instead of creating new ones. This notion of unity is directly 
derived from the fact that the entire story is predefined and 
all the storylines are happening simultaneously in the same 
time stream. This raises consistency issues in the literary 
fabrics of the narrative, which users thrive to treat by re-
ordering scenes or inserting new ones. 
The literary consistency of the narrative, defined as its 
elements and plots being in agreement/non-contradictory, is 
considered fundamental for understanding the story. 
Most subjects stated a dislike towards the notion of 
conflicting storylines, being consistency one of the main 
concerns when modifying/ adding scenes to the narrative 
space: maintaining consistency in the growing narrative was 
one of the main motivations for 8 out of 15 contributions, 
and 5 subjects used their contribution only for correcting 
consistency issues. Also, the totality of the changes made to 
previous contributions was for the sake of consistency. In the 
end of the experiment, only 5% of the scenes were 
considered inconsistent with the rest of the narrative.  
Consistency therefore seems to have a great degree of 
influence on the resulting user experience as exposed by the 
result analysis. The subject-perceived consistency level 
(Figure 3) is relatively stable if slowly decaying, even though 
it tends to stay on the high portion of the scale. This may be 
happening due to the accumulative complexity of the story 
and the growing cost for achieving consistent scenes. For this 
reason, the system should implement mechanisms for 
helping to preserve literary consistency without restricting 
the non-linearity of the narrative.  
 
Figure 3.  Evolution of the user-perceived consistency during the pilot experiment 

17
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
V. 
PROTOTYPING SHARED NARRATIVE SPACES  
The resulting interaction factors extracted from the first 
experiment were transduced as a set of implications (Table 
II) for the design of information systems that support 
interacting with shared narrative spaces. We developed a 
prototype named CrossTale based on those design 
implications to reproduce the user experience according to 
them.  
TABLE II.  
DESIGN IMPLICATIONS EXTRACTED FROM THE 
INTERACTION MODEL 
 Interaction Factors 
Design Implications 
Projection of a logic based 
on time, space and 
developments. 
Organization of the informative space 
based on time and space axis. 
Reading by following 
linear sequences about a 
character or a plot. 
Navigation through suggested plot and 
character storylines. 
Unitary and coherent 
narratives. 
Mechanisms 
for 
preserving 
congruence. 
Global viewpoint for 
comprehending the whole 
story. 
One interface mode for a global view 
of the informative space. 
Reading a storyline 
through a zoom-in 
viewpoint. 
One interface mode for following 
storylines. 
Focusing on a single 
scene for creating and 
editing.  
Independent interface mode for scene 
edition. 
 
A. Three interface modes 
CrossTale 
implements 
three 
interface 
modes 
corresponding to the three interaction modes defined 
previously. The global view (Fig. 4 a) lets users explore the 
whole narrative space, and has two differentiated contexts: 
the main context shows the narrative space visualized as a 
grid, with the axes representing time (from left to right, the 
scenes are ordered in temporal order) and space (each row 
representing a different place where the story takes place, as 
the kings castle or the enchanted forest). The upper context 
in this view allows the exploration through storylines 
(explained in the next section) by selecting characters and 
plots. When a character or a plot is selected, all the scenes 
belonging to that character/plot storyline appear highlighted 
forming a reading path. Selecting a scene changes the 
interface into the reading view (Fig. 4 b) in which the scene 
is maximized for reading. In this view, the user can also 
navigate back and forward by the current storyline. Finally, 
by selecting an empty frame in the global view, the user 
accesses the creation view (Fig. 4 c). In this view, s/he can 
create a scene selecting characters and objects from the right-
side menu and by arranging them through drag-and-drop. 
The user also can introduce a title and the literary text 
describing the scene, and indicate to which plot storylines 
lines is related the current scene (allowing the definition of 
new ones). This context also implements the “consistency 
preservation” rules, which are further described in this 
section. 
B. The storylines device 
 
In traditional linear storytelling, a single author creates 
story (the content) and discourse (how is it presented). But in 
non-linear storytelling, the reader decides this partially 
(alters part of the discourse) when he chooses to follow some 
part or another of the narrative space in a desired order.
Figure 4.  Three interface modes of the CrossTale prototype
(a) The global view 
 
(b) The reading view 
 
(c) The creation view 

18
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
As we stated in our findings of the “Story on a Wall” 
experiment, subjects observing the “branching-structured” 
narrative established higher-level conceptual relations 
between its parts to find their own reading order, projecting 
temporal and spatial logic between all the elements. The 
concepts relating one scene with another were perceived as 
maintaining a character or plot relationship. 
Following those pilot experiment discoveries we 
developed the “storylines” paradigm to allow the ordered 
exploration and development of the narrative space. The 
aforementioned grid of scenes, arranged in spatial and 
temporal axis, deconstructs the “scene tree” and presents all 
the information in a way where the user can easily recognize 
the spatial and temporal relation between all scenes. The 
paths of reading or “storylines” are provided by the interface 
when the user selects one character or plot to follow, 
highlighting a temporally ordered sequence of logically 
related scenes. This way, each scene can belong to an 
unlimited number of storylines based on what characters take 
part in it and to what plots the scene events are related. 
Concerning the nature of those relations, character 
reactions are the easier to understand and work with. A 
character storyline is simply composed by all the scenes 
where a character appears, ordered temporally. Usually those 
scenes contain temporal and cause-to-effect relations 
between them, describing the story of the character. This 
type of plotlines evades easily the problem of non-linearity, 
because following a character implies following a linear 
development: the character, being at one place at a time, 
experiences the story partially and linearly, similar to the 
users’ linear perception of time development. 
The notion of plot is more abstract than the preceding, 
and also more difficult to implement. As authoring tool, in 
CrossTale plots are decided by subjects, so the authors 
decide to assign different created scenes to the same plot, 
considering that they are describing a thematically-unified 
“sub-story” inside all the story world (e.g., in our fairy-tale, 
where lots of different actions are occurring, the plotline 
about the kidnap of the princess and the different factions 
who are searching for her). Not all scenes are linear in time, 
because the same plot can follow different characters, jump 
in time, and/or develop in two or more places at the same 
time. The plot storyline is presented following the temporal 
sequence, and scenes taking place simultaneously are shown 
intercalated. 
C. Consistency preservation rules 
CrossTale implements a set of constraints that can be 
activated in order to maintain consistency during the scene 
composition process. These constraints were designed to 
prevent subjects from adding scenes that somehow disrupted 
the sense of space or time. For instance one character could 
not be present at different places simultaneously or no one 
could travel further than one location away between two 
timeframes (locations were connected in an arbitrary way 
and this information was transmitted to subjects by providing 
a map). 
These rules were designed after the most common 
modifications performed by subjects during the previous 
experiment, attempting to anticipate potential displeasing 
outcomes and preventing them by blocking certain actions. A 
text dialog will be also displayed to inform the subject the 
reason why he cannot commit the change he is trying to (e.g., 
“The Princess cannot appear here because she is in another 
place at this moment”). If these mechanisms perform 
optimally, the whole story might experiment a global 
consistency increment and users might chose to concentrate 
on providing another kind of content. 
VI. 
EVALUATING CROSSTALE 
Our CrossTale system is a tool designed and 
implemented following the design implications extracted 
from the mental model of interaction observed during the 
pilot experiment. Therefore, we tested the tool through new 
experiments in order to assess the adequacy of this model in 
the development of systems to create and interact with non-
linear, multi-authored narratives. 
The objective of these experiences was to evaluate the 
adequacy of use of the different interaction modes, the 
paradigm of narrative space representation and exploration 
through the storylines device, and the usefulness and impact 
of the consistency preservation rules. With those aspects 
interrelated and being part of a complex system, we 
developed a couple of experiences to better understand the 
repercussions of those interaction factors. The first 
experience served us to evaluate the interaction mechanisms 
in terms of adequacy of design and user experience, with 
users performing creative tasks with the tool. Observations 
of the results of this creative task were used to analyze the 
nature of the created narratives and how users developed 
their storylines using the provided tool devices. Finally, a 
second experiment was conducted in order to test the impact 
of the consistency preservation rules on the produced 
narrative and the user experience. The description of the 
conditions and the result analysis of the evaluation 
experiments are presented next. 
A. Evaluating the interaction mechanisms 
The main experiment with the prototype, in order to test 
the adequacy of its design and the user experience, consisted 
of creating a narrative in a similar way to the pilot 
experiment. A total of 15 subjects (undergraduate students in 
media studies) were enlisted, and asked to freely use the 
interface to read and create a shared narrative with their own 
contributions. Each subject was briefly introduced to the 
interface controls, and then given an unlimited time to 
interact and the freedom to add as many scenes as wanted. 
Then, the subject executed eight interaction tasks provided 
by the evaluation team, and observations were made. 
Afterwards, each subject answered a questionnaire to rate the 
experience on a Likert scale, and evaluate the suitability of 
the design for reading and contributing and the overall user 
experience. 
The results of the task-driven evaluation are summarized 
in Table III. It describes how many subjects employed each 
interface view for each task. The results show that 11 out of 
15 subjects performed all tasks easily, and the remaining 4 
subjects successfully performed 6 out of 8 tasks. The 

19
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
subjects used the global view and/or the reading view to 
identify and comprehend the narrative elements. Similarly to 
the first experiment, some subjects concentrated on 
characters while others on plots, but everyone used one of 
these two paradigms for finding storylines and navigating the 
narrative space. During the contribution task all the 
contributors also used the creation view to compose new 
scenes, but this view was never accessed for performing the 
identification tasks. These results indicate that the design 
supports the modes of interaction identified in the first 
experiment, and that these modes dispose of adequate 
functionalities. However, most subjects prefer having more 
information about the context of scenes while reading them. 
This means that the dissociation between the global and 
reading views could be revisited. 
TABLE III.  
RESULTS OF THE DESIGN ADEQUACY EVALUATION  
Task 
NB 
Task 
Correctly 
executed 
Global 
View 
Reading 
View 
Both 
Views 
Navigating 
with 
Storylines 
1 
Identify the 
beginning 
scenes 
15 
13 
13 
11 
11 
2 
Identify story 
end scenes 
15 
13 
9 
7 
7 
3 
Identify main 
characters 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
4 
Identify 
important 
places 
15 
14 
14 
13 
13 
5 
Identify 
simultaneous 
scenes 
11 
13 
4 
4 
4 
6 
Identify 
scenes in the 
same location 
12 
14 
2 
2 
2 
7 
Approximate 
the duration 
15 
13 
13 
11 
10 
8 
Find any 
inconsistency 
15 
8 
12 
7 
8 
9 
Contribute 
(optional) 
13 
13 
6 
6 
5 
 
Table IV shows the evaluation results of the user 
experience. All subjects appreciated the experience of 
interacting with narratives through CrossTale. In particular, 
they found that CrossTale supports reading a non-linear 
narrative (4.33/5), contributing to it (4.77/5), and finding and 
correcting inconsistencies (3.92/5). 
TABLE IV.  
RESULTS OF THE USER EXPERIENCE EVALUATION  
Question 
Average Score 
Overall experience 
3.93 / 5 
Found the system entertaining 
4.33 / 5 
Design makes reading easy 
3.93 / 5 
Design helps to maintaining consistency 
3.92 / 5 
Design facilitates contributing 
4.77 / 5 
Using Ryan’s framework for the classification of 
interactivity with narrative systems, we can say that the users 
of CrossTale performed an external interaction during the 
whole experience, as they took on the role of agents external 
to the story, and read and contributed in it from outside the 
fiction world. This interaction is exploratory while reading, 
in the sense that the readers choose between storylines to 
follow but the reading itself does not change nor affect the 
structure of the narrative space. Finally an ontological 
participation is performed when the user takes the role of 
author and expands or alters the narrative world. 
B. Use of storylines in the composed narrative 
We present a general analysis of the resulting narrative 
compared with the narrative created in the pilot experiment. 
Figure 5 shows the structure of the resulting narrative. Users 
do not link scenes directly in CrossTale, but relations are 
established by the share of common characters/plotlines. 
According to this, we present the basic scheme with the 
time-consecutive scenes sharing characters connected (so 
they can be followed through character storylines), and each 
version of the figure showing what of those scenes belong to 
each of the four plot storylines the subjects used. 
From the initial set of 8 starting scenes given to the first 
subject the resulting narrative ended up having 35 scenes, so 
27 scenes were added by the subjects, with an average of 1.8 
scenes per subject. This is slightly superior to the 1.4 scenes 
per subject added in the pilot experiment, which could 
indicate that the interface makes the addition of the scene 
relatively easy. Following the analysis of the character 
plotlines, the story has 6 bifurcating scenes (scenes from 
which different character plotlines going to different new 
scenes emerge) compared to the 9 bifurcations of the pilot 
experiment narrative, and 3 ending/unconcluded scenes 
compared to the 4 in the pilot. As a general conclusion, the 
properties of the generated narrative being unitary and with 
limited divergence are preserved, if not emphasized, through 
the use of CrossTale. 
Analyzing the use of storylines, plot storylines generally 
do not create completely new reading paths but can be 
trailed following the transitions of the character storylines, 
so they don’t create a new level of divergence. We can 
observe that the first storyline (already given in the starting 
narrative) starts temporally at two places at the same time, 
but these two parts can be read following the storylines of 
two main characters (the princess and the prince). The other 
three storylines used in the story are practically linear and 
follow the scenes where some concrete character appears. 
The initial setting of the experiment provided three 
storylines. Subjects only added two storylines, one of them 
being the linear continuation of a previous one (thus being 
presented as one single storyline in the figure). To sum up, 
most of the users included their created scenes in one 
existing plot storyline, but the creation of new plot 
storylines was very low. 
As a conclusion according with this observations and the 
analysis done in the previous section, plot storylines are

20
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 5.  Plot storylines in the narrative produced with CrossTale 
 
regarded as much useful as character storylines when 
reading, but they are largely more abstract, thus difficult to 
use when creating. While using a character implies the 
unconscious continuation of his/her storyline in the 
narrative space, the use of plot storylines needs to be 
deliberately planned by the user.  Future investigations 
should focus on understanding deeply which concepts can 
relate scenes forming storylines, how to make easier to the 
creators find this relations (which can suggest new 
storylines), and consider if those relations should be 
automatically created (as in the case of the character 
storylines). 
C. Evaluating the consistency preservation rules 
In order to evaluate the consistency separately, we 
conducted an isolated experiment using two groups of ten 
people. The control group (group A) used CrossTale with 
the consistency constraints enabled, and the second group 
(group B) had these constraints disabled. Apart from this, 
both groups were exposed to the same experimental 
conditions: they were introduced to the use of the tool, and 
they contributed to the narrative one subject at a time, 
starting with the same set of initial scenes. The focus of the 
experiment was to evaluate the impact of the implemented 
system of rules in the congruence preservation and the user 
experience. 
The tests performed in the end of the experiments 
revealed that users of CrossTale with consistency 
preservation rules perceived a slightly higher consistency 
level than users without constraints (3.8/5 vs. 3.4/5). The 
most remarkable observation was that the perceived 
consistency level seemed to decay more quickly over each 
contribution without the usage of consistency constraints 
(Figure 6). An optimistic interpretation of this phenomenon 
could be that enforcing a certain notion of time and space 
logic through the scenes (which was the purpose of the 
constraints) tends to produce more consistent results. 
Adding the constraints also seems to have affected the user 
experience of users who felt limited all the time (as seen 
during the video codification, where they keep complaining 
almost every time a constraint block pops up). 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Perceived consistency level in the second experiment 
 

21
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Therefore, 
we 
expose 
an 
interesting 
situation; 
constraining scene composition to a specific outcome range 
way may lead to more consistent results while hampering 
the authoring process and negatively affecting its user 
experience. One possible answer to balancing the exposed 
tradeoff might be switching the nature of the introduced 
trigger from an enforcing one to a less intrusive 
recommending 
system. 
This 
way 
we 
can 
inform 
contributing subjects about the potential incoherence of their 
creation, 
maybe 
preventing 
them 
from 
introducing 
conflicting scenes that later users would want to correct. 
D. Final comments on the CrossTale evaluation 
The results of this experiments show that the concepts 
and design of CrossTale, as a prototype for interacting with 
narratives, are highly appreciated by the subjects. However, 
they also point out several issues that need to be addressed in 
future versions. In particular, the level of context awareness 
when users interact with one single scene in the informative 
space, the use of storylines when authoring narratives, and 
the degree of creative intrusion produced by the consistency 
constraints. We cannot neglect the repercussions of each one 
of those areas into the other: the ability to access the 
information and to mentally locate it in the whole narrative 
space, or the difficulties integrating a scene in the storyline 
structure, can condition the consistency level perceived or 
produced by the user, disregarding the actual consistency 
level of the complete informative space.  
In addition, social interaction between different authors 
remains indirect: users cannot communicate directly and the 
authors’ profiles and their contributions are not discernible in 
the current design. Future versions can include more support 
for this aspect and study its effects on the user experience 
and collaboration. 
VII. DISCUSSION 
The nature of shared narratives presents several 
challenges over how the inherent information is constructed, 
presented, and accessed. In a sense, non-linear interactive 
storytelling has always faced challenges for having to 
reconcile the sequential nature of narratives with the reader 
ability to explore between different threads of reading (the 
paradox of coping “storytelling” with the “non-linear”). In 
this work we provided a first grounding basis for addressing 
these challenges and developing shared narratives as a new 
kind of media. Our research is a first step for consolidating a 
standardized system for sharing and collaboratively 
constructing narratives, given we extracted, understood, and 
evaluated the user mental model associated with this 
interaction.  
Several use cases can be provided exemplifying our 
vision of shared narratives as a new kind of media. The focus 
of our work can be easily illustrated using the case in which 
our current study is based: the collaborative generation of 
fiction worlds. The first chapters of this work described how, 
since the apparition of the World Wide Web, internet 
communities of literature amateur practitioners have 
dedicated their conjoined efforts to develop and catalogue 
fiction sharing common narrative spaces, using tools as 
forums or wikis to organize the large amounts of interrelated 
information produced. The main issues those communities 
have to face are the difficulty to navigate and comprehend 
grand quantities of interrelated information, and maintaining 
coherency when lots of authors expand and/or modify those 
interdependent sets of data (e.g., maintaining the coherency 
of the biography of a character that appears in several stories 
created by different authors).  With tools implementing the 
interaction and data-management principles proposed in 
CrossTale, we would be able to develop systems that largely 
facilitate the creative process, ensuring that the collaborative 
efforts work together and empowering creativity rather than 
endangering it. 
Our studies have been developed working within the 
fiction genre (concretely fantasy tales), with amateur and/or 
non-professional authors. This setting for the study and the 
experiments reflected our focus on the emergent online 
communities of literature and fiction aficionados.  But we 
can discuss how this paradigm of authoring and exploring 
vast narratives could be applied to other genres or other 
contexts of use. Of course, this would require following new 
lines of research in order to study their particularities 
As we previously introduced, with the development of 
the information technologies and the raise of the mass-
oriented cultural products, the professional sector of literary 
creators dedicated to fiction has started to use computerized 
tools, as Celtx, to develop their creative tasks. Some of these 
tools try to deal with our studied difficulties: organization 
and exploration of complex informative spaces, and 
congruence preservation.  Certain among them (as Celtx) 
have developed the status of on-line, social tools, aiming for 
a multi-authored model. Assuming that research is conducted 
about the mental models and the interaction needs of a 
different standard of users as professional creators are, this 
scenario could largely benefit from our developments. Tools 
following the CrossTale paradigm for interacting shared 
narrative spaces could prove very useful in the field of 
commercial vast narratives [14], as long-running TV-series 
or especially complex trans-media fiction franchises, which 
involve lots of interrelated, multi-authored information.  
VIII. CONCLUSIONS  
In modern literature and fiction worlds, it is common to 
have multiple stories set in a complex chronology inside a 
common setting, such as in fiction franchises where 
narratives are constructed through the contributions of 
multiple professional authors. Tools based on the CrossTale 
interaction model would be capable of organizing all this 
encyclopedic knowledge in a structured narrative space that 
suits better the temporal, causal, and multi-lineal nature of a 
narrative, empowering the authors to contribute easily to 
expand the vast fiction worlds and empowering the readers 
to explore them naturally. With such tools, narrative spaces 
grow organically and collaboratively; the proactive role of 
participants consequently diffuses the mono-directionality of 
the author/audience relation. In that sense, non-linear 
interactive narratives can become a new kind of media of its 
own, suitable for creation, collaboration, information 
sharing, and learning. 

22
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
By experimentation, we learnt how users perceive and 
procreate the narrative space in a unitary and consistent way, 
how they mentally structure the informative space in terms 
of time and place, and navigate it following structured 
sequences of character and plot-related scenes. This model 
was used as the basis for designing a functional prototype, 
CrossTale, which was subsequently evaluated with users. 
These evaluations show the success of the adopted approach 
in supporting complex interactions with narrative spaces, 
which assimilate its non-linearity. It provides a validation for 
further investigations on the potential of shared narratives as 
new media. 
We can summarize the approach used as working in two 
fronts: the user interaction with the informative space, and 
the coherency computation of the contained information. 
Concerning the interaction when creating and exploring a 
shared narrative space, the critical aspect revealed to be how 
to provide a mean to obtain meaningful information when 
exploring a complex net of causal-related scenes or story 
parts. The use of the “storylines” mechanism is a first 
successful step towards this objective of providing 
meaningful “reading paths/orders”, but further developments 
should be made to approach some relevant issues (e.g., the 
simplicity of suggesting character storylines versus the 
abstract concept of “plot storylines”, which has to be 
consciously appointed by authors). 
About 
the 
preservation 
of 
consistency 
during 
collaboration, our experiments pointed that consistency 
between all the story elements and scenes is the main 
conception that readers use to understand the narrative space, 
and one of the main concerns when expanding the space by 
adding new scenes. The experiments seem to indicate that 
implementing computational rules help to raise consistency 
but can also undermine the user experience. Thus, we have 
to choose carefully what rules determine the consistency of 
the informative space, which of them should be only 
suggested, and which of them should be strictly followed to 
ensure that consistency. 
IX. 
FUTURE WORK 
This work has several limitations inherent to the nature of 
the experimental settings and the prototype. The pilot 
experiment was not designed as a strict experience for testing 
concrete aspects, but was used as an observation to extract 
information about how participants reacted and interacted 
with a collaborative narrative space. For this reason, direct 
comparisons between results of the pilot experiment and the 
prototype experiments should be taken carefully. While the 
pilot experiment was conducted in a large wall where all the 
informative space was present, access to the information 
using CrossTale is done through a common computer screen 
and mediated by the designed visualizations. This implies 
that, although mechanisms as storylines have been proven 
useful, its effectiveness is conditioned to the existent 
limitations of the interface design. 
Regarding the prototype nature, the visualizations used 
have functional limitations (e.g., visualizing all related 
scenes to a selected one). One important limitation was the 
aforementioned difficulty, when reading, to locate the actual 
scene in relation with the global set of scenes. Other 
improvable design issues, mostly usability-related, were 
identified during the evaluation (e.g., the composition view 
is not user friendly). Finally, the development of the 
experiments in a controlled environment does not reflect 
intimately interactions with shared narratives, nor the 
collaboration phenomenon (performed in an indirect way 
through the experiment), as ought to take place online during 
a greater amount of time. 
Some aspects related to narrative composition remained 
outside this study. In our experiments, the literary traits of 
the narrative space were somewhat pre-defined, especially 
the main characters (prince, princess, witch, etc.) and places 
(tower, castle, woods, etc.). This discouraged users to think 
about expanding the literary reach of the narrative space with 
few exceptions. In a collaborative creation processes, as 
online social role-playing games, some people perform the 
role of content generators, adding story elements (characters, 
objects, places, etc.) to the informative space. Such behavior 
should be further studied in the future.  
With this model and prototype as a starting point, our 
future step consists of addressing some issues detected 
during the experiments and conducting more focused 
experiments about the impact of the storylines device in the 
construction of the story and its resulting consistency, and 
how a recommendation system could better empower the 
consistency preservation without disrupting the creative 
process. Conducting those experiments with a larger number 
of users interacting and evaluating the resulting narrative 
during a larger period of time will better cope with a 
community co-creative process, and would allow us to study 
the nature of the resulting interaction and narrative structure 
under those conditions, as well as the potential of shared 
narrative spaces to empower long-term collaboration. It will 
also provide large quantities of data relative to the outcome 
of the continuous interaction of users in a multi-user 
deployment. 
With those experiences we will refine our knowledge of 
the interaction factors and try to discover new factors that 
can alter the user experience. We will determine which 
features are more useful or which ones need improvement, 
distinguishing between the tasks of creating and reading 
(e.g., the use of plot storylines, which have been proven 
useful to read but not very used while creating). We also 
pretend to discover factors external to the interface that can 
alter the experience and the behavior of the creators (e.g., 
starting the experience with a pre-established set of scenes 
and storylines could alter which features the users will use or 
how the narrative will grow). Those long-time experiments 
will also determine how the level of consistency evolves at 
long term, when large amounts of contributions are made, 
and compare the outputs of using or not consistency rules. 
Finally, we will also be able to find relations between those 
mentioned interaction factors and how they affect the 
consistency found (e.g., starting from a consistent set of 
storylines could help to reach a more consistent narrative 
space after several contributions). 
Next steps of this study are in the direction of evaluating 
which theoretical models of narrative (as those proposed by 

23
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Propp [17] and Campbell [15]) could help to structure the 
informative space and refine our understanding of the needs 
of creators and readers. Those models would lead us to 
discover which elements can be used to determine storyline 
relationships between the story fragments, and which 
elements can be used to compute the consistency of a 
creation. With this knowledge we will be also able to 
develop features for adding user-generated story elements (as 
characters and places) leading to a complete system for 
generating and maintaining shared narrative spaces. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Colàs, A. Tappscott, A. Moghnieh, and J. Blat, “CrossTale: 
Shared Narratives as a New Interactive Medium”, MMEDIA, 
2012. 
[2] L. Moholy-Nagy, "Theater, Circus, Variety" (1924), in 
Multimedia, from Wagner to Virtual Reality, R. Packer and 
K. Jordan, Ed. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2001, 
pp. 16-26. 
[3] ML. Ryan, “Beyond myth and metaphor: The case of 
narrative in digital media”, Game Studies, 2001. 
[4] J. R. Meehan, “TALE-SPIN, An Interactive Program that 
Writes Stories”, in Proceedings of the Fifth International Joint 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 1977. 
[5] B. Laurel, “Computers as Theatre”, Addison-Wesley, 1991. 
[6] C. Crawford, “Chris Crawford on Interactive Storytelling”, 
Berkeley, Calif.: New Riders, 2005. 
[7] Y. Cao, R. Klamma, and M. Jarke, “The Hero’s Journey – 
Template-Based Storytelling for Ubiquitous Multimedia 
Management”, Journal of Multimedia, vol. 6, no. 2, Apr. 
2011, pp. 156-169, doi: 10.4304/jmm.6.2.156-169. 
[8] Y. Cao, R. Klamma, and A. Martini, “Collaborative 
Storytelling in the Web 2.0”, in Proceedings of the First 
International Workshop on Story-Telling and Educational 
Games, 2008. 
[9] www.celtx.com (June 30, 2013). 
[10] S. Chatman, “Story and Discourse: Narrative Structure in 
Fiction and Film”, Cornwell University Press, 1990. 
[11] S. Gobel, L. Salvatore, R. Konrad and F. Mehm, “StoryTec: 
A Digital Storytelling Platform for the Authoring and 
Experiencing of Interactive and Non-linear Stories”, in 
Interactive Storytelling, 2008, pp. 325-326, doi: 10.1007/978-
3-540-89454-4_40. 
[12] O. Balet, “INSCAPE: An Authoring Platform for Interactive 
Storytelling” in Virtual Storytelling. Using Virtual Reality 
Technologies for Storytelling (ICVS 2007 Proceedings), Marc 
Cavazza, Stéphane Donikian (Eds.)  Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 
2007, pp. 176–177. 
[13] Tanenbaum, K. Tanenbaum, M. Seif El-Nasr, and M. Hatala, 
“Authoring Tangible Interactive Narratives using Cognitive 
Hyperlinks”, Proceedings of the Intelligent Narrative 
Technologies III Workshop, 2010. 
[14] P. Harrigan and N. Wardrip-Fruin, “Third Person: Authoring 
and Exploring Vast Narratives”, MIT Press, 2009. 
[15] J. Campbell, “The Hero with a Thousand Faces”, Princeton 
University Press, 1968. 
[16] M. del Fabro, A. Sobe, and L. Böszörmenyi, “Summarization 
of Real-Life Events Based on Community-Contributed 
Content”, MMEDIA, 2012. 
[17] V. Propp, “Morphology of the Folktale”, University of Texas 
Press, 1968. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

