121
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Extending the Usable Ka-Band Spectrum  for FSS Satellite Systems 
 by using a FS Database 
 
Wuchen Tang, Paul Thompson, Argyrios Kyrgiazos and Barry Evans 
Institute for Communication Systems (ICS), 
University of Surrey, Guildford 
 GU2 7XH, Surrey, United Kingdom 
 Email: {w.tang, p.thompson, a.kyrgiazos, b.evans}@surrey.ac.uk 
 
 
 
Abstract— Broadband access by satellite in Ka-band will 
become constrained by spectrum availability. In this context, 
the European Union (EU) FP7 project CoRaSat is examining 
the possible spectrum extension opportunities that could be 
exploited by a database approach in Ka-band via the use of 
cognitive mechanisms. The database approach utilizing 
spectrum scenarios between Fixed Satellite Services (FSS), 
Fixed Services (FS) and Broadcast Satellite Service (BSS) 
feeder links are considered. Database statistics for several EU 
countries are also provided for database analysis. Interference 
in the downlink scenarios are evaluated by the database 
approach using real databases and propagation models. The 
importance of using correct terrain profiles and accurate 
propagation models are shown. For the case of BSS 
interference to the FSS downlink (17.3-17.7GHz) it is 
demonstrated that in the UK an area of less than 2% is 
adversely affected. FS interference into the FSS downlink 17.7-
19.7GHz is shown for the UK to only affect a small percentage 
of the band at any location. Some initial preliminary findings 
when considering earth stations on moving platforms are also 
presented. It is concluded that by using a database approach to 
allocate frequencies it is possible to use most of the band across 
different locations for satellites services in the shared Ka-band. 
Keywords 
– 
Database 
approach; 
frequency 
sharing; 
propagation models; area analysis; spectrum analysis.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In this paper we address the extension of spectrum for 
satellite systems in the Ka-band using a database approach 
[1]. 
The demand for higher rate and reliable broadband 
communications is accelerating all over the world. Within 
Europe the Digital Agenda sets a target for universal 
broadband coverage of at least 30 Mbps across the whole 
of Europe by 2020 and 100 Mbps to at least 50% of the 
households [2]. Fixed connections and cellular cannot 
alone meet this target, particularly in the rural and remote 
areas but also in some black spots across the coverage. In 
these latter regions satellite broadband delivery is the only 
practical answer as satellite will cover the whole territory. 
Some recent studies of the roll out of broadband have 
shown that up to 50% of households in some regions will 
only have satellite available as a means of accessing 
broadband and thus 5-10 million households are potential 
satellite customers [3]. Current Ku band satellites do not 
have the capacity to deliver such services at a cost per bit 
that makes a business case and thus, the satellite 
community has turned to High Throughput Satellites 
(HTS) operating at Ka-band and above. Examples of early 
HTS Ka-band satellites dedicated to such services are 
Eutelsat’s KaSat [4] and VIASAT-1 [5]. These satellites 
employ multiple (around 100) beams using fourfold 
frequency reuse over the coverage area to achieve 
capacity of the order of 100 Gbps per satellite. The latter 
is limited by the exclusive spectrum available to satellite 
(FSS) of 500 MHz in both the up and downlinks and this 
limits the feasible user rates to 10-20 Mbps. Thus, looking 
ahead to the increased user demands we have to look to 
larger satellites (maybe up to a Terabit/s [6][7]) and to more 
spectrum. Moving up to Q/V bands has already been 
suggested for feeder links but for user terminals the 
additional expense is not considered desirable so we return to 
the problem of getting more usable spectrum at Ka band. 
The Ka-band exclusive bands for satellite are 19.7 to 20.2 
GHz in the downlink and 29.5 to 30 GHz on the uplink. In 
these bands FSS terminals can operate in an uncoordinated 
manner, which means that they do not have to apply for and 
be granted a license by the national regulators, provided they 
meet set performance characteristics. The issue in other parts 
of the Ka-band is that the spectrum is allocated, not just to 
FSS but also to fixed links (FS) and to BSS (uplinks for 
broadcast satellites) as well as mobile services (MS). 
The International Telecommunications Union (ITU) has 
allocated this spectrum in three regions of the world as 
shown in Table I for Ka-band (Europe is Region 1). In these 
so called ’shared bands’ the different services need to co-
exist and this is usually done by the process of coordination. 
For example, a larger gateway or feeder link may use this 
band but is coordinated and then licensed to operate and 
receives protection from interference from other service 
users. 
Within Europe, the European Conference of Postal and 
Telecommunications Administrations (CEPT) [8] have 
adopted decisions that expand those of the ITU and 
produce tighter regulation as follows; 
 

122
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
• 
17.3-17.7 GHz: the BSS feeder links are 
determined as the incumbent links but 
uncoordinated FSS links are also permitted in 
this band. 
• 
17.7-19.7 GHz: FS links are considered 
incumbent but FSS terminals may be deployed 
anywhere but without right of protection. 
• 
27.5-29.5 GHz: CEPT provide a segmentation 
of the band between FSS and FS portions as 
shown in Figure 1. Within each segment there is a 
specified incumbent but for instance FSS 
terminals can operate in FS portions provided 
they do not interfere with the incumbent FS. 
 
The work reported in this paper has been conducted 
within the EU FP7 project CoRaSat [9][10][11][12] that 
examines ways in which FSS satellite terminals in the Ka-
band can co-exist with FS and BSS links given the 
regulatory regime discussed above. Specifically, a database 
approach for such coexistence schemes is investigated and 
demonstrated to exploit the frequency sharing opportunities 
for uncoordinated FSS terminals and verify its applicability. 
The aim is to show that future satellite systems can access 
additional spectrum beyond the exclusive bands that is 
needed to deliver cost effective broadband services. 
Section II presents scenarios addressed and an outline 
of the database approach. Section III presents the database 
analysis and Section IV the database analysis for the 
specific scenarios under consideration. 
 
Section V presents the impact on regulations and 
standards whilst Section VI draws the major conclusions on 
the work. 
 
II. SCENARIOS AND DATABASE APPROACH 
We report for the first time in the literature that a full 
interference analysis has been performed for frequency 
sharing within the frequency bands presented in Section I. 
We aim to show how a database approach will allow 
sharing between the satellite and terrestrial services. Within 
the CoRaSat project three scenarios have been investigated 
that reflect the three spectrum components detailed in the 
previous section. In Figure 2 we illustrate the interference 
paths in these scenarios. Two of the scenarios are downlink 
for the FSS; scenario A, 17.3-17.7 GHz where the potential 
interference is from BSS uplinks and scenario B, 17.7-19.7 
GHz where the potential interference is from incumbent FS 
transmitters. In both of these cases the FSS is permitted to 
operate but is not protected by the regulatory regime and 
thus it is important to ascertain the level of the interference 
and its effect on the FSS received signal. The third scenario 
C, is in the transmit band of the FSS from 27.5-29.5 GHz 
and the interference is from the FSS transmitting earth 
station into the FS receivers, which are protected. The latter 
is more critical in that we need to demonstrate that the FSS 
does not contravene interference limits imposed by the 
regulatory regime. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. 
CEPT 27.5-29.5 GHz Segmentation 
 
 
 
Figure 2. 
Scenarios in CoRaSat 
 

123
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
The forward link, e.g., the downlink can be considered 
more important in that the ratio of downlink broadband to 
uplink broadband as operated via satellite is currently at 
around 6:1 and thus the acquisition of more spectrum here is 
key. In addition to this, operation in the downlink bands does 
not require regulatory changes but merely reassurance to the 
FSS users that the services need not be impaired. 
The calculation of interference can be performed if one 
has obtained the corresponding accurate FS database, which 
includes the characteristics and locations of the potential 
interferers, then using this with equipment models, 
propagation models and the path details.  
Similar ideas have been employed in Television White 
Space (TVWS) systems [13] to allow UHF frequencies to be 
used in the gaps between TV transmission regions. For 
scenario A the number of BSS uplinks in Europe is small and 
thus a database system is similar in magnitude to that of 
TVWS. However, for scenarios B and C the number of FS 
links runs into the tens of thousands and the database is 
much more complex. The data on the positions and the 
characteristics of the BSS and FS are generally held by 
national regulators and these need to be available for a 
database system to work.  
The information from a real interferer database is 
interfaced to an interference modelling engine, which uses 
ITU-R Recommendation P.452-15 [14] procedures plus 
terrain and other databases. This is the latest version of this 
ITU Recommendation that contains a prediction method for 
the evaluation of path loss between stations. ITU-R P.452-
15 includes all the propagation effects on the surface of the 
Earth at frequencies from 0.1 GHz to 50 GHz. In addition, 
other factors, which affect interference calculation, such as 
terrain height and bandwidth overlapping are also 
considered in the proposed database approach, which is 
illustrated in Figure 3. The typical interference threshold 
we determine is based on the long term interference, which 
can be expected to be present for at least 20% of the 
average year and it is set at 10 dB below the noise floor. 
The interference thresholds for FSS reception and for 
FS 
reception 
are 
therefore 
-154 
dBW/MHz 
and 
 - 146 dBW/MHz, respectively as given in [15] and [16]. 
Having determined the interference level at the FSS 
(in scenarios A or B) it can be compared with the 
regulatory threshold. The action is then taken in the 
resource allocation at the gateway where a new carrier 
can be assigned either in another part of the ’shared 
band’ where interference is acceptable or in the exclusive 
band. For scenario C the situation is different as the 
interference is caused by the FSS into the FS. Here the 
database is used to calculate the maximum permissible 
power that can be transmitted from the FSS in the vicinity 
in order to retain the threshold condition at the FS 
receivers. More details of the database approach are given 
in the following sections. 
 
 
 
TABLE I. EXTRACT OF ITU TABLE OF FREQUENCY ALLOCATIONS 
 
Frequency bands 
ITU Region 1 
ITU Region 2 
ITU Region 3 
17.3-17.7 GHz 
(Scenario A) 
FSS (space-Earth) 
BSS (feeder links) 
Radiolocation 
FSS (space-Earth) 
BSS (feeder links) 
Radiolocation 
FSS (space-Earth) 
BSS (feeder links) 
Radiolocation 
17.7-19.7 GHz 
(Scenario B) 
FSS (space-Earth) 
BSS 
(feeder links 18.1 GHz)  
FS 
FSS (space-Earth) 
FS 
FSS (space-Earth) 
BSS 
(feeder links 18.1 GHz) 
FS 
27.5-29.5 GHz 
(Scenario C) 
FSS (Earth-space) 
FS 
MS (Mobile Services) 
FSS (Earth-space) 
FS 
MS 
FSS (Earth-space) 
FS 
MS 
 

124
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 3. 
Interference modelling by ITU-R P.452-15 
 
 
 
 
        (a) Registered BSS feeder link stations in the UK.                        (b) Registered FS links of the whole band in the UK 
 
Figure 4. 
Registered BSS and FS links in the UK. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. 
Pie chart of (a) UK FS carrier number of each link and (b) carrier bandwidths (MHz) 
 

125
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
III. DATABASE ANALYSIS 
The information in a database is normally listed on a 
carrier by carrier basis for a frequency band of interest. All 
carriers are usually detailed with their frequencies and 
channel bandwidths. When the database relates to satellite 
terminals the database should also contain details on the 
associated satellite in terms of satellite longitude and the 
earth stations azimuth and elevation angles. Polarization and 
antenna gain are also required along with the antenna 
radiation patterns as defined in ITU Recommendations for 
use in regulatory work or ETSI standards. In addition, 
transmission power and equivalent isotropic radiated power 
(EIRP) may also be included. 
A UK BSS database made available for this study is used 
for scenario A and contains 442 carriers from a total of 31 
BSS uplink earth stations at 8 physical sites, to 12 different 
satellites, which is shown as Figure 4(a). The locations of all 
these 31 BSS earth stations are marked with an indication of 
the direction of the beam to the satellite. The number of 
carriers of each BSS earth station ranges from 1 to 42. The 
carriers span the range 17.3 GHz to 18.35 GHz. The 
bandwidths of the carriers that belong to the same BSS earth 
station are the same while those that belong to different earth 
stations might be different and are typically 26 MHz, 33 
MHz, 36 MHz or 66 MHz. The EIRP of these earth station 
antennas ranges from 69 dBW-84 dBW and all antenna 
radiation patterns are as defined in ITU-Recommendation 
S.465 [17] or S.580 [18]. 
FS databases at 18 GHz are required to evaluate scenario 
B. Again, an FS database was made available to this project 
(under the UK Freedom of Information Act). The database 
for the UK FS in the band 17.7 to 19.7 GHz is much larger 
than that for the UK BSS one and contains 12,712 links with 
15,970 carriers recorded in the UK. A French database has 
also been examined at 18 GHz and is based on the latest ITU-
R terrestrial services BR IFIC database [19], which 
contains 11,548 links with 17,384 carriers recorded. Figure 
4(b) illustrates the FS links in the band 17.7 to 19.7 GHz 
in the UK and it can be seen that the FS links are much 
denser than for the BSS. 
Figure 5 provides pie charts of numbers of carriers 
per link and carrier bandwidths based on the UK FS 
database in (a) and (b), respectively. It is indicated that 
more than 80% of links have only one carrier and more 
than 96% of links have up to 2 carriers. The majority of 
carriers have a bandwidth from 3.5 to 55 MHz. As a 
consequence, it can be deduced that at a particular 
location in the UK, little spectrum resource from the 
available 2 GHz band is used by the FS at a specific 
location. Thus, we are optimistic that spectrum available 
for FSS on a micro scale geographical basis is 
significant and can be exploited if the information of 
spectrum occupancy is known from the analysis of the 
database or is detectable by other mechanisms. A similar 
situation also exists for France. 
We have implemented the ITU-R.P452-15 propagation 
and interference modelling to provide cognitive zones 
around incumbent terminals based on the available 
database. A cognitive zone here is defined as the 
geographical area around an incumbent user station where 
cognitive radio techniques such as spectrum sensing and 
beamforming should be employed to mitigate the 
interference to an acceptable level. In other words, the 
interference outside of this area is below the acceptable 
interference threshold thus, cognitive radio techniques are 
not necessary. 
Figure 6 (a) and Figure 6 (b) show plots of cognitive 
zones around a BSS Station under scenario A case based on 
a free space loss model and the full ITU-R P.452-15 model, 
respectively. Similarly, Figure 6(c) and Figure 6(d) show 
plots of cognitive zones around a FS Station under scenario 
B case based on these two models. For the BSS cognitive 
zone the FSS terminal evaluated points to a satellite at 53 
degrees E longitude and the BSS transmitting terminal 
points to a satellite at 28.2 degree while for the FS 
cognitive zone the FSS terminal is pointing to a satellite at 
20 degrees E longitude and the FS transmitting terminal is 
pointing at a receive terminal on a bearing of 110 degrees 
East of True North (ETN). Clearly, for both cases the 
cognitive zones from the full model are much smaller and 
differently shaped than the ones under the free space 
model. On the average the areas are 9 times smaller at the -
155 dBW/MHz and 3.5 times smaller at the -145 
dBW/MHz thresholds. This is mainly because the 
diffraction effect based on the terrain data is considered in 
the full model while the free space loss model only includes 
line of sight propagation loss, which reflects the fact that 
the terrain databased diffraction effect is extremely 
significant in cognitive zone determination. 
IV. DATABASE APPLICATIONS FOR THE SCENARIOS 
In this section we analyze for scenario A the areas that 
are affected by interference from BSS uplinks and for 
scenario B the availability of spectrum at FSS locations as a 
result of FS interference. Typical examples are provided to 
demonstrate the additional spectrum that could be available. 
A. Scenario A: Area Analysis 
Using the BSS database, area analysis for scenario A in 
the UK is provided to investigate how much area would be 
affected by interference from the BSS feeder links. The band 
of interest is split into 10 x 40 MHz sub-bands (SB1−SB10) 
and the analysis is then conducted in each sub-band to 
determine the area of the contours at different cognitive zone 
thresholds. These mirror the usual 40 MHz channel spacing 
adopted for BSS satellites. Area analysis is based on BSS 
database with the full ITU-R P.452-15 model employing the 
terrain and climatic zones and the FSS terminal evaluated 
points to a satellite at 53 degrees E longitude. The results are 
for long term interference (normally 20%), it being assumed 
that Adaptive Coding and Modulation (ACM) will mitigate 
short duration interference events including rain fades. 
 

126
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
( a )                                                                                                ( b ) 
 
                                           (a)                                                                                                           (b) 
 
                                          ( c )                                                                                                    ( d ) 
 
                                        (c)                                                                                                            (d) 
Figure 6. 
Example of cognitive zone for (a) BSS with free space loss model (b) BSS with full ITU model  
(c) FS with free space loss model (d) FS with full ITU model. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. 
Example of cognitive zones for the sub-band 1 (17.3-17.34 GHz) based on full ITU model 
 

127
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
One example of an affected area at different cognitive 
zone thresholds is shown in Figure 7, which represents SB1. 
Full data on the areas are given in the Table II. It can be seen 
that in general across the sub-bands at a -155 dBW/MHz 
threshold less than for 2% of the area of the UK is affected 
by BSS feeder links and thus more than 98% of the area of 
the UK can be used by an FSS terminal without the need for 
any further action. Some mitigation of excess interference 
may be required in these affected areas. Such mitigation 
could be achieved by suitable site shielding, beam-forming 
or reallocation to another frequency that is clear at the 
specific location.  If such mitigation measures result in 10 dB 
suppression (a very conservative figure) then the remaining 
affected area would be of the order of 0.4% of the area of the 
UK. Re-farming the spectrum of such a small amount of 
traffic should not represent much of a challenge. This is very 
promising for future FSS deployment as the additional 400 
MHz identified in scenario A (17.3-17.7 GHz) represents an 
80% increase over the current exclusive band allocation 
(19.7-20.2 GHz). 
Although we have presented results herein for an FSS 
terminal pointed at a specific orbit location we have 
examined a range of orbit locations from the UK and the 
results are very similar. 
 
B. Scenario B: Spectrum Analysis 
 
Unlike the situation in scenario A, the UK 18 GHz FS 
database comprises many more carrier records (15,036 
records) over the 2 GHz band from 17.7 to 19.7 GHz. For 
scenario B we perform spectrum analysis for a particular 
location in the UK instead of geographical area analysis 
across the whole of the UK to determine what carrier(s) can 
be used by an FSS at a specific location. This information 
could then be integrated with a resource allocation algorithm 
in the satellite network to assign the carriers. 
Spectrum analysis results for the UK FS links at 18GHz 
at a specified location (with latitude of 52.5 degrees and 
longitude of -0.1 degree) is shown here as an example. The 
analysis results of the location with both Line of Sight (LOS) 
and full model (ITU-R P.452-15) are shown as Figure 8 and 
Figure 9, respectively. The FSS terminal evaluated, points to 
the same satellite as the previous examples, which is located 
at 53 degrees E longitude. In each figure, a map of the links 
that exceed an interference level of -160 dBW/MHz is 
presented along with spectrum analysis as a plot of the 
interference power spectral density (PSD). Interference PSD 
is shown per MHz from 17.7 to 19.7 GHz. At this location, it 
can be seen that with the LOS model the interference from 
FS links can be much farther from the location of interest 
and these links are ones pointing directly at the location. 
There are only a few points with some angular offset and 
these are located very close so that interference is from their 
side lobes. From the interference PSD in Figure 8, it can be 
seen that there are significant white spaces in the plot and 
thus more than half of spectrum resource from 17.7 GHz to 
19.7 GHz is available (with interference below the threshold) 
at this location for the LOS model. However, if the full 
terrain model is considered as in Figure 9, the number of 
interfering FS links dramatically decreases to less than ten, 
which means less than 0.1% of total FS links would cause 
problems at the location. Therefore, the majority of the 2 
GHz band can be used by an uncoordinated FSS VSAT 
terminal site.  
Complete maps of interference for locations in various 
European countries have been produced and these can be 
used as input to a resource allocation scheme that would then 
optimize the carrier allocation on the basis of the extra 
spectrum available. Examples for the UK and France are 
shown in Figure 10 and Figure 11 in terms of interfering 
spectrum occupied by the FS. It was noted that although the 
number of FS links in the database was large those that 
actually caused interference at a specific location and in a 
particular frequency band were quite small. It should also be 
noted that the available spectrum is not the same at each 
location and thus the database analysis can be used to 
optimize the carrier allocation as a function of FSS location. 
Calculations were also performed in order to assess the 
impact on a wider scale. In this case a range of FSS terminal 
locations from 8 degrees West to 2 degrees East at a 
longitude of 51.5 degrees North were used to assess the 
impact. In this case we present the number of FS links that 
would interfere (at -154 dBW/MHz interference threshold) 
for each location. The results are presented in Figure 12. It 
can be seen that the influence of the diffraction model is 
significant and for the more serious levels of interference the 
ratio of interfering links is of the order of 4.5:1. 
 
 
 
TABLE II. AREA ANALYSIS (SQ. KM.) OF THE BAND 17.3-17.7 GHZ (BSS) 
 
17.3 − 17.7GHz 
SB1 
SB2 
SB3 
SB4 
SB5 
−155 dBW/MHz 2, 420.9 (1.06%) 
1, 692.4 (0.74%) 
1, 692.4 (0.74%) 
1, 683.3 (0.73%) 
3, 570.9 (1.56%) 
−145 dBW/MHz 
683.0 (0.30%) 
544.8 (0.24%) 
544.8 (0.24%) 
541.8 (0.24%) 
926.0 (0.40%) 
17.3 − 17.7GHz 
SB6 
SB7 
SB8 
SB9 
SB10 
−155 dBW/MHz 1, 683.3 (0.73%) 
2, 411.0 (1.05%) 
2, 535.6 (1.11%) 
2, 367.6 (1.03%) 
2, 936.4 (1.28%) 
−145 dBW/MHz 
541.8 (0.24%) 
741.3 (0.32%) 
774.2 (0.34%) 
697.5 (0.30%) 
928.6 (0.40%) 
 
 

128
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                        ( a ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          ( b ) 
 
Figure 8. 
LOS result of all UK FS links, interfering to FSS terminal at latitude of 52.5 degs  
and longitude of -0.1 degs. ( a) contributing links, ( b ) interference spectrum 
 
 
 
 

129
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                       ( a ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                          ( b ) 
 
 
Figure 9. 
Full ITU-R P452-15 result of all UK FS links, interfering to FSS terminal at latitude of 52.5 degs  
and longitude of -0.1 degs. ( a) contributing links, ( b ) interference spectrum 
 
 
 

130
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 10. 
Interfering spectrum at -154 dBW/MHz for the UK 
 
 
 
Figure 11. 
Interfering spectrum at -154 dBW/MHz for France 
 
 

131
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 12. 
Number of links interfering (with and without terrain effects) 
 
 
Figure 13. 
Number of FS interferers for different satellite locations (longitude) 
 
 
Figure 14. 
Total Bandwidth occupied by FS interferers for different satellite locations (longitude) 

132
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Impact of FSS Satellite Longitude 
Calculations have been performed to assess the impact of 
the FSS antenna pointing to the satellite when the latter 
varies from 53E, 13E, 0E and 34W degrees longitude. Again, 
a range of FSS terminal locations from 8 degrees West to 2 
degrees East at a longitude of 51.5 degrees North were used 
to assess the impact. Figure 13 shows the number of FS 
interferers for four different satellite locations (longitude). 
Figure 14 depicts the total bandwidth occupied by FS 
interferers for the same cases. 
From these figures it can be seen that the assumption that 
the 53E longitude satellite represents the worst case scenario 
is validated. 
Area Analysis of the FS interference 
The ITU terrestrial services Radiocommunications 
Bureau (BR) International Frequency Information Circular 
(BRIFIC) provides us with databases to analyse the potential 
interference in the band of interest and from the results it is 
possible to get an increased insight into the situation. The 
analysis was conducted in UK, France, Poland, Hungary and 
Slovenia with the full diffraction model and statistics were 
derived from the results. To permit a fair comparison 
between the countries only the results for test point over land 
were included. The first set of statistics presented is the 
cummulative distribution function (CDF) of the number of 
interefering signals that exceed the -154 dBW/MHz 
threshold at each point.  The resulting CDFs are presented in 
Figure 15. 
A CDF was also produced for the total occupied 
bandwidth of the FS interferers at a point over the regions of 
interest. The resulting CDF is given in Figure 16. 
 
NOTE: Also, in Figure 16, a second horizontal axis at the 
top indicates percentage of the total spectrum occupied by 
the FS. 
The graphical results are also presented herein as tables.  
 Table III presents the CDF of number of FS links that 
interfer with a site in terms of the percentage of sites 
affected. Table IV presents the CDF of the total bandwidth 
of the interfering FS links that interfer with a site in MHz. 
Table V presents the same CDF but in terms of the 
percentage of the total bandwidth (17.7 – 19.7 GHz). 
Maps of the total occupied bandwidth at locations within 
The UK and France were shown earlier in Figure 10 and 
Figure 11. These have also been produced at higher 
resolution for use as inputs to resource allocation software at 
the network gateway.  
 
The results of the analysis for scenario B  across various 
European countries is that there is over 90% of the 2GHz 
band between 17.7 and 19.7GHz available for most positions 
in the countries examined. The latter are considered to be 
typical and indeed represent the most dense distribution of 
FS in Europe. Thus, using a database or an interference map 
produced from the database to control the carrier allocations 
at the network gateway it should be possible to use this 
shared band spectrum for FSS down links.  
 
Within the CoRaSat project there have been capacity 
gain calculations using a model multi beam satellite over 
Europe. These calculations are very dependent on the 
satellite characteristics and in particular on the satellite 
antenna C/I distribution across the beams. However, it was 
shown that in such a system using both the shared and 
exclusive bands a 400% increase in the forward capacity 
could be achieved [20]. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 15. 
CDF of number of interferers at a test point (for -154 dBW/MHz threshold) 

133
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
Figure 16. 
CDF of FS bandwidth occupied by interferers over the five regions (for -154 dBW/MHz threshold) 
 
 
TABLE III. CDF OF NUMBER OF INTERFERES PER FSS SITE 
 
% of 
sites 
UK 
FRANCE 
POLAND 
HUNGARY 
SLOVENIA 
>0 
54% 
31% 
47% 
26% 
29% 
10% 
>9 
>4 
>5 
>2 
>2 
1% 
>25 
>13 
>13 
>8 
>8 
0.1% 
>50 
>31 
>25 
>26 
>13 
 
TABLE IV. CDF OF TOTAL BANDWIDTH OF FS LINK INTERFERENCE PER FSS 
 
% of 
UK 
FRANCE 
POLAND 
HUNGARY 
SLOVENIA 
sites 
MHz 
MHz 
MHz 
MHz 
MHz 
10% 
139 
58 
80 
45 
50 
1% 
450 
258 
190 
270 
160 
0.1% 
700 
550 
400 
820 
405 
 
TABLE V. CDF OF TOTAL BANDWIDTH OF FS LINK INTERFERENCE PER FSS SITE (% OF 17.7 – 19.7 GHZ) 
 
% of 
sites 
UK 
FRANCE 
POLAND 
HUNGARY 
SLOVENIA 
10% 
7% 
3% 
4% 
2% 
3% 
1% 
23% 
13% 
10% 
14% 
8% 
0.1% 
35% 
28% 
20% 
41% 
20% 
 

134
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
C. Scenario C 
Scenario C addresses the uplink from 27.5 to 29.5 GHz 
as shown in Figure 1. The ITU allows sharing across this 
band between FS and FSS but in Europe the CEPT have 
segmented the band between FS and HDFSS. For 
applications of HTS satellite systems designed for broadband 
internet access the uplink requirements are less than the 
down link. Current Ka-band systems in Europe are indicating 
an asymmetry of around 6:1. Thus, in Europe the availability 
of the two HDFSS bands may be adequate for early systems. 
However, in other regions of the world there could be a need 
to coexist in the uplink as well as the downlink. 
In this case cognitive zones for scenario C are around FS 
stations and interference is from FSS terminals to FS links. 
This is a much more difficult case to address if we plan to 
use the whole of the shared band because we do not have 
access to adequate 28 GHz databases on which to operate. 
The techniques and software developed for scenario A and B 
can be used in a similar manner for scenario C if we have 
access to such a database. The results would be presented in 
a slightly different format as they would give the maximum 
allowable EIRP for the FSS at a given point. However, the 
HDFSS uplink band has been agreed for uncoordinated earth 
stations in all except 5 of the EU countries, therefore, 
perhaps the uplink increase in spectrum is not so urgent at 
this time. Some preliminary evaluation of scenario C was 
performed in [21] and the results of this indicated that only 
very close FS links (around 10km) would be affected and the 
density of FSS terminals would not cause a problem in the 
multi interference case. Some preliminary evaluations have 
also been done in the CoRaSat project using databases in 
Slovenia and Finland. These demonstrate that the reductions 
in FSS EIRP’s are small and interference is not that much of 
a problem for the long term availability criteria. Thus, 
sharing of the uplink looks feasible but more evaluations are 
needed to be done for a wider selection of databases to 
confirm these results. 
 
D. Earth Stations on Moving Platforms (ESOMPs) 
 
More recently work has been focused upon Ka-band 
operation of ESOMPs in the shared bands. 
 
The ESOMPs cases considered are as follows: 
 
• 
Case 1: Aircraft- mounted ESOMP with downlink in 
the band 17.7-19.7 GHz and uplink in the band 
27.5 to 30 GHz. 
• 
Case 2: Ship-mounted ESOMP with downlink in the 
band 17.7-19.7 GHz and uplink in the band 27.5 to 
30 GHz. 
 
For Case 1 the situation is quite complex. The very 
directive nature of the FS antennas and the airborne antenna 
contribute very significantly to the level of interference and 
the number of significant interfering links, which vary quite 
rapidly as the aircraft travels along its flight path. Scenarios 
A, B and C can be considered for such cases where the FSS 
terminal is the ESOMPs terminal. 
Analysis of Scenarios A and B for this case indicates that 
the above mentioned antenna effects will help reduce the 
cumulative interference levels to values that can be managed 
by appropriate mitigation techniques.  An example of such 
analysis is given below. 
For both cases, 1 and 2, for Scenario C we have limited 
our considerations to the case where in Europe the 
availability of the two HDFSS bands may be adequate for 
such systems and interference mitigation is not required. 
However, in other regions of the world this may not 
necessarily be the case. Work elsewhere has been addressing 
this matter in considerable detail [22], [23]. 
 
Case 1 Aeronautical ESOMP  
The methodology adopted earlier using ITU-R P.452-15 
can be extended to an aeronautical case by applying a 
number of critical modifications. These are: 
 
1. Increase the height above mean sea level of the victim 
receiver so that it corresponds to the altitude of the 
aircraft; 
2. Find the range from the FS transmitter to the aircraft for 
use in the calculations; 
3. Find the azimuth and elevation angles of the aircraft as 
viewed from the FS transmitter; 
4. Find the azimuth and elevation angles of the FS 
transmitter as viewed from the aircraft; 
5. Using the above, determine the off-axis angle and thus 
gain of the FS transmitter antenna; 
6. Using the above, determine the off-axis angle and thus 
gain of the aircraft receiving antenna; 
7. Adopt the more complex ITU-R P.676-10 annex 1 model 
which is applicable to low elevation angles for 
calculating the gaseous losses; 
8. Include the effect of aircraft fuselage attenuation; 
9. Adjust the parameters to take account of the fact that the 
aircraft receive antenna diameter is 0.6 metres. 
 
These modifications have been undertaken and wherever 
possible validated to be correct. 
By way of an example we have performed calculations 
for an airborne ESOMP flying along the example path 
indicated in Figure 17 (a) and Figure 17 (b) at two different 
altitudes. The first altitude is 3.81 km (12,500 ft) and the 
second is for 11.88 km (39,000 ft), which is the average of 
the maximum altitude capability of known commercial 
airliners. 
Figure 17 (b)  has a background that is indicative of the 
general interference level in terms of bandwidth used by the 
FS but is indicative rather than being specific to ESOMPs. 
The flight path is therefore over the more dense 
interference regions of the UK and typical of paths near 
Heathrow Airport. Detailed airborne ESOMP results are 
presented in Figure 17 (c), Figure 17 (d) and Figure 17 (e).  
 

135
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17. 
(a)  ESOMP Flight Path 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17. (b)  Indicative Interference (FS BW used) around the flight path 
 
 
 

136
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Figure 17. (c)   ESOMP altitude 3.81 km (12,500 ft), threshold = -154.5 dBW/MHz 
 
 
 
Figure 17. (d)   ESOMP altitude 3.81 km (12,500 ft), threshold = -144.5 dBW/MHz 
 

137
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 17.  (e) ESOMP altitude 11.88 km (39,000 ft), threshold = -154.5 dBW/MHz 
 
 
 
Figure 17 (c), Figure 17 (d) and Figure 17 (e) have 
several special features to note. Each interferer that exceeds 
the chosen threshold is shown as a blue band at the carrier 
frequency with its vertical extent indicating the carrier 
bandwidth. The length of the blue band indicates the 
longitude range (related to time) that the carrier remains an 
interferer. The narrow box on the right hand side of the 
figure indicates the composite amalgamation of all the 
interference entries.  The red curve is associated with the 
scale on the right hand side of the figure and represents the 
percentage of the 2 GHz of available bandwidth that 
interference from the FS exceeds the given interference 
threshold. 
Figure 17 (c) presents results for a low flying ESOMP at 
an altitude of 3.81 km (12,500 ft) with a threshold of -144.5 
dBW/MHz. Figure 17 (d) is for the same case with a 
threshold of -144.5 dBW/MHz. Figure 17 (e) presents the 
results for an ESOMP flying at an altitude of altitude 11.88 
km (39,000 ft) with a threshold of -154.5 dBW/MHz. It can 
be seen that the ESOMP experiences less FS interference at 
the higher altitudes and that some mitigation of the 
remaining interference should be possible with appropriate 
use of cognitive counter measures (especially interference 
aware radio resource management). There appears to be 
adequate bandwidth available for mitigating the FS 
interference, which in very encouraging.  
Due to the movement of the terminal of interest causing a 
time variant element to the interference conditions the 
interference driven resource management mechanisms need 
to be much more dynamic than that required for the 
previously reported fixed location FSS cases. 
 
Case 2 Maritime ESOMP  
 
For case 2 when the ESOMP is maritime in nature then 
Scenarios A and B are simply extended in areas in the sea. In 
the case of Scenario B, with the ESOMPS ship operating in 
the 17.7 to 19.7 GHz band, example results are given for a 
ship sailing along the English Channel as depicted in Figure 
18. Figure 19 presents the indicative interference field for 
total FS interfering bandwidth for a threshold of -154.5 
dBW/MHz at any given point. The path of interest is shown 
in red and represents a journey of length 284 km. 
 
In this example, it assumes that the ship is sailing in the 
interested path on the sea along the English Channel and that 
there are many UK based FS microwave stations on the land 
that may cause interference to the ship-borne ESOMP. Each 
FS link has its own frequency, bandwidth and the value of 
interference levels at each particular test point. The 
shipborne terminal is assumed to be pointing to a satellite 
located at 13 degrees East longitude with the ship receiving 
signals from the satellite. Antenna patterns, full terrain based 
propagation models and path losses were all taken into 
account for this calculation. 
 
 

138
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 18. 
Example ESOMP vessel movement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 19. 
Indicative interference field for the maritime example 
 
 
 
 
 

139
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
Figure 20. 
FS interference spectral plot along maritime path of interest (-155 dBW/MHz threshold) 
 
 
The red line, associated with the right hand scale, in 
Figure 20 represents the percentage of the 2 GHz of available 
bandwidth that interference from the FS exceeds the given 
interference threshold along the example maritime path. It 
should be noted that such total bandwidth may be similar at 
different locations but be comprised of several carriers at 
quite different frequencies. Figure 20 indicates the spectral 
nature of the interfering carriers along the ships path. The 
presentation format is the same as that outlined for the 
Aeronautical ESOMP in Figure 17 (c), Figure 17 (d) and 
Figure 17 (e). 
It can be seen that significant parts of the 17.7 to 19.7 
GHz band are available for use with ESOMPs when the only 
mitigation approach required is spectrum management 
within the satellite resource allocation algorithms.  The 
dynamic nature of the required interference driven resource 
management mechanism is not as fast or critical in the 
maritime case compared to the aeronautical one due to the 
lower speed of movement of the ESOMP. 
 
ESOMP Summary 
 
Example results for both shipborne and airborne 
operations have been presented indicating that with 
appropriate use of cognitive counter measures (especially 
interference aware radio resource management) there is 
adequate bandwidth available for mitigating the FS 
interference, which in very encouraging.  
Due to the movement of the terminal of interest causing a 
time variant element to the interference conditions the 
interference driven resource management mechanisms need 
to be much more dynamic than that required for the 
previously reported FSS cases. 
V. REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS 
As has already been discussed in the paper, acceptance 
by the Regulatory regime is crucial in order to access the 
additional spectrum in the shared band. In parallel to the 

140
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
work being conducted in the CoRaSat project, work has been 
on going in the CEPT groups SE-40 and FM 44 on sharing in 
the band 17.7 to 19.7 GHz. Consultation documents have 
been issued in midyear 2015 by these committees. Some 
regulators have started to put their FS databases on the 
World Wide Web and it is hoped that more may follow. 
Others have been more reluctant to release information. SE-
40 has been investigating software that could be made 
available to the national regulators so that they can interface 
with their databases and produce interference maps. The 
latter could then be made available to satellite operators and 
ground segment equipment providers to interface with 
resource allocation software at the gateways. Mechanisms 
are being sorted out amongst the regulators to allow the 
database systems with resource allocation to go ahead. 
Within the standards arena a technical report based on the 
work of CoRaSat “ETSI .TR.103.263.v1.2- Electromagnetic 
compatibility and Radio spectrum Matters (ERM); System 
Reference document (SRdoc);Cognitive radio techniques for 
Satellite Communications operating in Ka-band” has already 
been published and is going through the updating process in 
2015. Thus, manufacturers are engaged and buying into the 
use of systems as described in this paper. 
With regard to ESOMPs, European Regulations are being 
put in place to permit the harmonized use, free circulation 
and exemption from individual licensing of ESOMPs within 
the frequency bands of interest [23]. 
 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
To meet future broadband access targets, in this paper we 
have described how the increased spectrum opportunities can 
be exploited by the proposed database approach together 
with 
interference 
mitigation 
techniques. 
We 
have 
demonstrated that in 17.3-17.7 GHz spectrum band 400 MHz 
of additional bandwidth is available across 98% of the UK, 
which houses the most dense BSS network in Europe, and 
similar results were obtained for Luxembourg. The 
evaluation needs to be repeated in other EU countries, but a 
similar if not better performance would be expected due to 
the lower density of BSS. If the FSS is required to be closer 
to a BSS, then cognitive means can be used to mitigate the 
interference.  
We have also explored the availability of the 2 GHz of 
spectrum between 17.7 and 19.7 GHz (downlink) and the 
results have shown that the number of actual interfering FS 
links are limited due to terrain diffraction effects so that at 
a particular location substantial parts of the 17.7 to 19.7 
GHz are available, but not the same frequencies at all 
locations. This indicates that a database interfaced with a 
resource allocation scheme could give access to the increased 
spectrum. This was demonstrated for the UK but needs to be 
validated in other European countries. In the case of the 
uplink 27.5-29.5 GHz The situation also looks very 
promising. Regulators and standards bodies are engaged with 
the sharing techniques and are now taking them forward to 
realization. 
Our studies also indicate that the interference is also not 
too limiting for airborne and maritime ESOMPs operations 
in terms of interference from FS links into ESOMPs but a 
more dynamic interference aware resource management 
system will be required. 
 
We would like to note that the work presented in this 
paper represents just part of the work conducted in the EU 
Project CoRaSat. In particular we note that other colleagues 
in the project have evaluated spectrum sensing using a novel 
SINR scheme, which can be used instead of a database or to 
augment its performance. In addition other colleagues have 
evaluated carrier resource allocation schemes to be used with 
databases. Finally, there has been a laboratory demonstration 
of all of these techniques, database, spectrum sensing and 
resource allocation with real satellite terminal equipment. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to acknowledge the EU FP7 
project CoRaSat, which has supported the work herein. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] W.Tang, P.Thompson and B.Evans, “A database approach to 
extending the usable Ka band spectrum for FSS satellite 
systems”: SPACOMM -2015 
[2] European Commission, “A Digital Agenda for Europe, FCC 
02-155,” European Commission COM 245, Brussels, Tech. 
Rep., 2010. 
[3]  “EU FP7 Project BATS,” Available: 
http://www.batsproject.eu/ as at 1/11/2015. 
[4]  H. Fenech, E. Lance, and M. Kalama, “KA-SAT and the way 
forward,” Ka-band Conference, Palermo, Italy, 2011. 
[5]  “Highest-capacity communications satellite,” 
http://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/records-1/highest-
capacity- communications-satellite/  as at 1/11/2015. 
[6]  P. Thompson, B. Evans, L. Castenet, M. Bousquet, and T. 
Mathiopoulos, “Concepts and technologies for a terabit/s 
satellite,” in Proceedings of SPACOMM-2011, April 2011, 
Budapest, Hungary. 
[7]  A. Kyrgiazos, B. Evans, P. Thompson, P. T. Mathiopoulos, 
and S. Papaharalabos, “A terabit/second satellite system for 
european broadband access: a feasibility study,” International 
Journal of Satellite Communications and Networking, vol. 32, 
no. 2, 2014, pp. 63–92. 
[8]  “The European conference of postal and telecommunications 
adminis trations,” avaliable: http://www.cept.org/cept. As at 
1/11/2015. 
[9]  “EU FP7 Project CoRaSat,” available: http://www.ict-
corasat.eu. As at 1/11/2015. 
[10]  K. Liolis, G. Schlueter, J. Krause, F. Zimmer, L. Combelles, 
J. Grotz, S. Chatzinotas, B. Evans, A. Guidotti, D. Tarchi, and 
A. Vanelli-Coralli, “Cognitive radio scenarios for satellite 
communications: The CoRaSat approach,” in Future Network 
and Mobile Summit (FutureNetworkSummit), 2013, July 
2013, pp. 1–10. 
[11]  S. Maleki, S. Chatzinotas, B. Evans, K. Liolis, J. Grotz, A. 
Vanelli- Coralli, and N. Chuberre, “Cognitive spectrum 
utilization in ka band multi-beam satellite communications,” 
IEEE Communication Magazine, Vol 53, Issue 3, March 
2015, pp 24-29.. 
[12]  “Cognitive radio techniques for satellite communications 
operating in Ka band”, ETSI System Reference document, 
available: http://webapp.etsi.org. As at 1/11/2015. 

141
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[13]  “Standardization of TV white space systems,” available: 
http://www.ict- crsi.eu/index.php/standardization-streams/tv-
white-spaces. As at 1/11/2015. 
[14]  “Recommendation P.452-15: Prediction procedure for the 
evaluation of interference between stations on the surface of 
the earth at frequencies above about 0.1 GHz,” International 
Telecommunication Union,  2013. 
[15]  “Methods for the determination of the coordination area 
around an earth station in frequency bands between 100 MHz 
and 105 GHz,” ITU Radio Regulation Appendix 7, 
International Telecommunication Union, 2012. 
[16]  “Recommendation 
F.758-5: 
System 
parameters 
and 
considerations in the development of criteria for sharing or 
compatibility between digital fixed wireless systems in the 
fixed service and systems in other services and other sources 
of interference,” International Telecommunication Union, 
2012. 
[17]  “Recommendation ITU-R S.465: Reference radiation pattern 
for earth station antennas in the fixed- satellite service for use 
in coordination and interference assessment in the frequency 
range from 2 to 31 GHz,” International Telecommunication 
Union, 2010. 
[18]  “Recommendation ITU-R S.580: Radiation diagrams for use 
as design objectives for antennas of earth stations operating 
with geostationary satellites” International 
Telecommunication Union, 2004. 
[19] ITU-R Terrestrial BRIFIC, available: http://www.itu.int/ITU- 
R/index.asp?category=terrestrial&rlink=terrestrial-
%brific&lang=en. As at 1/11/2015. 
[20]  S. Sharma, E. Lagunas, S.Maleki, S. Chatzinotas, J. Goetz, J. 
Krause, and B. Ottersten “Resource allocation for cognitive 
satellite communications in Ka band (17.7-19.7GHz),” IEEE -
ICC 2015 Workshop CogRaN-Sat. 
[21]  A. Mohamed, M. Lopez-Benitez, and  B. Evans, “Ka band 
satellite terrestrial co-existence: A statistical modelling 
approach,” in Proceedings of 20th Ka and Broadband 
Communications, 
Navigation 
and 
Earth 
Observation 
Conference, October 2014. 
[22] ECC Report 184 “ The Use of Earth Stations on Mobile 
Platforms Operating with GSO Satellite Networks in the 
Frequency Range 17.3-20.2 GHz and 27.5-30.0GHz”, 
approved February 2013, 
http://www.erodocdb.dk/docs/doc98/official/pdf/ECCRep184.
pdf as at 1/11/2015. 
[23] ECC Decision(13)01 “The harmonised use, free circulation 
and exemption from individual licensing of Earth Station On 
Mobile Platforms (ESOMPs) within the frequency bands 
17.3-20.2 GHz and 27.5-30.0 GHz” Approved 8 March 2013, 
http://www.erodocdb.dk/does/doc98/official/pdf/ECCDec130
1.pdf  as at 1/11/2015. 
 
 

