Adaptive MCS Selection with Dynamic and Fixed
Sub-channelling for Frequency-Coherent OFDM
Channels
Muayad S. Al-Janabi, Charalampos C. Tsimenidis, Member, IEEE, Bayan S. Sharif, Senior Member, IEEE
and St´ephane Y. Le Goff School of Electrical, Electronics and Computer Engineering
Newcastle University, Merz Court, NE1 7RU, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
Abstract—This paper presents two strategies for joint adaptive
modulation and coding (AMC) techniques. The ﬁrst strategy
is based on the ﬁxed sub-channel (FS)-AMC allocation, which
exploits the coherence bandwidth of the wireless channel to
divide the transmitted frame into independent sub-channels
that correspond to the channel coherence bandwidth as well
as selecting the optimal modulation and coding scheme (MCS)
for each individually. The second strategy is based on dynamic
sub-channel (DS)-AMC allocation, reduces the size of pilot
sub-carriers for the stable sub-channel proﬁles; where the
redundant pilots are replaced with additional data sub-carriers,
which enhance the total system throughput. These strategies
are implemented for orthogonal frequency division multiplexing
(OFDM) systems with channel state information (CSI) feedback.
Low density parity check (LDPC) codes are utilized for encoding
by employing signal-to noise ratio (SNR) dependent coding rates,
as well as distinct modulation schemes to achieve adaptivity
to time-varying channel conditions. The performance of the
proposed system was tested on Rayleigh fading channels that
exhibit frequency coherent bands. Numerical results obtained
via simulation demonstrate that the throughput and bit error
rate (BER) performances of both proposed systems are better
than previously suggested approaches. Additionally, there is
a signiﬁcant improvement in the throughput performance of
the dynamic sub-channel allocation strategy over the ﬁxed
sub-channel allocation method.
Index Terms—Frequency channel coherent, sub-channelling,
OFDM, AMC, MCS.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recently, the requirements for achieving high performance
in wireless communications systems have increased dramati-
cally. These requirements have focused on the schemes that
increase the transmission of data as well as minimizing the
BER at the receiver. OFDM for single user and orthogonal
frequency division multiple access (OFDMA) for multiuser
are examples of such powerful systems. The above two sys-
tems have been adopted by many standards including Fixed
WiMAX IEEE 802.16 and Mobile WIMAX IEEE 802.16e.
They demonstrate high ability to tackle the degradations
introduced by multipath channels that cause inter symbol
interference (ISI) at low computational complexities. However,
the transmitted waveforms of these systems exhibit high peak-
to-average power ratio (PAPR) and are sensitive to Doppler
shifts, which produce inter carrier interference (ICI) [1]-[8].
OFDM and OFDMA systems are implemented in practice
using error correcting schemes, such as convolutional, turbo
and LDPC codes. In this paper, we adopt LDPC codes since
they exhibit lower computational complexity. LDPC codes
were invented by Gallager in 1963 as a class of linear
codes. Their main feature is a sparse generator matrix which
comprises a low density of ones. Nowadays, LDPC codes
are widely employed in AMC strategies to select suitable
modulation and coding rates for OFDM and OFDMA sub-
carriers based on returned CSI. The aim is to avoid the addi-
tional iterative processing, which is impractical with real-time
systems, since LPDC decoding already incorporates iterations
inside its decoder [9]-[11].
Most research studies so far have focused on AMC for
OFDM systems without any consideration of the frequency
coherence of the underlying wireless channel. In [12], AMC
for OFDM schemes was presented, which divided the OFDM
frame into ﬁxed clusters, with each cluster exhibiting inde-
pendent modulation and coding schemes according to CSI that
was returned from the receiver. In [13] and [14], the implemen-
tation of adaptive bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM)
with OFDM was introduced depending on the returned CSI
obtained from the estimated BER. However, they considered
the OFDM frame as a one part with same MCS for all symbols.
In [15], a novel two-step channel prediction technique has been
proposed that considered the time-varying nature of a channel
over the duration of interest that produced the required CSI to
the transmitter to achieve adaptivity.
Reliable transmission of the information stream was en-
sured by utilising the lowest and ﬁxed MCS levels in [16].
Moreover, this method was also very efﬁcient for a large
number of sharing users per transmitted frame. To increase the
system performance, two strategies were used; the ﬁrst strategy
enhanced the system throughput by employing the AMC
technique to exploit the capacity of the channel; the second
strategy adopted the link-layer auto repeat request (LARQ) and
hybrid auto repeat request (HARQ) to increase the transmitted
packet error rate and to reduce the convolutional code gain in
order to detect the error of the received data packet.
In [17], the AMC technique was used in a wideband code
division multiple access (WCDMA) downlink to enhance the
scheduling performance; at the same time, a fast cell selection
(FCS) strategy was adopted. In this work, the Round Robin
(RR), the simpliﬁed proportional fair (PF), the maximum car-
rier to interference ratio(C/I), and the conventional PF schemes
were investigated and compared as scheduling techniques.
131
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/

Moreover, the authors tried to maximise the user throughput
in a cellular network by proposing an optimal selection of
the MCS options. The system was based on the Chase Com-
bining and Incremental Redundancy schemes for the HARQ
mechanism. The optimal MCS selection was dependent on the
number of transmissions and successful decoding probability
in the HARQ operation.
The authors of [18] adopted the SNR-based and buffer-
assisted AMC technique strategies of selection to analyse the
channel packet transmission and re-transmission system. In
this work, the size and status of the transmit buffers have been
considered during the design and analysis of the performance,
efﬁciency, and complexity measurements.
The impact for the estimated channel errors in a CDMA
system, which used the AMC strategy with multi-codes, was
presented in [19]. Moreover, the communication channel was
modelled utilising Simple Moving Average (SMA) and Hidden
Markov Model (HMM) ﬁlters. In [20], a link adaptation algo-
rithm with Packet Error Rate (PER) was presented. The PER
performance was predicted for the coded multiple-antenna
OFDM system based on the detected error of the channel
estimation.
In [21], a comparison of the throughput performance be-
tween Single-Carrier transmission with Frequency-Domain
Equalisation (SCFDE) and OFDM over the non-linear fading
channels was presented. The transmitted power was used as
a metric with the AMC criteria to overcome the transmission
drawbacks. On the other hand, an efﬁcient Medium Access
Control (MAC) technique based on AMC strategy was pre-
sented in [22]. The packet format was varied based on the
channel state to achieve a high performance system and an
optimal analytical model was proposed for the non-stationary
transmission link. In addition, a comparison between the
analytical evaluations and simulation results was presented
to show the outperformance of the proposed system. Addi-
tionally, in [23], a cross-layer design over the data link and
physical layer was derived, the optimal system performance
was achieved by exploiting the truncated ARQ protocol ability
to correct the transmission errors as well as the using AMC
strategy features.
Issues concerning the distribution methods of the pilot
along the OFDM frame have been widely addressed in recent
research work. The two main prevailing approaches are the
block and comb pilot distribution methods [24]-[26].
The ﬁrst key contribution of our paper is to produce an FS-
AMC-OFDM scheme that exploits the frequency coherence of
the channel by dividing the OFDM frame into sub-channels
that correspond to the detected channel coherence bands at the
receiver. Subsequently, each individual sub-channel is assigned
its own independent MCS. The second contribution is to
present a DS-AMC-OFDM system, which reduces the number
of pilot sub-carriers within the individual stable proﬁle sub-
channels and replaces the unused sub-carriers by additional
information streams. This reduction is dependent on the SNR
ﬂuctuation values of the sub-channels, and the sub-channels’
minimum SNR values. Moreover, in order to achieve an
optimum channel estimate, pilots are inserted and interleaved
across the frame data using the comb method [24]-[25]. The
proposed AMC strategy is established on six adapting options
that support the ﬂexibility of switching between MCS schemes
in real time to reach the required performance.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
In Section II, the description of the proposed system is
presented. Section III outlines the LDPC decoding algorithm,
while the proposed transmission techniques is introduced in
Section IV. Section V demonstrates the performance of the
proposed systems via simulation results. Finally, conclusions
are drawn in Section VI.
II. SYSTEM MODEL DESCRIPTION
This section outlines the proposed FS-AMC-OFDM and
DS-AMC-OFDM systems. In these schemes, LDPC codes are
considered with three different coding rates in conjunction
with two modulation schemes, i.e. 16 quadrature amplitude
modulation (16-QAM) and quadrature phase shift keying
(QPSK) modulation. These two modulation types combined
with three coding rates produce six individual MCSs.
The transmitted OFDM frame of the proposed system
contains N sub-carriers, which are divided into Np pilots,
Nd data, and NG guard sub-carriers. The pilots are distributed
uniformly into groups corresponding to the number of detected
frequency coherence bands Ncoh of the channel.
For the FS-AMC-OFDM system, each sub-channel adopts
a distinct MCS and contains αd(i) = Nd/Ncoh data and
αp(i) = Np/Ncoh pilot sub-carriers, where i = {1, ..., Ncoh}
is the index of the sub-channels. The number of the selected
MCS for each group of symbols is sent to the transmitter via
the returned CSI, instead of estimating the channel and SNR
values in order to reduce the size of the feedback information
required. On the other hand, the size of data αd(i) and pilot
αp(i) sub-carriers, within sub-channels can be changed for
DS-AMC-OFDM system according to the returned channel
conditions. The CSI is assumed to be returned using time
division duplex (TDD) link without any feedback delay due
to the short transmission distance.
The proposed systems are applicable in many transmission
environments
and
they
require
identical
implementation
complexity
to
the
related
conventional
AMC
based
transmission schemes that utilize same MCSs. The proposed
systems are described in detail in the following sub-sections.
A. FS-AMC-OFDM system
The investigated FS-AMC-OFDM system can be divided
into the following three parts.
1. Transmitter: The transmitter comprises three main blocks
as shown in Fig. 1. The ﬁrst block generates, from the
binary data, different coded and modulated symbol groups
that are assigned to different sub-channels. The second block
assembles the OFDM signalling frame from the modulated
data and the pilots, which are inserted at uniform positions
using a comb approach. The ﬁnal part of the transmitter
implements the inverse fast Fourier transform (IFFT) and CP
132
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/

insertion operations. The transmitted OFDM frame can be
mathematically represented as:
x(k) =
1
√NFFT
NFFT
X
n=1
X(n)e
j2πkn
NFFT ,
(1)
where x(k) are the transmitted OFDM waveform samples
in
time-domain,
X(n)
denotes
the
OFDM
symbols
assigned to each data sub-carrier, NFFT is the FFT size
and k = {1, . . . , NFFT} and n = {1, . . . , NFFT} are the time
and frequency domain indices, respectively.
and
MUX
Pilot Insertion
Data
CSI
IFFT
and CP
insertion
Adaptive Mod.
LDPC Encod.
Fig. 1.
Transmitter block diagram of the proposed FS-AMC-OFDM system.
2. Channel Model: It is known that there are many types of
coherent channels, such as time variant and invariant channels
for both fast and slow fading. The frequency response of
these channels can be more or less selective in terms of
the selected sub-carriers. This selectivity may decrease the
coherence bandwidth, which in turns increases the utilized
sub-channels in our proposed system.
In this paper, a wireless Rayleigh fading communication
channel is considered in this paper. A key assumption is that
the channel exhibits coherence frequency bands, thus, the total
system bandwidth is divided into sub-channels that are time-
varying but ﬂat in terms of attenuation for all sub-carriers
within the same band. The individual sub-channel values are
assumed to be correlated between subsequent symbols. The
impulse response of the channel is given as:
h(k) =
L−1
X
l=0
hl(k)δ(τl),
(2)
where L is the number of taps, τl is the time delay associated
with the l-th tap and hl(k) is the complex-valued channel
fading coefﬁcient of the l-th tap for the time index k. The
coherence bandwidth Bcoh, which represents the frequency
correlation between channel gains, is given for values above
0.9 as:
Bcoh =
1
50στ
,
(3)
where στ is the root mean square (rms) of the multipath delay
spread in the time domain, given as:
στ =
v
u
u
t
PL−1
l=0 |hl(k)|2τl
PL−1
l=0 |hl(τl)|2 .
(4)
Fig. 2 demonstrates an example of the system channel with
20 MHz bandwidth suited to propagate one OFDM frame. This
model is based on the Rayleigh channel properties and exhibits
15 taps. In this ﬁgure, part (a) represents the the channel time
impulse response, while (b) is the channel frequency response
in dB.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0
0.5
1
Delay Spread (µs)
|h(n)|
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
−40
−20
0
20
Frequency (MHz)
|H(f)|2 (dB)
(b) 
Fig. 2.
Channel model.
3. Receiver Description: The receiver structure is illustrated
in Fig. 3. After the cyclic preﬁx has been removed, the received
OFDM frame can be represented as:
y(k) = r(k) + w(k) = x(k) ⊗ h(k) + w(k),
(5)
where y(k) are the received samples, h(k) refers to the channel
coefﬁcients, w(k) represents the additive white Gaussian noise
(AWGN) samples, ⊗ denotes the circular convolution opera-
tion. The result of the circular convolution, r(k), between the
transmitted OFDM samples and the channel values is deﬁned
as:
r(k) =
L−1
X
l=0
h(l)x((k − l))N, k = 0, . . . , N − 1.
(6)
After the FFT operation is applied to the entire OFDM
frame, the received signal samples can be expressed as:
Y (n) = X(n)H(n) + W(n).
(7)
Following the FFT operation, the pilots and the data are
extracted from the received OFDM frame. The pilots are
utilized in the channel estimation algorithm and CSI unit,
which produces the estimated channel and SNR values, as
well as, the decision of suitable MCS for each sub-channel.
Finally, the data are demodulated and decoded in the same
selected transmitted MCSs. In this paper, a Mobile WiMAX
IEEE 802.16e system is considered with the parameters listed
in Table I. The performance of the investigated FS-AMC-
OFDM system is effected by many utilized parameters, such as
the data and pilot sub-carriers number as well as the employed
bandwidth.
133
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/

Decod.
FFT and
CP removing
Pilot
H
Channel
estimation
and CSI
Return CSI
CSI
Data
DeMUX
Adaptive Demod.
and LDPC
Fig. 3.
Receiver block diagram of the proposed FS-AMC-OFDM system.
TABLE I
SYSTEM PARAMETERS
No
Parameter
Value
1
Bandwidth
20 MHz
2
Number of FFT
2048
3
Number of data carrier
1440
4
Number of pilot carrier
240
5
Number of guard sub-carrier
368
6
Cyclic perﬁx
1/4
7
Coherence bandwidth
4 MHz
B. DS-AMC-OFDM system
This section considers the developments applied to the FS-
AMC-OFDM system structure in order to produce an efﬁcient
scheme, which uses dynamic allocation for the data and
pilot sub-carriers across the distinct sub-channels instead of
a ﬁxed allocation strategy. The transmitter block diagram of
the proposed DS-AMC-OFDM system is similar to FS-AMC-
OFDM, where the ﬁrst block (Adaptive Mod. and LDPC
Encod.) decides the size of the transmitted information bit
stream for each sub-channel according to the returned CSI.
At the same time, the pilot generator can reduce or increase
the pilot stream size for each coherence bands based on the
corresponding returned pilot size.
The selectivity of the utilized channel frequency response
can effect the performance of the DS-AMC-OFDM system
particularly for the narrow coherence bandwidth channels. For
these channels, the proposed system uses all the employed
pilots for channel estimation. We use the same channel model
of the FS-AMC-OFDM system, while the receiver adds
another block to adjust the size of the data and pilot symbols
for each sub-channel individually as explained in the next
section.
1. Reciever: Fig. 4 illustrates the DS-AMC-OFDM system
receiver. From this ﬁgure, the size of the pilot and data for each
sub-channel is adjusted in the additional, Size Adjustment,
block. The main function of the new block is to decide a
suitable size for the data and pilot across the sub-channels
individually, while the other receiver’s blocks have the same
functions of the FS-AMC-OFDM system receiver. For stable
channel conditions, the pilots’ size is reduced and the available
size from this reduction is ﬁlled with additional data symbols
at the transmitter to increase the total transmission throughput.
The selected sizes of the pilots of each sub-channel is included
in the returned CSI.
Size Adjustment
FFT and
CP removing
Channel
estimation
and CSI
Data
DeMUX
Adaptive Demod.
and LDPC
Decod.
Pilot
Return CSI
CSI
SNR
Pilot
Fig. 4.
Receiver block diagram of the proposed DS-AMC-OFDM system.
III. LDPC DECODING
As the proposed systems follow the Mobile WiMAX
standard, we employ LDPC as one of the recommended error
correction methods. The LDPC codes that have been adopted
in this paper are irregular repeat accumulate codes which
have a high ability to detect and correct the receiving errors
depending on the error probability density function (pdf).
The LDPC encoding and decoding processes are explained
as follows.
A. LDPC encoder
LDPC encoding is performed by generating a parity check
matrix, which must be a sparse matrix with a speciﬁed
number of columns and rows according to the codeword size
and employed code rate respectively. To obtain the encoded
data sequence, the entire binary data vector is multiplied by
a generator matrix, which is derived from the parity check
matrix [27]. Fig. 5 shows the LDPC encoding process block
diagram.
Matrix
Stream
Data Bit 
Parity Check
Matrix
Generator
Code Word
Fig. 5.
LDPC encoder block diagram.
B. LDPC decoder
The algorithms performing the LDPC decoding process
produce efﬁcient and iterative methods to decode the received
data bits. In this paper the message passed algorithm
134
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/

is adopted. This algorithm is also known as the belief
propagation
algorithm,
and
sum-product
algorithm.
The
message passed algorithm is based on decoding the coded
bits in iterative manner as a message between the bit and
check nodes shown in Fig. 6 illustrating the Tanner graph. It
is implemented using four processing steps, i.e. initialization,
check node update, bit node update and hard decision. We
now proceed with the description of the individual steps [27].
1. Initialization: Set the loop iteration, l = 0,
η[0]
m,n = 0, ∀ (m, n) with A(m, n) = 1,
(8)
λ[0]
n = Lcrn.
(9)
where A is the parity check matrix, Lc is the channel reliabil-
ity, λ and η are the messages from bit nodes to check nodes,
and check to bit nodes, respectively.
2. Check node update:
l = l + 1.
(10)
η[l]
m,n = −2 tanh−1(Πj∈Nm,n tanh(−
λ[l−1]
j
− ηl−1]
m,j
2
).
(11)
3. Bit node update:
λl
n = Lcrn +
X
m∈Mn
η[l]
m,n.
(12)
4. Hard decision:
cn =
½
1,
if λn > 0
0,
otherwise
¾
(13)
if (Ac′ = 0) , then stop;
else if (l < L) go to check node update;
otherwise exit;
Here, cn are the decoded data bits, L is the maximum number
of iterations, and c′ is the vector containing the decoded bits
at the end of the ﬁnal iteration.
Message
Check nodes
Bit nodes
Check−to−variable
Message
Bit−to−Check
Fig. 6.
LDPC decoding algorithm Tanner graph.
IV. PROPOSED AMC-LDPC-OFDM TRANSMISSION
TECHNIQUES
The LDPC encoder encodes the entire data sequence
using one of the three possible code rates (1/2, 2/3 or 3/4).
Furthermore, two modulation schemes are available for sub-
channels in order to satisfy their selected MCSs, i.e. QPSK
and 16-QAM. In this section, the proposed transmission
strategies of both systems are described separately.
A. FS-AMC-OFDM strategy
The novelty of this system is the introduction of distinct
MCSs that correspond to the detected frequency coherent
sub-channels. The Np pilots are modulated using BPSK to
guarantee insensitivity to channel effects at both low and high
SNR levels. Additionally, they are distributed across the data
symbols according to the comb-method by allocating one pilot
carrier for every six data symbols, as illustrated in Fig. 7.
1
Data
sub−channel sub−channel
sub−channel
one
two
Ncoh
OFDM symbol
1
1680
1680/Ncoh
Pilot
Fig. 7.
AMC-LDPC-OFDM transmitted block frame.
At the receiver, channel and SNR estimation, as well as
the decision on MCS selection for each sub-channel are
performed. The channel estimation was implemented using the
least square (LS) method [28]:
ˆHp(i, m) = D[Xp(i, m)]−1Yp(i, m), m = 0 . . . αp(i) − 1,
(14)
where
ˆHp(i, m) are the estimated pilot channel values,
D[Xp(i, m)] is a diagonal matrix constructed using the known
transmitted pilot symbols, and Yp(i, m) are the received pilot
symbols after the FFT operation. In this paper, the channel
estimation error is not considered. It is caused by imperfect
synchronization, feedback delay and channel estimation. The
channel estimation error can be added as a noise to the
received signal as Y (n) = X(n) ˆH(n)+X(n)[H(n)− ˆH(n)]+
W(n). Furthermore, the channel estimation error effects the
computed value of the corresponding SNR, where
ˆH(n)
denotes the estimated channel coefﬁcients. The channel values
that relevant to the data sub-carrier are obtained by averaging
neighbour pilots instead of using interpolation methods to
reduce the complexity. A two-sample average was utilized
based on the assumption that the channel will remain constant
throughout the duration of an OFDM block, i.e.
ˆHd(i, z) = 1
2
h
ˆHp(i, m) + ˆHp(i, m + 1)
i
,
(15)
m = mod(z, Np), z = 0 . . . (αd(i)/αp(i)) − 1,
(16)
where ˆHd(i, z) represents the z-th data sub-carriers between
two pilots for each sub-channel, and m denotes the index of
corresponding pilot.
Furthermore, the SNR is estimated for each symbol in the
OFDM frame and the minimum value for each sub-channel
135
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/

γi,min is selected to guarantee that the required performance
is maintained:
SNRd(i, v) = E{| ˆHd(i, v)|2|X(i, v)|2}
E{|W(i, v)|2}
(17)
= E{| ˆHd(i, v)|2}E{|X(i, v)|2}
E{|W(i, v)|2}
(18)
= Es
E{| ˆHd(i, v)|2}
σ2
W (i, v)
(19)
where σ2
W (i, v) is the AWGN variance, Es = E{|X(i, v)|2} is
the average sub-channel symbol energy, which is 1 for QPSK
and 10d2 for 16-QAM, where d is the minimum distance
between constellation points. In practice, we can replace
E{| ˆHd(i, v)|2} with the estimated channel values | ˆHd(i, v)|2,
where v = {1, ..., αd(i)} is the sub-channel data symbols
index. The minimum SNR is then obtained as:
γi,min = min[SNRd(i, v)] = min
(
Es
| ˆ
Hd(i, v)|2
σ2
W (i, v)
)
(20)
The selection of suitable MCS for each sub-channel is
based on the estimated SNR of the corresponding sub-channel
according to Table II, which considers the threshold SNR
values for a BER of 10−3 [12]. The diversity of MCSs
TABLE II
SNR THRESHOLD VALUES FOR MCS
Modulation type
Code rate
Threshold dB
QPSK
1/2
4.5
QPSK
2/3
5.6
QPSK
3/4
8.2
16-QAM
1/2
10.5
16-QAM
2/3
11.9
16-QAM
3/4
> 11.9
for symbol groups that are included in the same OFDM
frame improves the system throughput µ by increasing the
transmitted throughput ψav(i), which depends on the sub-
channel symbol coding rate Rc(i) and the modulation order
M(i), and is given as [12]:
ψ(i, v) = log2[M(i)]Rc(i).
(21)
In terms of the probability of the MCS selection, the system
throughput can be mathematically expressed as:
µ =
NMCS
X
i=1
Pr{MCS(i)}ψav(i)(1 − SER),
(22)
where Pr{MCS(i)} denotes the probability of choosing
each MCS, ψav(i) = E{ψ(i, n)} is the average transmitted
throughput in bit/symbol, SER is symbol error rate and NMCS
is the number of MCSs. Additionally, the decrease of SER,
which depends on selection of the optimum MCS for the
channel type (Pr{MCS(i)}), leads to an increase in the
system throughput as shown in Eq. (22).
On the other hand, the system throughput can be expressed
in terms of the size of the transmitted data of each sub-channel,
αd(i), the average transmitted throughput, ψav(i), and the
average sub-channel bit error rate, Pe(i), as follows:
µ =
Ncoh
X
i=1
αd(i)ψav(i)[1 − Pe(i)].
(23)
From Eq. (23), the throughput, which is the successful
received bits, is based mainly on the size of the transmitted
data symbols. This leads to the ability of enhancing the
proposed system throughput performance by increasing the
transmitted data size as explained in the next section.
B. DS-AMC-OFDM strategy
The proposed DS-AMC-OFDM system exploits the scal-
ability of OFDM systems such as Mobile WiMAX, which
endorses the reduction in pilots, to improve the throughput by
replacing the unnecessary pilots within a channel coherence
band with information data streams; and hence increase the
total transmitted throughput. This reduction in the number
of pilots for each sub-channel individually depends on the
variance of the sub-channel SNR ﬂuctuation values, Γvar(i),
and the sub-channel γi,min. The range of the pilot reduction
λ(i) can be varied between zero and αp − 2.
To measure the coherence bandwidth, which is required to
obtained the number of the sub-channels, a correlation process
between the channel coefﬁcients is adopted in the frequency
domain. It assumes that the correlation between the channel
coefﬁcients frequency response depends only on the Bcoh. The
correlation value of the channel can be achieved as:
βBcoh =
E{[ ˆH(f) − η ˆ
H(f)][ ˆH(f)(f + Bcoh) − η ˆ
H(f+Bcoh)]∗}
E{| ˆH(f)|2}
,
(24)
where, η ˆ
H(f) and η ˆ
H(f+Bcoh) are the mean values of the
channel frequency responses, and f is the frequency index.
The uniform distribution of the phase of the Rayleigh channels
leads to η ˆ
H(f) and η ˆ
H(f+Bcoh) values to be zero, thus Eq. (24)
can be rewritten as:
βBcoh = E{[ ˆH(f)][ ˆH(f)(f + Bcoh)]∗}
E{| ˆH(f)|2}
= E{[ ˆH(f)][ ˆH(f)(f + Bcoh)]∗}
σ2
ˆ
H(f)
,
(25)
where σ2
ˆ
H(f) is the channel variance. By varying the Bcoh,
which is the correlation lag, in an iterative method and keeping
the correlation value over 0.9, we can obtain the coherence
bandwidth, where the channel responses for frequencies sep-
arated by Bcoh or less, are nearly equal. As a result, Ncoh
is calculated based on the total system bandwidth (BW) as
Ncoh = BW
Bcoh .
136
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/

The SNR ﬂuctuation of the channel coefﬁcients within each
coherence band is evaluated depending on the estimated SNR
values as:
Γ(i, n) = SNRd(i, v) − ϱ(i),
(26)
where ϱ(i) = E{SNR(i, v)} is the average SNR value for
each sub-channel. The Γvar(i) value can be calculated as:
Γvar(i) = E{|Γ(i, n)|2}.
(27)
Based on the detected coherence bandwidth, the number
of pilots and data for each sub-channel is set. Moreover, the
number of required pilots for the channel estimation is mainly
dependent on the ﬂuctuation values between the neighbouring
pilots. The SNR values of each sub-channel γi,min are further
used to measure the stability of the channel state in terms of
the noise. The equations describing the dynamic adjustment
of pilots and data streams can be written as:
ϑp(i) = αp(i) − λ(i),
(28)
ϑd(i) = αd(i) − λ(i),
(29)
λ(i) = ξ(i) γi,min
Γvar(i),
(30)
where ϑp(i) and ϑd(i) designate the new number of pilots and
data for each sub-channel, respectively, and ξ(i) is a variable
chosen to satisfy the condition, mod[ϑd(i)/ϑp(i)] = 0 , that
guarantees a uniform distribution of pilots and data within
each sub-channel. The size of the pilot subcarriers of each
sub-channel is included in the CSI to permit the transmitter to
adjust the transmission sizes. The resulting system throughput,
µ, in Eq. (23) can be mathematically rewritten as:
µ =
Ncoh
X
i=1
ϑd(i)ρav(i)[1 − Pe(i)].
(31)
Evidently, the increase in the transmitted data stream size
is expected to increase the system throughput performance.
At the same time, the optimal selection of the suitable MCS
for the sub-channels can decrease the BER, which leads to
increase the throughput. To measure the effect of the pilot
reduction on the channel estimation process, the mean square
error (MSE) of the estimated channel value in comparison with
the perfect channel H(i, n) and is calculated as:
MSE(i) = E{| ˆH(i, n) − H(i, n)|2}
(32)
and the total MSE is evaluated as TMSE = E{MSE(i)}.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
The performance of the proposed FS-AMC-OFDM and
DS-AMC-OFDM systems are investigated in Rayleigh fading
channels exhibiting ﬁve frequency coherence bands. The
parameters of the Mobile WiMAX standard listed in Table I
have been utilized for the simulation. The performance of the
investigated systems depends on the utilized parameters for
each transmitted OFDM frame. However, both systems still
outperform the conventional scheme for the same considered
parameters as shown in the next sub-sections. The simulation
results of the proposed systems are divided into two parts as
follows.
A. FS-AMC-OFDM system
This section demonstrates and discusses the simulation
performance of FS-AMC-OFDM system. Fig. 8 shows the
throughput comparison between two systems; a conventional
adaptive system which adopts the same MCS for the whole
OFDM frame, and the proposed adaptive system. It is
observed that the proposed scheme provides a throughput
related performance gain between 0.1-1.2 Mbit over the
conventional adaptive system for a SNR range between
5 and 35 dB. The enhancement in performance is due to
the fact that the proposed strategy exploits the channel
conditions to construct the transmitted OFDM frame, which
contains different types of modulation and coding rates that
are related to the coherence bandwidth of the underlying
channel. Moreover, the suggested approach beneﬁts from the
fading diversity on sub-channels to increase the transmitted
throughput, which in turn improves system performance by
increasing the coding rate and modulation level as indicated
in Eq. (21) and (22). It is worth observing that at high SNR
levels above 35 dB the performance of the adaptive systems
approximately converges to the same value because they
select the same MCS for all sub-channels.
Fig. 9 demonstrates the difference in transmitted throughput
between the conventional adaptive and proposed approaches.
It is apparent that the performance of proposed system
achieves 0.1-0.6 bit/symbol better than the conventional over
a SNR range between 5 and 35 dB.
Fig. 10 illustrates the average BER performance as a
function of the SNR for the two investigated systems.
After 10 dB of SNR, the plot shows clearly the performance
advantage of the proposed adaptive scheme. The improvement
is due to the optimal MCS selection for each sub-channel,
which in turn, enhances the BER performance. However,
for high SNR values, the difference in performance between
the two adaptive schemes is approximately the same, since
their constructed transmitted OFDM frames become nearly
identical.
Fig. 11 displays the behaviour of the proposed AMC-LDPC
based OFDM system in terms of selecting the maximum
reliable data size, which is computed by averaging each
137
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
SNR (dB)
Average System Throughput (Mbps)
 
 
Conventional
Proposed
Fig. 8.
Throughput of the conventional and proposed FS-AMC-OFDM
system.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
SNR (dB)
Average Transmitted Throughput (bit/symbol)
 
 
Conventional
Proposed
Fig. 9.
Transmitted throughput of the conventional and proposed FS-AMC-
OFDM system.
sub-channel. It should be highlighted that individual points
in this graph may contain different types of coding rates
and modulation levels. From the diagram, it is apparent that
the proposed scheme outperforms the conventional adaptive
system. Moreover, it should be noted that at 35 dB of SNR,
the data size is chosen to be maximum, indicating that all
sub-channels have same modulation type (16-QAM) and
coding rate (R=3/4).
B. DS-AMC-OFDM system
The simulation results related to the performance of the
DS-AMC-OFDM system are presented in this section. The
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
SNR (dB)
BER
 
 
Conventional
Proposed
Fig. 10.
BER of the conventional and proposed FS-AMC-OFDM system.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
SNR(dB)
Average Transmitted Data Size (Mbit)
 
 
Conventional
Proposed
Fig. 11.
Transmitted data size of the conventional and proposed FS-AMC-
OFDM system.
size of the pilot and data sub-carriers for each sub-channel
are adjusted the distinct criteria listed in Table III.
Fig.
12
demonstrates
the
throughput
performance
of
the conventional, the proposed FS-AMC-OFDM, and the
proposed
DS-AMC-OFDM
systems.
It
is
important
to
notice that the throughput of proposed DS-AMC-OFDM
system outperforms the FS-AMC-OFDM scheme by 0.1-0.7
Mbps over an SNR range of between 5 and 35 dB. At
the same time, the investigated DS-AMC-OFDM system
can achieve 0.1-1.7 Mbps gains over the conventional
adaptive transmission system across the same SNR range.
The enhancement of the proposed dynamic sub-channel
allocation strategy over the ﬁxed strategy is due mainly to
the increase in the transmitted data size according to Eq.
138
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/

TABLE III
DYNAMIC NUMBER OF THE PILOT AND DATA SYMBOLS FOR EACH
SUB-CHANNEL.
ϑp(i)
ϑd(i)
λ(i)
Γvar(i)
γi,min(i) dB)
48
288
0
otherwise
28
308
20
0.5 ≥ Γvar(i) > 0.3
10 ≤ γi,min(i) < 20
8
328
40
0.3 ≥ Γvar(i) > 0.2
20 ≤ γi,min(i) < 25
4
332
44
0.2 ≥ Γvar(i) > 0.1
25 ≤ γi,min(i) < 30
2
334
46
Γvar(i) ≤ 0.1
γi,min(i) ≥ 30
(31). The pilots number is reduced for the stable sub-channel
proﬁles
individually,
followed
by
replacing
the
unused
pilot symbols with additional data symbols based on Eq.
(28)-(30). On the other hand, the DS-AMC-OFDM scheme
throughput improvement in comparison with the conventional
AMC method is achieved by the optimal MCS selection for
each sub-channel as explained in the previous section. It is
observed from the plots that the pilots number reduction
has not inﬂuenced the performance of the system signiﬁcantly.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
SNR (dB)
Average System Throughput (Mbps)
 
 
Conventional 
Proposed FS−AMC 
Proposed DS−AMC 
Fig. 12.
Throughput of the proposed conventional, FS-AMC-OFDM, and
DS-AMC-OFDM systems.
Fig. 13 illustrates the BER performance of the investigated
systems. It can be seen that the BER plot for the DS-
AMC-OFDM system is approximately converging to the
FS-AMC-OFDM scheme. Although there is an increase in
the transmitted data size of the DS-AMC-OFDM system, the
BER performance is similar to the FS-AMC-OFDM system.
It is highlighted that the performance similarity proves that
the reduction in pilot size across the sub-channel has not
inﬂuenced the data recovery, which is based on the channel
estimation, at the receiver. Both proposed strategies perform
better than the conventional adaptive transmission method,
particularly between SNR values of 10 to 25 dB. Meanwhile
all compared systems’ plots are converging together for high
SNR values due to the similarity of selection the highest MCS
for all sub-channels. The BER enhancement of both proposed
systems is due to the independent selection of suitable MCS
for each sub-channel independently.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
SNR (dB)
BER
 
 
Conventional 
Proposed FS−AMC 
Proposed DS−AMC
Fig. 13.
BER of the conventional, FS-AMC-OFDM, and DS-AMC-OFDM
systems.
The comparison of the transmitted data size in bits between
the
conventional
AMC,
proposed
FS-AMC-OFDM,
and
proposed DS-AMC-OFDM schemes is presented in Fig.
14. It is observed that the size of the transmitted data for
the proposed system based on the dynamic sub-channel
allocation strategy is signiﬁcantly larger by 0.1-0.7 Mbit in
comparison with the FS-AMC-OFDM system. Moreover,
the DS-AMC-OFDM scheme outperforms the conventional
AMC in terms of transmitted data size by 0.1-1.7 Mbit over
the SNR range between 5 and 35 dB. The increase in the
transmitted data size of the DS-AMC-OFDM system over
the other investigated systems is achieved by reducing the
number of pilots without affecting the channel estimation
performance. Meanwhile, the redundant pilots are replaced by
additional data symbols for each sub-channel individually. As
mentioned earlier, the reduction in pilot number is restricted
by two main metrics; the sub-channel minimum SNR value,
and the variance of the sub-channel SNR ﬂuctuation values
as expressed in Eq. (30).
In order to monitor the effects of pilot number reduction for
each sub-channel independently, the MSE for the estimated
channel is evaluated as shown in Fig. 15. The ﬁgure shows
that the reduction in the number of pilots for the sub-channels
with stable proﬁle affects the estimation accuracy after 10 dB.
However, the degradation in terms of data recovery errors is
acceptable as demonstrated in Fig. 12 in the system throughput
performance. The MSE values for both the proposed systems
channel estimation is calculated according to Eq. (29).
139
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
SNR (dB)
Average Transmitted Data Size (Mbit)
 
 
Conventional
Proposed FS−AMC
Proposed DS−AMC
Fig. 14.
Transmitted data of the conventional, FS-AMC-OFDM and DS-
AMC-OFDM systems.
As a result, the proposed FS-AMC-OFDM and DS-AMC-
OFDM systems outperform the conventional approach for
different values of SNR. The proposed FS-AMC-OFDM
system can perform similar to the conventional scheme over
ﬂat fading channels due to the same selection of the MCS
level for all sub-channels.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
SNR (dB)
MSE
 
 
Proposed FS−AMC
Proposed DS−AMC 
Fig. 15.
MSE of the estimated channel for the FS-AMC-OFDM, and DS-
AMC-OFDM systems.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have proposed FS-AMC-OFDM and
DS-AMC-OFDM schemes and their performance has been
investigated in Rayleigh fading channels. In order to improve
the throughput and BER performance of the proposed FS-
AMC-OFDM scheme, the detected coherence bandwidth of
the channel has been employed as an important indicator
for dividing the OFDM frame into distinct sub-channels and
subsequently assigning individual modulation schemes and
coding rates suited to the corresponding channel conditions.
The throughput is improved in the FS-AMC-OFDM system by
exploiting the fading diversity of the channel, which results
in increased coding rate and modulation orders, which are
utilized for sub-channels with stable fading proﬁles. Moreover,
the optimal MCS selection for each sub-channel increases the
aggregate system throughput by decreasing the BER due to the
optimal utilization of the channel state for each sub-channel
at the transmitter.
On the other hand, the throughput performance of the inves-
tigated DS-AMC-OFDM system is improved in comparison
with the conventional and FS-AMC-OFDM schemes due to
the increase in the transmitted data size, achieved by replacing
the redundant pilots with data symbols. The redundant pilots
result from the pilot reduction across the stable sub-channel
proﬁles, based on the individual sub-channel minimum SNR
value, and the variance of the sub-channel ﬂuctuation values.
In order to measure the effects of the pilot reduction on the
channel estimation process, the MSE value of the estimated
channel was evaluated.
Simulation results have demonstrated that both the system
throughput and BER of the DS-AMC-OFDM system are
improved compared to the FS-AMC-OFDM scheme and con-
ventional adaptive approach. At the same time, the proposed
FS-AMC-OFDM scheme also outperforms the conventional
system.
Future work will be focused on enhancing the channel
estimation methods to further improve in the BER and
throughput performances of the proposed strategies. Moreover,
it is worth to investigate the ability of implementing the
proposed techniques for long term evolution 3rd generation
(LTE-3G) systems and discrete multi-tone modulation (DMT)
transmission strategies used in digital subscriber lines (DSL),
and the implementation restrictions in terms of the utilized
system parameters.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Al-Janabi, C. Tsimenidis, B. Sharif and S. Le Goff, “Adaptive MCS
Selection in OFDM Systems Based on Channel Frequency Coherence,
AICT 2009 , pp: 177-182.
[2] D. Tse, Fundamentals of Wireless Communications, University of Cali-
fornia, Berkeley, 2004.
[3] R. van Nee and R. Prasad, OFDM for Wireless Multimedia Communica-
tions, Artech House, 2000.
[4] A. L. Intini, Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing for Wireless
Networks, University of California Santa Barbara, 2000.
[5] H. Schulze and Ch. Luders, Theory and Applications of OFDM and
CDMA Wideband Wireless Communications, John Wiley and Sons Ltd,
Chichester, 2005.
[6] U. Madhow, Fundamentals of Digital Communication, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2004.
140
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/

[7] L. Nuaymi, WiMAX Technology for Broadband Wireless Access, John
Willey and Sons, Ltd, England, 2007.
[8] T. Onodera, T Nogami, O Nakamura and N. Okamoto, “AMC Design
for Wideband OFDM Maintaining Target Quality Over Time-Varying
Channels,” IEEE 18th International PIMRC 2007, pp:1-5.
[9] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA, 1963.
[10] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good Error-Correction Codes Based on Very Sparse
Matrices”, IEEE Trans. on Inform. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp: 399-431,
Mar. 1999.
[11] M. Zhou, L. Li, N. Wen, et al., “Performance of LDPC coded AOFDM
under frequency-selective fading channel,” Intern. Conf. on Commun.,
ICCCAS 2006, pp: 861-865.
[12] L. Lihua, Z. Mingyu, W. Haifeng and Z. Ping, “LDPC coded AMC
based on decoding iteration times for OFDM systems,” VTC 2006, pp:
1157-1161.
[13] K.Song, A. Ekbal, S. Chung and J. Ciofﬁ, “Adaptive Modulation and
Coding (AMC) for Bit-Interleaved Coded OFDM (BICM-OFDM)”, IEEE
Trans. on Wireless Commun., vol.5, No.7, pp: 1685-1694, Jul. 2006.
[14] S. Chung, C. Sung, J. Heo and I. Lee,“Adaptive Bit-Interleaved Coded
OFDM With Reduced Feedback Information”, IEEE Trans. Commun.,
Vol.55, No.9, pp: 1649-1655, Sep. 2007.
[15] J. Heo, Y. Wang, and K. Chang, “A Novel Two-Step Channel-Prediction
Technique for Supporting Adaptive Transmission in OFDM/FDD Sys-
tem,” , IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., Vol. 57, No. 1, pp: 188-193, Jan.
2008.
[16] T. Kwon and D. Cho, “Adaptive-Modulation-and-Coding-Based Trans-
mission of Control Message for Resource Allocation in Mobile Com-
munication Systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., Vol. 58, No. 6, pp:
2769-2782, Jul. 2009.
[17] H. Fu and D. Kim, “Scheduling Performance in Downlink WCDMA
Networks with AMC and Fast Cell Selection,” , IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., Vol. 7, No. 7, pp: 2580-2591, Jul. 2008.
[18] H. Yang and S. Sasakan, “Analysis of Channel-Adaptive Packet Trans-
mission Over Fading Channels With Transmit Management,” , IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., Vol. 57, No. 1, pp: 404-413, Jan. 2008.
[19] R. Kwan and C. Leung, “Performance of a CDMA System Employing
AMC and Multicodes in the Presence of Channel Estimation Errors,” ,
IEEE Trans. Commun., Vol. 56, No. 2, pp: 189-193, Feb. 2008.
[20] P. Tan, Y. Wu and S. Sun, “Link Adaptation Based on Adaptive
Modulation and Coding for Multiple-Antenna OFDM System,” , IEEE
J. in Select. Area Commun., Vol. 26, No. 8, pp: 1599-1606, Jul. 2008.
[21] K. Ishihara, Y. Takatori, S. Kubota and M. Umehira, “Comparison of
SCFDE and OFDM with adaptive modulation and coding in nonlinear
fading channel,” , Electronic Letters, Vol. 43, No. 3, pp: 174-175, Feb.
2007.
[22] L. Caponi, F. Chiti and R. Fantacci, “Performance Evaluation of a Link
Adaptation Technique for High Speed Wireless Communication Systems,”
, IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., Vol. 6, No. 12, pp: 4568-4575, Dec.
2007.
[23] X. Wang, Q. Liu and G. Giannakis, “Analyzing and Optimizing Adaptive
Modulation Coding Jointly With ARQ for QoS-Guaranteed Trafﬁc,” ,
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., Vol. 7, No. 7, pp: 1008-1013, Jul. 2008.
[24] L. Ye, A. Burr,“Adaptive modulation and code rate for turbo coded
OFDM transmissions,” VTC 2007, pp: 2702-2706.
[25] N. Miki, Y. Kishiyama, M. Sawahashi, “Optimum Adaptive Modulation
and Coding Scheme for Frequency Domain Channel-Dependent Schedul-
ing in OFDM Based Evolved UTRA Downlink,” IEEE WCNC 2007, pp:
1783-1788.
[26] N. Benvenuto and F. Tosato, “On the Selection of Adaptive Modulation
and Coding Modes over OFDM,” Communications, IEEE ICC 2004, pp:
3251-3255.
[27] T. Moon, Error Correction Coding, Mathematical Methods and Algo-
rithms, Join Wiley and sons, INC., Canada, 2005.
[28] C. Lim and D. Han, “Robust LS Channel Estimation with Phase Rotation
for Single Frequency Network in OFDM,” , IEEE Transactions on
Consumer Electronics Vol. 52, No. 4, pp: 1173-1178, Nov. 2006.
141
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/

