228
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Software Defined Radio Certification in Europe: 
Challenges and Processes 
 
Gianmarco Baldini 
Security Technology Assessment Unit 
Joint Research Centre, European Commission 
Ispra, Italy 
email: gianmarco.baldini@jrc.ec.europa.eu
Dimitrios Symeonidis 
Security Technology Assessment Unit 
Joint Research Centre, European Commission 
Ispra, Italy 
email: dimitrios.symeonidis@jrc.ec.europa.eu
 
 
Abstract— Standardization and certification of Software 
Defined Radio technologies are closely related. This paper 
describes the current standardization efforts for Software 
Defined Radio technologies in Europe and the related 
certification processes with a specific focus to the public safety 
and military domain.  This paper describes the regulatory and 
technical requirements for the certification of Software 
Defined Radio in the European context, which is characterized 
by various political entities and governmental institutions. We 
describe the development of an European Software Defined 
Radio certification process through a networked approach and 
we identify the main components including the Development 
and Testing tools, References Implementation, the Waveform 
Repository and the Issue Tracking system. The main 
stakeholders in the certification processes are identified and 
their roles are described. This paper describes also two specific 
certification processes, which are particularly important for 
Software Defined Radio technology: performance benchmark 
certification 
and 
security 
certification. 
Performance 
benchmark certification is used to evaluate the performance of 
Software 
Defined 
Radio 
against 
specific 
technical 
requirements. Security certification is needed to ensure that 
the Software Defined Radio platform and the waveforms 
validate security requirements. The conclusion is that Software 
Defined Radio certification at European level requires a 
comprehensive framework, which includes organizational, 
procedural and technical elements1.  
Keywords 
- 
Software 
Defined 
Radio, 
Certification, 
Performance Benchmarking 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The concept of Software Defined Radio dates back to the 
1992 when Joseph Mitola described it in [2]. 
For a number of years the focus of software defined radio 
(SDR) research was on military applications. The JTRS 
(Joint Tactical Radio Systems) program [3] and [4] is 
intended to permit the Military Services to operate together 
in a “seamless” manner via wireless voice, video, and data 
communications through all levels of command, including 
                                                           
1 the views expressed are those of the authors and cannot be 
regarded as stating an official position of the European 
Commission. 
direct access to near real-time information from airborne and 
battlefield sensors.  
JTRS is envisioned to function more like a computer than 
a conventional radio and is to be upgraded and modified to 
operate with other communications systems by the addition 
of software as opposed to redesigning hardware - a more 
costly and time-consuming process. A single JTRS radio 
with multiple waveforms can replace many separate radios, 
simplifying maintenance. The additional advantage is that 
because JTRS is "software programmable", they will also 
provide a longer functional life. Both features can offer 
potential long-term cost savings to the military organizations. 
For the public safety community, SDR developments 
were primarily part of the internal research and development 
activities of land mobile radio vendors. The Public Safety 
domain was not the primary focus of SDR industrial 
vendors. However, several incidents over the past several 
years have suggested that public safety community may use 
evolving SDR and cognitive radio technology to address 
critical public safety communications challenges.  
Interoperability has been a long-standing challenge in 
public safety communications. We have numerous examples 
in which responders with incompatible radios have been 
unable to communicate during a natural disaster or an 
emergency/crisis situation. The challenges of interoperability 
in public safety communication have been described by a 
number of sources including [5] and [6]. 
 
The application of SDR to mitigate or resolve 
interoperability barriers in the Public Safety domain has been 
the focus of the FP7 PASR WINTSEC project [7]. 
The WINTSEC (Wireless INTeroperability for SECurity) 
project aims to explore a mix of complementary solutions to 
overcome the barriers for wireless interoperability across 
different security agencies, taking into account the 
constraints of the security services and legacy systems and 
equipment. 
WINTSEC 
studies 
the 
deployment 
of 
standardized Internetworking layer at Core Network level 
and Software Defined Radio (SDR) added value for Base 
Station and Terminal. WINTSEC addresses information 
assurance, elaborates the European “SDR Architectural 
Framework” and the concepts for the “SDR Certification 
Environment”. 

229
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Certification of the equipment and software is an 
essential process in the Public safety or Defence domains. 
This is particularly important for the introduction of new 
technologies like SDR, which must be validated against 
specific operational and technical requirements.  
Because of its high degree of reconfigurability and ease 
of programming, SDR is a technology enabler for cognitive 
radio (CR). Cognitive radio is a radio or wireless 
communication device that is able to change dynamically its 
transmission or reception parameters by using the 
information collected or sensed on the external environment. 
Cognitive radios can also potentially enable Dynamic 
Spectrum Allocation (DSA), where the allocation of 
spectrum bands to communication services can change 
depending on time and context (see [8] and [10]). The use of 
SDR as an enabler of CR makes the certification activity 
even more important, because a badly configured or faulty 
SDR can negatively affect other wireless communication 
services in the same coverage area through harmful wireless 
interference. The need for a certification process for SDR as 
a CR and DSA enabler, are described in [9] as part of the 
standardization work of IEEE P1900.3. 
 
Reference 
[9], 
identifies 
four 
testing 
areas 
for 
certification: 
• 
 Over the Air. A Provisioning Testing, which 
verifies the ability of a device to correctly obtain 
& install applications over the air. 
• 
Security 
Testing 
to 
ensure 
that 
security 
requirements are validated. 
• 
Performance Testing to validate the time 
constraints and  
• 
Stress testing to verify the robustness of the 
implementation when stretched to the limits of 
system resources.  
The paper acknowledges that SDR certification is a 
difficult task because SDR is a complex system with a large 
potential state space. The validation and certification of non-
functional 
attributes 
(e.g., 
security) 
is 
particularly 
challenging for SDR products. 
 
The complexity of SDR certification is also discussed in 
[11], where the vast amount of SW and HW combinations is 
identified as one of the biggest challenge in the certification 
process. 
A preliminary study on SDR standardization and 
certification is provided by the same authors in [1], but the 
paper does not address performance benchmarking and 
security certification, which is investigated in this paper.  
 
 This paper will provide a survey of the SDR 
standardization and certification status in Europe and a 
proposal for a SDR certification framework and related tools. 
 
The paper is structured in the following sections: section 
II describes the status of SDR standardization and 
certification in USA and Europe with the identification of the 
main challenges. The certification framework is proposed in 
section III, which describes the main elements of the SDR 
certification 
process 
including 
the 
reference 
implementations, the certification of API compliance, 
certification tools, the structure of the certification network, 
the waveform libraries and the issue tracking workflow. Two 
specific certification processes are then presented in the 
following sections. Benchmark certification is described in 
section IV, while security certification is described in section 
V. Finally section VI concludes the paper. 
II. 
SDR STANDARDIZATION AND CERTIFICATION 
The initial drive for standardization has been the JTRS 
program, which proposed the Software Communications 
Architecture (SCA) as a framework to integrate the hardware 
and software components.  
SCA is a framework for developing SDR systems and we 
can define a framework as a set of cooperating classes that 
make up a reusable design for a specific class of software. 
The interfaces among the classes and the other elements 
of the framework must be clearly defined to facilitate the 
activity of development, integration and validation. 
The goals of the SCA are to:  
a) 
provide 
portability 
of 
applications 
between 
different SCA implementations,  
b) 
Reduce development time of new waveforms 
through the ability to reuse design modules;  
c) 
Build on evolving commercial frameworks and 
architectures. 
SCA is based on CORBA as a middleware to provide the 
communications among the main components and functions 
of the framework, which are:  
• 
Radio management functions,  
• 
Domain Manager,  
• 
Application Factories,  
• 
Applications,  
• 
Device Managers and  
• 
Devices 
 
The portability concept is quite important for SCA and it 
is a basis for the certification process. SCA and SDR are 
mostly investigated in the Wireless Innovation Forum, which 
is (from reference [12]): 
“Established in 1996, the Wireless Innovation Forum™ 
is a non-profit international industry association dedicated to 
promoting the success of next generation radio technologies. 
The Forum's 100-strong membership comprises world class 
technical, business and government leaders from EMEA, 
Asia and the Americas who are passionate about creating a 
revolution 
in 
wireless 
communications 
based 
on 
reconfigurable radio.  Forum members span commercial, 
defense and civil government organizations at all levels of 
the wireless value chain and include service providers, 
operators, manufacturers, developers, regulatory agencies, 
and academia.” The Wireless Innovation forum is very active 
in the Defence domain even if a number of deliverables have 
been created for the Public Safety and Commercial domain 
as well. 
In USA, the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) 
has adopted rule changes to address the certification of SDR 

230
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
equipment in [13], where SDR is considered a new class of 
equipment with streamlined equipment authorization. The 
purpose of the action is to modify certification rules to 
accommodate the flexibility offered by SDR. Specifically, 
FCC amended the equipment authorization rules to permit 
equipment manufacturers to make changes in the frequency, 
power and modulation parameters without the need to file a 
new 
equipment 
authorization 
application 
with 
the 
Commission. The action also permitted electronic labeling so 
that a third party may modify a radio's technical parameters 
without having to return it to the manufacturer for re-
labeling. The certification rules were updated in [14] to 
further facilitate the development and deployment of SDR 
and CR. Specifically, the action eliminated the rule for a 
manufacturer to supply radio software to the Commission 
upon request because this may become an unnecessary 
barrier to entry. 
 
The action also required the manufacturer to supply a 
high level operational description of the radio software that 
controls its RF characteristics for SDR certification. Security 
aspects were also addressed by requesting software controls 
to limit operation to authorized frequency bands.  
 
In [14], FCC does not allow the Telecommunications 
Certification Bodies (TCBs) to certify SDR equipment. SDR 
certification is required to be carried out at FCC labs. The 
reason is because software defined radio is a new 
technology; TCBs will not be permitted to certify software 
defined radios until the Commission has more experience 
with them and can properly advise TCBs on how to apply the 
applicable rules. 
 
The European context is more complex because of the 
geopolitical diversity and the presence of national 
certification centers and processes. 
The European Software Radio Architecture (ESRA) is an 
on going standardization activity at European level. The 
goals are to ensure waveform portability and SDR 
reconfigurability.  The ESRA standardization activity will be 
implemented through existing projects at European level like 
ESSOR [15], WINTSEC and its follow-up EULER, which is 
focused on the application of SDR for improved joint 
interoperability in Public Safety and defense. 
Many organizations and industries in Europe are 
involved in this process. The (EDA) European Defence 
Agency is a main player in this process.  
 
At the same time, ETSI (European Telecommunications 
Standards Institute) started a similar initiative to conduct 
feasibility studies for the standardization of a wider concept 
of SDR technology called RRS (Reconfigurable Radio 
Systems), which are defined as follows (from [16]): 
“The group of technologies for Cognitive Radio and for 
Software 
Defined 
Radio 
are 
all 
technologies 
for 
Reconfigurable Radio Systems (RRS). Such systems exploit 
the capabilities of reconfigurable radio and networks and 
self-adaptation to a dynamically changing environment, 
with the aim to ensure end-to-end connectivity.” 
In comparison to EDA, which is focused on the military 
and public safety domain, the main target domains of ETSI 
RRS are the commercial domain and the public safety 
domain. ETSI RRS is composed by four working groups: 
WG1 for system design, WG2 for handset architecture, 
WG3 for functional architecture and WG4 for Public Safety 
domain. 
From a standardization point of view, the ETSI RRS is 
performing work that is complementary to the IEEE SCC41 
and IEEE 802 activities, with a focus on SDR standards 
beyond the IEEE scope, CR/SDR standards addressing the 
specific needs of the European Regulatory Framework and  
CR/SDR TV White Space standards adapted to the digital 
TV signal characteristics in Europe.  
Currently, there are no specific working items on the 
certification of SDR/CR equipment, but the TC maintains a 
close link with other ETSI TCs and organizations to ensure 
conformance of SDR/CR to the European regulatory 
framework. Technical standards on the SDR architecture are 
currently under definition. 
 
The main challenge of SDR certification in Europe is 
currently the lack of technical standards for SDR/CR 
technology against which certification should be executed. 
 
The WINTSEC project has laid the foundations of 
ESRA, which however has not yet reached the level of a 
standard but rather an architectural framework; the items 
defined in the ESRA document are not actual requirements 
but mere recommendations. The ongoing EULER project 
[17], which is expected to provide further ESRA 
recommendations extensions, will not also propose a 
standard. 
However, certification is valid against a published 
standard; no certification can exist against an architectural 
framework. The consequence is that any certification 
guidelines described in the deliverables of the WINTSEC 
project are designed against a future, ESRA-derived 
standard, and that they are described as “compliance 
evaluation 
procedures” 
rather 
than 
“certification 
procedures”. 
The concept of compliance evaluation is significantly 
less rigid than the concept of certification for a number of 
reasons: a) evaluation is a much more informal, less 
authoritative procedure where the steps and requirements can 
be adapted to each specific test case; b) compliance 
evaluation can be performed on any relatively mature 
version of the product under test as it deals mostly with 
general properties of it, rather than specific details; c) the 
result of evaluation is a report elaborating on the estimate of 
each property's compliance to the guidelines; d) evaluation 
procedures are often related to new, rapidly evolving 
technological domains, where a standard and certification 
procedure would quickly become outdated or hinder 
development. 

231
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
It is advisable that a set of guidelines/directives 
accompanied by compliance evaluation procedures evolves 
into a standard and certification procedure as the 
technological domain involved matures. 
In Europe, certification of wireless equipment is driven 
by the Radio and Telecommunications Terminal Equipment 
Directive (R&TTE) that came into force in April 2000 in 
Europe. With the exception of a few categories of 
equipment, the Directive covers all equipment, which uses 
the radio frequency spectrum. A basic requirement is that 
radio equipment shall be so constructed to effectively use the 
spectrum allocated to terrestrial/space radio communication 
and orbital resources so as to avoid harmful interference. The 
adaptation of the R&TTE directive for SDR technology has 
been investigated by the Telecommunications Conformity 
Assessment and Market Surveillance Committee (TCAM), 
which is the standing Committee assisting the European 
Commission in the management of the R&TTE Directive 
99/5/EC. In TCAM, the specific sub-group TGS (TCAM 
Group on SDR) was created to investigate SDR regulation 
with respect to the R&TTE Directive. Based on a TGS report 
provided to TCAM in 2006 (“Conclusions concerning the 
regulatory aspects of SDR with respect to the R&TTE 
Directive”), and on discussions in TCAM, the European 
Commission draw some conclusions to particular discussion 
points, but the discussion was not finalized.  
 
Two deployment models for SDR technology are 
considered: 
• 
Vertical 
mode, 
where 
the 
terminal 
reconfiguration 
can 
only 
be 
done 
(and 
authorized) through the equipment manufacturer 
(who also takes the responsibility). 
• 
Horizontal model, where the reconfigurations 
can be authorized by different actors. The 
software only needs a declaration of standard 
compliance. This responsibility can be taken by 
different actors. 
 
The following conclusions were presented: 
• 
For downloaded SW, a digital marking (e.g., CE 
marking) is recommended. 
• 
It is recommended to maintain, in the SDR 
devices, a history of software changes. 
• 
SDR equipment would be considered as a 
"relevant component", in the meaning of Article 
2 of the R&TTE Directive. 
• 
Harmonized standards covering SDR devices 
should contain countermeasures against illegal 
programming and hacks for equipment, which 
are at risk. 
 
Future versions of the R&TTE Directive may incorporate 
additional elements for SDR certification. 
In summary, we can identify the following challenges for 
SDR certification in Europe: 
• 
SDR technical standards should be defined for all 
the relevant domains: military/public safety and 
commercial. 
• 
Identify who should have the responsibility of 
the final product or its components including 
software waveforms, SDR HW platform and 
software framework (e.g., SCA). This is 
especially important for a horizontal market. 
• 
The European SDR certification process should 
address the geopolitical diversity of Europe and 
the 
existing 
national 
organizations 
and 
certification centers. 
• 
Ensure 
that 
SDR 
technology 
validates 
harmonized 
radio-spectrum 
regulations 
at 
European level and non-harmonized regulations 
at national level. 
• 
Ensure that all the certified waveforms and SDR 
platforms 
are 
managed 
in 
a 
controlled 
environment and accessible to end-users across 
Europe. 
III. 
PROPOSAL OF A SDR CERTIFICATION FRAMEWORK 
The purpose of this section is to describe a SDR 
certification framework, which is able to address the 
challenges, describes in the previous section. 
The certification framework is based on the following 
elements: 
• 
Reference implementation, which complements 
existing or future standards on SDR. Reference 
implementations 
are 
useful 
to 
resolve 
ambiguities in the standards definition. 
• 
Procedures and tools to certify API compliance 
• 
Use of Reference platforms against which 
waveforms should be certified. 
• 
A European certification network to address the 
geopolitical diversity of Europe. 
• 
A repository of waveform libraries, which can be 
accessed by end-users across Europe. 
• 
A waveform usage and issue tracking to manage 
issues and changes in the versions of the 
waveforms. 
The 
SDR 
certification 
framework 
addresses 
the 
horizontal model, which is the most complex of the SDR 
certification and deployment models. 
 
The following stakeholders are identified: 
• 
SDR HW platform manufacturers, which are 
responsible for designing and deploy the SDR 
HW platforms 
• 
The SW waveforms designers, which are 
responsible for the creation of SW waveforms in 
accord to specific standards and specifications. 
• 
The telecom provider, which provides the 
network deploying SDR technology. 
• 
The user/subscriber of the SDR platform and the 
network. 

232
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
• 
The administrative organizations, which include 
the European and national spectrum regulators 
and the authorities, which manage the use (and 
certification) of SDR technology in the market. 
• 
The certification authorities, which may be 
industry or government representatives. 
A. Reference Implementation 
Naturally, a large effort is made during the design of a 
standard to be as concise, consistent and complete as 
possible. However, it is realistically inevitable that any 
standard contains ambiguities, gaps or sometimes even 
contradictions in its definition. This runs contrary to the goal 
of standard compliance, which is seamless interoperability 
between components or systems. 
A trend that is becoming more and more prevalent is for 
any standard to be complemented by a reference 
implementation. This is an open, free and complete software 
implementation of the standard, usually defined by a neutral, 
impartial, independent and trusted entity. The goal of such an 
activity is to clarify the standard, while at the same time 
encouraging wide adoption. 
Any ambiguities in the wording of the standard should be 
easily resolvable by consulting the source code of the 
reference implementation. Furthermore, any contradictions 
inside the standard definition should be discovered during 
the development of the reference implementation, and the 
standard drafting body (or consortium) should be notified, in 
order to rectify them. It is therefore evident that two-way 
flow of information between the standard drafting body and 
the developers of the reference implementation is necessary 
to improve the quality of the standard. 
The reference implementation should be thoroughly 
documented, as the goal is clarity. A high-level language 
should be preferred, since code readability should be 
preferred over efficiency in a reference implementation. 
Finally, the code should be extensively cross-referenced to 
the articles and clauses of the related standard, in order to 
improve the tracking of the design choices in the reference 
implementation. 
B. Certifying API Compliance 
The outcome of a software standard is often a set of 
Application Programming Interfaces (APIs), which allow 
other programs or modules to interface with and exploit the 
capabilities of software components. Therefore, an important 
activity of the certification process for standard compliance 
is to check compliance to the resulting API. 
 
Certification of a component's compliance to a given API 
is usually done by executing a software test tool (or set of 
tools) that thoroughly checks the existence of all the 
functions and data structures defined in the API in the 
component under test and their robustness (stress testing). 
For example a method might be called with a predefined set 
of arguments, and the result would be compared to the 
expected result. This is commonly called Unit Testing. Part 
of the stress testing process might be calling methods with 
erroneous/invalid input parameters; in this case, an error 
should be returned by method and the software executable 
under test should not enter in an undefined state. For 
example, the software executable should not crash or hang. 
Unit testing has a set of limitations: it can only follow a 
limited number of execution paths, and therefore it can only 
test for the existence of a limited number of errors. In other 
words, unit testing cannot guarantee the absence of errors. 
Finally, while unit testing can confirm the existence and 
correct operation (under normal conditions and under stress) 
of all the methods and objects in an API, it cannot test for the 
existence 
of 
additional 
methods 
and/or 
objects 
(extensibility). 
 
Development tools could also be used for testing and 
validation of the waveform and SDR framework (e.g., SCA) 
code. In the early days of computer programming, source 
code was written in a single long file using a plain text 
editor. The target had single processor architecture. Today, 
especially in the SDR context, the common practice is to 
create first a platform-independent model of a component, 
then a platform-specific model, and then generate code for 
multiple architectures (e.g., GPP, DSP and FPGA). 
Therefore, 
complex 
and 
powerful 
Integrated 
Development Environments (IDEs) are used throughout the 
industry. These IDEs provide a long series of additional 
features to the developer, such as syntax highlighting, auto 
completion, build automation, debugging, version control, 
built-in documentation, configuration management and 
others. 
Often these tools include (either built-in, or in the form of 
plug-ins) compliance testing functionalities for a specific 
standard. This is highly beneficial for the process of pre-
certification, as it allows developers to test their code for 
standard compliance parallel to their coding efforts (two of 
the four basic Extreme Programming activities), rather than 
test for compliance towards the end of the development 
process, when it actually might be too late. The reference 
implementation might be instrumental in this compliance 
testing process. 
Example of Development and Testing Tools are the 
CRC's SCA Architect and Prismtech's Spectra CX, which are 
both based on the Eclipse IDE. 
C. Reference Platforms 
While part of the certification testing of a waveform's 
components might occur on the source code or the 
configuration/interface files, some of the tests will inevitably 
need to be run on the full, ported waveform, which is 
downloaded and activated on the SDR platform. 
While it would be possible to select a high-quality SDR 
platform (i.e., the reference platform), against which all 
waveforms should be run for certification testing, several 
problems arise from this approach: 
 
1. Such a choice would give the manufacturer of the 
SDR platform an undeniable and unfair advantage 
over their competitors, as they would be able to 
claim to be the “preferred platform provider”. 
Furthermore, such a choice would tie the European 

233
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
SDR Certification community to a single vendor, 
denying all the benefits of market competition like 
costs reduction, supply chain diversification, etc). 
 
2. The standard must be meticulously implemented in 
the waveform and reference platform. Otherwise, a 
single reference platform would create a de facto 
standard, which might slightly differ from the paper 
standard; waveform developers would be forced to 
comply with this de facto standard to pass 
certification. 
 
As a solution to these problems, it is suggested to adopt 
multiple reference platforms for certification testing. A 
waveform under test would be ported, loaded and run on 
multiple platforms. A certification failure on a single 
platform would require further examination, but might hint 
to an incompatibility of the underlying platform. Instead, 
certification failure on two or more platforms would still 
require further examination, but it would indicate that most 
probably the error lies in the waveform under test. 
 
The relationship among the various certification activities 
is described in Figure 1.  
 
 
Figure 1 The relationships among different certification areas. 
In the first phase, the SDR platforms and the waveforms 
are separately tested and certified for compliance to the 
standards. If these steps are successful, the next phase is the 
certification of the combinations of SDR platforms (i.e., 
HW) and Waveforms (i.e., SW).  
 
An important certification activity is the conformance to 
the regulatory framework (e.g., the spectrum regulations) for 
the areas where the SDR Platforms and Waveforms are 
supposed to operate. For example, the SDR should not 
generate harmful interference to licensed users.  
The validation activity should also include the case of 
roaming where a SDR device is used in different contexts 
with different national spectrum regulations.  
At the end of the certification process, the certification 
body should release a compliance certificate, which includes 
the spectrum regulations considered in the testing activity. 
 
 
D. SDR Certification Network 
The technical requirements for the certification of SDR 
and its components must be mapped to a certification 
procedure. SDR certification tools need to be developed, 
either from scratch, or (more likely) building upon existing 
certification tools (e.g., the xUnit test framework). Then 
these procedures can be executed (using test tools) on a 
network of certification centers throughout Europe. 
 
Some characteristics of this network: 
• 
A centralized certification authority would not 
execute actual certification of products; instead it 
would prepare, monitor and accredit the 
certification centers, making sure that they are 
compliant to the shared certification procedures 
and tools. 
• 
Location transparency of the certification process 
is a necessary requirement. It means that it 
shouldn't be easier to pass certification at one 
centre rather than another. 
• 
Certification laboratories might be included in 
the process; these would be industrial champions 
or 
centres 
of 
excellence 
in 
a 
specific 
technological area (e.g., FPGAs), and would 
perform partial certification in that area for 
components developed by themselves or others. 
This is an extension of the concept of self 
certification. 
• 
Redundancy should be considered to address 
occasionally increasing certification workload, or 
problems in the certification process. 
 
A description of the structure of the European SDR 
certification network is provided in Figure 2, where 
Waveform and SDR platform certification centers are 
dependent on the national certification centre, which are 
connected to the centralized certification and accreditation 
authority. Note that centre for the validation against 
spectrum regulations can be affiliated both to a national 
centre and the centralized centre to include testing of 
roaming functionality among different nations. 
 
The optimum number of certification centers is difficult 
to decide: some European larger countries might choose to 
create more than one certification centre, while smaller 
countries may decide to share the cost with other countries, 
or depend on larger countries for their certification needs. 
 

234
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
NA
NA
Central Certification and
Accreditation authority
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
National certification authority
Waveform certification centre
SDR platform certification centre
Conformance to spectrum regulations
NA
NA
Central Certification and
Accreditation authority
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
Central Certification and
Accreditation authority
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
National certification authority
Waveform certification centre
SDR platform certification centre
Conformance to spectrum regulations
 
Figure 2 The structure of a potential European SDR certification network 
In addition to the benefits of redundancy and national 
independence achieved by having a network of certification 
centers instead of a single one, the network would mitigate 
the risk of a slightly different, de facto standard created by a 
single certification centre as in the case of multiple reference 
platforms. 
Finally, it would be mutually beneficial to maintain a 
close relationship with the US SDR certification centers 
(e.g., JTeL), to exchange know-how and possibly share 
procedures and tools. 
 
E. Waveform Libraries 
The creation of a central repository to maintain and 
distribute software modules is a common practice today. 
This approach provides the following advantages: 
• 
A central repository provides more control for 
the storage and maintenance of certified software 
modules. 
• 
The customers have easier access to a central 
repository. 
• 
It is easier to implement automatic download and 
updates for new versions/features. 
• 
It is easier to apply specific signatures on the 
certified software modules. 
 
A similar approach is proposed to store the certified SDR 
Waveforms: a common, centralized repository (called 
“Waveform Libraries”) of all the waveforms that have 
passed certification against the standards. This would 
facilitate over-the-air (OTA) downloads of complete 
waveforms as well as upgrades of waveforms and 
components. At the same time this repository would be a 
valuable tool during the certification process, by storing the 
results of the tests and keeping a history of past 
certifications. 
Because of the presence of various administration 
authorities in Europe, it is suggested to have a distributed, 
redundant architecture for this repository, possibly with one 
instance per certification centre and one per national 
authority; limited, stripped-down versions of the repository 
might even be included in the local, encrypted storage of the 
SDR base stations and terminals in the field. 
 
Central
Repository
National
Repository
National
Repository
National
Repository
National
Repository
Waveform repository
Waveform 
developer
Certification center
Submit waveform for 
certification
Delivery of certified waveform 
to the repository
User
Retrieves 
Waveform
Certificate 
Authority
Digital signatures
Repository Manager  
Figure 3 Waveform Repositories  
Such a repository could include source code, binary files 
of the waveforms, or both. Additionally, it would certainly 
include configuration files, model/interface files (UML, IDL, 
etc), other meta-data related to deployment and use (such as 
performance requirements), and documentation files both for 
the 
porting/certification 
process 
and 
for 
the 
deployment/usage. 
Some additional tags should accompany each waveform 
in the repository: information about certification status, the 
version of the standard with which the waveform complies, 
the communications protocol implemented, the license 
scheme, the owner of the waveform, etc. It will also include 
the information on the SDR platforms against which the 
waveform has been certified. 
The structure of the waveform libraries is described in 
Figure 3, where the main stakeholders are present. The 
waveform developer submits the waveform for certification 
to the certification centre. After the certification, the 
waveform is stored in the national and centralized repository 
together with the information described above.  The 
certificate authority can add digital signatures to the 
waveform to guarantee the security for the software 
download. Finally, the customer can collect or download the 
waveforms. 
 
F. Waveform Usage & Issue Tracking 
Alongside the waveform libraries discussed above, two 
additional tools are needed in the European SDR ecosystem 
to keep track of waveform usage and reported issues.  
One tool is used to track waveform usage in customers. 
Tracking waveform usage would be useful to understand the 
needs of the end-users/customers, to introduce upgrades 
(using a push-mode, rather than a pull-mode in order to 
deploy upgrades to all the users of a specific waveform or 
component), and possibly also for licensing and fees 
collection. A waveform usage directory (WUD) could be 

235
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
used to identify gaps in the SDR ecosystem and it would 
allow the central authorities to know which customers are 
using the waveforms. This tool can also be used to improve 
the efficiency of technical support and customization, but 
identifying which categories of customers are using specific 
waveforms. 
The other tool is a centralized issue tracking system (ITS) 
that is integrated with the Waveform Libraries and the 
WUD. Its objective is to report and track any issue related to 
the malfunction of certified SDR platforms and waveforms 
or a request for an enhancement. The centralized ITS will 
store the list of all the available waveforms and it will allow 
customers to report issues. 
The ITS will be based on a classical issues tracking flow. 
Once a new issue is reported by a customer, the issue 
tracking process will verify whether the issue reported is a 
known issue (i.e., a duplicate of another issue already 
registered in the ITS), if it is an enhancement request, if it is 
not really a waveform issue, but a deployment/configuration 
issue on the side of the end-user, or if it actually is a new 
issue that needs to have the developer's attention. When an 
issue is resolved by the developer, the ITS combined with 
the WUD would allow for efficient distribution of the update 
to all the users of the affected waveform or component. 
Finally, the centralized Issue Tracking System would 
allow the involved partners and supervising authorities to 
collect statistics about the quality of the waveforms and 
waveform components (thus measuring the performance of 
waveform developers), as well as the performance of the 
support organizations. 
 
IV. 
PERFORMANCE BENCHMARKING CERTIFICATION 
 
SDRs are generally considered soft real-time systems, in 
the sense that signal processing has to keep up with the data 
rate of the communications system. In other words, the result 
of a calculation must not only be accurate, but it must also be 
completed by a certain deadline, otherwise it will not 
validate the operational requirements. 
Each 
SDR 
waveform 
has 
specific 
performance 
requirements that need to be fulfilled, in order for it to run in 
real-time. These requirements might include definite 
processing speed from a processing core, a certain bandwidth 
or latency between processing cores, or the availability of 
certain components (e.g., an OCXO, or an RF front-end with 
a certain frequency range). 
 
A. Performance Metrics 
In order to compare the performance available on the 
platform with the performance required by the waveform, it 
is necessary to have a common way of describing and 
measuring these performance requirements and capabilities. 
This task is more or less complex if an SDR Set operates 
in single-mode than when it operates in multi-mode. With 
single-mode we mean that a single waveform will execute on 
the platform at any single moment, while with multi-mode 
we mean that multiple waveforms will execute on the 
platform at any single moment, with voice, video and data 
bridges between them. A terminal will probably operate in 
single mode most of the time, while a base-station is most 
likely to operate in multi-mode. 
In multi-mode, we should differentiate between the 
nominal (zero-load) performance that the platform can 
provide, and the actually available performance when one or 
more waveforms are already running on the platform. 
B. Performance Benchmarking 
Measuring the performance capacities of an SDR 
platform and the performance requirements of a SDR 
waveform is a valuable activity both during design phase and 
deployment phase. 
 
Specifically, performance benchmarking during the 
design phase of a platform or of a waveform can allow 
developers to identify components that are performance hogs 
and focus their optimization efforts on these bottlenecks. On 
the other hand, performance benchmarking is essential when 
making purchasing or waveform porting decisions: it enables 
authorities to determine the feasibility of a waveform porting 
onto a platform by providing assurance that the waveform 
performance requirements will be satisfied by the platform 
hardware and software resources. Furthermore, once porting 
feasibility has been guaranteed, benchmarking can drive the 
adaptation effort of the porting. 
 
Therefore the benchmarking has to start early in the 
design or porting process in order to limit the cost and time 
of the porting effort. 
C. Processing Cores Benchmarking 
CPU benchmarking might be the most widely studied 
and applied type of benchmarking in the computer industry. 
A wide selection of both open-source and proprietary  
solutions are available for CPU benchmarking; some of these 
tools are based on integer or floating  point arithmetic, others 
on linear algebra operations, and others still on compression 
or audio/video  encoding algorithms. 
 Here we mention only three of the most widely accepted 
CPU benchmarks: EEMBC's Coremark, HPL (High 
Performance Linpack) and Livermore loops. With minor 
modifications these tools could be ported to the SDR domain 
and be used in benchmarking GPPs/FPGAs and DSPs in 
SDR platforms. 
 
Each SDR HW component may be used for specific 
tasks. For example, DSPs concentrate mainly on FIR/IIR 
filters, FFT calculations and codec implementations, so 
naturally these are the kinds of operations benchmarked. An 
example of DSP benchmarking is BDTi's DSP Kernel 
Benchmarks: a proprietary solution that executes 12 different 
types of benchmarks on each processor. 
 
However, many of the graphics cards used for gaming 
PCs can be considered DSPs. In fact, several efforts are 
currently under way to exploit the DSP potential of 
commercial graphics processing units (GPUs) using either 

236
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
nVidia's CUDA or Apple's OpenCL for signal processing. 
 Furthermore, General Purpose Graphics Processing Unit 
(GPGPUs) such as the Cell processor (found in Sony's  
Playstation 3) or Intel's Larrabee show promising potential 
for mixed generic and signal processing  applications, which 
makes them a good fit for SDR applications. See [18] for a 
description of the use of GPGPU to realize SDRs on desktop 
computers with distributed resources. In both the above 
cases, a multitude of benchmarking tools already exists. 
D. Benchmarking the entire SDR platform 
In addition to the procedures discussed above, which 
target specific components of an SDR platform, it is 
important to complement them with benchmarks that test the 
SDR platform as a whole; these types of tests often reveal 
bottlenecks that might go undetected by examining 
individual components separately. 
 
The MPrime application is one such test. MPrime was 
originally developed to search for prime Mersenne numbers; 
however, due to the very intense performance requirements it 
imposes on the underlying platform, it is often used to stress-
test computing systems for stability. Other such stress-testing 
tools are the FurMark (a closed-source, Windows-only fur-
rendering performance and stability test for the GPU), or 
distributed computing clients such as the University of 
Berkeley's BOINC. 
 
Another tool that could be used for benchmarking the 
SDR platform as a whole is the Phoronix suite (see Figure 
4), probably the most widely used open-source test suite for 
Linux operating systems. It includes tests for the processor, 
memory, disk, and graphics and also for the system as a 
whole. 
 
 
Figure 4 Phoronix Test Suite v2.2.0. 
E. Power consumption benchmarking 
Another architectural area, which requires performance 
benchmarking, is power consumption/power efficiency. This 
is an issue that is increasingly seeing the attention of both 
industry and academia, and  a rather problematic area for the 
SDR domain (especially for handheld/portable radios) due to 
lower  power efficiency of the more generic hardware (both 
processing and RF) used in SDR compared to the  
specialized 
hardware 
used 
in 
traditional 
legacy 
communications systems. 
 
An example of benchmark tool for power consumption is 
PowerTop, an open-source tool released by Intel in 2007 as 
part of the LessWatts effort. PowerTop measures and tries to 
estimate the power consumption of software processes and 
device drivers, thereby identifying the culprits and guiding 
the effort of developers to minimize power consumption. 
This tool was successfully used in improving the power 
consumption of the Firefox browser and of several device 
drivers and kernel subsystems. 
F. Benchmarking of SDR waveforms 
While measuring the performance of a SDR platform is 
useful in the design, purchasing and waveform porting 
phases; it is instrumental to measure also the performance of 
an SDR waveform before porting or deployment. 
 
OProfile is a system-wide profiler for Linux systems, 
which allows developers to receive real-time statistics about 
the resource usage of all a waveform's components with low 
overhead (usually less than 1%), in addition to several post-
processing tools for analyzing these statistics. OProfile uses 
 hooks in the Linux kernel to raise interrupts, and can be 
used both on x86 and on ARM processors. 
 
OProfile is sponsored by some major companies such as 
IBM and RedHat. An OProfile plug-in exists for the Eclipse 
development framework, on which both Prismtech's and 
Zeligsoft's SDR development environments are based. 
G. Benchmark cheating 
Several incidents have been reported in recent years of 
cheating in CPU benchmarks, 3D accelerator benchmarks, 
Java VM benchmarks and others. This is commonly called as 
“benchmark cheating”. It is therefore important that 
statistically rigorous techniques are used when evaluating the 
performance of SDR components and systems in order to 
avoid deceptive advertising and other irregularities: 
 
• 
Run not one, but multiple different benchmark 
tools on the target in order to avoid “on-demand” 
benchmarks, i.e., benchmarks that favor one 
system vendor over the others. 
 
• 
Run each of the benchmark tools on the device-
under-test (DUT) a sufficiently large number of 
times, and clearly describe the statistical analysis 
on the vector of the results that led to the final 
benchmark output, so as to avoid e.g., reporting 
of only the best result obtained or arbitrarily 
discarding unfavorable results. 
 

237
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Finally, [19] describe tools from theoretical computer 
science including randomization, one-way functions, and 
trapdoor functions, which are used to improve the robustness 
of benchmarks against cheating. 
 
V. 
SECURITY CERTIFICATION 
As described in the previous sections, software 
portability should include security mechanisms, which 
guarantees the authenticity of the waveform and the trust of 
the SDR platform and waveforms.  
The certification process is based on certification criteria, 
which are defined on the basis of regulations, standards and 
industry specifications. There are usually two certification 
processes: one process to certify the SDR platform, which 
includes the HW platform, RTOS and software framework 
and the second process for the waveform certification.  
Additionally, a certification process should be established for 
the security requirements. Security certification is an 
essential protection against security threats like download of 
malicious software, masquerading of a SDR node and denial 
of service (DoS). The security certification process for SDR 
can be based on similar processes already defined in the 
computing domain like the Common Criteria [20].  Among 
other things, Common Criteria are used to develop 
Protection Profiles, which identify the security requirements, 
and Assurance Levels, which describe the rigor of testing 
and evaluation. The combination of Protection Profiles and 
Assurance Levels results in a Security Target against which 
the certification process can evaluate a product. This model 
is appropriate for the future use of SDR in different markets: 
military, public safety and commercial with different security 
requirements and equipment costs. For each domain, we can 
define different types of protection profiles and security 
targets.  
 
In comparison to conventional wireless equipment, the 
security certification process is particularly complex for SDR 
equipment because of the complexity of the technology and 
because various stakeholders could be involved in the 
certification process. A description of the challenges in the 
certification of non-functional requirements like security is 
provided in [9], which notes that certifications for security 
requirements are intrinsically different and more complex 
from those covering functional or process requirements, as 
they need to model the user as malicious for all the potential 
security threats and this increases the number of test cases.  
An additional level of complexity is the presence of 
supplementary stakeholders like the certificate authority, 
which should be part of the certification process. The number 
and the role of the stakeholders depend on the related 
domain: military, public safety and commercial domain. In 
the military and public safety domains there are usually well 
defined security certification processes for conventional 
equipment, which can be adapted to SDR technology.  
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Standardization is still an ongoing process, with multiple 
stakeholders involved. The goal of a European SDR 
standard is to facilitate waveform portability and system 
interoperability. To ensure these benefits, a network of 
certification 
centres 
accompanied 
by 
the 
relevant 
certification procedures and tools needs to be developed. 
These concepts were studied in the context of a European 
SDR Architectural Framework inside the WINTSEC 
project. The importance of performance metrics was 
described, as they're particularly important in order to 
validate the operational requirements in the public safety 
domain. Possible pitfalls were identified, including sensitive 
issues, either political or commercial. The need for 
Waveform Libraries, as well as a Waveform Usage & Issue 
Tracking directory were explained. Performance and 
Security aspects are particularly important in SDR 
technologies This paper described metrics, processes and 
tools for Performance benchmarking with special focus on 
mitigating the risk of performance cheating. This paper also 
described SDR security certification and the relationship to 
Common Criteria. 
Future work will focus on the definition of a 
comprehensive framework for security certification of SDR 
equipment. The framework will include identification of the 
main stakeholders and related roles, certification processes 
and the link to the standardization activity. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Part of this work was performed in the project 
WINTSEC which has received research funding from the 
European Community's Seventh Framework program. This 
paper reflects only the authors' views and the European 
Community is not liable for any use that may be made of the 
information contained therein. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
D. Symeonidis and G. Baldini, "European Standardization and SDR 
Certification,"  (AICT 2010), The Sixth Advanced International 
Conference on Telecommunications,  pp. 136-141, May 9-15, 2010, 
Barcelona, Spain. 
[2] 
J. Mitola III, "Software radios-survey, critical evaluation and future 
directions ," Telesystems Conference, 1992. NTC-92., National , vol., 
no., pp.13/15-13/23, 19-20 May 1992. 
[3] 
D. R. Stephens, B. Salisbury and K. Richardson, “JTRS infrastructure 
architecture 
and 
standards,” 
in 
Military 
Commun. 
Conf., 
2006.MILCOM 2006, Oct. 2006, pp. 1–5. 
[4] 
“The Joint Tactical Radio System (JTRS) and the Army’s Future 
Combat System (FCS): Issues for Congress” by Andrew Feickert. 
CRS Report for Congress. Order Code RL33161. November 17, 
2005. 
[5] 
“Why Can’t We Talk? Working Together To Bridge the 
Communications Gap To Save Lives”. A Guide for Public Officials 
by US National Task Force on Interoperability. February 2003. 
[6] 
US SAFECOM program.  Web site http://www.safecomprogram.gov. 
Last accessed 03/01/2011. 

238
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[7] 
V Blaschke, F. K. Jondral and S. Nagel, “Wireless Interoperability for 
Security - WINTSEC,” Nov. 2007, Software Defined Radio 
Technical Conf. Product Exposition November 2007. 
[8] 
J.M. Chapin, and W.H. Lehr, "Cognitive Radios For Dynamic 
Spectrum Access - The Path to Market Success for Dynamic 
Spectrum Access Technology," Communications Magazine, IEEE, 
vol.45, no.5, pp.96-103, May 2007. 
[9] 
J. Giacomoni and D.C. Sicker, "Difficulties in providing certification 
and assurance for software defined radios," New Frontiers in 
Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks, 2005. DySPAN 2005. 2005 
First IEEE International Symposium on, vol., no., pp.526-538, 8-11 
Nov. 2005. 
[10] I. F. Akyildiz, W. Lee, M. C. Vuran and S. Mohanty, “NeXt 
generation/dynamic 
spectrum 
access/cognitive 
radio 
wireless 
networks: a survey”. Computer Networks 50, 13 (Sep. 2006), 2127-
2159. 
[11] T. 
Ulversoy, 
"Software 
Defined 
Radio: 
Challenges 
and 
Opportunities," Communications Surveys & Tutorials, IEEE , vol.12, 
no.4, pp.531-550, Fourth Quarter 2010. 
[12] Wireless Innovation Forum (ex Software Defined Radio Forum). 
http://www.wirelessinnovation.org. Last accessed 03/01/2011. 
[13] Federal 
Communication. 
Commission, 
“In 
the 
matter 
of 
Authorization and Use of Software Defined Radios, First Report and 
Order,” Sept. 2001, FCC 01-264, ET Docket No. 00-47. 
[14] Federal Communications Commission, “In the matter of facilitating 
opportunities for flexible, efficient, and reliable spectrum use 
employing cognitive radio technologies, report and order,” Mar. 
2005, FCC 05-57, ET Docket No. 03-108. 
[15] ESSOR project announcement on European Defence Agency website, 
http://www.eda.europa.eu/genericitem.aspx?area=News&id=54. Last 
accessed 03/01/2011. 
[16] ETSI  Reconfigurable Radio System Technical Committee. 
www.etsi.org.. Last accessed 03/01/2011. 
[17] EULER project website, http://www.euler-project.eu/. Last accessed 
03/01/2011. 
[18] P. Szegvari and C. Hentschel, “An Universal Framework for Scalable 
Software Defined or Cognitive Radios Running on Desktop 
Computers” December. 2009, SDR'09 Technical Conference & 
Product Exposition. 
[19] J. Cai, A. Nerurkar and Min-You Wu, "Making benchmarks 
uncheatable," Computer Performance and Dependability Symposium, 
1998. IPDS '98. Proceedings. IEEE International , vol., no., pp.216-
226, 7-9 Sep 1998. 
[20] NIAP Common Criteria Evaluation and Validation Scheme. 
Available: http://www.niap-ccevs.org/cc-scheme/. Last accessed 
18/01/2011.
 

