263
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, a cognitive radio network (CRN) 
model is presented. In this model, the control of the CRN is 
distributed among the frequency spectrum considered for 
transmission using cognitive pilot channels (CPCs). This control 
is performed by using frequency-division and time-division 
multiplexing techniques. Frequency-division is used to divide 
the spectrum into predetermined frequency slots in which 
cognitive radio users (CRUs) communicate. Then, the frequency 
slots are divided into sub-frequency slots, some of which are 
defined as CPC and used by the CRUs to communicate with a 
central cognitive base station (CCBS) and to determine 
availability in a frequency slot. Time-division is used to 
determine if a primary user (PU) has accessed the channel used 
by CRUs. Using this time-division approach, presence of PUs is 
detected. We have designed a CRN able to work with today’s 
available technologies and CRU devices that use different 
frequency bands of operation. Since in terms of energy, this 
control can be very inefficient because at specific periods of time 
the network might be completely used, a method for energy 
reduction in a centralized cognitive radio network (CRN) is 
presented. Results of the performance of the network will be 
presented in terms of the number of CRU and the time these 
CRUs use the CPCs for control.  
 
Index Terms— Cognitive Pilot Channel; Cognitive Radio 
Networks; Dynamic Spectrum Access; Medium Access Control 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
A basic model for controlling and signaling a Cognitive 
Radio Network (CRN) was presented in [1]. Considering that 
fixed spectrum licensing has produced apparent scarcity in 
the wireless frequency spectrum [2-3], strategies such as 
Cognitive Radio (CR) have been suggested for efficient 
spectrum occupation. The CR systems have the ability to 
detect free frequency slots in the spectrum, i.e. “white 
spaces”, and to allocate the CR communications in these 
white spaces by using dynamic spectrum access (DSA) 
mechanisms [4-6]. CR has already been considered as the 
main technology for IEEE standards, such as IEEE 802.22, 
which is the standard for Wireless Regional Area Network 
(WRAN) using white spaces in the TV frequency spectrum 
and for standards related to DSA networks that are comprised 
in the IEEE SCC41 [2-3, 6].  
 
 
In general, a CRN should be able to perform 4 tasks 
efficiently, spectrum sensing, spectrum decision, spectrum 
sharing, and spectrum mobility [5]. Spectrum sensing refers 
to the identification of the most likely white spaces in a 
specific time. Spectrum decision refers to the process of 
deciding in which white spaces to allocate communications 
[5]. The spectrum sharing function consists on maximizing 
the cognitive radio users (CRUs) performance without 
disturbing Primary Users (PUs) and other CRUs; this is one 
of the main challenges for opportunistic spectrum access 
(OSA) in CRN [5, 7]. Spectrum mobility is the CRU ability to 
leave the frequency portion of the spectrum occupied when a 
PU starts using the same frequency portion and then, to find 
another suitable frequency slot for communication [5]. 
Spectrum sensing and spectrum mobility must be guaranteed 
in order to implement an efficient CR Medium Access 
Control (MAC). 
Several CR MAC protocols have been developed over the 
premise of the presence of a dedicated common control 
channel [8, 9]. In this CR MAC approach, all CRU must be 
able to communicate in this common control channel. Thus, 
the CR capacity is under-utilized, since data communications 
cannot be sent or received on the common control channel. 
The CR MAC protocols that improve this performance are 
based on multi-channel MAC protocols. This approach can be 
considered for efficient spectrum utilization because the CRN 
must operate in different frequency bands. The main 
difference between multi-channel and CR MAC protocols is 
that in the CR MAC protocols, the presence of PUs is 
considered. Multi-channel MAC protocols can be categorized 
in dedicated control channel, split phase, common hopping, 
and default hopping [10]. Other than the aforementioned 
dedicated control channel approach, these multi-channel 
MAC protocols need some kind of user synchronization to 
determine the control channel beforehand. Furthermore, in 
multi-channel MAC protocols, all CRU must be able to use 
the same frequency channels, which is not always the case in 
heterogeneous systems. A comparison among our proposal, 
CPCDF-MAC, multi-channel MAC protocols from [10] and 
existing CR MAC protocols from [8] is shown in Table I. 
 Distributed Control and Signaling using Cognitive Pilot Channels in a Centralized 
Cognitive Radio Network  
Nicolás Bolívar and José L. Marzo  
Broadband Communications and Distributed Systems Group (BCDS) 
Universitat de Girona 
Girona, Spain 
E-mail: nbolivar@eia.udg.edu, joseluis.marzo@udg.edu  

264
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
The utilization of beacons was suggested as a solution for 
spectrum sharing in [11], using these beacons to control the 
devices 
medium 
access 
into 
the 
frequency 
bands. 
Architectures with more than one beacon have been proposed 
to improve performance [12]. Decisions based on channel 
occupancy are performed by combining the information 
obtained in these beacons using data fusion techniques. The 
most common data fusion techniques to decide whether a 
particular frequency band is occupied are voting rules and 
logical operations [13]. In these proposals, the beacons are 
sent by the PU through a cooperative control channel or a 
beacon channel, with the latter being considered a better 
option in [14]. This approach has two main disadvantages for 
implementation 
in 
a 
CRN 
with 
today’s 
available 
technologies; the first is that a new set of primary users must 
exist or new hardware must be developed since the PUs 
should inform the nearby CRU about their presence, and the 
second disadvantage is that a new channel must be reserved 
for the beacon signals.  
A cognitive pilot channel (CPC) is a solution proposed in 
the E2R project for enabling communication among 
heterogeneous wireless networks. The CPC consists on 
controlling frequency bands in a single or various “pilot” 
channels, which is analogue to the beacon proposal. In both 
CPC and beacons proposal, there are “in-band” transmission, 
i.e. information transmitted in the same logical channels of 
the data transmission, and “out-band” transmission, i.e. 
information transmitted in different channels of the data 
transmission. Studies have been conducted in [15-18] to 
define the quantity of information that should be transmitted 
in the CPC, the bandwidth for each CPC, and the “out-band” 
and the “in-band” transmission or other solutions with a 
combination of both. The IEEE P1900.4 group, part of the 
IEEE SCC41, has accepted CPC as part of the architecture for 
the CR Access [16]. 
In the E2R project, for achieving communication between 
heterogeneous nodes and networks, and also scalability, a 
large band is divided into several sub-bands with one local 
CPC (LCPC). This LCPC is used for accessing a network, 
and informing the devices about the operator, frequencies and 
radio access technologies in this network [15-16]. In [17], 
CPC is considered for radio environment discovery, 
reconfiguration support and terminal radio environment 
information and context awareness. We expand the use of 
CPC in order to control the CRN. The objective is to build a 
CRN using today’s available technologies that are able to 
support heterogeneous frequency CRU devices, i.e. CRU that 
use different operation frequencies, while using the spectrum 
as effectively as possible.  
To control the CRN, joint time and frequency control for 
assuring effective spectrum sharing are used. For transmitting 
channel availabilities, network discovery and channel 
petitions, a frequency-based approach using beacons in a CPC 
is proposed. The utilization of the CPCs instead of a 
dedicated control channel allows heterogeneous systems to 
communicate in our CRN. In a first approach, a central 
cognitive base station (CCBS) sends beacons via parallel 
communication in sub-channels of all available frequency 
slots. With this approach, the use of all available frequency 
bands for communications was guaranteed. When a CRU 
requested access in the CRN, the CRU already knew which 
channels were available because of these beacons. However, 
in terms of energy, transmitting through every available 
channel would be inefficient. This is because the entire 
wireless spectrum channels would be occupied in a specific 
moment. Considering this problem, new alternatives are 
explored to reduce the energy used for signaling cognitive 
radio users (CRU) channel availability.  
Among the strategies that might be applied to decrease this 
amount of energy are: reducing the number of channels 
and/or amount of time/symbols used for signalization, and 
recognizing patterns of transmission. Since the network is 
centralized, collisions on entrance of CRUs are reduced. 
Considering that CRUs might also be capable of recognizing 
patterns of occupancy, to reduce the energy used for sensing, 
signaling and transmission. For this reason, Cognitive Radio 
technology has also been considered as an alternative to 
reduce energy consumption for wireless communications [19]. 
In [20], we explained the use of a distributed control and a 
centralized database for reducing the amount of energy used 
to signal this availability in the CRN. A complementary 
control based on a time-division approach, in which the PU 
entrances are detected via time slots, is also used. Finally, in 
this paper we present the performance of the network using 
this energy reduction method in our CRN with distributed 
control. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section II introduces the model of the network. Section III 
presents the expected results of our proposal and Section IV 
provides a discussion of our work.  
II. PROPOSED MODEL 
A. CCBS Control Architecture 
The proposed model of the CRN is an infrastructure-based 
architecture for effective spectrum access, sharing and 
management. The main reason for using a centralized model 
is to concentrate wideband spectrum sensing and spectrum 
decision in the central station and, as a consequence, to 
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON AMONG CR MAC PROTOCOLS 
Protocol 
Specific 
Control 
Channel 
Time 
Synchronizat
ion Needed 
Multiple 
Transceivers 
Support for 
Heterogeneous 
Frequency Devices 
Common Control 
Channel 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
Common Hoping/ 
Default Hoping 
Sequence 
No 
Yes 
No 
Partial 
OSA-MAC 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
HC-MAC/ OS-
MAC 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
CPCDF-MAC 
(Proposal) 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
 

265
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
reduce operations and the hardware required in the CRU 
devices. A basic representation of the centralized CRN model 
can be seen in Fig. 1. The elements of our CRN are the CCBS 
and the CRUs, which operate and coexist with the PUs.  
 
 
In Fig. 1, CRU1 is communicating with the CCBS 
(CCBS1), while PU1 is communicating with PU2. PU1 
transmission is within the range of the CCBS1 and CRU1. 
This means that the communication between CRU1 and 
CCBS1 must be performed in a different frequency slot than 
the one that the PUs is using. Hence, in order to ease CR 
operation, a CR radio spectrum model that uses fixed 
frequency slots for both CR frequency sensing and CR 
medium access is proposed. A frequency/time representation 
of the corresponding scenario is also shown in Fig. 1. 
In the proposed architecture, we assume that the 
management of the network is performed in the CCBS, which 
permits to reduce the amount of processes from the CR users 
(CRU)’ terminals and therefore, keeping those terminals 
simple while using today’s available technologies. We 
address the spectrum sharing problem, since we assume that 
the CCBS decides which channel to assign for each CRU, 
according to the available channels and the characteristics of 
the CRU. The architecture of a CCBS is shown in Fig. 2. 
 
 
The CCBS is composed of two major modules, information 
and processing module and transceiver module is proposed. 
The information and processing module is divided in five 
sub-modules: sensing, database, digitalization, channel 
control and communications. In the sensing sub-module, the 
CCBS scans the analog radio frequency spectrum, which is 
assumed to be perfectly and continuously sensed. In the 
digitalization sub-module, the analog sensed signal is 
digitalized 
within 
predefined 
frequency 
slots. 
An 
Analog/Digital (A/D) converter is used considering the 
thresholds determined for each channel according to the 
location. A logical “1” is then assigned if a communication 
exists in a frequency slot; otherwise a logical “0” is assigned. 
This information is stored as a vector in the database sub-
module, which also provides the specifications of the location 
that are loaded into the digitalization sub-module. In 
addition, the database sub-module stores information related 
to the CRU frequency assignments from the channel control 
and the communication sub-modules. The channel control 
sub-module uses a frequency subdivision of the frequency 
slots (sub-frequency slots). In those sub-frequency slots, 
CCBSs and CRUs exchange both control and data 
information. The channel control sub-module is responsible 
for controlling which CRUs are communicating and the 
frequency slots used. In this sub-module, CRUs are assigned 
free frequency slots to communicate. This information is sent 
in a vector to the control of the transceiver module, while it is 
also kept in the database. Fig. 3 shows the division in 
frequency 
and 
sub-frequency 
slots. 
Finally, 
the 
communications 
sub-module 
is 
responsible 
of 
data 
communication, which uses the frequency slot that has been 
defined in the previous sub-module. 
 
Fig. 2. CCBS Control Architecture 
 
Fig. 1. CRN Model 

266
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
The Transceiver Module is divided into 3 sub-modules, 
control, communication and coordination. These sub-modules 
are responsible for communicating the information coming 
from the information and processing module with the control 
module of the CRUs, the communication module of the 
CRUs, and with other CCBSs for cooperation, respectively. 
This architecture allows cooperation among the base stations 
of adjacent CRNs by using in each sub-channel a logical OR 
with the data from other CCBS. However, in this paper we 
are not considering the possible coordination among CRN. 
In this paper, only the CRN control is studied; the control 
algorithm for the CCBS is represented in Fig. 4. In this 
figure, the frequency spectrum sensing and A/D conversion 
block represent the equivalent processes that are shown in the 
CCBS Algorithm. On the other hand, the channel control 
block from Fig. 2 is divided into CCBS Control Broadcast 
Transmission, CCBS-CRU Control Communication and the 
time synchronization needed. It is worth to mention that both 
database 
storage 
and 
information 
and 
control 
transmission/reception are considered for the algorithm as 
part of the CCBS Control Broadcast Transmission and 
CCBS-CRU Control Communication processes. 
 
 
In the following section, the control of the system is 
explained, considering the control processes of the CCBS 
Algorithm. The algorithm is also related to each of the 
required dynamic functionalities for CRN, Dynamic Spectrum 
Access (DSA), Dynamic Spectrum Sharing (DSS) and 
Dynamic Spectrum Management (DSM) [7]. 
B. CCBS – CRU Control 
The CCBS-CRU Control Communication is performed 
under three different scenarios, CRU network discovery, CRU 
medium access and while CRU data communication is being 
transmitted. DSA is present for the first two scenarios, DSS 
for the last two, while DSM only occurs for the last one. For 
the CR network discovery and from the CRU perspective, the 
process is as follows. When a new CRU enters into a CCBS 
range, this CRU scans in its possible transmission channels, 
and sends in an available channel an identification frame that 
consists on: petition to enter, ID of the device, and type of 
device. This frame is sent in a frequency-based approach, 
since a CRU can enter for the first time to the network at any 
moment. When the CCBS receives this request, acknowledges 
the CRU type of device, keeps this information into memory, 
and sends a confirmation message. The CRU then waits for 
confirmation of the corresponding CCBS, and synchronizes 
itself with the CCBS.  
From the CCBS perspective, a broadcast signal is first sent 
in one or more of all the available frequency slots in which 
CRUs are able to communicate. This is the CCBS Control 
Broadcast Transmission process in Fig. 4. Since a CRU can 
enter to the CRN at any moment, time synchronization does 
not exist yet, and a frequency beacon mechanism is proposed. 
This consists in a two bit signal sent in the first two sub-
frequency slots shown in Fig. 3 of all the available channels. 
The set of values corresponding to control are detailed in 
Table II. 
 
When a CRU is trying to use the CRN, a message 
containing the identification frame is received from the CRU, 
and the process in the CCBS consists on determining if the 
information received is valid, i.e. no errors in the reception, if 
the CRU can access the CRN, and if both conditions are 
fulfilled, the CRU is accepted and its presence in the network 
is stored in the database.  
According to the channel and device characteristics, the 
CRU medium access might be performed in a time-based 
approach or a frequency-based approach. Since the analysis 
for the 2 bit message is the same for both frequency division 
and time division based approaches, the case for the 
frequency-based approach is explained, without losing 
generality. The process for the CRU Medium Access to the 
network is then similar to the previously shown process for 
 
 
Fig. 3. Frequency slot and sub-frequency slot division of the spectrum 
TABLE II.  
DISTRIBUTION OF CONTROL BITS FOR THE 
PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE 
Bit 1/Bit 2 
Process 
00 
CCBS and CRU coordination for using a 
channel 
01 
CRU request to use a channel 
10 
CCBS announcing availability 
11 
Frequency Slot occupied, CRU must leave 
immediately 
 
no
SENSING 
(from Frequency 
Spectrum - 
Analog) and
DIGITALIZATION 
(A/D Conversion)
Frequency slot 
free (fsi = 0)?
Secondary (CRU) 
transmission? (DB 
Search)
CCBS CONTROL 
BROADCAST 
TRANSMISSION 
CCBS-CRU 
CONTROL 
COMMUNICATION
CCBS TIME 
SYNCHRONIZATION 
yes
yes
no
i = 0                    i = N-1
 
Fig. 4. CCBS Algorithm per each frequency slot i (fsi) 

267
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
network admission. The differences are that the CRU is 
already present in the network, so there is no need to 
communicate the identification frame again and that after 
being admitted in a channel, data communication is the 
process that continues in the next time slot. The CCBS-CRU 
Control Communication process can be described then as in 
Fig. 5. When the CCBS receives information from a CRU in 
a communication channel, the CCBS compares this 
information with its database. If the CCBS does not identify 
this information as coming from a known CRU, the CRU 
admission process is started. If the CRU is already registered 
in the CRN, but this CRU is not communicating, the CRU 
confirmation process is activated. In the case this CRU has 
been 
already 
assigned 
a 
frequency 
slot, 
the 
data 
communication process is performed. 
 
 
When a CRU data communication is already established, 
and since PU communication can enter at any moment, a 
time-based approach is implemented in order to discover PU 
presence. This frequency and time system allows the 
elimination of a dedicated control channel for spectrum 
sharing. Using the slotted predefinition, if a transmission is 
received in a moment no transmission should be performed, 
we assume that a PU is communicating and, then, the channel 
is evacuated and the process of assigning a channel restarts, 
keeping into memory the last information that was going to 
be transmitted. For effective use of the wideband spectrum, 
we also propose a multi-channel approach, since several 
cognitive users might communicate in different channels. For 
the analysis of the system, we consider each communication 
channel separately, since it is transparent for the CRU in 
which channel is transmitting. An example of the time-based 
approach for determining PU entrance in the operation range 
of a CRN is depicted in Fig. 6, which shows the utilization in 
time of a frequency slot by both PU and CRUs. 
 
 
 
In [20], two additional characteristics are added to the 
CRN model of [1] to reduce broadcast transmissions. The first 
one is that CRU synchronization will be performed as 
follows: Since CRUs know the duration of the time slot, the 
CRU will search during a time slot in its channels for 
continuous transmission. If a CRU finds a PU-free channel, 
the device will send a signal for announcing that this CRU 
wants to access the network. A channel occupied by a CRU 
will be identified because of the time slots used for control, so 
this scheme will not introduce collisions among CRUs.  
The second reduction consists on using the ability the 
CCBS has to identify the channels every CRU in the network 
is able to use. In this manner, the CCBS will only send a new 
broadcast transmission for each channel petition. This means 
that now, the entire wireless frequency spectrum considered 
for the CRN domain will not be used at several moments. 
Using these alternatives, the flux diagram from Fig. 5 
presents two cases: a CRU wants to access the CRN, and 
another CRU exists in one of the CRU devices’ available 
channels. In this case, the new CRU senses the occupation, 
and when the device senses no transmission, it synchronizes 
with the CRN and could send its network admission petition 
or use a free channel to transmit, since the CRU device is 
already synchronized in time with the CRN.  
The other case is that no CRU is communicating in the 
network within the available channels for the new CRU 
device. In this situation, only PUs could be using the 
channels; this means that the CRU is not able to recognize 
the time slot that must be used for synchronization. The CRU 
then uses its time sensing capability to detect that a channel is 
being occupied for more time that the time-slot duration, so 
the CRU does not transmit through that channel. Next, the 
CRU device must find another channel to synchronize. If 
there is no available channel for this CRU, this device cannot 
access the CRN. When an available channel is found, the 
CRU then simply sends a petition to use the channel that the 
CCBS responds in the corresponding time slot, so the new 
CRU can be now synchronized to the network. 
In Fig, 7, an example of the CRU admission in the CRN is 
shown by using the same example as in Fig. 5. CRU 3, which 
has three channels for communications, “senses” its 
environment. Channel 1 is being used by a PU, so this 
 
Fig. 6. Frequency slot utilization by both PU and CRUs (in time) 
START
CRU already 
communicating?
DATA 
COMMUNICATION
END
CRU already in the 
network?
CRU 
ADMISSION 
(Discovery)
CRU 
CONFIRMATION 
(Medium Access)
no
yes
yes
RECEIVE 
INFORMATION 
FROM CRU
Fig. 5. CRU Admission in the CRN from the CCBS perspective 
 

268
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
channel is unavailable to CRU transmission. Channel 2 is 
occupied by CRU1. This makes the channel unavailable for 
CRU 3 use, but CRU 3 can detect the time slot position using 
CRU 1 transmission. Using that information, CRU 3 can 
access Channel 3 in time t2. 
 
 
III. RESULTS 
 In this section, the difference in expected transmission 
generated by both CRU interference to PU, and CRUs not 
having a frequency slot (channel) to transmit, which will be 
called transmission errors, will be analyzed. Due to the fact 
that none of the CR-MAC protocols shown in Table I present 
support for heterogeneous devices, no comparison is 
performed in this section. Results will be presented in terms 
of the number of CRU users and the relation of time dedicated 
for the Cognitive Control Algorithm.  
In [20], a simulation is then performed in MATLAB to 
show the obtained results. The values used are the following: 
number of channels (n) = 128, number of sub-channels (m) = 
256, control time/ (control + data) time = 1/10, and time 
duration (td) = 500 units of time. In Fig. 8, channel 
occupancy and power used when the CCBS sends broadcast 
signaling to announce availability is shown. 
 
As expected, when CCBS sends broadcast transmission, 
every channel is occupied either by PUs (thick blue lines) or 
the CCBS broadcast transmission (thin lines). In Fig. 9, the 
power used and channel occupancy in the proposal is shown. 
 
 
In Fig. 9, power used with the new model when CCBS in 
[1] would be sending broadcast transmission is shown. In this 
case, thick lines represent PU transmission, while thin lines 
represent CRU sending information to the CCBS. CRU lines 
in this case are thicker than in the previous model, since more 
information is sent in the first communication. This data is 
not sent later, as in [1], unless the information is asked to be 
submitted again by the CCBS 
The results show that in [20], in terms of energy reduction, 
the modifications provide the advantage of eliminating CCBS 
broadcasting transmission in all available channels, as 
explained in the previous section. This means a reduction per 
unit of time of (number of available channels) x (broadcasting 
transmission time) x (power used for beacon transmission).  
The reduction might be also seen when CRUs are 
communicating or requesting communications. As some 
CRUs might be using or requesting channels, the energy 
decrease is not as straightforward as in the admission process. 
This reduction depends not only on the usage of the network, 
but on the numbers of requests at a specific moment. 
An important measure for a CRN is how much information 
in terms of bits is lost due to interference to PU and how 
much CRUs interferes PUs. Using the same parameters, n = 
128, m = 256, td = 500, a simulation is performed. In Fig. 10, 
the information lost for the new model due to PU and CRU 
interference is shown.  
 
Fig. 9. Power used in the new model in t = 481, when CCBS in [3] would send 
broadcast transmission. 
 
Fig. 8. Power used in the model presented in [3] in t = 481, when CCBS sends 
broadcast transmission. 
 
 
Fig. 7. Frequency slot utilization by both PU and CRUs (in time) 

269
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
The results show that transmission errors decrease when 
the portion of the time that is used for control increases; 
however, the data that could be transmitted in the same 
amount of time also decreases. Effective transmission errors, 
which we define as Eff. Trans. Errors = Transmission 
Errors/Data Transmitted, might provide then a better 
guidance for choosing a Control/(Control+Data) rate for the 
CRN. Fig. 11 shows the effective transmission errors per 
CRU number. 
 
 
Results are very similar for different control time / control 
plus data time ratios. This is expected from the construction 
of the algorithm. Errors due to channel unavailability, defined 
as availability errors, in average, are shown in Fig. 12.  
 
 
Results from Fig. 12 show that the availability errors are 
quite random; however, when the number of repetitions 
increases, we might conclude these errors are dependent on 
the CRU Number since more users might be trying to use the 
same number of channels. Combining these results with the 
ones from Fig. 11, and since the idea is to transmit as much 
data and less control information as possible, we conclude 
that it is possible to construct a CRN using a CPC with a low 
Control/(Control+Data) ratio. 
IV. DISCUSSION 
The results indicate that a basic CR-MAC protocol can be 
implemented through CPC channels. Using this premise, a 
CRN composed by total heterogeneous wireless frequency 
devices could be developed. A comparison with a common 
control channel based CR-MAC, for future work, will permit 
to infer if better results could be obtained combining a 
common control channel approach with the CPC approach. 
The expected results are that controlling a CRN using a 
CPC, while not significant, still affect the performance of the 
PU compared to a CRN controlled by a common control 
channel, while allowing the presence of heterogeneous 
frequency CRU. Lowering the transmission and availability 
errors is also a must in future proposals. The results will be 
compared with the obtained in other CPC proposals such as 
in [16] and [18].  
The results also indicate that a reduction in energy 
transmission due to signalization can be achieved by using 
the basic CRU sensing properties. Since the CRU can only 
detect values above a specific threshold for a determined 
period of time, the CRU might detect PU transmission due to 
its continuity, and CRU transmission due to its periodicity. 
Using that property, broadcasting transmissions, which are 
the ones that contribute to energy waste are reduced. Another 
advantage of using this property is that the CCBS is already 
aware of the available channels of each CRU. This is because 
in the admission process, each CRU has already indicated its 
characteristics. Considering that the CCBS has this 
knowledge, direct channel assignation can be performed, so 
broadcast transmission is also reduced. 
On the other hand, broadcasting signaling would still be 
needed in some cases. The minimum number of channels to 
communicate with all CRUs in the CRN can be found 
according to the characteristics of the CRU, and the access 
control would be performed through those channels. Further 
works will be developed in this area to find the trade-offs for 
applying this combined approach while still guaranteeing 
effective heterogeneous communication. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Enrique Rodríguez-Colina 
for all his collaboration in the description of the model used 
in this paper. Part of this work was supported by the 
Department of Universities, Research and Information 
Society (DURSI) of the Government of Catalonia, European 
Social Funds (SGR-1202); by a FI Grant from the 
Government of Catalonia, in accordance with the Resolution 
IUE/2681/2008, and also by the Spanish Government 
(TRION MICINN TEC2009 - 10724) 
 
 
Fig. 11. Effective Transmission Errors 
 
Fig. 10. Transmission Errors 
 
Fig. 12. Availability Errors 

270
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
N. Bolívar, J. L. Marzo and E. Rodríguez-Colina, “Distributed Control 
using Cognitive Pilot Channels in a Centralized Cognitive Radio 
Network,” in the Sixth Advanced International Conference in 
Telecommunications, pp. 30-34, May 2010, ISBN: 978-0-7695-4021-4. 
[2] 
Overview of SCC41 and the 1900.x Working Groups. IEEE. 
http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/scc41/. Retrieved 2011-01-18. 
[3] 
M. Muck, S. Buljpre, P. Martigne, A. Kousaridas, E. Patouni, M. 
Stamatelatos, K. Tsagkaris. J.Yang, O. Holland, “IEEE P1900.B: 
Coexistence Support for Reconfigurable, Heterogeneous Air Interfaces,” in 
IEEE Dyspan 2007,  pp. 381-389, April 2007. 
[4] 
J. Mitola III and G. Q  Maguire, Jr., “Cognitive Radio: Making Software 
Radios More Personal,” IEEE Personal Communications (Wireless 
Communications), vol.6, no. 4, pp. 13-18, August 1999. 
[5] 
I. F. Akyildiz, W. Y. Lee, M. C. Buran, and S. Mohanty, “A survey on 
spectrum 
management 
in 
cognitive 
radio 
networks,” 
IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 40-48, April 2008. 
[6] 
IEEE 802 LAN/MAN Standards Committee 802.22 WG on WRANs 
(Wireless Regional Area Networks). IEEE. http://www.ieee802.org/22/. 
Retrieved 2011-01-18.  
[7] 
F. Wang, M. Krunz, and S. Cui, “Spectrum Sharing in Cognitive Radio 
Networks,” in IEEE 27th Conference on Computer Communications, 
INFOCOM 2008, pp. 36-40, April 2008. 
[8] 
H. Wang, H. Qin, and L. Zhu, “A Survey on MAC Protocols for 
Opportunistic Spectrum Access in Cognitive Radio Networks,” in IEEE 
International Conference on Computer Science and Software Engeneering 
2008, pp.  214-218, December 2008. 
[9] 
S. - Y. Lien, C. - C. Tseng, and K. - C. Chen, “Carrier Sensing based 
Multiple Access Protocols for Cognitive Radio Networks,” in IEEE 
Conference on Communications 2008, ICC 2008, pp. 3208-3214, May 
2008. 
[10] A. Yau, P. Komisarczuk, and P. D. Teal, “On Multi-Channel MAC 
Protocols 
in 
Cognitive 
Radio 
Networks,” 
in 
Australasian 
Telecommunication Networks and Applications Conference 2008, 
ATNAC 2008, pp. 300-305, December 2008. 
[11] A. P. Hulbert, “Spectrum Sharing Through Beacons,” in IEEE 16th 
International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio 
Communications, pp. 989-993, September 2005. 
[12] S. Mangold, A. Jarosch, and C. Monney, “Operator Assisted Cognitive 
Radio and Dynamic Spectrum Assignment with Dual Beacons – Detailed 
Evaluation,” in First International Conference on Communication System 
Software and Middleware 2006, pp. 1-6, August 2006. 
[13] Z. Quan, S. Cui, H. V. Poor, and A. H. Sayed, “Collaborative Wideband 
Sensing for Cognitive Radios,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 25, 
no. 6, pp. 60-73, November 2008. 
[14] A. Ghasemi, and E. S. Sousa, “Interference Aggregation in Spectrum-
Sensing Cognitive Wireless Networks,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics 
in Signal Processing, vol 2, no. 1, pp. 41-56, February 2008. 
[15] End 
to 
end 
efficiency. 
E3. 
https://ict-
e3.eu/project/technical_highlights/5_enablers/enablers_2009_10.html. 
Retrieved 2011-01-18. 
[16] M. Filo, A. Hossain, A. R. Biswas, R. Piesiewicz, “Cognitive Pilot 
Channel: Enabler for Radio Systems Coexistence,” Second International 
Workshop on Cognitive Radio and Advanced Spectrum Management 
2009, CogART 2009, pp. 17-23, May 2009. 
[17] End to End Reconfigurability II (E2R II) White Paper, “The E2R II 
Flexible Spectrum Management (FSM) Framework and Cognitive Pilot 
Channel (CPC) Concept – Technical and Business Analysis and 
Recommendations,” pp. 1-52, November 2007. 
[18] O. Sallent, J. Pérez-Romero, R. Agustí, P. Cordier, “Cognitive Pilot 
Channel 
Enabling 
Spectrum 
Awareness,” 
IEEE 
Conference 
on 
Communications Workshops 2009, ICC Workshops 2009, pp. 1-6, June 
2009. 
[19] J. Palicot, M. Katayama, A. Nafkna, G.Ravera, M.Massoth, J. Perez-
Romero, “Challenges in Advanced Communications and Services,” Panel 
AICT 2010, IARIA Panels, May 2010. 
  
[20] N. Bolívar and J. L. Marzo, “Energy Reduction for Centralized Cognitive 
Radio Networks with Distributed Cognitive Pilot Channels,” Accepted at 
2010 Latincom, September 2010. 
                                                        
 
 

