LEOCast: An Optical Multicast Protocol for LEO
Satellites based on Optical Codewords
Maha Sliti ∗, Walid Abdallah †, and Noureddine Boudriga ‡
Communication Networks and Security Research Lab, University of Carthage
Ariana, Tunisia
Email: ∗slitimaha@gmail.com, †ab.walid@gmail.com, ‡nab@supcom.rnu.tn
Abstract—Satellite networks provide worldwide coverage and
support a large variety of services. Since Low Earth Orbit (LEO)
satellites offer short round-trip delays, they are progressively
becoming more and more important for real-time services, such
as voice, data and video trafﬁc. The majority of these services
need a mechanism to deliver data to several receivers. In the
present work, we propose the LEOCast protocol, which is an
Optical Multicast Protocol for LEO Satellites based on Optical
Codewords. This protocol can function in two modes: the ﬁrst
mode is based on the shortest paths and the second mode is based
on the virtual multicast trees paradigm. The optical multicast
protocol considers free space inter-satellites links that provide
high data rate transmission for real time services and it is based
on the optical switching concept using optical codewords. The
two proposed multicast modes are compared in terms of the
trafﬁc load and the number of used decoding functions. It is
shown that the optical multicast mode based on the virtual
multicast tree concept generates less trafﬁc and uses less decoding
functions when performing the optical multicast process on each
intermediate satellite. However, it is demonstrated that each
multicast mode is adapted to a type of payload (packet/burst)
depending on the required processing delay for each multicast
mode.
Keywords–LEO constellation; all optical multicast; virtual mul-
ticast tree; structured codewords; tunable optical decoder.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Satellite-based optical communication systems have be-
come a most promising technology for their global coverage
and high-speed inter-satellite and satellite-to-ground commu-
nication links. Compared to communication satellites in geo-
stationary orbit, the communication links to Low Earth Orbit
(LEO) satellites are characterized by lower propagation delay
and lower link attenuation because of the shorter distance,
resulting in the need for reduced transmission power. Con-
sequently, LEO satellites are becoming increasingly important
for real-time applications such as voice, teleconferencing and
video trafﬁc, which require a mechanism to deliver informa-
tion to multiple recipients. However, due to the rapidly and
periodically changing of the network topology caused by the
high mobility of satellites, the routing in satellite networks face
great challenges.
In [1], we propose the LEOCast protocol, which is an
Optical Multicast Protocol for LEO Satellites based on Optical
Codewords. This protocol can function in two modes: the ﬁrst
mode is based on the shortest paths and the second mode is
based on the concept of virtual multicast trees. For the two
modes, we identify each satellite in the LEO constellation
network by an optical codeword. In the ﬁrst mode, each inter-
mediate satellite considers four codewords indicating its direct
neighbors: two in the same orbit, and two in the neighboring
orbits. A shortest path is deﬁned in terms of the number of hops
and is established by favoring the inter-orbit on the intra-orbit
hop. In the second mode, the virtual multicast paradigm is used
in order to underline that the multicast tree is not physically
established but only built on the codewords structure used to
switch trafﬁc contrary to the ﬁrst proposed mode that requires
a route discovery process preceding the routing of a multicast
trafﬁc. In this approach, the virtual tree establishment consists
on the management of codewords structure.
In the literature, several multicast routing protocols were
proposed for satellite networks [2]–[11]. These approaches are
mainly proposed in the context of IP (Internet Protocol) and
mobile networks and then adapted to support multicast in LEO
networks. However, the multicast process in satellite networks
present more speciﬁc requirements compared to other types of
networks such as the need of high data bit rate transmission
and the scalability to support important multicast group and
payload sizes. These requirements can be achieved by optical
communication inter-satellite links.
The key contributions of our proposed LEOCast protocol
with respect to the previously published research are:
1)
The proposed multicast process is performed at the
optical layer based on optical switching, which allows
the multicast packets to be processed at very high
bit rates (the order of gigabits/second) without con-
version to the electronic domain. During the optical
multicast process, the received packets are delayed
in an optical buffer proposed in [12], in order to
provide a tunable delay for real time trafﬁc. We have
chosen an optical multicast approach due to the fact
that the transmission quality of the light beam is near
perfect. Indeed, this latter will not be affected by the
attenuation and the dispersion effects in free space.
2)
The optical switching concept is based on the optical
codewords, which are represented by a sequence of
pulses. Indeed, a codeword is assigned to each satel-
lite in the network and serves as an optical identiﬁer
of the satellite. Based on the received codeword
and the structure we build in, the trafﬁc will be
multicasted to one or several directions allowing to
reach the destination satellites.
3)
The LEOCast protocol is scalable since its perfor-
mance is not affected by the multicast group size
and the member combination in the multicast group.
56
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Therefore, the optical multicast module implemented
in each intermediate satellite is at most composed of
four tunable decoders.
4)
The parameters of the proposed multicast module
can be dimensioned depending on the trafﬁc stream
estimation. These parameters can be the number of
tunable decoders, the number of loops that composes
each decoder based on the length of codewords, the
ﬁber length of the Virtual Optical Memory (VOM)
[12] based on the size of packet, etc.
In this paper, we have extended the proposed work in [1],
by adding the following contributions:
•
At the presentation level: First, we have investigated
recent multicast approaches proposed for LEO con-
stellations, and we have presented the multicast re-
quirements in such type of networks. Second, we
have deﬁned the optical codewords, their mathemat-
ical characteristics and the principle of their encod-
ing/decoding process. Third, we have illustrated the
optical codeword structures that are used by the two
multicast modes, and we have discussed the type
of payload (packet/burst) adapted to each multicast
mode. Finally, we have presented the advantage of our
multicast protocol compared to the other protocols by
presenting the advantage of the optical link use. The
new added points have allowed to complete and to
extend our reference list.
•
At the design level: we have improved the design of
the optical multicast mode based on the virtual mul-
ticast tree concept. Indeed, the header attached to the
payload is well structured in order to reﬂect the virtual
multicast tree and to optically switch the multicast
trafﬁc without the need to establish the route from the
source to destination satellites. We have also consid-
ered two multicast directions: front/backward instead
of right/left. Infact, due to the mobility of satellites,
we need to consider the direction of movement in the
orbit and not the localization of satellites. Thus, each
intermediate satellite must treat two types of trafﬁc: an
inter-orbit trafﬁc appropriated to destination satellites
in other orbits and an intra-orbit trafﬁc appropriated
to destination satellites in the same orbit.
•
At the simulation level, we have extended the pro-
posed simulation by assessing the optical signal qual-
ity when multicasted from a transmitter satellite to
other satellite neighbors using Free Space Optical
links (FSO) with speciﬁc characteristics (distance and
wavelength). The objective is to evaluate the effect of
these criteria on the output signal quality. The optical
signal quality is assessed based on two main criteria:
the wavelength and the distance between satellites. We
can conclude, when performing the optical multicast
process, that the optical signal quality increases when
decreasing the FSO communication link wavelength
and the distance between receivers.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II presents the proposed multicast approaches for the LEO
constellation networks in the literature. The optical codeword
concept, the code sequences characteristics and the codewords
structures used by the two optical multicast modes are pre-
sented in Section III. The codeword based switching process,
which is the main optical signal operation in each satellite,
and the optical codeword association to each satellite in the
constellation, are presented in Section IV. In Section V, the all
optical multicast mode based on the shortest paths is described.
In Section VI, the all optical multicast mode based on the
virtual multicast trees is explained. The mobility management
in the two all optical multicasting approaches is discussed in
Section VII. Simulations and experimental results are given in
Section VIII. Finally, Section IX concludes the paper.
II.
MULTICAST IN LEO CONSTELLATION NETWORKS
With recent needs of high speed communication systems,
Free Space Optical links (FSO) become a most promising
technology for high-speed inter-satellite and satellite-to-ground
communication links [13]–[15]. A free space optical com-
munication system includes optical transmitter and receiver
satellites.
This type of links is preferred over Radio Frequency (RF)
communication because of having narrower beam widths due
to use of lasers, reducing the size of used antenna, which
reduces the weight of the satellite, minimizing the power used
for the communication system, and offering higher data rate.
The advantages of an optical communication link compared
to a RF link in free space are characterized by: 1) high data
rate, 2) less transmitter power consumption, 3) terminal design
with reduced size and weight, and 4) transparency to RF
interference.
Satellites can be directly linked by Inter-Satellite Links
(ISLs) to other satellites in the constellation as described in
Figure 1. ISLs provide direct communication paths between
satellites. The ISLs between a satellite and its neighbors in
the same orbital plane are called intra-satellite links, and its
links with its neighbors in neighboring orbits are called inter-
satellite links.
Figure 1. Inter-Satellite Links (ISL).
57
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

There are several orbits available for satellites to reside.
The orbits are low Earth orbit (LEO), medium Earth orbit
(MEO), highly elliptical orbit (HEO) and geosynchronous orbit
(GEO). LEO satellites are orbiting at low earth orbits with an
altitude generally between 500 km and 2000 km. Compared
to communication satellites in geostationary orbit, the com-
munication links to LEO satellites are characterized by lower
propagation delay and lower link attenuation because of the
shorter distance, resulting in the need for reduced transmission
power. Since LEO satellites, presented in Figure 2, provide
low propagation delay and low power requirements, they are
becoming increasingly important for real-time services, which
require a mechanism to forward data to several receivers. How-
ever, LEO satellite systems have mobile network topologies
and this dynamic topology makes data multicast difﬁcult.
Figure 2. The topology of LEO satellite networks.
In the literature, some multicast protocols including In-
ternet Group Management Protocol (IGMP) [2], Reverse-
Path Multicast (RPM) [3], Distance Vector Multicast Rout-
ing Protocol (DVMRP) [4], and the Multicast Extensions
to Open Shortest Path First (MOSPF) [5] consider periodic
message exchanges for the establishment and the management
of multicast trees, which can overload the network mainly
in the case of long communication periods between source
and destination users during a multicast session. At present,
only a few multicast routing schemes in the literature, have
been developed for satellite networks. In [6], a new core-
based shared tree algorithm, viz Core-cluster Combination-
based Shared Tree (CCST) algorithm and the weighted version
(i.e., w-CCST algorithm) are proposed in order to resolve
the channel resources waste problem in typical source-based
multicast routing algorithms in LEO satellite IP networks. In
[7], the authors associate to every multicasting routing problem
a Steiner tree problem. In this paper, a dynamic QoS (Quality
of Service) routing mechanism is proposed to support multiple
Steiner trees. In [8], a fast iterative distributed multicast routing
algorithm was developed based on the inherent characteristics
of satellite networks, which using distributed computing model
and signiﬁcantly reducing the algorithm computational com-
plexity. In [9], a QoS-Guaranteed Secure Multicast Routing
Protocol (QGSMRP) is proposed for satellite IP networks us-
ing the logical location concept to isolate the mobility of LEO
and HEO satellites. a novel triple-layered satellite network
architecture including GEO, HEO, and LEO satellite layers
is introduced. In [10], combining LEO satellites’ advantages
on transmitting real-time information with GEO’s ability of
big computing, a GEO/LEO Double-Layer Multicast Routing
Algorithm (DLMRA) is given. The proposed algorithm aims
to minimize cost of multicast trees, under the condition of the
available bandwidth bound and multicast tree delay bound.
In [11], the authors proposed a multicast routing for LEO
satellite constellation networks with high performance. The
algorithm uses the group members’ geographic information
to route multicast packets, with less memory, computer power
and signaling overhead.
The proposed approaches are mainly proposed in the
context of IP and mobile networks and then adapted to support
multicast in LEO networks. However, a multicast protocol
used for LEO satellites must address more speciﬁc require-
ments. First, a multicast protocol must provide low latency
and low overhead when transferring multicast packets in the
network since multicast applications are high data rate real-
time application (such as voice and video trafﬁc) and the
number of multicast packets can be very important. Second,
a multicast protocol must provide scalability when consid-
ering different trafﬁc sizes, groups and connection delays.
Furthermore, a multicast protocol must insure the security
of connections when establishing multicast trees, constructing
and transferring packets in the network. Thus, optical com-
munications between satellites, which are not considered by
the proposed approaches, can fulﬁll the cited requirements
for a multicast protocol in LEO satellite constellations. In
the literature, several approaches studied the optical multicast
aspect in Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM) networks
[16]–[19]. In this context, we propose the LEOCast protocol,
which is a multicast protocol based on free space optical
communication links between satellites.
III.
CODEWORD BASED SIGNAL STRUCTURES
In this section, we introduce the optical codeword concept
and its characteristics. Then, we present the codewords’ struc-
tures used by the two modes of the LEOCast protocol: 1) the
mode based on the shortest paths, and 2) the mode based on
the virtual multicast trees.
A. Codeword concept
Optical encoding is based on optical codeword sequences.
An optical codeword is a set of (”0”,”1”) sequences of length
N that satisﬁes certain auto-correlation and cross-correlation
constraints. Each ”0” or ”1” of a sequence is called a chip.
Optical encoding has a wide range of novel and promis-
ing applications, such as label switching and Optical Code
Division Multiple Access (OCDMA) multiplexing technology.
In OCDMA, each transmitted data bit is optically encoded
by a speciﬁc pulse sequence. The optical encoding operation
consists in representing the data bit by a code sequence either
in the time domain, the wavelength domain, or a combination
of both (2D-coding) [20]. The decoding operation is performed
by the receiver to recover the original data. We deﬁne optical
58
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 3. Shortest path structure.
Figure 4. Virtual tree structure.
coding/decoding as the process by which a code is inscribed
into, and extracted from, an optical signal.
B. Code sequences characteristics
An optical orthogonal code [21]–[23] is a family of (”0”,
”1”) sequences with maximum auto-correlation and mini-
mum cross-correlation in order to optimize the differentiation
between correct signal and interference. Code family that
have the best orthogonal propriety is optical orthogonal codes
(OOC). An OOC is deﬁned as a collection C of codewords
C = {c1, ..., cm}, characterized by a 4-uplet (N, w, λa, λc),
where N is the length of a codeword, and w is the Hamming
distance of a codeword, and for each ci, cj:
•
PN−1
t=0
ci
tci
t+k ≤ λa for every k ̸= 0
•
PN−1
t=0
ci
tcj
t+k ≤ λc for every k
Hence, λa and λc deﬁne the constraints on the auto-
correlation and the cross-correlation functions, respectively.
The above conditions indicate:
•
The number of ones in the zero-shift discrete auto-
correlation function should be maximized.
•
The number of coincidences of non-zero shift discrete
auto-correlation function should be minimized.
•
The number of coincidences of the discrete cross-
correlation function should be minimized.
In the case where λa = λc = λ, the OOC is represented
by the 3-tuple (N, w, λ) and called optimal OOC. | C |= m
is the cardinality of the code (i.e., the number of codewords
contained in the code family). For a code characterized by
(N, w, λ) the maximum number of codewords that belong to
this code family, denoted by Φ(N, w, λ) should satisfy [24]:
Φ(N, w, λ) ≤ (N − 1)(N − 2)....(N − λ)
w(w − 1)(w − 2)...(w − λ)
(1)
For λ = 1, the number of codewords is upper-bounded by:
| C |≤
 (N − 1)
w(w − 1)

(2)
where ⌊C⌋ denotes the integer portion of the real number
C.
A (N, w,λ) OOC can be considered as a family of sets
(of cardinality w) composed by integers modulo N. Each
among these sets speciﬁes the positions of the nonzero bits
in the codeword. For instance, the codeword 1101000 in
the OOC characterized by (7, 3, 1) can be represented by
{0, 1, 3}mod(7) because the positions of the bits set to one
are respectively 0, 1, and 3.
C. Path and tree based codeword for signal transmission
An optical codeword is assigned to each satellite in
the LEO constellation network. Therefore, each satellite is
uniquely identiﬁed by its assigned codeword, which is similar
to an address in our case. The total number of associated
codewords is equal to N ∗ M with N is the number of orbits
(planes) in the constellation, and M is the number of satellites
in each orbit. We notice that the number of codewords used
for a LEO constellation network is very reduced compared to
current terrestrial networks. We suppose that the codewords
are generated, assigned and managed by a central entity
implemented in a terrestrial station, which is the ground station
in our case.
For the two optical multicast modes based the shortest
paths and the virtual multicast trees, we consider the following
header structures composed of a set of codewords. Figure 3
describes the header structure considered by the ﬁrst proposed
multicast mode based on the shortest paths and that will
be presented in the following section. In this approach, we
associate to the payload a set of optical codewords that
indicate satellites in a shortest path. Figure 4 presents the
header structure considered by the second proposed multicast
mode, which is based on the paradigm of the virtual multicast
trees that will be described in the next sections. As we can
notice, the structure of codewords associated to the payload
is more complicated compared to the ﬁrst mode. Indeed, each
codeword is structured in two parts: the ﬁrst part identiﬁes the
orbit in the LEO constellation and the second part identiﬁes a
satellite in the constellation.
IV.
CODEWORD BASED MULTICAST
In this section, we present the codeword based switching
process, which is the main optical signal operation performed
by each satellite. Furthermore, we describe the optical code-
word association to each satellite in the constellation.
59
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Light 
source
1xw Power splitter
Mod
Data
wx1 Power combiner
i1τ
i2τ
iwτ
Encoder 
signal output
Chip τ
Data bit T
.
.
(a) All-optical encoder
1xw Power splitter
wx1 Power combiner
(N-1-i2)τ
Decoder 
signal output
(N-1-i1)τ
(N-1-iw)τ
Decoder 
signal input
.
.
(b) All-optical decoder
Figure 5. All-Optical Encoding/Decoding
A. Codeword based switching
In this work, we propose an optical multicast process based
on codewords. Also, we provide a function so that each satellite
can optically switch a multicast trafﬁc based on codewords
properly structured. Thus, each satellite implements an optical
switching module based mainly on two optical operations,
which are the optical codeword matching and the deviation
of the trafﬁc to the adequate direction. The received codeword
is split to a set of decoders; if a codeword is matched by a
decoder, an optical switching gate will be activated by a pulse
to forward the multicast trafﬁc to the direction that allows
reaching the destination satellite. Indeed, each decoder is
conﬁgured with a codeword associated to a satellite neighbor.
Consequently, each multicast module is composed of only 4
tunable decoders associated to the 4 satellite neighbors.
One of the key issues to consider OOC codewords in
the optical signal processing operations is how to encode
and decode the received OOC. Thus, we need to design and
develop encoding and decoding techniques that can generate
and reliably recognize appropriate code sequences. Optical
encoders and decoders are major components to achieve optical
processing signal operations. The optical encoder encodes only
the information bit ”1” and does not produce any optical pulse
when the information bit ”0” is transmitted.
In a direct sequence optical code, each codeword can be
presented by its corresponding codeword block, where each
element in every block indicates the position of ”1” in the
codeword. Therefore, the structures and operational principles
of any temporal incoherent optical encoders/decoders are sim-
ilar with each other. Each codeword in an OOC (N, w, λa, λc)
corresponds to a codeword block {i1, i2, ..., iw}, where ij
represents the position of the jth ”1” of the codeword, 0 ≤
ij ≤ N − 1. A ﬁxed and tunable one-dimensional incoherent
optical encoder and decoder can be composed of an optical
power splitter, a number of ﬁxed or tunable optical delay lines
and an optical power combiner.
As it is shown in Figure 5a [25], an optical encoder for
a 1-D (N, w, λa, λc) OOC consists of a 1 × w optical power
splitter, w ﬁber-optic delay lines and a w × 1 optical power
combiner. The delay of the jth ﬁber-optic delay line is ijτ,
0 ≤ ij ≤ N − 1, where N is the code length of the optical
orthogonal code, w is the code weight, and τ is the width
of a chip (i.e., the time-width of an optical pulse). At the
beginning of a data bit cycle of a user, the light source sends
an optical pulse with time-width τ into the optical modulator.
The optical modulator outputs an optical pulse when the data
bit is “1” and the optical modulator outputs nothing when the
data bit is “0”. Then, the optical pulse corresponding to the data
bit “1” is encoded by an optical encoder whose output is an
optical pulse-signal waveform matching an optical orthogonal
codeword. Because there is no optical signal to be input into
the optical encoder for a data bit “0”, nothing is output from
the optical encoder.
As depicted in Figure 5b [25], a ﬁxed optical decoder
whose structure is the same as its corresponding encoder
except that the delay of its jth ﬁber-optic delay line is changed
into (N − 1 − ij)τ, 0 ≤ ij ≤ N − 1. When the input of the
decoder is the output signal from its corresponding encoder,
its output is an auto-correlation function of its corresponding
OOC codeword.
Finally, the data bit will be restored after the optical-to-
electrical conversion and threshold decision. If the decoder
60
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 6. Multicasting in LEO satellite constellation (Figure 1, [1]).
input is an encoded waveform from other OOC codeword, its
output is a cross-correlation function. Since an auto-correlation
peak does not occur there is no data output.
B. Multicast
Since LEO satellites provide short round-trip delays, they
are becoming increasingly important for real-time applications,
such as voice and video trafﬁc. Many applications require a
mechanism to deliver information to multiple recipients, as
illustrated in Figure 6.
Since each group of destination users has a geographic
location, each group is covered by a different distribution
satellite that we call also a destination satellite. At t0, a source
user is attached to a source satellite and a group of destination
users is served by a destination satellite via a wireless link. On
the contrary, the links between satellites, which are free space
optical communication links.
During the communication period, the group of destination
satellites are changed due to the mobility of the source and
destination satellites. Thus, the management of the multicast
process between the source and the destination satellites must
be done during communication periods that may last for hours.
V.
LEOCAST PROTOCOL: ALL OPTICAL MULTICAST
MODE BASED ON THE SHORTEST PATHS
In this section, we present an optical multicast mode based
on the shortest paths. In this approach, each intermediate satel-
lite considers four codewords indicating its direct neighbors:
two in the same orbit, and two in the neighboring orbits. A
shortest path is deﬁned in term of number of hops and is
established by favoring the inter-orbit on the intra-orbit hop.
In order to establish the shortest paths to a list of destination
satellites, the route discovery process is initiated by the source
satellite. The source satellite duplicates a Route REQuest
message (RREQ) in order to send it to d destination satellites.
The considered RREQ message format is composed of: the
message identiﬁer, the codewords associated to destination
satellites, the satellite source address, the satellite destination
address, and the communication time between the source user
and the destination users.
At the reception of a RREQ message, the intermediate
satellite adds its codeword to the Multicast list address and
sends it to the nearest neighbor based on the Destination
address in the RREQ message. A destination satellite that
receives the RREQ message, sends a Route RESponse (RRES)
message, which contains the shortest path to the source satel-
lite. A path is formed by a list of codewords that denote the
intermediate nodes in the shortest path.
After the route discovery process, a source satellite sends
the multicast trafﬁc to the d destination satellites. Each mul-
ticast packet is duplicated on the shortest paths established
to destination satellites. The paths are composed of a list of
codewords that characterize the list of intermediate nodes on
the shortest path. Thus, a header that contains the path to a
destination satellite is associated to each packet.
The design of the multicast module implemented in each
satellite is illustrated in Figure 7. Therefore, an intermediate
node that receives a multicast packet examines the received
header optically by considering the following steps:
•
the ﬁrst codeword in the header, which indicates the
current satellite, is extracted from the received list of
codewords that compose the header and dropped;
•
the packet and the new header are delayed in a VOM
61
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 7. All optical multicast based on the shortest paths (Figure 3, [1]).
based on optical delay lines that is developed in [12];
•
during the buffering delay, the second codeword in the
received header is extracted from the received list of
codewords and split to foure tunable decoders. Each
decoder allows to match a codeword that characterize
one neighbor of the current satellite; and
•
if the second codeword matches a conﬁgured code-
word, then the delayed packet and its corresponding
header will be sent to the adequate next neighbor that
allows to reach the destination satellite.
The multicast approach based on the shortest paths is more
adapted to a payload with small size, which corresponds to
a packet. Thus, the proposed multicast process requires a
buffering delay of the payload in the optical buffer in order
to optically switch the received payload to the next satellite
in the shortest path in order to reach the destination satellite.
Consequently, the buffering delay must not be more important
than the size of the payload in order to have an optimized
utilization of the bandwidth. In the proposed approach, the re-
quired buffering delay is simply the delay required to perform
the matching process of one the four codewords corresponding
to the direct neighbors of the current satellite.
VI.
LEOCAST PROTOCOL: ALL OPTICAL MULTICAST
MODE BASED ON MULTICAST TREES
In this section, we present an optical multicast approach
based on the concept of virtual multicast trees. The virtual
multicast paradigm is used in order to underline that the
multicast tree is not physically established but only built on
the codewords structure used to switch trafﬁc contrary to the
ﬁrst proposed approach that requires a route discovery process
preceding the routing of a multicast trafﬁc. In this approach,
the virtual tree establishment consists on the management of
codewords structure. Thus, an optical codeword is structured
in two parts as follows: the ﬁrst part identiﬁes the orbit and
the direction (front or backward) conforming to the direction
of the satellite movement in this orbit, and the second part
identiﬁes uniquely a satellite in the LEO constellation network.
Therefore, the destination satellite can be either on the front
or on the backward of an intermediate satellite or it can be
localized in another orbit. The source satellite sends a multicast
packet composed of the payload and a list of codewords that
corresponds to the list of destination satellites. At the reception
of a multicast trafﬁc, an intermediate satellite can forward the
trafﬁc to the front or backward if the destination satellite is in
its orbit or it switches the trafﬁc to the following orbit.
In the following example, we consider the virtual tree
example illustrated in Figure 8. Therefore, from a source
satellite, the header to be sent, which is composed of a set
of codewords, has the following structure: CdOrbit2
f CdD1
CdD3 — CdOrbit2
b CdD2— CdOrbit3
b CdD4 — CdOrbit3
f
CdD5, where CdOrbiti
f is the codeword that identiﬁes the
front direction in the Orbiti conforming to the satellite move-
ment, CdOrbiti
b is the codeword that identiﬁes the backward
direction in the Orbiti conforming to the satellite movement,
and CdDj is the codeword that identiﬁes the destination
satellite Dj in the LEO constellation network. Thus, each
optical codeword identifying an orbit is succeeded by a set
of optical codewords identifying destination satellites in this
62
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 8. Virtual tree example (Figure 4, [1]).
orbit in a speciﬁc direction, front or backward (depending on
the direction of the satellite movement in the orbit).
Each intermediate satellite manage a multicast trafﬁc ar-
riving in the same orbit (inter-orbit trafﬁc) and from different
orbits (intra-orbit trafﬁc). This is achieved by considering a
multicast module, which design is described in Figure 9. The
multicast module is mainly composed of a set of optical
buffers, tunable decoders and a control unit. The optical buffers
delay the payload and the header during the matching process.
The tunable decoders are conﬁgured by the control unit at the
establishment of the multicast connection with the adequate
codewords in order to send the multicast payloads to the
destination satellites, which can be in the same orbit as the
intermediate satellite or in the next orbits. At the reception
of a payload and its corresponding header, which presents the
multicast tree, the optical multicast process will be performed
as follows:
•
Different headers are extracted of the received header
in order to obtain a separate header for each multicast
direction (front, backward, next orbit conforming to
the satellite movement in the orbit) and delayed with
the received payload in different optical buffers. The
considered optical buffer is called a VOM [12].
•
The header, which corresponds to a list of structured
codewords, is split in order to sequentially treat the
codewords by the multicast module. The latter is
composed of a set of tunable decoders conﬁgured with
the following codewords by the control unit:
◦
CdOrbitcurrentCdDsatdest, which indicates
that the current satellite is a destination satel-
lite.
◦
CdOrbitcurrent
f
CdDsatid,
which
indicates
that the satid situated in front of the current
satellite is a destination satellite.
◦
CdOrbitcurrent
b
CdDsatid,
which
indicates
that the satid situated in backward of the
current satellite is a destination satellite.
•
A matching process is performed by the set of conﬁg-
ured decoders on the received codewords that compose
the header.
•
Based on the result of the matching operation, the
received payload will be multicast to one or several
directions: front of the current satellite, backward of
the current satellite and down to reach next orbits.
Indeed, if CdOrbitcurrentCdDsatdest is matched then
the delayed payload will be treated. If CdOrbitcurrent
f
is matched then an optical switching gate is activated
in order to send the delayed payload and its cor-
responding header to the neighbor satellite in front
of the current satellite in order to reach destination
satellites in this direction. The new header associated
to the payload is composed only of codewords rel-
ative to destination satellites in front of the current
satellite. If CdOrbitcurrent
b
CdDsatid is matched then
the delayed payload and its corresponding header will
be sent to the neighbor satellite in backward of the
current satellite. If none of the conﬁgured codewords
is matched, then a threshold detector commands an
optical switching gate in order to send the delayed
payload and its corresponding header to the neighbor
satellite situated in the next orbit in order to reach
destination satellites in other orbits.
In our case, we need a high speed optical switching
gate with a switching time window in order to get
out the delayed signal from the VOM, which can
be achieved for example by a Semiconductor Optical
Ampliﬁer gate (SOA). One of the most desirable
properties of the considered SOA gate is the fast
switching speed. Depending of the type of the SOA
gate and the key temporal parameters of the SOA
transit time, we obtain different switching window
widths [26]–[28] as illustrated in Figure 10. For high-
speed processing, short switching window is used. In
our case, we have a synchronization issue that must
be considered. Indeed, the switching window width
Tsoa must be sufﬁcient to extract the header relative
to a direction Te and to get a copy of the delayed
optical signal in the VOM Ts. Thus, in order to satisfy
the synchronization constraint, we deﬁne the following
relation: Ts + Te < Tsoa.
The multicast approach based on the virtual multicast tree
63
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 9. All optical multicast based on the Virtual multicast tree.
Figure 10. Switching window.
paradigm is adapted to a payload with important size, which
corresponds to a burst (association of packets). Thus, the
proposed multicast process requires a buffering delay of the
payload in the optical buffer. This delay corresponds to the
treatment of the set of codewords in the header sequentially
and the generation of the new header to each burst to be
switched to the adequate direction in order to reach destination
satellites.
VII.
MULTICAST COPING WITH LONG PERIOD SERVICES
In this section, we study the mobility management in the
two all optical multicast modes of the proposed LEOCast
protocol.
A. Mobility management
Satellite movement results in challenging mobility man-
agement problems in LEO satellite networks. Due to the
movements of the satellites and according to the movements
of their coverage area and footprints, a group of destination
users are served by several groups of satellites during a com-
munication period that may lasts for hours, when transmitting
voice/data/video to users in the earth. In this section, we
present the mobility management for the two proposed optical
multicasting approaches. For the two approaches, three types
of handovers can occur during a multicast session period T.
The ﬁrst type of handover occurs when the source satellite
moves and will not serve the users source of the trafﬁc any-
more. The second type of handover occurs when a destination
satellite will not serve any destination user therefore it will be
deleted from the group of the destination satellites. The third
type of handover occurs when a destination satellite is added
to the group of the destination users in order to serve one or
several destination users.
1) Shortest paths management: The optical multicasting
based on the Shortest paths requires the initiation of a novel
Route request discovery process to the destination satellites
when a source satellite is not in the coverage of source users
anymore. The ground station must send the current list of
codewords that indicate the current list of destination satellites,
64
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

to the new source satellite. In the case where a destination
satellite will not serve any destination user, it will be deleted
from the group of destination satellites. This type of mobility
does not require any treatment in the intermediate satellites.
In fact, the multicast trafﬁc to be switched by the intermediate
satellites will no longer be switched in the direction of the
deleted satellite since it is not in the coverage of the desti-
nation users. An updated list of codewords that corresponds
to the new list of destination satellites, will be sent to the
source satellite from the ground station. In the case where a
destination satellite is added to the group of destination users
in order to serve one or several destination users, the shortest
path from the source to the new destination satellite must be
established. An updated list of codewords will be sent to the
source satellite from the ground station.
2) Virtual tree management: When a source satellite is not
in the coverage of source users anymore, the optical multicast-
ing based on the virtual tree concept does not require any route
reestablishment process initiation to discover the routes to the
destination satellites as it is the case in the optical multicasting
based on the Shortest paths. Indeed, the multicast tree will
be implicitly established by sending a multicast trafﬁc that
requires at each intermediate satellite to be optically switched.
The ground station must send the current list of codewords
that indicate the current list of destination satellites, to the new
source satellite. In the case where a destination satellite will not
serve any destination user, therefore, it will be deleted from
the group of destination satellites. The ground station must
send the current list of codewords to the new source satellite.
And, the source replaces the codeword corresponding to the
deleted destination satellite by the codeword associated to the
new destination satellite and adds to the codeword, a special
codeword that identiﬁes the destination orbit and the direction
(front or backward) in the orbit. The new codeword will be
added to the header of the multicast trafﬁc. In the case where
a destination satellite is added to the group of the destination
users in order to serve one or several destination users, its
corresponding codeword will be added to the header of the
multicast trafﬁc.
3) Comparison: First, the two proposed optical multicast-
ing approaches are compared in term of the number of used
segments. The segments used by the approach based on virtual
trees are those in the tree axis and in the front and backward
of the axis. And the segments used by the approach based
on the shortest paths are the total segments that compose the
shortest paths to the destination satellites. Thus, the number
of segments used in the ﬁrst approach avoids the segments
redundancy and consequently, it is smaller than the number of
segments used in the second approach.
Second, the virtual tree construction favors the inter-orbit
over the intra-orbit hop, which allows to have only one possible
path to the destination satellite. This method is also considered
in order to establish the shortest paths in the second approach.
Indeed, the association of all established shortest paths gives
the constructed virtual tree in the ﬁrst approach.
Third, in the approach based on the shortest paths, when
a satellite leaf handover occurs in the direction of satellites
movement, a segment is removed of the path and the codeword
of the removed destination satellite is removed of the list of
destination satellites. In the contrary case, a segment will be
added to the path and the codeword of the new destination
satellite is added to the list of destination satellites. Thus,
the handover in this approach consists on the increase or the
narrowing of paths. When we consider the approach based
on virtual trees, the destination satellites can be either a leaf
or an intermediate satellite, which minimizes the increase or
the narrowing of paths due to handovers compared to the ﬁrst
approach.
VIII.
SIMULATIONS AND EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we assess the performance of the two pro-
posed optical multicasting approaches in terms of trafﬁc load
(in erlang) and number of decoding functions. As simulation
environment, we have considered Matlab tool. For simulation
purpose, we consider the GE Starsys constellation topology
[29], which forms a LEO network (6 orbits, each orbit has
4 satellites), a trafﬁc load matrix. The trafﬁc load matrix
considers a trafﬁc load only between each satellite and its
four neighbors (up and down, front and backward). For each
simulation, a source satellite number and destination satellite
numbers are randomly generated.
In order to compare the efﬁciency of the two multicasting
approaches in terms of the trafﬁc load, we calculate the
trafﬁc load for each approach by considering the maximal
path length/multicast tree depth and the mean on all short-
est paths/segments of the tree. As illustrated in Figure 11,
we can notice the similarity between the trafﬁc load curves
computed on the maximal path length and the depth of the
multicast tree and considered for several multicast group sizes
(4,8,12,16,20,24).
Figure 11. Trafﬁc load in terms of multicast group size (Figure 6, [1]).
This similarity can be justiﬁed by the fact that the max-
imum path length corresponds to the depth of the multicast
tree. We notice also that the mean trafﬁc load on the total
65
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

segments of the multicast tree is the half for a multicast group
size equals to 24 satellites, which is optimized compared to
the mean trafﬁc load on the total path lengths. Therefore, we
can deduce that the all optical multicasting approach based on
the virtual multicast tree has the advantage to eliminate the
redundant segments in the shortest paths established in the all
optical multicasting approach based on the shortest paths.
The efﬁciency of the two multicasting approaches in terms
of the number of used decoding functions is also assessed. We
have considered a communication period of one hour between
a source and destination users. During this period and due
to the mobility of satellites, four source satellites and four
multicast groups are considered. We calculate the number of
used decoding functions for: 1) different multicast group sizes
(4,5,6,7,8,9,10), 2) three path lengths less or equal to 1,2,3
hops. As illustrated in Figure 12, we notice that the number
of used decoding functions for optical multicasting approach
based on the shortest paths is ﬁve times greater than the
number of used decoding functions for optical multicasting
approach based on the virtual multicast tree for a multicast
group size equals to 10 satellites. This can be the fact that the
virtual multicast tree eliminates segments redundancy observed
in the shortest paths approach.
Figure 12. Decoding function number in terms of multicast group size
(Figure 7, [1]).
Consequently, the optical multicasting approach based on
the virtual tree decreases the trafﬁc load observed in the
network segments and uses less decoding functions for the
optical multicasting. Thus, this approach is more efﬁcient than
the approach based on the shortest paths.
In Figure 13, we assess the optical signal quality after the
multicast process to three receivers, which correspond to the
three direct neighbors of the transmitter. To this objective, we
consider Optiwave Optisystem as a simulation platform. We
Figure 13. FSO link application in LEO networks.
consider a transmitter with a frequency of 353 THz and a
power of 12 dBm, and we choose an Avalanche Photo Diode
(APD) detector receiver, which is commonly used as FSO
receiver [30], [31]. The optical signal quality is assessed based
on two main criteria: the wavelength and the distance between
satellites.
The eye diagram and the bit error rate are used as perfor-
mance estimators in this simulation. Figure 14 describes the
eye diagrams obtained when observing the received signal at
the output of each receiver. The ﬁrst eye diagram corresponds
an ISL as an optical link with 850 nm and 3000 km. The
second eye diagram corresponds to an ISL optical link with
1550 nm and 3000 km. The third eye diagram corresponds
to an ISL optical link with 850 nm and 2500 km. Distortions
shown on the eye diagram demonstrate that the best signal
quality is obtained for the third receiver and the worst signal
quality is obtained for the second receiver. Furthermore, the bit
error rate obtained for the third receiver is lower than 10−9,
which is considered as an acceptable Bit Error Rate (BER)
threshold, while the BER for the second receiver is greater than
10−9. We can conclude that the optical signal quality increases
when decreasing the FSO communication link wavelength and
the distance between receivers when performing the multicast
process optically. Furthermore, 1550nm lasers transmit more
power than 850nm lasers for eye safety reasons (i.e. more
power can be transmitted to overcome attenuation by aerosols).
However, detectors in the 1550nm are typically less sensitive
and have a smaller receive surface area when compared to
silicon APD detectors that operate in the 850 nm wavelength.
IX.
CONCLUSION
In this work, we propose an all optical multicast protocol
LEOCast based on an optical switching technique that allows
to perform the multicast of received trafﬁc streams based on
their optical codewords. Furthermore, this optical switching
66
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(a) Wavelength:850nm, Distance:3000km
(b) Wavelength:1550nm, Distance:3000km
(c) Wavelength:850nm, Distance:2500km
Figure 14. Eye diagrams related to three receivers.
technique allows to perform several other functions with an
optimized resource utilization. However, it is possible to use
FSO links and consider an other switching technique with
assuming the optical-electronic-optical conversion on interme-
diate satellites.
The proposed LEOCast protocol offers two multicast
modes: the shortest path multicast mode and the virtual mul-
ticast tree mode. Each multicast mode is adapted depends
on the buffer The multicast approach based on the shortest
paths is more adapted to a payload with small size, which
corresponds to a packet. Thus, the proposed multicast process
requires a buffering delay of the payload in the optical buffer
in order to optically switch the received payload to the next
satellite. In this mode, the required buffering delay is simply
the delay required to perform the matching process of one
of the four codewords corresponding to the direct neighbors
of the current satellite. The multicast approach based on the
virtual multicast tree paradigm is adapted to a payload with
important size, which corresponds to a burst (association of
packets). This is due to the fact that this mode requires a more
important buffering delay compared to the ﬁrst mode. This
latter corresponds to the treatment of the set of codewords in
the header sequentially and the generation of the new header
to each burst to be switched to the adequate direction in order
to reach destination satellites.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Sliti, W. Abdallah, and N. Boudriga, “Optical multicast protocol for
leo satellite networks,” in Proceedings of the 6th International Confer-
ence on Advances in Satellite and Space Communications (SPACOMM
2014), (Nice, France), pp. 29–35, 23 February 2014.
[2]
S. Deering, “RFC 1112: Host extensions for IP multicasting,” tech. rep.,
IETF, 1989.
[3]
S. Deering and D. Cheriton, “Multicast routing in datagram internet-
works and extended LANs,” ACM Transactions on Computer Systems
(TOCS), vol. 8, pp. 85–110, May 1990.
[4]
D. Waitzman, C. Partridge, and S. E. Deering, “RFC 1075: Distance
vector multicast routing protocol,” tech. rep., IETF, 1988.
[5]
J. Moy, “Multicast routing extensions to OSPF,” tech. rep., IETF, 1994.
[6]
L. Cheng, J. Zhang, and K. Liu, “Core-based shared tree multicast
routing algorithms for LEO satellite IP networks,” Chinese Journal of
Aeronautics, vol. 20, pp. 353–361, August 2007.
[7]
Z. Yang, F. Long, F. Sun, and D. Wang, “A dynamic QoS routing
mechanism based on steiner trees for LEO satellite networks,” in
Proceedings of the International Conference on Networking, Sensing
and Control (ICNSC), (Chicago), pp. 153–158, 10-12 April 2010.
[8]
T. Mao, “A multicast routing algorithm for LEO satellite networks,”
in Proceedings of International Conference on Future Computer and
Communication, (Wuhan), pp. 94–96, 6-7 June 2009.
[9]
Z. Yin, L. Zhang, X. Zhou, P. Xu, and Y. Deng, “QoS-guaranteed secure
multicast routing protocol for satellite IP networks using hierarchical
architecture,” International Journal of Communications, Network and
System Sciences, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 355–363, 2010.
[10]
C. Yuan and X. Wang, “A multicast routing algorithm for GEO/LEO
satellite IP networks,” in Proceedings of the International Conference
on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing (DASC), (Chengdu),
pp. 595 – 599, 21-22 December 2013.
[11]
Y. Ma, J. Su, C. Wu, X. Wang, W. Yu, B. Zhao, and X. Hu, “A
source-based share-tree like multicast routing in satellite constellation
networks,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Mobile,
Ubiquitous, and Intelligent Computing (MUSIC), (Vancouver), pp. 240
– 245, 26 - 28 June 2012.
[12]
S. Batti, M. Zghal, and N. Boudriga, “New all-optical switching node
including virtual memory and synchronizer,” Journal of Networks,
vol. 5, pp. 165–179, February 2010.
[13]
X. Wu, P. Liu, and M. Matsumoto, “A study on atmospheric turbulence
effects in full-optical free-space communication systems,” in Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Wireless Communications
Networking and Mobile Computing (WiCOM), (Chengdu), pp. 1–5, 23-
25 September 2010.
[14]
Y. Koishi, Y. Suzuki, T. Takahashi, I. Mase, M. Jibiki, Y. Hashimoto,
S. Murata, T. Yamashita, and K. Shiratama, “Research and development
of 40gbps optical free space communication from satellite/airplane,” in
Proceedings of the International Conference on Space Optical Systems
and Applications (ICSOS), (Santa Monica), pp. 88 – 92, 11-13 May
2011.
[15]
M. Rahman, S. Iqbal, and M. Islam, “Modeling and performance
analysis of free space optical communication system,” in Proceedings
of the International Conference on Informatics, Electronics & Vision
(ICIEV), (Dhaka), pp. 211 – 218, 18-19 May 2012.
67
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[16]
W. Kmiecik and K. Walkowiak, “Survivable overlay multicasting in
WDM optical networks with dual homing architecture,” in Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Optical Network Design and
Modeling, (Stockholm), pp. 19 – 24, 19-22 May 2014.
[17]
D. D. Le, M. Molnr, and J. Palaysi, “Multicast routing in WDM
networks without splitters,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 52,
pp. 158–167, July 2014.
[18]
R. Abbas, A. Masrub, S. Amin, and H. Al-Raweshidy, “High QoS
and low cost wavelength allocation protocol in optical network using
multicast technology,” in Proceedings of the International Conference
on Innovative Computing Technology (INTECH), (London), pp. 356 –
359, 29-31 August 2013.
[19]
H. Liu, T. Hu, Y. Chen, Q. Chen, and Y. Xie, “Optimisation of layer
rate and wavelength allocation based on network coding for multirate
optical multicast,” IET Communications, vol. 8, pp. 1570 – 1577, June
2014.
[20]
H. Ghafouri-Shiraz and M. M. Karbassian, Optical CDMA Networks:
Principles, Analysis and Applications. Wiley-IEEE Press, 2012.
[21]
Y. Li, J. Gao, Q. Li, and J. Liu, “A construction method of optical
orthogonal code based on difference set,” in Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Network Infrastructure and Digital Content,
(Beijing), pp. 486 – 490, 6-8 November 2009.
[22]
R. Chauhan, R. Kumar, M. Shukla, A. Sigh, and G. Bagaria, “Proposal
for one dimensional optical orthogonal codes: Design, analysis, &
algorithm,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Commu-
nication Systems and Network Technologies (CSNT), (Katra, Jammu),
pp. 514 – 519, 3-5 June 2011.
[23]
D. Wu, H. Zhao, P. Fan, and S. Shinohara, “Optimal variable-weight
optical orthogonal codes via difference packings,” IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory, vol. 56, pp. 4053 – 4060, August 2010.
[24]
J.Salehi, H.Chung, and V.K.Wei, “Optical orthogonal codes: Design,
analysis, and applications,” IEEE Transactions on Information theory,
vol. vol 35, pp. 595–605, May 1989.
[25]
H. Yin and D. J. Richardson, Optical Code Division Multiple Access
Communication Networks Theory and Applications. Springer Publica-
tions, 2007.
[26]
Y. Guan and R. Wang, “Demonstration of an optical switch based
on SOA-MZI operation at 10 gbit/s,” in Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Software Engineering,
(China), pp. 239–241, July 2013.
[27]
R. Rostam, M. Wahid, S. Rais, and M. Faridus, “The effect of signal
repetition rate, injected current and switching window on cross-phase
modulation in SOA-NOLM,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Regional
Symposium on Micro and Nanoelectronics, (Malaysia), pp. 373 – 376,
September 2011.
[28]
H. N. Tan, M. Matsuura, and N. Kishi, “Parallel WDM regenerative
waveform conversion for mixed NRZ and RZ transmission networks
using a SOA-based multiple switching-window optical gate,” in Pro-
ceedings of the Optical Fiber Communication Conference and Exposi-
tion (OFC/NFOEC), (Los Angeles, USA), pp. 1–3, March 2011.
[29]
M. Sturza, “LEOs - the communications satellites of the 21st century,”
in Proceedings of Northcon/96, (Seattle, Washington), pp. 114–118, 4-6
November 1996.
[30]
K. Kiasaleh, “Performance of APD-based, PPM free-space optical
communication systems in atmospheric turbulence,” IEEETransactions
on Communications, vol. 53, pp. 1455–1461, September 2005.
[31]
P. Sun, M. Hayat, and A. Das, “Bit error rates for ultrafast APD
based optical receivers: exact and large deviation based asymptotic
approaches,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 57, pp. 2763
– 2770, September 2009.
68
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

