Possibilities of Quality of Service Parameter
Tracking and Transformation
in Industrial Applications
Gy¨orgy K´alm´an
Centre for Cyber and Information Security
Critical Infrastructure Protection Group
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
mnemonic AS
Email: gyorgy.kalman@ntnu.no
Abstract—Machine to machine communication offers both an
opportunity and poses a challenge for communication networks.
In this paper, after an introduction to industrial control networks,
an overview of typical QoS metrics is given and their relation
to automation metrics is analyzed, current industrial networking
technologies and their QoS possibilities are presented. Conversion
or mapping of QoS metrics between communication and control
systems is evaluated. As a possible direction, use of formal
methods and procedures known from industrial safety systems
are recommended.
Keywords—critical infrastructure; QoS; metrics; automation;
control networks; PROFINET; EtherCAT; Ethernet.
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper is an extension of [1], ”Quality of Service Param-
eter Tracking and Transformation in Industrial Applications,”
published at IARIA AICT 2016.
Since the introduction of packet switched networks, ques-
tions and analyses around the possible service level have been
a hot topic. In current networks, the use of best-effort forward-
ing is dominating. Although it is very efﬁcient, guaranteeing
end-to-end connection parameters is a challenge and currently
mostly done by overprovisioning.
The technology landscape is similar in both ofﬁce or com-
munication and industrial networks: on the Local Area Net-
work (LAN) ﬁeld, Ethernet is dominating, on the Wide Area
Network (WAN) side, standard telecommunication solutions
are used also for industrial applications.
Since its introduction in industrial automation, Ethernet’s
determinism has been a returning concern, mainly because of
both outdated information (behavior of 10-Base2) and bus-like
topologies [2] with long chains of switches.
Most of the bandwidth-related problems were solved with
the introduction of gigabit Ethernet and for the most demand-
ing applications, technologies like EtherCAT, with intrinsic
QoS are available. For traditional switched networks, there are
efforts for the inclusion of a resource management plane in the
IEEE 802.1 Time-Sensitive Networking Task Group (TSN).
The paper is structured as follows: the second section gives
an introduction to industrial control networks, the third section
gives an overview of QoS. Section four gives an overview on
QoS features of current networking technologies used, section
ﬁve provides an overview of Distributed Control System
(DCS) structures. Section VI presents how requirements may
be speciﬁed in a structured way, Section VII explains the
importance of requirements tracking. Section VIII presents
parameters of a control loop and how QoS parameters can be
converted between the industrial and communication metrics.
Section IX draws the conclusion and provides an outlook on
future work.
II. INDUSTRIAL CONTROL NETWORKS
In a historical perspective, control of manufacturing and
process plants was done mechanically: the transmission of
signals were done by some physical mean, like pneumatics,
hydraulics or manual force. These mechanical structures were
replaced by electric solutions in parts of the systems. Electric
control had been successful and mechanical control systems
were replaced by electronics, mostly employing hardwired
circuits [3].
The hardwired circuits were both prone to errors and con-
sumed large amounts of space and money. A similar evolution
has happened as with the telecommunication lines: a digital,
interleaved solution was needed [4].
With the introduction of microelectronics and digital bus
systems, it became possible to exchange the long and expen-
sive dedicated wiring with bus systems, commonly called as
ﬁeldbus. We can date the birth of QoS in industrial environ-
ments to this step of the evolution: in case of direct wiring,
there was no question on access to the transmission media.
Delay or jitter were not applicable, the signal propagated with
nearly the speed of light and had dedicated media (bandwidth)
to the controller.
The use of digital communication solutions has spread on
all levels of automation and resulted in the current state,
87
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

where Ethernet is used in both industrial and connected
corporate networks. The main difference remaining in these,
similar looking networks is the requirements posed by the
communication parties. An industrial network is connected
to the physical world and events on communicated on this
network have a physical dimension. This connection results in
different priorities for QoS [5], [6].
Practically all new industrial deployments will use a com-
munication technology, in the vast majority of cases, Ether-
net. Each industry has its own set of different, but similar
requirements. On the timescale basis, we typically distinguish
between: bus bar protection/motion control, manufacturing and
process control.
Bus bar protection and motion control require the most
stringent achieved QoS levels: the information must reach its
destination with great precision and low latency.
Manufacturing has a typical requirement time scale of tens
of milliseconds. In the view of corporate networks these
requirements are still hard to keep, but in an industrial
environment, on this level standard equipment is used. The
main support property for the QoS parameter calculation is
that the typical source-destination of a control loop with hard
requirements is in most of the cases close to each other. As a
result, the network as a whole does not have to adhere for the
requirements, but paths on the network might be involved.
Process control is the most relaxed of the three and typically
poses no strict requirements. In case of a process control loop,
the typical timing possibilities are in the second range rather
than milliseconds, so delays on current Ethernet networks
(which are in the microsecond range) are mostly not noticeable
in such installations.
Due to that industrial networks do have a connection to
the physical world, failure of such a system has the potential
for much more severe impact than that of a corporate system.
Effects of failure can be, e.g., damage to equipment, produc-
tion loss, environmental damage or the worst: injury or loss of
life. The connection to physical processes also introduces the
need for real-time behavior. The expression real-time is often
used as a synonym to fast, but the more precise deﬁnition
is that the network has to give an answer within a speciﬁed
(real/physical) time slot and if it fails, the data is or nearly is
worthless [7], [8].
The strict requirements on delay or jitter are in a reverse
order compared to closeness to the physical process: ﬁeldbus
tend to have strong requirements, especially if functions, like
motion control is executed. The communication after the con-
troller level is less critical, as here mainly the communication
parties are the historians and the Human Machine Interface
(HMI) units. As in these upper levels, human operators are
the typical recipient of information, the expected delays due
to trafﬁc and non-determinism are magnitudes smaller than the
reaction time of the employees.
Determinism is a property, which, beside telecommunica-
tion networks, is not typically used as a measure of QoS.
In an industrial environment, it can be one of the questions
which need to be answered. Here again, in parallel with jitter
Fig. 1. Delay and jitter ranges in PROFINET [9]
and delay, the typical determinism requirements are more strict
closer to the physical process. To call a network deterministic,
it must be possible to give an upper bound for delivering
a chunk of data (Fig. 1). In dedicated wire solutions or
slotted technologies, like serial lines or bus like Proﬁbus, the
upper bound could be calculated from the network setup. In
particular, early Ethernet is not a good solution to provide
upper bounds. Half-duplex implementations suffered the well-
known loss of throughput in high-trafﬁc situations, because of
the Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Detection
(CSMA/CD) medium access protocol. This history still limits
the acceptance of Ethernet in automation environments, how-
ever, in current networks with full-duplex switched topologies,
CSMA/CD is not needed as there are no collisions. Still, if
not media access, trafﬁc situations can lead to queueing. In
a typical situation, where the two end-hops are running on
100Mbps, while the backbone network is running on 1Gbps,
the accumulated queueing delay after several core hops will
be still magnitude lower than the propagation delay of the
100Mbps (non-congested) hops.
Jitter is the variance of delay. In a network, where a control
loop is run, it is typically a requirement to have low jitter,
thus the periods of sampling will be uniformly distributed
over time. Here the network has to provide a jitter below
the upper bound, which is acceptable for the control loop.
Time synchronization is one of the features, which provide
the connection point towards the physical world. Temporal
consistency and the ability to record the events in correct
order are important both for supervisory tasks but also for
troubleshooting.
An important measure of the network equipment is the
throughput. Industrial applications here also have different
emphasis areas: in ofﬁce or telecom, a typical frame has a
long payload compared to the header (with the one famous
exception being Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM)). Data
frames transmitted on industrial networks are typically short,
especially close to the physical process, where the other QoS
requirements are high. This property makes fulﬁlling the QoS
parameters more problematic, as it is easier to utilize the full
bandwidth for network equipment if the frames are long, thus
fewer forwarding decisions need to be taken and the overhead
88
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

is also smaller.
Composition of trafﬁc in control networks, especially on
the ﬁeld level, differs considerably from the typical ofﬁce en-
vironment. As the communicating parties are near exclusively
machines and the operation of control systems is very often
periodic, it is very typical to have a nearly static trafﬁc picture
with mostly very stable packet streams. Aperiodic events like
state changes or alarm conditions compose a growing part of
the trafﬁc starting from being nearly negligible on the ﬁeld
level to being a considerable part on the client-server or plant
level. Periodic trafﬁc on the ﬁeld level was expected to be
be problematic, if strict real time requirements are extended
with high data speed, like in the case of IEC 61850-sampled
values. Experience shows that in most cases, the best effort
forwarding works without causing problems, as in typical
cases, the offered bandwidth is well above the requirements of
the control loop. For special requirements, industrial Ethernet
variants, like EtherCAT and Proﬁnet IRT were developed.
These offer intrinsic QoS witch scheduling functions supported
by the special hardware implementations.
Compared to ofﬁce networks, a distinct physical feature
of the industrial deployments is the ruggedness of devices.
A typical device has to withstand vibration, shock, has to
accept wider operational and storage temperature ranges and
might even need to withstand moisture. From the operational
viewpoint, however, these properties have little impact. On
the performance side, current chipsets are providing adequate
resources even with only using passive cooling and if needed,
special connectors are used to avoid physical damage on the
connecting wires. The designed lifetime of the devices is much
higher than in the ofﬁce environment: a representative life
expectation is around 20 years.
A. Types of Information
On a typical industrial network, there are a handful types of
data: control information, related to keeping the process under
control, the sampled data, which connects the control system
with the physical process, diagnostics and management and
auxiliary functions like technical safety.
Control information and process data is the communication
between instruments and controller and are the main connec-
tion of the control system to the physical world. In most cases,
the majority of trafﬁc is part of this category and often the only
considered part of the trafﬁc mix. The hard QoS parameters are
typically property of trafﬁc in this category, as this layer of the
network is the closest of the actual process. Example trafﬁc
on this level is sampled values from some instrument, like
an Intelligent Electronic Device (IED) or temperature/pressure
sensor. Event-controlled trafﬁc is also present, for example,
valve status changes.
Diagnostics and management are important auxiliaries: di-
agnostics is an integral part of creating a reliable control
system. Errors of various causes can happen in the system and
an effective diagnostics can predict or identify failed compo-
nents. The detail of diagnostics and the capabilities provided
by this subsystem depend on the reliability and redundancy
requirements. Diagnostics is a type of data, which is collected
by the system, but by default, for expected values, there is
no reaction. High coverage diagnostics is also an enabler,
for example, Safety Instrumented Systems (SIS). Management
of the system is necessary above the very basic level. The
overview of current system status is important information for
both operators and engineers.
Safety is the most important auxiliary function. A dimension
of running a SIS is to have adequate diagnostics. Categories of
safety levels are deﬁned by IEC 61508. Safety information is
carried in parallel to control information. The different Safety
Integrity Levels (SIL) have different implications on redun-
dancy of the safety system and the coverage of diagnostics.
III. QUALITY OF SERVICE
QoS is the measure of transmission quality and service
availability of a network [11], thus not only limited to actual
forwarding parameters like bandwidth and delay, but also,
e.g., availability, reconﬁguration time and reliability.
Keeping a certain service level was a requirement in
telecommunication networks and it was a natural decision to
have features to support service level deﬁnition when packet
switched networks were introduced in the telecom networks.
Providing QoS in Local Area Networks (LANs) was fo-
cused on services, where at least one of the communicating
parties was a human. The services could range from web
browsing through VoIP to multi-party video conferencing. The
parameters were adopted to the human perception and also
tolerance for disturbances was adapted to the human users. The
metrics for service quality were not new either at that time;
telecommunication networks had service levels deﬁned already
and since those were also technical and focused on human
users, the introduced metrics were also adapted to computer
networks, like Ethernet or more generally, Internet Protocol
(IP). In current industrial applications, IPv4 is generally used,
if needed, then as IPv4 islands interconnected with tunnels
over IPv6 networks. In Internet of Things (IoT) installations,
the use of IPv6 is expected as a result of the large number of
connected devices.
The evolution of technology showed that in the vast majority
of cases, an over dimensioning of the network resources is both
the cheapest and easiest to manage.
A. Telecommunication metrics
As an example, ATM metrics for trafﬁc contracts are
composed from trafﬁc parameters such as:
• Peak Cell Rate (PCR) The maximum allowable rate at
which cells can be transported along a connection in the
ATM network. The PCR is the determining factor in how
often cells are sent in relation to time in an effort to
minimize jitter.
• Sustainable Cell Rate (SCR) A calculation of the aver-
age allowable, long-term cell transfer rate on a speciﬁc
connection.
89
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

• Maximum Burst Size (MBS) The maximum allowable
burst size of cells that can be transmitted contiguously
on a particular connection.
and QoS parameters,
• Cell Transfer Delay (CTD) The delay experienced by a
cell between the time it takes for the ﬁrst bit of the cell to
be transmitted by the source and the last bit of the cell to
be received by the destination. Maximum Cell Transfer
Delay (Max CTD) and Mean Cell Transfer Delay (Mean
CTD) are used.
• Peak-to-peak Cell Delay Variation (CDV) The difference
between the maximum and minimum CTD experienced
during the connection. Peak-to-peak CDV and Instanta-
neous CDV are used.
• Cell Loss Ratio (CLR) The percentage of cells that are
lost in the network due to error or congestion and are not
received by the destination.
The list shows the focus areas of QoS already in the 90s:
bandwidth (in bits per second), burstiness and parameters
related to disturbances in forwarding.
In addition to these connection-related parameters, the com-
munication network had also network-wide parameters in other
relations, like redundancy with, e.g., reconﬁguration time in
case of link loss or routing alternatives.
ATM is raised as an example, since it offers one of the
widest range of possibilities for QoS. It also introduced a
couple of concepts, which, although ATM was later deemed
as a failure, do a comeback in today’s QoS networks.
B. Metrics on packet switched networks
On packet switched networks, initially the focus was on
efﬁcient forwarding. Efﬁciency and simple network operation
lead to cheaper devices and ultimately to today’s technology
landscape with the domination of Ethernet and IP.
While there were different approaches for QoS (integrated
and differentiated services), the main QoS metrics were band-
width, loss, delay and jitter [11]. In future installations with
IPv6 it is expected that the use of differentiated services will
be more widespread, as after RFC 2460/3697, the properties
of Trafﬁc Class and Flow Label can be used to select ﬂows
of the aggregated trafﬁc and grant priority. The 20 bit ﬁeld
of Flow Label also allows a large number of ﬂows to be
present concurrently, which would ﬁt even a large industrial
deployment. The impact of this feature however depends on
the timing of tasks running on the network and also how
this ﬁeld could be used for other properties important in the
automation applications: redundancy and reconﬁguration time
in case of link loss.
An effort to include some of the trafﬁc engineering possi-
bilities of ATM for LANs is the IEEE Shortest Path Bridging
(SPB). This standard is being developed by the TSN working
group and allows, amongst others call admission, resource
reservation over the whole path. SPB has raised a high interest
in the automation ﬁeld and most of the industry is either
contributing directly or closely following the development.
C. Automation
QoS requirements of an automation system tend to be very
different than those of an ofﬁce network. The protocol set
used is different and the typical communication inside an
automation system runs on Layer 2 [12]. Sources and sinks of
trafﬁc streams are typically machines with little tolerance on
disturbances, but good predictability in communication.
The network topology of automation networks is often
contributing to the challenges around QoS [13]. Networks are
built with low port count switches. This typically results in an
infrastructure that has more devices than an ofﬁce network.
A bigger reﬁnery can have several hundreds of switches with
a typical branching factor of 4-7. The still widely used bus-
topology leads to even longer forwarding chain, introducing
delay and jitter, which only exists in considerably larger
networks in the ofﬁce/telecommunication scenarios.
IV. QOS FEATURES OF INDUSTRIAL ETHERNET
Industrial Ethernet variants are mostly building their QoS
features on the existing trafﬁc prioritization services of Ether-
net. While not directly a QoS feature, the most important step
towards the usability of Ethernet in industrial applications was
the introduction of full duplex networks and Ethernet switches.
Fig. 2. Ethernet priority ﬁeld [28]
• IEEE 802.1p As the most important trafﬁc management
feature, inbuilt in Ethernet. .1p offers the possibility to
assign. Priorities have been deﬁned in the project and
the switches typically implement a solution with multiple
queues and round-robin scheduling with ageing. There
are 8 different trafﬁc classes (Fig. 2), from background
and best effort up to network control. Unfortunately,
in industrial applications, 7 (the highest) is often used.
Although this will give these frames priority over all
other frames, but since nearly all automation trafﬁc is
in the same trafﬁc class, delays might occur. Also, it is
not practical that all automation trafﬁc is getting the same
priority as the network control, as signaling trafﬁc for the
network infrastructure might have much larger impact on
the system as the loss of a couple of automation frames.
• IEEE 802.1 Time Sensitive Networks TSN is a group of
standards, which provides a real-time Ethernet implemen-
tation, where deterministic transport of data is possible. In
addition to implementing call admission control to guar-
antee that the communication requirements are fulﬁlled
90
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

through the path, it also introduces a global reference to
physical time. The standard has emerged from the IEEE
802.1AVB, Audio-Video Bridging (Fig. 3) proposal and
widened the possible ﬁeld of use with automation and
especially the use of Ethernet in the Internet of Things
(IoT).
Fig. 3. Connection of physical time and trafﬁc in TSN [14]
A. PROFINET
PROFINET was developed and is the preferred Industrial
Ethernet variant of Siemens. The main QoS feature is that
by default, PROFINET provides three different trafﬁc classes
(Fig. 4: the ﬁrst one provides a framing service for legacy
PROFIBUS and also carries non-critical data with cycle times
of around or above 100ms. The trafﬁc can be run on normal
TCP/IP. The second trafﬁc class is, what the protocol calls,
Real Time (RT), which is supporting IO applications with a
cycle time of around 1ms to 100ms [15]. The third trafﬁc
Fig. 4. Trafﬁc classes of PROFINET [16]
class is Isochronous Real Time (IRT). With using special
hardware, IRT provides a communication solution for low-
latency applications.
B. EtherCAT
EtherCAT was developed to provide a deterministic network
solution for devices on a local ring. It is a technology with
an intrinsic QoS solution, as the processing of the data on
the ring is done on the ﬂy, as the frame travels through the
Fig. 5. EtherCAT master-slave example [17]
Application Speciﬁc Integrated Circuits (ASICs) of the slave
machines (Fig. 5). A representative example of the cycle times
is that the master is beginning to receive the frame at its
input, before the sending is ﬁnished on the output. The simple
topology and the call admission control are both enablers to
allow the short cycle times. The most important property is
the possibility to calculate the cycle time with high precision.
An additional ﬂexible feature is that in-between the periodic
frames, it is compatible with normal trafﬁc and it is possible
to send out these also on the automation loop.
C. SERCOS III
SERCOS III combines a solution resembling EtherCAT for
on-the-ﬂy processing of the frames and the possibility to use
L3 communication for non-critical information exchange. The
slave processing is done as the frame traverses the Ethernet
interface, but SERCOS splits the in- and output to different
frames as compared to the single frame sent in the case of
EtherCAT.
D. IEC 61850
IEC 61850 is implemented directly over L2. This industrial
Ethernet type is used mainly in electric substation automation.
The trafﬁc itself is typically composed of multicast and unicast
frames, the delay and jitter depends on the QoS functions of
standard Ethernet. The lack of L3 in the communication stack
enables potentially faster communication, reaching the level
of the best case Ethernet.
E. Ethernet/Industrial Protocol
Ethernet/IP is a protocol developed by Open DeviceNet
Vendors Association (ODVA), led by Rockwell Automation.
The Ethernet/IP protocol is implemented on the application
layer and provides an encapsulation service for Common In-
dustrial Protocol (CIP) data (Fig. 6). Implementing a protocol
on the application layer has both its positive and negative
implications. From the QoS viewpoint, the use of application
layer allows the utilization of the features offered by lower
layers: prioritization on L2 (Ethernet) and IntServ or DiffServ
features (if implemented) on L3. The shortcoming of the
application layer is that strict, low latency control loops are
91
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 6. Protocol stack of Ethernet/IP [18]
in practice not feasible. This is a result of primarily the delay
added by the travel through the protocol stack. In an optimal
situation, the timing properties can be very close to one of
standard Ethernet.
F. Foundation Fieldbus High Speed Ethernet
Foundation Fieldbus HSE is implemented as an application
layer protocol and has similar properties and limitations as
Ethernet/IP: in the best case, the delay and jitter can be close
to the L2-based implementations, but the additional software
layers will introduce some uncertainty.
V. DCS ARCHITECTURE
Control systems are traditionally built using a three network
levels (Fig. 7.). The plant, the client-server and the control
network. These levels might have different names, but they
share the following characteristics:
• Plant network is home of the traditional IT systems, like
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), ofﬁce services and
other support applications. It is typically under the control
of the IT department.
• Client-server network is the non-time critical part of the
automation system, where the process-related workplaces,
servers and other support entities are located. It is ﬁre-
walled from the plant network and is under the control
of Operations.
• Control network includes everything close to the ac-
tual process: controllers, sensors, actuators and other
automation components. Typically, it follows a strict time
synchronization regime and contains the parts of the
network with time-critical components. It is accessible
through proxies from the client-server network and under
the control of Operations.
The most important component from the control systems
viewpoint is the Programmable Logic Controller (PLC) or
controller. These are specialized industrial computers imple-
mented as solid-state electronic devices, they replaced hard-
wired relay-based circuits. Current devices, beside offering the
traditional groups of digital and analogue circuit interfaces
towards instrumentation, also offer a wide range of other
Controller
Controller
Plant network/intranet
Client/server network
Control network
Fieldbus
Workplaces
Servers
ERP, Remote control
Proxy
Fig. 7. Traditional DCS network architecture
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF DCS AND SCADA PROPERTIES
SCADA
DCS
Small physical distances
Large distances
Independent system
Interconnects/monitors several systems
Full local network control
Typically uses third parties
Data driven
Event driven
services, like logging, status report over SNMP or security
features like a ﬁrewall.
Remote monitoring was introduced to industrial applications
decades ago with the different Supervisory Control and Data
Acquisition (SCADA) systems. These used various communi-
cation technologies (leased lines, radio links, etc.) to feed in
status data to a central monitoring entity. Typically, remote
control was not available. SCADA operations can be very
much represented as a software-only entity. Since SCADA
only has the task to supervise the selected systems, the com-
munication is less critical and mostly event-driven. Remote
Terminal Units (RTUs) are used to feed the data to the central
entity, the Master Terminal Unit (MTU). Remote monitoring
is not a replacement for functionality on site: operations
shall be possible to maintain also in island mode. SCADA
is not expected to lower the site’s reliability or security [19],
[20]. The typical long physical extent requires the use of
communication infrastructure delivered of third parties. The
cost pressure on the communication costs typically led also
in these operations to move from leased lines or other high
QoS-high cost solutions to packet switched solutions.
Developments in the smart grid and IoT extend the possibil-
ities for remote operations is by taking current communication
solutions in use. The extension of the features also requires a
well-deﬁned network infrastructure [21]. An interesting aspect
from the interconnecting task of SCADA systems is that
the typical hardware/software platform used for the SCADA
system will be obsolete in a couple of years, and will be
needed to be upgraded, the systems the SCADA is reporting
abbot will still have the same, relatively old DSC as clients.
92
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A. QoS in automation
Trafﬁc ﬂows in automation typically are M2M. This prop-
erty and the systems connectivity to the physical world require
both different tolerances for disturbances and potentially dif-
ferent metrics [22].
An automation system somewhere in the process is con-
nected to the physical world even if some of the functions can
be virtualized [23]. This means that amongst others, it has
to refer to real time. Forwarding disturbances might lead to
potentially dangerous situations with implications far beyond
a dropped Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) call.
The deﬁnition of QoS requirements in the automation world
has its roots in the deﬁnition of control loops. In control
of the early DCSs bus and serial links were used, which
typically operated in a slotted or polled way. This allowed
the automation engineers to exactly set the communication
parameters to meet the requirements of the control system in
a deterministic way.
For special applications, technologies with intrinsic QoS are
used, e.g., EtherCAT, which allows deterministic communica-
tion, but represents a minority of installations. In the following,
focus will be on solutions, where no intrinsic QoS is available.
The physical world connection also has an inﬂuence on the
used QoS metrics. In automation, beside bandwidth, time and
availability related metrics are more emphasized, like delay
and jitter or availability (redundancy, reconﬁguration time).
A special aspect is also the quality of time synchronization.
The importance and weighting of these metrics is different
compared to the telecommunication or other communication
operations. One of the most important differences is that at
the moment there is no protocol which would bridge the gap
between requirements speciﬁcation in automation terms and
network operations, which results in extended engineering
work and challenging life-cycle support. This is in contrast
with, e.g., VoIP, where protocols like the Resource Reservation
Protocol (RSVP) can be used to reserve resources on the
communication path.
VI. REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATION
Deﬁning requirements and keeping the original intention
in complex systems is a problematic task. In automation, the
main challenge is that the requirements are deﬁned in the
automation context, but the bearer network uses by default
different metrics for expressing forwarding parameters.
In a control loop, typical parameters are control frequency
(how often the data is refreshed or modiﬁed), maximum toler-
able delay, jitter and availability parameters. One of the most
demanding applications, where no technology with intrinsic
QoS is used is substation automation with IEC 61850 [24].
IEC 61850 is a standard for communication networks and
systems for power utility automation. This protocol is a great
step forward for substation automation, as it, amongst others
translates all information into data models, which is supported
by the application focused architecture. This speeds up the
engineering process both in planning and integration [25].
However, also IEC 61850 is not deﬁning exact QoS require-
ments for the network infrastructure. Although the Speciﬁc
Communication Service Mapping (SCSM) feature allows the
deﬁnition of communication links inside the IEC 61850 world,
the translation of requirements is not included.
When the control loops are deﬁned, the current process is
based on individual mapping of automation requirements to
network QoS parameters. This process, although not efﬁcient,
can and is working for smaller installations, but suffers from
scalability problems. The lack of direct coupling between the
automation and communication parameters typically leads to
very pessimistic QoS requirements.
In the Internet of Things (IoT) scenario, where the automa-
tion networks are extended behind the LAN [26], tracking
requirements is becoming more important. Very strict param-
eters of the automation system on the LAN can be mixed into
the WAN requirements, which might lead to prohibitive cost
on communication. Validity of requirements for each ﬂow has
to be analyzed to ensure an efﬁcient ﬁt. The efforts for keeping
the QoS parameters as close to the requirements as possible
can lead to more efﬁcient and cheaper operation.
A. Industrial safety
Conversations on Safety Integrated Systems (SIS) mainly
include questions on QoS. The cause is that these installations
share the communication network between the automation task
and the safety function (as they can also share infrastructure
with the ﬁre alarm system). In a safety sense, SIS have no
QoS requirements. The safety logic is built in a way, so that a
communication error is interpreted as a dangerous situation
and the safety function will trip. So, the system avoids
dangerous situations at the expense of lower productivity and
availability.
Safety as such is an availability question and through
availability, it implies QoS requirements on the automation
system as any other communication task. Special treatment is
not required.
Although a solution like this does not exist for commu-
nication QoS, but the industry has a ﬁeld, where a similar
challenge was solved with structured approach and formal
methods: safety. Safety is already considered as a process,
which is present for the whole life cycle of the product.
Safety systems are classiﬁed into 4 levels, Safety Integrity
Level (SIL) 1 to 4. The different levels pose well-deﬁned
requirements towards the system. These integrity levels cover
all aspects of the system, including hardware, software, com-
munication solution and seen in contrast with the application.
A similar approach could be also beneﬁcial for formalizing
the relationship between the automation application and the
bearer network.
The IEC 61508 standard requires that each risk posed by the
components of the safety system is identiﬁed and analyzed.
The result of the risk analysis should be evaluated against
tolerability criteria.
Key processes of a safety development are risk analysis
and risk reduction. These are executed in an iterative manner
93
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 8. The Health and Safety Executive’s Risk criteria
until the acceptable risk level is achieved. A possible method
for risk classiﬁcation is shown on Fig. 8. from the United
Kingdom Health and Safety Executive.
Analogue to this, a similar approach could be used for deﬁn-
ing an operational envelope for the communication infrastruc-
ture. All possible ﬂows of data should be identiﬁed (analogue
with identifying risk), which is possible with high conﬁdence
on a mostly M2M communication system. Then these ﬂows
should be analyzed and as a result, QoS requirements for
the ﬂows should be identiﬁed. As these are identiﬁed, the
aggregated results should be evaluated against the possibilities
of the underlying infrastructure [27].
The analysis will result in a range, stating the minimum QoS
requirement (with a certain conﬁdence) and the preferred QoS
requirement. If the expected QoS after taking communication
ﬂows into account is inside the operational envelope, the
system can deliver with the deﬁned conﬁdentiality level.
The operational envelope will be larger than zero (not
just forming a baseline composed from the single QoS re-
quirements) because of the stochastic nature of best-effort
forwarding and large networks. Also, an analogy with the
different SIL can be drawn with comparing them to the
conﬁdentiality level of keeping the Service Level Agreement
(SLA) [29].
The approach taken for safety can be a solution for other
properties of the industrial communication system, e.g., QoS
for transport or security [30].
VII. REQUIREMENTS TRACKING
One of the key aspects missing in engineering work today
is the follow-up of requirements stated against the communi-
cation infrastructure.
On the LAN level, the lack of tracking only results in minor
problems, as network resources are typically not problematic.
Even not on the redundancy requirements, since most of the
critical network will have approximately the same reliability
requirements. As an example, a current IEC 61850 substation
will have tens of devices connected to the network.
Fig. 9. Requirements traceability matrix by the U.S. Department of Trans-
portation
The local communication of IEC 61850 is composed from
horizontal and vertical ﬂows, where horizontal ﬂows tend to
use more resources, as Sampled Values (SV) trafﬁc is sent this
way. SV is the continuous stream of sampled input or output
values, which is sent to a controller for processing. The stream
can ﬁll 10s of Mbps. On a network with a gigabit backhaul,
conveying trafﬁc in several 100 Mbps range is not problematic.
Redundancy is typically covered by either a secondary network
or redundant links.
Already in the horizontal-vertical split of ﬂows, different
requirements are valid against the network infrastructure. As
the automation task gets more far away from the ﬁeldbus level
(direct contact with the physical world), so are the deadlines
for communication and processing more relaxed.
Requirements tracking is becoming key as the automation
system passes the LAN boundary. Costs associated to network
communication are becoming more expensive and obeying
QoS parameters increasingly problematic.
Several well-known approaches can help the aggregation
and validation of the QoS parameters during the life cycle
of the project. One of these solutions is the requirements
traceability matrix.
In such a matrix, requirements posed by different automa-
tion tasks towards the infrastructure can be gathered (Fig. 9.).
To allow both aggregation of parameters and identiﬁcation of
the source of a speciﬁc requirement.
Source identiﬁcation is key for long-life installations, where
extensions and updates can be expected during the lifetime of
the system.
Evaluation if a requirement is still valid in different parts or
domains of the system has also a key importance in efﬁcient
deployments. It is important to set up an iterative process
for QoS parameter evaluation. Here, a possible solution could
be to follow the V-model used in, amongst others, software
development and safety development. Fig. 10. shows the iter-
ative development process. The QoS requirements should be
evaluated at each step and their fulﬁlment validated after each
step. With using such a model, the bearer infrastructure would
be more integrated into the development process. Integration
can lead to more optimized QoS requirements. Current practice
results more in a worst-case requirement list.
94
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 10. V-model [31]
For WAN situations, tracking requirement validity has key
importance. The validity area of the respective QoS parameters
has to be limited to cover only the necessary parts. As part of
an iterative process, when the communication scope is getting
wider (e.g., the data is being passed upward in a hierarchical
network architecture), validity of the QoS parameters has
to be checked. An example is that if there is a strict time
synchronization requirement with IEEE 1588, but there is no
such requirement for the WAN section, nor is a loop covering
two endpoints in different networks, then the 1588 requirement
should not be taken over to the SLA deﬁnition of the WAN
interface.
VIII. CONTROL LOOP PARAMETERS
Requirements deﬁnition for the communication network is
one of the actual challenges in automation. The challenge in
this task is that the automation ﬂows are deﬁned using different
metrics than the communication links. An example IEC 61850
control loop would be deﬁned as: having a sampling rate
of 80 samples per cycle (4800 Hz for 60 Hz networks),
with sampling 16 inputs, 16 bit per sample. Event-based
trafﬁc is negligible compared to the periodic trafﬁc. If there
is a requirement for synchronous operation, time precision
(quality) can also be a QoS metric. Redundancy requirements
can lead to topologies, which are unusual in a normal network
infrastructure: ﬁrst, the use of Rapid Spanning Tree Protocol
(RSTP) to disable redundant links, second the general use
of loops (rings) in the network to ensure that all nodes
are dual-homed. With dual-homing, the network can survive
the loss of one communication link without degradation in
the service level. From the network viewpoint, this control
loop will introduce a trafﬁc ﬂow, with a net ingress payload
stream of approx. 98Mbps. The sampling will generate 2560
bytes of trafﬁc each second, which can be carried by at
least two Ethernet frames, thus the system can expect at
least approx. 10000 frames per second. The trafﬁc will be
forwarded on a horizontal path to the controller. On the ingress
port to the backbone, it will enter with approx. 110 Mbps
(header+payload). The trafﬁc ﬂow will be consumed at the
egress port to the controller.
Due to the stochastic nature of Ethernet, there will be
jitter between the frames transmitted over the network. The
maximum jitter is deﬁned by the maximum delay variation
tolerance of the control loop (typically, every second frame
must arrive in good time). This requirement can then be
calculated with either the length of the typical frame of the
ﬂow or with a maximum length frame. In both cases, the
allowed jitter will be considerably longer than the expected
disturbances on the LAN. Precision requirement on the time
synchronization implies two choices: the choice of protocol
and time source. The choice of protocol is generally IEEE
1588v2, which allows high precision time synchronization and
GPS as a time source. The choice of GPS is actually an input
to the risk analysis of the whole project, as then the time
reference will depend on a network controlled by a third party.
IX. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
With communicating automation systems covering large
geographical areas and also expanding in logical complexity,
current, non-scalable solutions for performance deﬁnition and
evaluation are getting outdated. Deterministic mapping of
control-related parameters to QoS parameters of the used
networking technologies supported with requirements tracking
can be a way to go.
To show a similar process in the engineering of automation
systems, examples from safety integrated systems are shown.
Introduction of the structured approach used in safety devel-
opment can both enhance the quality of deployments and also
allow easier communication between the parties. The main
gain with using a process built on the safety development is,
that the safety process (like the V-model) is already known
and accepted. Networking and QoS is, as safety, not a single
delivery, but a process and follows the life-cycle of the product.
Future work will focus on, how QoS requirements can
be formalized in a technologically neutral way and mapped
into actual solutions. Protocol development or adaptation for
resource reservation for automation applications in both LAN
and WAN environments is an important ﬁeld of study, includ-
ing the use of SDN in automation [10], [32].
As an outlook, future hot spots of research could be auto-
matic parameter tracking through the design process and real
time monitoring of deployments also during their operation.
Automation and smart grids are an important ﬁeld of 5G
efforts and it is expected to utilize the existing telecommu-
nication protocols with applying industry-speciﬁc proﬁles, in-
cluding protocols like Resource reSerVation Protocol (RSVP).
Developing these proﬁles which will not only deﬁne the
infrastructure requirements, but also interfaces towards other
systems.
95
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

REFERENCES
[1] Gy. K´alm´an, ”Quality of Service Parameter Tracking and Transforma-
tion in Industrial Applications,” in Proceedings of IARIA AICT 2016,
St. Julians, Malta
[2] Gy. K´alm´an, D. Orfanus, and R. Hussain, ”An Overview of Switching
Solutions for Wired Industrial Ethernet,” The Thirteenth International
Conference on Networks ICN 2014, pp. 131-136, Nice
[3] B. Galloway, and G. Hancke, ”Introduction to Industrial Control Net-
works,” IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, Volume 15, Issue
2, Pages: 860-880, 2013 Q2
[4] Alcate-Lucent, ”Transformation of mission-critical communication net-
works,” Alcatel-Lucent White Paper, 2015
[5] H. Bernhard, and J. Mottok, ”Real-time behavior of Ethernet on the
example of PROFINET,” https://www.hs-regensburg.de/ﬁleadmin/media/
fakultaeten/ei/forschung projekte/MAPR Ver%C3%B6ffentlichungen/
ARC Heitzer.pdf, accessed: 08.09.2016
[6] Y. Jeon, ”QoS Requirements for the Smart Grid Communications Sys-
tem,” IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network
Security, Volume 11, Issue 3, 2011
[7] I. Dominguez-Jaimes, L. Wisniewski, and H. Trsek, ”Identiﬁcation of
Trafﬁc Flows in Ethernet-based Industrial Fieldbuses,” IEEE Emerging
Technolgoies and Factory Automation (ETFA), 2010
[8] M. Yaghmaee, Z. Youseﬁ, M. Zabhi, and S. Alishahi, ”Quality of Service
Guarantee in Smart Grid Infrastructure Communication Using Trafﬁc
Classiﬁcation,” 22nd International Conference on Electricity Distribution,
Stockholm, 2013
[9] A. Verwer, ”Overview and Applications of PROFINET,” PROFIBUS
and PROFINET International, http://www.proﬁbus.com/uploads/media/
proﬁnet overview.pdf.pdf, accessed: 08.09.2016
[10] Gy. K´alm´an, ”Applicability of Software Deﬁned Networking in In-
dustrial Ethernet,” in Proceedings of IEEE Telfor 2015, pp.
340-343,
Belgrade, Serbia
[11] Cisco, ”End-to-End QoS Network Design: Quality of Service for Rich-
Media & Cloud Networks,” Cisco Press, 2013
[12] C. Alcaraz, G. Fernandez, and F. Carvajal, ”Security Aspects of SCADA
and DCS Environments,” In Critical Infrastructure Protection: Information
Infrastructure Models, Analysis, and Defense, LNCS 7130, Springer,
2012, pp. 120-149
[13] L. Sheng, ”QoS Design and Its Implementation for Intelligent Industrial
Ethernet,” International Journal of Materials, Mechanics and Manufactur-
ing, Vol. 4, No. 1, 2016, pp. 40-45.
[14] TTTech, ”Deterministic Ethernet and TSN: automotive and industrial
IoT,” Industrial Ethernet Book, Issue 89/8, 2016
[15] P. Neumann, and A. P¨oschmann, ”Ethernet-based Real-Time Communi-
cations with PROFINET IO,” ACMOS’05 Proceedings of the 7th WSEAS
international conference on Automatic control, modeling and simulation,
Pages 54-61, 2005
[16] Siemens, ”Proﬁnet Answers for Industry,” https://w3.siemens.com/
mcms/water-industry/en/Documents/PROFINET.pdf,
2010,
Accessed
28.01.2016
[17] EtherCAT Technology Group, ”Moving up to Industrial Ethernet,”
Industrial Ethernet Book, Issue 45/35, 2016
[18] Rockwell Automation, ”Fundamentals of Ethernet/IP Network Technol-
ogy,” Rockwell Automation presentation, TechED 2015
[19] Jari Ahokas, ”Secure and Reliable Communications Solution for
SCADA and PPDR Use,” Master’s Thesis, Laurea University of Applied
Sciences, 2013
[20] C. Hauser, D. Bakken, I. Dionysiou, K. Gjermundrˇrd, V. Irava, and
A. Bose, ”Security, Trust and QoS in next-generation control and com-
munication for large power systems,” International Journal of Critical
Infrastructures, Volume 4, Issue 1-2, 2008
[21] N. Barkakati and G. C. Wilshusen, ”Deﬁcient ICT Controls Jeopardize
Systems Supporting the Electric Grid: A Case Study,” Securing Electricity
Supply in the Cyber Age, Springer, 2009, pp. 129-142
[22] J. Bilbao, C. Cruces, and I. Armendariz, ”Methodology for the QoS
Characterization in High Constraints Industrial Networks,” Open Journal
of Communications and Software, Volume 1, Number 1, 2014, pp. 30-41
[23] J. Beran, and F. Zezulka, ”Evaluation of Real-Time Behavior in Virtual
Automation Networks,” Proceedings of the 17th World Congress of The
International Federation of Automatic Control, Seoul, Korea, 2008
[24] V. Skendzic, I. Ender, and G. Zweigle, ”IEC 61850-9-2 Process Bus
and Its Impact on Power System Protection and Control Reliability,”
in proceedings of the 9th Annual Western Power Delivery Automation
Conference, April 3-5, 2007, Spokane, USA
[25] M. Rensburg, D. Dolezilek, and J. Dearien, ”Case Study: Using IEC
61850 Network Engineering Guideline Test Procedures to Diagnose and
Analyze Ethernet Network Installations,” in proceedings of PAC World
Africa 2015, November 12-13., Johannesburg, South Africa
[26] A. Al-Fuqaha, M. Guizani, M. Mohammadi, M. Aledhari, and
M. Ayyash, ”Internet of Things: A Survey on Enabling Technologies,
Protocols, and Applications,” IEEE Communication Surveys and Tutori-
als, Vol. 17, No. 4, 2015, pp. 2347-2376
[27] Open Networking Foundation, ”Software-Deﬁned Networking: The
New Norm for Networks white paper,” https://www.opennetworking.org/
images/stories/downloads/sdn-resources/white-papers/wp-sdn-newnorm.
pdf, Accessed 28.01.2016.
[28] Industrial Ethernet Book, ”Quality of Service for high priority
networks,” http://www.iebmedia.com/index.php?id=5594&parentid=63&
themeid=255&showdetail=true, accessed: 08.09.2016
[29] P. Blanco, G. A. Lewis, and P. Merson, ”Service Level Agreements in
Service-Oriented Architecture Environments,” Technical Note, Software
Engineering Institute, CMU/SEI-2008-TN-021
[30] R.C. Parks and E. Rogers, ”Best practices in automation security,”
Security & Privacy, IEEE (Volume:6 , Issue: 6 ), 2009, pp 37-43
[31] G. Blank, ”Object-oriented Software Engineering,” http://www.cse.
lehigh.edu/∼glennb/oose/ﬁgs/pﬂeeger/Vmodel.jpg, Accessed 18.03.2016.
[32] D. Cronberger, ”The software-deﬁned Industrial Network,” The Indus-
trial Ethernet Book, Issue 84, 2014, pp. 8-13
96
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

