217
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 System Architecture for High-speed Close-proximity Low-power RF Memory Tags 
and Wireless Internet Access 
 
Iiro Jantunen 
Department of Applied Physics 
University of Eastern Finland 
Kuopio, Finland 
iiro.jantunen@uef.fi 
Joni Jantunena, Harald Kaajaa, Sergey Boldyrevb 
aNokia Research Center 
bNokia Location & Commerce 
Helsinki, Finland 
{joni.jantunen, harald.kaaja, sergey.boldyrev}@nokia.com 
Le Wang, Jyri Hämäläinen 
Department of Communications and Networking 
Aalto University 
Espoo, Finland 
{le.wang, jyri.hamalainen}@aalto.fi 
 
Abstract — We have developed an open architecture platform 
for 
implementing 
passive 
radio-frequency 
identification 
(RFID) tags with a mass memory for close proximity environ-
ment. Purposes for such mass memory tags are, e.g., multime-
dia files embedded in advertisements or logged sensor data on 
a low-power sensor node. In the proposed architecture, a mo-
bile phone acts as the reader that can read or write the 
memory of these RFID tags. The architecture also enables 
creation of a new type of wireless internet access suitable for, 
e.g., internet kiosks. The architecture is designed so that devel-
opment path to a full Network on Terminal Architecture (No-
TA) is feasible. The wireless reading speed of the mass memory 
tags, demonstrated to be 112 Mbit/s, is in the range that a 3-
minute 640×320-pixel video can be loaded from the tag to the 
phone in less than 10 s. Our solution supports Nokia’s Explore 
and Share concept. 
Keywords — memory architecture; multimedia systems; 
RFID; telephone sets; RF memory tags; Internet connection 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Today’s mobile phones contain music and video players, 
which make it possible for consumers to enjoy entertainment 
while on the move. Acquiring new multimedia content by 
downloading or streaming, however, is hampered by the high 
cost and slow speed of Internet connections, as well as by the 
fact that commonly used physical multimedia formats, such 
as optical disks, cannot be read with a mobile phone. Thus, 
to make acquiring new content easier, cheaper and less pow-
er-consuming, we propose a new technology based on radio 
frequency (RF) memory tags readable and writable by mo-
bile phones [1]. 
RFID tags are increasingly a part of our life; transport, 
traceability, and secure access are some of the main uses of 
this close proximity technology today. Conventional ma-
chine-readable wireless tags, e.g., Near Field Communica-
tion (NFC) tags, normally have a very small memory in the 
range of hundreds of bytes or kilobytes. Some RFID stand-
ards include an option to have a flexible-use memory, but the 
capacity is low compared to factory-set fixed-content 
memory. Tag selection is based on reading the content in a 
selected tag memory address (e.g., tag or manufacturer ID). 
As the memory capacity of these tags is small, the amount of 
data to be transferred is also small and power consumption of 
RF communication is, thus, not a critical issue. 
Various research groups have developed improvements 
to the commercially available RFID technologies. To over-
come the storage capacity limitation of passive tags, Wu et 
al. increase effective tag storage sizes with proposed distrib-
uted RFID tag storage infrastructure (D-RFID stores) [2]. 
Tags would be distributed in space and time in this architec-
ture. Ahmed et al. focus on RFID system unreliability and 
improvements in middleware for object tracking and object 
location with moving readers or tags [3]. As a result of their 
research, a virtual reader system architecture was introduced. 
Ying described a verification platform for RFID reader that 
utilized Ultra High Frequency (UHF) frequency [4]. This 
platform is applicable for customization with different RFID 
standards. Pillin et al. have developed a passive far-field 
RFID tag using the 2.45 GHz Industrial, Scientific and Med-
ical (ISM) band, with a data rate of 4 Mbit/s on the range of 
5.5 cm [5]. As an example of a proprietary solution, HP’s 
Memory Spot tag also works on the 2.45 GHz ISM band and 
has demonstrated 4 MB memory and 10 Mbit/s data rate but 
only allowing a touch range [6]. 
The problems of low data reading rate and small memory 
size provided by contemporary RFID tags become empha-
sized if one considers mobile users reading multimedia files 
from tags embedded on, e.g., paper media. The attention 
span of a mobile user is about 10 seconds [7]. Within this 
period, the user could get a single multimedia content file 
from a memory tag. Considering a movie trailer, the file size 
for a 2-minute 640×320-pixel 30-fps (3 Mbit/s), encoded 
with H.264, would be around 50 MB [8]. The required min-
imum data transfer rate from the user point-of-view is thus 
50 Mbit/s. This exceeds the maximum data rate available by 
the 13.56 MHz NFC technology, 848 kbit/s, by a factor of 
60. Even the maximum data rate for NFC demonstrated on a 
laboratory set-up, 6.78 Mbit/s [9], is not enough. When users 
are getting used to NFC, the speed and storage capacity be-
comes quite easily a limiting factor. Thus, there is a need for 
a new high-speed touch-range RFID radio interface. 

218
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The aim of our research has been to develop a high-
capacity memory tag, which is wirelessly readable with a 
mobile phone and suitable for consumer markets in ubimedia 
applications [10][11]. The mobile phone acts as the user 
interface for reading and writing passive RF memory tags 
that contain a high-capacity memory (0.1–1 GB). The rea-
soning for the proposed technology was justified by modern 
trends in non-volatile memory technologies, according to 
which the power consumption, physical size, and price of 
memory are continuously decreasing. The technology pre-
sented in this paper supports Nokia’s Explore and Share 
concept, a new way of transferring content (e.g., multimedia, 
maps, and applications) to a mobile phone [12]. 
Another use case for the technology presented in this pa-
per is an Internet Kiosk, i.e., a short-range hotspot providing 
access to the Internet. Traditionally, an Internet kiosk is 
nearly always a computer connected to core network via a 
backhaul link that can be wired or wireless broadband. The-
se Internet Kiosks are typically pay-as-you-go (credit card 
or pre-paid) or funded by advertisements presented within 
the kiosk screen.  
Nowadays, accessing the Internet freely and securely has 
become critical for business and recreational needs.  Personal 
wireless terminals (such as mobile phones or laptop comput-
ers) are, thus, associated with modern Internet hotspots based 
on wireless local area network (Wi-Fi) technology. These 
Wi-Fi hotspots are either free or paid by credit card when 
logging in and are widely deployed.  Another kind of wire-
less Internet hotspot is femtocell-based [14], providing a 
local connectivity through cellular technology such as wide-
band code division multiple access (WCDMA). Convention-
ally, femtocells are designed for use in a home or small busi-
ness to improve indoor wireless coverage. As Bluetooth is a 
competitive wireless solution especially from energy saving 
point-of-view, it has also been considered as one technology 
to enable wireless kiosks [15]. Moreover, NFC featured 
kiosks allow users to be connected and download multimedia 
content via NFC-enabled mobile phones [16]. 
All the wireless internet kiosk or hotspot types mentioned 
above share the demand of internal power within the phone, 
the power usage of the connection depending on the technol-
ogy and status of the hotspot (distance, amount of devices 
connected etc.). If draining the battery of the phone is not 
acceptable (e.g., while travelling), a wired connection to a 
power outlet is needed. 
In this paper, we describe and specify a network architec-
ture, which enables mobile phones to read and write passive 
RF memory tags and use a RF memory tag based Internet 
connection. The architecture has been developed and demon-
strated in the EU's 6th Framework Programme (FP) “Micro-
Nano integrated platform for transverse Ambient Intelligence 
applications” (MINAmI) project [17], and thus the architec-
ture is referred to as MINAmI Architecture. Important archi-
tecture requirements include openness, modularity, scalabil-
ity, and energy efficiency. Openness and modularity are 
needed to support creation of novel applications and services 
by 3rd parties. Scalability of data rate is needed to enable 
evolution of the technology along with evolution of multi-
media services. Energy efficiency is essential to enable pas-
sive operation of the tags as well as to save the phone’s bat-
tery. 
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we in-
troduce the system architecture, along with a key component 
of the architecture, RF memory tags. In Section III, we intro-
duce a novel dual-band radio subsystem and its hardware and 
software implementation. In Section IV, we introduce a new 
type of power-saving short-range wireless internet access for 
mobile devices and compare its power use to other available 
wireless internet access technologies. In Section V, we pre-
sent the current status of implementation of the architecture, 
discuss possibilities for future development, and draw some 
conclusions. 
II. 
MINAMI ARCHITECTURE 
The proposed MINAmI architecture makes use of the 
mobile phone’s capability of running software and providing 
several radio interfaces (Fig. 1). The architecture is modular, 
enabling simpler and faster development of new technical 
extensions (e.g., RF memory tags). Our architecture focuses 
on utilization of modularity on component level (e.g., where 
to plug memory tag functionality) and on communication 
level (e.g., how the available memory tags are utilized). At 
close proximity domain (range < 1 m), different tags are 
communicating locally with a mobile phone. In the present 
work we have concentrated on the RF memory tags. The 
sensor parts of the architecture (RFID sensor tags and Blue-
 
Figure 1. MINAmI Architecture [11] 

219
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
tooth sensor devices) have been studied in an earlier project 
[18][19]. 
The main RF memory tag architectural design challenges 
include target platform performance obstacles, such as avail-
able bus operations (read/write) and power requirements, 
especially when drawing the line for autonomous operations 
in the described MINAmI architecture. The other challenge 
is minimizing changes to the existing system communication 
layering, only to the external memory stack block.  The tech-
nological choices in the MINAmI system architecture were 
able to support both existing standard radios for low-rate 
sensors, and the high-rate high-capacity memory tags. 
A. Network-on-Terminal Architecture (NoTA) 
NoTA is a modular service-based system architecture for 
mobile and embedded devices offering services and applica-
tions to each other [20]. The concept is being defined in an 
open initiative. NoTA is also known as an open device dis-
tributed architecture, which allows direct connections be-
tween different nodes, within subsystem or between subsys-
tems, supporting several physical interfaces within the device 
or between devices [21]. This architecture also supports both 
messaging and streaming services. The beauty in the archi-
tecture resides in modularity and transport independency. 
Direct connection between subsystems improves the effi-
ciency as they do not necessarily require any processor in-
volvement, when subsystems have all the needed functionali-
ties available for their independent operations. Transport-
specific portion is hidden underneath NoTA communication 
layering. 
NoTA communication layering is built around transport-
independent parts and it provides interfaces towards 
transport-specific parts (Fig. 2). Extension architecture with 
Device Interconnect Protocol (DIP) enables flexible open-
source architecture for different hardware platforms. DIP 
provides logical links between a requesting subsystem and 
other subsystems or within a subsystem [21]. DIP is a de-
vice-level communication protocol that can be implemented 
for various physical interfaces ranging from MIPI (Mobile 
Industry Processor Interface) high speed serial interfaces and 
Universal Serial Bus (USB) to wireless interfaces, such as 
Bluetooth [22][23]. Another example of utilization of DIP is 
the Open Modem Interface Protocol [24]. 
NoTA host subsystem and neighboring subsystems are 
connected via the high speed physical interface. DIP adapts 
physical interfaces to the upper layers. It is the lowest layer 
that is common for all subsystems (i.e., also for MINAmI 
subsystem) and hides the physical dependencies underneath. 
Above DIP there is a common service interface used for 
resource management, file systems, and system boot-ups. 
Middleware frameworks, e.g., for multimedia, USB, and 
other applications, use a common service interface or exten-
sion Application Programming Interface (API). The architec-
ture also takes into account vertical solutions, which may 
require an optimized protocol design for certain requirements 
that are tied to HW-specific applications. 
NoTA subsystem structure takes into account possibility 
to add different types of independent service or application 
subsystems to the architecture, and the MINAmI subsystem 
forms one high data rate high capacity subsystem. When 
properly designed, the modular NoTA-based subsystem 
specification involves clear distinction of the system design-
er/integrator and vendor views of subsystem description and 
scenarios. Based on a provided subsystem specification the 
vendors test and validate their subsystem implementation 
and deliver them to the product designers for integration 
[25]. 
The MINAmI subsystem offers memory tag read/write, 
storage and local connectivity services to other subsystems 
within mobile device, and its architecture is compatible with 
NoTA communication layering. The MINAmI subsystem 
includes both the mobile phone (Mobile Reader/Writer) and 
the tag and all the relating hardware and software resources. 
Mobile Reader/Writer sees the contents of the memory of a 
 
Figure 2. NoTA extension architecture for MINAmI subsystem, where HSI = High Speed Serial Interface; HS-MMC = High Speed MultiMediaCard: SPI = 
Serial Peripheral Interface bus. 

220
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
passive RF memory tag only when there is an established 
connection, i.e., power field and data connection exists. 
B. RF Memory Tags 
The focus of our research has been on mobile-phone-
operable memory tags suitable for consumer markets and 
ubimedia applications. The tag is developed as a part of our 
mobile-phone-centric architecture. Our memory tag devel-
opment targets improving both transfer speed and storage 
capacity. These improvements give direct benefit for 
ubimedia users.  
The target memory capacity of our memory tag has been 
in the range of gigabits and mobile reader/writer transfer 
speed to and from memory tag in excess of 10 Mbit/s.  The 
same design platform is usable for both ends, for mobile 
phone platform reader/writer and for tag implementation. 
When designing the platform, various important design pa-
rameters, such as the selection of the used radio technology, 
were considered to provide an efficient and low-power solu-
tion for mobile reader/writer and tags.  
It was important to make sure that connectivity technolo-
gy is simple enough for the user, e.g., it should facilitate easy 
content selection (see Section III.D). Memory tag content 
selections should be based on metadata (e.g., filenames, file 
content types, file content keywords). Due to the large 
memory size, power consumption for memory access is a 
critical design issue, both for reading and writing the 
memory tag. To be successful on the market, RF memory 
tags for ubimedia must be passive to make them as small 
(size) and cheap as possible, and to achieve autonomous 
usage with minimum maintenance (e.g., usage without 
charging of battery). This severely limits the power budget. 
On the other hand, a short communication range (even touch) 
is sometimes preferable to make it easier for the user to 
physically select the tag. An RF memory tag will be read 
many times by different users, but written more rarely – in 
some cases, only once. The memory unit must work reliably 
even with several consecutive read cycles. A limited write 
throughput due to power constraint is not an issue, as data is 
rarely written by the users. 
III. 
UWB LOW END EXTENSION 
As memory tags have high data storage capacity, a high-
speed radio is needed for communication to enable reading 
even all the contents of the tag in an acceptable time. Cur-
rently available mobile phones contain several radio trans-
ceivers, such as cellular, Bluetooth, and Wi-Fi, along with 
NFC. Most of the technologies are made for well-established 
communication between active devices, consuming a rela-
tively large amount of power. These technologies are also 
not inherently designed for ad-hoc, possibly one-time, con-
nections between devices that have not communicated with 
each other before, resulting in long latency in establishing 
the communications. For example, in an environment with 
many unknown Bluetooth devices, the Bluetooth connection 
setup latency can be over 10 seconds [26]. NFC enables 
communications between an active and a passive battery-less 
device and is physically more selective; its communication 
range is almost in touch. However, it has severe limitations 
in data transfer speed.  
To provide higher data rates, a wider frequency band 
available on higher frequencies needs to be used. On the 
other hand, the efficiency of wireless power transfer (WPT) 
decreases as a function of center frequency. To solve the 
problem of providing high-speed communication (high fre-
quency needed) while simultaneously providing power wire-
lessly to the tag, a dual-band radio interface has been pro-
posed [27]. One narrowband signal on RFID frequencies 
(e.g., RFID frequency bands globally available between 860–
960 MHz) is used to power the tag and to provide a mutual 
clock reference for both ends of the communication link, 
whereas the communication link itself is based on impulse 
Ultra-Wideband (UWB) technique to provide a high com-
munication bandwidth and scalability for even higher data 
rates. 
As the selected RFID frequencies are approximately in 
the same frequency range as Global System for Mobile 
Communications (GSM) or WCDMA 900 MHz, in the read-
er there is a possibility of integrating the WPT function to the 
existing Phone Radio Subsystem, as presented in Fig. 3. In 
that case, Phone Radio Subsystem is designed so that the 
WPT Physical (PHY) Layer function may request a direct 
access to control the activation of the narrowband transmit-
ter. Especially, the time-domain interleaving of different 
 
Figure 3. MINAmI Architecture on phone 
 
 
PHONE
UI/APP
MIPI BUS
WPT
MINAmI CONTROLLER
POWER
SUBSYS
MEMORY
SUBSYSTEM
BATTE
RY
PHONE 
RADIO
SUBSYS
MINAmI 
SUBSYSTEM
POWER
MANAGEMENT
I-UWB
HSI
MEMORY 
CONTROL LAYER
MIPI mPHY
PCM
NETWORK
UWBLEE MAC
UWBLEE PHY
I-UWB
WPT
CONTROL BLOCK
 
Figure 4. MINAmI Architecture on a RF memory tag 

221
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
functions 
is 
important 
to 
support 
co-existence 
of 
GSM/WCDMA and WPT signaling.  
The architecture of the RF memory tag (Fig. 4) is similar 
to the MINAmI subsystem on the mobile phone. For simple 
RF memory tags, no network layer implementation is needed 
to take care of the point-to-point communication between the 
reader and the tag, and therefore is handled on Medium Ac-
cess Control (MAC) layer. 
As an option for use-cases like data-logging sensor de-
vices, the memory control layer provides a sensor interface. 
During the sensing, the sensor data is stored to the Phase-
Change Memory (PCM) block and the low data-rate data 
capturing is powered from a battery or with energy harvested 
from the environment. For fast downloading of the logged 
data, the reader powers the sensor tag wirelessly. 
A. Hardware architecture 
The hardware, both the radio front-end and the memory, 
of the RF memory tag needs to run on the energy scavenged 
from the UHF transmission of the mobile phone. This sub-
section describes the enabling technologies: low-power 
high-data-rate radio front-end and low-power high-capacity 
high-speed non-volatile memory. 
1) Radio Front-end 
As presented in [27], a very simple super-regenerative 
transceiver architecture can be used in impulse UWB com-
munication to achieve required data-rates over short distanc-
es. In contrast to conventional impulse UWB transceivers 
[28], there is no need for multipath recovery over the dis-
tances below 30 cm. This decreases the requirements set for 
the UWB transceivers. This is used to minimize complexity 
and power consumption of the transceivers. In the aforemen-
tioned super-regenerative transceiver one super-regenerative 
oscillator is used alternately both to generate transmitted 
pulses and to amplify received pulses, and no linear amplifi-
ers are needed. Thus, the architecture utilizes the inherently 
low duty cycle of the transmitted impulse UWB signal also 
in reception the receiver being fully active only exactly dur-
ing the detection of incoming pulses.  
Synchronization is often problematic in impulse UWB 
systems because of the low duty cycle and pseudo-random 
timing of pulsed signal, and due to frequency drift and dif-
ferences of reference clocks between the transceivers. In the 
proposed system the frequency synchronization between the 
reader and tag is achieved thanks to the mutual narrowband 
WPT signal, which is also used as the reference clock. The 
phase synchronization of impulse UWB transceivers is also 
easier to achieve due to decreased need for pseudo-random 
time-coding of pulse patterns. 
The transceiver structure supports simple On-Off-Keying 
(OOK) modulation. The data-rate and power consumption is 
also scalable depending on the power level available for the 
wirelessly powered tag. Due to the simplified transceiver 
structure, targeted ultra-low power consumption and partial 
exploitation (500 MHz) of full UWB band (3.1–10.6 GHz) 
authorized by Federal Communications Commission (FCC) 
for unlicensed use, the impulse UWB system referred here is 
called UWBLEE (UWB Low End Extension). 
Altogether, the optimized transceiver architecture makes 
it possible to achieve required high data-rates with a low 
power consumption performance (a few mW) suitable for 
WPT. As a proof-of-concept, a complete wirelessly powered 
RF front-end implementation of the super-regenerative trans-
ceiver is presented in [29] and [30] by using a single super-
regenerative oscillator for transmission and reception. The 
front-end implementation supports data-rates up to 112 
Mbit/s with the energy consumption of 48 pJ/bit in reception 
and 58 pJ/bit in transmission. The feasibility of the ultra low 
power consumption in high data-rate two-way communica-
tion is verified with an integrated RF front-end implementa-
tion based on the symmetrical transceiver architecture pro-
posed earlier [27]. A 900 MHz WPT signal is used as a mu-
tual clock reference and the communication is done over an 
impulse UWB link at 7.9 GHz center frequency. The scala-
ble data-rate of UWB link up to 112 Mbit/s has been demon-
strated as well as robustness against narrowband interfer-
ence.  
2) Non-Volatile Memory (NVM) technology 
The main reason to pick up PCM in favor of any other 
memory technology [31] were the benefits of PCM technol-
ogy, e.g., the estimated high number of read/write cycles as 
1×10^6, which consequently results in need of no or just a 
lightweight wear leveling algorithm, and the bit alterability – 
lack of need of block erase cycles (as with flash memory) 
when data should be stored. From the perspective of technol-
ogy lifecycle PCM stands now between a pure innovative 
technology and early adopters’ stage. There are several 90 
nm products [32] on the market already and more to come.  
Aggregating main memory characteristics in comparison 
with NAND/NOR flash technology and dynamic random-
access memory (DRAM) execution memory, PCM stands 
between those two in terms of cost per die. It is characterized 
as 5.5 F^2 factor in cell size having the same wafer complex-
ity as DRAM technology. Currently only Single Level Cell 
(SLC) PCM is available, though Multi-Level Cell (MLC) 
PCM is on the way out, which can substantially extend the 
density and, justify the cost structure [31]. Thus, the applica-
tion range can be quite wide from external usage (cards, 
keys) and wireless applications (RF memory tags) to high 
performance computing applications (caches, code execu-
tion, data storage). Considering reliability characteristics it is 
important to note that PCM technology gives more than 10 
years retention ratio that can be extended even further, if 
necessary, by proper bit error management. 
PCM has performance characteristics such as read & 
write latency and read & write endurance almost as good as 
DRAM, while giving clear benefits through the non-volatile 
nature of PCM technology. PCM has a low system-wise 
energy consumption (~0.2 mW/pF read, <1.25 mW write) 
~<1 mW/GB of idle power, access time comparable to 
DRAM (~85 ns), with read latency 50–100 ns, write band-
width from 10 to 100+ Mbit/s/die, write latency 500 ns – 1 
µs, various packaging and die stacking solutions, high-speed 
low-pin-count low-power interface solutions, and maturity of 
the technology as such. 
The PCM technology highlights provide clear reasoning 
for the selection of such technology for the RF memory tag 

222
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
application, preserving the opportunity to justify it even 
further when some other application should be designed. 
B. Software Architecture (protocol stack) 
The MINAmI software architecture (protocol stack) is 
designed to be modular and scalable. The protocol stack is 
based on three layers: Network Layer, MAC Layer, and PHY 
Layer. The APIs of the layers are open for 3rd parties. These 
layers will be presented in the following sections. The proto-
col stack has been developed taking into account future 
compatibility with NoTA architecture. Care should be taken 
to have a clear implementation path towards the final archi-
tectural (NoTA) solution. 
1) Network Layer 
Network Layer will first only provide point-to-point con-
nections regardless of state. In future, also applications using 
multiple targets could become feasible when MINAmI Sub-
system is in active mode. If a point-to-multipoint network 
protocol is needed, nanoIP is easily implementable [18][33]. 
However, to get full internet support classical IP protocol 
may be valid, and more common in networking devices. In 
the final architecture (NoTA) solution, the network layer will 
consist of Device Interconnect Protocol (DIP), as a middle-
ware, which guarantees the compatibility with NoTA. In DIP 
protocol, it is possible to select, which transport mode and 
network is used. For example DIP TCP L_IN (transport 
selected) is ready to be used within one device and between 
several devices in a sub-network as such. Multicasting must 
be enabled in IP interface in order for device discovery to 
work. Nodes, which are in different sub-network, cannot be 
detected [21].  
Packet size is an important parameter and depends on 
what is feasible for MAC and PHY layers. Upper layer pack-
ets are segmented and reassembled and this is dependent on 
what kind of packet sizes the system supports. 
2) MAC Layer 
The MAC of the novel dual-band radio interface has 
three different operational modes: the passive mode, where 
no internal power source is available or used; and the active 
and semi-passive modes, where internal power source is 
available. Tags on battery-less objects without power wire 
connection (e.g., implanted on paper) are passive. 
In the active mode, the mobile phone actively searches 
and selects the target tags, sends the targets the WPT signal 
for powering and for frequency synchronization of the com-
munication link, reads/writes data on the tags, and closes the 
connection to the target when active connection is no longer 
required. This operation can be an automatic feature, or ena-
bled by the user (initiating the application for reading and 
writing the tag). In the semi-passive mode the phone receives 
data sent by an outside device, but powers itself, allowing a 
longer communication range, which would otherwise be 
limited by the WPT link. In semi-passive mode, however, the 
initiator device takes care of the synchronization of the I-
UWB communication link. 
Active mode states are used by battery-powered mobile 
devices, whereas passive mode states are applied for passive 
devices and tags. In passive mode, possible connections are 
powered by an outside device with WPT. In the passive 
operating mode, the default state (when powered by an out-
side device) is P-IDLE, i.e., ready to receive any data, after 
the boot-up sequence. 
The main operational states of UWBLEE MAC are 
shown in Figures 5 and 6. In addition to the shown directions 
of movement from state to state, there need to be possibility 
of built-in error recovery operation from any operational 
state to the corresponding idle state (A-IDLE or P-IDLE). 
For the applications requiring higher security, a suitable 
security protocol can be applied for the ongoing data trans-
mission. 
3) Physical Layer 
UWBLEE PHY layer controls both the I-UWB commu-
nications and Wireless Power Transfer (WPT) transmission. 
Depending on the operational mode (active or passive) WPT 
link is used to send (or receive) power and/or to provide the 
clock reference signal. 
UWBLEE PHY is divided to two sub-blocks: I-UWB 
PHY and WPT PHY. I-UWB PHY controls the Impulse-
UWB radio interface and WPT PHY controls the Wireless 
Power Transfer interface. I-UWB PHY and WPT PHY are 
coordinated by UWBLEE PHY so that I-UWB transmission 
is synchronized with the WPT transmission. 
The function performed by UWBLEE PHY is defined by 
UWBLEE MAC, as shown in Table 1. 
 
Figure 5. Active (and semi-passive) UWBLEE MAC states on a mobile 
phone. Active states denoted with A, semi-passive with S. 
 
Figure 6. Passive UWBLEE MAC states on a RF memory tag. 
TABLE I: UWBLEE PHY IN DIFFERENT MAC STATES 
 
MAC mode 
Passive 
Semi-passive 
Active 
I-UWB 
Transmit / receive 
WPT synch 
Receive 
Receive 
Transmit 
WPT power 
Receive 
 
Transmit 
Power source 
WPT 
reception 
Battery 
Battery 
Remarks 
Being read / written 
Reading / writing 
other devices 
 
ACTIVE MODE
OFF
A-IDLE
A-SCAN
A-CONNECT
A-CONNECTED
S-CONNECT
S-CONNECTED
MOBILE 
PHONE
PASSIVE MODE
OFF
P-IDLE
P-CONNECT
P-CONNECTED
PASSIVE MEMORY TAG

223
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
C. Packet-level Communication 
The MINAmI subsystem communication between active 
mobile reader/writer and passive RF memory tag consists of 
periods shown in Fig. 7. In the beginning, there are no tags 
within the mobile reader/writer local connectivity coverage. 
If the mobile reader/writer detects a tag during the powering 
period, it tries to scan all tags available (in the polling peri-
od) and – based on the current selection criteria – choose one 
with whom to communicate (in the activation period). The 
right tag is found by scanning the coverage area, synchroniz-
ing communications with the tags, and selecting the right tag. 
After this selection, connection and device configuration is 
executed in the initialization period to set communication 
parameters, to specify packet level parameters (e.g., length, 
memory allocation). The connection period is initiated when 
connection between mobile reader/writer and selected tag is 
established. This is followed by the data transmission period, 
reading and/or writing selected content from/to tag. After 
successful data transmissions, in the termination period, 
connection is closed or continued with another read/write 
operation to the tag. 
Basic connection procedure between a mobile reader and 
a tag is described in Fig. 8, which also identifies affected 
internal entities, e.g., MINAmI server, memory management, 
and communication entity (MAC and PHY layers). For the 
air interface, the data from/to the non-volatile storage 
memory (PCM) is buffered into a DPRAM buffer memory 
equal to the maximum packet size transferred over the air. 
D. File System Design 
The mobile phone can read tags and with writeable tags 
the phone can also write all or parts of their contents. The 
communication capacity between the mobile terminal and 
the RF memory tag is targeted to exceed 50 Mbit/s (as dis-
cussed in Section I). Plug-in software (External memory 
stack in Fig. 1) is required to facilitate seamless use of the 
tag memory for mobile phone applications. 
The memory tag can be used as an extension to the local 
file system of the reader (e.g., mobile phone). The memory 
tag can be either a passive and cheap one (Fig. 9) or an active 
 
Figure 7. Mobile reader/writer to RF memory tag communication sequence 
Memory Tag
“touch the tag”
Polling period
Activation period
Powering period
Initialization period
Connection period
Data Transfer period
Termination period
Scan
Select
Wakeup
Active/Passive tag
Configuration
Connection establishment
Read from tag / write to tag
Close / Exit / Malfunction
Memory Tag
 
Figure 8. Basic MINAmI subsystem communication setup sequence 
 
Memory Tag
Memory
MAC 
SW 
Reader/Writer
PHY
Request the 
service
Configuration
PHY cmds
Read tag 
memory content
Data 
transfer 
(R/W)
PHY cmds
Transfer 
completed
PHY cmds
Retransmission 
over the air
Retransmission 
from buffer
buffer
buffer
buffer
buffer
Release the memory
MINAmI
Server
GUI 
Reader
PHY
MAC 
SW
Memory
Close the tag 
connection
Close the connection
Scan & select 
(tag 1, tag X)
Response to 
polling and activate 
the tag
Read / Write Tag 
memory content
Start closing the 
connection
Release the memory
Retransmission 
from buffer

224
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
one, including an own power source and thus being more 
expensive (Fig. 10) [11].  Plug-in software in the file system 
of the reading device handles the connection to the memory 
tag. Storage space on the memory is mounted on the local 
file system in the same way as any detachable storage. The 
volatile nature of the connection causes overhead in main-
taining the file system view in the reader/writer device. This 
kind of RF memory tag would be suitable for e.g., a concert 
ticket containing implanted multimedia available to be read 
with a mobile device. 
Adding a processing element to the memory simplifies 
the connection. An ultra low-power processing element can 
process the access requests independently and even provide 
some more advanced services like metadata-based queries 
[34]. A service proxy relays the service interface of the 
memory directly to the applications running on the accessing 
device. The volatile nature of the connection is not a problem 
if the server is made stateless and transactions atomic. This 
type of RF memory tag will be able to support more complex 
use cases. 
Device internal modules need to support NoTA to get full 
benefit of subsystem independency and still give a fast con-
nection between subsystems. This interconnect architecture 
allows future extensions for modules within one device. 
IV. 
WIRELESS INTERNET ACCESS 
Service providers and device manufacturers are continu-
ally challenged to deliver value and convenience to users by, 
for example, providing compelling network services. These 
services can include selling and distributing content. More 
effective and efficient way is needed to distribute the con-
tent. As a complementary solution to address the issue, RF 
memory tag based internet kiosk can provide the ultra-fast 
and power-efficient connectivity for downloading multime-
dia content, which is beneficial especially when ad-hoc 
downloading large amount of content. 
The multimedia content such as audio and /or visual con-
tent can be ordered by users and/or pre-downloaded by ser-
vice providers. The content is preloaded into a radio frequen-
cy memory tag installed in the Internet kiosk as shown in 
Fig. 11. When a user stays in the range of UWB, a request is 
generated for the content stored in the memory tag. The 
Internet kiosk initializes wireless transmission to push the 
content from the memory tag to the user’s terminal in re-
sponse to the request via UWB [35]. The Internet kiosk can 
be deployed in public spaces for users to access ubimedia 
applications, e.g. downloading magazines, newspapers or 
audio/movie multimedia for recreation in airports.  
As discussed in Section III, most of the technologies, 
namely Wi-Fi, cellular, Bluetooth and NFC are designed for 
well-established communication between active devices, 
which result in relatively high power consumption and a long 
connection establishment time. In our RF memory tag based 
solution, MINAmI subsystem is within mobile devices to 
provide necessary connectivity to the Internet kiosk, memory 
tag and storage for downloading ubimedia content as illus-
trated in Figs. 3 and 4. The subsystem can be standalone and 
operational without maintaining from main application bus 
in mobile devices and consuming extra system resources. 
 
Figure 9. File system view of a mobile phone reading a passive memory 
tag: a cheap tag without its own processor [11]. 
 
 
Figure 10. File system view of a mobile phone reading a passive memory: a 
more expensive tag with its own processor [11]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Mobile phone operating in passive or semi-passive mode to 
download data through an Internet Kiosk. 
Data flow
Radio transmission
Phone
Tag
Memory
Memory
Power
Data
Tag
Memory
Internet
Kiosk
Cache
Internet
Server

225
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Besides, the subsystem can be powered off until a new re-
quest arrives and it would not suffer from long latency in 
establishing a new connection. 
In this architecture, the mobile devices could operate in 
either semi-passive or passive mode instead of active mode. 
The downloading is powered by phone battery in semi-
passive mode and it is powered by the Internet kiosk in 
passive mode. By running in passive mode, the memory tag 
is powered by the Internet kiosk, and the mobile devices 
only consume energy to receive content and write these data 
into memory. This yields a great potential of energy saving 
on mobile devices especially when downloading large 
amount of content. 
From the communications point-of-view, under the end-
to-end Transmission Control Protocol – Internet Protocol 
TCP/IP layer there is a memory connection (MEMCON) 
layer connecting the content of the phone tag and the kiosk 
tag (see Fig. 12). The memory within the tags is divided into 
at least two parts, of which one is outgoing and one incoming 
data area. The master device (in the case of the kiosk, the 
kiosk tag) reads automatically the data in the outgoing data 
area of the slave device (phone tag), copying it to the incom-
ing data area of its own memory. The data is then read by the 
controlling software and possible application level com-
mands (e.g., fetch content from web address) found are then 
carried out. The reply data (e.g., data fetched from the web 
address) is then written to the outgoing data area of the kiosk 
tag, which is automatically copied to the incoming data area 
of the phone tag. Thus the memory connection layer auto-
matically reads and copies the outgoing data from each de-
vice to the incoming data area of the other device. The upper 
layer control software of each device then moves the data 
further to the Internet services (Kiosk) or phone memory 
(phone) to be used by the application requesting the data. 
From the point-of-view of an application on the phone re-
questing data (e.g., Internet message access protocol (IMAP) 
email download) from a service provider in the Internet, 
there is a TCP/IP connection available. 
The solution also makes possible providing an instant 
content download possibility by preloading data from an 
Internet service to the phone, e.g., a web page, digital maga-
zine, or email account contents. In that case, the kiosk can be 
labeled with the logo of the corresponding service, telling the 
user what he/she would get by touching the logo with the 
phone. As the data is pre-loaded to the tag, the speed of de-
livery is only affected by the speed of the UWBLEE connec-
tion and data handling and displaying within the phone. 
A. Comparisons 
Maximized throughput and minimized power consump-
tion are critical requirements in order to extend battery life of 
mobile devices. Given the scenario of Internet Kiosks, vari-
ous radio technologies could be utilized to provide Internet 
connectivity from mobile phones to the Internet Kiosks. 
Normally, Wi-Fi and femtocell focus on local coverage. 
They are widely deployed and typically used by mobile 
devices. However, they are not always the most viable solu-
tions. When traveling abroad, data roaming over cellular 
network, such as 3G (WCDMA) may be very expensive.  
3G and Wi-Fi typically drain battery quickly on mobile 
devices. Since the fixed overhead of transmission is signifi-
cantly high when the radio interfaces are in communication 
state. Once the radio interface is on and operates in active 
state, most of the power is consumed on circuits and does not 
matter how many data are sent or received over the interface. 
Especially in 3G networks, the radio switches to the higher 
power states, DCH (Dedicated Channel) or FACH (Forward 
Access Channel) from IDLE state, when the network is ac-
Phone stack
Embedded tag
Kiosk tag
Internet
Phone
memory
Content
TCP/IP
Buffer
Buffer
HTTP
UI/APP
NET
MAC
PHY
NET
MAC
PHY
MEMCON
MEMCON
HTTP
OUT
IN
IN
OUT
UWBLEE
TCP/IP
I-UWB
 
Figure 12. Schematic layout of the communication system when a mobile phone connects to the Internet via a memory-tag-based Internet kiosk. 
TABLE II. COMPARISON OF POWER CONSUMPTION OF DIFFERENT 
DATA COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES 
Wireless 
interface 
Max 
data 
rate 
Maximum 
application 
throughput 
Power  
consumption 
Energy  
consumption 
 
 
Mbit/s 
mW 
nJ/bit 
3G 
7.2 
~5 
~850 
~170 
IEEE 
802.11g 
54 
~20 
~500 
~25 
Bluetooth 
2.0+ EDR 
3 
~2.1 
~60 
~28 
NFC 
6.78 
848 kbit/s 
~30 
~35 
UWBLEE 
112 
~50 
~5.4 
50-60 pJ/bit (* 
*) The value 50-60 pJ/bit is only for the RF front-end of UWBLEE 
 

226
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
tive [36]. Based on our measurements on a Nokia N900 
phone, IDLE state is considered as low power states, which 
consume only around 30 mW. The state of Cell FACH con-
sumes around 400 mW and the state of Cell DCH consumes 
around 800 mW. According to 3GPP standard, there are so 
called inactivity timers managed by the radio network con-
troller (RNC). The transitions between the different states are 
controlled by inactivity timers. Transitioning from the high 
to the low power state immediately after a packet is transmit-
ted, the device transitions only when the network has been 
inactive for the length of the inactivity timer. This mecha-
nism serves two benefits: 1) it alleviates the delay incurred in 
moving to the high power state from the idle state, and 2) it 
reduces the signaling overhead incurred due to channel allo-
cation and release during state transitions. Since lingering in 
the high power state also consumes more energy, network 
operators set the value of the inactivity timer based on this 
performance/energy trade-off, with typical values being 
several seconds long. However, these timers result in extra 
energy consumption even if there is no data to be sent or 
received since the radio has to wait for the timers to expire. 
The energy consumption is defined as tail energy [36]. 
To overcome energy consumption constraint in 3G and 
WLAN networks, short-range radio communication could be 
used.  There are several radio technologies that can be con-
sidered for the use of Internet Kiosks. For instance, Blue-
tooth, NFC and UWBLEE where the mobile phone could 
operate in semi-passive mode in which communications are 
powered by the Internet Kiosk. 
In order to reduce power consumption and extend battery 
life of mobile phones, battery-operated devices require be-
ing equipped with a radio technology with high bandwidth 
and low power consumption. Therefore, the mentioned radio 
technologies are taken into consideration of comparison. 
The transmission rate and energy consumption of receiving 
data over various radios are benchmarked in Table II.  
Considering the scenario shown in Section I, which as-
sumes a mobile user downloads 50 MB movie trailer, Fig. 13 
demonstrates the time and energy consumption of using 
various radio technologies. In the figure, the value of time is 
shown in the left y-axis and the value of energy consumption 
in the right. In the results of the case in 3G, data rate follows 
High-Speed Downlink Packet Access (HSDPA) Category 10 
in 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) Release 5 and 
we assumed inactivity timer lasts 5 seconds. For the 
UWBLEE technology the estimated total power consump-
tion for the complete integrated transceiver with digital parts 
in passive and semi-passive operating modes is multiplied 
with the factor of 2 in comparison to the power consumption 
of RF front-end implementation [30]. However, the power 
consumption of digital parts is highly dependent on the total 
complexity allowed in passive and semi-passive operating 
modes, and on the optimized design of integrated circuit. The 
energy consumption does not include the part of writing data 
into memory storage in all the cases and only shows the 
energy consumption of receiving data via different radios. 
The power consumption of writing in our NoTA-based solu-
tion is around 2 nJ/bit for NAND flash and approximate 1–2 
nJ/bit for PCM. Both of memories are considered competi-
tive from energy efficiency point-of-view [37].  
Based on the calculation, the time spent on downloading 
the movie trailer is only 8 s and the energy consumption of 
RF front-end is 0.043 J when using UWBLEE. As men-
tioned, in the total power consumption for the complete 
integrated transceiver the power consumption of digital 
parts must be taken into account. In addition, there is a great 
difference in the global power consumption of the system in 
the passive and semi-passive modes although the power 
consumption of the functions in the mobile phone is equal in 
the two modes. The reason for this is that in the passive 
mode the energy for communication is transferred wireless-
ly, whereas in the semi-passive mode the energy is taken 
from the battery. The efficiency of the WPT link, mandatory 
in the passive mode, is highly dependent on the factors such 
as transfer frequency, size of antennas, and distance, and it 
is obviously lower than in battery-powered case. Neverthe-
less, the estimated total energy consumption of downloading 
the trailer remains below 0.1 J (and below 1 J with the 
memory access) for UWBLEE in the mobile phone. Com-
paring other technologies with UWBLEE, the energy con-
sumption of using 3G is up to 72.25 J, where the tail energy 
accounts for 6% of total energy consumption. Moreover, 
time consumed on downloading the movie trailer by using 
Bluetooth and NFC is up to 190.5 s and 417.7 s respective-
ly. No matter from speed and energy saving point of view, 
our RF memory tag based solution would enable shorter 
time of downloading ubimedia content, better user experi-
ence, as well as smaller energy consumption. 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
The RF memory tag (i.e., mobile reader/writer and tag) 
solution was developed and tested in the MINAmI project. 
Implementation is shown in Fig. 14. The development of a 
RF memory tag sub-system of MINAmI project is based on 
a flexible, field-programmable gate array (FPGA) based 
hardware platform. The sub-system takes benefit from the 
ultra-low power UWBLEE transceiver architecture, which is 
suitable for data rates required in RF memory tag applica-
tions. The technical results are promising and useful for the 
concept of mobile-phone-readable RF memory tags. The 
data-rate of 112 Mbit/s has been achieved over the novel 
radio interface in technical demonstrations [30]. This leaves 
 
Figure 13. Time and energy consumed of using different radio technologies 
when downloading 50MB movie trailer. 
0
25
50
75
100
0
50
100
150
200
3G
Wi-Fi
Bluetooth
NFC
UWE
Energy consumption / J
Time / s
Time
Energy
Incl. energy 
tail
Up to 471.7 s
Only 86 mJ

227
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
room for up to 50% protocol and memory access overhead 
when targeting 50 Mbit/s end-to-end communications. On 
the PHY and MAC layers short target distance and point-to-
point communication efficiently minimize the protocol 
overhead on packet level. However, efficient pipelining in 
buffering of the data is in crucial role in optimization of the 
end-to-end system. The third important factor is the memory 
access speed. This is relevant when reading data from the 
source memory and when writing the data to the target stor-
age memory. As shown in Section III, the continuous devel-
opment of NVM memories will provide power-efficient and 
fast solutions for the target applications. Altogether, the 
listed factors and the results achieved with the demonstra-
tion platform show that mobile reader/writer and the high 
capacity memory tag is implementable. 
A. Future development 
The UWBLEE wireless connection technology presented 
in this paper provides data rates significantly exceeding the 
existing NFC technology already in the market. From tech-
nology ecosystem point-of-view there is little sense in devel-
oping UWBLEE as an independent technology. UWBLEE 
can thus be seen as a possible future high-speed extension to 
existing RFID or NFC technologies. 
As the range of this wireless interface is fairly short, in 
the range of 10 cm, there exist use-cases similar to the NFC 
use cases (range touch to 3 cm). Physical selection [38] by 
touching of a service-providing tag is thus possible. In such 
use, the tag would be marked with a logo of the correspond-
ing service, such as title or picture of a movie or a magazine, 
making selection of the service intuitive and easy. 
The possibility of using a mobile phone to read a passive 
tag is, naturally, not the only operational combination of 
these devices, as shown in Fig. 15, where (a) refers to a 
phone reading a RF memory tag, (b) to Internet kiosk based 
on a RF memory tag, (c) is a variant of (b), and (d) refers to 
data transfer between mobile phones. In a multi-device envi-
ronment one device can work as a proxy for the memory tag 
and provide other devices with access to its services [11]. 
There are also possibilities to have memory tags with their 
own power sources, which eliminate the need of wireless 
powering. In that case, the reading range can be extended or 
power use within the mobile phone can be reduced. The 
phone can also communicate directly with other similarly 
equipped phones. 
Our RF memory tag solution supports Nokia’s Explore 
and Share concept, a new way of transferring content (e.g., 
multimedia, maps, and applications) to a mobile phone [12]. 
RF memory tags feed users appetite for ever increasing local 
bandwidth and capacity requirements. Users would, natural-
ly, invent new use cases and ways of utilizing these tags in 
the local content delivery domain. These Express Tags can 
explore new large content shared by others [39]. NoTA is 
well positioned in the transport agnostic technology. It fits to 
the many inter-device use cases, such as in ubiquitous world. 
Our vision is that there is an ever-increasing need to 
move content from the Internet to mobile devices and vice 
versa, as well as between devices. The amount of available 
energy to support all this wireless traffic is not increasing 
correspondingly, however. Thus, possibility to distribute the 
energy consumption of wireless connections so that either of 
the endpoints takes care of most of the power usage is an 
interesting enabler to future applications. 
B. Conclusions 
The evolution of non-volatile memory technologies gives 
the basis for the vision about RF memory tags. However, the 
large memory creates a need for a high-speed data connec-
tion that can be used to transfer the contents of the tags in a 
timeframe acceptable for the user. The dual-band radio inter-
face, UWBLEE introduced in this paper provides the re-
quired data rate and possibility for future scalability as 
memory sizes become larger. 
Modular architecture is mandatory in the RF memory tag 
system to optimize performance. For example, latencies 
common in memory access of centralized systems are not 
acceptable. Power consumption of the mobile reader/writer is 
efficiently minimized with an independent sub-system keep-
ing the involvement of the main processor at the minimum. 
In contrast to conventional radio systems, the main processor 
only triggers the communication and the independent sub-
 
Figure 14. Our UWBLEE implementation 
 
Figure 15. Some possible operational combinations of mobile phones 
interacting with RF memory tags. 
Power transmission
Reference clock
Data R/W
Powered unit
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

228
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
system handles the transfer and storage of the data. Thus, the 
main processor does not have to be involved in the low level 
communication processes. 
In addition to the RF memory tag reader/writer capability 
in mobile devices, mobile devices can be also equipped with 
embedded RF memory tags. This enables a new usage sce-
nario called internet kiosk which can be further used to ena-
ble internet connection seemingly with zero power consump-
tion in the mobile device. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank all the partners of MINAmI project, who have 
contributed to development of this technology. This study is 
a part of MINAmI project under EU FP6 contract IST-
034690. This research was also supported by the Finnish 
Academy under grant no 129446. 
REFERENCES 
[1] I. Jantunen, J. Hämäläinen, T. Korhonen, H. Kaaja, J. Jantunen, and 
S. Boldyrev, "System architecture for mobile-phone-readable RF 
memory tags".  Proc. UBICOMM 2010. IARIA, 2010, pp. 310–316. 
[2] V. Wu, M. Montanari, N. Vaidya, and R. Campbell, “Distributed 
RFID tag storage infrastructure”. University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, IL, USA. Tech. Rep. 2009. 
[3] N. Ahmed, R. Kumar, R.S. French, and U. Ramachandran, ”RF2ID: a 
reliable middleware framework for RFID deployment”. Proc. IPDPS 
2007. IEEE, 2007, pp 1–10. 
[4] C. Ying, “A verification development platform for UHF RFID 
reader”. Proc. CMC'09. IEEE, 2009, pp. 358–361. 
[5] N. Pillin, N. Joehl, C. Dehollain, and M.J. Declercq, “High data rate 
RFID tag/reader architecture using wireless voltage regulation”. Proc. 
RFID 2008. IEEE, 2008, pp. 141–149. 
[6]  J.T.E. McDonnell, J. Waters, W.W. Loh, R. Castle, F. Dickin, H. 
Balinsky, and K. Shepherd,  “Memory Spot: A Labeling 
Technology”. IEEE Pervas. Comput., vol. 9, 2010, pp. 11–17. 
[7] J. Nielsen, “Usability engineering”. Morgan Kaufmann, 1993. 
[8] W. Cui, P. Ranta, T.A. Brown, and C. Reed, “Wireless video 
streaming over UWB”. Proc. ICUWB 2007. IEEE, 2007, pp.933–936. 
[9] H. Witschnig, C. Patauner, A. Maier, E. Leitgeb, and D. Rinner, 
“High speed RFID lab-scaled prototype at the frequency of 13.56 
MHz”. Elektrotechnik & Informationstechnik, vol. 124, 2007, pp. 
376–383. 
[10] J. Jantunen, I. Oliver, S. Boldyrev, and J. Honkola, ”Agent/space-
based computing and RF memory tag interaction”. Proc. IWRT 2009. 
INSTICC PRESS, 2009,  pp. 27–38. 
[11] E. Kaasinen, M. Niemelä, T. Tuomisto, P. Välkkynen, I. Jantunen, J. 
Sierra, M. Santiago, and H. Kaaja, “Ubimedia based on readable and 
writable memory tags”. Multimedia Syst., vol. 16, 2010, pp. 57–74. 
[12] M. Cooper, “Explore and Share – Nokia shows ultra-fast wireless 
data transfer concept”. Nokia Conversations, 23 Feb 2010. 
[13] “The PayKiosks Opportunity”. PayKiosks Internet Terminals, 2011. 
[14]  A. R. Brisebois and R.Klein. “Enterprise femto based kiosk”. US Pat. 
App. 20100318417. 16 Dec. 2010. 
[15] Bluetooth 
Kiosk 
System 
Project. 
webee.technion.ac.il 
/labs/comnet/Info/projects/winter08/cn02w08 12.1.2012 
[16] K. Ok. V. Coskun, M.N. Aydin, and B. Ozdenizci, “Current Benefits 
and Future Directions of NFC Services”. Proc. ICEMT 2010. IEEE, 
2010, pp. 334–338. 
[17] www.fp6-minami.org 12.1.2012 
[18] I. Jantunen, H. Laine, P. Huuskonen, D. Trossen, and V. Ermolov, 
“Smart sensor architecture for mobile-terminal-centric ambient 
intelligence”. Sens. Actuators A, vol. 142, 2008, pp. 352–360. 
[19] Y. Têtu, I. Jantunen, B. Gomez, and S. Robinet, “Mobile-phone-
readable 2.45GHz passive digital sensor tag”. Proc. RFID 2009. 
IEEE, 2009, pp. 88–94. 
[20] K. Kronlöf, S. Kontinen, I. Oliver, and T. Eriksson, “A Method for 
Mobile Terminal Platform Architecture Development”. Advances in 
Design and Specification Languages for Embedded Systems, S.A. 
Huss, ed. Springer, 2007, pp. 285–300. 
[21] projects.forum.nokia.com/NoTA/wiki 12.1.2012 
[22] K. Keinänen, J. Leino, and J. Suomalainen, “Developing keyboard 
service for NoTA”. VTT, Espoo, Finland. Tech. Rep. 2008. 
[23] www.mipi.org 12.1.2012 
[24] “Open Modem Interface Proposal Based on Device Interconnect 
Protocol Version 1.0”. Nokia, Espoo, Finland. White paper, 2010.  
[25] D. Truscan, J. Lindqvist, J. Lilius, I. Porres, T. Eriksson, J. Rakkola, 
and A. Latva-Aho, “Testable Specifications of NoTA-based Modular 
Embedded Systems”.  Proc. ECBS 2008. IEEE, 2008, pp. 375–383. 
[26] S. Asthana, and D.N. Kalofonos, “The problem of Bluetooth pollution 
and accelerating connectivity in Bluetooth ad-hoc networks”. Proc. 
PerCom 2005. IEEE, 2005, pp. 200–207. 
[27] J. Jantunen, A. Lappeteläinen, J. Arponen, A. Pärssinen, M. Pelissier, 
B. Gomez, and J.A. Keignart, “New symmetric transceiver 
architecture 
for 
pulsed 
short-range 
communication”. 
Proc. 
GLOBECOM 2008. IEEE, 2008, pp. 1–5. 
[28] S.R. Aedudodla, S. Vijayakumaran, and T.F. Wong, “Timing 
acquisition in ultra-wideband communication systems”. IEEE T. Veh. 
Technol., vol. 54, 2005, pp. 1570–1583. 
[29] M. Pelissier, B. Gomez, G. Masson, S. Dia, M. Gary, J. Jantunen, J. 
Arponen, and J. Varteva, “112Mb/s full duplex remotely-powered 
impulse-UWB 
RFID 
transceiver 
for 
wireless 
NV-memory 
applications”. Proc. VLSIC 2010. IEEE, 2010, pp. 25–26. 
[30] M. Pelissier, J. Jantunen, B. Gomez, J. Arponen, G. Masson, S. Dia, J. 
Varteva, and M. Gary, "A 112 Mb/s Full Duplex Remotely-Powered 
Impulse-UWB 
RFID 
Transceiver 
for 
Wireless 
NV-Memory 
Applications," IEEE J. Solid-St. Circ., vol.46, 2011, pp. 916–927. 
[31] G.W. Burr, B.N. Kurdi, J.C. Scott, C.H. Lam, K. Gopalakrishnan, and 
R.S. Shenoy, “Overview of candidate device technologies for storage-
class memory”. IBM J. Res. Dev., vol. 52, 2008, pp. 449–464. 
[32] “Intel, STMicroelectronics deliver industry's first phase change 
memory prototypes”. Physorg.com, 6 Feb 2008. 
[33] Z. Shelby, P. Mahonen, J. Riihijärvi, O. Raivio, and P. Huuskonen, 
“NanoIP: the zen of embedded networking”. Proc. ICC’03. IEEE, 
2003, vol. 2, pp. 1218–1222. 
[34] J. Arponen, A. Lappeteläinen, J. Jantunen, and O. Tyrkkö, ”Content 
storing device query”.  US Pat. App. 20080281787. 13 Nov 2008. 
[35] S. Boldyrev, I. Oliver, J. Jantunen, J. Arponen, and S. Balandin. 
“Method and apparatus for retrieving content via a service endpoint”. 
US Pat. App. 20110055351. 3 Mar 2011. 
[36] N. Balasubramanian, A. Balasubramanian, and A. Venkataramani, 
“Energy Consumption in Mobile Phones: A Measurement Study and 
Implications for Network Applications”. Proc. IMC’09. ACM, 2009, 
pp. 280–293. 
[37] S. Eilert, M. Leinwander, and G. Crisenza, “Phase Change Memory: 
A New Memory Enables New Memory Usage Models”. Proc. 
IMW’09. IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–2. 
[38] P. Välkkynen, M. Niemelä, and T. Tuomisto,  “Evaluating touching 
and pointing with a mobile terminal for physical browsing”. Proc. 
NordiCHI’06. ACM, 2006, pp. 28–37. 
[39] S. Constantinescu, “Nokia Research Center working on high speed 
NFC enabled file transfers”. Intomobile.com, 9 June 2011.
 

