Optimizing the Performance of a Dismounted Future Force Warrior by Means of 
Improved Situational Awareness 
 
Tapio Saarelainen 
Department of Military Technology 
National Defence University 
Finland  
e-mail: tapio.saarelainen@mil.fi 
 
 
Abstract—The future operational settings involve a battlespace 
where warriors and commanders rely on SA-tools to perform 
optimally in their given tasks. This may include combat 
settings in Military Environment (ME) as well as counter 
insurgency actions, peace-keeping operations and operations in 
Crises Management Environment (CME). In multi-national 
operations taking place in versatile and hostile environments, it 
is essential to detect, classify and identify the encountered 
objects and targets in the battlespace early enough. 
Consequently, the concept of war has changed in the direction 
of multi-symmetric warfare involving enemy troops, own 
forces and impartial entities. This paper discusses the existing 
and 
applicable 
Commercial-off-the-shelf 
(COTS)-based 
communication technologies with solutions suitable for 
military operations. These examples are examined by focusing 
on enhanced Situational Awareness (SA) as a tool facilitating 
improved decision making processes to support the execution 
of operations in a versatile battlespace and thereby optimize 
the performance of a dismounted Future Force Warrior 
(FFW). 
Keywords-Situational Awareness (SA), Common Operational 
Picture (COP), Wireless Polling Sensor Network (WPSN), 
Performance, Future Force Warrior (FFW). 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 
The purpose of this paper is to examine the existing and 
applicable 
Commercial-off-the-shelf 
(COTS) 
based 
communication tools available for enhancing dismounted 
Future Force Warriors’ Situational Awareness (SA) and 
thereby maximizing their performance via improved 
decision-making capabilities. Dismounted warrior fights on 
foot, not inside of a vehicle. This paper begins by 
introducing the topic and key terminology followed by 
covering related studies [1]. Then the text turns to challenges 
concerning 
Combat 
Identification 
(CID). 
Then 
a 
comprehensive approach to targeting process is discussed. 
After this, the paper examines the means of accruing data for 
improved decision making processes and moves on to 
challenges involved in distributing Situational Awareness-
data. Then the focus shifts to location and communication 
possibilities in urban areas followed by the discussion 
section and the conclusions. 
When optimizing the performance of Future Force 
Warriors (FFWs), the data distributing and processing 
capabilities become seminal in enhancing improved SA and 
data distribution to enable near real-time Common 
Operational 
Picture 
(COP) 
and 
Shared 
Situational 
Awareness (SSA). Once the location data of varying entities 
can be reliably forwarded to respective command posts, the 
number of fratricide incidents and collateral damage can be 
significantly minimized. 
 
Once identifying and defining relevant information and 
its distribution in the battlespace is determined as the key in 
Network Centric Operations (NCO), every effort to ensure 
the information flow between own warriors and sensors 
needs to be analyzed [2]. Contemporary weapon systems 
require greater amounts of intelligence data at a higher 
fidelity than ever before [3]. Since operations tend to be 
multi-national, different sensors and systems are required to 
communicate understandably between each entity to 
minimize fratricide and collateral damage by maximizing the 
distribution of the near real-time COP. One solution involves 
utilizing Business Management Language (BML) [2].  
This paper concentrates on tackling the following three 
questions: 1) How to optimize the performance of a 
dismounted FFW by means of improved SA? 2) How to 
increase SA with the available COTS-based communication 
technologies? 3) What are the means to avoid casualties, 
collateral damage, and fratricide?  
As for key terminology, a new network structure called 
the Wireless Polling Sensor Network (WPSN) is explained 
in [4]. Since nodes do not form a network per se but rather 
are polled by a selected node of the mobile network, they 
remain undetected due to their passive nature. The network 
structure offers a new and ubiquitous way to share and 
forward all kinds of data, including data collected by various 
sensors. Moreover, the outdated Identification Friend or Foe 
(IFF) systems are replaced and supplemented with effective 
and accurate means to identify the prevailing objects. 
Examining the means to minimize fratricide and 
collateral damage presupposes applying the model presented 
in Figure 1. This terminologically updated model emphasizes 
how Tactics Techniques and Procedures (TTP), Combat 
Identification (CID), Common Operational Picture (COP), 
and Situational Awareness (SA) play a central role in 
minimizing the number of fratricide incidents and collateral 
damage. 
42
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 1.  The Reason’s Swiss Cheese Model updated by applicable 
terminology as a tool to explain the mechanism of avoiding fratricide and 
collateral damage, Blue-on-Blue (BoB) [5]. 
An applicable definition for Situational Awareness (SA) 
is given in the Army Field Manual 1-02 (September 2004): 
“Knowledge and understanding of the current situation 
which promotes timely, relevant and accurate assessment of 
friendly, competitive and other operations within the 
battlespace in order to facilitate decision making. An 
informational perspective and skill that fosters an ability to 
determine quickly the context and relevance of events that is 
unfolding.” 
The process of determining the affiliation of detected 
objects in the battlespace equals Target Identification (TI) 
[6]. When using this categorization, blue denotes the friendly 
force, red the enemy, and white refers to neutral (impartial) 
entities. The traditional method of TI is based on visual 
signature of the object of interest. In contemporary warfare 
TI is also based on utilizing the electromagnetic spectrum of 
the target. Properly applied, data and sensor fusion can be 
seen as a means to prevent collateral damage and fratricide. 
As a matter of fact, TI can be divided into two categories: 
Cooperative 
Target 
Identification 
(CTI) 
and 
Non-
Cooperative Target Identification (NCTI). CTI allows a 
human shooter or sensor to interrogate a potential target and 
thereby forces the potential target to respond to the 
interrogation in a timely manner as described in Figure 2 [5] 
[6]. 
 
 
Figure 2.  The process of Cooperative Target Identification (CTI) [5]. 
In contrast, NCTI does not require a cooperative response 
from the target. NCTI involves systems or methods which 
exploit the physical characteristics of entities in the 
battlespace to help identify and determine affiliation. NCTI 
systems include optics, such as Thermal Weapon Sights 
(TWS), night Vision Goggles (NVG), Forward Looking 
Infrared Radar (FLIR), as well as vehicle and personnel 
markings, for instance, Joint Combat Identification Marking 
Systems (JCIMS) [6].  
Combat Identification can be defined as a process of 
attaining an accurate and timely characterization of detected 
objects in the joint battlespace to the extent that high 
confidence, timely application of military options and 
weapons resources can occur [6][8]. An extension of this can 
be understood as a process of accurately characterizing the 
detected objects via the operational environment sufficiently 
to support engagement decisions [6]. The purpose of CID is 
to enhance unit combat effectiveness and simultaneously 
minimizing fratricide. In the form of an equation CID reads 
as: SA + TI = CID [6].  
The core capability in SA is Common Operational 
Picture that fosters effective decision making, rapid staff 
actions, and appropriate mission execution [6][9]. COP is 
employed to collect, share and display multi-dimensional 
information to facilitate collaborative planning and response 
to security incidents. COP typically comprises three types of 
modules as indicated in [5]: 1) information gathering sources 
that observe events and report information to the command 
and control module, 2) a command and control module that 
makes decisions based on both information received directly 
from its information gathering sources and information 
reported by other peers, and 3) display units at the 
emergency location that receive instructions from the 
command and control module [6]. 
The acronym MOUT (Military Operations on Urban 
Territory) denotes military actions planned and conducted on 
a terrain complex where manmade constructions impact the 
tactical options available to commanders. Urban combat 
operations may be conducted in order to capitalize on the 
strategic or tactical advantages gained by the possession or 
control of a particular urban area or to deny these advantages 
from the enemy [4]. The characteristics of MOUT include 
complex situations brought about by engagements in urban 
environments (ambushes, civilians).  
Combat Effectiveness (CE) can be defined as the ability 
of a (friendly) unit to rapidly and accurately sort and 
categorize detected objects (blue, white, red) and make a 
decision as to whether or not to employ deadly force against 
the identified object/target. Effectively applying the CE 
guarantees a minimum level of collateral damage and 
fratricide. 
Now, to exemplify the previously defined terms, the 
following briefly examines Rules of Engagement (ROE). 
Together with tactics, techniques and procedures, ROE 
defines guidelines which then support an individual in a 
situation when a decision is made about whether or not to 
open fire. TTP supports the decision making process 
regarding force implementation in the Area of Operations 
(AOR). Depending on the ROE formulations, the orders 
concerning using force may vary as indicated in Figure 3. 
 
43
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 3.  ROE in relation to the number of troops killed (blue, white, red) 
and the number of losses and fratricide [5]. 
All warriors depend on situational awareness (SA) [10] 
which can be provided also by using WPSN-systems 
introduced in [4]. The Blue Force Tracking-systems (BFT) 
along with the White Force Tracking (WFT) presented in [5] 
provide vital information for improving commanders’ 
decision-making and avoiding fratricide and collateral 
damage. Blue Force (BF), allies and White Force (WF) need 
to be constantly precisely located. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
This study has a strong linkage to dismounted FFW 
programs and Soldier Modernization Programmes (SMPs) 
ongoing in all major militaries. Obviously, they continue to 
be increasingly significant in enhancing the overall 
performance of militaries regardless of the financial 
retrenchment and downsizing demands. These programs 
concentrate on improving and updating dismounted soldiers’ 
equipment thereby optimizing performance to minimize 
collateral damage and fratricide. The specifics related to the 
challenges concerning gathering and forwarding information 
are well known by militaries around the world. However, 
since nations invest significant sums of money on 
development projects, the specifics tend to remain classified 
and no valid test-data are available. The same applies to 
mathematical formulae, simulation results, and other types of 
ad hoc testing reports. Thus comparing and analyzing 
existing Future Force Warrior communication systems and 
architectures is currently a research mission impossible as 
the data remain unavailable for validation purposes. 
Developing military gear for future armed forces, and special 
operation forces in particular, continues to be expensive as 
devices are necessarily tailored for a limited number of users. 
This is why COTS-based gear solutions become an 
attempting alternative for military purposes as well.  
Moreover, the existing COTS-based Command, Control, 
Communications, Computers, Intelligence, Information, 
Surveillance and Reconnaissance (C4I2SR) technologies 
with their applications are relevant in facilitating the 
developments necessary for overcoming the varying 
challenges encountered in the future battlespace. 
In terms of practical battle proof examples, the 
technology for Blue Force Tracking (BFT) was used during 
Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) for coordinating operations 
among the Joint Services and with allies and resulted in 
reduced 
causalities 
due 
to 
enhanced 
SA 
[11]. 
Understandably, the means to increase SA via improved BFT 
and WFT are also developments in progress. Figure 4 
illustrates an example of the dismounted FFW system from 
the perspective of selected warrior gear. 
 
 
Figure 4.  An example of a dismounted FFW with selected gear. 
As introduced in [12], this paper continues to examine 
the interconnectedness of trained FFW and their gear in the 
light of the following three warrior levels: 1) the basic 
Warrior at the bottom level, 2) the Readiness Brigade 
Warrior, and 3) the Special Forces Warrior. The amount of 
TID and SA data varies along with the level of a FFW. In the 
higher echelons, the amount of data gathered via sensors and 
tracking systems is vast. To transmit and distribute the 
location information filtered and fused through various 
systems remains a challenge. A basic warrior located on the 
ground must fight rather than monitor his palm or wrist 
computer or lap-top.  
In the building process of FFW, the key element is the 
hierarchy of the warrior levels (Basic, Readiness Brigade and 
Special Forces Warrior). As described in [12], concerning 
warrior levels, FFW act as moving relay stations to ensure 
the throughput of communication devices used. A warrior is 
in a key role in low level operations, and a warrior acts as a 
node or sensor in Network Centric Operations [12]. The 
FFW is an applicable sensor platform for Netcentric 
Operations as indicated in Figure 5. 
 
44
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 5.  An example of a fully integrated Warrior for location purposes 
outdoors, indoors and in MOUT for contemporary warfare [19]. 
The principal 
contributing 
efforts, technical and 
procedural, involve the following [10][11]. First, CTI, 
automated query or response systems for dismounted 
personnel and light vehicles need to be addressed. Secondly, 
a means to share SA systems for employment at the platoon, 
squad, team, and individual levels must be applied. Thirdly, 
digitally-aided supporting fires’ coordination and control 
must be defined. Fourth, Digitally-aided Close Air Support 
(DCAS) coordination and control has to be applied. In 
addition, challenges with Combat Identification Server (CIS) 
interoperability and Personnel Recovery Command and 
Control need to be solved. Lastly, marking and beacon 
systems for dismounted personnel, light vehicles, and 
friendly locations need to be applied. In fact, the US Army is 
fielding its new SA system known as Force XXI Battle 
Command and Brigade and Below (FBCB2) [10][12]. One 
of the keys into the success is careful mission analysis and 
thorough evaluation of Courses of Actions (COAs). Both 
processes can save time and minimize collateral damage. 
The use of available Blue and friendly Forces and resources 
can be optimized. This increases efficiency and along with 
minimum casualties, leads to minimum recovery times. 
III. 
CHALLENGES IN COMBAT IDENTIFICATION 
In military operations everything is done to prevent 
fratricide. Currently, identifying a warrior regardless of the 
visibility conditions is essential. As evident in Figure 2 
earlier, both an interrogation unit and a responder unit are 
necessary, presupposing, first of all, that the systems are 
fully operational, and, secondly, that the distance between 
the warriors is appropriate. In case the identification system 
doesn’t reply, a human is making the decision to open fire 
based on the TTP. The Identification to whether or not to 
open fire is based on the visual signature of the uniform, 
weapon and gear [5]. 
However, one needs to keep in mind that there is always 
the possibility that the location device gets stolen or misused 
by a third party in that, for example, an insurgent tries to 
function as a member of the White Force [5]. In order to 
increase the reliability of the system, the tracking devices 
have to be pre-coded and tied in pairs in advance before 
entering the battlespace to prevent the stealing of the 
tracking device. Once paired devices are torn apart, they stop 
functioning as planned – and devices become dysfunctional 
[5]. After the separation process, the devices must be re-
paired and re-coded by the operator. During this process, the 
operator re-identifies the person. 
IV. 
COMPREHENSIVE TARGETING PROCESS 
First of all we start with the Point of Interest (POI) in the 
battlespace. When the POI has been detected, classified and 
finally identified, it may be indicated as a potential target. 
POI is not automatically a target. The utilization of 
Unmanned Vehicles (UVs) and Unmanned Aerial Vehicles 
(UAVs) and Unmanned Ground Vehicles (UGVs) play an 
important role in target acquisition, starting from the phase 
of detection of a POI. 
When returning to ROE/TTP (whether or not to open 
fire), a link behind the targeting process deserves a closer 
look. The process is known as Detect, Identify, Decide, 
Engage, and Assess (DIDEA) [6]. The DIDEA provides an 
iterative, standardised and systematic approach supporting 
targeting and decision making, being generic enough to be 
used as a systematic process for Command and Control (C2) 
node targeting and decision making. Separate actions inside 
DIDEA area as follows [5]: 
Detect: The process of acquiring and locating an object in 
the battlespace by analysing the phenomena in the 
electromagnetic spectrum.  
Identify: The process of classifying an object into the 
category of blue, white (neutral) or enemy. This represents a 
primary step where specified CID tasks are accomplished.  
Decide: The decision making process that follows the 
detection and identification phases. This is the most generic 
step within the process and represents the primary step where 
a specific ROE application occurs. In the decision-making 
phase, the executive officer / warrior has to decide and 
define what type of weaponry is appropriate for to the 
mission. In cases of opting for the use of deadly force, the 
following questions need to be addressed: 1. Can I engage 
(ROE application)? 2. If there are several targets, what is the 
order to engage the selected targets? 3. Which one is the 
most appropriate weapon system (most cost-effective, 
appropriate against the selected target)?  
Engage: The execution of selected weapons in a selected 
order starting from the most dangerous target moving on 
according the panned sequence.  
Assess: Monitoring the gained effects with the use of 
destruction power. Employing the force of various weapon 
systems available is repeatedly executed until the required 
level of destruction is achieved.  
Once the critical data have been collected they have to be 
quickly analyzed to be used for evaluating different Courses 
of Actions. Success depends on an accurate mission analysis 
and a timely evaluation process of the accrued data. 
Improved SA results in optimal time for mission execution 
and simultaneous minimizing of casualties, which increases 
45
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

efficiency and leads to minimum recovery times improving 
the overall efficiency of the troops utilized. 
Once commanders have access to more current 
reconnaissance data for mission execution, they are able to 
analyze different COAs and, calculate the pros and cons to 
evaluate the best possible method to operate in any scenario 
prevailing. As explained in Figure 6, military commanders 
have by default value at least two different options for 
executing the mission in question. Once the Military 
Decision Making Process (MDMP) has been completed, the 
most effective operation can be executed to maximize the 
performance of the designated troops. In the described 
scenario below, the commander focuses the performance on 
destroying the Command Post (CP), the alternative number 
2, instead of attacking against the armored enemy. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Possibilities of COAs [13]. 
When it comes to SSA, it is crucial to be able to 
distribute the accrued data rapidly and accurately in order to 
ensure success in military operations. When the accrued data 
remain intact and non-corrupted, both the execution of 
operations and the evaluation of COAs at all commander 
levels are improved. In particular in joint operations, the 
effective distribution of COAs and SSAs is in a central role. 
V. 
HOW TO ACCRUE DATA FOR THE DECISION MAKING 
PROCESS? 
Self-evidently, cases of fratricide and collateral damage 
are bound to surface to some extent. Militaries are interested 
in locating both own troops and also increasingly the neutral 
entities of Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and 
Governmental Organizations (GOs), the WF, the members of 
which can be tracked by using WFT described in [1]. 
Briefly put, the problem relies in relating the TTP, CID, 
COP and SA to the rules of ROE. This involves dealing with 
the balance described in Figure 3 earlier. If ROE 
formulations are too strict, for example, the commander’s 
intent is to avoid the use of deadly force unless it is 
absolutely certain that the targeted object is positively 
identified to be an enemy – the Blue Force will suffer on the 
basis of the actions caused by the enemy. And, if ROE 
formulations leave too much room for interpretation, various 
types of casualties (red, blue and white) are bound to occur. 
Thereby the transmission of combat-critical location and 
identification data plays a crucial role in the battlespace.  
The process of a complete targeting process can be 
described in a simplified form in a formula: Detect, Identify, 
Decide; Engage and Assess [6]. The DIDEA provides an 
iterative, standardised and systematic approach supporting 
targeting and decision making, being generic enough to be 
used as a systematic process for C2 node targeting and 
decision making. This process is thoroughly discussed in [6]. 
Furthermore, older existing systems are available for 
distributing data gathered by various types of sensors in 
various 
types 
of 
military 
and 
humanitarian 
crises 
environments. These technologies are based on WPSNs 
described in [4] and Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) 
described in [14][15]. The former are passive and will 
remain hidden whereas the latter are active and represent a 
more easily detectable system. Both systems are applicable 
in transmitting constantly flowing data from a sensor to a 
node, for example, to a vehicle or an unmanned vehicle 
(UV).  
As suggested in [12], viable COTS-based methods exist, 
which improve the C4I2SR of a warrior at all the levels. The 
examples covered are based on usability cases of WPSN-
solutions. They indicate that a warrior can obtain more 
critical information on the battlespace by using the presented 
WPSN solutions. This improves the general efficiency of a 
warrior at all levels. The platforms used today on the 
battlespace are not efficient. This is because they are based 
on a single sensor and they do not collect data in a way that 
would allow collaboration of multiple sensors. The proposed 
solution makes use of multi-sensor collaboration for 
improved location information and improved SA. Figure 7 
explains the structure of a warrior skeleton as well as the 
location of the WPSN-system inside the FFW-system [4]. 
 
 
Figure 7.  A Warrior’s electronic skeleton [4]. 
In terms of FFW equipment, warriors need to be 
functional and their gear must be planned according to the 
set tasks. A key factor is the efficiency of a warrior, which 
can be gained via an improved SA, BFT and Command and 
Control. Warriors have to maintain their agility and remain 
active in the battlespace. However, since only combat-crucial 
gear can be hauled along, thereby not nearly all the gear 
necessary can be attached to the dismounted FFW. Thus the 
warrior skeleton and its communication systems need to be 
carefully defined and built at each warrior level according to 
the given task requirements. Currently, the present solutions 
seen in active use are cumbersome and lack integration. The 
WPSN-solutions still remain unapplied in these platforms. 
Thus the maximum potential remains unreachable without 
effective sensor and data fusion. Militaries are moving 
towards smaller specialized units while the overall 
performance requirements keep increasing. At the same time 
46
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

troops are designed and trained for dismounted operations in 
which a greater degree of flexibility and reliability of battle-
proof and robust systems are needed. 
Practically speaking, small militaries are often unable to 
utilize the possibilities in target acquisition offered by UVs 
and UGVs. As introduced in [13], affordable and easily 
deployable Sensor Munition Element (SEM) offers new 
possibilities to accrue data behind the enemy lines. The 
system is based on Commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS)-
products and is affordable for the use of small troops utilized 
in small militaries. 
Means to accrue SA-data in the battlespace are depicted 
in Figures 8 and 9. All available means are utilized in order 
to avoid fratricide and collateral damage thus maximizing the 
performance of own troops to ensure mission success. 
 
 
Figure 8.  On deploying an SE above an enemy territory: 1) Fire Support 
Order is commanded, 2) SEM is airborne, 3) SEM opens and ejects the SE, 
4) the SE starts to transmit gathered data from the enemy territory and 
targets [13]. 
 
Figure 9.  The Comprehensive system of gaining SA-data to avoid 
collateral damage and fratricide [5]. 
The decision as to whether or not to open fire is based on 
the visual signature of a given uniform, weapon and gear as 
well as magnetic, seismic or acoustic signals identified by a 
sensor [14] as described earlier. Self-evidently, the 
transmission of combat-critical location and identification 
data play a crucial role in the battlespace. Once the accrued 
data have been transmitted and received, they flow through a 
dissemination process, where these data are analyzed and 
fused to form a COP and to increase the overall SA. Figure 
10 explains the process of Signature Prediction Process 
(SPP). 
 
 
Figure 10.  The Signature Prediction Process, typical of several available 
surveillance and detection systems. 
The destruction power of a given weapon system has to 
be optimized according to the enemy location (forest, open 
area, Urban Territory), the state of movement on-the Move 
(OTM) or at-the-halt (ATH), and the protection-level 
(mounted, 
dismounted, 
dug). 
Apart 
from 
this, 
the 
commanding officer must keep in mind that operations are 
executed with improper SA, COP and suffer from lack of 
precise real- time CID. 
Figure 11 emphasizes the importance of SA around the 
target area. The shooter has to be aware of the locations and 
status of both own troops and the enemy. It is critical to 
optimize the destruction power of a weapon system along the 
identification of a target. When the target represents a 
hierarchically critical enemy commander, he or she can be 
destroyed by transmitting the coordinates and visual 
signature to the designated shooter, as indicated in Figure 11. 
 
 
Figure 11.  The importance of the SA around the target area [5]. 
To enhance improved SA and COP, Geographical Based 
Situational Awareness (GBSA) can be utilized [14]. The 
system utilizes the VHF-frequency operated Combat Net 
Radios (CNRs). When the CNRs are on the connectivity 
range, they recognize and identify radios in the system. Once 
the radios are at the same channel and the clock (hopping 
sequence) of CNRs are in a correct time, a reliable SA-tool 
47
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[14]. The main problems related to this system have to do 
with the clock and hopping sequence. This is one possibility 
to minimize fratricide and collateral damage. At the moment, 
the main benefit of this concept is in preventing from being 
fired at by own weapon systems, minimizing incidents of 
fratricide by means of improved SA-information. 
VI. 
CHALLENGES INVOLVED IN DISTRIBUTING 
SITUATIONAL AWARENESS DATA 
The amount of data accrued via versatile sensors and 
tracking systems is necessarily immense to say the least. As 
a result, to distribute the location information filtered and 
fused through various systems remains a challenge. As said, 
warriors’ main function remains to fight instead of double-
checking monitor his palm-top or equivalent. Besides, there 
will always be disturbances in electromagnetic spectrum, 
quality of service (QoS) and transmitting power along with 
the limited bandwidth set limitations to the ubiquitous 
communication systems. As indicated in Figure 12, the 
possibilities of battlespace communication are versatile, 
since almost all the sensors utilized are somehow linked 
together to facilitate BFT and CID and to improve COP and 
SA. 
 
 
Figure 12.  The types of possible platforms serving as sensors and network 
nodes [5]. 
The problems encountered in data distribution are linked 
to the present existence of various devices and data in 
interfaces. BML can be seen as a common language enabler 
between gadgets and interfaces [2] along with almost 
ubiquitous swarms of UAVs described in [15]. Limitations in 
energy and bandwidth play a vital role. The locating of 
instruments of various types consumes reasonable amounts 
of energy, not to mention the increase in weight and number 
of devices in warrior gear and required maintenance. Due to 
lack of accessible wireline infrastructures, unmanned 
systems have to be powered through a combination of 
batteries, solar power, and power scavenging [16]. When 
FSO-technology is adopted in backbone networks and 
between selected ground stations, an intelligent, dynamic and 
secure data transmission with high data rates can be offered 
to mobile end-user [17]. FSO-technology offers high-speed, 
reliable and cost-effective connectivity for heterogeneous 
wireless services provision in both urban and rural 
deployments when Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing 
(DWMD) is utilized in Radio-on-FSO (RoFSO) system [18]. 
It has been demonstrated in tests that the advanced DWDM 
RoFSO offers a viable solution to provide broadband 
wireless connectivity. Radio over Fiber (RoF) technology 
will most likely offer a reliable data transmission rate of 10 
Gbps in the next generation FSO-systems [18]. A simplified 
principle of FSO-communication system is introduced in 
Figure 13. 
 
 
Figure 13.  A schematic diagram of a point-to-point FSO communication 
system [19]. 
To maximize the possibility of devices communicating in 
a proper and planned manner, the topology of network 
systems has to be correctly coordinated (manage spectrum 
usage with group mobility patterns) [20]. In addition, the 
hierarchy of a network has to support and enable this. Both 
the goals can be achieved by hierarchical design where 
devices are only to interact with their peers from the same 
group [21]. Furthermore, the transmit antenna selection is a 
practical technique for achieving significant power gain, 
even with commodity hardware and without changes to 
different waveform protocols [13].  
As discussed in light of usability cases presented in [16], 
WPSN is beneficial because of the following reasons: the 
effect of roadside bombs can be avoided once their precise 
location is known early and precisely enough. The increased 
knowledge at the basic warrior level in the form of location 
information gained from the Self-Calibrating Pseudolite 
Array (SCPA) on the battlespace improves warriors’ ability 
to carry out the set tasks. Roadside bombs can be detected 
early enough and dismantled or destroyed before own or 
allied forces arrive on the spot. The Special Forces utilize the 
same output of SCPA while conducting their ultimate tasks. 
Since the nodes of WPSN do not communicate with each 
other, the system remains concealed, yet active. The WPSN 
node communicates with a UAV through encrypted 
messages. Thus WPSN responds only after a UAV has 
submitted a polling request with a specific code. Utilizing 
swarms of UAVs and UGVs has to be emphasized. The 
routes of UVs can be fed into the systems early enough to 
gain the needed information from the designated areas as 
depicted earlier in Figure 11. 
VII. LOCATION AND COMMUNICATION POSSIBILITIES IN 
URBAN AREAS 
An Army tactical warfighter needs network services both 
OTM and ATH [5]. One of the lessons learned from Iraq and 
48
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Afghanistan was the need for a more robust Beyond-Line-
Of-Sight (BLOS) communication capacity between the 
lower Army echelon Land Warriors, from Squad Leaders to 
Battalion Commanders [5]. 
The proposed and described solutions have to be based 
on novel, generic and robust battlespace-proven solutions in 
order to meet the given needs, and this in turn involves 
addressing the topology of the network system carefully. In 
MOUT transmitting and receiving signals of different 
waveforms simultaneously is challenging due to the nature 
of the combat environment [22]. 
Since the power production and power consumption will 
remain as a challenge, certain issues need to be addressed. 
Thus when defining the network design, it has to be 
emphasized that network coding enables a more efficient, 
scalable and reliable wireless network [23].  
The MOUT environment features no service of the 
Global Navigation Sensor System (GNSS) indoors, and 
indoors propagation poses a serious problem. The placement 
of an antenna platform is challenging. One solution can be 
the installing of a high-bandwidth conformal antenna in the 
soldier’s helmet with the coverage of over 750 MHz through 
a 2,7 GHz frequency band [24]. The combat-critical 
solutions involve improving communicating, SA and 
transmitting C2 information among highly dispersed 
battlespace units in dynamic environments, such as MOUT 
[23] [24]. 
Next, let us assume that there is a WPSN-system 
available for positioning and location services. If the 
capability of GPS-Pseudolite, better known as the Self-
Calibrating Pseudolite Array, is attached into the satellite-
based Carrier-phase Differential GPS-type (CDGPS), it is 
possible to determine positioning in locations without access 
to the GPS satellite constellation [4] [15] [25]. This will 
improve locating own troops inside buildings dramatically, 
thereby significantly improving CID, TID and SA. This 
system is depicted in Figure 14. 
 
 
Figure 14.  The WPSN presented in the urban infrastructure [4]. 
VIII. DISCUSSION 
This study examines COTS-based communication 
technologies available for increasing dismounted FFW 
performance, minimizing collateral damage, improving SA 
and COP and focuses on how to apply technical solutions in 
the military environment to enhance the overall performance 
of a dismounted FFW. Applying suitable and relevant 
applications, C4I2SR tools in the existing networks, aids in 
overcoming the varying challenges in the battlespace [4][26]. 
Possibilities of Free Space Optics (FSO) can be utilized, as 
introduced in [19]. This study outlines aspects of applying 
the existing communication technologies, C4I2SR, to 
military battlespace systems [3]. In addition, the C4I2SR 
tools for dismounted FFWs have to cater for the 
requirements of affordability, reliability, versatility and 
modularity [4]. 
Means to present the accrued data are versatile and 
challenging. Since, as can be repeated ad nauseam, a warrior 
must primarily fight, the chosen method to present fused data 
has to support warriors’ main task rather than disturb and 
distract. Especially, in order to be able to present SSA-data 
appropriately in battlespace settings, the assisting role and 
practical features of Graphic User Interfaces (GUIs) 
practically remain utterly important. This practical usability 
angle is depicted in Figure 15. 
 
 
 
Figure 15.  Means to forward the accrued data via various warrior displays. 
In terms of the equipment angle to the FFW-concept, a 
properly equipped FFW represents a warrior who is supplied 
with the latest technology applicable which translates into 
enhanced performance capabilities in versatile terrain, 
including MOUT, CME and special operations. As evident, 
this asks for computer-aided modularity and scalability to 
allow for adaptability according to warriors’ task-levels, 
timings, and locations of operations. Furthermore, the 
integration of subsystems must be possible in order to ensure 
the optimal functionality and accurate data transmission 
between the given systems. This requires that the equipment 
be rapidly replaceable and exchangeable for the purposes of 
location services and C4I2SR -systems. 
As denoted in [7], asymmetric warfare sets more 
challenges compared to traditional warfare. This involves the 
challenges related to identifying the Point of Interest (POI) in 
the battlespace. It is essential to define the POI early enough 
as an enemy (red), own (blue), or neutral, White Force [27]. 
Before the execution of weapon systems, the commanding 
officer and a single Warfighter has to be in control of the 
given situation to avoid fratricide [28]. In case the POI is 
identified as an enemy, the decision of possible use of force 
has to be made rapidly [29]. 
An identification device utilizable in a battlespace 
consists of a transmitter and the receiver elements, the 
49
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

former based on laser, the latter on a radio frequency (RF) 
system. Warriors can be equipped with Cooperative Target 
Identification Systems. CTI allows a human shooter or 
sensor to interrogate a potential target and thereby forces the 
potential target to respond to the interrogation in a timely 
manner as described earlier in Figure 2 [5] [7]. 
As concluded in [12], the equipping of a FFW can be 
pictured by means of a product line warrior drawing from 
three-tier warrior levels. An FFW’s gear has to be designed 
to meet the requirements set by the future hybrid battlespace 
[30]. Therefore, the warrior equipment must be versatile and 
modular. Moreover, remotely controlled UVs serve as tools 
to improve SA and BFT, and thereby assist in ensuring 
mission success [31]. The number and nature of different 
Human Machine Interfaces (HMIs) is growing with an 
increasing speed. 
A computer can be adopted in varying roles depending 
on the warrior level in question: the computer can be 
mounted to clothing or on the wrist, for example. The higher 
the role of a warrior, the more a computer is seen as an 
assistant. In contrast, the lower the level, the more the 
computer forwards tasks. As presented in Figure 16, a 
computer can be programmed to task a warrior to move and 
fight at a certain pace depending on the mission. A computer 
can command a warrior to move at a certain pace and 
directions following the cycle of friendly fire missions as 
indicated in Figure 16. This process increases warrior 
efficiency, minimizes fratricide and increases a commander’s 
SA. 
 
 
Figure 16.  The principle of computer-tasked pace of movement (r) and a 
wrist module (l) [4]. 
Effect-based thinking and systems engineering serve as 
the tools to be deployed to achieve the ultimate goal: the 
optimally functioning effective FFW at all the command 
levels in all potential battlespace environments. Remotely 
controlled UAVs and UGVs can act as assisting tools for a 
warrior [32]. They can facilitate BFT and improve SA 
thereby increasing the probability of success in missions, 
even when operating Beyond Line of Sight (BLOS) [31]. 
According to [4], warriors have to remain functional and 
their gear needs to be planned according to their set tasks. A 
key factor is the efficiency of a warrior, which can be gained 
via improved SA, BFT and C4I2SR [12]. A Warrior has to 
maintain his or her agility and remain active in the 
battlespace. Furthermore, only part of the gear necessary can 
be attached. As demonstrated via the usability cases, WPSN 
solutions together with SCPAs and UVs can be utilized to 
reach the maximum performance at all the warrior levels. 
Planning the warrior’s gear requires a deep understanding of 
the operational environments and the requirements set for the 
performance of a warrior. 
As introduced in [12], the issue of exploiting C4I2SR-
tools is not only a matter of a complicated command and 
control system [33]; it is a matter of trust in the entity, 
especially in operations utilizing collaboration tools of 
various types [34]. Each entity embedded into the C4I2SR-
tool environment can contribute added value to SA and 
intensify the desired outcome by committing themselves to 
and abiding by the set rules and policies. Only this way 
C4I2SR -tools can be maximally exploited, and increase the 
number of promising instruments for the enhanced 
performance in ME and CME.  
By being successful in merging all these described 
elements and tools, several C4I2SR -related challenges can 
be solved. As long as a human being serves in a loop as a 
performing entity, there will always be a certain amount of 
mistrust. Finally, once a reliable tool for distributing 
traceable tasks can be created, the amount of trust between 
entities can be increased. 
As in [35], all the entities need collaboration for their 
mission success and survivability in ME and CME 
operations [36]. If an entity fails to collaborate, it takes a 
calculated risk to fail. Collaboration requires suitable tools 
and reliable and ubiquitous network systems [37]. 
Collaboration is necessary for avoiding chaos and avoid 
wasting resources in order to combine resources for an 
optimized outcome [37]. 
As demonstrated in [35], three results are offered as a 
contribution for the further development of Command and 
Control-tools: 1) a C2-tool, which enables use of Business 
Process (BP) in the command and control process; 2) the 
Resource Manager (RM), which is a central element of the 
Military Service Oriented Architecture (MSOA) in the 
distributing of limited resources; lastly, 3) the BP in the ME 
along with the MSOA [35], [38]. These results offer the yet 
missing attributes for the C2-tools for ME and CME. 
Combining these elements enables a successful control for 
the BP in ME and CME settings. Furthermore, [35] 
introduces the composition of the RM and the role of a 
scheduler, the function of the BP, and highlights the 
significance of trust and commitment in CME [35]. Trust is 
needed to gather information of the entities and to ensure 
tasks will be completed in the given time and manner [35]. 
Each entity embedded into the C2-tool environment can add 
increased value into the SA and thereby intensify the 
outcome by committing themselves to rules and abiding by 
the set policies. Understanding the meaning of combining the 
presented new tools gives an edge in the battlespace to 
perform more efficiently and with a minimum number of 
casualties. 
As denoted in [19], FSO-technology offers a secure and 
reliable means to forward a constant flow of data with an 
adequate transmission rate [17]. Present communication 
systems on a warrior level are energy consuming and require 
a lot of training in order to benefit from the system [39]. The 
FSO-system in turn is simple to use, and thereby also less 
trained FFWs can effortlessly perform the necessary 
communication tasks. The overall reconnaissance system 
50
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

benefits from FFWs, individual sensors, sensor networks, 
and mathematical analyzing and data mining programs, 
resulting in high level data for increased SA [40]. The key 
function of an FFW is to collect large amounts of SA 
information and forward these data to the CP for further data 
analyzing processes. In brief, adopting FSO in active use 
allows for a system featuring high transmission security, 
high bit rates, low bit error rates, and no need for expensive 
optical or copper cables [41] and FSO can be utilized when 
using DWDM as introduced in [18]. The main limitations of 
FSO-technology are related to its susceptibility to the effects 
of atmospheric absorption, smoke, rain, fog, snow 
(attenuation), and pollution/smog and, obviously, a free line-
of-sight [42]. These factors restrict FSO devices’ range 
communication capability to cover approximately a mile in 
optimal conditions [41]. 
 
TABLE I.  
THE SYSTEM CHARACTERISTICS OF AND FUNCTIONAL 
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE FSO COMMUNICATION SOLUTION [19]. 
System 
Characteristics 
Functional Requirements 
Communication 
High bit-rate, urban range in the usage 
scenario, hard to intercept and detect 
Physical 
Lightweight, low energy consumption, 
quick set-up 
Architectural 
Modularity, versatility, based on existing 
gear, suitable to Network Enabled Defence 
(NED), IP interface 
Economic 
Affordable, disposable, COTS-based 
Dependability 
Reliable, secure, proven technology 
Capability 
improvement 
Addresses a realistic capability gap 
(many relevant scenarios) 
 
The WPSN-solution features many advantages over those 
of the traditional WSNs. This is, polling can use sensor 
specific codes and thereby security issues become easier to 
tackle [4]. Moreover, the energy consumption of the nodes in 
the fixed network is more equal since multi-hop data 
transmission is removed. The fixed sensor nodes do not lose 
connectivity even if a large number of nodes is removed [4].  
As demonstrated via the presented usability cases [4], 
WPSN solutions together with SCPAs and UVs can be 
exploited to reach the maximum performance at all warrior 
levels. 
Planning 
an 
FFW’s 
gear 
requires 
a 
deep 
understanding of the environment and the demands set for a 
warrior. The warriors’ niche and the nature of their missions 
have to be thoroughly understood. The keys to success rely 
on precise planning based on the needs of warrior systems 
and subsystems from bottom to top 
Obviously, in all military operations and especially in 
low-level tactical military operations in particular, critical 
Situational Awareness data have to be collected rapidly, 
since mission success is time-dependent. Figure 5 
concentrates on describing the data accruing process, when 
Figure 6 expresses the outcome of MDPM as alternative 
COAs. Once data have been accrued, a battle can be won 
only by careful mission planning, comparing different COAs 
and rapidly executing successful operations. 
Figure 8 earlier illustrates the process of targeting by 
utilizing the capabilities offered by the COTS-based SEM. 
Thereby the adoption of existing COTS-technologies and 
their solutions, when appropriately applied, offers a key to 
ensuring the desired success.  
Since accurate and timely identification in the battlespace 
is a matter of life and death for each warrior, a careful 
analysis of the performance and capabilities of chosen 
systems needs to be carried out before introducing these 
systems in the battlespace. CID equals the process that 
warriors and sensors go through in order to identify 
battlespace objects prior to deciding whether or not to open 
fire. Warfighters are trained to employ all available means at 
their disposal to define and assess potential targets in the 
battlespace prior to applying combat power. CID can be seen 
as a complex series of networked systems, procedures and 
doctrine as presented in Figures 1 – 6. These systems also 
include the definitions of TTP, COP, SA, ROE and DIDEA. 
More specifically, problems can arise in particular in 
commanding 
and 
being 
commanded. 
A 
Combat 
Identification Server (CIDS) offers military commanders and 
warriors access to accurate and near real-time BFT and WFT 
systems [5]. Besides this, CIDS offers commanders a tool 
which can foster improved mission planning resulting in 
increased accuracy and tempo of missions. To sum up, CIDS 
aids commanders to reduce the number of unexpected 
incidents and minimize collateral damage.  
Once the TTP, CID, COP, and SA systems discussed in 
this paper (cf. Figure 1) are designed, tested and become 
fully implemented as part of the combat gear, some progress 
may be discernible in minimizing fratricide and collateral 
damage. The reality is that for as long as human actors 
remain part of any decision-making processes, incidents of 
fratricide and collateral damage are bound to occur. All 
efforts to minimize the human error factor by improving 
existing technologies, TTP, CID, COP and SA together with 
defining explicitly the formulations in ROE, are to be 
saluted. The efforts to minimize the unwanted phenomena 
are to be applied, for instance, in an ongoing series of Bold 
Quest exercises. 
IX. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In the very beginning of this study, the following three 
questions were raised: 1) How to optimize the performance 
of a dismounted FFW by means of improved SA? 2) How to 
increase SA with the available COTS-based communication 
technologies? 3) What are the means to avoid casualties, 
collateral damage, and fratricide?  
First, as for the question of optimized dismounted FFW 
performance, regardless of the asymmetric and hybrid 
characteristics of future wars and conflicts with their 
respective battlespaces, combat settings necessarily involve a 
duel: participants try to surprise and outwin each other in 
terms of positions, timings, maneuvers, and technical 
capabilities. Defining suitable technological solutions as part 
of the FFW gear ensures the optimal FFW performance, 
which presupposes reliable and technologically mature 
C4I2SR-tools suitable for use in various battlespace 
environments 
with 
ubiquitous 
communication 
data 
transmitted with the solutions of NCW. An FFW functions in 
NCW contexts as a force multiplier of the network centric 
51
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

C2-cycle from the sensor to the shooter aiming at minimized 
numbers of fratricide and collateral damage.  
As for the elements necessarily part of the FFW-concept, 
the following features become seminal. FFWs with their 
computer-aided equipment need to be designed to meet the 
battlespace requirements dependent on their respective niche. 
Thereby the designing and constructing process of the FFW 
must be taken into account. To simplify, each warrior acts as 
a node or sensor and thus needs a reliable, versatile, modular 
and scalable electrical platform to receive and transmit the 
necessary data and information in a given operation- and 
task-dependent timeframe. Moreover, it needs to be possible 
to integrate subsystems to ensure the optimal functionality 
and accurate data transmission between the given systems, 
which in turn enhances overall warrior performance 
capabilities. 
FFWs’ 
functionality 
aims 
at 
improved 
overall 
performance and situational awareness (SA), which become 
evident in, for example, the instances of Blue Force 
Tracking, and Combat Identification (CID) facilitated by the 
capability to utilize data transmitted by UAVs and UGVs.  
FFWs’ personal computers’ status is again dependent on 
the warrior-level in question: slave, assistant, or master. The 
role of the computer in all warrior levels is to enhance the 
overall SA, avoid fratricide and collateral damage and lastly 
but least, improve the performance of the warrior. Once the 
system that still currently remains to be designed is fully 
operational, a computer may order warriors to carry out an 
offensive in a particular direction at a given point in order to 
maximally utilize their performance capabilities. Since 
terrain requirements vary from remote locations or densely 
built-up areas to versatile battlespace, all the warrior 
equipment must be adaptable and able to support the warrior 
in the changing circumstances. 
Obviously, the overall objective of planning and 
designing an optimally functioning FFW aims at avoiding 
fratricide and minimizing collateral damage. This ensures 
that all the resources available are focused on getting the 
ordered tasks fulfilled maximally. The end result then equals 
a state of Combat Effectiveness that enables a given unit to 
rapidly and accurately sort and characterize detected objects 
into relevant categories (blue, white, red), and, consequently, 
make a decision as to whether or not to employ force against 
the identified object / target. 
Second, when it comes to improving SA by means of 
utilizing 
COTS-based 
communication 
technologies, 
challenges in CID continue to surface. As discussed, 
solutions for pinpointing and locating POIs can be based on 
COTS-technology. Yet, although the required technologies 
do exist, their usability still has to be tested and re-evaluated, 
and thoroughly selected solutions need to be adopted to 
avoid unnecessary casualties and destruction in the 
battlespace. 
In terms of targeting, a more comprehensive targeting 
process can be attained with the assistance of UVs and 
UAVs. Once the targeting process is effective, it boosts the 
DIDEA decision making cycle. Moreover, by improving the 
targeting process, tools for better decision making can be 
offered. This in turn results in a better analyzing of COAs. 
Applying and properly executing the most favourable COAs 
facilitates are mission success with minimized number of 
fratricide incidents and collateral damage. 
New technologies, such as FSO combined with WPSN 
can improve TID, CID, COP and SA. FSO offers a possible 
means to transmit large amounts of data to Command Posts 
with quick wireless set up. FSO also offers an insensitive and 
reliable means to improve the overall SA in ME and in 
CME. These all together support mission success and 
improves the overall efficiency in execution of versatile 
operations in rapidly changing operational environments.  
As for the overall FFW gear development, extensive field 
trials with actual troops are required in order to test, validate, 
and evaluate the performance of the C4I2SR-gear. The focus 
of using these tools has to be in detection, identification and 
target acquisition processes. The capability to embed the 
required gear on the warfighter has to be combat proof. The 
interfaces between the human and the machine have to be 
designed, tested and evaluated to determine the optimal 
solutions to meet the set objectives. To ensure data 
distribution between various platforms, interfaces and 
machines problems in data distribution are linked to various 
devices. As noted earlier, BML can serve a common 
language enabler between machines and interfaces as well as 
a tool in exchanging data between and among swarms of 
UAVs. 
In the future, the overall troop performance aided by 
assisting electrical devices has to be evaluated in varying 
environments, such as open terrain, MOUT, desert and forest 
terrain, and multiple scenarios have to be exploited as test-
beds for realizing improved COP and SA. The level of the 
adopted gear has to match the existing chain of command 
and the task-based level and capability of the performing 
troops. Furthermore, the development of the user interface 
for the UVs remains a challenge. In addition, Graphical User 
Interfaces (GUI) are significant in maximizing the potential 
of the adopted and implemented gear. Thus extensive series 
of tests both in laboratories and as field trials are required to 
optimize the user-friendly GUIs. 
There is an ever increasing need for more effective and 
versatile warriors. Armies of the world are downsizing their 
number of troops while requiring increased performance of 
the remaining military power, and, ever increasingly, 
versatile tasks along warfighting, including executing 
humanitarian missions, continue to set new requirements for 
warfighters and their capabilities. 
And, finally, the bottom line here obviously targets the 
question of how to minimize casualties, collateral damage, 
and fratricide. As CID and TID systems continue to remain 
inadequate for battlespace settings, new COTS-based 
technologies and applicable solutions are both welcome and 
indispensable. As we speak, all the decisions as to whether or 
not to apply combat power boil down to a human being 
executing the decisions and owning the ensuing actions. 
Therefore any affordable means available must be exploited 
in order to be able to resort to applications and gear which 
truly facilitate improving the performance of dismounted 
FFWs, optimizing SSA and thereby reducing the number of 
52
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

instances which inevitably feature lives and assets lost no 
matter how honed the gear and minds involved. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] T. Saarelainen, Enhancing Situational Awareness by Means 
of Combat-ID to Minimize Fratricide and Collateral Damage 
in the Theater, The Sixth International Conference on Digital 
Telecommunications, ICDT2011, April 17 – 22, 2011 
Budapest, pp 131 – 139. 
[2] K. Rein, U. Schade and M. Hieb, Battle Management 
language (BML) as an enabler, IEEE Conference on 
Communications, ICC’09, 14 – 18 June, Wachtberg, 
Germany, 2009, pp. 1 – 5. 
[3] R. Buchanan, Intelligence as Fuel Data Requirements for 
Modern CID Systems, A presentation in Combat-ID and 
Situational 
Awareness 
Conference, 
IQPC, 
London 
16.11.2010. 
[4] T. Saarelainen, and J. Jormakka, C4I2-Tools for the Future 
Battlefield Warriors, in Proceedings of IEEE International 
Conference on Digital Communications (ICDT), 13 –19 June 
2009, 
Athens, 
Greece, 
pp. 
38 
– 
43, 
doi 
10.1109/ICDT.2010.15. 
[5] T. Saarelainen, Enhancing Situational Awareness by Means 
of Combat-ID to Minimize Fratricide and Collateral Damage 
in the Theater, The Sixth International Conference on Digital 
Telecommunications (ICDT2011), April 17-22, Budapest, 
Hungary. 
[6] E. Ospital, A. Wojack, A Holistic Approach to Combat 
Identification, Military Technology, vol XXXIV, issue 9, 
2010, ISSN-3226, pp. 68 –73. 
[7] T. Saarelainen, White Force Tracking, in Proceedings of the 
8th European Conference on Information Warfare and 
Security, ECIW2009, 6 – 7 July 2009, Lisbon, Portugal, pp. 
216 – 223. 
[8] J. Donner, Combat Identification with German Air Force, A 
presentation in the Combat-ID and Situational Awareness 
Conference, IQPC, London 16.11.2010. 
[9] Bhattacharyya, A., Mazumdar, C., and Saraswat, V., A Real-
Time Robust Decision Support System for Network Centric 
Warfare, in Proceedings of the 8th European Conference on 
Information Warfare and Security, ECIW2009, Braga, 
Portugal, 6-7 July 2009, pp. 9 – 19.  
[10] K. Chevli, P.Kim, A.Kagel, D. Moy, R. Pattay, R. Nichols,  
A. Goldfinger, Blue Force Tracking Network Modeling and 
Simulation, IEEE Military Communications Conference, 
MILCOM 2006, 23-25 Oct. 2006, Washington, U.S.A., pp. 1 
– 7. 
[11] Bold Quest 2011 Overview, a presentation attached to the 
Finnish Defence Forces’ Letter of Intent concerning the Bold 
Quest 2011. 
[12] T. Saarelainen, and J. Jormakka, (2009) Computer-aided 
Warriors 
for 
Future 
Battlefields. 
Lisbon, 
Portugal: 
ECIW2009 Press, pp.224–233. 
[13] T. Saarelainen, Targeting Situational Awareness beyond the 
Event Horizon by Means of Sensor Element Munition, 
submitted for IARIA2012 Conference. 
[14] T. Sierksma, J. Hoekstra, B. Jansen, Geographical Based 
Situational Awareness in Military Mobile Domain, IEEE 
Military Communications Conference, MILCOM2007, 29 – 
30 Oct, 2007, Orlando, U.S.A, pp. 1 – 7. 
[15] D. Al-Abri, J. McNair, Improving Localization Accuracy in 
Wireless Sensor Networks using Location Verification 
Feedback, MILCOM 2007, 29 – 31, Oct. 2007,Orlando, FL, 
USA, pp. 1 – 7 
[16] O. Kosut, A. Turovsky, J. Sun, M. Ezovski, L. Tong, and G. 
Whipps, Integrated Mobile and Static Sensing for Target 
Tracking, MILCOM 2007, 29 – 31 Oct. 2007, Orlando, FL, 
USA, pp. 1 – 7. 
[17] A. Desai, S. Milner, Autonomous Reconfiguration in Free-
Space Optical Sensor Networks, IEEE Journal on Selected 
Areas in Communication, vol 23, issue 8, 2005, pp. 1556 – 
1563. 
[18] K. Kazaura, K. Wakamori, M. Matsumoto, N. Higashino, K. 
Tsukamoto, and S. Komaki, A Proposal for a Broadband 
Wireless Access Technology based on Radio-on FSO Links, 
in Proceedings of IEEE GLOBECOM Workshops, Nov. 30 – 
Dec 4, 2008, New Orleans, U.S.A., pp. 1 – 6, doi 
10.1109/GLOCOMW.2008.ECP.71. 
[19] T. Saarelainen, Free Space Optics in the use of the Future 
Force Warriors, International Society in Military Studies 
(ISMS), 10 – 11.11.2010, Stockholm, peer reviewed, accepted 
and presented. This article is to be published in an issue of the 
Journal of Communications and Computer in 2011.  
[20] T. Saarelainen, and J. Jormakka, Computer-Aided Warrior for 
Future Battlespaces, Proceedings of the 8th European 
Conference on Information Warfare and Security, ECIW2009, 
Braga, Portugal, 6-7 July 2009, pp. 224 – 233. 
[21] H. Zheng, J. Shi, L. Cao, Group-Mobility-Aware Spectrum 
Management for Future Digital Battlespaces, MILCOM 2006, 
Washington, DC. 
[22] J. Miller, Coalition Combat Identification Capability 
Assessments “Bold Quest”, A presentation in the Combat-ID 
and Situational Awareness Conference, IQPC, London 
16.11.2010. 
[23] G. Jakobson, J. Buford and L. Lewis, A Framework of 
cognitive situation modelling and recognition, MILCOM 
2006, 23 – 26 Oct. 2006, Washington, DC, pp. 1 – 7. 
[24] D. Herold, L. Griffiths, and T.Y. Fung, Lightweight, High-
Bandwidth Conformal Antenna System for Ballistic Helmets, 
MILCOM 2007, Orlando, FL, USA. 
[25] M. Matsuoka, S.M. Rock, and M. G. Bualat, Autonomous 
Deployment of a Self-Calibrating Pseudolite Array for Mars 
Rover Navigation, Position Location and Navigation 
Symposium, PLANS 2004, 26 – 29 April 2004, pp. 733 – 
739. 
[26] K. Lund, A. Eggen, D. Hadzic,T. Hafsoe, and F.T Johnsen, 
Using web services to realize service oriented architecture in 
military 
communication 
networks, 
Communications 
Magazine, 
vol 
45, 
Issue 
10, 
pp. 
47 
– 
53, 
doi 
10.1109/MCOM.2007.4342822.  
[27] H. Chang,  and J. Zhang, New metrics for clutter affecting 
human target acquisition, IEEE Transactions on Aerospace 
and Electronic Systems, vol 42, issue 1, Jan. 2006, pp. 361 – 
368, doi 10.1109/TAES.2006.1603429.  
[28] W-h. Xu, Y. Zhang, and Z-X. Li, Lightweight weapon system 
for robot soldier, in Proceedings of 4th IEEE Conference on 
Industrial Electronics and Applications, 2009, (ICIEA 2009), 
pp. 1727 – 1729, doi 10.1109/ICIEA.2009.5138492.  
[29] T.W. Hayden, and C. Ward, Human collaboration tools for 
net-centric 
operations, 
in 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
2005 
International Symposium on Collaborative Technologies and 
Systems, 20-20 May 2005, St Louis, MO, pp. 20, doi 
10.1109/ISCST.2005.1553286.  
[30] N. Suri, E. Benvegnu, M. Tortonesi, C. Stefanelli, J. Kovach, 
and J. Hanna, Communications middleware for tactical 
environments: Observations, experiences, and lessons learned, 
Journal of IEEE Communications Magazine, October 2009, 
vol 
47, 
Issue 
10, 
pp. 
56 
– 
63, 
doi 
10.1109/MCOM.2009.5273809.  
[31] B. Cummings, T. Zimmerman, B. Robinson, and M. Snyder, 
Voice over Blue Force Tracking, in Proceedings of IEEE 
53
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Conference 
on 
Military 
Communications 
Conference 
(MILCOM 2006), 23-25 Oct. 2006, Washington, DC, pp. 1 – 
5, doi 10.1109/MILCOM.2006.302173.  
[32] V.N. Dobrokhodov, I.I. Kaminer, K.D. Jones, and R. 
Ghabcheloo, Vision-based tracking and Motion Estimation 
for Moving targets using Small UAVs, Proceedings of the 
2006 American Control Conference Minneapolis, June 14 - 
16, 
Minnesota, 
USA, 
pp. 
1428 
– 
1433, 
doi 
10.1109/ACC.2006.16564418  
[33] M. Joze, M. Fras, and Z. Cucej, New approach to the 
modeling of Command and Control Information Systems, in 
Proceedings 
of 
IEEE 
Conference 
on 
Military 
Communications (MILCOM2008), 16-19 Nov. 2008, San 
Diego, CA, pp. 1 – 7, doi 10.1109/MILCOM.2008.4753134. 
[34] H. Chang, and J. Zhang, New metrics for clutter affecting 
human target acquisition, IEEE Transactions on Aerospace 
and Electronic Systems, vol 42, issue 1, Jan. 2006, pp. 361 – 
368, doi 10.1109/TAES.2006.1603429. 
[35] T. Saarelainen, and J. Jormakka, Interfacing Collaboration 
and Command Tools for Crises Management Military 
Command and Control Systems, International Journal of 
Electronic security and Digital Forensics, vol 3, No. 3, 2010, 
pp. 249 – 264.  
[36] D. Damian, S. Marczak, M. Dascalu, M., Heiss, and A. Liche, 
Using a Real-Time Conferencing Tool in Distributed 
Collaboration: An Experience Report from Siemens IT 
Solutions and Services,IN Proceedings of Fourth IEEE 
International Conference on Global Software Engineering 
(ICGSE 2009), 13-16 July 2009, Limerick, pp. 239 – 243, doi 
10.1109/ICGSE.2009.31. 
[37] A. Martini, S. Mourão, and W. Silva, What Now: A System to 
Enable Videostream in a Mobile Network, in Proceedings of 
IEEE 
Conference 
on 
Future 
Computing, 
Service 
Computation, Cognitive, Adaptive, Content, Patterns, Future 
Computing, Service Computation, Cognitive, Adaptive, 
Content, Patterns, 2009 (COMPUTATIONWORLD '09), 
Athens, 
Greece, 
pp. 
557 
– 
562, 
doi 
10.1109/ComputationWorld.2009.99. 
[38] T. Saarelainen, and J. Timonen, Tactical Management in near 
real-time Systems, in Proceedings of IEEE International 
Multi-Disciplinary Conference on Cognitive Methods in 
Situation Awareness and Decision Support (Cogsima 2011), 
CogSIMA2011, Miami Beach, Fl, U.S.A., pp. 240 - 247, doi 
10.1109/COGSIMA.2011.5753452.  
[39] J.M. Comstock, C.D. Freeborg, B.J. Martinez, C.P. Turner, 
D.L. Wilson, and T. Rippert, Future Force Warrior, in 
Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Systems and Information 
Engineering Design Symposium, pp. 234 – 238, doi 
10.1109/SIEDS.2006.278682.  
[40] C.K.S. Leung, and Q.L. Khan, Distributed Mining of 
Constrained Patterns from Wireless Sensor Data, in 
Proceedings of Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent 
Technology Workshops (WI-IATW2006), 2006, pp. 248 – 251, 
doi 10.1109/WI-IATW.2006.59.  
[41] A.M. Mahdy, and D.S. Deogun, Optimizing Free Space 
Optics for City-Wide Wireless Networks, in Proceedings of 
the Sixth International Conference on Networking (ICN ’07), 
Martinique, pp. 66, doi10.1109.2007.66.  
[42] R.S. Raghavan, A. Kam, and R.Y. Mannepalli, Modeling & 
simulation to study the performance of hybrid free space 
optical/rf military communication networks, in Proceedings of 
IEEE Conference on Military Communications Conference 
(MILCOM 2008), 16-19 Nov. 2008, San Diego, CA, pp.1 – 7, 
doi 10.1109/MILCOM.2008.4753149. 
 
54
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

