 
Extended Mobile WiMAX Signal Transmission over RoF viaTriple Symmetrical 
Dispersion System SMF, DCF and CFBG 
Mazin Al-Noor, Jonathan Loo, Richard Comley  
School of Engineering and Information Sciences, 
Middlesex University, Hendon, NW4 4BT 
LONDON, UK 
M.Al-Noor@mdx.ac.uk, J.Loo@mdx.ac.uk, R.Comley@mdx.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— The main impediments for long distance signal 
transmission in the fibre optic system, especially the radio over 
fibre (RoF) system, are the chromatic dispersion and signal 
power attenuation. Additionally, the power consumption in the 
laser diode and optical amplifiers affect the signal transmission 
costs; however, it is lower than in a wireless system. Therefore, 
decreasing the power consumption and chromatic dispersion 
and increasing the data bit rate in RoF are the demands for 
present and future fibre optic system technology. In order to 
increase the signal transmission distance and improve the 
frequency spectrum, we study in this paper a mobile 
Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access (WiMAX) 
signal transmission over RoF via a triple symmetrical 
dispersion system. The combination of three different fibres - 
single mode fibre (SMF), dispersion compensating fibre (DCF) 
and  chirped fibre Bragg grating (CFBG) - is used to transmit 
a 120Mbps mobile WiMAX scalable Orthogonal Frequency 
Division Multiple Access (OFDMA) signal with 3.5GHz carrier 
frequency and 20MHz bandwidth  over a RoF system. To 
compensate the dispersion, the SMF and DCF are employed 
and specifically the high reflector CFBG is applied to reduce 
signal power loss. In our study, the WIMAX signal is 
transmitted through a triple symmetrical dispersion system 
consisting of 2xDCF (20 km) and 2xSMF (100 km) connected 
to SMF (24 km) and CFBG. Simulation results clearly indicate 
that the limited signal transmission length and data bit rate in 
the RoF system, caused by fibre attenuation and chromatic 
dispersion, can be overcome by the combination of SMF, DCF 
and CFBG. The transmission distance in the fibre is extended 
to 792 Km, SNR and OSNR are highly satisfactory; 
simultaneously the power consumption is decreased.  
Keywords- Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access 
(WiMAX); Radio over Fibre (RoF); Dispersion Compensating 
Fibre (DCF); Chirped Fibre Bragg Grating (CFBG);  Single 
Mode Fibre (SMF).   
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The communication systems such as wireless broadband 
and mobile broadband systems offer better client service, by 
enhancing 
mobility, 
accessibility 
and 
simplicity 
of 
communication between people. Therefore, there has been 
growing interest in WiMAX systems, WiMAX IEEE 802.16 
and 802.16e-2005 mobile [1]. In comparison to Universal 
Mobile Telecommunication System (UMTS) and Global 
System for Mobile communications (GSM), WiMAX offers 
an enlarged significant bandwidth by using the channel 
bandwidth of 20 MHz and an improved modulation 
technique (64-QAM).   
When 
equipments 
are 
operating 
with 
low-level 
modulation and high-power amplifiers, WiMAX systems are 
capable to serve larger geographic coverage areas, and they 
support the different modulation technique constellations, 
such as BPSK, QPSK, 16-QAM and 64-QAM[2][3]. 
WiMAX physical layer consist of OFDM, which offers 
resistance to multipath. It permits WiMAX to operate in non-
line-of-sight environments (NLOS) and is highly understood 
for alleviating multipath for wireless broadband. WiMAX 
provides modulation and forward error correction (FEC) 
coding schemes adapting to channel conditions; it may be 
changed per user and per frame [2]. 
The electrical distribution of high-frequency microwave 
signals through either free space or transmission lines causes 
difficulties and costs. Losses increase with frequency in free 
space, due to absorption and reflection; and in transmission 
lines impedance rises with frequency, which leads to very 
high losses. Therefore, expensive regenerating equipment is 
required 
to 
distribute 
high-frequency 
radio 
signals 
electrically over long distances. The alternative would be to 
distribute baseband signals, radio frequency (RF) signals or 
signals at low intermediate frequencies (IF) from the control 
station (CS) to the base station (BS) and subsequently to the 
user. The RF or baseband signals are down-converted to the 
required microwave or mm-wave frequency at each BS, 
amplified and transmitted. Reverse, from user to the BS, the 
signals would be up-converted [4]. 
The radio in millimeter-wave (mm-wave) band is the 
promising media to transmit the ultra-broadband signal in the 
wireless telecommunication system and, since the recent ten 
years, has been developing to a favorite research topic.  By 
optics method the mm-wave signal is readily generated and 
can be transmitted through a long fiber distance. In the RoF 
system, the generation of the optical mm-wave is one of the 
key techniques. Several techniques to generate the optical 
mm-wave at around 60 to 120GHz have been reported, 
including direct modulation of laser diode (LD), heterodyne 
technique with optical phase locking, electrical sub-harmonic 
injection and external modulation. Of all these techniques, 
the optical external modulation is an appropriate option to 
generate the optical mm-wave signal with high spectral 
purity [5]. 
RoF systems are analogue fibre optic links, which are 
used to transmit demodulation signal carrier of radio 
183
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
frequency (RF) directly or indirectly from  a CS to a BS  
through a remote unit antenna (RAU) or radio accesses 
antenna (RAP) to the client [6]. 
 In order to find leading techniques for the WiMAX 
network deployment, RoF has been studied extensively in 
recent years. Many studies have been focused on the fibre 
[7][8][9][10], the low attenuation (0.2 dB/km), and high 
performance solution for high-speed fibre based on wireless 
access.  
The utilization of millimeter-wave (MMW) frequency for 
high-speed wireless access, in future RoF systems, would 
meet the requirement of high bandwidth and overcome the 
spectral congestion at low frequency. Surely, the RoF system 
is the future network technology, which has on one hand the 
capacity 
to 
satisfy 
the 
demands 
for 
decreasing 
electromagnetic smoking, wireless traffic, power, noise, cost, 
and antenna size and, on the other hand, to increase 
frequency, bandwidth, data rate and capacity also eventually 
improves the spectral efficiency.  
So far, the investigations have been narrowed to resolve 
the dispersion effect and to control the chromatic dispersion, 
which is explained in Section II, the signal distortion also 
reduce the power and increase the transmission distance [11]. 
In our study, the compensators methods are used to equalize 
the dispersion slope in a fibre and have been demonstrated in 
the form of DCF and CFBG. DCF has proved to be effective 
to overcome chromatic dispersion in high velocity light; with 
a special design, consisting of a fibre and a negative 
dispersion slope, it compensates the positive dispersion in 
SMF.  We also use an optical amplifier and a CFBG, due to 
the high insertion loss of DCF, which is discussed in Section 
III and IV. 
CFBG is a high Bragg reflector placed in a short segment 
of an optical fibre, used to correct chromatic dispersion. It 
can be used as a wavelength-specific reflector or as an inline 
optical fibre. CFBGs are extensively employed for functions 
such as dispersion compensation, stabilizing laser diodes, 
and add/drop multiplexing in optical fibre systems. The 
CFBGs comply with environmental requirements by 
increased stability and durability (free from rust), they can be 
highly multiplexed (many sensing points in a single fibre 
cable), and have the advantage of low power attenuation 
through transmission over several kilometers [12]. 
This paper studies methods to increase the WiMAX 
signal transmission distance through utilizing a RoF system 
with the aim to reduce power consumption and to obtain 
satisfactory 
OSNR, 
SNR 
and 
high 
quality 
signal 
transmission spectrums. The work focuses on WiMAX 
signals transmitted over RoF by applying SMF, DCF and 
CFBG. The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we 
focus on related work; in Section III, we describe the theory 
of light dispersion in the fibre optic cable for SMF, DCF and 
for CFBG. In Section IV, we introduce the system 
description of WiMAX and RoF system and describe the 
design of the complete system. We discuss the simulation 
results in Section V and finally, conclusions are drawn in 
Section VI. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
As mentioned in Section I, RoF technology as a means to 
deliver WIMAX signals has been studied by a number of 
researchers. Based on the IEEE 802.16d-2004 specification 
in the 3.5 GHz band, [13] reported about measured spectra 
and Error Vector Magnitude (EVM) for different single 
mode fiber spans up to 5 km. 
Also, [14] investigated EVM for RoF WiMAX signal 
transmission. In this approach, fiber lengths between 0km 
and 5km for both uplink and downlink instances were 
investigated. The results show, on the downlink, the EVM 
measured was better than 3.1% between -3dBm and 10dBm. 
Lowest EVM was measured at 3dBm. 
A hybrid radio on dense-wavelength-division-multiplexing 
(DWDM) transport system for WiMAX applications is 
proposed in [15]. The researchers were able to improve the 
bit error rate (BER) over a large, effective area fiber (LEAF) 
of 100km.  
In [16], a WiMAX-RoF transport system is proposed and 
achieved satisfactory BER performance over a 120 km SMF 
length for both, down and up links.  
Osadchiy et al [17] proposed a bi-directional WiMAX-over-
fiber signal transmission system. The scheme supports signal 
transmission on a 2.4 GHz carrier at a bit rate of 100 Mb/s 
downlink and 64 Mb/s uplink for an 80km access fiber link. 
They also demonstrated a successful transport of 100 Mb/s 
WiMAX-compliant signals with a 5.8 GHz RF carrier over a 
78.8km deployed SMF and a 40km distribution SMF. The 
results show that the WiMAX signal stayed within 5% RMS 
EVM after 118.8-km fiber link transmission and air 
transmission. 
III. 
THEORY AND ANALYSES 
Dispersion is a highly important factor due to the effect 
on the bit rate. There are three types of dispersions: material 
dispersion, also known as chromatic dispersion, is caused by 
the fact that the refractive index of the fibre medium varies 
as a function of wavelengths, waveguide dispersion depends 
on geometrical characteristics like shape, design and 
chemical composition of the fibre core and finally, 
intermodal dispersion, which is related to the fact that the 
light is not transmitted as a single beam [18]. 
Accordingly, chromatic dispersion emerges because of 
variable frequency components and also signals at differing 
wavelengths move at different velocities due to the refractive 
index. It has the following units of measurement: ps/nm/km, 
where nm is the spectral width of the pulse, ps refers to the 
time spread of the pulse and km refers to the fibre length. 
The chromatic dispersion of SMF is 16 ps/ nm/km at 1550 
nm and 17ps/nm/km at 1552nm, and can be expressed as 
follows [19]:                                                                    
      
 
 
   
  
where L is the fibre length and tg is the time to dispread the 
distance. For externally modulated sources, transmission 
184
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
distance limited by chromatic dispersion can also be 
expressed as follows [19]: 
 
                     
   
  | |     
                                 (2) 
                                                                                                 
where B is the bandwidth;    is the wavelength and c is the 
light velocity. Eq. (1) and (2) show the transmission distance 
of the signal is limited due to the chromatic dispersion in the 
SMF. To abolish the limitation of signal transmission in the 
SMF, techniques like DCF and CFBG have been 
demonstrated to be useful to compensate the accumulated 
dispersion in the fibre. DCF has a dispersion characteristic 
that is contrary to that of the transmission fibre. Dispersion 
compensation is achieved by inserting an open loop of DCF 
into the transmission path. The total dispersion in the DCF 
open loop needs to be equal and opposite of the accumulated 
dispersion in the SMF. This means that, if the SMF has a low 
positive dispersion, the DCF will have a large negative 
dispersion. With this technique, the absolute dispersion per 
length is nonzero at all points along the fibre, whereas the 
total accumulated dispersion is zero after some distance. The 
length of the DCF should be minimized as the special fibre 
used has a higher attenuation than the transmission fibre. The 
attenuation is around 0.6dB/km at 1550nm compared to 
0.2dB/km for SMF [20]. 
Because of the high power loss in DCF, the CFBG is 
applied to control and tune the difference in arrival times of 
the multiple frequency components resulting from a typical 
dispersion. It has been shown that strong, long, and highly 
reflective gratings can be 
used for dispersion in 
communication links in transmission with negligible loss 
aspersion, by proper design of the grating.  For high-bit-rate 
systems, higher- order dispersion effects become important, 
dissipating the advantage of the grating used in transmission. 
The rules utilized for the design of the grating to compress 
pulses in a near ideal technique are a compromise between 
the reduction of higher-order dispersion and pulse 
recompression. 
Bandwidths 
are 
limited 
with 
this 
configuration by the strength of the coupling constant and 
length of a realizable uniform period grating. 
 
Figure 1.  The wavelength reflected in CFBG by the Bragg grating 
referred to  Bragg wave is λ1. λ2, λ3 and  the unwanted wavelength passes; 
the spacing decreases along the fibre; accordingly, the Bragg wavelength 
decreases with distance along the grating length. 
The reflected wavelength in CFBG amends with the 
grating period, because the spacing of the grating varies and 
is designed for a desired wavelength. The different 
wavelengths reflected from the grating will be subject to 
different delays; if the injected light wavelength differs from 
the grating resonant wavelength, the light is not reflected. As 
shown in Figure 1  , the chirp in the period can be related to 
the chirped bandwidth        of the fibre grating which is 
presented in the following equation [11]: 
             (             )  
                                     
 
The reflection from a chirped grating is a function of 
wavelength, and therefore, light entering into a positively 
chirped grating (increasing period from input end) suffers a 
delay in reflection that is approximately [11]. 
 ( )  
(    )
       
   
   
                              
where   is the Bragg wavelength at the center of the 
chirped bandwidth of the grating, and vg is the average 
group velocity of light in the fibre. By introducing a 
maximum delay of 2Lg/vg between the shortest and the 
longest reflected wavelengths, the effect of the chirped 
grating is that it disperses light. This dispersion is of 
importance since it can be used to compensate for chromatic 
dispersion in optical fibre transmission systems. The figure 
of merit is a high-length grating with a bandwidth important 
feature of a dispersion-compensating device as at 1550 nm, 
the group delay τ in reflection is ~10 nsec/m. Several 
parameters affect the performance of the CFBGs for 
dispersion compensation: the insertion loss due to reflectivity 
< 100%, dispersion, bandwidth, and polarization mode-
dispersion, deviations from linearity of the group delay also 
group delay ripple. Ignoring the first and the last two 
parameters momentarily, we consider the performance of a 
chirped grating with linear delay characteristics, over a 
bandwidth of Δλ chirp. 
The dispersion coefficient Dg [ps/nm/km] for the linear 
CFBG is given by the following simple expression [8]: 
   
  
        
where n is the average mode index, c is the light velocity, ∆λ 
is the difference in the Bragg wavelengths at the two ends of 
the grating. Eq. (5) represents that Dg of a chirped grating is 
ultimately limited by the bandwidth ∆λ; the increase in the 
transmission distance will be possible only, if the signal 
bandwidth is reduced. 
 
185
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
IV. 
SYSTEM DISCRIPTION  OF  WIMAX OVER  ROF 
An important difference between fixed and mobile 
WiMAX is the physical layer. Mobile WiMAX uses 
OFDMA as its physical layer transmission scheme instead of 
plain Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM). 
OFDMA can also be used as a multiple access mechanism 
when groups of data subcarriers, called sub channels, are 
allocated to different users. Mobile WiMAX also introduces 
more scalability into the actual physical layer parameters. 
Cyclic prefix durations and channel bandwidths in multiple 
OFDMAs, which have different amounts of subcarriers, are 
utilized to allow the wireless link design to be optimized 
according to the environment where the system is deployed. 
Figure 2 illustrates the schematic simulation setup of 
WiMAX over RoF, including the dispersion model 
techniques SMF, DCF and CFBG. In this simulation, the BS 
deployed the data of mobile WiMAX IEEE 802.16e-2005 to 
the fibre system as a RF signal; firstly, to the RAU antenna 
as an electrical signal; subsequently, converted to the fibre 
optic signal by modulating the RF to the laser beam, which a 
laser diode has injected into the SMF; this modulation 
operation arises in the Mach Zehnder Modulator (MZM). 
 In future work, it would be possible to use a WiMAX 
Femtocell instead of a BS because  it has several advantages.  
It can  be  use in  microcell,   pico-cell area  and  indoor;  the  
typical cell radius ranges between 50-100m[17]. The 
proposed scheme would not require to be changed, because, 
at the end of fibre, the optical signal is converted to the 
electrical RF signal, which would radiate via Femtocell to 
micro or pico-cell. The WiMAX transmission signal is 
centered at 3.5 GHz; comprising 128 subcarriers and 
64QAM (6 bit-per-symbol) modulates each; the bandwidth is 
20MHz, and the transmitted bit rate is 120Mbps. The 
important component in WiMAX is the scalable orthogonal 
frequency division multiplexing (S-OFDMA). In the basic 
version of OFDMA, one sub-carrier is assigned to each user. 
The spectrum of each user is quite narrow, which makes 
OFDMA more sensitive to narrowband interference. The 
core of an orthogonal multi-carrier transmission is the Fast 
Fourier transform (FFT) respectively, inverse FFT (IFFT) 
operation; synchronization and channel estimation process 
together with the channel decoding play an important role. 
To ensure a low cost receiver (low cost local oscillator and 
RF components) and to enable a high spectral efficiency, 
robust digital synchronization and channel estimation 
mechanisms are needed. The throughput of an OFDM 
system does not only depend on the used modulation 
constellation and Forward Error Correction (FEC) scheme, 
but also on the amount of reference and pilot symbols spent 
to guarantee reliable synchronization and channel estimation 
[23].  
Figure 2.  Schematic shows the setup of WiMAX downlink integrated in the RoF system which consist of SMF, DCF and CFBG for the increased fibre 
length of 792km. 
186
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
OFDMA utilized in mobile WiMAX is scalable in the ability 
that by flexibly adjusting FFT sizes and channel bandwidths 
with fixed symbol duration and subcarrier spacing, it can 
address wide spectrum needs in different area regulations in 
a cost competitive approach. The S-OFDMA consists of a 
flexible and large fast Fourier transform (FFT) size changes 
from 128 to 2048, and it is used in IEEE802.16e-2005 [3].  
The transmitter's (TX) source data in the WiMAX are 
encoded, and then modulated by QAM64, buffered and 
manipulated through serial to parallel (S/P) mechanism so as 
to make an appropriate vector for IFFT. The signal is 
transmitted to the fibre as a RF signal; subsequently, 
converted to an optical signal by the RAU antenna by being 
indirectly modulated through the MZM. Intensity modulators 
are important components for high bit rate light wave 
systems operating at a wavelength of 1552nm. 
 The MZM structure is composed of an input optical 
branch, where the incoming light is split into two arms, and 
two independent optical arms, which are subsequently 
recombined by the output optical branch. As shown in Figure 
3, the continuous wave (CW) laser diode (LD) emits a light 
wave  into an optical input of the MZM;  the WiMAX_RF 
radiates  into two electrical inputs of MZM. The bias voltage 
of V1,  2bias = Vπ/2 controls the degree of interference at the 
output optical branch and accordingly the output intensity. 
The MZM is based on an electro-optic effect, the effect that 
in certain materials, e.g., LiNbO3, the refractive index n 
changes with respect to the voltage V applied across 
electrodes. The optical field at the output of the modulator is 
given by following equation [24]:  
    ( )   
 
 [   (
 
    ( ))     ( 
 
    ( ))     
where    is the modulation voltage, which is the differential 
drive voltage (V1-V2=  ) resulting in differential phase shift 
of   rad between two waveguides. Ein (t) is the optical field 
applied to the input of the modulator. The MZM modulated 
electrical signal refers to WiMAX–RF; optical beam  
 
Figure 3.  Schematic shows  Mach- Zehnder LiNbO3 (MZM) optical  
input  from laser diode CW and   two electrical  inputs from WiMAX_Tx  
 refers to the CW laser and is injected in the output as an 
optical power signal over fibre. The CW LD technology is at 
the standard telecommunications wavelength of 1552.52 nm. 
The CW LD output power is too low and would require 
additional amplification. The CW LD has an average output 
power of 3 dBm for laser frequency 193.1 THz with a 
linewidth of 10 MHz and relative noise dynamic  of 3dB and 
a noise threshold of 
 -100dB . 
 Subsequently, the optical signal is transmitted over the 
RoF system, which is composed of a triple symmetrical 
dispersion system: each consisting of DCF (20 km), SMF 
(100 km) SMF (100 km) and DCF (20 km), connected to the 
SMF (24 km) and to the CFBG, which is added after every 
264 km. This setup allows a  compensation of the positve 
dispersion signal in SMF; therefore, the signal transmission  
is  increased to 264km  fibre length.  
  The SMF dispersion parameter is 16 ps/nm/km and the 
SMF length is set up to 100km; the SMF signal attenuation is 
0.2dB/km; therefore, total accumulated dispersion is 
16×100=1600 ps/nm. The dispersion slope will be sharper 
with the increment of the transmitting fibre length L as 
expressed in Eq. (2).  DCF is configured to negative 
dispersion -80ps/nm/km at 1552nm to compensate the 
positive signal dispersion in SMF, considered in Eq. (7). It is 
proved to be effective to reverse chromatic dispersion in  
high-velocity light and it is highly important to increase the 
signal transmission distance and bit rate by a DCF function 
to keep the wavelength at a zero dispersion, which is called 
the “zero-dispersion wavelength”  (λ0).  
     (         )  (         )                           (7)                        

where       is the dispersion factor in the  SMF ,       is 
the fibre length of the SMF ,      is the dispersion factor in 
the DCF and  the      is the  length of the DCF. 
 
(    
           )  (     
          )     
                                                                                           (8) 
 
Eq. (8) shows the result of the accumulated dispersion in 
combined  DCF and SMF. SMF is configured  to a fibre 
length of 100km  and  DCF is  configured to the negative 
dispersion of -80ps/nm and used over a 20km  fibre length  to 
reduce the chromatic dispersion and, as explained  before, 
DCF is added to keep the transmission signal of 
zerodispersion for a long distance. 
 
Figure 4.  Illustrates  the dispersion character for the wavelength  
187
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
As shown in Figure 4, the dispersion of the light signal in 
fibre optic is zero by 1330nm and 16 ps/nm/km by 1550 nm 
wavelength. The advantage of using a wavelength of 1552nm 
compared to a wavelength of 1330nm lies in low power 
attenuation. The devices working with the 1330 nm 
wavelength are able to transmit a high amount of power but 
the modulation constraints of the laser source can make the 
design more complicated. The wavelength of 1550nm is the 
most used in terrestrial communication systems and a wide 
range of devices are available[25]; the Doppler Effect is 
lower than at other frequencies and for this carrier it is 
possible to carry out DPSK (Differential Phase Shift Keying) 
and QAM modulation schemes. 
 Figure 5 illustrates the affected DCF of the signal 
dispersion in SMF; the signal transmitter TX injects the 
WiMAX RF in the fibre after modulation through the laser 
diode and MZM. In the fibre system the SMF is configured 
for a fibre length of 100km because of the SMF’s  dispersion 
character of 17ps/nm/km at 1552nm, the 20km DCF  is 
added and configured to the negative dispersion of                  
-80nm/ps/km to keep the transmission signal of zero 
dispersion. 
As described in Section III, the DCF has a high-power 
attenuation and cannot be used in this system  for a distance 
longer than 20 km; therefore, the EDFA is employed  after 
100Km of  SMF, being configured to 12.8 dB. The CFBG  
 
Figure 5.  Illustrates that for every 100km SMF fibre length  there are  20 
km long DCF  modules to compensate the accumulation dispersion  in the 
SMF. 
chirped bandwidth is ∆λ=2 nm; n=0.0006 and lengths of 110 
mm. The optical power is converted to the current electrical 
signal by a photo detector diode (PIN for dark current 10nA 
and centre frequency 193.1 THz). The electrical bandpass 
Gaussian filter is used to minimize the electrical signal noise 
and group delay becomes constant for all frequencies. In a  
receiver, a bandpass Gaussian filter allows signals within a 
selected range of frequencies to be heard or decoded, while 
preventing signals at unwanted frequencies from getting 
through the centre frequency (f0). As mentioned before, f0 is 
set up to 3.5GHz for a bandwidth of 20MHz.  
The applied RAU antenna can offer a small antenna size 
for broadband operation. The RAU can convert the incoming 
RF signal to the fibre and subsequently to an electrical signal. 
The incoming optical signal is detected by a photodiode (PD) 
and converted to the RF signal, then amplified and 
transmitted over the wireless path for 300m to the BS 
antenna and  to the WiMAX RX. At the WiMAX receiver 
the RF signal is demodulated by the Quadrature 
demodulator, which  implements an analog demodulator 
using a carrier generator for Q and I Quadrature components; 
it consist of two low pass filter. 7GHz cutoff frequency of 
low pass filter is configured; the OFDM demodulator is 
implemented by a complex point 1024 FFT; in OFDM the 
FFT is used to realize multi-carrier modulation, which 
reduces the complexity of OFDM systems greatly. 
Generating OFDM symbols with high data rate requires  a 
high-speed FFT processor. Moreover, an FFT processor with 
low area and low power consumption is needed by the 
portable feature of OFDM systems. In the QAM sequence 
decoder, the bit sequence is split into two parallel 
subsequences; each can be transmitted in two quadrature 
carriers when building a QAM modulator. This is achieved 
by using a serial to parallel converter.  
V. 
RESULT AND DISCUSSION 
The simulation results clearly show that the fibre 
attenuation and the chromatic dispersion, which are the main 
cause for a limited signal transmission length and data bit 
rate in the RoF, can be controlled by transmitting the 
WiMAX-OFDMA for 120 Mbps bit rate via a combination 
of different fibers, namely SMF, DCF and CFBG. The 
results indicate that the use of a accumulated dispersion 
compensation method, which consist of a triple symmetrical 
compensator system and, in addition, a CFBG for each 
system, is the means to control the chromatic dispersion, 
keep the transmission signal of zero dispersion and to 
increase the transmission distance to 792 km. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Illustrates the total power dBm in the DCF for a DCF length 
from 17 to 22km and the wavelength is 1552nm 
188
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 6 shows the total of the signal power in dBm 
according to the DCF length from 17km to 22km. At 17km, 
the signal power is 16.2dBm; at 22km, the signal power is 
8dBm, due to the high signal power loss the CFBG and the   
EDFA are used. The red colour refers to the optical power, 
the power is focused in the centre of the fibre and the green 
colour refers to the noise in the DCF, which is caused by the 
laser diode. 
 
 
Figure 7.   Illustrates  the delay in the CFBG for the wavelength from1546 
nm(1.546um)  to 1554 nm (1.554um); the delay is measured in ps. 
Apart from the combination in the order of DCF-SMF-
SMF-DCF-SMF with a fibre length of 20-100-100-20-24 
km, a 55mm long CFBG is added at every 264 km to 
compensate the chromatic dispersion. Figure 7 shows the 
reflectivity and delay characteristics of the chirped gratings 
operating in 10-55mm grating length. It is noted that the 
reflection wavelength of 1548 to 1552 nm has the delay time 
of 50ps; respectively the delay in the CFBG is important to 
balance the wavelength and to control the chromatic 
dispersion, due to the different frequency velocities in the 
fibre.   
 
 
 
Figure 8.   Shows the cumulative phase of the transmission and reflection 
wavelength. 
The control of the chromatic dispersion is essential in the 
fibre optic system network, due to the increase of the signal 
transmission distance, as well as the data bit rate. The CFBG 
can be implemented in DWDM and in this research is used 
as signal tuneable. The cumulative phase difference between 
transmitted and reflected wavelength is shown in Figure 8. 
The blue line  refers to the reflective wavelength in the 
CFBG and the red line represents the forward wavelength 
transmission. Any delay in the wavelength in the CFBG 
refers to phase delay 75ps at wavelength 1552nm. 
TABLE I.  
OSNR INPUT AND OUTPUT 
 
 
As mentioned in Sections I and III, the wave delay in the 
CFBG is important because the light spectrum in SMF and 
DCF travels with different velocity, which means that it 
consists of different wavelength, which reaches the end of a 
fibre optic cable delayed. Therefore, the CFBG is used to 
control the chromatic dispersion and power attenuation, as 
well. 
 
Table (I) shows the input parameter at transmitter after 
MZM and the output parameter after 792km. The WiMAX-
RF modulated to laser for frequency 193.1THz for a 
wavelength of 1552.5244nm. The difference between the 
input OSNR and output OSNR ranges at ~ -74dB; if the 
chirped gratings are set up to 10mm, the input signal power 
is at -0.0614 dBm and the output signal power is at -8.5112 
dB.  The difference between input and output power is -
8.4498 dB, when the chirped grating of CFBG is 10mm for a 
fibre length of 792km.  The result is highly satisfying 
because the optical amplifier only used 192 dB for the fibre 
length of 792km. 
 
As shown in Figure 9, the configuration of the CFBG 
chirp length has an influence on the OSNR: the shorter the 
chirp length the higher OSNR. The higher output OSNR 
after 792km is 26.63dBm, when the chirp grating is set up to 
10mm length, and lower OSNR, when the chirped grating is 
set up to 55mm. Additionally, the figure shows that the 
OSNR has decreased linearly, which is an important result 
because it let the signal in a stable condition and the signal 
quality is affected positively. This means, that the 
configuration of the CFBG can improve the signal quality in 
the RoF system and can be used as a band pass filter and 
tuneable component,  as well. 
 
Input Signal 
dB 
Input 
OSNR 
(dB) 
Output 
Signal 
(dB) 
Output 
OSNR(dB) 
CFPG 10mm 
 
-0.06141464 
99.9856 
-8.5112 
26.63 
CFBG 32mm 
-0.0141464 
99.9856 
--11.2111 
23.62 
CFBG 55mm 
-0.06141464 
99.9856 
-13.4115 
19.62621 
 
(nm) 
(nm) 
(nm) 
(nm) 
Wavelength 
1552.5244 
1552.524 
1552.52 
1552.524 
189
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
Figure 9.  OSNR measurement at the  Chirped Grating  length from 10mm 
to 55mm in CFBG  
As shown in Figure 10, the total gain power measured at 
CFBG chirp length from 10mm to 55mm at wavelength 
1552nm decreases linearly. At a chirp length of 10mm the 
power is -8.5112dB, at 32mm -11.2111dB and at 55mm, the 
power is 13.4115 dB. 
  
Figure 10.  Total power measurement at  the chirped Grating length from 
10-55mm  in CFBG 
Figure 11 (A) shows the optical bandwidths for a fibre 
length of 264 and 792km at a wavelength of 1552nm. At all 
fibre lengths, the optical bandwidth is 300nm. There is a 
minor change in the optical signal power after the signal has 
travelled for 528 km: at 264 km, the signal power is -5 dBm, 
at 792 km the signal power is -14 dBm; however, a limited 
optical amplifier was used. The green area refers to the noise, 
which is produced by the laser diode, and the red area refers 
to the optical bandwidth, which is expressed in terms of 
wavelength rather than frequency, using the following 
equation [26]: 
                                        
  
                                  (9) 
where   optical bandwidth is for wavelength 1552nm; c is 
light speed;    is the wavelength square. 
 Figure 11 (B) shows the optical bandwidths for a fibre 
length of 792km at a wavelength of 1552nm. At all fibre 
lengths, the optical bandwidth is 300nm. The intensive green 
colour at 1552nm (1.55um) refers to the noise intensity in the 
bandwidth. The red colour refers to the signal power at           
-25dBm. 
   
 
 
       
Figure 11.   (A)  optical bandwidth for fibre length  after 264km                  
(B) optical bandwidth after 792km fibre legnth  
   
    
Figure 12.   Constellation diagram of 120–Mbit/s WiMAX  QAM-64 
transmission  downlink  for fibre length 792Km          
  
190
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 12 shows a constellation diagram, which is a 
representation of a signal modulated by a digital modulation 
scheme It clearly shows the electrical constellation at the 
WiMAX transmitter which is a representation of 6 bit-data 
per symbol of the 64-QAM modulator, of WiMAX TX for 
OFDM 1024 and modulator 64- QAM 8 bit by SNR 116.78 
dB; the signal is clear and noise free.  
 Figure 13 shows the electrical constellation diagram at 
WiMAX-TX receiver. The signal at the receiver is 
transmitted over RoF via the combined SMF and DCF for a 
length of 528km. The DCF length is 4x20km and the SMF 
length is 4x100km, respectively 2x24km. Compared to 
Figure 11, a change in the 6 bit QAM 64 can be recognized 
because of noise and power attenuation, which are added to 
the signal through the wavelength deployed over a distance 
of 528km in the fibre. The  black colour refers to the noise 
and the red colour refers to the total signal. 
                                              
  
Figure 13.      Constellation diagram of 120–Mbit/s WiMAX  QAM-64 
receiver downlink  for fibre length 528Km 
    
Figure 14.     Constellation diagram of 120–Mbit/s WiMAX  QAM-64 
received downlink  for fibre length 792Km 
Figure 14 illustrates the electrical constellation diagram 
64QAM for 6 bit at the receiver after the WiMAX 
transmission signal travelled over a fibre length of 792km 
and was converted to an electrical signal by the photo 
detector diode. The signal has a noise, which is shown in 
blue, due to the laser diode noise;  the red colour refers to the 
WiMAX signal total signal. The comparison of Figure 12 
and Figure 13 shows that the noise has slightly increased by 
the extended signal transmission distance from 528km to 
792km. The reason for this is the long transmission distance; 
the signal power becomes weak due to the laser noise and the 
DCF attenuation. To reduce these effects, an increase of the 
optical power amplifier is needed. This result shows the 
maximum signal transmission distance for a limited fixed 
power amplifier. 
 
Figure  15  shows the RF spectrum of WiMAX 3.5 GHz 
carrier frequency for bandwidth 20 MHz at the WiMAX 
transmitter before transmitting over fibre, the bandwidth is in 
the frequency range of f0-fL,f0,f0+fH (3.5-3.49, 3.5, 3.5+3.51) 
GHz, the spectrum of the signal power, displayed in blue, 
measured at 100 dBm and the green colour refers to the 
noise, which is measured as 22 dBm.  
 
 
 
Figure 15.  3.5GHz WiMAX-TX  for bandwidth 20MHz and FFT 1024 
before transmitting over RoF . 
      
 
Figure 16.  WiMAX carrier frequency 3.5GHz  for bandwidth  20MHz at 
WiMAX-RX after tranmission over RoF for fibre length of 792km. 
191
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 16 shows the 20MHz bandwidth after a fibre 
length of 792 km for an output power of 60dBm; the noise is 
measured as 26 dBm. The spectrum consistes of the signal 
and noise, which is illustrated in blue and the red area refers 
to the signal without noise. 
The power loss  between the transmitter and receiver is 
30dBm. The signal is deployed over SMF, DCF and tuned by 
a CFBG filter for fibre length 792km. At the end of the 792 
km fibre length, the optical to noise ratio (OSNR) is 26.64 
dB. Typically, the larger the OSNR value, the lower the 
receiver sensitivity. 
Table (II) shows the parameter at the electrical 
transmitter at electrical  input of MZM; the maximum value 
of SNR is 116.78512 dB  for WiMAX_RF 3.5GHz; the total 
power is  16.785116 dBm. 
TABLE II.  
TOTAL POWER AND SNR AT  TRANSMITTER 
 
 
Table (III)  shows the parameter of  the electrical signal 
after having been converted from optical at the photo 
detector diode; the SNR is 31.318564 dB; the diffrence 
between input and output is 85.466556 dB; considering the 
WiMAX signal has been transmitted over a fibre length of 
792km , this result is highly satisfactory 
TABLE III.  
TOTAL POWER AND SNR AT THE RECEIVER 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17.  Signal transmitted in SMF for fibre length of 264km 
Figure17 shows an optical signal transmitted over SMF 
fibre; the red colour refers to the optical power, which is to 
be seen clearly in the centre of the SMF after 264km fibre 
length. 
The SNR is measured as 31.31856 dB at the receiver in 
comparison to the SNR of a WiMAX transmission signal 
over air, which is typically 21dB for a code rate of ¾ [20]. 
The BS-TX propagation loss via air according to the Egli 
calculator[26] ranges at 167.57 dB for 5km. Compared to the 
transmission of the signal over fibre, which has travelled 792 
km, using a laser diode of 5 dBm for fibre attenuation 180dB 
per 792km (SMF+DCF) attenuation, the result is highly 
satisfactory. 
 
VI. 
  CONCLUSION 
This paper proposed a method for transmitting RF signals 
over fibre, using a WiMAX system downlink deployed via 
SMF/DCF and CFBG over a RoF system. The system is able 
to carry a WiMAX S-OFDMA signal of 128 subcarriers with 
an FFT of 1024 for a 3.5GHz carrier frequency and 
bandwidth of 20MHz. The bit rate for WiMAX increased to 
120Mbps with 64-QAM over a RoF system for a fibre length 
of 792km. We compared the chirp length 10mm to 55mm in 
CFBG with OSNR and proved the best OSNR result with 
10mm chirp. The results show that by using SMF with a 
DCF setup for dispersion of -80 and a CFBG setup for a 
length of 10 to 55mm, we achieved an increase in the 
WiMAX transmission over fibre distance to 792km. This 
method is able to control the chromatic dispersion affected in 
the fibre. This means that the power budget of the WiMAX 
downlink signal can be improved compared to the energy 
consumed in a WiMAX transmission BS antenna 167.57dB 
for 5 km; the data bit rate increased to 120Mbps. Finally, the 
bandwidth spectrum stayed relatively constant over the long 
fibre distance, and the result of SNR and OSNR are highly 
satisfactory; the power consumption is very low between the 
input and output of the fibre. 
    In summary, with the described setup, we reached the aim 
to increase the transmission distance, to improve the 
frequency spectrum and to reduce the power consumption. 
Additionally, as future work, it is possible to further increase 
the signal transmission distance for various mobile and fixed 
broadband systems, such as the WiMAX and UWB system 
by utilizing more than three circuits, consisting of the triple 
symmetrical dispersion system SMF, DCF and CFBG. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Al-Noor, K.-keong J. Loo, and R. and Comley, “120 Mbps Mobile 
WiMAX Scalable OFDMA Signal Transmission over RoF with SMF 
, DCF and Chirped FBG for Fibre Length of 792 km,” ICWMC, 2010 
6th International Conference, IEEE Computer Society, 2010, pp. 373-
377. 
[2] D. Pareek, The Business of WiMAX, Southern Gate, Chichester, west 
sussex: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2006. 
[3] WiMAX Forum,” Mobile WiMAX, Part I: A technical overview and 
performance evaluation,” June 2006. 
192
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
[4] A.N. oma Ng, Radio-over-Fibre Technology for BroadBand. Wireless 
Communication 
Systems 
door, 
Eindoven: 
CIP-data 
Library 
Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, 2005.  
[5] J. Ma, J. Yu, X. Xin, C. Yu, and L. Rao, “Optical Fiber Technology A 
novel scheme to implement duplex 60-GHz radio-over-fiber link with 
20-GHz double-sideband optical millimeter-wave transmitted along 
the fiber,” Optical Fiber Technology, vol. 15, 2009, pp. 125-130. 
[6]  I. Harjula, et al., "Practical issues in the combining of MIMO 
techniques and RoF in OFDM/A Systems,"   7th WSEAS Int. Conf. 
on Electronics, Hardware, Wireless and Optical Communications, 
Cambridge, pp. 244-248, 2008. 
[7] D. Wake, N.J.G. Anthony Nkansah, C. Lethien, C. Sion, and J.-P. 
Vilcot, “Optically Powered Remote Units for Radio-Over-Fiber 
Systems,” Lightwave Technology, vol. 26, 2008, pp. 2484-2491. 
[8] J. Ma, J. Yu, X. Xin, C. Yu, and L. Rao, “Optical Fiber Technology A 
novel scheme to implement duplex 60-GHz radio-over-fiber link with 
20-GHz double-sideband optical millimeter-wave transmitted along 
the fiber,” Optical Fiber Technology, vol. 15, 2009, pp. 125-130. 
[9] L. Chen, J. Lu, J. He, Z. Dong, and J. Yu, “A radio-over-fiber system 
with photonic generated 16QAM OFDM signals and wavelength 
reuse for upstream data connection,” Optical Fiber Technology, vol. 
15, Jun. 2009, pp. 222-225. 
[10] X. Jin-ling, H. Xu-guang, and T. Jin, “A full-duplex radio-over-fiber 
system based on a novel double-sideband modulation and frequency 
quadrupling,” Optics Communications, vol. 283, 2010, pp. 874-878.  
 
[11] Y. Chaba and R.S. Kaler, "Comparison of various dispersion 
compensation techniques at high bit rates using CSRZ format,"  in 
Optik - International Journal for Light and Electron Optics,vol.121, 
2010, pp. 813-817. 
[12] H. Yin and D.J. Richardson,” Optical Code Division Multiple Access 
Communication Networks Theory and Applications,” Tsinghua 
University Press, Beijing and Springer-Verlag GmbH Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2007. 
[13] F. Martínez, J. Campos, A. Ramírez, V. Polo, A. Martínez, D. 
Zorrilla, and J. Martí, “Transmission of IEEE802 . 16d WiMAX 
signals over radio-over-fibre IMDD links,” Project TEIDE FIT-
330210-2006-86 and European Network of Excellence ISIS, pp. 1-9. 
[14] M.-li Yee, A. Ng, and M. Sauer, “Performance Analysis of IEEE 802 
. 16e WiMAX Radio-over-fiber Distributed Antenna System,” Power, 
2009, pp. 197-200. 
[15] S.-J. Tzeng, H.-H. Lu, W.-I. Lin, H.-C. Peng, S.-S. Hsu, and H.-W. 
Wang, 
“A 
hybrid 
radio-on-DWDM 
transport 
system 
for 
PHS/LAN/ITS/WiMAX applications,” Optical Fiber Technology, vol. 
15, Mar. 2009, pp. 119-124. 
[16] H.-han Lu, C.-yi Li, S.-jye Tzeng, H.-chun Peng, and W.-i Lin, 
“Optical Fiber Technology Full-duplex radio-on-fiber transport 
systems based on main and multiple side modes injection-locked DFB 
laser diode,” Optical Fiber Technology, vol. 15, 2009, pp. 251-257. 
[17] A.V. Osadchiy, K. Prince, and I. Tafur Monroy, “Converged delivery 
of WiMAX and wireline services over an extended reach passive 
optical access network,” Optical Fiber Technology, vol. 16, Jun. 
2010, pp. 182-186. 
[18] R. Kashyap, Fiber Bragg Gratings,  Academic Press, San Diego, 
1999. 
[19] G.P. Agrawal, Fiber- Optic Communication Systems, New York , 
USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2001. 
[20] Marcos D. Katz VTT, Frank H.P. Fitzek  “WiMAX Evolution 
Emerging Technologies and Applications” Chichester,West Sussex, P 
Wiley & Sons 2009. Pp. 115-127. 
[21] M.D. Katz and F. H.P.Fitzek, WiMAX Evolution, west Sussex, UK: 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2009. 
[22] Fazel, K, and S Kaiser. Multi-carrier and spread spectrum systems. 
John Wiley & Sons, 2003 
[23] S. Han, W. Yue, and S. Smith, “FTTx and xDSL: A Business Case 
Study of GPON versus Copper for BroadBand Access Networks,” 
submitted to FTTH Conference paper to be published, 2006. 
[24] B.Chomycz, plannig Fiber Optical Network,New York,USA: MG 
Graw-Hill,2009. 
[25] I.P.Kaminow and T. LI, Optical Fiber  Telecommunications IVa 
Components, Jamestown Road,London: AP Academic Press, 2002. 
[26] http://www.radius.net/egli--free-space-calculator.html ,17.05.2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
193
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 1 & 2, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

