Citizens Broadband Radio Service Spectrum Sharing Framework - A New Strategic 
Option for Mobile Network Operators? 
Seppo Yrjölä 
Nokia 
Oulu, Finland 
email: seppo.yrjola@nokia.com
 
 
Abstract - The paper seeks to identify mobile network 
operators’ business opportunities and strategic options in the 
new Citizens Broadband Radio Service shared spectrum access 
framework. More flexible and scalable utilization of the 3.5 
GHz spectrum aims to increase the efficiency of spectrum use 
in delivering fast growing and converging mobile broadband 
and media services while paving way to new innovations, e.g., 
in the area of Internet of Things and 5th Generation. The 
opportunity analysis and created simple strategic rules 
indicated that the mobile network operators could benefit 
significantly from the new, shared Citizens Broadband Radio 
Service bands enabling them to cope with increasing 
asymmetric media data traffic, and to offer differentiation 
through improved quality and personalization of services. 
Furthermore, through unbundling investment in spectrum, 
network infrastructure and services co-operative business 
opportunities may open with vertical segments, new alternative 
operator types and the Internet domain. The concepts of co-
opetition and simple rules strategic framework were found 
useful to characterize the business environment regarding 
spectrum sharing. Heterogeneous network assets leveraging 
the Third Generation Partnership Program’s Long Term 
Evolution were found to be the key enabler while regulatory 
actions may frame the availability of spectrum and limit the 
economic value for an operator.  
Keywords - business model; Citizens Broadband Radio 
Service; mobile broadband; spectrum sharing; strategy. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
We have witnessed the rapid growth of wireless services 
with a large range of diverse devices, applications and 
services requiring connectivity. The number of mobile 
broadband (MBB) data subscribers, connected ‘things’ and 
the amount of data used per user is set to grow significantly 
leading to increasing spectrum demand, and need for novel 
spectrum management techniques, and related new business 
models discussed in the COCORA 2016 [1]. The US 
President’s Council of Advanced Science & Technology 
(PCAST) report [2] emphasized the need for novel thinking 
within wireless industry to meet the growing spectrum needs 
[3], and to tackle crisis in spectrum allocation, utilization and 
management. The essential role of spectrum sharing and 
dynamic spectrum access were underlined to find a balance 
between the different systems and services with their 
different spectrum requirements and system dynamics. For 
any spectrum-sharing framework, where several radio 
systems operate in the same spectrum to be a feasible and 
attractive, early cooperation across regulation, business and 
technology domains is essential. Collaboration in the 
technology and innovation domain between industry and 
research enables validation of the enabling technologies and 
new concepts while ensuring economies of scale and scope 
in implementation. Furthermore, regulation has a key enabler 
role through spectrum harmonization and providing 
incentives for early adopter while on the other hand, defines 
limiting factors and competition framework. The spectrum 
regulation has played central role in the wireless ecosystems 
in creating current multibillion business ecosystems, for 
MBB operator businesses via exclusive Quality of Service 
(QoS) spectrum usage rights, and at the same time for 
unlicensed wireless local area network (Wi-Fi) ecosystem 
drawing from the public spurring innovations. 
So far, only a subset of the spectrum sharing research has 
reached the regulation domain, the early studies on cognitive 
radio (CR) on license exempt access with intelligent user 
terminals and spectrum sensing as the general interference 
mitigation technique as one example. Furthermore, several 
spectrum sharing concepts widely studied, standardized and 
supported by national regulatory authorities (NRA) has not 
scaled up commercially as expected, TV White Space 
(TVWS) [4][5] being the latest example. Based on the 
decade of profound CR, and in particular unlicensed TVWS 
concept studies, a couple of novel licensing based sharing 
models have recently emerged and are under regulatory 
discussion and early stage standardization, the Licensed 
Shared Access (LSA) [6] from Europe and the Citizens 
Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) from the US [7]. This 
paper investigates: 
 
1) How can the CBRS spectrum sharing be defined for 
Mobile Network Operators (MNOs)? 
2) What are MNOs’ business opportunities, and how are 
they framed regarding the CBRS? 
3) What kind of strategic choices do MNOs have to 
make regarding spectrum sharing? 
 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, the 
state of art and the research gap is shortly discussed in 
Section II. Second, the CBRS 3-tier sharing framework is 
presented and defined for a MNO in Section III. Theoretical 
background for co-opetitive business opportunity framework 
and the Simple Rules strategic approach is introduced in 
Section IV. The elements framing business opportunities and 
77
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Simple Rules strategic options are derived and evaluated in 
Section V. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section VI. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
For the prominent spectrum-sharing concepts currently 
under research, particularly the CBRS, there is not much 
prior work available regarding their business model or 
strategic analysis. An initial evaluation of the general 
spectrum-sharing concept from the business modeling point 
of view can be found in [8] and the LSA focused analysis 
from [9][10]. The feasibility and attractiveness of the LSA 
and the CBRS spectrum sharing concepts were analyzed in 
[11]. Furthermore, key stakeholders’ capability to deal with 
combined internal and external resources and capabilities in 
doing business utilizing the CBRS concept was analyzed in 
[12] based on the Dynamic Capability strategic management 
framework. That work is extended by focusing on the 
dynamic CBRS sharing concept, and analyzing the MNO 
business opportunities using the co-opetitive (co-operation 
and competition) business opportunity framework and the 
Simple Rules strategic framework [13]. 
III. 
CITIZENS BROADBAND RADIO SERVICE SPECTRUM 
SHARING FRAMEWORK 
The key policy messages of the PCAST report were 
further strengthened in 2013 with 
the Presidential 
Memorandum [14] stating “…we must make available even 
more spectrum and create new avenues for wireless 
innovation. One means of doing so is by allowing and 
encouraging shared access to spectrum that is currently 
allocated exclusively for Federal use. Where technically and 
economically feasible, sharing can and should be used to 
enhance efficiency among all users and expedite commercial 
access to additional spectrum bands, subject to adequate 
interference protection for Federal users, we should also 
seek to eliminate restrictions on commercial carriers' ability 
to negotiate sharing arrangements with agencies. To further 
these efforts, while still safeguarding protected incumbent 
systems that are vital to Federal interests and economic 
growth, this memorandum directs agencies and offices to 
take a number of additional actions to accelerate shared 
access to spectrum.” 
Followed by intense discussion and consultation with the 
industry the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) 
released Report and Order and Second Further Notice of 
Proposed Rulemaking to establish new rules for shared use 
of the 3550-3650 MHz band in April 2015 [7]. The FCC sees 
the opening of the 3.5 GHz Band as “a new chapter in the 
history of the administration of one of our nation’s most 
precious resources—the electromagnetic radio spectrum.” 
The framework defines a contiguous 150 MHz block at 
3550-3700 MHz for MBB that the FCC calls Citizens 
Broadband Radio Service. The 3550-3650 MHz spectrum is 
currently allocated for use by the US Department of Defense 
(DoD) radar systems and Fixed Satellite Services (FSS), 
while the 3650-3700 MHz spectrum incumbents are the FSS 
and the grandfathered commercial wireless broadband 
services. 
The FCC prefigures CBRS as an “innovation band”, 
where they can assign spectrum to commercial MBB 
systems like the 3rd Generation Partnership Program (3GPP) 
Long Term Evolution (LTE) on a shared basis with 
incumbent radar and FSS systems and promote a diversity of 
Heterogonous Network (HetNet) technologies, particularly 
small cells. The sharing framework consists of three tiers: 
Incumbent Access (IA), Priority Access (PA) and General 
Authorized Access (GAA), as shown in the Fig. 1. 
 
Incumbent
Access (IA)
Priority Access (PA)
General Authorized Access 
(GAA)
Incumbent
Access (IA)
General Authorized 
Access (GAA)
3550-3650 MHz
3650-3700 MHz
Federal naval and
Ground-based radars,
FSS earth stations
Federal ground based
Radars and
Grandfathered FSS
 
 
Figure 1.  The US CBRS 3-tiered authorization framework with the FCC’s 
spectrum access models for 3550-3650MHz and 3650-3700MHz spectrum 
segments. 
The PA users will obtain a FCC PA license (PAL) to 
operate up to 70 MHz of the 3550-3650 MHz spectrum 
segment, and are protected from harmful interference from 
the GAA operations. The PA layer covers critical access 
users like hospitals, utilities and governmental users and 
non-critical users, e.g., MNOs. PA users receive short term 
priority 
authorization 
to 
operate 
within 
designated 
geographic areas with the PALs such as 3 year 10 MHz 
unpaired channel in a single census track, awarded with 
competitive bidding. During the first application window 
only, an applicant may apply for up to two consecutive three-
year terms for any given PAL. Licenses will be permitted to 
hold no more than four PALs in one census tract at one time. 
This will ensure the availability of PAL spectrum to at least 
two licensed users in the geographic areas of highest 
demand. PALs are assigned specific frequencies within their 
service area, and at the end of its term, a PAL will 
automatically terminate, and may not be renewed.  
The third GAA tier will operate under a licensed-by-rule 
framework and will be allowed throughout the 150 MHz 
band without any interference protection from other CBRS 
users. This framework aims to facilitate the rapid 
deployment of compliant small cell devices, while 
minimizing administrative costs and burdens on the public, 
licensees, and the FCC. GAA users may use only certified, 
the FCC approved CBRS devices, and must register with a 
SAS with information required by the rules, e.g., operator 
identity (ID), device identification, and geo-location 
information. 
In the CBRS functional architecture [15] depicted in the 
Fig. 2, CBRS Devices (CBSDs), which are fixed stations, or 
78
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

networks of such stations will be assigned spectrum 
dynamically by the FCC selected SAS, which could be 
multiple. In case of a CBSD is a managed network as in the 
typical case of MNOs, CBSD network includes a domain 
proxy (DP) and a network management functionality as 
shown in the Fig. 3. A DP’s function is to accept a set of one 
or more available channels and select channels for use by 
specific CBSDs, or alternatively pass the available channels 
to the operators Operation Administration and Maintenance 
(OAM) Network Management System (NMS) for CBSD 
channel selection. In practical implementation, OAM NMS 
may be co-located with the DP. The DP back reports selected 
channels to a SAS optionally received via a NMS, and 
receives confirmation of channel assignment from a SAS. 
 
 
Figure 2.  The CBRS functional architecture. 
Furthermore, the DP performs bidirectional bulk CBSD 
registration and directive processing through operator NMS 
if present. Additional bidirectional information processing 
and routing function may include, e.g., interference 
reporting. 
  
Figure 3.  The Domain Proxy in the CBRS functional architecture. 
To summarize, the DP could be a pure bidirectional 
information processing and routing engine, or a more 
intelligent mediation function, e.g., combining the small cells 
of a mall or a sports arena to a virtual CBSD entity that 
covers the complete mall or sports arena. The latter option 
allows flexible self-control and interference optimizations in 
such a network. End user devices (EUD), e.g., handsets are 
not considered as CBSDs. 
The SAS controls the interference environment and 
enforces exclusion zones to protect higher priority users, as 
well as takes care of registration, authentication and 
identification of user information. As the IA users have 
primary spectrum rights at all times and in all areas over PA 
and GAA, all the CBRS users must be capable of operating 
across the entire 3.5 GHz band, and discontinuing operation 
or changing frequencies at the direction of the SAS to protect 
the IA. Automated channel assignment by a SAS will simply 
involve instructions to these users to use a specific channel, 
at a specific place and time, within 3550-3700MHz. The 
SAS would obtain the FCC information, e.g., about 
registered or licensed commercial users, exclusion zone areas 
requiring sensing from the FCC database. Informing 
incumbent architecture option allows the federal IA to inform 
the SAS ahead of plans to use the spectrum in some area, 
e.g., related to planed use of the spectrum. The SAS could be 
administrated by a third party or a mobile operator as an 
operator SAS. By operating own operator SAS, MNOs may 
better control their business operation critical information 
flow and sharing between their MBB network and the third 
party administrated SAS. However, all the SAS systems 
should be FCC certified and meet all the SAS requirements 
set forth by the FCC and the WINN Forum specifications. 
It will be mandatory for all the CBRS users to protect the 
IA users in the band. Based on nature and critical 
requirements of the federal incumbent the FCC adopted rules 
to require Environmental Sensing Capabilities (ESCs) to 
detect federal spectrum use in and adjacent to the 3.5 GHz 
the band. The federal IA user protection will be adopted in 
two phases. In the first phase, a large portion of the country 
outside the static exclusion zones will be available after SAS 
is commercially available and FCC approved. At the second 
phase, the rest of the country, including major coastal areas, 
will become available as exclusion zones will be converted 
to protection zones through the ESC system detecting federal 
incumbent use. The SAS receives input from ESCs, and if 
needed, could order commercial tier users to vacate a 
spectrum resource in frequency, location, or time, which 
when in proximity to federal incumbent presents a risk of 
harmful interference.  
Prospective ESC operators must have their systems 
approved through the same process for SASs and SAS 
administrators. An ESC consists of one or more 
commercially operated networks of device-based or 
infrastructure-based sensors that would be used to detect 
signals from federal radar systems in the vicinity of the 
exclusion zones. Within 300 seconds after the ESC 
communication of a detected federal system signal, the SAS 
must confirm either suspension or relocation of operations to 
another unoccupied frequency. 
The opportunistic GAA with no interference protection 
from other CBRS users is planned to provide a low-cost 
entry point into the CBRS band for a wide array of users and 
SAS 1
FCC 
Databases
Incumbent 
Detection 
(ESC)
SAS-SAS Interface
SAS 2
SAS-User Interface
CBSD
4
CBSD
3
CBSD
2
CBSD
1
Network Management 
System (NMS) (opt)
CBSD 
Sensing(opt)
Informing
Incumbent
Domain 
Proxy
EUD
EUD
EUD
79
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

services first while PAL system operations have to wait 
auction process estimated to start after the US 600 MHz 
incentive auctions in 2016 -2017. For the meanwhile, the 
FCC has encouraged multi-stakeholder groups to consider 
various issues raised by the rules. The Wireless Innovation 
Forum (WINNF) Spectrum Sharing Committee (SSC) [16] 
with representatives from the MBB, Wireless broadband, 
Internet, Internet of Things (IoT) / machine to machine 
(m2m) and defense ecosystems has started standardization 
work on interfaces between a MBB system and a SAS work 
targeted to allow sharing of the CBRS till end of the year 
2016. 
The US Government has initially identified an additional 
2 GHz of spectrum below 6 GHz owned by the DoD and 
other users for future shared commercial use conditionally if 
the spectrum sharing at 3.5 GHz proves successful. This 
paves way to make licensed spectrum sharing a third 
mainstream way of licensing spectrum to commercial users 
complementing 
traditional 
exclusive 
licensing 
and 
unlicensed spectrum access. The FCC has vision to repeat 
Wi-Fi success through lowering the entry barrier QoS 
spectrum for new entrants and verticals, e.g., enterprise, 
utilities, healthcare, public safety, smart cities, etc. 
IV. 
BUSINESS OPPORTUNITY BASED SIMPLE RULES 
STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK 
In this section, we introduce business and strategy 
frameworks used in analyzing the business opportunities 
and strategic options for a MNO utilizing CBRS spectrum. 
A. Co-opetitive Business Opportuntiy Framework 
An entrepreneurial opportunity can be defined as the 
possibility to serve customers better and differently [17] 
framed by enablers, limiting factors, and challenges caused 
by the business context. Fig. 4 below depicts the framework 
used in this paper to develop and frame the business 
opportunities for MNOs. 
 
Value
Co-capture
Value
Co-creation
Value
Co-opetition
Enablers
CBRS 
business 
opportunity
 
 
Figure 4.  The Co-opetitive business opportunity framework. 
In the CBRS context, business opportunities are made to 
create and deliver value for the stakeholders, value that is co-
created among various actors from MBB, wireless and 
incumbent ecosystems as a joint effort. An equally important 
aspect is the ability of the stakeholders to capture value, i.e., 
obtain profits [18], which in the context of this study can be 
called value co-capture. Furthermore, value co-creation can 
be seen as a cooperative and the parallel value co-capture as 
a competitive process [19]. The third term co-opetition 
illustrates the increased system complexity of the CBRS 
business environment, where companies simultaneously 
compete and cooperate with each other not only over 
spectrum resources but also over customers.  
 
B. Business Model Typology 
 
A coherent 4C typology was created to classify Internet 
era business models, and to make the business model 
analysis easier and more structured [20]. The typology 
introduces four prototypical models, each with varying 
value propositions and revenue models [20]: 
 
1) Commerce enables low transaction costs for buyers 
and sellers of goods and services; Direct sales revenues and 
indirect streams as commissions, 
2) Context provides structure and navigation for Internet 
user to increase transparency and reduce complexity 
typically 
based 
on 
transaction 
independent 
online 
advertisement revenues, 
3) Content delivers various types of consumer centered, 
personalized content; Mainly indirect revenue streams like 
online advertisement, premium content increasingly with 
subscription or usage pricing, and 
4) Connection provides network infrastructure and 
related services that enable exchange of information and 
users’ participation having both the direct and indirect 
revenue stream models. 
 
Different stakeholders of the ecosystem can implement 
these business models alone or combined as a hybrid, which 
is an important aspect in relation to sharing. The business 
potential of the whole ecosystem depends on the ecosystem 
players’ 
synergies 
when 
providing 
their 
services. 
Furthermore, the 4C typology can be interpreted as “layers” 
where a “lower” layer business models are required as 
enabler and value levers for higher layers to exist as 
depicted in Fig. 5 in the analysis Section V.  
C. Simple Rules Strategic Framework 
Business literature provides us with numerous examples 
of business strategy approaches and strategic elements 
applied. Traditional strategic logic based on position focuses 
on answering the question: where should we be through 
identifying an attractive market segment and sustainable 
position and then establishing, strengthening and defending 
it, e.g., [21]. In structured businesses, another widely used 
approach is built around leveraging core competences and 
resources, i.e., What to achieve sustained long-term market 
dominance, e.g., [22]. 
In rapidly changing complex markets, like today’s 
wireless communications, traditional approaches have faced 
several limitations: they do not build around the business 
80
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

opportunity, have only weak linkages to the key business 
processes, depict resources rather than activities, and lack 
needed flexibility to seize fast changing opportunities. In this 
paper, the strategic Simple Rules approach presented in [13] 
was adopted, that partly helps to answer to the concerns 
discussed above. 
In emerging and dynamic business environments, the 
novel Simple Rules approach sees business strategies as built 
around the opportunity and the key processes needed to seize 
them flexibly and timely. The strategic approach provides 
practical guidelines within, which opportunities could be 
pursued with selected key processes. The proposed 
framework consists of five categories: 
 
1) How-to rules for conducting business in an unique, 
differentiating way, 
2) Boundary rules for defining the boundaries of the 
business opportunities of the stakeholders, 
3) Priority rules that help to identify and rank the 
criteria for opportunity decision making, 
4) Timing rules that help in synchronizing, coordinating 
and pacing emerging opportunities, and 
5) Exit rules that help in identifying basis for exit or 
selecting initiatives to be stopped. 
V. 
ANALYSIS OF THE STRATEGIC OPPORTUNITIES 
The business opportunities and strategic choices as 
Simple Rules created and their analysis are summarized in 
this section. 
A. Elements Framing Business Opportunities 
In the analysis for the business opportunity elements of 
the CBRS, five key ecosystem roles were identified: the 
NRA, federal incumbent, MNOs, SAS administrator, 
infrastructure vendors and device/chip manufactures. In the 
systemic framework change like the CBRS, all the 
stakeholders play a vital role in adopting of the novel CBRS 
concept and spectrum sharing in general. In addition, when 
developing and analyzing the opportunity frame authors 
argue that three domains; regulation, business, and 
technology, affecting spectrum sharing concept should 
proceed in tandem. Enabling, limiting and challenging 
elements framing the business opportunities for a MNO are 
next discussed and summarized in Table I. 
Business and technology elements can be identified as 
enablers for value co-creation. Fast growing demand and 
lack of exclusive spectrum combined with the drastic 
changes in the consumption habits will urge the adoption of 
novel more flexible and efficient spectrum management 
concepts. Framework radically unbundles investment in 
spectrum, network infrastructure and services, and enables 
novel services and business models. Furthermore, different 
spectrum sharing schemes are high in regulators agenda with 
aims to lower the entry barrier to spectrum for new 
alternative types of operators, which could consider entering 
the wireless broadband business. Utilization of the LTE 
ecosystem scale and harmonization will reduce risk related 
technology maturity, and provide tools to seamlessly 
integrate additional spectrum capacity to MNOs HetNet, e.g., 
through modern techniques like Carrier Aggregation (CA) 
[23], LTE Unlicensed (LTE-U/LAA) [24] or MulteFire [25], 
and Self Organizing Network (SON) load balancing and 
traffic steering [26]. 
Furthermore, as content is increasingly over-the-top 
(OTT) video and multimedia, Mobile Edge Computing 
(MEC) platform can rapidly process content at the very edge 
of the mobile network, delivering an Quality of Experience 
(QoE) that is ultra-responsive as latency is significantly 
reduced. The MEC will take a full advantage of the localized 
shared spectrum resources and telco cloud, enabling new 
possibilities to serve the operator’s radio network and to co-
exist with other virtualized network functions [27]. Big data 
analytics capabilities will play a major role in coping with 
the SAS dynamic requirements and enabling low transaction 
costs, and in the future enabling spectrum aggregator and 
broker models. 
Regarding limiting factors, sound, sustainable and 
harmonized regulatory environment can be the limiter that 
needs to be addressed before a MNO can co-create and co-
capture value from it with ecosystem partners. The limited 
spectrum availability in frequency, time or location with 
potential restriction and uncertainties may negatively 
influence MNOs outlook on shared use and the spectrum 
valuation. A specific technology item to be considered is the 
degree of business (MNOs) and mission (DoD) critical 
information needed to share and resulting need for the ESC 
system. In addition to MNO opportunities, it is essential to 
consider reciprocal incentives for the current federal 
spectrum holders to further transition to CBRS.  
Policy risk and uncertainty are the main elements of the 
co-opetitive challenges in the competitive domain. MNOs 
traditionally used to operate with exclusive spectrum rights 
framework will see strategic risks with moving towards 
interference-protected rights only provided by the CBRS. 
Fragmented national and global market structure deprives 
economies of scale and scope, raising costs and hampering 
innovation in the ecosystem. Furthermore, introduction of 
sharing models may influence the MNOs current exclusive 
spectrum licensing model and it is availability in the future. 
The regulatory approach, and in particular the 3-tier concept 
could 
unbundle 
investment 
in 
spectrum, 
network 
infrastructure and services. Faster access to spectrum with 
lower initial investment (annuity payments for spectrum 
rights) enables local ‘pro-competitive’ deployments and 
further expands sharing mechanism for pooling spectrum and 
infra resources between operators. Furthermore, the IoT and 
5G era also opens up opportunities for new competition, 
especially in the traffic hotspots with specific venues with 
very specific interest to be fulfilled, e.g.,  hospitals, sporting 
events, shopping malls, universities will attract new players. 
At the same time, the complexity of the CBRS 
framework and the SAS might influence the value of the 
spectrum and the required time of recovering the network 
investments. On the competence domain, MNOs need to pay 
attention to dynamic capabilities needed to deploy, manage 
and optimize multilayered HetNets under sharing conditions. 
81
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE I.  
ELEMENTS FRAMING BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES 
 
Business opportunity framing elements 
Enablers 
 Lack of exclusive spectrum triggers new spectrum access approaches 
 Consumers MBB consumption habits are changing towards asymmetric multi-device usage 
 Shared spectrum allocation improves overall spectrum use efficiency 
 Regulators considering shared spectrum framework in Europe and the US 
 Unbundles investment in spectrum, network infrastructure and services 
 Additional lower cost capacity to cope with asymmetric traffic and improve performance 
 Better QoS spectrum may increase dense urban area business 
 Additional GAA capacity for offloading and local services 
 May lower entry barriers for challenger MNOs and new alternative type of operators 
 Harmonized LTE technology base leverage HetNet asset optimization and offers scale 
 Mobile Edge Computing improves QoS and QoE of localized services 
 Big data and analytics capabilities with Internet domain 
Limiters 
 Limited spectrum availability and predictability limit MNO business opportunities 
 Need for global and national regulation outside of the US may slow down entry - 
Harmonization is a precondition to scale and enable potential benefit fully. 
 Real incentives for the federal incumbents unclear or missing 
 Federal incumbent special requirements in particular related to security and need for sensing  
 Regulatory framework restrictions may reduce the economic value 
 Degree of information sharing of business critical (MNOs) and secret information (Federal 
incumbent) and needed ESC system 
 Standardization of SAS functionalities for 3GPP ecosystem and technologies needed 
Challenges 
 Uncertainty and risks related to regulation in timing, term, licenses and flexibility creates 
exposure and risk for a MNO to proceed with the investment. 
 Impact on exclusive spectrum licensing model and availability in the future  
 Attractive and dynamic spectrum market with potentially lower transaction costs. 
 May increase and change competition. New operator types, and from other business domains. 
 Increased technical and operational complexity (SAS) with related capital and operational 
costs 
 New competencies and capabilities needed for network management and optimization 
 Timely availability of full band base stations and terminals and potential impact on cost and 
complexity 
82
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Traditional MNOs support for the 3.5GHz spectrum in 
their networks is paramount to encourage chip and device 
manufacturers to support the whole 3.5GHz band 
introduction with competitive terminals. Attractive and 
dynamic spectrum market with potentially lower transaction 
costs may increase and change competition, e.g., through 
introducing new and alternative operator types locally and 
from other business domains. On the other hand, 
introduction alternative local operators offer co-opetitive 
collaboration opportunities for a MNO, e.g., through sharing 
infrastructure and or network capacity. 
B. Business Opportunities 
In this section, business opportunities are discussed based 
on their key framing elements from Sub-section A, and 
summarized utilizing the 4C business model typology. 
There is a need to fundamentally design future spectrum 
sharing enabled and complemented networks not just to 
service new use-cases, but also enable new business models. 
The industry is moving from today’s “bit pipe” connectivity 
business models for MBB monetizing connectivity and 3rd 
party content (like video) towards “smart pipes” capturing 
value from digital content & information from the cloud and 
consider offering connectivity, in some cases free-of change. 
This will turn mobile broadband business from competitive 
value creation and capture thinking toward co-opetitive 
sharing economy, multitude of ecosystems to work with. 
In order to realize the business potential of the novel 
dynamically shared spectrum resources, MNOs have 
occasion to simultaneously co-create and co-capture value 
with 
ecosystem 
players 
in 
a co-opetitive 
business 
environment where co-operation (spectrum, infrastructure 
assets) and competition (customers & services) exist parallel 
to each other. MNOs are in unique position to leverage 
additional multi-tiered capacity the CBRS concept offers. 
Faster access to QoS licensed small cell optimized spectrum 
without mandatory coverage obligations will help them to 
timely cope with booming asymmetric data needs more 
locally when and where needed. Additional scalable and 
flexible spectrum resource leveraged with LTE technology 
enablers will enable them to better retain and grow existing 
customer base with changing demand and consumer habits. 
MNOs business models and opportunities are powered 
by premium network performance, information brokering 
and network as a service. The premium performance level of 
networks enables novel broadband services such as High 
Definition (HD) video and Virtual Reality (VR)/Augmented 
Reality (AR) services in the home, on the move, and for the 
business world. These Premium Connectivity business 
models provide new opportunities by guaranteed high 
service levels not only with end users, but also with content 
and other service providers. As content is increasingly OTT 
video and multimedia, Mobile Edge Computing capabilities 
can rapidly process content at the very edge of the mobile 
network, delivering an experience that is highly responsive 
as latency is significantly reduced. Premium connectivity 
enables partner-based propositions and allows for faster 
development and launch of these partner services at the 
benefit of all. 
The increasing number of control and transaction data 
produced by the network can be particularly leveraged in 
new vertical segments. The innovation possible in the IoT 
and 5G use cases involves bringing massive internal and 
external data sets together to uncover new insights to add 
value in new sharing economy based services. MNOs with 
needed big data and analytics dynamic capabilities will be 
optimally positioned to broker information with different 
business domains such as providers of augmented reality 
services, smart cities, factories, logistics, health, and utilities. 
Dedicated virtual sub-networks, the network slices, can 
be modelled as Network as Service (NaaS), which provide 
exactly the functionality needed for different verticals and 
industries with their diverse use cases. E.g., use case of 
consumer health sensors is completely different to ultra-high 
quality video delivery. On-demand, as-a-service business 
models play essential role in the timely sharing economy 
concept, defined as “the value in taking the underutilized 
assets and making them accessible online to a community, 
leading to a reduced need for ownership of those assets 
[28].” 
In the NaaS concept, all elements of the network from 
radio access, core network and Operations Support System 
(OSS) to security and analytics can be virtualized through 
Network Function Virtualization (NFV), and sliced out as 
one integrated service. This enables an operator to create an 
instance of an entire network virtually relying on whatever 
underlying infrastructure is available for the defined 
geography. With the power of programmability in the 
Software Defined Networking (SDN) of the networks, it 
should be further possible to customize such a ‘network 
instance’ 
for 
vertical 
Anything-as-a-Service 
(XaaS) 
solutions, e.g., for logistics, automotive, healthcare, utilities, 
or retail. 
In Fig. 5, discussed business opportunities are mapped 
into the 4C Internet business typology. Currently, the main 
source of revenue for MNOs drives from subscriber retail 
markets based on the connectivity. Through leveraging 
additional flexible capacity, MNOs are in good position to 
expand their business model to cover wholesale, where one 
party gets spectrum, build, owns and operates the LTE 
access network and leases bandwidth to virtual operators, 
subject to QoS controlled by dynamic Service Level 
Agreements (SLAs). Utilizing discussed NFV and SDN 
technologies, the model could be further developed to 
provide connectivity as a Service to new alternative 
operators. Edge computing and data monetization enables 
MNOs to enter higher layer content and context models in 
collaboration with new customer from verticals and other 
industries with new growth opportunities. 
 
83
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 5.  The MNO business opportunties mapped into 4C business 
model typology. 
C. Simple Rules 
In this Sub-section strategic rules applying the Simple 
Rules strategy approach from [13] for MNOs deploying the 
CBRS were created and analyzed for the business 
opportunities identified and discussed in the Sub-section B. 
Created Simple Rules are summarized in Table II. 
MNOs’ How-to rules for conducting business in a unique 
and differentiating way continues to be based on the 
dominant market position and lock-ins through Customer 
data and Experience Management (CEM). This could be 
reached by gaining access, if possible, to all available 
exclusive spectrum, and by combining existing and new 
shared CBRS spectrum assets to deliver premium 
connectivity service in QoS and QoE. Sharing terms and 
conditions, particularly at the PAL layer, such as term, 
predictability, certainty and geography limitations, impair the 
economic benefits of shared spectrum. Becoming a MEC and 
NaaS platform provider for new customer segments could 
enhance utilization of the dominant market position. MNOs 
could utilize their big data platforms, analytic skills and 
CEM capabilities to monetize their unique subscriber data 
for other industries, without jeopardizing the trust of their 
customers. Brokering telco data and co-creating value by 
combining it with vertical data will enable MNOs to capture 
value from context driven business models.  
To strengthen market boundaries of the business 
opportunities, established MNOs could leverage their 
existing infrastructure investments in radio, core, OSS, as 
well as in the fixed network assets. Furthermore, the 3GPP 
evolution offers scale and harmonization in investing in and 
the build-up of spectrum sharing based businesses. MNOs 
could also try to turn alternative and new local micro 
operators into co-opetitive partners thru virtualization and 
XaaS. As the MBB spectrum management in general and 
novel shared spectrum initiatives in particular are highly 
dependent on spectrum policy and regulatory actions, it is 
essential to play active role in regulation and standardization, 
and to have direct contact with the national regulator. E.g., in 
order to protect own entry to new local area collaborative 
business opportunities, and to keep entry barrier for new 
non-MNO entrants, MNOs could try delay the introduction 
of neutral host enabling technologies like MulteFire. As 
MulteFire could utilize license by rule GAA spectrum, cable 
companies, Internet Service Providers (ISPs), small 
businesses, enterprises, venue owners and building owners, 
can readily deploy it. For new entrants, it offers the chance to 
own and control their own ‘standalone’ LTE network. It also 
offers a number of benefits, including outdoor coverage, 
wide coverage and improved performance and safety of data 
and voice applications.  
Priority rules help a MNO to identify and rank emerging 
opportunity. For MNOs, key decision priority is to retain 
control over the spectrum, and prefer CR network techniques 
and solution that keep control in the operator domain. 
Having spectrum control integrated with the OSS NMS 
enables a MNO to utilize its advanced HetNet SON features, 
and to protect operation critical network information. 
Spectrum sharing could start first with other domains like 
federal users in the case of the CBRS. Furthermore, from the 
regulatory perspectives, it is central to keep sharing 
voluntary and binary with the incumbent. At the early stages 
of spectrum sharing businesses, a MNO will appreciate 
premium Average Revenue Per User (ARPU) services over 
operational efficiency to utilize their customer base. In the 
second phase, MNOs could explore value co-capture 
opportunities with verticals and other industry domains. 
Synchronization, coordination and timing of emerging 
opportunities is the fourth simple rule category. In-house 
HetNet intersystem spectrum sharing could be implemented 
first in order to develop needed dynamic capabilities to 
optimize utilization of spectrum resources across layers. In 
order to leverage existing business models, operators should 
prioritize the QoS guaranteed and predictable PAL sharing 
opportunities first. Offering could then be complement with 
offloading and local sharing at the GAA layers with better 
QoS compared traditional Wi-Fi offloading. Thirdly, with 
full set of spectrum assets a MNO could explore 
opportunities with local alternative operators and verticals 
utilizing wholesale, XaaS, MEC and data brokering 
platforms. 
Finally, Exit rules help in identifying basis for exit, or 
initiatives to be stopped. Regardless of the technology 
enablers or business models utilized in spectrum sharing, 
MNOs should never give up spectrum, even if not fully 
utilized. MNOs should try to avoid co-primary sharing 
concepts that introduce sharing between MNOs, which may 
have negative impact on their competitive positioning, and 
the availability of the exclusive spectrum in the future.  In 
the CBRS FCC regulation [7], the term unused is important 
as according to FCC rules GAA users may utilize unused 
PAL spectrum if unused. Furthermore, exclusive spectrum 
will remain first priority having important strategic value in 
keeping the entry barrier for new entrant high and protecting 
high investments in spectrum and infrastructure. 
Connection
Commerce
Context
Content
Existing 
customers
New 
customers
Premium 
Connection
Network
as a Service
Data 
Brokering
Mobile Edge
Computing
84
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE II.  
SUMMARY OF DEVELOPED SIMPLE RULES 
Opportunities 
How to rules 
Boundary rules 
Priority rules 
Timing rules 
Exit rules 
Premium connectivity 
service to existing 
customer base with 
growing demand 
 
Premium connectivity 
with extra capacity 
and mobile edge 
computing 
 
Wholesale and NaaS 
offering to focused 
market demand based 
on access to local 
lower-cost spectrum 
 
Telco data 
monetization with 
verticals locally 
Invest to maintain 
dominant market 
position 
Gain access to all 
exclusive spectrum 
available 
Strengthen existing 
customer lock-in  
Utilize shared CBRS 
spectrum assets to 
deliver premium and 
localized services 
Become edge 
computing and XaaS 
platform provider for 
new customer 
segments 
Broker telco data to 
enter verticals with 
context 
Leverage existing 
infrastructure 
Utilize scale and 
harmonization of 
3GPP evolution 
Active lobbying and 
contribution to 
regulation 
Delay the introduction 
of neutral host 
technologies to keep 
entry barrier 
Turn alternative 
operators to co-
opetitive partners thru 
virtualization and 
XaaS. 
Maintain control over 
spectrum 
Protect operation 
critical network 
information 
Prioritize sharing with 
other domains  
Keep sharing 
voluntary and binary 
with the incumbent 
Appreciate premium 
ARPU services 
Actively look value 
capture opportunities 
in verticals and other 
industry domains 
Base sharing with 
others on in-house 
HetNet dynamic 
capabilities (inter-
system sharing and 
optimization first) 
QoS guaranteed and 
predictable PAL 
sharing 
Offloading and local 
sharing at GAA layers 
Explore opportunities 
with local alternative 
operators 
Exclusive spectrum is 
first priority 
Avoid co-primary 
sharing concepts 
between MNOs 
Protect critical 
operational network 
data  
Monetize customer 
and telco data 
 
 
In the MNO strategic decision making, strategic value 
may in many case overrule technology based avoided cost 
engineering value and business driven market surplus value. 
Protection of the critical operational network data remains 
important source of competitive advantage. Entering co-
opetitive business with other industries with content and 
context based business models; customer and telco data will 
become critical assets, and create competitive advantage 
when optimally combined with the use case specific vertical 
data, or Internet company’s customer data assets 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper discussed the transformative role of the novel 
Citizen Broadband Radio Service framework in the future 
mobile broadband networks as an endeavor to meet the 
growing 
traffic 
demand 
and 
changing 
consumption 
characteristics of the customers while paving the way to 
make licensed spectrum sharing a third mainstream way of 
licensing spectrum to commercial users complementing 
traditional exclusive licensing and unlicensed spectrum 
access. We utilized co-opetitive business opportunity 
framework for understanding mobile network operator’s 
enablers and opportunities and how they are framed from 
policy, technology, and business perspectives, in the future 
CBRS shared spectrum networks. Opportunity analysis was 
used in creating and discussing strategic options as simple 
rules. 
We argue that policy and regulation will be on the one 
hand the key enablers in the path toward shared spectrum 
access, and on the other hand will play key role in removing 
limiting and challenging elements critical in the first steps of 
that path. In particular, the sharing framework for the priority 
access licenses should be attractive and feasible to encourage 
mobile broadband industry to invest, which could lower the 
barrier for change, and furthermore create economies of 
scale across tiers and for the whole ecosystem.  
More flexible and scalable use of the spectrum aims to 
increase the efficiency of spectrum use in delivering fast 
growing and converging mobile broadband, media and 
Internet content to meet changing consumer needs. The 
proposed opportunities and related simple rules enable 
mobile network operators to retain existing customers, 
acquire new customers and strengthen overall market 
position 
by 
offering 
improved 
personalized 
mobile 
broadband data services timely. Furthermore, through 
unbundling investment in spectrum, network infrastructure 
and services co-operative business opportunities may open 
with vertical segments, new alternative operator types and 
the Internet domain. 
Mobile operators are optimally positioned towards these 
business opportunities in parallel with their traditional 
business model leveraging technology enablers from mobile 
broadband 3GPP LTE evolution and big data analytics while 
waiting for the more optimized cognitive 5G solutions. 
This paper serves as a starting point for analyzing the 
business enablers, opportunities and business environment 
around the CBRS. We saw that the concept of co-opetition 
could be used to characterize the business environment 
regarding spectrum sharing. The strategic choices as simple 
rules provides a dynamic framework for MNOs for exploring 
and exploiting emerging opportunities, developing dynamic 
capabilities to respond transforming environment, and 
building business models to leverage new shared spectrum 
access approaches. However, future work is needed to 
expand research to cover also other key stakeholders, in 
particular alternative new local operators, and to dwell 
85
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

deeper into the framework of value co-creation, co-capture 
and co-opetition for identifying MNOs’ business models and 
ecosystem relations in the new CBRS concept and in the 
third opportunistic GAA layer in particular. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work is supported by Tekes – the Finnish Funding 
Agency for Technology and Innovation. The author would 
like to acknowledge CORE++ project consortium: VTT 
Technical Research Centre of Finland, University of Oulu, 
Centria University of Applied Sciences, Turku University of 
Applied Sciences, Nokia, PehuTec, Bittium, Anite, Finnish 
Defence Forces and Finnish Communications Regulatory 
Authority. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Yrjölä, “Citizens Broadband Radio Service Spectrum 
Sharing Framework - A Path to New Business Opportunity 
for Mobile Network Operators?,” In Proc. The Sixth 
International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio 
(COCORA), Lisbon, 2016. 
[2] The White House: Realizing the Full Potential of 
Government-Held Spectrum to Spur Economic Growth. 
President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology 
(PCAST) Report, 2012. 
[3] Cisco white paper: Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global 
Mobile Data Traffic Forecast Update, 2014–2019. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/service-
provider/visual-networking-index-vni/white_paper_c11-
520862.html 2016.11.04 
[4] FCC: 
White 
Spaces. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
http://www.fcc.gov/topic/white-space 2016.11.04. 
[5] Ofcom: TV White Spaces Pilot. [Online]. Available from:  
http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/spectrum/tv-white-
spaces/white-spaces-pilot/ 2016.11.04 
[6] ECC: Licensed Shared Access (LSA). ECC Report 205, 2014. 
[7] FCC: Report and Order and second FNPRM to advance 
availability of 3550-3700 MHz band for wireless broadband, 
2015. 
[8] J. Chapin and W. Lehr, “Cognitive radios for dynamic 
spectrum access – The path to market success for dynamic 
spectrum access technology,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 45, 
no. 5, 2007, pp. 96-103.  
[9] M. Matinmikko et al., “Business benefits of Licensed Shared 
Access (LSA) for key stakeholders,” In O. Holland, H. 
Bogucka & A. Medeisis (eds.) Opportunistic Spectrum 
Sharing and White Space Access: The Practical Reality. John 
Wiley & Sons, 2015. 
[10] P. Ahokangas, M. Matinmikko, S. Yrjölä, H. Okkonen, and T. 
Casey, “"Simple rules" for mobile network operators' strategic 
choices in future cognitive spectrum sharing networks,” IEEE 
Wireless Communications, vol.20, no.2, 2013, pp. 20-26. 
[11] S. Yrjölä, P. Ahokangas, and M. Matinmikko, ”Evaluation of 
recent spectrum sharing concepts from business model 
scalability point of view,” in Proc. IEEE DySPAN, 
Stockholm, 2015, pp. 241-250. 
[12] S. Yrjölä, M. Matinmikko, M. Mustonen, and P. Ahokangas, 
”Analysis Of Dynamic Capabilities In The Citizens 
Broadband Radio Service,” in Proc. Wireless Innovation 
Forum Conference on Wireless Communication Technologies 
and Software Defined Radio (WInnComm ‘16), Reston, 2015. 
[13] K.M. Eisenhardt, D.M. Sull, “Strategy as simple rules,” 
Harvard Business Review, vol. 79, no. 1, 2001, pp. 107-116. 
[14] The White House: Expanding America’s Leadership in 
Wireless Innovation. Presidential Memorandum, 2013. 
[15] The WINNF Spectrum Sharing Committee, "SAS Functional 
Architecture," 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://groups.winnforum.org/d/do/8512 2016.11.04 
[16] The WINNF Spectrum Sharing Committee. [Online]. 
Available from: http://www.wirelessinnovation.org/spectrum-
sharing-committee 2016.11.04. 
[17] D. Hansen, R. Shrader, and J. Monllor, “Defragmenting 
Definitions of Entrepreneurial Opportunity, Journal of Small 
Business Mgmnt,” vol 49, no. 2, 2011, pp. 283-304. 
[18] J. West, “Value Capture and Value Networks in open source 
vendor strategies,” In: Proc. of the 40th Annual Hawasection 
International Conference on System Sciences, 2007. 
[19] A. Brandenburger and B. Nalebuff, “Co-opetition,” New 
York: Doubleday, 1998. 
[20] B. Wirtz, O. Schilke, and S. Ullrich, “Strategic development 
of business models – implications of the web 2.0 for creating 
value on the Internet,” Long Range Planning, Vol. 43, 2010, 
pp.272–290. 
[21] M. Porter, “The Five Competitive Forces That Shape 
Strategy,” Harvard business Review, 2008. 
[22] C.K. Prahalad and G. Hamel, “The core competence of the 
corporation,” Harvard Business Review, 68(3), 1990, pp. 79–
91. 
[23] 3GPP: Technical report TR 36.808: Evolved Universal 
Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); Carrier Aggregation; 
Base Station (BS) radio transmission and reception,” 2012. 
[24] 3GPP: Study on Licensed-Assisted Access using LTE. RP-
141646, 2014. 
[25] Qualcomm, "Introducing MuLTEfire: LTE-like performance 
with Wi-Fi-like simplicity," [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.qualcomm.com/news/onq/2015/06/11/introducin
g-multefire-lte-performance-wi-fi-simplicity 2016.11.04   
[26] 3GPP: Telecommunication management; Principles and high 
level requirement. 3GPP TS 32.101 V12.0.0 [Rel-12], 2014. 
[27] ETSI: Mobile Edge Computing [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.etsi.org/technologies-
clusters/technologies/mobile-edge-computing 2016.11.04 
[28] A. Stephany, “The Business of Sharing: Making it in the New 
Sharing Economy,” Palgrave and Macmillan, 2015. 
 
 
86
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

