57
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Smart Navigation in Intelligent Transportation
Systems: Service Performance and
Impact on Wireless Networks
Alessandro Bazzi, Barbara Mav`ı Masini, Gianni Pasolini, and Oreste Andrisano
CNR-IEIIT and DEI, University of Bologna at Wilab, Bologna, Italy
Email: alessandro.bazzi@cnr.it, barbara.masini@ieiit.cnr.it, gianni.pasolini@unibo.it, oreste.andrisano@unibo.it
Abstract—Wireless communications are nowadays considered
as enablers of innovation in the ﬁeld of smart mobility in
smart cities. In this work, we focus on the smart navigation
service, which is aimed at providing drivers with the best route
to destination taking into account real time trafﬁc conditions.
Smart navigation is increasingly used today and expected to
reduce trafﬁc congestions, but the real impact on travel time
and the cost in terms of wireless network resources are still
open issues. These aspects are here discussed starting from the
objectives and the outputs of the Italian project PEGASUS.
More speciﬁcally, to what extent this application can reduce the
travel duration and how frequently trafﬁc information must be
updated will be ﬁrstly discussed; then, the impact on wireless
networks of both the uplink collection of trafﬁc information and
the downlink transmission to vehicles is shown, focusing on the
UMTS cellular technology; ﬁnally, the use of short range IEEE
802.11p wireless communications technology is investigated to
ofﬂoad cellular networks. Through simulations performed in a
dense urban scenario, it is shown that 30% to 50% travel time
can be saved, that the needed information exchange might reduce
the cellular network capacity available for other services of 20%
or more, and that the deployment of few road side units and
multi-hop transmissions can be effectively used to ofﬂoad cellular
networks.
Keywords—Smart navigation, Intelligent transportation systems
(ITS), Vehicular networks (VANETs), Simulations, UMTS, IEEE
802.11p.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Keeping trafﬁc moving is a challenge that governments,
industries and researchers are facing worldwide. Effective so-
lutions can only be obtained with a capillary and continuously
updated knowledge of trafﬁc conditions: the creation of an
infrastructure for communication between vehicles, service
centers and sensors, is thus one of the main needs identiﬁed by
international institutions, service providers and car manufactur-
ers to address with satisfactory results the problems generated
by trafﬁc, justifying the big efforts that are being pushed both
in Europe and in the rest of the world.
Many projects have been carried out in the last decade on
these topics. Among the others, an interesting example is the
Italian project PEGASUS [1], [2], which relies on over one
million vehicles already equipped with devices periodically
transmitting their position and speed to a control center. Safety,
enhanced mobility, and smart navigation systems were the
services targeted by the project.
With the expression smart navigation we refer to the best
route discovery service, which is based on the collection of
measurements from vehicles equipped with sensor devices,
hereafter on board units (OBUs), and the provision of updated
trafﬁc information to those vehicles equipped with on board
navigators, hereafter smart navigators (SNAVs). Each OBU
periodically collects and sends data to a remote control center
and each SNAV receives from the control center information
related to the actual traveling speed on the interested road seg-
ments, exploiting this information to update the path toward its
ﬁnal destination. Indifferently, SNAVs can be either on-board
navigation systems or personal smartphones with speciﬁc apps.
Starting from the outputs of PEGASUS, here we focus on
the beneﬁts provided by the smart navigation and its impact on
the communications network. The various topics addressed by
PEGASUS, discussed in [3]–[8] and summarized for the ﬁrst
time in [1], are here extended and discussed with an integrated
approach to provide an overview of smart navigation even from
the point of view of wireless communications.
More speciﬁcally, in this paper we will discuss: i) the impact
of updated trafﬁc information on travel time and the amount
of data that must be transferred through the wireless networks
to make the smart navigation effective, ii) the feasibility
and the impact of uplink transmissions of data from a large
number of OBUs through cellular networks, iii) the feasibility
and the impact of downlink transmissions of updated trafﬁc
information to a large number of SNAVs through cellular
networks, and iv) the feasibility and the performance of short
range vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-roadside (V2R)
communications used to ofﬂoad the cellular networks.
These issues are hereafter addressed through simulations
carried out adopting a simulation platform that integrates a
vehicular trafﬁc simulator, which reproduces the urban mobil-
ity, and a wireless network simulator, which models the details
of the communication protocols and the signal propagation.
The paper is organized as follows: In Section II, the en-
visioned application is detailed and the addressed issues are
introduced. In Section III, the simulation platform is described.
In Section IV, we focus on the smart navigation service and
we evaluate the saved travel time. In Section V, the cellular
system and the related performance in the considered scenario
are investigated. In Section VI, short range communications

58
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Fig. 1.
Scenario: real time trafﬁc information exchange and wireless
technologies.
to ofﬂoad the cellular network are presented and their perfor-
mance investigated. Finally, in Section VII the conclusions are
drawn and the future research activities are outlined.
II.
OPEN ISSUES ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FOR
THE SMART NAVIGATION SERVICE
With the aim to study the beneﬁts of smart navigation
in terms of saved travel time and its feasibility from the
communication network point of view, we consider the sce-
nario shown in Fig. 1, where vehicles are equipped with
OBUs acting as trafﬁc sensors and periodically transmitting
their position and speed to a remote control center, either
through the cellular network or through multi-hop short range
communications toward a road side unit (RSU). The data
collected at the control center are processed in real time to
estimate the actual trafﬁc conditions (i.e., the travel time) on
each monitored road segment; when the control center detects
trafﬁc conditions different from those foreseen by the static
roadmap data base, it updates the roads travel times on a
dynamic data base. Updated information is then transmitted
from the control center to the vehicles equipped with the
SNAVs through the cellular network in unicast or multicast
mode. Then, the SNAVs calculate the optimal route; on a real
time basis, they update their data and, in case, modify the route
in order to avoid slowdowns.
From the communication technologies point of view, we
need to acquire updated trafﬁc information from OBUs (up-
link) and to re-transmit processed data to the SNAVs (down-
link). What amount of information needs to be transferred
and which technologies to use are thus the obvious questions
that arise. The ﬁrst issue is strictly related to the impact
of various parameters, such as the rate of data acquisition
by OBUs or the rate of trafﬁc updates provided to SNAVs,
have on the effectiveness of the smart navigation service.
The second issue ﬁnds cellular networks and short range
wireless communication systems as possible candidates. In
the short term, cellular networks appear as the only feasible
solution, already guaranteeing high penetration and worldwide
coverage. However, the resources needed for smart navigation
are subtracted to other services, and their amount might be
not negligible. A possibility to ofﬂoad cellular networks could
be to exploit short-range wireless communications based on
wireless access in vehicular environment (WAVE) [9], which
adopts IEEE 802.11p [10] at the MAC and physical layers
and represents the future for V2V communications. This
technology, well suited for safety applications, entertainment,
gateway access, and road charging, can also be exploited in the
envisioned scenario through the deployment of some RSUs and
multi hop V2Vcommunications.
The above considerations motivated us to investigate several
speciﬁc issues. First of all, in order to evaluate the potential
beneﬁts of updated trafﬁc information provided by wireless
communications systems, as detailed in Section IV we:
•
investigate the travel time of vehicles equipped with
SNAVs, periodically receiving updated trafﬁc informa-
tion, that enable to discover the best path. In particular
we discuss the impact of the percentage of vehicles
equipped with the OBU, the data collection rate, and
trafﬁc update timeliness.
The outcomes of these investigations are then used to discuss
the role and the performance of wireless communications, both
in the uplink and in the downlink, ﬁrstly focusing on the
universal mobile telecommunications system (UMTS) cellular
technology (in Section V) and then on the short range IEEE
802.11p technology (in Section VI). Focusing on UMTS we:
•
investigate the feasibility of the acquisition of small
but frequent amount of data from many OBUs (uplink
performance);
•
verify the feasibility of real-time transmissions to
SNAVs of trafﬁc information, both in unicast and mul-
ticast mode (downlink performance);
•
investigate the impact of this service on the others
already supported by the network (both in uplink and
downlink).
Finally, considering IEEE802.11p-based V2V and V2R com-
munications, we:
•
investigate the impact of V2V and V2R short range com-
munications to ofﬂoad the cellular networks, with focus
on the uplink delivery of measurement data generated
by the OBUs.
III.
INVESTIGATION TOOLS AND SIMULATED SCENARIO
The investigation of the considered scenario requires a
complete simulation of the enabling wireless networks, as
well as a realistic simulation of vehicle movements. In fact,
vehicular mobility signiﬁcantly impacts on the performance of
the telecommunication network and on the trafﬁc redistribution
itself. A realistic mobility model is thus needed, and it has to
take into account all roads, with their speed limits, vehicles
acceleration and deceleration, queues at trafﬁc lights, etc. To
this purpose we developed a simulation platform that integrates
the VISSIM [11] vehicular trafﬁc simulator and the SHINE
[12] network simulator, that provided a realistic modeling of
both the vehicular trafﬁc (with queues, number of lanes, one

59
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Fig. 2.
Integrated platform for the simulation of smart navigation.
way roads, etc.) and the network behavior [6]. The reasons
behind this speciﬁc choice are detailed in [6], where pros
and cons of several alternative vehicular trafﬁc and wireless
network simulators are discussed.
Vehicular simulator: VISSIM [11]. It is a commercial mi-
croscopic simulation tool that reproduces trafﬁc ﬂows in urban
areas as well as interurban motorways, and allows to reproduce
car-following and lane changing as in real scenarios. It uses a
psycho-physical car following model for longitudinal vehicles
movement and a rule-based algorithm for lateral movements.
VISSIM can be controlled by external applications with the
use of a component object model (COM): by the adoption of
dynamic link libraries (DLL), it is possible for an application
to control the movement of vehicles and to manage the whole
simulation.
Wireless network simulator: SHINE [12]. It is an event
driven dynamic simulator developed in our laboratories and
written in C++, which allows to jointly take into account
all aspects of the wireless networks related to the various
layers of the network protocol pillar. SHINE has been designed
to simulate heterogeneous wireless networks, according to a
client-server structure; it is constituted by one server-core
simulator (upper layers simulator, ULS) and one or more client
simulators (lower layers simulators, LLSs), speciﬁc for the
considered access technologies; among others, it includes an
UMTS LLS and an IEEE 802.11p LLS.
Integrated platform. We realized a ﬂexible architecture inte-
grating VISSIM with SHINE, enabling the realistic simulation
of vehicular trafﬁc as well as of wireless networks [6]. This
integrated platform allows the simulation of the whole smart
navigation scenario: the vehicular mobility and the OBU
transmissions, the data processing at the control center, the
data base update with dynamic data, and the retransmission of
the elaborated information to the SNAVs.
The architecture of the overall simulation platform is de-
picted in Fig. 2, and includes PostgreSQL databases and com-
ponents written in C#; the interaction between components is
Fig. 3.
Origins and destinations of the eight paths considered for the
evaluation of the smart navigation impact on travel time.
provided through sockets and remote procedure calls (RCPs).
More speciﬁcally, the following main blocks can be identiﬁed:
OBU, which simulates the on board device collecting and
transmitting position and speed; SNAV, which represents the
ﬂeet of vehicles equipped with the smart navigator, able to
receive updated trafﬁc information from the control center;
Control Center, which is responsible of the gathering of data
transmitted by the OBUs to update the dynamic data base;
Wireless Network, which simulates the wireless network; Traf-
ﬁc Control Framework, which is based on VISSIM simulator
and is in charge of controlling vehicles and their interactions;
Simulation Globals, which manages the overall architecture.
More details are available in [6].
Simulation scenario. The road-network layout of the ref-
erence scenario used for simulations consists of the medium
sized Italian city of Bologna. In particular, we considered
13.636 road segments, corresponding to a length of about
600 Km. The digital-maps have been provided by TeleAtlas
and given as input to VISSIM.
As detailed in the following, results concerning the cellular
network performance will be obtained considering a portion
of the entire scenario and assuming pedestrians that perform
voice calls as background trafﬁc added to the trafﬁc generated
by OBUs and SNAVs.
IV.
SMART NAVIGATION IMPACT ON TRAVEL TIME
To evaluate the beneﬁts, in terms of saved travel time,
provided by timely updates of trafﬁc information used by smart
navigators, we assume that SNAVs receive updated information
on the trafﬁc conditions for each road segment from the current
position to the destination and calculate the optimal route; on
a timely basis, they update their data and, in case, modify the
route in order to avoid slowdowns.
A. Simulation Settings and Output Figures
We consider non static trafﬁc conditions, with a vehicle
density that during each simulation varies in the range 1-10

60
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I.
SIMULATION PARAMETERS FOR THE SMART NAVIGATION
SERVICE: DEFINITIONS AND NUMERICAL VALUES.
Parameter
Values
Starting instant of the journey
600 s
of the monitored vehicle
Percentage of vehicles equipped
0%, 1%, 3%, 5%, 10%,
with OBU (δOBUx100)
20%, 50%, 100%
Interval time for the transmission
10 s, 30 s, 60 s
of the measured data τ
Interval time over which
10 s
measured data are averaged Tint
Number of last consecutive intervals
5
to obtain the current average speed
Interval time after which
20 s, 60 s
the average speed is updated
in the smart navigator Tupdate
vehicles/Km (please note that these are average values, also
including secondary roads rarely used).
A parametric percentage of vehicles is assumed equipped
with OBUs (δOBU ×100, with δOBU ∈ [0,1]); every τ seconds,
each OBU transmits several parameters including the actual
vehicle position and speed to the control center. Measured
data are processed by the control center to estimate the actual
average speed of each road segment. Speciﬁcally, measured
data are averaged on a parametric Tint interval time.
Then, every Tupdate seconds, the control center retransmits
the processed data back to vehicles equipped with smart
navigators. To avoid rough estimates in those roads where no
vehicles or a too low percentage of them passed, we set up
an average speed equal to that given by the static roadmap
provided by TeleAtlas lowered by the 30%. In addition, when
the measured speed is lower than 15 Km/h, we force the
measurements exactly to 15 Km/h: this avoids to overestimate
the travel time in the involved road segments.
We considered four paths, with different origins and des-
tinations, in two directions (i.e., eight routes in total), as
represented in Fig. 3. Each path is denoted in the following as
path Nx, with N from 1 to 4, indicating the source-destination
couple, and x either equal to a or b, indicating the direction.
Since a smaller number of vehicles complete their route than
those that are newly generated, the overall trafﬁc increases in
time, generating queues in an increasing number of junctions.
In particular, about 1000 vehicles are present after 300 s, 2000
after 800 s, and 3000 after 1800 s.
The main parameters settings and their numerical values are
summarized in Table I.
B. Numerical Results
Numerical results are obtained assuming one vehicle
equipped with the SNAV: this vehicle starts after 600 s and
moves along one of the eight paths depicted in Fig. 3. For
each path the time spent by the vehicle to reach the destina-
tion is investigated for different combinations of signiﬁcant
parameters (see Table I). Per each considered combination
of parameters, six simulations were performed with different
random variable initializations, that affect, for instance, the
choice of the vehicles equipped with the OBU.
Results are presented for Tint = 10 s, Tupdate = 20 s and
60 s, and τ equal to 10, 30, or 60 s. Figs. 4 and 5 show the
travel time, from origin to destination, of a monitored vehicle
equipped with the SNAV for different percentage of vehicles
equipped with the OBU and different scenarios. In each ﬁgure,
results are compared with the following three cases adopted as
benchmarks: i) Free running, referred to the case of a single
vehicle moving alone on the entire scenario; ii) Best case with
smart navigation, referred to a vehicle equipped with a smart
navigator continuously updated with the best route, iii) No
smart navigation, referred to the the same route as in Free
Running in the presence of trafﬁc (a navigator may be present,
but without knowledge of real time trafﬁc).
In Figs. 4 and 5, the travel time to destination is shown for
path 1a for Tupdate = 20 s and 60 s, respectively. Figs. 4(a),
4(b), and 4(c) (so as Figs. 5(a), 5(b), and 5(c)) refer to three
different (uplink) transmission intervals τ: 10 s, 30 s, and 60 s,
respectively. For each percentage of OBU equipped vehicles,
six results are presented, corresponding to six different sim-
ulations providing time and space randomness (i.e., different
vehicles are equipped with OBU, and the sampling process
starts at different instants). By observing Figs. 4(a), 4(b), and
4(c), it can be noted that the time to destination increases
with τ, showing a not negligible impact of a timely update
of road segments trafﬁc conditions. Focusing on Fig. 4(a), the
impact of the percentage of OBU equipped vehicles can be
appreciated: with a frequent trafﬁc update in the uplink (τ = 10
s), the 10% of vehicles equipped with OBUs is sufﬁcient to
have a time to destination very close the best case (i.e., about
600 s). As the uplink transmission interval τ increases, the
10% of vehicles is no more sufﬁcient to obtain optimal results,
that can be instead achieved (and not all times) only when all
vehicles are equipped with OBUs.
From a comparison between Fig. 4 and Fig. 5, referring to
Tupdate = 20 s and 60 s, respectively, it can be observed that
the impact of the downlink (from the control center to SNAVs)
transmission interval is lower than the impact of the uplink
transmission interval τ (from OBUs to the control center),
Fig. 6 summarizes the results provided in Figs. 4 and 5,
showing the average travel time of the six simulations and the
conﬁdence interval, corresponding to the standard deviation of
the same values. The vehicle equipped with SNAV running in
path 1a encounters various slowdowns and the free run time
of 505 s increases up to 1033 s under the assumed trafﬁc con-
ditions. Smart navigation allows a reduction of the travel time
to 629 s in the best case, which corresponds to about 40% of
time saving. Results show that this saving can be achieved only
with a sufﬁcient amount of collected data: speciﬁcally, 10% of
vehicles equipped with OBUs and τ = 10 s are required. As
can be observed, a similar advantage can be achieved in some
cases also for a higher τ, but it is not guaranteed and depends
on which vehicles are equipped and when they collect and
send their data; for example, focusing on Fig. 4 and assuming
τ = 30 s and δOBU = 1, in the forth case (yellow bar) the SNAV
suggests the best possible route, whereas in the ﬁfth case (red
bar) it suggests a route, which is worse than the one followed
with no smart navigator. Furthermore, comparing Figs. 6(a)
and 6(b), referring to Tupdate = 20 s and 60 s, respectively,
a slight performance degradation can be noted when a lower
update rate is assumed (Tupdate = 60 s), but this effect is not

61
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1%
3%
5%
10%
20%
50%
100%
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Time to destination [s]
Vehicles equipped with OBU
 
 
Free Running
Best Case
No Smart Navigation
(a) τ = 10 s.
1%
3%
5%
10%
20%
50%
100%
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Time to destination [s]
Vehicles equipped with OBU
 
 
Free Running
Best Case
No Smart Navigation
(b) τ = 30 s.
1%
3%
5%
10%
20%
50%
100%
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Time to destination [s]
Vehicles equipped with OBU
 
 
Free Running
Best Case
No Smart Navigation
(c) τ = 60 s.
Fig. 4.
Travel time to destination for path 1a with different percentage of vehicles equipped with OBU and Tupdate = 20 s.
1%
3%
5%
10%
20%
50%
100%
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Time to destination [s]
Vehicles equipped with OBU
 
 
Free Running
Best Case
No Smart Navigation
(a) τ = 10 s.
1%
3%
5%
10%
20%
50%
100%
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Time to destination [s]
Vehicles equipped with OBU
 
 
Free Running
Best Case
No Smart Navigation
(b) τ = 30 s.
1%
3%
5%
10%
20%
50%
100%
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Time to destination [s]
Vehicles equipped with OBU
 
 
Free Running
Best Case
No Smart Navigation
(c) τ = 60 s.
Fig. 5.
Travel time to destination for path 1a with different percentage of vehicles equipped with OBU and Tupdate = 60 s.
TABLE II.
SUMMARY OF TRAVEL TIME FOR THE SMART NAVIGATION SERVICE.
Path
Free Run [s]
No Smart Nav. [s]
TI
Best Route [s]
SNI
Parameters to Allow the Best
Performance of Smart Nav.
1a
505
1033
51.1%
617
40.3%
τ ≤ 10 s and at least 10% of OBU
1b
577
1016
43.2%
564
44.5%
τ ≤ 10 s or 100% of OBU
2a
477
651
26.7%
567
12.9%
Small advantage and easily achieved.
2b
482
800
39.7%
566
29.2%
τ ≤ 10 s and at least 10% of OBU
3a
494
575
14.1%
552
4.0%
Smart navigation is useless.
3b
439
533
17.6%
533
0.0%
Smart navigation is useless.
4a
374
449
16.7%
390
13.1%
τ ≤ 10 s and more than 10% of OBU
4b
386
864
55.3%
441
49.0%
τ ≤ 10 s and more than 10% of OBU or
τ ≤ 20 s and minimum 50% of OBU
as remarkable as that observed varying τ.
Similar results can be obtained for all the other paths and
are summarized in Table II. In particular, the columns show:
•
the path name;
•
the Free Run time in seconds, hereafter denoted with
tFR;
•
the No Smart Navigation time, hereafter denoted with
tNoSN;
•
the trafﬁc impact TI evaluated through the following
equation:
TI = tNoSN −tFR
tNoSN
×100
(1)
where (1) corresponds to the increase of the travel time
along the best route withe respect to free run conditions
caused by the presence of trafﬁc in the absence of smart
navigation, normalized and expressed in percentage;
•
the Best Route time, hereafter denoted with tBR;
•
the maximum achievable beneﬁt of smart navigation SNI
evaluated through the following equation:
SNI = tNoSN −tBR
tNoSN
×100
(2)
where (2) corresponds to the highest reduction of time
enabled by smart navigation compared to the time
needed in the same trafﬁc conditions without smart
navigation, normalized and expressed in percentage;
•
a brief summary of the parameter settings that allow
to achieve the maximum beneﬁt from smart navigation,

62
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1%
3%
5%
10%
20%
50%
100%
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Time to destination (mean and std. dev.) [s]
Vehicles equipped with OBU
 
 
Free Run
No Smart Navigation
τ=10s
τ=30s
τ=60s
(a) Tupdate = 20 s.
1%
3%
5%
10%
20%
50%
100%
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Time to destination (mean and std. dev.) [s]
Vehicles equipped with OBU
 
 
Free Run
No Smart Navigation
τ=10s
τ=30s
τ=60s
(b) Tupdate = 60 s.
Fig. 6.
Mean and standard deviation of the time to destination for path 1a.
i.e., that allow the minimum travel duration with high
probability.
The eight considered paths allow to compare the effect
of smart navigation in various trafﬁc conditions: when TI is
high, i.e., when the trafﬁc severely affects the travel duration
(paths 1a, 1b, 2b, 4b), the smart navigation service allows to
signiﬁcantly reduce the travel time, with SNI between 30%
and 50%; on the contrary, when TI is low (paths 2a, 3a, 3b,
and 4a) the observed SNI is lower than 15%.
Another interesting conclusion arises comparing the impact
of τ and Tupdate: the transmission rate from OBUs is much
more important than the update rate at SNAVs. τ has, in
fact, a direct impact on the trafﬁc estimation, beacuse higher
transmission rates from OBUs entail more available trafﬁc
measurements and thus better estimates, whereas Tupdate only
impacts on the decision made by the SNAVs, taken at the few
main junctions encountered.
Numerical results show thus that smart navigation allows
the equipped vehicle to signiﬁcantly reduce the travel time
whenever the trafﬁc has a signiﬁcant impact on the travel
duration and they highlight that a sufﬁcient amount of data
must be collected by OBUs. In particular, they show that a
simple average of the collected speeds allows a good route
selection when a transmission interval τ lower than 10 s is
assumed and at least 10% of vehicles are equipped with OBUs.
It may be possible that more sophisticated algorithms with
more complex processing at either the control center or the
OBUs would allow similar results with a lower τ, but the
design of such algorithms is out of the scope of the present
paper.
V.
CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS ENABLING SMART
NAVIGATION
The smart navigation service relies on wireless communi-
cations. Among all possibilities, cellular systems represent the
obvious short term solution, both to collect data from OBUs
(uplink) and to retransmit them to SNAVs (downlink). Due to
the widespread diffusion of always-on navigators and smart-
phones with positioning applications, cellular systems allow
the service implementation avoiding new set-ups or expensive
installations [13]–[15]. Various activities are ongoing [4], [5],
[16], [17], and products based on cellular technologies are
already on the market.
Some studies on the performance of cellular systems in
vehicular applications are coming out (see, e.g., [18]), but
still few investigations focused on the impact that these new
services have on other cellular services (such as voice calls)
in terms of resource availability and quality of service (QoS).
Focusing
on
the
uplink,
the
use
of
vehicles
as
communication-enabled moving sensors opens to a number of
potential applications, as pointed out in [19]–[22]. Example
applications are also presented in many related works, where
vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs) are envisioned, for
instance, to alert upcoming vehicles when an accident occurs
[23], to guarantee urban environment surveillance [24], to
provide widespread pollution measurements [25], to enable
trafﬁc monitoring and smart navigation [4], and to perform
civil infrastructure monitoring and automotive diagnostics
[26]. For all these applications, cellular systems are today the
unique solution. A study on the feasibility of data acquisition
from vehicles through cellular systems has been carried out
in the German project Aktiv CoCar [27], that deﬁned a
new protocol, called “trafﬁc probe data protocol” (TPDP),
to upload trafﬁc data through UMTS common channels.
However, results are given only in terms of cumulative
distribution function (CDF) of the end-to-end delay, and
no evaluation of the impact of this service on the QoS
experienced by other users is given.
Focusing on the downlink, also broadcast technologies are
available. A ﬁrst example is represented by the trafﬁc message

63
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
channel (TMC) [28], [29], aimed at delivering trafﬁc and travel
information using the radio data system (RDS) on conventional
frequency modulation (FM) radio broadcasts. However, these
technologies and applications have some severe limitations. In
fact, the data rate reserved for these services is limited, thus
allowing the trafﬁc conditions update for a very reduced num-
ber of roads. In addition, only the main events are described,
with few approximate descriptions.
For this reason, in several Countries on-board navigation
devices receive updated trafﬁc information by means of cellular
technologies [30]. Reduced data rate is sufﬁcient until trafﬁc
information is not frequently updated nor capillary, but as the
service coverage and timeliness increase the cellular network
capacity and the expected QoS becomes a primary issue to be
investigated.
Here, we focus on the most widely adopted cellular technol-
ogy, UMTS, to collect data from OBUs and to provide updated
trafﬁc information back to SNAVs. Different strategies are
considered in both directions and their impact is shown through
simulations: in the uplink we compare the use of dedicated
channels or random access channels, while in the downlink we
compare the use of unicast or multicast transmissions. Since
the quality perceived by users of other services is also of great
interest, also pedestrians performing voice calls are considered.
A. Simulation Scenario and Non Vehicular Users
The portion of Bologna considered for UMTS simulations
is shown in Fig. 7 and consists of a rectangular area of the
city center sized 1.8 km (longitude) x 1.6 km (latitude) with 35
UMTS cells covered by 15 Nodes-B (1, 2 or 3 cells per Node-
B are assumed), with a single frequency planning. This portion
of the entire scenario has been considered for the assessment
of the cellular network performance to avoid edge effects.
Fig. 7 also shows the approximated coverage of each cell with
random colors. Black segments represent roads where vehicles
movements are constrained.
Concerning non vehicular users, a variable number of pedes-
trians randomly walking in the scenario is generated, with an
uniform distribution and the same birth probability in each cell
(this means that a higher density of voice users is assumed
where smaller cells are considered). Hereafter, Λ(v) indicates
the average offered voice load in Erlang per km2.
As previously detailed, vehicles are constrained on roads and
generated by VISSIM; a heavy trafﬁc condition with many
trafﬁc queues is investigated, with 220 average vehicles per
Km2. A portion δOBU ∈ [0,1] of vehicles are equipped with the
OBU, while a portion δSNAV ∈ [0,1] of vehicles are equipped
with the SNAV.
Particular attention has been paid to all physical level
aspects, including propagation, interference, and power control
mechanisms. For further details on both the scenario and the
UMTS simulator the reader may refer to [3].
1) Background Voice Trafﬁc: The duration of each voice
call is randomly deﬁned with Poisson distribution and 90 s
as average. In the UMTS access network, voice trafﬁc uses a
12.2 kbit/s bearer, corresponding to a logical dedicated trafﬁc
channel (DTCH), a transport dedicated channel (DCH), and
Fig. 7.
UMTS planning in the considered scenario. Filled black squares
correspond to Node-B locations. An approximated area of coverage is depicted
for each cell with random colors.
a physical dedicated data channel (DPDCH). The DPDCH
has a spreading factor (SF) equal to 64 in uplink and 128
in downlink.
Output ﬁgures. The evaluation of the QoS perceived by voice
users is based on the following deﬁnitions: per each frame
lasting 10 ms, a user (i.e., a voice call) is deﬁned in outage if
the BER after channel decoding of that frame is greater than
2% (uplink and downlink are evaluated independently to each
other); an ended voice call is then considered in outage when
either in downlink or in uplink, the outage intervals exceed a
threshold of 5%. Hence, we have an outage voice call when
one user is able to talk to the other party, but with poor audio
quality. A voice call may also incur in the following situations:
it may be blocked by the call admission control algorithm due
to insufﬁcient resources, or it may drop due to an excessive
reduction of the received signal power.
Results will be presented in the following in terms of
satisfaction rate (SatR), that is the ratio between the number of
users, which are not blocked, neither dropped, nor in outage,
and the total number of call requests.
B. Uplink Acquisition from Vehicles
Among the cellular technologies, general packet radio ser-
vice (GPRS) is nowadays the most adopted in vehicular
scenarios for uplink measurements transmission. However, to
transmit data over the GPRS network, the mobile device must
ﬁrst send a message on a common channel asking for a
dedicated resource, with procedures requiring a not negligible
access time, in the order of seconds [31]; for this reason
in practical systems the OBU collects tens of measurements
before transmitting them in a single packet. This approach
obviously increases the data acquisition delay at the control
center, and limits the effectiveness of the smart navigation
service, as shown in Section IV. Differently to this, UMTS
also allows the transmission of small amount of data over

64
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the shared random access channel (RACH), avoiding the set-
up of dedicated resources [32]. This way, any measurement
can be transmitted by the OBU as soon as it is taken, with
minimum delay and reduced signaling overhead. This solution
appears promising especially considering the expected increase
of the number of equipped vehicles, but it clearly requires
investigations on feasibility and resources occupation.
Here, we discuss the impact of real time data acquisition on
the performance of cellular networks, foreseeing the realistic
perspective of an explosion of the number of equipped ve-
hicles. We consider DTCH using either dedicated or random
access logical and physical channels. In the former case, a
logical DCH and a DPDCH are used in uplink with a SF
equal to 16, and the same channels are used in downlink with
a SF equal to 32 (a dedicated channel is required also in the
downlink for the TCP acknowledgment transmissions), both
providing 64 kbit/s. In the latter case, a logical RACH mapped
on the physical random access channel (PRACH) is used.
Differently from the RACH, the dedicated transport channel
is characterized by features such as fast power control, fast
data rate change on a frame-by-frame basis, and soft handover.
However, it has to be established each time a connection is
required.
Vehicles transmit 80 byte packets every 10 seconds. When
the random access is exploited in uplink, one RACH (out of
the available ones) is exclusively used in each cell by the smart
navigation service.
Output ﬁgures. The impact of the smart navigation service is
primarily shown in terms of the effects it causes on the QoS
of voice users. Besides this, the QoS of this service can be
addressed investigating the probability that each measurement
stored in vehicles is correctly received by the control center,
independently on the speciﬁc source.
When the DCH is used, data cannot be lost due to the
use of TCP at transport level and the delay introduced by
the transmission over the cellular link is not very critical
(the average delay remains lower than few seconds unless the
network is heavily congested). Thus, observing the effect on
the voice trafﬁc is sufﬁcient in this case.
When the RACH is used, the delay is even lower, but
not all packets are delivered to the control center. In fact,
a scheduled transmission fails in two cases: 1) when the
RACH ramping procedure is unsuccessful, meaning that the
propagation conditions and the perceived interference level
are so disadvantageous that the maximum transmission power
is not sufﬁcient, and 2) when an error is detected at the
receiver. In any case, the MAC layer may attempt a number
of retransmissions before discarding the packet. Focusing on
the smart navigation service with RACH, results are thus also
expressed in terms of packet discard rate (RD), that is the ratio
between the number of discarded packets and the total number
of packets generated by all OBUs.
UMTS Uplink: Numerical Results. The SatR for voice users
and the RD for the smart navigation service with RACH are
plotted in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9, respectively, as a function of Λ(v).
In Fig. 8, the SatR of voice users is depicted with δOBU = 1,
and the case with no smart navigation service (δOBU = 0) is
shown for comparison. Observing Fig. 8, the presence of the
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
Λ (v) [E/km2]
SatR (Voice users)
 
 
δOBU=0
δOBU=1, RACH
δOBU=1, DCH
Fig. 8.
Voice trafﬁc performance: voice SatR vs. the offered voice trafﬁc
Λ(v). Comparison between no smart navigation (δOBU = 0), smart navigation
adopting RACH, and smart navigation adopting DCH.
smart navigation service seems not to impact on voice users,
since their satisfaction remains almost unchanged. This is no
more true when the dedicated channel DCH is adopted for the
smart navigation service instead of RACH, that results in a
SatR reduction. To grant a SatR = 0.95, about 740 voice users
could be served both in the absence of the smart navigation
service or using RACH, whereas the same SatR is satisﬁed
with only 600 when the DCH is adopted (that entails a not
negligible reduction of about the 20%).
From this preliminary result, related to voice users only, it
seems that the use of RACH does not impact the network
performance: for a given SatR the maximum Λ(v)allowable
is not affected by the underlying smart navigation service
adopting RACH. However, looking at Fig. 9, where the RD
is also plotted as a function of Λ(v) for δOBU = 1, this
conclusion must be revised. As can be observed, the higher
is the network load, the higher is the value of RD, and the
QoS of the smart navigation service results deteriorated. If
Λ(v)=740 (corresponding to SatR = 0.95) is taken as reference
value, a packet loss higher than 5% can be observed, meaning
that guaranteeing a SatR = 0.95 to voice users, does not imply
that the smart navigation users are also served. To improve the
QoS of the smart navigation service, a lower number of voice
calls must be accepted. For instance, if RD lower than 10−2
is targeted, with respect to a maximum of Λ(v)=740 in the
absence of the smart navigation service, a reduction of about
100 (13.4%) average voice users per Km2 must be considered,
drastically reducing the capacity left for voice users. Such
reduction is, however, lower than that caused by the smart
navigation service with the use of DCH.
C. Downlink Transmission to Vehicles
As far the adoption of UMTS to deliver trafﬁc information to
SNAVs is concerned, two options are available: either transmit-
ting personalized data through unicast DCHs, or to distribute

65
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
0
200
400
600
800
1000
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
RD (ITS service)
Λ (v) [E/km2]
 
 
δOBU=1, RACH
Fig. 9.
Smart navigation performance: RD varying the offered voice trafﬁc
Λ(v). δOBU = 1.
the same content to all users through multimedia broadcast
multicast service (MBMS) channels. Hereafter, we compare
these two cases, evaluating if the network can support the
additional new load and the impact it has on the performance
perceived by other UMTS users.
Due to the adoption of code division multiple access
(CDMA) [3], the number of active channels in UMTS is a
consequence of the trade-off between coverage and capacity,
and the amount of resources occupied by each transmission
is given in terms of used power: on the one hand, a higher
data rate as well as a higher distance from the base requires
a higher power for a sufﬁcient QoS; on the other hand, a
higher power reduces the cell capacity. The power is, in
fact, a limited resource at the base station (in downlink) and
each transmission turns into an interference to all other active
communications (in both directions).
As for MBMS, it allows to share resources among many
user. Hence, power is allocated to MBMS channels only once
for any number of users in the cell receiving the service. When
the multicast transmission is exploited in downlink, we assume
that in each cell one MBMS channel is exclusively used by
the smart navigation service, and that all SNAVs are enabled
to join the multicast group, where trafﬁc-related messages
are distributed. It has to be remarked that MBMS uses part
of the power available at the base station, thus limiting the
number of DCHs that can be established. Moreover, the
broadcast/multicast nature of the channel does not allow to
exploit the fast power control feature that is of main importance
for an interference limited system like UMTS; the base station
pre-assigns a certain amount of power to MBMS services
depending on the coverage planning and the desired bit rate.
The following strategies, thoroughly described in [5], are
assumed for trafﬁc updates:
•
For the unicast mode, the update involves road segments
encompassed by an ellipse whose focuses are the actual
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Λ (v)
MAX [E/km2]
δSNAV
 
 
Voice and unicast
Fig. 10.
Voice capacity as a function of the fraction δSNAV of vehicles
receiving dedicated trafﬁc information in unicast mode.
vehicle position and either an intermediate point or the
ﬁnal destination. This strategy avoids the transmission
of information related to road segments too far from
the actual vehicle position, which would be out of date
when the vehicle needs it. Moreover, since only the
transmission of the coordinates of two points is needed
from the SNAV to the control center, the amount of
data transmitted in the uplink is very small, thus limiting
costs and resource occupation. Following [5], 1000 road
segments are updated every 5 minutes.
•
For the multicast mode, a progressive coverage strategy
is considered, consisting in the transmission to the SNAV
of the information related to the most important roads at
national level and regional level, and to the minor roads
at local level only. Following [5], 12000 road segments
are updated in average.
Independently on the unicast or multicast communication
technology, we assume the transmission of transport protocol
experts group (TPEG) [33] messages at the highest layers of
the protocol pillar with 60 bytes packet per each road segment
[17].
1) Unicast Mode: Following the given assumptions, SNAVs
receive updated trafﬁc information through a 60000 bytes
download (i.e., 1000 road segments × 60 bytes) every 5
minutes. Data are transmitted adopting the TCP protocol at the
transport level, that assures data reception. A 64 kbit/s bearer
is considered, corresponding to a logical DTCH, a transport
DCH, and a physical DPDCH (the low amount of bytes and
the relaxed delay requirements do not justify the use of more
consuming bearers). The DPDCH is transmitted adopting a SF
equal to 32 in downlink and 16 in uplink (note, in fact, that a
dedicated unicast link is required also in the uplink direction
for the TCP acknowledgment transmissions).
Output ﬁgures. A smart navigation user is satisﬁed if the
update is received with a delay lower than 15 s (please consider
that less than 10 s would be required if data were transmitted

66
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
−20
−19
−18
−17
−16
−15
−14
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Λ (v)
MAX [E/km2]
Power to MBMS relative to maximum [dB]
 
 
Voice and multicast 64 kbit/s
Voice and multicast 128 kbit/s
Fig. 11.
Voice capacity as a function of the Node-B power dedicated to the
multicast channel providing the envisioned service.
at 64 kbit/s with no errors and no TCP redundancy).
2) Multicast Mode:
Data are transmitted adopting user
datagram protocol (UDP) at transport level, which introduces
limited redundancy but do not grant reliable communications;
in this case, in fact, the absence of the uplink connection
does not allow the transmission of acknowledgments. Two
bearers at 64 and 128 kbit/s are considered, each corresponding
to a logical MBMS transport channel (MTCH), a transport
forward access channel (FACH), and a physical secondary
common control physical channel (S-CCPCH). The S-CCPCH
is transferred (obviously, in downlink) adopting a SF equal to
32 for 64 kbit/s and 16 for 128 kbit/s.
With the assumptions given above, all roads are updated
every 90 or 45 seconds with the 64 and 128 kbit/s bearers,
respectively.
Output ﬁgures. An ended smart navigation session is as-
sumed in outage if less than the 95% of packets are correctly
received. For smart navigation users the satisfaction rate is the
ratio between the number of users that do not experience an
outage and the total number of users.
UMTS Downlink: Numerical Results. In Fig. 10, the max-
imum Λ(v)is plotted as a function of the number of equipped
vehicles receiving updated trafﬁc information via DCH. In
particular, the x-axis represents the ratio δSNAV of vehicles
that are equipped with the SNAV. The y-axis represents the
maximum amount of voice calls that allow the system to
serve both trafﬁc classes (voice and smart navigation) with
a satisfaction rate (i.e., ratio of satisﬁed users over the number
of users of that class) greater than 95%. When the number
of equipped vehicles is zero, we obtain results referred to
the presence of voice only, considered as a benchmark (740
average voice calls). We can observe that, as the number of
equipped vehicles receiving updated information increases, the
maximum number of voice calls (i.e., the number of voice
users) decreases, due to larger resources dedicated to the smart
navigation service. It is however interesting to note that the
decrease of Λ(v)
MAX is smooth for small values of δSNAV, and
it becomes rapid as δSNAV approaches 1; more speciﬁcally, a
reduction of only 10% voice users is observed if the 50%
of vehicles are equipped with SNAVs (δSNAV = 0.5), but a
reduction of about 50% is observed when all vehicles are
equipped (δSNAV = 1).
Multicast results, shown in Fig. 11, are obtained varying
the power used to transmit the S-CCPCH, which is a constant
fraction of the maximum available power at the base station.
Since an MBMS channel per cell is assumed independently
on the number of SNAVs, the value of δSNAV is not relevant.
Fig. 11 shows the maximum amount of voice calls (per km2)
that allow the system to serve both classes of trafﬁc with at
least 95% satisfaction rate as function of the fraction of Node-
B power dedicated to MBMS. Multicast at 64 kbit/s and 128
kbit/s are compared. As can be observed, independently on
the adopted bearer, the number of voice calls increases with
the power assigned to MBMS until a maximum, then it starts
decreasing: low power levels assigned to the MBMS service,
in fact, require low interference (generated by voice users)
in order to guarantee a full coverage to the smart navigation
service, while high power levels generate strong interference
that limits the number of voice calls that can be served. We can
thus note that a trade off between voice and smart navigation
services can be obtained for both 64 kbit/s and 128 kbit/s: -18
dB to MBMS with about 1% less average voice calls compared
to the case of no smart navigation service in the former case;
-16 dB to MBMS with about 30% less average voice calls in
the latter case. These numbers also highlight that the adoption
of a 128 kbit/s bearer greatly reduces the number of voice calls
with respect to 64 kbit/s.
Comparing the unicast versus multicast approach, results
show that the latter is preferable only for a high penetration
of the service and only if an update every 90 s is acceptable
(corresponding to a multicast channel at 64 kb/s).
VI.
SHORT RANGE COMMUNICATIONS TO OFFLOAD
CELLULAR NETWORKS
As shown in previous sections, the increasing number of
vehicles equipped with OBUs or SNAVs might overload the
cellular networks, and this is particularly true in the uplink
direction (acquisition of small but frequent packets from a very
large number of OBUs). The use of alternative solutions, and in
particular of short range V2V and V2R communications, could
thus be conveniently exploited; in this case, RSUs could be
deployed at proper positions and V2V and V2R could be used
to collect data without the use of cellular communications.
Dealing with short range communications in vehicular sce-
narios, the WAVE [9]/IEEE 802.11p [10] is presently the ref-
erence standard, and several ﬁeld trials and research activities
are currently carried out focusing on it (see, e.g., [34]–[40]).
WAVE deﬁnes the communication system architecture and the
complementary set of services and interfaces for vehicular
scenarios, whereas IEEE 802.11p, which is an amendment
to the IEEE 802.11 standard conceived for vehicular com-
munications at 5.9 GHz, describes the MAC and physical
layer protocols. At the physical layer, IEEE 802.11p is based

67
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
on the orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM)
modulation, with seven non overlapping channels of 10 MHz
each; one of these channels is reserved for control purposes and
the other six are provided as service channels. In the control
channel all OBUs are expected to periodically broadcast their
identity and position (e.g., GPS coordinates) in packets denoted
as beacons, so that each OBU has a real time knowledge of all
its neighbors. A key amendment introduced by WAVE/IEEE
802.11p is the WAVE mode, which allows the transmission and
reception of data frames with the wildcard basic service set
(BSS) identity and without the need of belonging to a partic-
ular BSS. This feature enables very efﬁcient communication-
group setup without much of the overhead typically needed
in nomadic IEEE 802.11a/g networks; it simpliﬁes the BSS
operations in a truly ad hoc manner for vehicular usage [10],
[41], and can be used by devices for a fast exchange of data.
Here, we assume that OBUs are equipped with the
WAVE/IEEE 802.11p [9], [10] communication interface with
the objective to ofﬂoad the cellular networks. Although it is not
mandatory according to the speciﬁcation, here we assume the
use of two channels in parallel, with the control channel only
used for beacon broadcasting and one service channel used for
data exchange; this conﬁguration guarantees that no reduction
of performance is caused by the smart navigation service to
safety applications. In our simulations, each OBU broadcasts
its position in the control channel, with a beacon frequency of
10 Hz (in accordance with the considerations given in [42] and
[43]), and transmits data in the service channel when needed.
To reduce the cellular network load, if an OBU is under the
coverage of any RSU, it directly delivers its data through V2R
communication. Otherwise, a routing algorithm is required to
ﬁnd the best route towards an RSU through V2V multiple hops.
In particular, the scope of the routing algorithm is to search for
a suitable next relay among the neighbor nodes. Among the
many routing algorithms proposed in literature for VANETs
(see, e.g., [44], [45]), here we adopt greedy forwarding (GF),
which inspired most of those suited for not fully connected
networks. In GF, the OBU knows the position of the nearest
RSU (thanks to a location service, out of the scope of this
work) and selects it as the destination; the OBU also knows
the position of all its neighbors (thanks to the beaconing
mechanism), and considers as possible relays those that are
nearer to the destination; the OBU forwards data to the relay
which is closest to the destination, if any, and stores the data
otherwise.
Since an RSU or a suitable next relay are not always
available and since the OBU buffer is limited and data cannot
be stored for an unlimited amount of time, all packets are
sent through the cellular network whenever one of the fol-
lowing conditions is met: (i) the number of packets inside
the transmission buffer reaches a threshold NMAX, or (ii) at
least one of the queued packets was generated more than
TMAX seconds before the actual instant. NMAX is related to the
hardware implementation of the OBUs, while the choice of
TMAX is strictly related to the maximum acceptable delivery
delay. Since, as shown in Section IV, the timely update of
information impacts on the smart navigation effectiveness, the
value of TMAX is of main interest for the envisioned service.
RSU A
RSU B
RSU C
RSU D
RSU E
RSU F
RSU H
RSU G
Fig. 12.
RSU positions in the considered scenario.
In the following, we show the performance in terms of
cellular resources that can be saved by exploiting V2V and
V2R communications to deliver the sensed data to the control
center through the RSUs.
A. Simulation Settings and Output Figures
As in previous sections, a parametric portion of vehicles
δOBU (δOBU ∈ [0,1]) is assumed equipped with an OBU, which
acquires some measurements every τ seconds. Like in the
UMTS case, simulations are performed in a portion of Bologna
with an high density of vehicles, corresponding to 220 vehicles
per Km2. In this case, one or more RSUs are deployed in the
scenario, in the positions shown in Fig. 12. The selected sites
correspond to the mostly crowded junctions, noting that major
junctions are suitable sites also owing to the likely presence
of lighting, trafﬁc lights, and therefore of power supply. RSU
A is positioned, in particular, in the busiest crossroad of the
whole scenario, while RSU C is in the less loaded crossroad
among the eight shown in Fig. 12.
As already discussed, the maximum number of packets
NMAX that can be queued is related to the hardware imple-
mentation of the OBUs, and is here set to a high value, 1000.
On the contrary, different values are assumed for TMAX.
In short range simulations, we refer to the following prop-
agation model:
PL(d) = PL0(1)+10β log10(d)
(3)
where PL0(1) is the free space path loss at 1 meter distance,
β is the path loss exponent, and d is the distance in meters. A
threshold model is then assumed for the packet error rate, with
the shadowing effect due to buildings: a transmission between
two devices is possible only if 1) the virtual line connecting
them do not cross any building, 2) the received power is
higher that the receiver sensitivity and 3) the signal-to-noise-
plus-interference ratio is higher than a threshold. With the

68
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
δOBU
CSAVED
 
 
All RSUs
RSU A
RSU C
Fig. 13.
Short range communications: impact of the OBU penetration δOBU
and of RSU number and positions. Speciﬁcally, CSAVED as a function of δOBU,
with all eight RSUs, with RSU A only, and with RSU C only. TMAX = 10 s.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
TMAX
CSAVED
 
 
δOBU=0.1
δOBU=0.5
δOBU=1
Fig. 14.
Short range communications: impact of the maximum delay before
transmission through the cellular link TMAX. Speciﬁcally, CSAVED as a function
of TMAX, with various values of δOBU. RSU A.
assumed parameters, the maximum communication distance
in the absence of interferers is 200 m.
Numerical results are provided in terms of ratio of saved
cellular resources CSAVED, i.e., the ratio between the number of
packets delivered through the RSUs and the number of packets
generated by all vehicles.
B. Numerical results
The impact of the OBU penetration and the impact of the
number and positions of RSUs are investigated in Fig. 13,
where CSAVED is plotted as a function of δOBU, with various
RSU deployments. To guarantee an updated knowledge of
trafﬁc conditions at the control center, TMAX is set to 10 s.
Results show the large amount of cellular resources that can
be saved through the joint adoption of V2V and V2R com-
munications. As expected, when all the RSUs are deployed,
CSAVED outperforms the cases of a single RSU. However, even
in case of single RSU A, CSAVED is always larger than 0.3
when δOBU > 0.1, even reaching 0.9 when δOBU = 1; this
result highlights that even a single RSU, properly positioned,
can be exploited to save a large amount of cellular resources.
Observing the curve that refers to RSU C, which is located in
a less busy junction, it can be observed that it is less effective,
owing to a reduced number of vehicles passing in its proximity.
However, also in this case CSAVED exceeds 0.6 when δOBU = 1,
with a not negligible percentage of saved cellular resources.
Fig. 14 shows CSAVED as a function of TMAX for various
values of δOBU, when only RSU A is deployed. Allowing a
greater TMAX increases the probability that vehicle mobility
generates new paths toward the RSUs. As can be observed, if
a higher TMAX is acceptable, then CSAVED noticeably increases.
If a TMAX higher than 30 s and a δOBU higher than 0.5 are
assumed, then CSAVED with RSU A becomes grater than 0.9,
almost fully ofﬂoading data from the cellular network.
Short range communication is thus proved to represent an
interesting solution to ofﬂoad the cellular network with limited
costs.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we have discussed the smart navigation service
from the wireless communication networks point of view.
In particular, we have ﬁrstly evaluated the performance of
the smart navigation in terms of travel time, showing that
a reduction of even the 50% is possible; results have also
revealed that at least 10% of vehicles providing information
every 10 s are needed to enable a correct estimation in most
conditions, while the update at the smart navigator is less
critical. Then, the feasibility from the communication systems
point of view has been discussed. To this scope, we have
considered UMTS as the enabling technology for the real time
acquisition and transmission of trafﬁc information, evaluating
the impact of such a communication both on other services
already provided by UMTS and on the QoS of vehicular users.
Furthermore, the use of dedicated channels or shared channels
was compared. Our studies have highlighted that the service
appears feasible and that the number of equipped vehicles does
not seem a critical issue. We have also pointed out, however, a
not negligible loss in capacity; in particular, it has been shown
that, to guarantee a satisfactory quality of service, 15% or
more resources are subtracted to the other services. Finally, the
adoption of short range V2V and V2R communications have
been explored to ofﬂoad the cellular network in the uplink,
showing that 30% to 90% data trafﬁc can be ofﬂoaded even
with few RSUs, depending on the number of vehicles equipped
with such technology and the accepted delivery delay.
Besides the several aspects discussed in this paper, a number
of issues are still open for future work. Concerning the beneﬁt
of smart navigation for the driver, we will extend our study to
the effect of smart navigation when all vehicles are routed
at the same time. Furthermore, we will investigate if the

69
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
same trafﬁc estimation can be obtained with a lower amount
of information, adaptively changing the rate of both uplink
collection and downlink update following trafﬁc conditions.
Regarding cellular resources, we will investigate the adoption
of long term evolution (LTE) and LTE advance instead of
UMTS. Focusing on short range communications, we will
investigate other routing algorithms and we will also address
the downlink diffusion of information from the RSUs to the
SNAVs.
VIII.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank the colleagues at WiLab for their
contribution in the PEGASUS project and the reviewers for
their valuable comments.
This work has been funded by the national project PEGA-
SUS, ﬁnanced by the Italian Ministry of the Economic Devel-
opment in the framework of Industria 2015. The work has been
developed at WiLab (Bologna, Italy) with the collaboration of
researchers from CNR-IEIIT and DEI, University of Bologna.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Bazzi, B. Masini, G. Pasolini, and O. Andrisano, “Wireless commu-
nications enabling smart mobility: Results from the project PEGASUS,”
in Second International Conference on Mobile Services, Resources, and
Users (MOBILITY) 2012, Oct. 2012.
[2]
PEGASUS project. Accessed on June 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://pegasus.octotelematics.com
[3]
A. Bazzi, B. Masini, and O. Andrisano, “On the frequent acquisition
of small data through RACH in UMTS for ITS applications,” Vehicular
Technology, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 2914–2926, 2011.
[4]
A. Conti, A. Bazzi, B. Masini, and O. Andrisano, ”Vehicular Networks:
Techniques, Standards, and Applications”. Auerbach Pub., CRC Press,
Taylor & Francis Group, 2009, ch. Heterogeneous Wireless Communi-
cations for Vehicular Networks, pp. 63–107, ISBN: 9781420085716.
[5]
A. Bazzi, B. Masini, G. Pasolini, and P. Torreggiani, “Telecommu-
nication systems enabling real time navigation,” in Intelligent Trans-
portation Systems (ITSC), 2010 13th International IEEE Conference
on, 2010, pp. 1057–1064.
[6]
A. Toppan, A. Bazzi, P. Toppan, B. Masini, and O. Andrisano, “Ar-
chitecture of a simulation platform for the smart navigation service
investigation,” in Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and
Communications (WiMob), 2010 IEEE 6th International Conference on,
2010, pp. 548–554.
[7]
A. Bazzi and B. Masini, “Real time trafﬁc updates via UMTS: Unicast
versus multicast transmissions,” in Vehicular Technology Conference
(VTC Fall), 2011 IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–6.
[8]
A. Bazzi, B. Masini, and G. Pasolini, “V2V and V2R for cellular
resources saving in vehicular applications,” in Wireless Communications
and Networking Conference (WCNC), 2012 IEEE, 2012, pp. 3199–
3203.
[9]
IEEE Trial-Use Standard for Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments
(WAVE) - Multi-Channel Operation, Std., 2006.
[10]
Standard for Information Technology- Telecommunications and In-
formation Exchange between Systems- Local and Metropolitan Area
Networks-Speciﬁc Requirements Part 11 - Amendment 6: Wireless
Access in Vehicular Environment, IEEE Std. 802.11p, 2010.
[11]
Vissim. Accessed on June 2013. [Online]. Available: http://vision-
trafﬁc.ptvgroup.com/en-us/products/ptv-vissim
[12]
A. Bazzi, G. Pasolini, and C. Gambetti, “SHINE: Simulation platform
for heterogeneous interworking networks,” in Communications, 2006.
ICC ’06. IEEE International Conference on, vol. 12, 2006, pp. 5534–
5539.
[13]
C. Sommer, A. Schmidt, Y. Chen, R. German, W. Koch, and F. Dressler,
“On the feasibility of UMTS-based trafﬁc information systems,” Ad Hoc
Networks, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 506 – 517, 2010.
[14]
I. Lequerica, P. Ruiz, and V. Cabrera, “Improvement of vehicular
communications by using 3G capabilities to disseminate control infor-
mation,” Network, IEEE, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 32–38, 2010.
[15]
D. Valerio, A. D’Alconzo, F. Ricciato, and W. Wiedermann, “Exploiting
cellular networks for road trafﬁc estimation: A survey and a research
roadmap,” in Vehicular Technology Conference, 2009. VTC Spring 2009.
IEEE 69th, 2009, pp. 1–5.
[16]
The aktiv CoCar project. Accessed on June 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://www.aktiv-online.org
[17]
S. Cho, K. Geon, Y. Jeong, C.-H. Ahn, S.-I. Lee, and H. Lee, “Real
time trafﬁc information service using terrestrial digital multimedia
broadcasting system,” Broadcasting, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 52,
no. 4, pp. 550–556, 2006.
[18]
P. Belanovic, D. Valerio, A. Paier, T. Zemen, F. Ricciato, and C. Meck-
lenbrauker, “On wireless links for vehicle-to-infrastructure communica-
tions,” Vehicular Technology, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 59, no. 1, pp.
269–282, 2010.
[19]
A. Bazzi, B. M. Masini, A. Toppan, and O. Andrisano, “The beneﬁts of
a cellular enabled smart navigation in urban environments,” in Energy
Conference and Exhibition (ENERGYCON), 2012 IEEE International,
2012, pp. 1044–1048.
[20]
U. Lee, E. Magistretti, B. Zhou, M. Gerla, P. Bellavista, and A. Corradi,
“Efﬁcient data harvesting in mobile sensor platforms,” in Pervasive
Computing and Communications Workshops, 2006. PerCom Workshops
2006. Fourth Annual IEEE International Conference on, 2006, pp. 5
pp.–356.
[21]
U. Lee and M. Gerla, “A survey of urban vehicular sensing platforms,”
Computer Networks, vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 527 – 544, 2010.
[22]
F. Losilla, A.-J. Garcia-Sanchez, F. Garcia-Sanchez, J. Garcia-Haro, and
Z. J. Haas, “A comprehensive approach to WSN-based ITS applications:
A survey,” Sensors, vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 10 220–10 265, 2011.
[23]
B. Masini, L. Zuliani, and O. Andrisano, “On the effectiveness of a
GPRS based intelligent transportation system in a realistic scenario,” in
Vehicular Technology Conference, 2006. VTC 2006-Spring. IEEE 63rd,
vol. 6, 2006, pp. 2997–3001.
[24]
X. Yu, H. Zhao, L. Zhang, S. Wu, B. Krishnamachari, and V. Li,
“Cooperative sensing and compression in vehicular sensor networks for
urban monitoring,” in Communications (ICC), 2010 IEEE International
Conference on, 2010, pp. 1–5.
[25]
A. R. Al-Ali, I. Zualkernan, and F. Aloul, “A mobile GPRS-sensors
array for air pollution monitoring,” Sensors Journal, IEEE, vol. 10,
no. 10, pp. 1666–1671, 2010.
[26]
B. Hull, V. Bychkovsky, Y. Zhang, K. Chen, M. Goraczko, A. Miu,
E. Shih, H. Balakrishnan, and S. Madden, “CarTel: a distributed mobile
sensor computing system,” in Proceedings of the 4th international
conference on Embedded networked sensor systems, ser. SenSys ’06.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2006, pp. 125–138.
[27]
U. Dietz, “CoCar Feasibility Study: Technology, Business and Dissem-
ination,” CoCar Consortium, Report, May 2009.
[28]
TMC.
Accessed
on
June
2013.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.tisa.org/technologies/tmc/
[29]
Trafﬁc and Traveller Information (TTI)
TTI messages via trafﬁc
message coding Part 1: Coding protocol for Radio Data System Trafﬁc
Message Channel (RDS-TMC) using ALERT-C, ISO Std. 14 819-1.
[30]
Tom
Tom.
Accessed
on
June
2013.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.tomtom.com/
[31]
P. Benko, G. Malicsko, and A. Veres, “A large-scale, passive analysis of
end-to-end TCP performance over GPRS,” in INFOCOM 2004. Twenty-
third AnnualJoint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communica-
tions Societies, vol. 3, 2004, pp. 1882–1892 vol.3.
[32]
I. Vukovic and T. Brown, “Performance analysis of the random access
channel (RACH) in WCDMA,” in Vehicular Technology Conference,

70
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
2001. VTC 2001 Spring. IEEE VTS 53rd, vol. 1, 2001, pp. 532–536
vol.1.
[33]
Trafﬁc and Travel Information (TTI) via Transport Protocol Expert
Group (TPEG) data-streams: Parts 1 to 6, ETSI Std. ISO 18 234.
[34]
B. Bai, W. Chen, K. Letaief, and Z. Cao, “Low complexity outage
optimal distributed channel allocation for vehicle-to-vehicle communi-
cations,” Selected Areas in Communications, IEEE Journal on, vol. 29,
no. 1, pp. 161–172, 2011.
[35]
J. Karedal, N. Czink, A. Paier, F. Tufvesson, and A. Molisch, “Path
loss modeling for vehicle-to-vehicle communications,” Vehicular Tech-
nology, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 323–328, 2011.
[36]
C. Campolo and A. Molinaro, “Vehicle-to-roadside multihop data deliv-
ery in 802.11p/WAVE vehicular ad hoc networks,” in Global Telecom-
munications Conference (GLOBECOM 2010), 2010 IEEE, 2010, pp.
1–5.
[37]
A. Paier, D. Faetani, and C. Mecklenbrauker, “Performance evaluation
of IEEE 802.11p physical layer infrastructure-to-vehicle real-world
measurements,” in Applied Sciences in Biomedical and Communication
Technologies (ISABEL), 2010 3rd International Symposium on, 2010,
pp. 1–5.
[38]
P. Alexander, D. Haley, and A. Grant, “Cooperative intelligent transport
systems: 5.9-GHz ﬁeld trials,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 99, no. 7,
pp. 1213–1235, 2011.
[39]
V. Shivaldova, T. Paulin, A. Paier, and C. Mecklenbrauker, “Perfor-
mance measurements of multi-hop communications in vehicular ad
hoc networks,” in Communications (ICC), 2012 IEEE International
Conference on, 2012, pp. 7162–7166.
[40]
A. Bazzi, B. Masini, A. Zanella, and G. Pasolini, “Vehicle-to-vehicle
and vehicle-to-roadside multi-hop communications for vehicular sensor
networks: Simulations and ﬁeld trial,” in Communications, 2013. ICC
’13. IEEE International Conference on, June 2013.
[41]
D. Jiang and L. Delgrossi, “IEEE 802.11p: Towards an international
standard for wireless access in vehicular environments,” in Vehicular
Technology Conference (VTC Spring), 2008 IEEE, 2008, pp. 2036–
2040.
[42]
M. van Eenennaam, W. Wolterink, G. Karagiannis, and G. Heijenk,
“Exploring the solution space of beaconing in VANETs,” in Vehicular
Networking Conference (VNC), 2009 IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–8.
[43]
R. Schmidt, T. Leinmuller, E. Schoch, F. Kargl, and G. Schafer,
“Exploration of adaptive beaconing for efﬁcient intervehicle safety
communication,” Network, IEEE, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 14–19, 2010.
[44]
F. Li and Y. Wang, “Routing in vehicular ad hoc networks: A survey,”
Vehicular Technology Magazine, IEEE, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 12–22, 2007.
[45]
J. Bernsen and D. Manivannan, “Unicast routing protocols for vehicular
ad hoc networks: A critical comparison and classiﬁcation,” Pervasive
and Mobile Computing, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1 – 18, 2009.

