173
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Inter-domain Peering and Overlay Topologies Support for  
Content-Aware Networks Dedicated to Multimedia Applications 
 
Eugen Borcoci 
Telecommunication Dept. 
University POLITEHNICA of 
Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
eugen.borcoci@elcom.pub.ro 
Radu Dinel Miruta 
Telecommunication Dept. 
University POLITEHNICA of 
Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
radu.miruta@elcom.pub.ro 
Serban Georgica Obreja 
Telecommunication Dept. 
University POLITEHNICA of 
Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
serban.obreja@elcom.pub.ro 
 
 
 
 
Abstract — The Content Aware Networking (CAN) is an 
emerging architectural solution, responding to the significant 
increase in Internet content orientation. In particular media 
flows distribution can be well supported by virtual CAN 
oriented networks, aiming to control and assure the quality of 
services desired for such real-time services. In case of multi-
domain spanning VCAN an inter-domain peering problem has 
to be solved, to create the VCAN overlay. This paper is a 
continuation of a previous work and refines a management 
framework for inter-domain peering in overlay VCAN, QoS 
enabled, built over multi-domain and multi-provider IP 
networks. An overlay inter-domain topology service and 
negotiation protocols are defined in this paper, based on 
cooperation of the CAN Managers belonging to network 
domains. Alternative solutions are proposed for VCAN 
topology creation and their usage is outlined.  The scalability 
and efficiency is preliminary analyzed.  
Keywords — Content-Aware Networking, Network Aware 
Applications, Multi-domain, Inter-domain peering, Management, 
Multimedia distribution, Future Internet. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The current Internet limitations are recently recognized, 
related to the increasing needs of today world and the global 
spread of this technology. Intensive research efforts are 
spent in order to find some enhanced architectural solutions 
or “clean slate” ones, to solve the limitations thus leading to 
the Future Internet (FI) architectures. Sample of works are 
presented in [2]-[8][14].  The work [14] emphasizes the 
strong orientation of the FI towards content and services and 
shows 
the 
importance 
of 
management. 
Network 
virtualization is seen as an important “tool” to overcome the 
ossification of the current Internet [2]-[5]. The overview 
paper [6], identifies the inefficiency of the current Internet 
for content delivery and analyses new solutions based on 
Content Oriented Networking (CON) with decoupling of 
content and location identification at networking level. A 
major idea in recent proposals is the shift from the 
traditional TCP/IP stack concepts, based on traditional IP 
network layer to more sophisticated solutions that insert 
more intelligence in the network nodes.  The new network 
nodes will process  the data packets/content_chunks, based 
on content type recognition or, even more, treating the data 
objects based on their names and not as in traditional 
TCP/IP stack, i.e.,  based on location address, [6][7]. The 
TCP/IP stack is changed, in the sense that IP is no longer 
the thin waist, of the stack [7]. Thus the routing and 
forwarding paradigms are significantly changed being based 
on content names rather than on destination IP address. 
Also caching content will be available in network nodes, 
thus giving the possibility to have the content replicas closer 
to the requester and so, shorter routes between content 
sources and consumers.  
The revolutionary approaches are often referred to as 
Information-Centric Networking (ICN), which is used as an 
umbrella term for related concepts such as Content-Oriented 
Networking (CON) and Content-Centric Networking (CCN), 
[5][6][7][8]. Apart from novel from routing and forwarding 
functions, the ICN routers have caching capabilities, [7][9], 
thus shortening the paths between content sources and 
consumers. These and other reasons (not detailed here), lead 
to the conclusion that ICN/CCN/CON approach has some 
strong open issues related to scalability, security, etc. and 
also needs significant changes of the current Internet 
deployments and protocols. Last but not least, the 
complexity of this approach makes necessary to apply 
autonomic management principles as described in [10]. 
Therefore, still evolutionary (or incremental) other 
approaches have been developed in parallel, such as 
Content-Aware Networking (CAN), which aim to create a 
content - awareness by building upon existing Internet 
network layers. The new concept actually has two aspects:  
the Content-Awareness at Network layer (CAN) and 
Network-Awareness at Applications layers (NAA). These 
evolutionary solutions are hopefully offering a better 
support to the development of the networked media systems 
and also to the market orientation towards content, while 
being open to future migration to full ICN/CCN. The 
CAN/NAA approach is claimed by many studies to bring 

174
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
new benefits for both, Service and Application Layer and 
Network layer, thus creating a powerful cross-layer 
optimization loop between the transport and applications 
and services layers, while still allowing a seamless 
deployment. The network service can better adapt itself to 
the content which is transported, while the applications and 
services may take benefit from (limited) information about 
the network service.  
A CAN/NAA architecture has been proposed in the 
European FP7 ICT running research project, “Media 
Ecosystem Deployment Through Ubiquitous Content-Aware 
Network Environments”, ALICANTE, [11][12][13].  It 
defined an architecture, and then specified designed and now 
is currently implementing a Media Ecosystem, on top of 
multi-domain IP  networks, aiming to offer a large variety of 
services for different business actors playing roles of 
consumers and/or providers. Architecturally, this is a 
“middle-way” solution: it adopted content-type recognition 
at network level and light virtualization (separation in the 
Data Plane of the virtual VCANs but has defined a single 
management and control plane). This solution offers 
seamless deployment perspectives and tries to avoid the 
scalability problems of the full ICN/CCN/CON approach. 
Several 
cooperating 
environments 
are 
defined, 
including several business entities/actors: User Environment 
(UE), containing the End-Users; Service Environment (SE), 
containing High Level Service Providers (SP) and Content 
Providers (CP); Network Environment (NE), where a new 
CAN Provider exists (CANP - managing and offering 
Virtual Content Aware Networks- VCANs);  traditional 
Network Providers (NP/ISP) - managing the network 
elements at IP level. By  “environment”, it is understood a 
generic grouping of functions working for a common goal 
and which possibly vertically span one or more several 
architectural (sub-) layers. 
A Virtual Content Aware Network - VCAN as assumed 
in this study is media oriented in the sense that the network 
services offered by this logical data plane to the upper layers 
are optimized for media flows requirements expressed by the 
Service Provider. However regular IP traffic can be as well 
accepted. A VCAN can span several network domains, 
where each one is managed independently (a realistic 
business constraint), while offering different levels of QoS 
guarantees for media flows needs. Therefore decision 
regarding the architecture has to be taken, on how to manage 
the peering, first at the level of the Data Plane (including 
inter-domain routing) and second, in the Management and 
Control Plane (M&C signaling) in order that they cooperate 
to the realization of a shared VCAN. This is the subject of 
this 
paper. 
Several 
solutions 
are 
analyzed 
for 
Management&Control Plane (cascade, hub, mixed) and 
finally the so called “hub model” has been selected. A M&C 
negotiation protocol is proposed to run between domain 
managers. The scalability aspects are preliminary discussed. 
 The Content Aware Network Provider offers to the 
upper layers enhanced VCAN-based connectivity services, 
unicast and multicast (QoS enabled) over multi-domain, 
multi-provider IP networks. The VCAN resources are 
managed 
quasi-statically 
by 
provisioning 
and 
also 
dynamically by using adaptation procedures for media flows. 
The management is based on vertical and horizontal Service 
Level Agreements (SLAs) negotiated and concluded 
between providers (e.g., Service Provider-Content Aware 
Network Provider). In the Data Plane, content/service 
description information (metadata) can also be inserted in 
the media flow packets by the Content Servers and treated 
appropriately by the intelligent routers of the VCAN. 
The multimedia hifgh level services for which such a 
system can be used as platform are mainly related to content 
distribution in real and non-real time (Video on Demand 
streaming, IPTV, etc.) with several level of QoS guarantees 
at Service Provider requests. The VCANs are custotized for 
a given content type. 
In [1] an overlay inter-domain topology service and 
negotiation protocols are defined to serve the multi-domain 
VCAN mapping. It was based on cooperation of the CAN 
Managers belonging to network domains. The paper [15] 
studied the mapping the overlay VCANs onto real network 
resources in a multi-domain context, while satisfying QoS 
constraints. In that approach the VCAN resources are first 
logically reserved; later when installation is requested by the 
SP, they are really allocated in routers. A basic mapping 
algorithm has been developed. 
This paper integrates the results of the previous work 
[1][15], and brings additional contributions. It refines 
further the management framework for inter-domain peering 
in overlay VCAN, QoS enabled,  built over multi-domain 
and multi-provider IP networks. A new variant with global 
optimization is proposed as different from the basic mapping 
algorithm presented in [15]. The one-step solution and two 
step solution for VCAN mapping algorithm are compared 
and experimental results are presented. Implementation 
results of the combined algorithm (constrained routing, 
admission control, QoS reservation and final VCAN 
mapping) are presented. Scalability is also discussed. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section II presents 
additional samples of related work. Section III recalls the 
overall architecture. Section IV shortly presents the content 
awareness features of the system and QoS assurance 
solutions. Section V is dedicated to the peering solution 
selected and associated negotiations aiming to extend a 
VCAN over several domains. Section VI discusses variants 
of solutions in terms of complexity, scalability and other 
considerations. Section VII shows how the overlay topology 
is used in VCAN mapping, and experimental results are 
presented and discussed. Section VIII contains conclusions 
and future work outline. 
II. 
OTHER RELATED WORK 
The objective of the paper is to develop management 
solutions to govern the construction of Virtual Content 
Aware Networks, QoS spanning several independent 
network domains which should be peered aiming to  assure 
guaranteed QoS enabled transport of real-time and media 
traffic. 
For inter-domain QoS enabled domain peering, there 
exist basically two kinds of approaches. The first one 

175
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[16][17], proposes QoS enhancements for the Border 
Gateway Protocol (BGP). The BGP advertises QoS related 
information between network domains – seen at limit as 
autonomous systems (ASes), and then a QoS aware routing 
table is built. However, the notion of content awareness at 
domains level is absent there.  
The work [18] discusses creation and routing of/in 
Content Addressable Network Virtual Topology which is a 
partially similar with our idea to extend the inter-domain 
network matrix in a new one with few intra-domain details. 
They pick a uniform hash function that maps an object to a 
point in [0,1]d. They divide the d-cube into zones and assign 
a node to a zone and store (object, location) pair in the zone 
that owns the zone for the hashed value of the object. The 
neighbors of a zone are defined as those nodes whose zones 
overlap over d-1 dimensions. If a node i wants to find out 
where object j is stored, it computes h(i) and then sends a 
lookup message to its neighbor that is closest to h(j); this 
continues until the message reaches the node that owns h(j); 
it then returns the location for object j. 
Boosted by the increasing demand for multimedia 
applications over Internet, the problem of finding routing 
paths satisfying QoS constraints has been extensively studied 
by the research community. Representative examples of such 
QoS constraints are related to bandwidth, delay, jitter and 
packet loss [19]. Even if the e-2-e delay is often a metric of 
interest for multimedia content distribution the authors from 
[19] prefer to minimize delay, maintaining only optimal rate. 
They proposed an overlay model that represents the real 
network topology; essentially, it is a regular overlay graph, 
except the links are not weighted by numbers; instead, the 
link capacities are variables, and a set of linear capacity 
constraints express the constraints placed on overlay links by 
shared bottlenecks. In their model, every node selects d 
neighbors to which it has links with the highest bandwidth. 
In a similar mode of establishing the bandwidth capacity 
uploaded Intra-NRM (Intra-Network Resourge Manager) to 
its associated CAN Manager (CANMgr) for each asked 
domain, in [19] is used a term of predicted bandwidth. In 
their work, the highest-bandwidth multicast tree is obtained 
by a greedy algorithm modified to take linear capacity 
constraints into consideration. 
We have to note that the acronym CAN might create 
confusion, given that it is used in different texts with several 
semantics. As an example, the paper [20], introduces the 
concept of a Content-Addressable Network (CAN) as a 
distributed infrastructure that provides hash table-like 
functionality on Internet-like scales. It is shown that the 
CAN is scalable, fault-tolerant and completely self-
organizing. However the Content-Aware Networks concept 
considered here has not as fundamental property the 
addressability based on content names but the adaptation of 
the transport characteristics to the type of content, mainly in 
order to assure the required quality of services. 
Other solutions for inter-domain QoS peering and 
routing are based on the overlay network idea [21][22][23] 
[24]. An overlay network can be defined, which first, 
abstracts each domain with a node, represented by the 
domain resource manager, or more detailed with several 
nodes represented by the ingress-egress pair routers from 
that domain. There exist protocols to transport QoS and 
other information between nodes and, based on this 
information, QoS routing algorithms are used to choose the 
QoS capable path. In [21] a Virtual Topology (VT) is 
defined by a set of virtual links that map the current link 
state of the domain without showing internal details of the 
physical network topology. Then Push and Pull models for 
building the VT at each node are considered and analyzed. 
In the Push model each AS advertises its VT to their 
neighbor ASes. This model is suited for small topologies. In 
the Pull model the Virtual Topology is requested when 
needed, and only from the ASes situated along the path 
between given source and destinations; the path itself is 
determined using BGP.  
After routes are found, a negotiation protocol should be 
run [1][15][23], to establish inter-domains Service Level 
Specification (SLS) agreements (note that the SLS is the 
SLA technical part) containing the reciprocal commitments 
of the parties and in particular clauses for QoS guarantees. 
The inter-domain peering in the management and control 
plane is related on what topology the domain mangers 
discuss with each other. Several solutions are examined and 
compared 
(cascade, 
hub, 
mixed-mode) 
[21][22][23]. 
However, neither solution considers the content awareness 
capabilities of the multiple domain infrastructure, nor the 
virtualization aspects. This paper   takes these into account. 
The architecture proposed here realizes parallel Internet 
planes as in [25], but additionally associates to each plane a 
VCAN (Virtual Content Aware Network). Over the overlay 
topology determined, VCANs will be mapped and then 
finally the VCANs are mapped onto real network links. This 
achieves cooperation between the network layer and 
applications and services layers, thus realizing a powerful 
optimization loop (OL), similar to [26]. 
III. 
ALICANTE SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND VCAN 
MANAGEMENT 
A. General Architecture 
The general ALICANTE architecture is already defined 
in [11][12][13]. A set of business actors is defined, 
composed of traditional Service Providers (SP), Content 
Providers (CP), Network Providers (NP) and End-Users 
(EU). New business actors are introduced: CAN Provider 
(CANP) offering virtual layer connectivity services and the 
Home-Box (HB) - partially managed by the SP, NP, and the 
end-user. It is  located at end-user's premises and gathering 
content/context-aware and network-aware information. The 
HB can also act as a CP/SP for other HBs, on behalf of the 
EUs. Correspondingly, two novel virtual layers exist: the 
Content Aware Network layer and the Home Box layer. The 
novel CAN routers are called Media-Aware Network 
Elements (MANE) to emphasize their additional capabilities: 
content and context - awareness, controlled QoS/QoE, 
security and monitoring features, etc. 

176
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The CAN layer Management & Control Plane is partially 
distributed; it supports CAN customization to respond to the 
Service Environment needs, including: topology, different 
communication modes like  unicast, multicast, broadcast, or 
even peer-to-peer (P2P),  traffic control and QoS constraints, 
etc. and also allows efficient network resource exploitation. 
The interface between CAN and the upper layer supports 
cross-layer optimizations interactions in several ways:  
dynamically provisioning and modification of VCANs as to 
serve several SPs requirements (only this is the subject of 
this paper); individual or aggregated media flow adaptation 
to the current network conditions and terminal context based 
on Scalable Video Codec technologies; may offer network 
distance information to Home Boxes to improve their 
collaboration in P2P style, [26]. A hierarchical monitoring 
subsystem supervises several points of the service 
distribution chain and feeds the adaptation subsystems with 
appropriate information, at the Home Box and Content 
Aware Network Layers. Fig. 1 presents a partial view of the 
ALICANTE architecture, with emphasis on the CAN layer 
and management interaction. The network contains several 
Network Domains (ND), belonging to NPs (they can be also 
seen as Autonomous Systems - AS) and access networks 
(AN). 
Note that the Access Networks (AN) are out of scope of 
VCANs. This decision has two reasons: the access 
technologies are numerous, with more or less well defined 
resource management; the scope of the ALICANTE project 
has been initially and intentionally limited to core network 
only.   
One CAN Manager (CANMgr) exists for each IP domain 
to assure the consistency of VCAN planning, provisioning, 
(based on negotiation), offering, installation, exploitation 
termination and advertisement. Each domain has an Intra-
domain Network Resource Manager (IntraNRM), as the 
ultimate authority configuring the network nodes. The 
Content Aware Network layer cooperates with Home Box 
and Service Environment by offering them CAN services. 
This solution associates a Content Aware Network Provider 
component to each Intra-Network Resource Manager 
component and gives the possibility to an Intra-NRM to 
upgrade its functionality and become CANP. 
B. VCAN Management 
The Virtual Content Aware Network Management 
framework has been already defined in [11][12][13]. Here 
only a short summary is recalled for the sake of clarity. 
Several design decisions among several solutions, have 
been taken as a trade-off between complexity, optimality and 
scalability. Some details on the selection are given in the 
corresponding sections. 
• 
M&C 
plane 
and 
virtualisation 
degree: 
light 
virtualisation (separate virtual Data Planes only); Full 
virtualisation (all virtual Planes, i.e.,  Data, 
Management and Control are separate). 
Decision: the light virtualisation model based on a single 
management and control plane has been adopted in 
ALICANTE, given less complexity, seamless development 
capabilities in real networks and still possibility to offer good 
transport services for media flows. 
• Relationships 
between 
Content 
Aware 
Network 
Provider (CANP) and Service Provider (SP) concerning 
the VCAN services : Static SLA between CANP and 
SP; Dynamic SLA between CANP and SP:  
Decision: Dynamic SLA, aiming at higher flexibility and 
dynamicity  
• Multiple domain capable VCANs – establishment 
procedure : each CAN Manager manages only one 
VCAN spanning a single domain; any CAN Manager 
can initiate and coordinate multi-domain capable 
VCAN construction 
Decision: second choice, given the flexibility 
• Support of Content-awareness provided by SP to the 
CAN layer : CAN layer does not get any support 
information on content provided by SP; CANP gets 
content related information from SP via the control 
plane; SP provides content related information via the 
control plane and data plane 
Decision: all three are adopted to get flexibility. If no 
information on Content Awareness (CA) from SP, then 
CAN layer is free to choose its own degree and behavior – 
related to CA, and therefore selects the methods to enforce 
CA in the VCANs. 
• 
Inter-domain negotiation style between CAN 
Managers for multi-domain VCANs establishment: 
hub Model; cascade/mesh model;  
Decision: Hub model, given more control on the VCAN for 
the initiating CAN Manager 
 
 At the Service Manager SM@SP, the CAN Network 
Resources Manager (CAN_RMgr) performs all actions 
needed for VCAN support on behalf of SP. It performs, at SP 
level, VCAN planning, provisioning (negotiation with CANP 
on behalf of the SP) and then VCAN operation supervision. 
The CANMgr@CANP performs, at the CAN layer, VCAN 
planning, provisioning and operation. The two entities 
interact based on the SLA/SLS contract initiated by the SP. 
The interface implementation for management is based on 
Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP)/Web Services.  
The contracts/interactions of SLA/SLS types performed 
in the M&C Plane are shown in Fig. 1. The management 
interactions are described as follows: 
(1) SP-CANP: the Service Provider (SP) requests to CAN 
Provider (CANP) to provision/ modify/ terminate  VCANs to 
which the  CANP will finally say yes/no; also CANP might 
advertise existent VCANs to SP; Actually the CANP is 
represented by a single CAN Manger which is the initiator of 
the VCAN construction. The role of an initiator can be 
played by any CAN Manager.  
(2) CANP-NP: CANP negotiates resources with NP; 
(3) CANP-CANP– negotiations are needed between CAN 
Mangers if the VCAN spans several NP domains;  

177
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(4) Network Interconnection Agreements (NIA): between 
the Network Providers or between NPs and CANPs; these 
are not new ALICANTE functionalities but are necessary for 
NP cooperation.  
After the SP negotiates a desired VCAN with CANP, it 
will issue the installation commands to CANP, which in turn 
configures, via Intra-NRM (action 5), the MANE (Media 
Aware Network Element) functional blocks (input and 
output).  
 
 
AS1 
Intra-NRM 
@NP 
AS2 
Intra-NRMr 
@NP 
CAN 
Manager  
CAN 
Manager 
 
2 
3 
1 
Multi-domain VCAN 
QoS enabled 
NIA 
 
HB + SP 
 Environment 
 
MANE 
MANE 
Service  
 Provider 
5 
CAN RM 
4 
OL 
MANE 
Access 
Network 
Access 
Network 
HB 
MANE 
Home 
Network 
EUT 
 
Service  
Manager@SP 
SLS 
SLS 
HB/CS 
 
CANP :
CAN  
Layer  
Network 
Layer  
 
 
 
Figure 1 High level ALICANTE architecture: multi-domain VCANs and 
main management and control interactions 
Notations: OL - Optimization Loop;  SLS – Service Level 
Specification; NIA - Network Interconnection Agreement; 
RM – Resource Management; SP – Service Provider; CANP 
Content Aware Network provider; NP - Network Provider 
CS- Content Server; Intra-NRM – Intra domain Network 
Resource Manager; HB-Home Box; EUT- End User 
Terminal; MANE – Media Aware Network Element ; AS – 
Autonomous System 
 
IV. CONTENT AWARENESS AND QOS AT CAN LAYER 
The Content Awareness (CA) is realized in three ways:  
(i) by concluding a SLA  between the Service Provider 
and CAN provider (SP –CANP) concerning different VCAN 
construction. The Content Servers (CS) are then instructed 
by the Service Provider to insert (if they are able to do it) 
some special Content Aware Transport Information (CATI) 
fields in the headers (e.g in the Real Time Protocol header)of 
the data packets. How to optimize this insertion is not in the 
scope of this paper. This CATI simplifies the media flow 
classification and treatment by the MANE;  
(ii) SP-CANP SLA is concluded, but no CATI can be 
inserted in the data packets (this is the case of legacy Content 
Servers). The MANE applies deep packet inspection for data 
flow classification and assignment to VCANs. The flows 
treatment is still based on VCANs characteristics defined in 
the SLA;  
(iii) no SP–CANP SLA exists and  no CATI. However, 
the flows treatment can still be processed in content aware 
style, but conforming to the local policy at CANP and 
IntraNRM. 
The networking technologies to support QoS enabled 
VCANs are DiffServ and/or MPLS.  The sets of flows are 
splitted in QoS classes (QC), with a mapping between the 
VCANs and the QCs. Several levels of QoS granularity can 
be established when defining VCANs.  The QoS behavior of 
each VCAN (seen as one of the parallel Internet planes) is 
established in the SP-CANP SLA contract. 
Generally a 1-to-1 mapping between a VCAN and a 
network plane will exist. Customization of VCANs is 
possible in terms of QoS level of guarantees (weak or 
strong), QoS granularity, content adaptation procedures, 
degree of security, etc. A given VCAN can be realized by the 
CAN Provider, by combining several processes, while being 
possible to choose different solutions concerning routing and 
forwarding, packet processing, and resource management. 
The definitions of local QoS classes (QC) and extended 
QCs and meta-QoS classes were adopted in ALICANTE, 
[16][17][23][25] to allow capturing the notion of QoS 
capabilities across several domains. Each domain may have 
its local QoS classes and several local QCs can be combined 
to form an extended QC. The types of VCANs defined for 
different QoS granularities based on QoS Classes are 
VCANs based on meta-QCs [16], VCANs based on local QC 
composition and hierarchical VCANs based on local QC 
composition. The last case is the most efficient but also the 
most complex. Inside each VCAN, several QCs are defined 
corresponding to platinum, gold, silver, etc. In such a case, 
the mapping between service flows at SP level and CANs 
can be done per type of the service: VoD, VoIP, Video-
conference, etc.  
The definition of QoS classes makes the system robust to 
traffic overload with protection of desired flows against such 
overloads. Actually the QoS support for the real-time traffic 
in the VCANs are assured by : 
- 
QoS constrained routing and logical reservation of 
traffic trunk pipes (provisioned at SP request); 
- 
installation of them in the network (unicast or 
multicast mode); 
- 
traffic enforcing rules in the Data Plane. 
 
For unicast VCAN the supporting QoS technology is 
MPLS cooperating with Differentiated Services (E-LSP 
solution). For multicast case  QoS constrained trees are 
computed, resource reservation is done and then  in the Data 
plane Diffserv is enforced. 

178
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
V. CAN  MULTI-DOMAIN PEERING 
A. Horizontal M&C VCAN Negotiation 
A given VCAN may span one or several IP domains. In a 
multi-domain context, one should distinguish between two 
topologies (in terms of how the domains are linked with each 
others): Data plane topology and Management&Control  
plane (M&C) topology.  The first can be of any kind 
(depending on SP needs and including the domains spanned 
by a given VCAN). In a general case, one may have a 
mesh/graph of domains. The M&C topology defines how the 
CAN Managers associated to different domains inter-
communicate for multi-domain VCANs construction. The 
VCAN initiating CANMgr has to negotiate with other CAN 
Managers. There exist two main models to organise this 
communication at management level: hub model  and 
cascade model, see  [16][17][23][25]. 
The hub model was selected for this study; it has the 
advantage that initiating CAN Manager(CANMgr) can 
know, each VCAN component (network)  and its status. A 
drawback is that each CAN Manager should know the inter-
domain topology (complete graph) of network domains. 
They could be of lower tier grade or be Autonomous 
Systems (AS), involved in a VCAN. Given the tiered 
hierarchy of the Internet, the number of Network Domains 
(ND) involved in an E2E chain is not too high (actually is  
lower than 10, [8]), scalability problem is not so stringent. 
Two functional components are needed: (1) inter-domain 
topology discovery protocol; (2) overlay negotiation protocol 
for SLA/SLS negotiations between CAN Managers.  
 
The cascade model, [17][23] is more advantageous for 
initiating CAN Manager if a chain of domains is to form the 
VCAN. However, for an arbitrary mesh topology of the NDs 
composing the VCAN, and for multicast enabled VCAN, 
this model offers less efficient management capabilities.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
MANE 
CANMgr n 
CNDm 
CNDn 
MANE 
CANMgr m 
SP1 
1.Initial VCAN1 request 
2.1.VCAN1 negotiation 
2.2.VCAN1 negotiation 
ANm1 
ANm2 
ANn1 
 
HB 
 
HB 
 
HB 
CNDk 
CANMgr k 
ANk2 
ANk1 
 
HB 
 
HB 
Resulting 
VCAN1 
CS1 
CS2 
CS3 
Traffic Trunks 
SP2 
Other SP VCAN2 request 
VCAN2 
 
 
Figure 2 Example of  multi-domain VCANs and negotiation signalling for VCAN1( hub model for management plane) 
 
SP – Service Provider; HB - Home Box; CS - Content Server; CND – Core Network Domain;  CANMgr – CAN Manager 
VCAN – Virtual Content Aware Network – logical virtual plane; AN – Access Network;  MANE – Media Aware Network 
Element ;  
 
Fig. 2 shows an example of a multi-domain infrastructure 
and two VCANs, i.e.,  VCAN1 and VCAN2. It is supposed 
that the inter-domain discover protocol has already produced 
its results, so each CAN Manager knows about the inter-
domain graph and have inter-domain routing information, 
including link capacities and QoS related capabilities.  The 
SP1 asks for a VCAN1 to a CANMgr (Initiator) – see action 
1. It was supposed that the SP knew the edge points of this 
VCAN1, i.e.,  the Media Aware Network Elements IDs 
where different sets of HB currently are, or they will be 
connected. The initiator CANMgr_n determines all network 
domains (ND) involved (from the SP information and its 
inter-domain knowledge). The initiator CANMgr splits the 
overall SLS parameters (the VCAN1 is multi-domain), e.g., 

179
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
determining ingress-egress points, bandwidth, delay, etc. 
needed for each domain. Then the initiator CAN Manager 
negotiates in parallel with all other CAN Managers (actions 
2.1, 2.2) to establish the VCAN1 = {VCAN1n U VCAN1m 
U VCAN1k}, where the three components are mapped onto 
the networks CNDn, CNDm, CNDk. In a successful 
scenario, the multi-domain VCAN1 is agreed and then it is 
later instantiated in the network. 
The system allows several Service Providers, each one 
may ask one or several VCANs. In Fig. 2 it is given an 
example of SP2 wanting a VCAN2 spanned over CNDk, 
CNDm. 
B. Overlay Virtual Topology 
Constructing VCAN over one or multiple domains is one 
of the main task of the CAN Manager. Each Core Network 
Domain (CND) has complete autonomy w.r.t. its network 
resources including network dimensioning, off-line traffic 
engineering (TE), and  dynamic routing. The Content Aware 
Network Manager (CANMgr) cooperating with Intra-
Network Resource Manager (Intra-NRM) is supposed to 
know about its network resources.  
Given that in ALICANTE each CND has associated the 
Intra-NRM and CANMgr, one could abstract both under the 
name of Network Domain Manager (NDMgr). This entity 
should have an abstract view of its network domain and 
output links towards neighbors in a form of a set of virtual 
pipes (called Traffic Trunks). A set of such pipes can belong 
to a given QoS class. As already stated, a multiple domain 
VCAN should also belong to some QoS class and therefore 
inter-domain QoS aware routing information is necessary in 
order to increase the chances of successful 
SLS 
establishment, when negotiating the multi-domain VCAN. 
The multi-domain VCANs deployment needs knowledge on 
a virtual multi-domain topology. 
Each Core Network Domain (CND) can assure QoS 
enabled paths towards some destination network prefixes 
while implementing its own network technology: DiffServ, 
MPLS, etc. Also, each CND can be seen in an abstract way 
as an Overlay Network Topology (ONT) expressed in terms 
of TTs (traffic trunks) characterized by of bandwidth, 
latency, jitter, etc. One TT is belonging to a given QoS class 
QCi.  
We define an Overlay Network Service (ONS) 
responsible for getting the ONTs related to CNDs belonging 
to a multi-domain VCAN. The CANM Managers will then 
inter-negotiate the SLS contracts in order to reserve VCAN 
resources and finally ask installation of them. The overlay 
topology can be hierarchised on several levels. 
Fig. 3.a presents a first level (inter-domain) Overlay 
Network Topology, in which, each domain CND is seen as a 
node. The overlay graph of the CNDs belonging to the 
VCAN is composed of the nodes CNDk, CNDn, CNDm. 
Then, a second order ONT can be defined for one CND. Fig. 
3.b shows the ONT for the domain CNDk, composed of 
Traffic Trunks, each one characterized by a bandwidth and a 
delay. If the initiating CAN Manager knows the ONT graph 
of the CNDs involved, then provisioning of QoS enabled 
VCANs can be done.  
 
 
SP 
CNDk 
VCAN 
CNDj 
NDm 
CNDn 
a 
CNDk 
Traffic trunks for 
class QCi 
Ingress 
ONT(CNDk) 
Egress 
CANMk 
CANMn 
Ingress 
CNDm 
CNDn 
CANMm 
B=5, D=4 
B=6, D=2 
B=6, D=2 
B=3, D=1 
b 
 
Figure 3  a. Inter-domain overlay network topology (ONT); b. ONT of the 
domain CNDk ( B= bandwidth, D= max delay- generic figures) 
The Overlay Network Service can collect the topology 
information in two ways (see also [21]): a proactive (push) 
mode and a reactive (also called pull or on demand) mode in 
order to obtain the overlay (virtual) topologies of other NDs.  
In the proactive case, every CND advertises its Overlay 
Network Topology (ONT) to other CNDs without being 
requested for. The advantage is the same as in IP proactive 
routing protocols: the ONTs of other CNDs are already 
available at a given ND because they are periodically or 
event-triggered advertised among CND managers. The 
advertisement can be executed at an initiative of each CND 
manager, so this model allows promotion of some routes to 
other domains. This can be subject of policies. The 
dynamicity is high (event driven advertisements), but the 
complexity is also high. Scalability problems exist, because 
of high control traffic volume and also flooding the neighbor 
CNDs with (maybe) not needed information.  
In the reactive (on-demand) mode the ONTs are obtained 
on demand by an Core Network Domain (CND) interested to 
reach a given destination prefix. The CND will query each 
domain of a given path to get the ONTs. No advertising 
mechanism is necessary. The scalability is higher because 
only the ONTs of the chosen routes will be obtained. Studies 
[8] show that the mean End to End (E2E) communication in 
the Internet usually involves few domains (less than 8). 
Therefore, the number of domains to be queried to obtain the 
ONTs is small. The pull model latency is higher (need time 
for queries and calculations). The updates of ONT 
knowledge is not event driven w.r.t. other CNDs, because 
lack of advertisements. For our purposes we have chosen the 
reactive model.  
If a CAN Manager wants to build an ONT it will query 
its directly linked (at data plane level) neighbor domains (i.e.,  

180
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the corresponding CAN Managers). It is supposed that it has 
the knowledge of such neighbors. There are two possibilities 
of a query: a. non-selective query/demand- i.e.,  the asking 
CANMgr wants to know all neighborhood of the asked 
neighbors; b. selective demand-  the asking CANMgr wants 
to know answers only from those neighbor domains  which 
have paths to a given set of destinations. 
1) Non-selective query 
The interrogating CAN Manager receives from SP the 
IDs of the ingress-egress points of a future VCAN. So, it can 
determine to which domains it belongs (mapping details 
between Ingress-egress IP addresses and network domains 
are out of scope of this paper). Therefore the initiator CAN 
Manager can know which domains must participate to the 
VCAN. It should also determine what other transit domains 
also must participate. The process of topology discovery can 
end when a contiguous graph containing the “must” domain 
is obtained. Note that non-optimal solution can be obtained if 
the process is limited to a minimal graph containing the 
desired 
ingress-egress-points. 
The 
information 
on 
reachability of a given point from a domain can be obtained 
in two ways: by consulting a BGP data base, or based on 
interrogating the neighbors and so on, until information is 
obtained.   
Example:  
1. The SP issues a requests for  VCAN (I1, O1, O2, O3)  
to CANMgr2, assume that this is the VCAN initiator (where 
Ik, k= 1,2, ..…, On, n= 1, 2, … are the ingress and egress 
points of traffic flows (actually these are IP addresses of 
edge MANE routers). 
2. CANMgr2 determines that CND1, CND4, CND5, 
CND6 must participate to the VCAN, because the ingress 
and egress points {I1, O1, O2, O3}   belong to them. 
Each queried CANMgr  can return – in a first most 
simple approach only its list of neighbors. At receipt of such 
information, the interrogating CANMgr updates its topology 
data base.   
 
 
CND1 
CS1 
CND2 
CND5 
VCAN  
requested 
CND6 
CND4 
I1 
O1 
O2 
O3 
CANMgr1 + 
Intra-NRM1 
(CANMgrx + Intra-NRMx) associated to CNDx 
SP 
VCAN  
request 
 
 
Figure 4 Example of a requested VCAN (I1, O1, O2, O3) 
 
 
Then it queries the new nodes learned and so on. The 
process continues until the interrogating node CANMgr 
learns the whole graph of “international” topology of interest 
for it. How large is this network zone? The scope of such a 
zone can be limited by and determined in two ways: by local 
policies and by considering the request from SP for a given 
multi-domain VCAN. 
Because the events that change the topology structure are 
not very frequent (hours, days, weeks, months), the topology 
construction process could be run at large time intervals 
(once per hour, for example). Consequently the amount of 
messages used to build the Overlay Network Topology will 
not overload significantly the network.  
 
CNDk 
Answer of CNDn: 
    1. reachability offered by 
CNDn  to reach  the destination  
           Dstx=NDz.MANEj 
ONT(NDk) 
Destination CND 
CANMgrk 
 
CNDm 
CNDz 
Dstx 
Initial knowledge area of domain 
CANMgr@CNDk (Level 0 of extension) 
MANEj 
CNDn 
CNDp 
 
 
Level 1 of extension 
 
Figure 5 Different areas of ONT knowledge for NDk ( Level 0, Level 1, …) in selective –query mode 
 
 
2) Selective querry 
The query process is similar, but the answers will be 
selective, i.e., , filtered conforming the required set of 
destinations. The area of knowledge desired by a given 
CANMgr can be also determined by the SP request 
(proposed VCAN span) and by local policies; it can be 
enlarged if needed. Fig.  5 shows such an area for two levels 
of extension.  
We summarize the selected design decision- most 
appropriate to our objectives: on-demand model based on 
overlay network topology service; based on non-selective 

181
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and selective queries and simple answers (i.e.,  reduced ONT 
topologies obtained from the domains). Advantages of this 
solution consist in  less complexity, less overhead, and 
preserving privacy and autonomy of intra-domain routing 
information. 
 
VI. 
VARIANTS OF SOLUTIONS AND SCALABILITY ISSUES 
The complexity, scalability and signaling overhead of the 
inter-domain peering and ONT information collection 
depends also on the variants of the VCAN mapping. Even if 
the detailed discussion of the algorithm of VCAN mapping is 
not the objective of this paper, we present below some 
considerations on possible solutions. We consider the 
general case of multi-domain VCAN.  
The VCANs should serve Fully Managed (FM), Partially 
Managed (PM) and Unmanaged Services (UM)- seen from 
the QoS level of guarantees, [11][12] point of view. The 
most demanding in terms of QoS are the FM services.  
Therefore QoS enabled routing is needed both intra and 
inter-domain. Given that QoS assurance is required the 
metrics used for network distances should reflect these 
requirements. Also constrained routing will be used in order 
to maximize the chances to successfully conclude the SLSes 
associated to VCANs. 
 
A. One step VCAN Mapping 
In this case the initiator CAN Manager completely maps 
a mono/multi-domain VCAN (requested by SP) onto the  
network infrastructure, by using the complete ONT 
represented as Resource Availability Matrices (RAM) 
(containing topologies + available capacities) for both inter-
domain and intra-domain. The RAM is delivered to the 
CAN Manager by its associated   Intra-Network Resource 
Manager (i.e.,  RAM is uploaded by the associated Intra-
NRM, for its network  domain) and other CAN Managers  
concerning the summary of available connectivity resources 
of the respective domains (Overlay Network Topology -
ONT for each domain).The pros and cons in this case are: 
Pros: 
o 
Intra-NRM (Intra Network Resource Manager) is 
not requested to run mapping algorithms but only 
to dimension its network conforming local policies 
(more simple functioning); 
o 
It is a more simple solution for unicast VCANs 
based on MPLS paths - e.g., Intra-NRM establishes 
a 
matrix 
of 
MPLS 
pre-provisioned 
paths, 
conforming its own policy and offers them to a 
CAN Manager in abstracted form as intra-domain 
ONT; 
o 
The CAN (Content Aware Network) Manager has 
stronger control on VCANs. It can also run a 
global optimization algorithm when doing VCAN 
mapping. 
o 
Optimal global solutions can be obtained in terms 
of resource reservation. 
Cons: 
o 
More complexity for  the CAN Manager, given that 
it should   collect the complete ONT and also run at 
inter-domain level the combined algorithm for QoS 
routing, 
Admission 
Control 
(AC), Resource 
reservation and VCAN mapping  
o 
Higher signaling overhead; 
o 
Periodic or event triggered or on-demand updates 
are necessary to refresh the CAN Manager 
knowledge on the network resources matrix for the 
network domain to which it is associated; 
o 
Less dynamicity at network level: MPLS paths are 
pre-provisioned, before knowing the actual SPs 
requests; 
o 
Not applicable solution for multicast enabled 
VCANs (i.e VCANs wher one has a tree of traffic 
trunks); the intra-domain tree  should be 
constructed - on demand of the CAN Manger 
addressed to its associated  Intra-NRM (the tree  
cannot be pre-provisioned) and mapped onto real 
network paths. 
 
B. Two steps VCAN Mapping 
 
The Initiator CAN Manger only collects the first level 
ONT, i.e.,  obtains a graph containing only the domains 
abstracted as nodes (see Fig. 3.a). So, the Intra-NRMs and 
consequently the other CAN Managers (apart from initiator) 
do not have to deliver to the initiator CAN manager any 
ONT. The initiator CAN Manager runs the VCAN mapping 
algorithm on a graph where each core network domain is 
represented as a node and the edges of the graph are inter-
domain links. Then each Intra-NRM performs actually the 
mapping of VCAN requested resources on its network 
resource matrix (i.e.,  intra-domain ONT) for the part of 
VCAN spanning that domain, by  running a similar 
algorithm. 
Pros:  
o 
Intra-NRM does not disclose to the CANP 
(Content Aware Network Provider) any intra-
domain topology (neither detailed nor ONT) except 
the ingress and egress points; this is a good 
solution from business point of view; 
o 
More scalable solution for both ONT topology 
determination and VCAN mapping algorithm 
based on  two hierarchical levels: CAN Manager 
runs the combined VCAN mapping algorithm at 
inter-domain level for the first time. Secondly, the 
CAN Manager of each selected domain as being 

182
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
part of the path will run again the algorithm for the 
intra-domain topology;   
o 
Each Intra-NRM having  total knowledge on its 
network resource matrix, runs the combined 
VCAN mapping algorithm at intra-domain level;            
o 
Suitable solution for multicast capable VCANs (the 
mapping of the tree onto networks paths is done by 
the Intra-NRM on demand from CAN Manager and 
not provisioned in advance; 
o 
More simple solution for CAN Manager in terms 
of algorithm complexity; 
o 
Less amount of signaling between CAN Managers. 
Cons: 
o 
No global optimisation of the multi-domain 
multicast tree is assured, given that selection 
process of the inter-domain path does not consider 
any information  boaut6 so0me possible intra-
domain bottlenecks; 
o 
Overload of the  Intra-NRM with VCAN mapping 
algorithm; 
o 
Need to establish dynamically MPLS paths - so 
more complexity (Label distributiuon protocol is 
needed). 
Considering the pros and cons of the above solutions, we 
adopted both of them have been: the first solution for 
unicast VCANs (one level mapping algorithm running at 
CAN Manager level) and the second solution for multicast 
VCANs (two levels - combined algorithm). 
C. Summary of VCAN Mapping Solutions Selection 
For inter-domain routing, a combined algorithm and 
protocol is proposed to perform jointly QoS routing, 
admission control, VCAN mapping and logical resource 
reservation, while using the multi-domain graph of the 
network, available resources (per QoS class) containing the 
following information: topology, where a domain will be 
represented as: a node – for unicast/MPLS VCANs; - 
summary of  ONT (Overlay Network Topology)  for 
multicast VCANs; - link capacities for each edge of the 
graph. For intra-domain routing the same combined 
algorithm and protocol is proposed but only for multicast 
VCANs, while using the intra-domain graph of the network 
(per QoS class), containing the following information:  intra-
domain topology; link capacities for each edge of the graph. 
Specifically we have:  
Unicast VCANs (mono or multi-domain), supported by 
MPLS provisioned paths at each network domain level: one 
level planning and VCAN mapping performed at CAN 
Manager based on applying the combined algorithm on an 
inter-domain graph composed of inter-domain links and 
summary of the domain topologies of the network domains 
(delivered as RAM – Resource Availability Matrix by Intra-
NRMs) to the CAN Manager. 
Multicast VCANs (mono or multi-domain), supported by 
hybrid multicast trees: a hierarchical two-levels approach for 
VCAN mapping onto multi-domain network infrastructures. 
The two levels are: inter-domain VCAN mapping, intra-
domain VCAN mapping. 
D. Routing Metric 
A QoS constrained routing is performed over the ONT. A 
combined metric was proposed [15] for a link, considering 
the bandwidth request, the bandwidth available, targeting to 
choose the widest path. The cost of an inter-domain link (i,j) 
in the ONT can be C(i,j) = Breq/Bij , where Bij is the 
available bandwidth on this link. Note that this cost is not a 
static one: it depends on the amount of requests and on the 
capacity available on the link for that class of service . 
The simplest cost of the full path will be: Sum (link 
costs). Additionally one can use: Sum (link costs) * NHF 
(path) where Number of Hops Factor NHF (path) is a weight 
factor approximately proportional to the number of CNDs 
crossed by this path. This solution will try to reduce the 
number of transited domains. 
The ratio also can be interpreted as link utilization factor; 
that is why an alternative notation can be used: C(i,j) = 
Ulink_ij.. The constraint is: (Breq/Bij < 1). Therefore in each 
action of path search the branches not satisfying this 
constraint should be not considered. 
VII. COMPUUTATION AND USAGE OF THE OVERLAY 
TOPOLOGY TO MAP VCANS 
A. Operational Phases 
This section describes how the overlay topology 
information is used to map the multi-domain VCANs. The 
VCAN mapping algorithm is actually a combined one, 
making 
jointly 
a 
QoS 
routing, 
admission 
control 
(considering the bandwidth requests of the SP), resource 
reservation for virtual paths and VCAN mapping on these 
paths. For details of this algorithm one can consult [15]. In 
order to be more specific the example presented in Fig. 4 is 
considered. 
Supposing that the VCAN initiator CAN Manager 
learned the inter-domain overlay network topologies (ONT) 
and inter-link capacities, it can negotiate with SP an SLS 
contract and to conclude this contract it has to try to map 
VCANs onto network resources. The VCAN mapping can be 
done on a single level (jointly inter and intra-domain) or 
separately on two hierarchical levels: inter-domain and intra-
domain. We present here the first solution , i.e.,  single level 
VCAN mapping.  
We suppose the initiator CAN Manager has knowledge 
on ONT as presented in Fig. 3.a, i.e.,  it knows the graph of 
inter-domain topologies but it does not know anything about 
intra-domain traffic trunks.  
The VCAN mapping problem is the following: given an 
inter-domain graph and a Traffic Matrix (TM is contained in 
the SLS produced by SP), how to map the TM onto real 
network graph as to respect some minimum bandwidth 
constraints and also optimize the resource usage. The 
simplest form for TM is expressed as a matrix having entries 

183
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
{(input, output, bandwidth) ….} for different traffic trunks 
belonging to the desired QoS class. Note that in a more 
complex approach several QoS parameters can be 
considered, e.g., delay, but here we treat the simplified case 
of only capacity (bandwidth). 
We continue the example given in Fig. 4. It is supposed 
that the desired VCAN has a tree topology. We assume that 
steps 1 and 2 have been already performed. The following 
steps follow, ending with a complete VCAN mapping onto 
real network topology.  
 
3. CANMgr2 (knowing the inter-domain graph) determines 
that Core Network Ddomain1 (CND1), ..CND6 should 
participate to VCAN. In particular it adds CND3 to the list 
in order to reach CND6 
As a result, CANMgr2 knows an abstracted graph as in Fig. 
6. 
4. CANMgr2 determines possible input points and output 
points (border routers I/Fs IDs) for each domain by using 
the inter-domain graph. Note that it does not know yet the 
inter-domain paths. Several solutions might exist. Fig. 7 
shows this graph. 
 
 
 
   
CND1 
CS1 
CND2 
CND4 
CND3 
Abstracted  
Inter-domain 
 graph 
CND5 
CND6 
New CND added to the graph 
in order to be able to reach CND6 
 
 
Figure 6. First abstraction of an inter-domain graph determined by 
CANMgr2 able to realise VCAN spanning 
 
5. CANMgr2 asks the ONT information from each domain 
in the form of Resource Availability Matrix (RAM). The 
paramters of the requests have entries like  (input, output, 
bandwidth) for all ingress-egress pairs of points of that 
domain. This RAM returned is actually the summary 
overlay topology and capacities of each domain. In this way 
each domain has not to disclose its actual topology and 
capacities to a third party.  
 
 
CS1 
Inter-domain  
graph 
CND1 
CND2 
CND4 
CND3 
CND5 
CND6 
Border Router and  
possibly MANE 
 
 
Figure 7 Inter-domain graph known by CANMgr2 with ingress-egress 
points specification 
 
6. CANMgr2 receives the ONTs and capacities, i.e.,  the 
RAMs from all CANMgrs and its Intra-NRM and constructs 
a detailed graph of available links. 
Note 1: that each domain is free to return whatever RAM is 
wants depending on its own policy. This process is depicted 
in Fig. 8. 
Note2: the CANMgrx does not know yet the capacities 
needed by VCAN initator, simply because CANMGr2 does 
not know yet what to request from CANMgrx. CANMgr 2 
only asks for RAM. 
7.  CANMgr2 computes (modified and combined algorithm 
based on Dijkstra one) and determines VCAN mapping and 
the allocation of resources (Fig. 9). 
8.  CANMgr2 communicates back to each CANMgr and 
also to its Intra-NRM what resources have been used on 
intra-and inter-domain links. 
9. Each CAN Manager communicates to its Intra-NRM 
what resources have been booked as reserved, on behalf of 
this domain. 
10. Each CAN Manager and Intra-NRM map internally the 
portion of the VCAN on some real network paths (e.g., 
MPLS label switched paths. Note that the solution already 
exists because at step 5 the RAMs expressing the internal 
ONT of the domain) have been communicated to the 
initiator VCAN manager. 
11. The RAMs are adjusted accordingly at each domain. 
12.The new VCAN is registered in all Data Bases of 
different CAN Managers. 
13. Confirmations are returned to the CANMgr2. 
14. CANMgr2 registers this VCAN in its Data Base.  
15. CANMgr2 returns response to the Service Provider. 
 
 
 

184
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
CS1 
CND1 
CND2 
CND3 
Inter-domain graph 
CND5 
CND6 
RAM returned by 
Intra-NRM2 to 
CANMgr2  
 
RAM returned by 
CANMgr3 from 
CANMgr2 
RAM returned by 
CANMgr5 to 
CANMgr2  
Border Router and possibly MANE 
CANMgr 
Intra-NRM 
RAM requests 
RAM request 
RAM answer 
RAM answer 
CND4 
 
 
 
Figure 8  CANMgr2 collects the internal ONT from other CAN Managers by issues RAM requests and getting answers 
 
 
 
 
 
Border Router and possibly MANE 
CANMgr 
Intra-NRM 
Multi-domain VCAN Mapping 
CS1 
CND1 
CND2 
CND4 
CND3 
CND5 
CND6 
Information on resources used for this 
VCAN addressed by CANMgr2 to 
CANMgr3 
Figure 9 Computed VCAN ( tree in this example)  
 
B. VCAN Mapping Algorithm Implementation  and  
Experiments 
This section presents an implementation variant and then 
some  numerical examples and experimental results for the 
procedure proposed in the above sub-Section A.  
The VCAN mapping algorithm has been implemented in 
C, using Visual Studio C++ Express Edition as development 
environment. The hardware platform used, relevant for the 
obtained results (especially the average processing time), is 
a device equipped with Intel(R) Core(TM)2 CPU 
T5600@1.83GHz processor and 2,00 GB installed memory 
(RAM) on a 32-bit OS. 
A complete implementation of the CAN Manager and 
Intra-domain Network Resource Manager and Servcie 
Provider software are currently in progress and detailed 
results will be reported soon. 
 
The multi-domain network is supposed to contain several 
Core Network Domains CND A, CND B, .. CND F. 
The Initiator CAN Manager is supposed to collect the 
overall ONT composed from inter-domain and intra-domain 
parts (steps 2-6). Note that in this example to keep it simple, 
we did not specify exactly who the initiator CAN Manager 
is. Actually it can be any of them. 
 
Initially the first level inter-domain abstracted ONT 
(Overlay Network Topology) is collected – expressed in a 
graph containing only the domains (abstracted as nodes) and 
inter-domain link capacities (similar to Fig. 6). Then after 
finishing step 6 of the procedure the inter-domain graph plus 
each domain ONT is obtained (Fig. 9).  
 
In this example, the first level ONT (image of the 
network graph) is presented in the Fig. 10 as a matrix M1 
where A,B,C, ..F correspond to indexes 0, 1, 2, ..5 of rows 
and columns. To simplify the presentation, the numbers 
(entries) stand for generic bandwidth units (capacities) on 
the inter-domain links (a zero entry value means no link 
between the corresponding nodes). Here each domain is 
abstracted as node numbered with an index belonging to the 
set {0, 1, …, 5}. 

185
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
0
0
0
30
0
0
0
0
23 12
43
0
0
12
0
0
18
0
30
23
0
0
21 16
0
43
18
16
0
15
0
0
0
21
15
0
M1 =
 
 
Figure 10 Inter-domain first level non-oriented graph (ONT) example 
represented as a matrix 
 
After having the first image of the inter-domain ONT, the 
Initiator CAN Manger performs the steps 3-4-5-6 of the 
procedure. The result is getting a completed ONT collected 
from the CND A, …, F. The complete inter-domain graph is 
presented in Fig. 11, where the ONTs for the domains A, B, 
…, F are also represented (see step 6 in the procedure 
described in sub-section A).  
In Fig. 11, the values attached to the middle of each link 
represent the segment capacity and the 1 to 6 numbers are 
the exit point’s indexes from a CND (Core Network 
Domain). For example between CND B and CND D there is 
a link with 18 bandwidth units’ capacity and the exit point 
from CND B is the one with no 4. The dotted lines inside 
each CND represent the ONT of each domain, i.e.,  
Resource Availability Matrix - RAMs returned by each 
Content Aware Network Manger of the domains A, B, … to 
the initiator CANMgr. The continuous lines together with 
dotted lines form the complete inter-domain network graph 
where each domain is summarized by its ONT. 
The graph of Fig. 11 can be represented as a matrix (Fig. 
12) and this will be the input to the VCAN mapping 
algorithm. In the matrix the value 0 means no link between 
adjacent nodes and other value different from 0 signify that 
there is a link with the correspondent capacity. 
 
 
Figure 11 Inter-domain network graph (non-oriented) and summary of 
domains’ ONT collected by the Initiator CABN Manger after finishing the 
step 6 
 
 
 
Figure 12 The inter-domain graph (ONT) –used as  input for VCAN 
mapping algorithm. 
 
The detailed description of the VCAN mapping algorithm 
(combined QoS routing and reservation - proposed by the 
same authors) is not in the scope of this paper. For details 
one can see [15]. However, for completeness of the example 
presentation, a short description is given below. 
The Service Provider request for a VCAN (Virtual Content 
Aware Network) can be expressed in the simplest form as a 
Traffic Demand Matrix (TDM) having entries (input_Id, 
output_id, bandwidth_requested). , i.e.,  source of request, 
the destination and the capacity requested.  
The primary objective of the algorithm is to select paths 
based on the criterion of largest capacity (bandwidth) 
possible and then make resource reservation on those paths. 
AS an example, Fig. 13 represents the Traffic Demand 
Matrix 
 
 
Figure 13 Traffic Demand Matrix example 
 
The indexes of the representation (A1, A2,…) correspond to 
the extended matrix (where the numbers 0, 1, 2, …, 15 
represents A1, A2, …., respectively F1).  
The results obtained after running the algorithm for M2 
matrix are shown in Fig. 14, where the computation time, a 
total cost of the solution and the degree of request 
satisfaction is also presented. 
 

186
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 14 VCAN Mapping algorithm results – simple example 
The VCAN system has been implemented as part of 
ALICANTE work and installed on a pilot testbed. It consists 
in three fully meshed core network domains, with all nodes 
as Linux routers ( MANE routers and Core Routers in each 
domain). Each domain has a CAN Manager and and Intra-
domain Network Resource Manager. The implementation is 
made in C under Linux, Unicast VCANs and multicast 
VCANs have been experimented and validated on this 
testbed. Results are already submitted to be published in 
additional papers. 
The main blocks of the VCAN Manager implemnetd 
have been: CAN Planning, CAN Provisioning, CAN SLS 
negotiation Protocols, CANMgr interfaces – vertical and 
horizontal ones. 
 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The paper proposed a management solution for inter-
domain peering, to support Content Aware Networks for a 
multi-domain 
and 
multi-provider 
environment. 
The 
management is based on horizontal SLAs negotiated and 
concluded between CAN providers (represented by CAN 
Managers) the result being a set of parallel VCANs offering 
different classes of services to multimedia flows, based on 
CAN/NAA (Content Aware Network/Network Aware 
Application) concepts. The inter-domain approach is to 
develop an overlay topology service to support VCAN 
construction, thus obtaining several parallel QoS planes. A 
CAN Manager is initiating the multi-domain VCAN 
realization by using the overlay topology service. Two 
solutions are proposed for topology collection in multi-
domain environment: one and two steps. The optimization 
solution in one step is anew contribution of this paper. Pros 
and cons are discussed related to complexity, scalability, 
signaling overhead and business point of view and it is 
conclude that each solution can be better in some scenario: 
one-step solution for unicast VCDANs and two-step solution 
for mukllticat VCANs. 
A numerical example and samples of implementation 
results are given for the one-step algorithm. 
Algorithm experimentation for large topologies is in 
progress and results are already submitted for publication. 
The system is currently under complete design and 
implementation in the framework of the FP7 research project 
ALICANTE. Further validation and extensive performance 
evaluation results will be shown in a future work.  
 
 
Acknowledgments 
 
This work was supported partially by the ALICANTE 
project (FP7-ICT-248652) and partially by the projects 
POSDRU/88/1.5/S/61178 together with POSDRU/89/1.5/S/62557.  
REFERENCES 
[1] E.Borcoci, R.Miruta, S.Obreja, “ Inter-domain Peering in Content-
Aware Networks for Multimedia Applications” Proc. of. CTRQ 2012, 
France, 
April 
 
2012,  
http://www.iaria.org/conferences2012/CTRQ12.htm 
[2] Baladrón, 
C., 
“User-Centric 
Future 
Internet 
and 
Telecommunication Services”,  in: G. Tselentis, et. al. (eds.), 
Towards the Future Internet, IOS Press, 2009, pp. 217-226.  
[3] Turner, J. and Taylor, D., “Diversifying the Internet,” Proc. 
GLOBECOM ‘05, vol. 2, St. Louis, USA, Nov./Dec. 2005, 
pp. 760-765. 
[4] Anderson, T., Peterson, L., Shenker, S., and Turner, J., 
“Overcoming the Internet Impasse through Virtualization”, 
Computer, vol. 38, no. 4, Apr. 2005, pp. 34–41.  
[5] 4WARD, “A clean-slate approach for Future Internet”, 
http://www.4ward-project.eu/. 
[6] J.Choi, J.Han, E.Cho, T. Kwon, and Y.Choi, A Survey on 
Content-Oriented Networking for Efficient Content Delivery, 
IEEE Communications Magazine, March 2011. 
[7] V. 
Jacobson 
et 
al., 
“Networking 
Named 
Content,” 
CoNEXT ’09, New York, NY, 2009, pp. 1–12. 
[8] W.K. Chai, et.al., CURLING: Content-Ubiquitous Resolution 
and Delivery Infrastructure for Next-Generation Services , 
IEEE Communications Magazine, March 2011. 
[9] I. Psaras, W. K. Chai, G. Pavlou, "Probabilistic in-network 
caching for information-centric networks", Proceedings of the 
second edition of the ICN workshop on Information-centric 
networking, 
2012, 
pp.55-60,  
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2342501 
[10] M. Femminella, R.o Francescangeli, G. Reali, J. W. Lee, H. 
Schulzrinne, 
"An 
enabling 
platform 
for 
autonomic 
management of the future internet" IEEE Network, 
Volume:25, November/December Issue: 6, pp. 24-32. 
[11] FP7 ICT project, “MediA Ecosystem Deployment Through 
Ubiquitous 
 
Content-Aware 
Network 
Environments”, 
ALICANTE, No248652, http://www.ict-alicante.eu/ (last 
accessed: Dec. 2010). 
[12] Borcoci, E., Negru, D. and Timmerer, C., “A Novel 
Architecture for Multimedia Distribution based on Content-
Aware Networking” Proc. of. CTRQ 2010, Athens, June 
2010, pp. 162-168.  
[13] ALICANTE, Deliverable D2.1, ALICANTE Overall System 
and 
Components 
Definition 
and 
Specifications, 
http://www.ict-alicante.eu, Sept. 2011. 
[14] Schönwälder, J., Fouquet, M., Dreo Rodosek,  G., and 
Hochstatter, I.C.,  “Future Internet = Content + Services + 
Management”, IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 47, no. 
7, Jul. 2009, pp. 27-33.  
[15] E.Borcoci, 
R.Miruta, S.Obreja, 
“Multi-domain 
Virtual 
Content-Aware Networks Mapping on Network Resources” –
EUSIPCO2012,http://www.eurasip.org/Proceedings/Eusipco/
Eusipco2012/Conference/papers/1569588939.pdf 
[16] Levis, P., Boucadair, M., Morrand, P., and Trimitzios, P., 
“The Meta-QoS-Class Concept: a Step Towards Global QoS 
Interdomain Services”, Proc. of IEEE SoftCOM, Oct. 2004. 
[17] Howarth, M.P. et al., “Provisioning for Interdomain Quality 
of Service: the MESCAL Approach”, IEEE Communications 
Magazine, June 2005, pp. 129-137. 

187
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[18] Abhay Perekth, “Routing on Overlay Networks”, University 
of 
Berkeley, 
October 
2002, 
http://robotics.eecs.berkeley.edu/~wlr/228a02/Lecture%20Sli
des/routing4.pdf (last accesed December 19th, 2012) 
[19] Y. Zhu, B. Li, “Overlay Networks with Linear Capacity 
Constraints”, 
University 
of 
Ontario, 
http://faculty.uoit.ca/zhu/papers/tpds06.pdf 
(last 
accesed 
December 19th, 2012) 
[20] Sylvia Ratnasamy, Paul Francis, Mark Handley, Richard 
Karp, and Scott Shenker. 2001. A scalable content-
addressable network. SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev. 
31, 4 (August 2001), 161-172. DOI=10.1145/964723.383072 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/964723.383072 
[21] Fabio L. Verdi, Maurıcio F. Magalhaes “Using Virtualization 
to Provide Interdomain QoS-enabled Routing”, Journal of 
Networks, April 2007, pp. 23-32. 
[22] Z. Li, P. Mohapatra, and C. Chuah, Virtual Multi-Homing: 
On the Feasibility of Combining Overlay Routing with BGP 
Routing, University of California at DavisTechnical Report: 
CSE-2005-2, 2005. http://www.cs.ucdavis.edu/research/tech-
reports/2005/CSE-2005-2.pdf 
[23] ENTHRONE, 
End-to-End 
QoS 
through 
Integrated 
Management of Content, Networks and Terminals, FP6 
project, URL: http://www.ist-enthrone.org/. 
[24] Zhi Li, P. Mohapatra, “QRON: QoS-Aware Routing in Overlay 
Networks”, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 
22, No. 1, January  2004, pp.29-39. 
[25] Boucadair, M. et al., “A Framework for End-to-End Service 
Differentiation: Network Planes and Parallel Internets”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, Sept. 2007, pp. 134-143. 
[26] Aggarwal, V., Feldmann, A.,  “Can ISPs and P2P Users 
Cooperate for Improved Performance?”, ACM SIGCOMM 
Computer Communication Review, vol. 37, no. 3, Jul. 2007, 
pp. 29-40.  
 
 
 
 

