1
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Study of a Battery-less Near Field Communicating Sensor Network  
with ContactLess Simulator 
David Navarro, Cédric Marchand, Laurent Carrel 
Université de Lyon, ECL, INSA Lyon, UCBL, CPE  
INL, UMR5270 
F-69134, Ecully, France 
david.navarro@ec-lyon.fr, cedric.marchand@ec-lyon.fr, laurent.carrel@ec-lyon.fr 
 
 
Abstract - Active tags and sensor nodes are an important part 
of the devices involved in the Internet of Things and in some 
cases it is impossible to power them using standard power 
supply or even battery. In such a case, battery-less smart 
sensors are needed. Design this kind of smart system is not an 
easy task and many different considerations must be taken into 
account. To face autonomy problems, battery-less sensor is a 
serious alternative. Energy harvesting is one of the main issue 
and it is mandatory to simulate the behavior of the system 
before designing and manufacturing it. In this article, we 
present ContactLess Simulator (CLS). It is developed in order 
to simulate contactless powered smart systems such as Near 
Field Communication (NFC) devices. CLS has been written 
using visual C# and is thus very flexible and easily portable. 
More precisely, this article focusses on a battery-less electronic 
systems: an autonomous NFC smart sensor. To design such a 
system, the energy budget has to be explored as the central 
point. CLS was developed exactly for this goal and this article 
describes a realistic test case to demonstrate it. The test case 
corresponds to a battery-less sensor node. It is composed of a 
microcontroller unit, a temperature sensor and a NFC circuit 
for communication and energy harvesting.  
 
 
Keywords-Simulation; 
Modelling; 
NFC; 
Sensor 
node; 
Microcontroller; MCU; Energy harvesting. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This paper is an extended work of [1], about autonomous 
Wireless Sensor Networks energy study. 
 The Internet of Things (IoT) is now a well-known 
ecosystem, continuously growing (five times more are 
expected be connected in the next few years), where small 
and smart objects interact trough communicating networks. 
Even if these networks can be wired or wireless, the trend is 
to choose wireless communication in most cases. This is 
explained 
since 
small 
devices 
using 
wireless 
communications gives faster and easier installation and 
deployment. Among these objects, sensor nodes sense 
physical data in order to send information or actuate.  
As shown in Fig. 1, they are usually composed of a 
microcontroller, a sensor, a communication device and a 
battery or an energy harvesting system. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.   Typical Architecture of a smart object. 
Concerning wireless communications, different solutions 
exist depending on the size of the network and on the 
communication range. Local Area Networks (LAN) are 
small networks whith small number of connected objects 
(up to few hundreds), they use short range communications 
(up to 300m). In this scope of networks, Bluetooth, Zigbee 
or Wifi are used for communication. At the contrary, Wide 
Area Networks are considered for big networks where more 
than 1000 objects are involved and where long range 
communication such as LoRa or mobile communications 
(3G, LTE, etc.) are used. Energy consumption consideration 
divides all these strategies of communication in two groups. 
The first one correspond to WAN which are often plugged 
with powerful supply, AC power supply or heavy acid-like 
battery. At the contrary, LAN and LoRa (based on the Low 
Power WAN) can be powered with small batteries and their 
autonomy can go up to years with lithium batteries and a 
smart usage. 
It is even possible to design battery-less sensor node 
(energy-constrained electronic systems) in LAN and new 
trends target energy harvesting in the environment and 
smart management of this precious energy to create 
completely autonomous systems. We consider 2 kinds of 
harvesting: natural and artificial energy sources. Natural 
sources are directly given by the Nature, such as seismic 
vibrations, temperature, or solar rays. Many electronic 
systems are developed to consider these energy sources, 
such as for example Seebeck-effect systems or mini-
photovoltaic panels [14]. Non-natural sources include for 
example 
machine 
vibrations 
(often 
coupled 
with 
piezoelectric elements [18]), ambient radiofrequency waves 
(through radiofrequency to continuous power converters), or 
magnetic fields such as wireless powering systems. 
 

2
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Wireless powering systems exist since several years, and 
are nowadays widespread in powering systems, such as 
inductive charging stations for smartphones [10] or vehicles  
wireless chargers [16]. Moreover, certain lightweight 
systems communicate at the same time they power the 
object. It is the case in RadioFrequency IDentification 
systems (RFID). They are composed of an emitter and a 
receiver, called tag. The emitter sends radiofrequency waves 
in order to power a tag and communicate at the same time. 
A classical tag answers its identification number. Near Field 
Communication (NFC) is based on RFID. It permits very 
short communications at a high frequency, in a full peer to 
peer mode. NFC inherits characteristics from RFID, 
network and smart card. It is suitable for secure 
communications; as an example, smartphone payment is 
possible with NFC. 
This paper focuses on NFC battery-less objects. As 
Energy is the major constraint of these systems, a deep 
study has to be led at every stage. To achieve this goal, it is 
an absolute necessity to simulate the system before design 
and production. As these systems are electronic and 
communicating objects, they can be studied at different 
levels: low-level (hardware, software) or high-level 
(protocol, network). Many studies involve hardware 
platforms, like [3]. Low-level simulations focus on 
hardware or radiofrequency aspects. For example, [2] 
describes a MATLAB-Simulink model of a radiofrequency 
transceiver in order to provide a quick evaluation of the 
performances according to noise and non-linearity of each 
individual block in the transceiver. [6] and [17] present 
studies on the physical link (emitter, air, receiver) and 
radiofrequency propagation aspects. [8] gives a MATLAB 
Simulink NFC model for radiofrequency modulation study. 
High-level simulations consider protocols, network and 
communication performance. RFIDSIM [9] is a more 
complete simulator that considers physical link and 
protocol. It provides a realistic physical layer and permits a 
multi-interface and multi-channel analysis. Others higher-
level simulators focus on communication protocol and 
communication performance, such as the well-known NS-3 
simulator. NFC models and protocol study have been 
developed over NS-3 [5].  
However, no simulator takes the energy as the central 
point. A new system-level simulator, called Contact-Less 
Simulator [1], has been developed in order to precisely 
study these electronic systems from the energy point of 
view. This paper details this new simulator, presents new 
features and a real test case. CLS simulator considers energy 
harvesting from NFC emitter and energy balance according 
to the tag electrical consumption. The wireless-supplied tag 
is not only composed of a classical NFC circuit, but of a 
more complex smart system. It is possible to configure a 
sensor node and an application, the simulation then gives 
the answer if the node is well designed or not. 
 
The rest of this article is organized as follow: Section II 
describes the NFC system considered in this study and 
details its signal transmission and typical architecture. 
Section III presents the simulator interface, the different 
possible configurations and details implemented models. 
Section IV describes the NFC hardware used as test case 
and shows simulation results. Finally, Section V concludes 
the paper and gives future improvement that will be 
included inside de simulator. 
II. 
CONSIDERED NFC SYSTEM 
A. Electronic system 
A typical NFC system is composed of an emitter and a 
tag. It is shown in Fig. 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Typical Architecture of NFC system [13]. 
A tag is often composed of a NFC circuit that comprises 2 
main sub-systems: energy harvesting part (for supply) and 
data decoding part (for communication). The energy 
harvesting block converts the received electromagnetic field 
into usable energy in order to supply the circuit. The data 
decoding block demodulates the signal in order to recover 
the bit-stream. As Energy is self-powered in passive tags, 
communication has to be initiated so that they are supplied 
in order to answer. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Classical NFC Tags 
Fig. 3 shows the architecture of a classical tag composed 
of a microcontroller unit (MCU). When the tag is powered, 
the microcontroller executes the program as shown in Fig. 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Classical use of NFC Tags 

3
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In this study, we consider a smarter tag comprising a 
microcontroller unit, a temperature sensor and a smart 
energy management block. Thus, this tag is called sensor 
node or wireless sensor node because of NFC (wireless) 
communications. Furthermore, we focus on a complete 
battery-less smart system where the only energy source 
comes 
from 
electromagnetic 
field 
during 
NFC 
communications between emitter and tag. We choose the 
ST-Microelectronics M24LR04E NFC chip for our test 
case. This chip is compatible with 13.56 MHz NFC ISO 
15693 and ISO 18000-3 mode 1. In addition, it has an 
energy harvesting analog output, which makes it possible to 
supply other circuits on the board (i.e., microcontroller, 
sensor). The global considered system is shown in Fig. 2 
and the tag architecture is detailed in Fig. 5. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Considered battery-less smart tag. 
The energy storage block is composed of two switches and 
storage capacitor as can be seen in Fig. 6. According to 
switches states, capacitor can charge (S1 closed, S2 opened) 
or discharge and supply circuits (S1 opened, S2 closed). 
 
 
Figure 6.  Energy storage block 
This energy buffer offers new functionality: MCU and 
sensor can operate independently of NFC communications. 
We also target the energy use illustrated in Fig. 7. The 
electromagnetic field charges an energy tank, then this 
amount of energy is used along time by tag. Simulator will 
help us to check if it is possible. 
Now the electronic system considered in this study has 
been described, the next section will provide the analysis of 
the signal propagation involved in such system. This will 
help to understand how the simulator can take into account 
the energy budget as the main constraint to validate a 
design. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Targeted use of smart NFC Tag 
B. Signal propagation 
NFC systems use Low frequency (LF) from 125 KHz to 
134 KHz, high Frequency (HF) at 13.56 MHz, or ultra-high 
frequency (UHF) at 860 or 960 MHz. We consider the 13.56 
MHz frequency communication that is mostly used in NFC 
systems [13]. 
The emitter outputs a powerful signal in a coil (also called 
"antenna") at a specific -resonant- frequency. The 
electromagnetic field carries power and data with the help 
from an Amplitude Shift Keying (ASK) modulated signal 
[12]. 
Input power at receiver (tag) depends on signal strength at 
emitter, antennas gains, and distance between antennas. No 
simple exact equation exists since communication is near 
field and the Friis equation, which is used in classical long-
range radiofrequency communications, is not valid. Indeed, 
Maxwell equations have to consider electric (E) and 
magnetic (H) fields. In our case, we use electrically small 
antennas. This implies that the near field limit distance r 
depends only on wavelength λ. This distance is given by the 
following equation [4], [7]: 
                         r =  
 
As shown in Fig. 8, several kinds of radiofrequency signal 
propagation are observed according to the distance between 
emitter (represented as RFID reader and its antenna on the 
left) and the receiver (along the horizontal axis). 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Radiofrequency signal propagation [14]. 
 
More precisely, the NFC system considered has frequency 
of 13.56 MHz and a distance between emitter and tag of few 
centimeters.  

4
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Thus, the tag is placed in reactive near field region leading 
to use simpler equations to model signal attenuation due to 
distance. Received power formulas are [12]: 
 
PRX(E) = 








6
3
4
2
2
1
.
1
.
1
.
1
k d
k d
d
k
 . PTX(E)            (2) 
PRX(H) = 







4
5
2
4
.
1
.
1
k d
d
k
 . PTX(H)                           (3) 
 
Attenuation is also linked to pow of sixth, pow of four and 
pow of two of distance d; k1 to k5 are constants. Sometimes, 
simpler models are used, for example, [15] approximates 
power decay to be proportional to 1/d6. 
III. 
CLS INTERFACE, MODELS AND SIMULATION 
As it is shown in previous section, several electronic 
circuits compose the system. In order to provide a precise 
estimation of the energy consumption, it is necessary to 
model them separately. Models are high-level (electronic 
system level), they ar e written with C language. 
Emitting power and antenna gain make it possible to 
calculate radiofrequency output power, in other terms the 
magnetic field H in mA/m. Frequency and distance between 
antennas lead to radiofrequency signal attenuation. 
ContactLess Simulator (CLS) is organized as a set of 
configuration windows allowing the user to easily set up its 
system in order to launch the simulation. It has been 
developed in Visual C# in order to be easily portable on 
Microsoft 64-bit Windows operating systems. It is part of 
the Visual Studio Community, a free tool for academic 
research [11].  
 
Graphical user interface is drawn in a horizontal way, 
from Emitter on the left towards Load (Electronic system) 
on the right. Fig. 9 shows the main windows of CLS where 
it is possible to recognize the global hardware architecture 
presented in Fig. 2. In this section, each part of CLS is 
described along with the model associated to each of the 
components of the electronic system.  
A. Emitter model 
The first menu in CLS (from the left) corresponds to the 
Field Generator (Emitter). It is modeled according to: 
 
Emitting power 
 
Frequency of the radiofrequency carrier 
 
Distance between emitter and tag antennas 
 
Emitter antenna gain 
When the user enters in the Setup window of this part, a 
new window appears where all default meaningful values 
are prefilled, as shown in Fig. 10. Emitted electromagnetic 
field at emitter antenna and propagated electromagnetic 
field towards distance are calculated. 
B. Tag antenna model 
The emitter and tag antennas are PCB coil antennas in our 
prototype. Antenna gain is used to calculate propagation 
losses. According to above calculations, radiofrequency 
signal strength is known at tag antenna input. Tag antenna 
gain attenuation thus gives the signal after antenna. In CLS, 
Antenna setting, presented in Fig. 11, the tag antenna 
parameter is the gain (dBi). Magnetic field at tag antenna 
input is known from previous block. Tag antenna 
attenuation also decreases the signal. 
 
 
Figure 9. CLS Simulator graphical user interface 

5
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
   
 
Figure 10. Electromagnetic field parameters at Emitter 
 
 
Figure 11. Tag antenna parameters 
C. NFC circuit model  
NFC circuit has the task to demodulate the radiofrequency 
signal. Principle is to extract the low frequency information 
carried in the high frequency: the carrier. High frequency 
permits propagation in the medium (air, plastic packages, 
...). Once the information is decoded, an answer can be send 
toward he emitter. Network-like communications occur in 
NFC. As this functionality is not the key point of this study, 
only the electrical consumption of this block is considered. 
To do this, this part is divided in two part in CLS: self-
power and energy storage blocks. 
D. Self-power and energy storage blocks  
Several blocks in NFC circuit are considered. For a better 
understanding of these blocks, RF2DC and DC2DC are 
illustrated separately in Fig. 5. They are also modelled 
separately. RF2DC block receives the radiofrequency signal 
and converts it to a DC (voltage and current) signal. The 
aim is to create a power supply. Conversion goal is to 
extract the maximum electrical power. DC2DC block 
converts the RF2DC output, in order to create a usable 
voltage for electronic devices. Electrical power is given 
according to efficiency of blocks. As power is set, a good 
balance between voltage and current has to been chosen. 
Performances are based on ST-Microelectronics M24LR04E 
circuit characteristics. This communicating and harvesting 
circuit permits self-powering and provides an analog output 
to power other circuits in the system. Moreover, it permits 
data exchange between NFC circuit and microcontroller. If 
another circuit is to be used, global parameters, like 
efficiency, can be set. 
 
1. RF2DC converter 
The RF2DC part of the self-power block is shown in 
Fig 
12. 
It 
calculates 
electrical 
power 
from 
the 
radiofrequency signal carrier. M24LR04E circuit has been 
modelled for this power conversion task. The datasheet of 
this circuit gives H field from radiofrequency strength and 
output power from H field. 
 
 
 
Figure 12. Radio to DC converter parameters 
 
Then, the required current at output has to be known in 
order to calculate the output voltage Vout. According to the 
output current Isink: curves in datasheet give the output 
voltage the circuit can provide. For simpler use, a global 
parameter can be used for other circuits: the overall power 
efficiency (output versus input). 
 
2. DC2DC converter 
This block is presented in Fig. 13. Models have been 
separated because RF2DC and DC2DC blocks could be 
designed in separate circuits. Thus, in order to best 
distinguish individual performances in the system and to 
define parameters if they have to be designed, they are 
modelled in two separate blocks. DC2DC converter 
efficiency is expressed in percentage between output and 
input. 

6
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 13. DC to DC converter parameters 
 
3. Energy storage block 
The energy storage parameters window presented in Fig. 
14 are used to calculate the amount of energy that can be 
saved in an energy tank. We will later detail the novel 
switched capacitor architecture that is used. In Fig. 14, 
parameters are capacitance value (nF) and total leakages 
(fA) of switches and capacitor. The role of this module is to 
simulate the energy that can be stored (according to the 
power input from DC2DC bloc) and the energy that can be 
used (according to the supplied load and leakages). It will 
lead to an energy budget analysis. 
 
 
Figure 14. Load (electronic system) parameters 
 
E. Microcontroller circuit model and sensor 
For this release, microcontroller and sensor are simply 
modeled as an electrical load according to their activity.  
 
 
Microcontroller and sensor require a minimal voltage and 
consume a nominal current. In model, electrical power of 
microcontroller is calculated according to: 
 
Microcontroller brand and model, 
 
Oscillator type, 
 
Operating frequency. 
 
At this stage, Microchip PIC18LF2525 is modeled. Table 
I shows all targeted microcontrollers that will be 
implemented in simulator. 
TABLE I.  
TARGETTED MCUS MODELS 
Microcontroller brand 
Microcontroller model 
ATMEL 
ATMega-328 
Microchip 
PIC18LF2525 
ST-Microelectronics 
ST-8ML 
ST-Microelectronics 
STM-32 
Texas Instruments 
MSP-430 
 
ATMEL, ST-Microelectronics and Texas Instruments 
models are under development and will be released soon. 
Sensor is a Maxim MAX6613 temperature sensor. Its 
analog output is connected to an ADC input of 
microcontroller. The MAX6613 is supplied with an output 
pin of microcontroller. Supply voltage is also the same for 
both components. 
In this release, the load is a microcontroller unit (MCU) 
and a temperature sensor. When a microcontroller is chosen 
in the list-box, the "Configure MCU" button opens a new 
window. Oscillator type, operating frequency, desired 
supply voltage, active and sleep time of microcontroller are 
entered as shown in Fig. 15. 
For this example, Microchip PIC18LF2525, oscillator type 
can be external RC (up to 4 MHz), external XTAL (crystal 
oscillator, up to 40 MHz), or internal oscillator. For internal 
oscillator, the example presented at the bottom of Fig. 15, 
user can select from the internal 8MHz source down to the 
31KHz source. 
Several frequencies are available according to frequency 
post-scaler in the microcontroller. Frequency (KHz) is the 
primary oscillator frequency that must match one possible 
configuration according to the oscillator type. Supply 
voltage of the microcontroller is then entered. All the 
parameters are taken from Microchip PIC18LF2525 
datasheet; from current voltage versus frequency, current 
versus voltage and current versus frequency curves. 
Parameters for sensor are taken from Maxim MAX6613 
datasheets.  
 

7
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
Figure 15. Load (electronic system) parameters 
 
F. Simulation setup 
 
The simulation setup window (Fig. 16) permits to 
configure the simulation. The duration parameter will be 
used in future release in transient simulations. For the 
moment only static simulations are run. Design goal 
specifies which value is to maximize: voltage or current. 
Indeed, RF2DC and DC2DC blocks output a given power, 
and the couple voltage and current can vary. This option 
also configures the simulation in order to search the 
maximum current point or the maximum voltage point. The 
other parameter (for example, voltage if current is the 
design goal) is displayed as a result. Designer has to take it 
into account in design as a constraint. If the value of this 
other parameter is unreal, parameters concerning the 
hardware 
have 
to 
be 
changed, 
for 
example 
the 
microcontroller speed. 
 
 
 
Figure 16. Simulation Setup window. 
 
IV. 
TESTCASE AND RESULTS 
  
To illustrate how the simulation behaves, a test case has 
been simulated. All parameters used in setup windows are 
summarized in Table II. Simulation time for a static analysis 
is configured to few milliseconds. Results are presented in 
Fig. 17. The left part shows results on tag side where the 
magnetic field H is calculated. It depends on emitter power, 
distance, and antennas gains. Then the harvesting part gives 
output of RF2DC and DC2DC parts in the M24LR04E. 
 
TABLE II.  
PARAMETERS USED FOR TESTCASE SIMULATION 
Emitting power 
50 mW 
Frequency of carrier for NFC 
communication 
13560 MHz 
Distance emitter / tag 
5 mm 
Duration of NFC 
communication 
5 s 
Antennas gain (emitter & tag) 
-3 dBi 
RF2DC & DC2DC converters 
Equations from M24LR04E 
Energy storage capacitance 
1000 nA 
Switches leakages (energy 
storage) 
100 fA 
Microcontroller brand/model 
Microchip / PIC18LF2525 
Microcontroller Oscillator / 
Operating voltage range 
Internal oscillator, 31KHz / 2V to 
5.5V 
Sensor / Operating voltage 
range 
Maxim MAX6613 / 1.8V to 5.5V 
Duration of node sensing and 
MCU processing and storage 
100 ms 
Simulation setup 
Design goal = current 
 
 

8
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
As design goal of the example is the output current, the 
simulator calculates the nominal current to retrieve from 
harvesting part. Nominal current is fixed by the required 
current from the electrical load (MCU and sensor). This 
current is calculated from MCU and sensor parameters: 
PIC18LF2525 requires 15.05µA when running from internal 
oscillator at 31KHz. MAX6613 consumes 7.5µA. Simulator 
then calculates the harvesting possible voltage output for a 
sink current of 22.55µA. From datasheet curves in the 
model, simulation gives 2.67V. Fig. 17 shows that the 
required power for load is 67.64µW but the harvester can 
only provide 60.2µW. As a result, the required voltage 3V is 
not reached. Designer will have to deal with a 2.67V supply, 
or decrease load current consumption in order to increase 
supply voltage. 
Energy calculations are also implemented in the simulator. 
It considers electrical power consumption and active time. 
Active time for the emitter correspond to the duration of the 
electromagnetic field. Result window thus displays 301µJ 
for 5s duration. Active time for the MCU is time while 
MCU is running (time running parameter in Fig. 15). Its 
energy is then 6.76µJ for 100ms. This result allows the 
designer to plan how many cycles the MCU could run with 
a single electromagnetic charge. It is 44 cycles for this 
example. 
Battery-less system is also possible: for example, an 
application in industry where a sensor network is deployed 
in the aim of measuring a temperature on several machines. 
Each evening, a person will read the data on each sensor 
node with a 5 seconds NFC communication. While 
downloading data from node to phone (or tablet), the node is 
being charged for the next day: it is able to make a 
measurement every 33 minutes for the next 24 hours. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this article, a concrete energy analysis of novel 
electronics architecture and ContactLess Simulator was 
presented. CLS is a simulator dedicated to energy efficiency 
in battery-less sensor node. Its interface is based on setting 
windows to graphically configure a NFC system composed 
of an emitter and a smart tag. As targeted tags are battery-
less (self-supplied), it comprises an energy harvesting 
module with a RF2DC and DC2DC converter, a 
microcontroller unit (MCU) and a sensor. Each hardware 
block is configured by a setup window form. Simulation can 
be tuned for one design goal: search maximal voltage or 
maximal current. This choice depends on designer priority. 
A launch button runs the simulation and displays a result 
window. 
Several 
electrical 
outputs 
are 
calculated: 
electromagnetic field at tag input, harvested power (voltage 
and current), harvested energy for a single contactless 
energy intake, required power (voltage and current) for the 
microcontroller and sensor, required energy for a main 
program loop. Result analysis on a realistic testcase shows 
that the harvested power is a bit weak (60.2µW) compared 
to the required power (67.64µW). According to the design 
goal, fixed to prioritize current, harvested voltage is 2.67v 
instead of 3v. Meanwhile, the sensing node is supplied with 
the required current (22.55µA). Energy calculation makes it 
possible to think about a better use of the energy. Indeed, 
 
 
 
Figure 17. Result window 

9
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
harvested power is weak but harvested energy (301µJ) is 
much bigger that required energy (6.76µJ). Feasibility is 
also proven: it is possible to charge the energy buffer during 
a 5 seconds NFC communication (while previous data are 
retrieved) then to use the battery-less system for 44 data 
recording (temperature measurements). 
ContactLess Simulator can be improved to support 
transient analysis and to propose devices according to 
design constraints for example. Other microcontroller and 
sensor will be added and the global interface will be 
changed to be closer to Fig. 5. Another possible 
improvement will be to add curves in the results window in 
order to helps the designer to know understand where the 
sensor node can be modified to meet the constraint. Finally, 
it may be interesting to implement realtime static analysis to 
the simulator to provide an efficient support during the 
design phase and dedicate the simulation to transient 
analysis. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Navarro and G. Migliato-Marega, “Cls: Contactless simulator,” in 
The 
12th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Wireless 
and 
Mobile 
Communications, Barcelona, Spain, 2016, pp. 65–69. 
[2] D.-K. Ahn, S.-G. Bae, and I.-C. Hwang, “A design of behavioral 
simulation platform for near field communication transceiver using matlab 
simulink,” The Transactions of The Korean Institute of Electrical 
Engineers, vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 1917–1922, 2010. 
[3] C. Angerer, B. Knerr, M. Holzer, A. Adalan, and M. Rupp, “Flexible 
simulation and prototyping for rfid designs,” in Procceedings of the First 
International EURASIP Workshop on RFID Technology, 2007. 
[4] Atmel, “Understanding the requirements of iso/iec 14443 for type b 
proximity contactless identification card. nov. 2005,” Application Note, 
[Online, 
retrieved: 
15th 
July 
2017]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.atmel.com/images/doc2056.pdf. 
[5] G. Benigno, O. Briante, and G. Ruggeri, “A sun energy harvester model 
for the network simulator 3 (ns-3),” in 2015 12th Annual IEEE 
International Conference on Sensing, Communication, and Networking - 
Workshops (SECON Workshops), June 2015, pp. 1–6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[6] T. Cheng and L. Jin, “Analysis and simulation of rfid anti-collision 
algorithms,” in The 9th International Conference on Advanced 
Communication Technology, vol. 1, Feb. 2007, pp. 697–701. 
[7] A. B. Constantine et al., “Antenna theory: analysis and design,” 
MICROSTRIP ANTENNAS, third edition, John wiley & sons, 2005. 
[8] J. Deckmar and A.Perez-Boutavin, “Nfc,” [Online, retrieved: 15th July 
2017]. 
Available 
from: 
https://fr.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/34915-nfc. 
[9] C. Floerkemeier and S. Sarma, “Rfidsim - a physical and logical layer 
simulation engine for passive rfid,” IEEE Transactions on Automation 
Science and Engineering, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 33–43, Jan. 2009. 
[10] U. K. Madawala and D. J. Thrimawithana, “A bidirectional inductive 
power interface for electric vehicles in v2g systems,” IEEE Transactions on 
Industrial Electronics, vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 4789–4796, Oct. 2011. 
[11] Microsoft, “Visual studio community,” [Online, retrieved: 15th July 
2017]. Available from: https://www.visualstudio.com/enus/products/visual-
studio-community-vs.aspx. 
[12] P. V. Nikitin, K. V. S. Rao, and S. Lazar, “An overview of near field 
uhf rfid,” in 2007 IEEE International Conference on RFID, March 2007, 
pp. 167–174. 
[13] G. Proehl, “An introduction to near field communications,” 
STMicroelectronics, [Online, retrieved: 15th July 2017]. Available from: 
http://www.st.com/content/st_com/en/applications/connectivity/nearfield-
communication-nfc.html, 2013. 
[14] S. Roundy, D. Steingart, L. Frechette, P. Wright, and J. Rabaey, Power 
Sources for Wireless Sensor Networks. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 
2004, 
pp. 
1–17. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-24606-0_1 
[15] H. G. Schantz, “Near field propagation law a novel fundamental limit 
to antenna gain versus size,” in 2005 IEEE Antennas and Propagation 
Society International Symposium, vol. 3A, July 2005, pp. 237–240 vol. 3A. 
[16] R. Tseng, B. von Novak, S. Shevde, and K. A. Grajski, “Introduction 
to the alliance for wireless power loosely-coupled wireless power transfer 
system specification version 1.0,” in 2013 IEEE Wireless Power Transfer 
(WPT), May 2013, pp. 79–83. 
[17] J. Wang and D. Yang, “Design of a multi-protocol rfid tag simulation 
platform based on supply chain,” in 2009 International Conference on 
Management and Service Science, Sept. 2009, pp. 1–4. 
[18] W. S. Wang, W. Magnin, N. Wang, M. Hayes, B. O’Flynn, and C. 
O’Mathuna, “Bulk material based thermoelectric energy harvesting for 
wireless sensor applications,” Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 
307, no. 1, p. 012030, 2011. [Online]. Available: http://stacks.iop.org/1742-
6596/307/i=1/a=012030 
 

