84
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Interference Avoidance Routing Strategy in Cognitive Radio Networks
Minh Thao Quach, Francine Krief
LaBRI, University of Bordeaux
Talence, France
Email: quach@labri.fr and krief@labri.fr
Mohamed Aymen Chalouf
IRISA, University of Rennes
Rennes, France
Email: mohamed-aymen.chalouf@irisa.fr
Abstract—Co-existence between legacy wireless infrastructure
and a cognitive radio network has been attracting the research
community. However, many challenges arise due to several
difﬁculties, such as how to leverage current deployment for a
secondary network but guarantee no interference to the primary
network. This work illustrates a speciﬁc coexistence deployment
in which a primary coverage reception overlaps with a cognitive
transmitter’s reception zone. We show that typically, a large
overlap zone causes high interference; however, the interference
level is lower when the node density is minor. Fuzzy logic is
used to combine observed factors of the wireless environment
(e.g., area overlapping and primary receiver density) to estimate
interference level to primary receivers. The computed results
reﬂect the precise impact that may occur when a cognitive radio
communication is operating nearby. Interference level is retrieved
by the routing engine and becomes a routing metric alternative
to the hopcount metric for our routing proposal, which leverages
Dynamic MANET On Demand for cognitive radio networks. In
this paper, we detail the proposed routing idea, which promotes
a cross-layered routing design for cognitive radio networks and
incorporates observed environment information to prevent severe
interference with primary networks.
Keywords–Cognitive radio; overlap region; prediction model;
fuzzy logic; interference avoidance.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The objective of this paper is to deﬁne a routing strategy
which avoids interference in cognitive radio networks (CRNs).
This strategy is essentially based on our previous work [1].
To make the readers easy to follow, we present the reason
why CRNs were introduced. Due to the limitation of ﬁxed
broadband and frequency range allocation, there is a huge
need for enhancing radio resource usage using cognitive ra-
dio technologies, especially for the rural areas. The federal
communications commission (FCC) has been conducting data
collection and evaluating the communication needs of rural
communities since 2008 in the US [2]–[4]. Expanding broad-
band deployment for rural areas is critical, however their full
impact has not been yet realized and it would be interesting
to measure this impact.
As illustrated in Figure 1 [5], CRN infrastructure can
coexist with an existing primary system including the primary
transmitter base station and its primary receivers. Again,
evaluating the impact with this co-existing scheme should be
studied since it has not been realized thoroughly. To do so, we
are interested in studying the reception overlap between the
secondary transmitter and primary transmitter and observing
its impact on the primary receivers.
Eliminating interruptions during an operation is one of the
key properties of reliable applications or services. In CRNs,
Figure 1. Cognitive radio networks reference architecture
interruptions obviously happen when the transmission of a
primary radio (PR) forces cognitive radios (CRs) to vacate on
the selected band. On the other hand, when an overlap exists
in the coverage area between the CR and PR transmitters, the
undesired interference generated by the secondary transmitters
on PR communications becomes difﬁcult to control. For this
reason, it is necessary to accurately characterize this overlap
and its effect on every available channel for better spectrum
selection.
We deﬁne an overlap region as an area where a PR emitter’s
signal meets a CR emitter’s signal. In case of coexistence,
this area is vulnerable to the operating primary receivers
within the region. When it comes to protecting PR receivers’
communication, avoiding this vulnerable area is one of the
options. However, since these receivers are not always operat-
ing continuously on this area, the spare spectrum within this
area can be exploited and used by CR nodes. Considering the
line-of-sight propagation model in rural areas, we deﬁne an
overlap in CRN context as being a geometrical overlapping
area between two circles that were formed by the signal
of the PR and CR transmitters. As illustrated in Figure 2,
the PR transmitter overlaps with two other CRs that creates
two overlap regions, overlap region 1 and overlap region 2
respectively.
We rely on the position of the transmitters and their
transmission ranges to identify the encountered overlap sit-
uations. Different overlapping cases have different effects on

85
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 2. Overlap in cognitive radio networks deﬁnition
the primary receivers. Therefore, characterizing all these cases
provides better vision on designing an interference-free CR
communication scheme. For instance in a rural area, a CRN
overlaps with TV transmission signals; the overlap area size
could be variable. Assuming that a smaller overlap region leads
to less impact on possible TV receivers, this CRN can operate
on the area that has small overlapping area. As long as the
impact on the receivers is observed, the interference can be
avoided.
In a CRN, a CR node makes decisions based on its own
observed information even though this knowledge may be
incomplete. Fuzzy logic, however, can yield useful outputs
with incomplete, approximate or vague information (e.g., low
or high interference, sufﬁcient or insufﬁcient available radio
resources). Furthermore, fuzzy logic does not require too
complicated computation since the calculation is mostly based
on if-then-else rules. Hence, we can use fuzzy logic in real-
time cognitive radio applications for which the response time
is crucial to the system performance [6]. Due to its simplicity,
ﬂexibility, and if-then-else rules composition, processing time
for fuzzy logic is minor.
Fuzzy logic introduces a logic theory that was developed
to generalise ‘true’ and ‘false’ values to any value between 0
and 1 [7]. It also presents the approximate knowledge, which
may be difﬁcult to express by conventional crisp methods (i.e.,
bivalent set theory). A fuzzy logic system with two inputs and
one output is described in Figure 3. The fuzzy sets are sets of
unsharp boundaries in which membership is a matter of degree
(in range of 0 to 1). For instance, a fuzzy set of weekend
may contain half of Friday, Saturday and Sunday and a set of
weekdays may contain from Monday to the ﬁrst half of Friday.
So, Friday can exist in both sets with distinctive degrees. To
identify the degree of these variables, a membership function
is used to imply the related information. The membership
function assigns a value in the interval [0, 1] to a fuzzy variable,
denoted by µ(weekend(day)), where weekend is a fuzzy set,
and day is a fuzzy variable.
Input crisp values are fuzziﬁed to produce appropriate
linguistic values according to deﬁned membership functions.
Then, the inference engine will extract the associated outputs
based on the deﬁned rules. These outputs are fuzziﬁed based
on output membership functions. Finally, fuzziﬁed outputs are
aggregated into a single crisp value by the defuzziﬁer.
The output can be used to investigate how the routing layer
reacts and makes the right decisions to maximise spectrum re-
sources while avoiding interference with the primary receivers.
Figure 3. General fuzzy logic system
For instance, a CR can operate within an area which has high
overlap size but low number of operating primary receivers.
We apply fuzzy logic to determine the overlap size and the
probability of operating primary receivers (e.g., low or high).
In the literature, we did not ﬁnd any explicit solution or
proposal that is sufﬁcient to protect the PR when coexistence
happens. There is always a trade-off between the coexistence
and interference. In our previous works [8], [9], we graphically
observed and estimated how the PRs get impacted when
overlap happens along with a proposal of using the stochastic
model Grey and Kalman ﬁlter to predict the potential PRs that
may be impacted. From these observations, we proposed a
method to combine these two factors using fuzzy logic, which
was detailed in [1]. We explain this again in this article so that
the readers understand the proposed routing framework.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. A literature
review of routing solutions in CRN is provided in Section II.
Then we brieﬂy present the overlap calculation and the node
density estimation method in Section III. The method to
compose these two factors into an interference level, in which
we estimate this level using fuzzy logic and a routing proposal,
is in Section IV and V. Overall, we conclude our work in
Section VI.
II.
RELATED WORK
Network layer plays an important role in computer network
communication, essentially, routing protocol to establish a path
between a sender and a receiver. Routing in a wireless network
is always an interesting topic in the research community. In
CRNs, the routing problem imposes a great challenge due to
the dynamic spectrum access nature. If two neighboring nodes
do not have a common accessible channel, or they have a
common channel but do not tune to the same frequency, the
communication in this case is infeasible and no route can ever
be established. In CRNs, topology construction includes spec-
trum detection, neighbor discovery, and topology management.
In some circumstances, a routing decision also depends on the
required Quality of Service (QoS) from upper layer and also
from the control information from the lower layers (PHY and
MAC).
Due to the unique function of a CRN, intermittent link is
the ﬁrst challenge that any routing solution needs to tackle.
To be speciﬁc, routing challenges in CRNs include spectrum
awareness, quality route discovery process, and route mainte-
nance/reparation mechanism [10]. Researchers hence have to
keep in mind the fact that they will not have any pre-allocation
spectrum access for the routing module, so the routing al-
gorithm has to accommodate the change of the environment.

86
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
However, the algorithm also has to satisfy the basic network
performance [11]. Nevertheless, an inter-dependence solution
between route selection and spectrum management could be an
appropriate approach to resolve the spectrum awareness issue
[12].
Routing over the open spectrum environment is a fun-
damental issue, especially in dealing with multi-hop CRNs.
Several routing solutions were proposed but no general routing
solution exists [13]. Again, the challenge is how to ensure
radio resources for cognitive transmission while guaranteeing
the service for all on-going PR communications over the
exploited channels on the whole path. Regarding service-wise
perspective, the question is how many possible services can be
provided to the end users in the secondary networks. Overall,
any routing solution in CRNs should always be aware of
the potentially available spectrum that may be provided by
the sensing function locally or globally. Research by Cesana,
Cuomo, and Ekici [10] classiﬁed two main classes of rout-
ing algorithm, full spectrum knowledge and local spectrum
knowledge, which consider global and local spectrum infor-
mation among CRs as the main criteria for routing algorithm
classiﬁcation.
Cheng et al. [14] proposed a spectrum-aware routing so-
lution that selects a route according to the switching delay
among channels and backoff delay within a channel based
on the spectrum information provided. Also, research by Liu,
Cai, and Shen [15], another spectrum-aware routing solution,
suggested coupling spectrum sensing and spectrum sharing
in multichannel for multi-hop routing. Based on the location
information and channel statistic, a CR selects the relay
hop and adapts its own transmission to dynamic spectrum
access opportunities in its neighbor. The authors proposed a
routing metric that encountered the throughput called cognitive
transport throughput as the main metric for the protocol. This
metric was used to capture the dynamic change from sensing
information and evaluate potential gain of each relay hop. In
term of spectrum-aware solutions, Zhu, Akyildiz, and Kuo
[16] also built a spectrum tree based as on-demand routing
solution for Cognitive Radio Ad-Hoc Networks (CRAHNs).
The global sensing and sharing information were utilized to
build a tree with distinguished levels of available spectrum
on each band. They suggested cooperating this information
from the spectrum decision and routing selection process to
produce a metric and adapt an on-demand routing protocol
for CRAHNs. Other on-demand routing adaptations for CRNs
were also introduced in [17], [18].
Some other works that also take into account the cooper-
ation between spectrum sensing and the routing module were
introduced in [19], [20]. Xin, Xie, and Shen [19] proposed
a graph-based solution that associated spectrum sensing de-
cisions with the radio interfaces of each node in the net-
work to assign speciﬁc spectrum opportunities to the radio
interfaces, while Krishnamurthy et al. [20] modiﬁed MAC
layer conﬁgurations to determine a common set of channels to
facilitate communication among the nodes. The topology so is
formed according to this common set of discovered channels.
This solution indeed used the global spectrum knowledge to
accommodate the routing algorithm. Additionally, the physical
location of each node was also disclosed among the node to
provide the global view of the network topology.
Once the knowledge of the surroundings is partially
learned, Guan et al. [21] proposed a prediction-based middle-
ware between the network layer and lower layers. The authors
studied topology control and routing issues in Cognitive Radio
MANETs (CR-MANETs) and built a middleware-like cross-
layer module to provision cognition capacity to do routing
for CR-MANETs. The work aimed to capture the dynamic
change of topology and potentially construct an efﬁcient and
reliable topology. Indeed, the solution is the inter-dependence
component as mentioned between MAC layer and routing
layer, and this component incorporates sensing statistics to
predict and provide information on the available duration of
link to routing components. Other solutions that deal with
opportunistic networks include an opportunistic access routing
solution in [13], where routing metric was rendered based
on demanded QoS in cooperation with the channels’ access
opportunities.
Location awareness is another aspect of concern in CRN
routing. A geographic forwarding based Spectrum Aware Rout-
ing protocol for Cognitive ad-Hoc networks (SEARCH) is
also a location awareness routing solution in [22] that joined
undertaken paths to completely avoid the PR’s region, while
routing to protect the PR devices within this area. Similarly,
Habak et al. [23] suggested location-aware routing solutions
could provide better protection for PR devices from CRNs’
communication. Also, a routing solution with consideration
about overlapping was proposed in [24]. PR receivers protec-
tion was studied in this work as the main purpose. The routing
mechanism ensured a perfect protection for PRs by selecting
routes that avoid any overlap between PR and secondary radio
coverage. However, the resources of the overlap region may
be usable when the PR receivers are inactive or non-existent.
Even though the research community has been spending
considerable resources and effort to resolve routing challenges
for CRNs, there are still no routing standards that could
overcome all the challenges. Routing issues encountered in
CRN design can be varied. Each hop has its own different
expectation of available resources (channels, frequency range,
power level, interference level, etc.) and allocation time. There-
fore, most of the existing solutions treat routing designs as a
cross-layered problem with cooperation between a lower layer,
e.g., to acquire sensing information and to render potential
resources, and the routing mechanism on the network layer to
establish a path among nodes.
Another perspective that attracts the research community
is interference analysis in CRNs. The investigation of interfer-
ence analysis takes a critical role to provide input to design
various network parameters to guarantee certain performance
for the primary users [25]. Many studies have been carried out
in [26]–[30]. Hossain et al. [25] have studied and classiﬁed two
types of interference conﬁguration, network with beacon and
network with primary exclusive regions.
Assuming that in a circular network the CRs are uniformly
distributed with a constant density λ, the interference generated
by these CRs depends on their locations and on the random
channel fading, so this type of conﬁguration causes random
interference [31]. In the network with beacons where CRs
capture and detect beacons sent from PRs, the CRs try to avoid
transmitting in the next duration after successfully detecting
these beacons. The PRs’ communication is hence safe from

87
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
being perturbated. However, again the channel fading problem
could make these CRs misdetect the beacons. Therefore, a
beacon detection threshold becomes on a crucial parameter to
design a CRN that limits the impact on the PR’s operation. In
the network with primary exclusive regions, the PR transmit-
ter’s exclusive region is better avoided by any CRs within the
area since PR receivers within this area are passive devices
and they might be affected if any of the nearby CR operates.
Also depending on the locations of CRs and PRs, our
work studies the network environment’s observations from the
CRs point of view to evaluate the impact, which an on-going
CRN may cause to the primary network. Our observations
take into account the inclusive zone between PRs’ and CRs’
networks. This awareness is then incorporated into a metric
called interference level that reﬂects the importance of the
impact. Our proposed routing solution uses the interference
level as the crucial metric on select the route that minimizes
the impact to the primary networks that is unnecessarily
completely avoided when inactive or non-existing PR receivers
are detected. Our routing proposition is also a cross-layered
approach where the network layer accesses and retrieves
physical information directly from the physical layer via a
management controller (see Section V-B). In the following
sections, we detail the different parts of our work: overlap
observation, impact estimation and routing proposal.
III.
OVERLAP REGION AND NODE DENSITY
OBSERVATIONS
In this section, we present the overlap region observation
and node density estimation approach, which are the essential
piece of information to envisage possible interference on the
PR’s system when CR’s system is operating.
A. Overlap Region Observation
We argue that when the reception area of a CR emitter
and the reception area of a PR emitter overlap, it produces
unavoidable effects on the primary system, especially to the
PR receivers. This observation was mentioned in [8]. However,
we also proved that not only the overlap size but also the
number of existing primary receivers cause the impact [9]. Our
approach takes into account the overlap ratio and node density
probability as two main factors. The ratio of the overlap size
to the overall size of the PR emitter’s disk is named overlap
ratio, while the node density probability is the probability of
possible node density within this PR emitter’s disk.
The realistic overlap case highlighted in Figure 4 and
Figure 5 is obtained when the following condition is satisﬁed.
We study the possible impact of these general cases.
d < RP + RC and d > RP
and d > RC.
(1)
The overlapping region is clearly displayed and by using
classical geometry, we calculate the general overlap region
between the PR and CR for this case in equation (2),
AOverlap = θC
2 R2
C − R2
C |cos β| cos θC
2
+ θP
2 R2
P − RC |cos β| RP cos θP
2 ;
(2)
Figure 4. General overlap case
Figure 5. Particular overlapping case between PR Transmitter and a
CR Node
where θC and θP are the angles formed at OC and OP with
points A and B, respectively, whereas β is an intermediate
variable for our computation given,
sin β = R2
P −

88
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 6. Single Channel - Different Overlap regions - Uniform
Distribution
Figure 7. Single Channel - Different Overlap regions, smaller
reception zone - Uniform Distribution
Figure 8 corresponds to the second scenario where two
channels are available with a PR transmitter observing different
overlaps on each channel. In fact, the overlap on channel 1 is
about 120000m2 while on channel 2 the intersection between
transmitter circles is around 500m2. In Figure 8, we study the
distinctive ratio of affected nodes while modifying the number
of PR receivers on both channels.
Again, the experiment is performed with various numbers
of PR receivers within the PR transmitter’s disks on both
channels. The x-axis shows the number of PR receivers while
the y-axis illustrates the ratio of nodes being affected by the
CR transmitter’s signal. This ratio varies from 10% to almost
15% on channel 2 but from almost 34% to almost 40% on
channel 1 when the receivers are distributed uniformly within
these disks (as in Figure 8).
Though the relationship between overlap sizes and the
impact is shown, we performed another experiment on a single
channel network with different overlap sizes and arbitrary
Figure 8. Multi Channel - Different Overlap regions - Uniform
Distribution
deployment of PR receivers. In this test, the primary users
were deployed further from the vulnerable area. For instance,
even when 200 receivers were deployed, the ratio of affected
nodes was lower than the deployment of 80 or 50 receivers
in Figure 9 and Figure 10, respectively. Hence, envisaging
the distribution over the overlap area and applying the proper
prediction model to estimate the density of the receivers could
be a new approach to protecting the primary receivers in
general.
Figure 9. Single Channel - Big Reception Zone - Arbitrary
Deployment
In summary, the simulation results reﬂect the relationship
between the overlap area and the impact on the primary
receptions with homogeneous distributions of PR receivers.
However, positions of PRs may be affected by practical con-
siderations such as obstacles, buildings, mountains, etc., which
prevent regions of the coverage area from containing receivers.
Therefore, a prediction model to estimate the location of these
devices is required.

89
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 10. Single Channel - Small Reception Zone - Arbitrary
Deployment
B. Node Density Estimation Approach
We now look for a solution for estimating the node density
within a speciﬁc area. There are two approaches that are taken
into account in this work the grey model GM(1, 1) and the
Kalman ﬁlter. The Grey systems theory [32] is known for the
analysis of problems with incomplete or uncertain information.
This is an uncertain system in which the information is
incomplete and the existing data is partially accurate. Grey
system focuses on the uncertainty problems of known samples
or inadequate information. Many components of Grey system
theory have been built up since the theory was introduced in
[33]. These components consist of systems analysis, evalu-
ation, modeling, prediction, decision-making, etc. Our work
focuses on the Grey prediction in terms of modeling and
predicting on a set of samples.
In the literature, the Grey predictor is robust with respect
to noise and lack of modeling information compared to other
prediction methods [34]. The Grey model deﬁnition is quoted
[32]: “Grey models predict the future value of a time series
based only on a set of the most recent data depending on the
window size of the predictor assuming that all the data used
in the models are positive and the sampling frequency of the
time series are ﬁxed.” One of the most efﬁcient Grey models
in real time applications is GM(1, 1). The model GM(1, 1),
pronounced as “Grey Model First Order One Variable”, is the
time series forecasting model in which the model is renewed
when new data become available to the prediction model [34].
In next generation networks, e.g., software-deﬁned radio
networks or so-called CRNs, the resource exploration pro-
cess on these devices has very limited information about
radio environment. A prediction model that satisﬁes partial
knowledge can be useful. The density of these devices for
example is one of the important characteristics that a CR
needs to estimate to avoid the maximum perturbation on the
primary system. A proposal on the use of the Grey Model
in [35] deﬁned a function that facilitates the detection of
free-bands by the mobile cognitive radio equipment dedicated
to the real-time patient’s monitoring. This work basically
proposed a predictive strategy, which is based on machine
learning techniques combined with the Grey Model system
for performing a spectral prediction. Although we characterize
the relationship between the overlap area and the effect on
the primary system, the primary receivers’ density within this
vulnerable area is vaguely known. We argue that the Grey
Prediction Model is able to estimate the mobile node position.
Firstly, we are interested in predicting the distribution of
the PR receivers within a speciﬁc area using the forecasting
model GM(1, 1) and the Kalman ﬁlter. Since we are short of
space in this article, we encourage readers to refer to details
of the model GM(1, 1) explained in [9], and [35]. The model
uses least-squares method to adapt the prediction curve to the
original curve. The idea of using the least-squares method is
to ﬁnd the most closest point to the actual value curve/line
of the data. In the Grey Model, to ensure the accuracy of the
predicted value in the time domain (that reﬂects the trend of
the series) and prediction control variation (the variance of the
predicted value and the actual value), the least-squares method
is applied to calculate these coefﬁcient factors.
We adapt GM(1, 1) to predict primary receivers on a spe-
ciﬁc area if a statistical receiver quantity is known. Assuming
we have statistical information of the number of active licensed
mobile devices in a speciﬁc area (note that we focus on the
rural area since there are less obstacles in-between). Depending
on the time unit of the statistic, we extract the statistic into
a time series chain of the number of active licensed devices,
which is named “predicted PRs”. This is the input series of the
Grey Model GM(1, 1). In current experiments, the relationship
between transmission power and reception power in free space
can be approximated by [36]:
Pr(d) = PtGtGrλ2
(4πd)2L
where Pr and Pt are received and transmitted power, respec-
tively, Gr and Gt denote the antenna gains of receiver and
transmitter, L the system loss factors (a.k.a. ﬁlter losses and
antenna losses), d the distance between the transmitter and
the receiver and λ is the wavelength of the transmitted signal
in meters. Thus, knowing the PR’s positions based on their
transmitting/received power by the CR node, the system (i.e.,
Cognitive Radio emitter) could estimate the changes in their
position and the number of PR receivers from the overlap
region. According to this information, the CR node could
adapt its transmit parameters (power) to minimize the possible
impact on PR systems.
Another approach that we consider is the Kalman ﬁlter.
The Kalman-based estimator provides good results in practice
due to its optimality (it minimizes the mean square error
of the estimated parameters). The Kalman ﬁlter recursively
corrects the estimation function associated with the current
measured value, current predicted value and current predicted
measurement value. For example, suppose we have a prediction
function of variable x at time t called, ˆx−
t . The current
measured value is zt, the predicted measurement, which is
yielded by the predicted value of x at t is z−t, providing that
z−t = Hx−t with H is the related matrix to the measured
value at time t.
If the actual value of x is denoted by ˆxt, the prediction
function is then corrected as follows:

90
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
ˆxt = ˆx−
t + K(zt − Hˆx−
t )
(4)
K is called the Kalman gain associated with the error from
the actual measured value and the prediction measurement
value, zt and z−t, respectively. In (4), the composition after
K is the correction for the predicted function for estimation
of x, denoted by ˆx−
t .
We apply the same adaptation and series to perform an ex-
periment with the basic Kalman ﬁlter model. The idea behind
comparing these two methods is the data smoothing process
that the Kalman ﬁlter provides. We found that the rendered
plots provide similar effects between the original series and
the predicted series. The collected results in Figure 11 and
Figure 12 show the relationship between the received signal
and the distance. The future position is predicted based on
this received signal and the current position. These examples
(Figure 11 and Figure 12) allow us to estimate the different
positions of the PRs in the overlap region and to characterize
the overlap region with PRs mobility. The sensitivity range
for this case has a limit which approaches −100dBm. These
results can also be the basis for adaptive transmission power
selection.
Figure 11. Relation of RSSI and distance with Grey Model GM(1,
1)
IV.
FUZZY LOGIC-BASED INTERFERENCE LEVEL
ESTIMATION
From the observations presented in the previous section,
we combine overlap ratio and node density probability using
fuzzy logic in this section. These parameters are the fuzzy
inputs of our fuzzy inference system. A proper implication
is applied for each rule listed in the rule table. The result
from the implication rule is then aggregated and defuzziﬁed
to obtain the ﬁnal result. This is the degree of impact on the
primary system. A CR can consider this degree before using
a frequency range when overlap happens.
To interpret the output of antecedents (i.e., the overlap
ratio), we use the Mamdani Min Implication rules [7] to extract
Figure 12. Relation of RSSI and distance with Kalman Filter
the ﬁnal result for the overlap ratio fuzzy set. For instance,
at the intersection of two functions, an or operator is used
to connect two sets, and the maximum of two membership
functions is evaluated for the antecedent part of the fuzzy rules.
µOverlapRatio(x) = µLow(x) ∨ µHigh(x)
= max[µLow(x), µHigh(x)]
(5)
Detailed explanation and implementation to produce the
interference level was described in our article [1], hence we
only summarize the sample rules table, its inferred statements
and the ﬁnal results of the aggregation process to produce
the interference level from the overlap ratio and node density
probability.
TABLE I. ENHANCE INTERFERENCE LEVEL RULES TABLE
Index
Overlap Ratio
Density
Interference Level
1
Low
Low
Low
2
Low
Medium
rather Medium
3
High
Medium
somewhat High
4
High
High
High
5
Very High
High
extremely High
6
Very High
Very High
extremely very High
For instance, the above rules infer the following.
•
If (Overlap-Ratio is Low) or (Density-Ratio is Low),
then (Interference Level is Low) (1)
•
If (Overlap-Ratio is Low) and (Density-Ratio is
Medium), then (Interference Level isn’t Low or rather
medium) (0.5000)
•
If (Overlap-Ratio is High) or (Density-Ratio is
Medium), then (Interference Level is somewhat High)
(1)
•
If (Overlap-Ratio is High) or (Density-Ratio is High),
then (Interference Level is High) (1)

91
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
•
If (Overlap-Ratio is Very High) and (Density-Ratio is
High), then (Interference Level is extremely High) (1)
•
If (Overlap-Ratio is Very High) or (Density-Ratio is
Very High), then (Interference Level is extremely Very
High) (1)
Figure 13. Interference Level membership function
Figure 14. Interference Level Output as function of Overlap and
Node Density - Rule set of 16
The fuzzy inference engine combines the rules to obtain
the aggregated fuzzy output. The output is the fuzzy set of
the interference level that is deﬁned in Figure 13. The Fuzzy
controller has to defuzzify this output into crisp values using
the centroid method to make the ﬁnal decisions. Figure 14
shows the system output as a function of 2 variables, overlap
ratio and node density, with the rules set of 16 conditional
statements.
Table II and Table III show the fuzziﬁed data of the inputs
based on their deﬁned membership functions. Table IV shows
the output of the inference system. The aggregated values are
processed according to the interference membership function
in Figure 13. The rules are applied correspondingly in the
defuzziﬁcation process to produce the ﬁnal crisp value of the
interference level.
More precisely, the Fuzzy Logic Controller (FLC) maps the
fuzziﬁed outputs (a.k.a., the output of each linguistic variable
of overlap ratio and node density probability) of the inputs to
infer the associated consequences. For instance, the inference
engine decomposes an input of overlap ratio of 0.25596 into
TABLE II. OVERLAP DEGREE FUZZIFICATION OUTPUT
Index
overlap ratio
µ(x) Low
µ(x) Medium
µ(x)High
µ(x) Very High
1
0.25596
0.29362
0.37305
0
0
2
0.57829
0
0
0.81143
0
3
0.44402
0
0.37322
0.29345
0
4
0.66566
0
0
0.22894
0.26264
5
0.53420
0
0
0.89467
0
6
0.65453
0
0
0.30314
0.21811
TABLE III. DENSITY DEGREE FUZZIFICATION OUTPUT
Index
Density probability
µ(x) Low
µ(x) Medium
µ(x) High
µ(x) Very High
1
0.08049
1
0
0
0
2
0.19908
0.67281
0
0
0
3
0.66764
0
0
0.21574
0.27056
4
0.81842
0
0
0
0.87370
5
0.28182
0.12118
0.54548
0
0
6
0.57480
0
0
0.83466
0
TABLE IV. INTERFERENCE LEVEL FUZZIFICATION DATA
Index
Overlap input
Density input
Interference Level
Crisp Value
1
0.25596
0.08049
Low
0.14236
2
0.57829
0.19908
Medium
0.21464
3
0.44402
0.66764
High
0.39495
4
0.66566
0.81842
Very High
0.47103
5
0.53163
0.74970
Very High
0.40053
6
0.65453
0.57480
High
0.37930
µ(low) at 0.29362 and input of density probability of 0.08049
into µ(low) at 1. This composition matches the ﬁrst rule in
Table I - If (Overlap-Ratio is Low) or (Density-Ratio is Low),
then (Interference Level is Low).
Figure 14 shows the system output as a function of 2
variables, overlap ratio and node density, and the output of
interference level. Each of the variables presented in Figure 14
reﬂects both the linguistic and also the crisp values. For
instance, when the overlap degree and density degree are zeros,
the interference is also almost zero (coded with dark-blue
area). While the overlap ratio is high (over 60% certainty) and
the node density degree is low (below 20%), the interference
level is low with low probability (the blue area). This explains
the fact that the interference level still strongly connects to
the 20% degree of node density that might be affected by the
big overlap ratio. The higher the node density, the higher the
interference level with high probability.
This interference level can be used in routing in CRNs,
which we present in the next section.
V.
ROUTING DESIGN PROPOSITION
To get the picture of current work for routing in mobile
networks, we go through some existing approaches for routing
solutions. There exist three types of routing protocol designs
for mobile networks: proactive, reactive and hybrid. Proactive
routing protocol are protocols that require node establishes a
route to all destinations regardless of the applications’ demand.
In reactive routing protocol, on the other way round, a node
only initiates routing explorations upon applications’ demand.
Hybrid protocols merge the advantages of both proactive and
reactive features.
On Link State Routing (OLSR) is a well-known proactive
routing protocol while Ad-hoc On-demand Distance Vector
(AODV) and Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) are common

92
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
reactive routing protocols. However, which routing protocol
can work efﬁciently in CRNs and how much adaptation could
be considered? There are some considered facts in cognitive
radio ad-hoc network routing design, as follows. Routing
protocol in CRNs should
•
avoid periodic messages since redundant messages
sometimes cause collision and confusion,
•
avoid acknowledgement over the CR link, so that the
overhead of the protocol is not too big,
•
detect primary users’ existence so that the routing
exploration process does not cause serious impact to
the primary networks.
We ﬁrst look at some current research that studies the
performance of reactive routing protocols. In literature, much
work has been conducted to verify the efﬁciency of these
reactive protocols but obtained results are controversial. We
present some of the work in the following.
Johnson and David [37] introduced DSR in 1996 and the
protocol was then standardized in RFC 4728 [38] in 2007.
DSR was designed to quickly adapt to routing changes when
a mobile host moves frequently in an ad-hoc network. A route
establishment process can only initiate on the desire of the
data sender - when a host wants to send a data packet to a
destination.
AODV was introduced in 1999 by C. E. Perkins, E.
Belding-Royer, and E. M. Royer [39] and was standardized
in RFC 3561 [40]. The original design of the protocol has
been vastly used by the research community. Many spin-off of
AODV have been proposed as the routing protocol for different
types of mobile networks.
In principle, AODV is a table-driven routing protocol
while DSR is cache-driven. AODV has route maintenance
features while DSR lacks route maintaining function. DSR
has to re-initiate the routing exploration process when there
is a link breakage. Consequently, data communication may be
interrupted.
AODV’s creator and his co-authors conducted a compari-
son regarding the performance of these two routing protocols
in ad-hoc modes in [41]. Packet delivery fraction (or ratio
in some of the recent articles), average end-to-end delay and
normalized routing load were the main metrics used to measure
the performance of AODV and DSR. The performance results
show that DSR outperforms AODV in small network topol-
ogy and lower mobility. However, AODV handles changes
better - i.e., nodes move faster - than DSR does in dynamic
networks thanks to the tracking mechanism. Basically, since
AODV keeps track of actively used routes, multiple actively
used destinations can hence be searched using a single route
discovery ﬂood. This mechanism helps to control routing load
over the medium, so that the overhead of the protocol seems to
be lower than that of DSR. However, the overhead may come
from MAC instead causing the routing load increases.
Recently, Jain et al. redo the comparison of these two
protocols on the basis of propagation path loss models [42]
while Manickam et al. in [43] examine the performance of
these two protocols similarly to the work of Perkins et al. in
[41].
TABLE V. ROUTING PROTOCOL COMPARISON TABLE
Protocol
Type
Metric
Periodic message
Acknowledgement message
Applicable network
DSR
Reactive
Shortest path
Yes
Yes
Ad-hoc but less
dynamic than AODV
OLSR
Proactive
Shortest path
Yes
Yes
MANETs
AODV
Reactive
Hop count
Yes
Yes
MANETs
DYMO
Hybrid
Hop count with
No
Optional
VANETs and MANETs
alternative metrics
The concluded results suggest similar performance to that
described in [41]. Yet in [42], [43], DSR has lower end-to-end
delay than AODV since the exploring path from source to sink
is attached in every routing request. By reversing the enclosed
path, the sink does not take much time to travel back to the
source, so that the processing delay is reduced. Regarding the
packet delivery fraction, AODV performs consistently better
than DSR does in both [41], [43].
Regarding the performance of a proactive and a reactive
routing protocol, we found a study of Sagar et al. [44] in
which OLSR is compared with Dynamic MANET On-demand
(DYMO) or AODVv2 routing protocol. DYMO was designed
to deal with modern day dynamic ad-hoc network topologies.
It works as a reactive and also a proactive routing protocol.
Initiating discovering routes when it is active or looking up for
a route on demand are two different conﬁgurations of DYMO.
In fact, the protocol is intended for use by mobile routers in
wireless, multihop networks. DYMO operates very similarly
to AODV, but requires only the most basic route discovery
and maintenance procedures [45]. DYMO has also been built
with enhancements. Most of the optimizations available in
AODV should be applicable to DYMO as well. Sagar et al.
[44] have evaluated DYMO and OLSR on MANETs and
VANETs. The results suggest that DYMO performs better
than OLSR does especially in VANETs where the mobility
of mobile nodes are dynamic and the surrounding is quickly
changed. Other analyse on the performance of DYMO are also
discussed in [46], [47]. All these works concluded that DYMO
outperformed the existing routing protocols for MANET in
terms of packet delivery, delay and compatible throughput.
However, in [45] the authors suggest that DYMO assumes the
link between mobile nodes are bidirectional. More precisely,
this routing relies on the accuracy of the information provided
from the MAC layer.
Overall, a proactive routing protocol requires that a route
is established and maintained before any data communication
is needed. Therefore, it may not be suitable for CRNs due to
the overhead of the control messages all over the channels.
Consequently, the resources of a cognitive node exploits may
just be used for routing the control message. However, with a
reactive routing protocol, the route exploration process is only
initiated when a node wants to start a data communication,
though route maintenance should be also considered as part of
the design. We want to leverage current design with minimal
customization. Therefore, adopting both reactive and proactive
approaches appears to be reasonable. The DYMO protocol is
a potential candidate for this purpose. We will brieﬂy discuss
the protocol and its essential operations; e.g., route discovery
and route maintenance.
A. DYMO Operation
The Dynamic MANET On-demand DYMO routing proto-
col has been developed and deﬁned as an IETF speciﬁcation

93
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(Internet draft version 4.0) [48]. This is a successor of the
AODV routing protocol, which was proposed by the same
main author. DYMO has AODV’s attributions, which can work
basically in mobile ad-hoc network mode. For instance, route
discovery is only activated when needed. Loop prevention
is done by attaching the sequence number to each routing
message. Supposedly, a node only creates a route when it has
a demand to send data messages to the target node. Therefore,
the intermediate nodes maintain and detect topology changes
while listening to these exchanging data messages. No HELLO
packets are needed to distinguish AODV, so the change is
detected faster and the overhead of sending extra control
messages is lower. However, some requirements of DYMO
should be taken into account to guarantee the best performance
of this protocol. The protocol assumes to work under the
bidirectional link. It hence relies on the reliability of the lower
layer to provide essential environment state information. We
will discuss this relation in later Sections. Firstly, we brieﬂy
describe the main operations of DYMO in MANET.
Route Discovery: When a mobile node wants to establish a
path to communicate to another node in the network, this node
has to discover the path to reach its desired destination. To do
so, this node, called the source, generates a route request and
transmits this request to any of its known neighbors. Each of
these neighbors, including the source and the target node, will
maintain the active discovered link via a routing table, which is
created right after the discovery process ﬁnishes. Each entry
contains basic information for routing such as the addresses
of source and sink, sequence number, hop-count, next hop
address, next interface, timestamp of last used, expiration time,
metric type and metric, the route state.
We provide an example in Figure 15 to comprehensively
illustrate the route discovery process of DYMO in MANET.
A path must be established to allow routing data from A
to F. Similar to AODV, routing information is maintained at
A in its own routing table while RREQ is ﬂooded to A’s
neighbors and their other neighbors until the destination is
reached. The sequence number in each RREQ is increased
at each new neighbor before the RREQ is forwarded. At C,
there are redundant RREQs from both directions with the same
sequence number. If the alternative metric was not pre-set, it
does not matter which path will be chosen. In this case, let us
assume that C records the route from B to C. C then carries on
forwarding this RREQ to the next hops, D and F. F is already
the target destination while D is not. F replies the request with
its RREP while D records the route. The RREP from F will
be transferred on the reverse path from F back to C, B and A,
the source. The data transmission will be then followed after
this process has ﬁnished.
Upon sending the RREQ, the originator node A has to
wait for a RREQ WAIT TIME for the RREP reception. In
case there is no RREP received, A properly attempts to send
another RREQ with a different sequence number. The waiting
time is set to be 1000 milliseconds by default. Once the
RREP is created and sent back, the ﬂow of trafﬁc of RREP is
unicast. Therefore, it relies heavily on the MAC to ensure the
bidirectional link underneath the network layer.
An example scenario of a CRN without PR is depicted in
Figure 15. Since DYMO allows us to implement an alternative
metric for the route selection process, we can modify the
Figure 15. DYMO Route Discovery from source A to sink F
without PR’s existence
protocol with a minor change in retrieving MAC information
according to the environment observations explained previ-
ously. An example of the application that DYMO can work
in CRN is illustrated in Figure 16, in which we assume that B
is kept in silent as it operates in the area where it overlaps with
a PR transmitter. This is an expected route discovery with a
scenario of a CRN with PR’s existence depicted in Figure 16
using an alternative routing metric interference level.
Figure 16. DYMO Route Discovery from source A to sink F with
PR’s existence
Route Maintenance: Each node that has received a route
request and a route reply has to maintain the active route
locally by monitoring the communication exchanging along
the path. However, when there is problem in the network
that triggers the path changes, a route error (RRER) may be
generated and issued by these nodes to their neighbors. Two
common problems are broken links on the current active route
and unknown path from a received data packet.
Before using a route to forward a packet, a node must
check the status of the route as follows. If the route is marked
as broken, this node will not use it for forwarding. If the
Current Time is higher than the Route.ExpirationTime,
the route has expired and cannot be used for forwarding. If
the route is currently not in use when (Current Time −
Route.LastUsed) < (MAX SEQNUM LIFETIME),

94
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the route table entry must be expunged. When generating
a RRER, a node creates a list of unreachable destinations
including their addresses with associated sequence number. Its
routing table is also updated according to the broken link.
In the case of undeliverable packets, the RRER may be
multicasting or unicasting to the neighbor from which the data
packet was sent from. For unicast RRER, a special message
type of value (TLV) is mandatorily included. In the case of
broken link, the RRER is sent to all neighbors of the node that
experience a broken link. After the other intermediate nodes
receive the RRER, they verify the information contained in the
RRER to react with the event accordingly. We illustrate this
process in the example in Figure 17. A Route Error RRER is
generated from C and then sent towards all of C’s neighbors
including B, G, and D to prevent future data transmission
towards link C-F. These nodes had already recorded a path
containing F; therefore, the RRER is further sent to A and E.
Figure 17. DYMO Route error sent from C when there is a broken
link
The Hop Count is traditionally used as the default metric
to select a route for a target node in exisiting table entries.
However, some applications may require metric information
other than Hop Count and this metric unfortunately sometimes
causes the selection of the worst possible route in many
situations. In CRNs, sometimes the Hop Count metric is not
sufﬁcient to choose a route to a target without interfering with
current operating primary networks. The authors of AODVv2
[48] have been discussing alternative metrics since 2012. It was
introduced in Internet draft version 24 [49]. Each such alternate
metric measures a “cost” of using the associated route, and
there are many different kinds of cost (latency, delay, monetary,
energy, etc.).
The cost of each of the multiple routes is measured by
a different metric. The speciﬁcation provides the abstract
function to evaluate the cost of each route in term of a function
Cost(R), where R is the route for which the cost is calculated.
The route information for R must always include the type
of metric by which Cost(R) is evaluated. While using this
alternative metric, we should also be careful and guarantee a
loop-free environment while the routing engine is operating.
In other words, given that the Cost(R) is calculated, a loop-
free routine should also be invoked. Since DYMO-AODVv2
is still work in progress, speciﬁc descriptions for metric type
for alternative metric vaguely describes. The protocol requires
experiments and changes if necessary. In the scope of this
work, we tend to use it to evaluate the efﬁciency of interference
level in preventing impact on PR networks while the routing
engine is working.
B. CRN-DYMO routing protocol
Generally, our working scope is a conceptual framework
that is illustrated in Figure 18. This framework focuses on
an interference avoidance strategy which co-exists between
the CRN and primary network scenarios, providing that the
Management Controller stores all environments’ observation
parameters such as mobile nodes’ movements and locations.
The Overlap Calculation block then can locally retrieve,
compute and analyse the current situation of the current CR
compared to a PR emitter. Similarly, the Node Density Estima-
tor obtains historical statistics of the node within a speciﬁc area
and estimates the probability of current node density. These
blocks produce estimated inputs for the Interference Estimator,
which combines these inputs using fuzzy logic to compute the
interference level.
Figure 18. Working scope
Essentially, the DYMO routing agent can retrieve its neigh-
bor’s information based on the MAC layer and the interfer-
ence level from the Interference Level Estimator. Customized
DYMO-CRN the attaches interference level as an alternative
metrics that is used for route selection, as explained in Fig-
ure 19 and Figure 20.
In Figure 19, we describe the route discovery, which is
performed at node A to look for a path to node E overlapping
with a PR. We assume that at C, the sequence numbers in the
RREQs are the same for both direction from B to C and from
G to C, but the interference levels from B and D are medium
with non-zero probability. Therefore, in this case, the selected
path to E is the path towards F. Figure 20 has the similar
scenario with Figure 19 with an overlap with PR2 on G’s
and F’s side. Route selection is changed since the interference
levels from B and D are medium with non-zero probability
while the interference levels from G and F are high with non-
zero probability, and the interference level from C with PR2
is small with non-zero probability.
C. The routing process of Dymo-CRN routing protocol
We propose an extended Dymo routing protocol for CRN
in this section. The proposed protocol involves route discovery
and route maintenance processes.

95
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 19. DYMO Route Discovery from source A to sink E with
PR’s existence
Figure 20. DYMO Route Discovery from source A to sink E with 2
PRs’ existence
1) Route discovery: Similarly to Dymo speciﬁcation, route
discovery of the proposed protocol is performed when a node
must transmit a packet towards a destination for which it
does not have any route. The discovery process initiates and
multicasts a route request message (RREQ) to ﬁnd a path
toward some target destination. Along the path, each of the
neighbor who receives the request records a route toward the
originator. When the request reaches the target node, this node
also records the path included in the request and generates
a unicast route reply (RREP) to the originator. Again, each
neighbor along the path receiving this reply also records the
path toward the target destination of the previous RREQ.
These intermediate nodes then send the RREP unicast to the
originator. The citeria to evaluate incoming route information
are the hop count and the interference level (IL), which is
the alternative metric. When a RREQ is received, each node
will check, acquire its local interference level on each channel
assuming that the node may have more than one available
accessible channel. A comparison among its local IL is carried
out and the most optimal IL is chosen as the local metric IL.
As well as hop count, the new metric and new metric IL
are recalculated as in (6) and (7). As presented, IL is a
impact level computed from the percentage of overlap and
node density degree. The new metric hence takes the average
IL of the current local IL and the received IL. This is the metric
of IL for the path from the orignator to the current node.
new metric IL = (metric IL + last metric IL)/2 (6)
new metric = metric + last hop metric
(7)
The information from a received RREQ is handled by
a routine call routing handling process (RteHandler), as de-
scribed in Figure 21. By default, DYMO uses hop count as
the routing metric to handle a route request with metric type
3. In the context of this work, we deﬁne metric type 4 to be
the metric type of interference level. A metric type message
TLV should hence be built and attached to a route message
accordingly. During the RREQ process, the handler checks
and looks in its routing table for an entry with the extracted
metric type, e.g., metric type 4 for IL. In addition, an optimal
IL is also acquired locally at the current node to recompute the
new metric cost along the path. If the path to the target node
exists, the sequence number of the entry is then compared with
the sequence number in the received RREQ. In the end, the
process will return an existing route entry without any update
if the sequence number of the RREQ is outdated or the metric
in the RREQ does not improve the cost of the path. If the
routing entry needs to be updated (e.g., the sequence number
needs to be refreshed, status of the route and update the new
metric value). The routing table is also updated accordingly.
The merit of enabling the metric IL is that we can guarantee
the optimal IL from each CR to the its surrounding. If the
current path has the minimum IL along the path, the route
from the original CR to the target CR should have the least
impact on any PR receivers.
2) Route maintenance: Route maintenance is performed to
avoid permaturely expunging a route from the current route
table as well as to avoid dropping packets when an active
route breaks. Basically, the maintenance process consists of
two operations, extending the route lifetimes upon successfully
forwarding a packet and notifying the upstream nodes when a
route to a target is broken due to loss of link to neighbors. In
CRNs, breaking link to neighbors could be due to environmen-
tal change such as the transmission of PR receivers. However,
thanks to the information obtained from the radio event table,
CR nodes can always look for an alternative route and start
notifying their neighbors about the change. This change would
result in a complete path change (via different channels). The
discovery process may be invoked in the case of one of the
nodes is unreachable. This work can be deferred to future
work.
VI.
CONCLUSION
Overall, we have presented the entirely of a routing strategy
in CRNs. The article covers everything from the simplest
observation of the surroundings regarding the overlap phe-
nomena and primary node density with associated techniques.
These observations are inputs to produce a routing metric
that could prevent foreseen interference when a CRN coexists

96
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 21. Routing information process
with a primary network. Essentially, we introduced a medium
access control messages dissemination procedure, in which
CR nodes maintain the knowledge of their neighbors as well
as their resources before they can initiate transmissions. This
establishment supports the routing protocol at the upper layer,
which in this case is the interference level routing protocol.
This is a guideline for developing a cognitive routing protocol
that could prevent potential impact on primary networks when
CRNs operate. Further extension of this work is encouraged
to provide a more elaborate protocol so that it can be applied
in a real CRN platform.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by LICoRNe project, funded in part
by the National Agency for Research in France - ANR (Agence
Nationale de la Recherche). Besides, the authors would like
to thank Dr. Yao-ban Chan of University of Queensland for
proofreading.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. T. Quach, F. Krief, M. A. Chalouf, and H. Khalif´e, “Fuzzy-based
interference level estimation in cognitive radio networks,” in The Tenth
Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications (AICT).
IARIA XPS, 2014, pp. 138–143.
[2]
M. J. Copps, “Bringing broadband to rural america: Report on a rural
broadband strategy,” Federal Communications Comission, Tech. Rep.,
May 2009.
[3]
F. C. Comission, “Bringing broadband to rural america: Update to report
on a rural broadband strategy,” Federal Communications Commission,
Tech. Rep., 2011.
[4]
J. Genachowski, M. Clyburn, and J. Rosenworcel, “Eight broadband
progress report,” Federal Communications Commission, Tech. Rep.
FCC 12-90, August 2012.
[5]
I. F. Akyildiz, W.-Y. Lee, M. C. Vuran, and S. Mohanty, “Next
generation/dymanic spectrum access/cognitive radio wireless newtork:
A survey,” in Computer Networks, vol. 50, 2006, pp. 2127–2159.
[6]
D. N. Ekram Hossain and Z. Han, Dynamic spectrum access and
management in cognitive radio networks.
Cambridge University Press
Cambridge, 2009.
[7]
T. J. Ross, Fuzzy logic with engineering applications.
John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd., 2010.
[8]
M. T. Quach and H. Khalife, “The impact of overlap regions in cognitive
radio networks,” in Wireless Days (WD), IFIP, 2012, pp. 1–3.
[9]
M. T. Quach, D. Ouattara, F. Krief, H. Khalif´e, and M. A. Chalouf,
“Overlap regions and grey model-based approach for interference
avoidance in cognitive radio networks,” in IEEE Fifth International
Conference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks (ICUFN), 2013, pp.
642–647.
[10]
M. Cesana, F. Cuomo, and E. Ekici, “Routing in cognitive radio
networks: Challenges and solutions,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 9, no. 3,
2011, pp. 228–248.
[11]
B. Wang and K. J. R. Liu, “Advances in cognitive radio networks: A
survey,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 5,
no. 1, Feb 2011, pp. 5–23.
[12]
Q. Wang and H. Zeng, “Route and spectrum selection in dynamic spec-
trum networks,” in IEEE Consumer Communications and Networking
Conference (CNCC), 2006, pp. 342–346.
[13]
H. Khalif´e, N. Malouch, and S. Fdida, “Multihop cognitive radio
networks: To route or not to route,” IEEE NET, The Magazine of Global
Internetworking, vol. 23, no. 4, August 2009, pp. 20–25.
[14]
G. Cheng, W. Liu, Y. Li, and W. Cheng, “Spectrum aware on-demand
routing in cognitive radio networks,” in 2nd International Symposium
on New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks. IEEE, 2007,
pp. 571–574.
[15]
Y. Liu, L. Cai, and X. Shen, “Spectrum-aware opportunistic routing in
multi-hop cognitive radio networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas
in Communications, vol. 30, no. 10, November 2012, pp. 1958–1968.
[16]
G.-M. Zhu, I. F. Akyildiz, and G.-S. Kuo, “Stod-rp: A spectrum-
tree based on-demand routing protocol for multi-hop cognitive radio
networks,” in IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, Nov 2008,
pp. 1–5.
[17]
A. Cacciapuoti, C. Calcagno, M. Calefﬁ, and L. Paura, “CAODV:
Routing in mobile ad-hoc cognitive radio networks,” in Wireless Days
(WD), October 2010, pp. 1–5.
[18]
S. Salim and S. Moh, “On-demand routing protocols for cognitive radio
ad hoc networks,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and
Networking, vol. 2013, no. 1, 2013, pp. 1–10.
[19]
C. Xin, B. Xie, and C.-C. Shen, “A novel layered graph model for
topology formation and routing in dynamic spectrum access networks,”
in First IEEE International Symposium on New Frontiers in Dynamic
Spectrum Access Networks.
IEEE, 2005, pp. 308–317.
[20]
S. Krishnamurthy, M. Thoppian, S. Venkatesan, and R. Prakash,
“Control channel based mac-layer conﬁguration, routing and situation
awareness for cognitive radio networks,” in Military Communications
Conference (MILCOM).
IEEE, 2005, pp. 455–460.
[21]
Q. Guan, F. Yu, S. Jiang, and G. Wei, “Prediction-based topology
control and routing in cognitive radio mobile ad hoc networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 59, no. 9, Nov 2010, pp.
4443–4452.
[22]
K. Chowdhury and M. Felice, “Search: A routing protocol for mobile
cognitive radio ad-hoc networks,” Computer Communications, vol. 32,
no. 18, 2009, pp. 1983–1997.
[23]
K. Habak, M. Abdelatif, H. Hagrass, K. Rizc, and M. Youssef, “A
location-aided routing protocol for cognitive radio networks,” in Inter-
national Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications
(ICNC), Jan 2013, pp. 729–733.

97
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[24]
K. Chowdhury and I. F. Akyildiz, “Crp: A routing protocol for cognitive
radio ad hoc networks,” Selected Areas in Communications, IEEE
Journal on, vol. 29, no. 4, 2011, pp. 794–804.
[25]
E. Hossain, L. Le, N. Devroye, and M. Vu, “Cognitive radio: From
theory to practical network engineering,” in New Directions in Wireless
Communications Research, V. Tarokh, Ed.
Springer, 2009, pp. 251–
289.
[26]
T. C. Clancy, “Achievable capacity under the interference temperature
model,” in 26th IEEE International Conference on Computer Commu-
nications (INFOCOM), May 2007, pp. 794–802.
[27]
M. Gastpar, “On capacity under receive and spatial spectrum-sharing
constraints,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 53, no. 2,
Feb 2007, pp. 471–487.
[28]
P. J. Kolodzy, “Interference temperature: a metric for dynamic spectrum
utilization,” International Journal of Network Management, vol. 16,
no. 2, 2006, pp. 103–113.
[29]
W. Wang, T. Peng, and W. Wang, “Optimal power control under
interference temperature constraints in cognitive radio network,” in
IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, WCNC.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 116–120.
[30]
Y. Xing, C. Mathur, M. Haleem, R. Chandramouli, and K. Subbalak-
shmi, “Dynamic spectrum access with qos and interference temperature
constraints,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 6, no. 4,
April 2007, pp. 423–433.
[31]
M. Vu, S. Ghassemzadeh, and V. Tarokh, “Interference in a cognitive
network with beacon,” in IEEE Wireless Communications and Network-
ing Conference (WCNC), March 2008, pp. 876–881.
[32]
D. Julog, “The basis of grey theory,” Huazhong University of Science
and Technology Press, 2002.
[33]
L. Sifeng, F. J., and Y. Yingjie, “A brief introduction to grey systems
theory,” in Grey Systems and Intelligent Services (GSIS), 2011 IEEE
International Conference on, 2011, pp. 1–9.
[34]
E. Kayacan, B. Ulutas, and O. Kaynak, “Grey system theory-based
models in time series prediction,” Expert Systems with Applications,
vol. 37, no. 2, 2010, pp. 1784–1789.
[35]
D. Ouattara, F. Krief, M. A. Chalouf, and O. Ahmdi, “Spectrum sensing
improvement in cognitive radio networks for real-time patients monitor-
ing,” in International Conference on Wireless Mobile Communication
and Healthcare (MobiHealth), November 2012, pp. 179–188.
[36]
E. Hossain, D. Niyato, and Z. Han, “Dynamic spectrum access and
management, cognitive radio networks,” Cambridge University Press,
2009.
[37]
D. B. Johnson and D. A. Maltz, Dynamic source routing in ad hoc
wireless networks.
Springer, 1996, ch. 5, pp. 153–181.
[38]
D. Johnson, Y. Hu, and D. Maltz, “The Dynamic Source Routing
Protocol (DSR) for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks for IPv4,” RFC 4728
(Experimental), Internet Engineering Task Force, Feb. 2007, URL:
http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4728.txt [accessed: 2013-11-02].
[39]
C. E. Perkins, E. Belding-Royer, and E. M. Royer, “Ad-hoc on-
demand distance vector routing,” in Second IEEE Workshop on Mobile
Computing Systems and Applications.
IEEE, 1999, pp. 90–100.
[40]
C. E. Perkins, E. Belding-Royer, and S. R. Das, “Ad hoc On-Demand
Distance Vector (AODV) Routing,” RFC 3561 (Experimental), Internet
Engineering Task Force, 2003, URL: http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3561.txt
[accessed: 2013-11-02].
[41]
C. E. Perkins, E. M. Royer, S. R. Das, and M. K. Marina, “Performance
comparison of two on-demand routing protocols for ad hoc networks,”
Personal Communications, IEEE, vol. 8, no. 1, 2001, pp. 16–28.
[42]
M. Jain, J. I. Choi, T. Kim, DineshBharadia, S. Seth, K. Srinivasan,
P. Levis, S. Katti, and P. Sinha, “Practical, real-time, full duplex
wireless,” in Proceedings of the 17th annual international conference
on Mobile computing and networking.
ACM, 2011, pp. 301–312.
[43]
P. Manickam, T. G. Baskar, M. Girija, and D. Manimegalai, “Perfor-
mance comparisons of routing protocols in mobile ad hoc networks,”
International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks, vol. 3, no. 1,
2011, pp. 98–106.
[44]
S. Sagar, J. Saqib, A. Bibi, and N. Javaid, “Evaluating and comparing
the performance of dymo and olsr in manets and in vanets,” in IEEE
14th International Multitopic Conference (INMIC), 2011, pp. 362–366.
[45]
C. Perkins and I. C. Futurewei, “Dynamic manet on-demand (AODVv2)
routing,” Internet-Draft, 2013, URL: https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-
manet-dymo-26 [accessed: 2013-11-15].
[46]
N. Sivakumar and S. K. Jaiswal, “Comparison of dymo protocol with
respect to various quantitative performance metrics,” Department of
Computer Science, Malardalen University, 2009.
[47]
S. K. Bisoyi and S. Sahu, “Performance analysis of dynamic manet
on-demand (dymo) routing protocol,” Special Issue of IJCCT, vol. 1,
no. 2, 2010, p. 3.
[48]
C. Perkins, Futurewei, S. Ratliff, Cisco, J. Dowdell, and Cassid-
ian, “Dynamic manet on-demand (AODVv2) routing, draft-ietf-manet-
aodvv2-04,” Internet-Draft, 2006, URL: https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-
ietf-manet-dymo-04 [accessed: 2013-11-14].
[49]
C. Perkins and I. C. Futurewei, “Dynamic manet on-demand (AODVv2)
routing,” Internet-Draft, 2012, URL: https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-
manet-dymo-24 [accessed: 2013-11-15].

