249
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Towards Efﬁcient Energy Management: Deﬁning HEMS and Smart Grid Objectives
Ana Rossell´o-Busquet and Jos´e Soler
Networks Technology & Service Platforms group, Department of Photonics Engineering,
Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
{aros, joss}@fotonik.dtu.dk
Abstract—Energy consumption has increased considerably in
the last years. The way to reduce and make energy consumption
more efﬁcient has become of great interest for researchers. One
of the research areas is the reduction of energy consumption
in users’ residences. In order to reduce energy consumption
in home environments, researches have been designing Home
Energy Management Systems (HEMS). Efﬁciently managing
and distributing electricity in the grid will also help to reduce
the increase of energy consumption in the future. The power
grid is evolving into the Smart Grid, which is being developed
to distribute and produce electricity more efﬁciently. This
paper presents the high level goals and requirements of HEMS
and the Smart Grid. Additionally, it provides an overview on
how Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) is
involved in the Smart Grid and how they help to achieve the
emerging functionalities that the Smart Grid can provide.
Keywords-Home Gateway, Home Energy Management Sys-
tem (HEMS), Smart Grid, power grid, Advanced Metering
Infrastructure (AMI), Demand-Response (DR), Information and
Communication Technologies (ICT)
I. INTRODUCTION
Despite the fact that home appliances have become more
energy efﬁcient [1], electricity consumption in households
has increased 30% over the last 30 years [2]. This is due to
the fact that the number of appliances that can be found in
households is also increasing. According to the International
Energy Agency (IEA), European electricity consumption
is going to increase 1.4% per year up to 2030, unless
countermeasures are taken [3].
Residential buildings can reduce their energy consumption
by becoming more energy efﬁcient. This paper tries to iden-
tify the objectives that need to be fulﬁlled in order to deploy
an energy efﬁcient infrastructure. This infrastructure will
help reduce the electricity consumption in users’ residencies
and make the electric grid more efﬁcient by having more
control over the electricity ﬂow.
The research areas of efﬁcient energy management can
be divided into three more speciﬁc research areas: energy
management in-home environments with Information and
Communication Technologies (ICT), energy management in
the power grid with ICT and ICT linking the Smart Grid
and customers.
In this paper, ‘utilities’ are referred as the parties involved
in the production and distribution of electricity, through
the power grid. In addition, we use the term ‘distribution’
to refer to the process of electricity transport from the
generation plants to the users’ residences.
As shown in Table I, energy consumption in home
environments can be reduced by installing Home Energy
Management System (HEMS) [1] in users’ residences. A
HEMS will provide the users the necessary tools to manage
and reduce their consumption. ICT will enable two way
communication among the customers-location and utilities.
ICT will beneﬁt the users, as it will enable the provision
of real time rates and billing status. If users take into
consideration the price of electricity while consuming and
reduce their consumption when the price is high, consump-
tion will be optimized, as the utilities will be able to shift
and shape demand. In addition, providing this exchange of
information is one of the ﬁrst steps towards optimization
of energy distribution and production. This will provide the
utilities with statistical data that will help predict energy
consumption. In order to reduce losses and optimize energy
distribution and production, the power grid elements need to
be upgraded. Upgrading and introducing ICT in the power
grid will lead to the so called Smart Grid. The Smart
Grid will include new components and functionalities to
efﬁciently manage the electricity distribution and production.
In this paper, the different goals that should be achieved
in these areas in order to reduce energy consumption in
home environment and make distribution and production
of electricity more efﬁcient are presented. When designing
HEMS and Smart Grid systems, researchers usually focus
on one of the existing goals such as the integration of the
electrical vehicles or renewable energy sources. However,
it is important that these systems are designed in the
framework they are going to be deployed in and with all
the goals they should achieve to maximize the beneﬁts. This
paper summarizes the different objectives of these research
areas which can be used as a guideline.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Sec-
tion II introduces the concept of Home Energy Management
System (HEMS) and describes the high level goals and
requirements to deploy it successfully. Section III provides
an overview of the actual power grid and introduces the
Smart Grid concept. The Smart Grid objectives and func-
tional areas are also introduced in this section. An overview
of ICT in the Smart Grid is provided in Section IV, where
the communication requirements for the functional areas of

250
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Table I
IMPROVING ENERGY MANAGEMENT
hhhhhhhhhhh
Issues
Research areas
Home environments
ICT
Power Grid
Energy Goals
Reduce energy consumption
Provide grid’s status information for
Reduce losses and integrate DER and EV
efﬁcient consumption and distribution
Who beneﬁts?
Users
Users and utilities
Utilities
How?
HEMS
Information exchange
Smart Grid
Figure 1.
Home Energy Management System Goals
the Smart Grid and issues are presented together with the
ongoing ICT European projects. Finally, in Section V the
conclusions are presented.
II. ENERGY MANAGEMENT IN HOME ENVIRONMENTS
Introducing Information and Communication Technolo-
gies (ICT) into home environments can help to reduce
energy consumption of users. A HEMS is a system that
includes all the necessary elements to achieve this reduction
of electricity consumption in home environments. One of its
main elements is the so called home gateway or residential
gateway which is able to communicate and manage the
rest of the home appliances and offers the users tools to
reduce their consumption. Using context-aware information
in HEMS will provide knowledge, which can be used to
further decrease energy consumption.
Section II-A presents the goals HEMS should achieve and
the high-level requirements it should fulﬁl. Section II-B will
present the major challenges when designing HEMS.
A. HEMS High-Level Objectives and Requirements
The main objectives of a HEMS are shown in Figure
1. HEMS main goal is to reduce the energy consumption.
However, to achieve this, monitoring energy consumption
and managing appliances are needed. In order to reduce
energy consumption, it is ﬁrst necessary to know how energy
is consumed. Therefore, consumption monitoring is needed.
Secondly, it is necessary to manage the appliances in order
to apply energy reduction strategies.
We consider that HEMS has to fulﬁl the requirements
summarized in Figure 2 to achieve these goals satisfactorily:
• Easy to deploy: It has to be taken into considera-
tion that HEMS should be easy to deploy into users’
houses because deploying new cables or infrastructure
Figure 2.
Home Energy Management System Requirements
is sometimes not a feasible nor cost efﬁcient solution.
Using already installed communication systems, such
as wireless communication or power line communi-
cation which will minimize the costs and gain users’
acceptance.
• Interoperability: in order to monitor and manage users’
appliances efﬁciently, a home network has to be in-
troduced, where devices can exchange information and
commands, without interoperability conﬂicts. The ap-
pliances found in users’ premises are usually manu-
factured by different producers and may use different
communication technologies can lead to interoperabil-
ity issues among devices.
• Data security: Security has to be incorporated into
HEMS in terms of data encryption and authentication
to protect the system against external threats. However,
security issues will not be analyzed as they are out of
scope of this paper.
• Auto-conﬁguration or easy set-up: HEMS is going to
be used by users without enough knowledge to perform
network conﬁguration tasks. Taking into consideration
that users may add or change their home appliances,
HEMS should provide easy to use conﬁguration tools
or in the best case the network should be auto-
conﬁgurable.
• Display energy consumption: One of HEMS goals
is to monitor energy consumption. This information
should be available to users through the user inter-
face. Furthermore, the displayed information could be
shared with the utilities, to create statistical data of
energy usage in home environments, or with third
parties. Current consumption and also previous con-

251
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
sumptions, providing daily, monthly and even annual
reports should be provided. Additionally, the possibility
to compare the electricity consumption between months
or even compare it to other sources, such as average
neighborhood consumption or other users’ consumption
is an interesting feature.
• User friendly interface: The user interface should dis-
play information about the current consumption and
also previous consumptions as stated above. Addition-
ally, this interface should also provide management op-
tions, where the users may modify their preferences and
control their appliances. User preferences are related to
the strategy used to reduce users’ energy consumption
and may vary from system to system. It is also impor-
tant to provide the possibility of controlling devices, as
the system may apply undesired conﬁgurations and the
user has to be able to correct them.
• Context-aware and intelligent: HEMS should have
some intelligence to facilitate efﬁcient energy manage-
ment. This can be achieved by creating a context-aware
system. A context-aware system is capable of col-
lecting information from the environment, or context,
and react accordingly. It is considered that a context-
aware system can signiﬁcantly improve the reduction of
energy consumption. There are different ways in which
context-aware systems can be implemented in HEMS:
by deﬁning energy polices or rules or by creating
intelligent system.
A HEMS that uses energy policies is a context-aware
system which collects information from the environ-
ment and then uses this information together with
the policies or rules to reduce energy consumption.
This type of system is a static system and contains
predeﬁned policies or rules. However this policies and
rules may be modiﬁed at any time by the user, by
deleting, creating or modifying them.
An intelligent HEMS requires a more complex system.
In the context of this paper the intelligent HEMS is
deﬁned as a system that reduces energy consumption
by using context-aware information to predict users’
behavior and then applies the energy management strat-
egy without compromising the users’ comfort. Before
being able to predict users’ behavior and apply the
energy management strategy, there has to be a learning
process. This learning process includes (1) collecting
context-aware information, which can include location-
aware information, and (2) analyzing and processing
this information to extract the users’ routines and
patterns. Once the learning process is completed, the
system can extract the settings needed to reduce energy
consumption. Unlike a rule based HEMS, this system
is dynamic, adapts to user and also self-evolving.
• Communication with smart meter: As it will be ex-
plained in Section IV-B, the smart meter is found
in costumers premises to measure the electricity con-
sumption and communicate this information to the
utility. Enabling this communication will provide the
user with real-time price and billing status, energy
consumption information, as well as possible services
that may arise. HEMS should communicate with the
smart meter to obtain this information. An example of
a new service HEMS could obtain from the smart meter
could be comparing the household energy consumption
to other users’ consumption. However, some of these
new services could be offered through the Internet and
not through the smart meter.
In the next section, the challenges found designing HEMS,
when trying to comply with the above requirements, are
presented.
B. Issues and Challenges
The main challenge to provide an efﬁcient HEMS is
interoperability. HEMS should provide seamless interaction
between devices. However, there are a number of dif-
ferent home appliance manufacturers and communication
technologies available for the user, which makes device
interoperability problematic. In addition, devices of the
same type, such as washing machines, can have different
functionalities depending on the model. Technical incom-
patibility has limited market possibilities. Users are looking
for a ‘one size ﬁts all’ solution without having to worry
about compatibility requirements. Therefore, one of the main
challenge in HEMS is the variety of technologies, providing
different communication methods, as well as the diversity of
producers, providing different types of devices and services.
This seamless interaction between devices could be provided
by creating a central element, the home gateway, which
would be able to communicate with all the devices. An
example of how to solve this problem can be found in [4],
[5].
Additionally, other challenging expectations from users
have to be fulﬁlled, related to the following requirements:
auto-conﬁguration or easy set-up, user friendly interface and
easy deployment:
• Easy to use and control: there is diversity in users’
preferences and expectations when interacting with
HEMS. Some users would like an interface that will
give them advanced options while others would just
like a simple system but without losing control of
their devices [6]. Furthermore, users have different user
interface preferences, some users would like to use their
mobile phone or PDA, while others would rather use
their computer or a controller. An example of how to
deal with this can be found in [7].
• Easy to conﬁgure: complex conﬁguration or profes-
sional help to conﬁgure the network is a drawback.
HEMS should be easy to conﬁgure or even be auto-
conﬁgurable. However this can be a challenge due

252
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
to the heterogeneity of home appliances and home
technologies. Strategies and mechanism for software
conﬁguration and updates for devices installed in home
environments can be found in [8], [9].
• Easy software upgrade: home appliances can have
software installed, which in some occasions has to be
updated. Software update should be easy for users to
perform. The authors in [8], [9] present how to deal
with software upgrades in home devices.
Moreover, designing HEMS as an intelligent and context-
aware system is not an easy task and presents these following
challenges:
• Design of context-aware systems, data collection and
interpretation: HEMS may use sensors to collect in-
formation about the users’ behavior. The system may
have to work with different types of sensors and from
different brands. This will force the system to be
designed to deal with different sensor details which sets
a barrier to interoperability. Dey et al. [10] proposes an
infrastructure to support software design and execution
of context-aware applications using sensors to collect
data.
Another issue is coping with the amount of data trans-
mitted from home appliances and likely sensors. An
example of how to deal with this can be found in [11].
• Policies and rules: There are two main challenges
when using policies to implement energy management:
coordination and contradiction. As the number of ap-
pliances in the house increases so does the number of
policies, which can lead to coordination problems and
contradictory rules. Tools to identify interactions and
detect conﬂict resolution between policies should be
incorporated into HEMS to manage rules and policies
more efﬁciently. An example of this can be found in
[12], [13].
• Intelligent HEMS: This type of HEMS should include
an algorithm which after processing the collected data
will be able to learn and predict the users’ behavior.
Examples of such algorithms can be found in [14], [15].
• Multiple-inhabitants: Prediction of users’ behavior
when there is more than one user in the home envi-
ronment adds complexity to the predicting algorithm
as each user has his/her own routines, practices and
policies/rules, which may be different for each user.
• Not compromising users’ comfort: HEMS should not
have undesirable outcomes, it should be an intelligent
system that can adapt to different situations and user
behavior.
III. ENERGY MANAGEMENT IN THE POWER GRID
As stated before, energy consumption in home environ-
ments is increasing and consumption patterns have consid-
erably changed in the last years. The National Academy of
Engineering acknowledges the power grid as the supreme
Figure 3.
Power Grid Architecture Overview
engineering achievement of the 20th century, due to its
ingenious engineering, its support for other technologies
and the impact in improving quality life style for society
[16]. However, the power grid has not changed signiﬁcantly
during the last century (the average substation transformer
age is over 40 years old [17]). The power grid was de-
signed to provide one-way ﬂow of electricity and centralized
generation. Furthermore, the actual power grid has limited
automation and situational awareness and there is a lack
of customer-side data. Therefore, an upgrade is needed to
achieve efﬁcient energy distribution and production and
to fulﬁl the new power grid functionalities, which will
be explained in Section III-D. The integration of these
functionalities into the power grid will lead to the so called
Smart Grid. Smart Grids will incorporate ICT to fulﬁl the
new requirements and functionalities.
The next section provides an overview of the power grid
and Section III-B presents the Smart Grid concept and
NIST and ETP Smart Grid view. In Section II-A, the high-
level objectives of the Smart Grid are explained. Finally, in
Subsection III-D the functional areas of the Smart Grid are
presented.
A. Power Grid Architecture Overview
The power grid is an interconnected electricity network,
which includes infrastructure of power generation, power
transmission, power distribution and control. A typical
power grid system is illustrated in Figure 3. A brief de-
scription of the different sections of the power grid is given
below.
• Generation: it is composed of different types of power
generators, such as coal, fossil fuels, natural gas, nu-
clear, wind turbines and hydraulic power plants among
other. The main part of the electricity generated comes
from large power plants located in strategic locations.
For instance a coal power plant could be found near a
coal mine. This section of the power grid is responsible
to generate enough power to supply the demand.
• Transmission system: it carries electric power in an
efﬁcient way from the power plants to the distribution

253
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
system, where the power will be later consumed. Trans-
mission system may span hundred of kilometers and
line voltage are above 100 kV in Europe. The electricity
is transmitted at very high and high voltages to reduce
the energy losses in long distance transmission. The
power plants are connected to the transmission system
by a substation or transformer. A substation contains
circuit breakers, switches and transformers, which step-
up or step-down the voltages in the lines. Furthermore,
substations can be found through the transmission sys-
tem to change the voltages in the lines.
• Distribution system: it is similar to transmission sys-
tem as their function is to carry electricity. However,
the distribution system carries the electricity from the
transmission system to the to consumers. This system
includes medium and low voltages and also contains
substations to interconnect it with the transmission
system. The substations are also found thought the
distribution system. The voltage in the transmission
system lies between 69 kV and 240 V in Europe.
• Consumption system: composed by residential/home
consumers, commercial and industrial consumers. The
consumers are equipped with an electricity meter that
register the consumers electricity consumption. Con-
sumers may be found in rural, suburban or urban areas.
Moreover, industrial consumers may be connected to
the distribution grid at power levels higher than 240 V.
• Control Centers: In the traditional power grid the sys-
tem operation and maintenance is done through cen-
tralized control and monitoring, Supervisory Control
and Data Acquisition (SCADA). The control centers,
communicate with the substations found around the
power grid through private microwave radio, private
ﬁber and public communication network [18].
As it will be explained in the following sections, the power
grid architecture is changing into a more distributed and
decentralized grid which will introduce new functionalities
and ICT requirements.
B. Smart Grid Deﬁnitions
The Smart Grid concept is used by the different players
involved in the power grid, not only utilities but also
governmental entities. However, there is no standard def-
inition. Different deﬁnitions exist, some functional, some
technological, and some beneﬁts-oriented:
• European Technology Platform (ETP): ETP deﬁnes
the Smart Grid as “an electricity network that can
intelligently integrate the actions of all users connected
to it
generators, consumers and those that do both -
in order to efﬁciently deliver sustainable, economic and
secure electricity supplies” [19].
• European Commission: European Commission deﬁnes
the Smart Grid is “an electricity network that can
efﬁciently integrate the behavior and actions of all users
Figure 4.
NIST Smart Grid Reference Model [24]
connected to it
generators, consumers and those that
do both
in order to ensure economically efﬁcient,
sustainable power system with low losses and high
levels of quality and security of supply and safety” [20].
• Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI): “The term
Smart Grid refers to a modernization of the electricity
delivery system so it monitors, protects and automat-
ically optimizes the operation of its interconnected
elements
from the central and distributed genera-
tor through the high-voltage network and distribution
system, to industrial users and building automation
systems, to energy storage installations and to end-
use consumers and their thermostats, electric vehicles,
appliances and other household devices” (EPRI) [21].
• US Department of Energy (DOE): “An automated,
widely distributed energy delivery network, the Smart
Grid will be characterized by a two-way ﬂow of
electricity and information and will be capable of
monitoring everything from power plants to customer
preferences to individual appliances. It incorporates
into the grid the beneﬁts of distributed computing and
communications to deliver real-time information and
enable the near-instantaneous balance of supply and
demand at the device level” [22].
The Smart Grid is still an open concept. However, from
these deﬁnitions it can be seen that the Smart Grid will
enable a more dynamic, resilient, sustainable, efﬁcient and
adaptable grid with new capabilities and will involve the
participation of different players, from customers to utilities.
The Smart Grid will not only supply power but also informa-
tion and intelligence. As the European Technology Platform
(ETP) states “the smartness is manifested in making better
use of technologies and solutions to better plan and run
existing electricity grids, to intelligently control generation
and to enable new energy services and energy efﬁciency
improvements” [23].
Furthermore, NIST has developed a Framework and
Roadmap for Smart Grid Interoperability Standards which
“presents the ﬁrst steps of a Smart Grid interoperability

254
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
framework based upon initial standards and priorities to
achieve interoperability of Smart Grid devices and systems”
[24]. Additionally, it provides a conceptual architectural
reference model shown in Figure 4. This model divides
the power grid into domains, actors and applications. There
are seven domains, which are further divided into sub-
domains. Each domain is a high-level grouping of actors,
organizations, individuals, systems or devices which have
similar objectives and may have overlapping functionality.
NIST deﬁnes actors as devices, systems, or programs which
are capable to make decisions, exchange information and
interact with actors from the same or other domains. The
tasks performed by one or more actors are deﬁned as
applications. In the following, there is a brief description
of each domain and also some of the identiﬁed interfaces
by NIST for which interoperability standards are needed.
• Bulk Generation: More renewable energy resources will
be deployed into the Smart Grid. The main actors in this
domain are big power plants such as renewable vari-
able sources (solar and wind), renewable non-variable
(hydro, biomass and geothermal) and non-renewable
(nuclear, coal and gas). This domain may also include
energy storage for later distribution of electricity.
• Transmission: Similar to the electricity transmission
system today, this domain carries electricity over long
distances. However, a two-way communication system
will be deployed in substations and other intelligent
devices found inside this domain, which will it make it
substantially different from the current one.
• Distribution: The main changes to the distribution is
the two-way communication system for monitoring and
controlling. It may also include storage of energy and
connection with alternative distributed energy resources
(DER), such as wind farms and solar panels systems.
• Customers: In the Smart Grid, customers will be ca-
pable of generating, storing and managing the use of
energy as well as the connectivity with their plug-
in vehicles into the power grid. In this conceptual
model the smart meters, besides being able to con-
trol and manage the ﬂow of electricity to and from
the customers, will provide information about energy
usage and consumption patterns. Consumers will have
a two-way communication with utilities and other third
parties.
• Markets: Markets domain includes the operators and
participants in electricity markets, such as market man-
agement, DER aggregation, retailing, wholesaling and
trading among others. This domain is in charge of
coordinating all the participants in the electricity mar-
ket and ensuring a competitive market, in addition to
exchanging information with third-party providers. For
instance, roaming billing information for inter-utility
plug-in-vehicles could be an example of a third-party
service.
• Service Providers: This domain handles all third-party
operations between domains. Examples of actors in
this domain are installation and maintenance, billing,
customer management and emerging services among
other. Through this domain customers and utilities can
exchange data regarding energy management.
• Operations: Operations domain is in charge of manag-
ing and operating the ﬂow of energy through the power
grid. It is connected to customers, substations and other
intelligent devices through a two-way communication.
Actors included in this domain are metering reading,
maintenance and construction, security management
and network operations among others. This domain pro-
vides monitoring, reporting, controlling and supervision
status, which is an important to obtain a reliable and
resilient power grid.
The European Technology Platform (ETP) network vision
of the Smart Grid is shown in Figure 5 [3]. ETP does
not deﬁne domains, however, it identiﬁes the stakeholders
involved, which may include governmental entities, con-
sumers, traders, transmission and distribution companies,
ICT providers and power equipment manufactures among
others. Their vision on for the Smart Grid includes a two-
way communication among these stakeholders which will
provide coordination at regional, national and European
level. ETP expects deployment of intelligent devices and
distributed energy resources along the power grid. Further-
more, the European Commission identiﬁes the following
challenges for enabling Smart Grid deployment in Europe
that have to be addressed [25]:
• Developing common European Smart Grids standards.
• Addressing data privacy and security issues.
• Regulatory incentives for Smart Grids deployment.
• Smart Grids in a competitive retail market in the interest
of consumers.
• Continuous support for innovation and its rapid appli-
cation.
C. Smart Grid Objectives
One of the main objectives of the Smart Grid is to make
the power grid more efﬁcient and to incorporate renewable
energies. These objectives can help to reach the targets set
by the European Commission.
Figure 6 summarizes the main high-level objectives the
Smart Grid should fulﬁl. When designing the Smart Grid
these goals should be taken into consideration and be
integrated together in order to maximize the beneﬁts.
• Enable the active participation of consumers: In the
Smart Grid, customers will become active participants
and will play a role in optimizing the operation of
the system. The grid can ask the users to reduce their
consumption to avoid shortages and reward them with

255
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 5.
European Technology Platform Network Vision [3]
Figure 6.
Smart Grid Objectives
economical beneﬁts. This process is referred as De-
mand Response (DR), discussed in more detail in III-D.
DR will help utilities shape the demand according to the
available production. Enabling this interactive service
network in the power grid will improve the efﬁciency,
safety ad reliability of the electricity transmission and
distribution [22].
Customers are installing renewable energies in their
premises and the Smart Grid should be capable of
accepting these injections into the grid. Consumers in
the Smart Grid that consume and generate energy will
be called prosumers (pro-duces and con-sumers).
• Reliable, resilient and robust grid: the Smart Grid
should improve security and quality of supply and
reduce the number of blackouts and shortages to in-
crease system reliability. In order to achieve a more
resilient, reliable and robust grid than the actual power
grid, Smart Grids should be easily reconﬁgurable and
dynamic, in other words they should be self-healing
system.
• Optimization and efﬁcient operation: optimization and
efﬁcient operation of the grid implies a reduction of
energy losses in power grid. Moreover, the Smart Grid
should signiﬁcantly reduce the environmental impact
of the whole electricity supply system and improve
the grid infrastructure operation. This can be achieved
by upgrading the grid components and by using con-
sumption statistics to foresee the electricity usage. It
should also embody efﬁcient and reliable alarm and
fault management for self-healing procedures.
• Accommodation of all types of generation and storage:
the Smart Grid has to accommodate from large central-
ized power plants to renewable energies installed in the
users’ premises or distribution systems. In addition, it is
foreseen that new storage systems, such as community
storages, may be included in the Smart Grid. To prop-
erly manage and control these new components, the

256
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Smart Grid should be designed as a decentralized and
distributed grid to better facilitate the connection and
operation of generators of all sizes and technologies.
• Efﬁcient control of the grid: introducing ICT into the
power grid can help collect real-time data if the con-
sumption, production and grid status. This information
can be used to achieve efﬁcient control of the power
grid to balance loads and avoid blackouts and electricity
shortages.
• Reduce carbon emissions: The European Commission
Climate Action set three energy targets to be met by
2020, known as the “20-20-20” targets which are [26]:
– A reduction in EU greenhouse gas emissions of at
least 20% below 1990 levels
– 20% of EU energy consumption to come from
renewable resources
– A 20% reduction in primary energy use compared
with projected levels, to be achieved by improving
energy efﬁciency.
The carbon emissions can be reduced by incorporating
some of the already mentioned objectives:
– Reduce network losses by using more efﬁcient
components
– Facilitate penetration of renewable energies, such
as wind turbines and photovoltaic cells installed in
the distribution grid or in users’ premises.
– Improve operational decisions in the power grid by
using weather forecast to estimate the production
of solar and wind farms. Also load forecast will
make the power grid more efﬁcient.
– Use DR to reduce or even avoid demand peaks.
[27] presents a system where the house consump-
tion is kept under certain limit to avoid demand
peaks.
• Accommodation of PHEV and PEV: Even though
Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles (PHEVs) and Plug-
in Electric Vehicles (PEVs) are not yet wide-scale
adopted, they should be taken into consideration when
designing the Smart Grid. It is foreseen that the amount
of PHEV and PEV will increase which will lead to
a considerable increase of electricity demand which
cannot be supported by the current power grid.
• Real time price and billing: ICT will provide the means
to transmit real time price and billing information to
the user. Furthermore, the consumers will be provided
with greater information and options for choice of sup-
ply. The Smart Grid should incorporate the necessary
elements to make this information available. The price
of electricity is determined on the basis of supply and
demand.
• Microgrid operation mode: Microgrids are generally
deﬁned as low voltage grids, which can range between
few hundred kilowatts to a couple of megawatts, and
include distributed generation sources, storage devices
and consumer side. The ETP deﬁnes a microgrid “a
controlled entity which can be operated as a single
aggregated load or generator and, given attractive re-
muneration, as a small source of power or as ancil-
lary services supporting the network” [3]. Although
microgrids mainly operate connected to the rest of the
power grid, they can automatically switch to islanded
mode when faults occur, which could cause shortages
or blackouts in the microgrid area. Microgrids should
later on re-synchronize with the rest of the power
grid with minimal service disruption, when the fault is
stabilized. During islanded mode, the microgrid main
functionality is to balance the distributed resources with
local energy loads. Therefore, microgrids are capable
of taking decision locally, while operating in islanded
mode, but also when connected to the rest of the grid.
However, coordination with the rest of the power grid
and actors is necessary when the microgrid is connected
to the power grid. Microgrids provide a new level
of ﬂexibility in conﬁguring and operating the power
grid, which may makes the grid more efﬁcient, reliable,
resilient and dynamic.
D. Smart Grid Functional Areas
The high level objectives described in the previous sub-
section can be classiﬁed into the six functional areas deﬁned
by DOE [28] in which most Smart Grid applications fall:
• Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI): refers to the
infrastructure capable of measuring and collection con-
sumption and generation at the consumer side and
communicating it, in a two-way communication ﬂow,
to management system which makes this information
available to the service provider. Additionally, AMI can
provide real-time price information to the consumers.
The consumers data can be collected and transmitted
by using the smart meter installed in the consumer
premises. The energy consumption data can be then
be used by the service provider and utilities for grid
management, outage notiﬁcation, and billing purposes.
• Demand-Response (DR): is a reduction of consumption
by the consumers, residential users, commercial or
industrial as a response to high electricity prices or
a request from the utilities in order to reduce heavy
loads in the system. By using DR systems demand
can be shaped to follow the production and therefore
shortages and blackouts can be avoided. Furthermore,
renewable energies, such as wind energy, have very
variable power output depending on weather conditions.
DR can help balance such loads providing a more
ﬂexible and dynamic power grid. However, accepting
power reduction request is voluntary and can create
some operational complexities.

257
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
• Wide-Area Situational Awareness (WASA): is a set of
technologies that will enable improved reliability and
prevention of power supply disruption by monitoring
the grid status. WASA systems include sensors, which
monitor the status of different elements in the power
grid, intelligent devices, which can trigger an alarm in
case of a critical situation, and two-way communica-
tion with the service providers. The main objective of
WASA is to provide information about the grid status
on real time. WASA will transform the power grid
into a proactive systems, which will prevent critical
situations instead of reacting to them.
• Distributed Energy Resources (DER): extends from
distributed renewable energy sources to electric vehi-
cle batteries, combined heat and power (CHP), unin-
terruptible power supplies (UPS), utility-scale energy
storage (USES) and community energy storage (CES).
It is expected that DER will be deployed along the
power grid, specially on consumers and distribution
system. Integrating DER into the power grid involves
a major change as it implies decentralized generation
and multi-directional ﬂow of electricity, from utility-to-
consumer, from prosumer-to-utility and even prosumer-
to-consumer. DER applications require a more complex
control situation and effective communication technolo-
gies to keep the balance in the power grid.
• Electric Transportation (ET): plug-in hybrid electric
vehicle and plug-in electrical vehicles will drastically
change the users consumption. This change of load has
to be taken into consideration when designing the Smart
Grid, which has to provide sufﬁcient energy supply for
electric vehicles and effectively manage the demand.
This new kind of vehicles offer also the potential to
function as storage devices, thus helping balancing
the load in the Smart Grid by reducing the demand
in energy shortage periods and absorbing the demand
during excess supply periods.
• Distribution Grid Management (DGM): involves re-
motely control of the components found in the power
grid. By using real time information about the power
grid status and being able to remotely control the
power grid, the Smart Grid becomes a more reliable
power grid. Furthermore, Distribution and substation
automation are part of the distribution Grid Manage-
ment, which will provide more effective fault detection
and power restoration. Supervisory Control and Data
Acquisition (SCADA) and Distribution Management
Systems (DMS), examples of DGM, require center-
based control and monitoring systems in order to coor-
dinate the power grid and keep balance.
Table II matches the presented objectives to be fulﬁlled
by the Smart Grid in Section II-A and the above functional
areas.
Figure 7.
Communication between users’ residences and utilities
E. Towards Smart Grid
The electrical grid has to undertake a transformation
to reach the Smart Grids objectives. Introducing ICT into
the grid will provide the communication tools to help
reach some of the Smart Grids objectives. However, further
changes in the Smart Grid components have to be done
to successfully fulﬁl these goals. Advanced components,
advanced control methods and improved decision support
will be introduced in the power grid as it moves towards
becoming a Smart Grid. In addition, sensing and measure-
ments technologies should also be incorporated to evaluate
the correct functionality of all elements in the grid and
enable and efﬁcient control.
IV. ICT IN THE SMART GRID
As it has been stated through this article ICT deployment
in the power grid is an important step towards the Smart
Grid. A reliable communication system that fulﬁlls the
Smart Grid’s objectives, deﬁned in III-C, and functionalities,
deﬁned in III-D, will determine the efﬁciency of the new
power grid. The aim of ICT in the Smart Grid is provide
more information about:
• Consumption: Knowledge about energy demand of the
consumers will efﬁciency distribution. By providing
this knowledge to the utilities, they can also foresee the
energy needs of their consumers and avoid electricity
shortages or blackouts. ICT can also be used to collect
real-time consumption data to maintain the equilibrium
between consumption and production.
• Production: Deployment of renewable energies, such as
photovoltaic panels, is increasing in home environment
and in the distribution system. Monitor and control is
necessary for an efﬁcient power grid.
• Status: Real-time monitoring the grid will help to
detect critical situations. Remote control of the grid’s
component will help solve or even avoid this situations.
Deploying ICT in the power grid will start a cooperation
between consumers and utilities. As shown in Figure 7,
the upstream communication is deﬁned as the transmission
of data from the user to the provider and the downstream
is deﬁned as the one from provider to user. As stated
before, the data transmitted in the upstream will include
information about users’ electricity patterns taking into con-
sideration the likely installed renewable energies resources
in their premises. The downstream communication is the
transmission of electricity price and billing information from
the utilities to the users. Having access to real time price

258
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Table II
IMPROVING ENERGY MANAGEMENT
hhhhhhhhhhh
Objectives
Functionalities
AMI
DR
WASA
DER
ET
DGM
Active participation of costumers
✓
✓
-
✓
✓
-
Reliable and secure supply
-
-
✓
-
-
✓
Self-healing
-
-
✓
-
-
✓
Optimization and efﬁcient operation
-
-
✓
✓
✓
✓
Accommodation of all types
-
-
-
✓
-
✓
of generation and storage
Efﬁcient Control
-
✓
✓
-
✓
✓
Reduce Carbon Emissions
-
✓
-
✓
✓
✓
Accommodation of PHEV and PEV
-
-
-
✓
✓
-
Real-Time price and billing
✓
-
-
-
-
-
Microgird operation
-
-
✓
✓
✓
✓
and billing information will make the users become more
conscious about their electricity consumption and they may
try to reduce the associated costs, by avoiding peak hours,
leading to a more distributed and efﬁcient consumption. In
addition, the utilities can use this downstream to ask their
users to reduce their demand when demand peaks occur. This
communication system will enable utilities to be proactive,
acting before the problem occurs instead of reacting to it.
Furthermore, utilities can offer new service that can be
access by the user through this downstream.
Next section presents the communication requirements
for the functional areas presented previously. Section IV-B
explains how the smart meter and the home gateway collab-
orate with the smart meter. Finally, Section IV-C describes
some of the issues raised by ICT in the Smart Grid.
A. ICT Requirements
Many communication and networking technologies can
be used to support Smart Grid applications, which can vary
around the power grid. S
Due to the different functionalities to be carried out by
the Smart Grid, the ICT supporting them have different
communication requirements. This will likely lead to a
variety of communication technologies to be deployed in
the Smart Grid. One of the technologies supporting ICT
in the Smart Grid could be cable lines, ﬁber optic cable,
cellular, satellite, microwave, WiMAX, power line commu-
nication, as well as short-range in-home technologies such
as WiFi and ZigBee. Furthermore, different players in the
Smart Grid have different views on what the communication
requirements are for each of the functionalities presented
in Section III-D as they are still under development. US
Department of Energy (DOE) has written a technical report,
Communication Requirements of the Smart Grid [28], which
encloses the communication requirements based on the pro-
jections of future communications needs and the input of the
different actors involved in ICT for the Smart Grid. Table
III summarizes the Communication requirements found in
this report and commented in the following subsections.
1) Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI):
• Bandwidth: It has been estimated that the bandwidth
required for AMI will be between 10 to 100 kbps per
node. However, communication among the aggregation
point and the utility will likely have bandwidth require-
ments in the 500 kbps range.
• Latency: The delay between the consumption mea-
surement and the moment at which the information is
reported to the utility is not critical for AMI. However,
demand response applications may be affected as they
depend on this information.
• Reliability: AMI’s level of reliability falls into the
99 percent to 99.99 percent range. The information
provided by AMI has to reach the utilities. However,
if some consumption measurement is lost it can be
updated by the next measurement packet.
• Security: This network will carry consumption private
information, therefore the it has to have a high security
level.
• Backup Power: Backup power is not necessary as there
is no consumption during blackouts.
2) Demand-Response (DR):
• Bandwidth: There are different DR programs that can
be implemented: incentive-based, rate-based DR, de-
mand reduction bids. Therefore, communications re-
quirements of DR program may vary depending on the
sophistication of the system.
• Latency: The latency requirements start from as little
as 500ms, to 2 seconds, up to several minutes. This
wide range is likely due to the different DR programs.
Some programs maybe considered time-critical as if the
demand is not reduced, it would lead to a system over-
load situation. However, if not used for grid balancing,
relatively lower latencies may be necessary.
• Reliability: DR is likely to be used as a grid manage-
ment tool, reliability will be important, and experts have
estimated reliability will range between 99% percent to
99.99% level.

259
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Table III
COMMUNICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SMART GRID FUNCTIONAL AREAS [28]
XXXXXXXXXXXXXX
Functional
Areas
Communication
Requirements
Bandwidth
Latency
Reliability
Security
Backup Power
Advanced Metering Infrastructure
10-100 kbps per node
2-15 sec
99-99.99%
High
Not necessary
500 kbps for backhaul
Demand-Response
14-100 kbps per node
500 ms-several minutes
99-99.99%
High
Not necessary
Wide-Area Situational Awareness
600-1500 kbps
20 ms-200 ms
99.999-99.9999%
High
24 hour supply
Distributed Energy Resources
9.6-56 kbps per node
20 ms-15 sec
99-99.99%
High
1 hour
Electric Transportation
9.6-100 kbps,
2 sec-5 min
99-99.99%
Relatively high
Not necessary
Distribution Grid Management
9.6-100 kbps
100 ms-2 sec
99-99.999%
High
24-72 hours
• Security: As DR messages can be used for load man-
agement, its is important to verify the integrity of the
information exchanged.
• Backup Power: There is no need for backup power, as
the load management functions and DR programs are
not necessary if there is a blackout.
3) Wide-Area Situational Awareness (WASA):
• Bandwidth: Data transferred in WASA is continuous
and periodical rather than variable, but its through-
put is expected to be high. Furthermore, the increase
of distributed generation resources deployed and the
introduction of new applications for phasor data, the
bandwidth requirements will increased.
• Latency: WASA is used for real-time monitoring, there-
fore, the latency requirements are low between 20 to
200 ms. However, if historical data is transmitted the
latency requirements can be higher.
• Reliability: Due to WASA is used to avoid critical
situations its reliability is higher than AMI and DR.
• Security: Due to the same reason as above security in
WASA systems is expected to be high.
• Backup Power: Backup power is necessary as the
information provided by WASA is used to ﬁnd the why
and where the failure occurred and repair it.
4) Distributed Energy Resources (DER):
• Bandwidth: DER are unpredictable energy sources as
they depend on weather conditions. Therefore there
generation measurements need to be transmitted. It is
estimated that the bandwidth will range between 9,6
kbps to 56 kbps.
• Latency: DER will imply having multiple energy
sources feeding the distribution grid at multiple loca-
tions, which will complicate service restoration. Al-
though the estimated latency ranges from 20 ms to 15
s, during faults, a lower latency maybe needed.
• Reliability: It has been estimated that the reliability of
DER should be similar to AMI and DR.
• Security: As this information is expected to be critical
during failures, security should be high.
• Backup Power: Backup power is estimated to last 1
hour as DER information can be used to restore power.
5) Electric Transportation (ET):
• Bandwidth: Electrical vehicles (EV) will cause a con-
siderable increase in demand, which needs to be co-
ordinated to not overload the system. ICT are needed
for this coordination and also for billing purposes as the
ET will likely charge at a variety of locations, including
customers premises, ofﬁce parkings, and other public or
private locations during long-distance travel. Bandwidth
requirements have been estimated to be between 9,6
to 56 kbps. However if EV batteries are used in DR
programs to reduce demand peaks or absorb excess of
electricity the necessary bandwidth could be up to 100
kbps.
• Latency: Latency estimates depend on the communica-
tion’s main purpose, if it is used only for billing or also
used for DR programs.
• Reliability: Due to the fact that some of the function-
alities are similar to AMI and DR the reliability is the
same for ET communications.
• Security: Security is important as information about the
vehicles location should be protected. In addition, the
charge and discharge of the EV should be done by
authorized parties.
• Backup Power: Charging will not occur during a black-
out, and backup power will likely not be critical. In fact,
EV batteries, if charged, may serve as backup power
not only for likely ET communication but also other
potentially critical applications on the Smart Grid.
6) Distribution Grid Management (DGM):
• Bandwidth: DGM will make possible to remotely mon-
itor and control the grid through automated decision-
making, providing more effective fault detection and
power restoration. Therefore, bandwidth requirement
varies depending on the task to be performed, it is
expected that during faults and critical situations more
bandwidth will be needed.
• Latency: DGM latency requirements vary, from less
than 1 s for alarms and alerts to 100 ms for messaging
between peer-to-peer nodes. However, the maximum

260
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
latency is expected not to exceed 2 s.
• Reliability: The reliability is expected to be similar to
the rest of Smart Grid applications, between 99% to
99,99%.
• Security: Due to the management nature of this func-
tionality high security is required.
• Backup Power: Backup power is necessary to effec-
tively restore power in case of blackout.
B. Smart Meter and Home Gateway
The smart meter is found in costumers premises to
measure the electricity consumption. The smart meter is
equipped with communication capabilities to transfer the
measured information to the utilities. Therefore, the smart
meter is one of the main elements of AMI and the informa-
tion collected can be used for WASA and DR. The smart
meter is in charge of communicating this information to the
utility as this element should ensure the validity of the data
collected. Furthermore, the smart meter may also receive
data from utilities, such as real time price. It can also be
used to communicate with the components involved in DR,
to transmit or receive information from/to the utilities.
The home gateway, besides being the main element of
HEMS and being able to communicate with all the home
appliances and the smart meter, can be involved in DR and
AMI. The smart meter can communicate the real time price
information to the home gateway which can display this
information in a user graphical interface. Then, the HEMS
or the user can react accordingly to the price. The request
to reduce electricity consumption associated to DR can also
be forwarded from the smart meter to the home gateway, or
depending on the DR implementation, be send directly to
the home gateway. The home gateway, can then, according
to user preferences, accept or decline the utilities requests.
In order to reduce the the information ﬂow through the
smart meter, historical consumption and billing information
can be directly transmitted to the home gateway.
C. Issues
As it has been presented in the previous sections the
Smart Grid is a system of systems which involves different
actors and has different functional areas that require ICT.
Deploying ICT will require that these parties work together
to obtain the maximum beneﬁts. This may require data
interfaces between the different parties that ensure inter-
operability. Integrating ICT into the grid may require (1)
to deploy a new communication infrastructure in the grid,
(2) to standardize the communication between parties, (3)
to fulﬁll all the necessary requirements for the Smart Grid
applications.
Some of the barriers the stakeholders have to overcome
when developing ICT for the Smart Grid are:
• Diversity of available technologies: There are different
available communication technologies that can imple-
ment the ICT in the Smart Grid. This leads to a diversity
of possible architectures, which can cause division in
the power grid.
• Different entities: There are different players involved
in the development of the Smart Grid. It is important
that these entities can communicate with each other and
exchange information in order to achieve the objectives
and functionalities of the Smart Grid. However, due to
the fact that there is diversity of available technolo-
gies and different protocols for machine-to-machine
communication, interoperability between the different
entities involved in the Smart Grid is becoming a
challenge.
• Different functional requirements: The different func-
tionalities have different requirements and requires
communication between different players which is a
challenge to incorporate the ICT into Smart Grid as
more than one communication network maybe needed.
• Security: As Smart Grid will enable remote control of
the power grid elements, therefore security becomes
an issue. The ICT incorporated into the Smart Grid
should be resilient to cyberattacks. Furthermore, as the
consumption data of consumers is transmitted through
AMI, data authenticity should be ensured.
• Privacy: Detailed private information about the con-
sumption in consumers premises will become available
in the Smart Grid. This information may be of interest
to different entities, which the user might not be in-
teresting to share it with, as they can extract patterns
of home activity from metering data. For example,
which devices they own, when do they use them, and
lifestyle routines can be deduced from the users’ load
proﬁles. Therefore, the data regarding consumption of
users should be protected when transmitted through the
Smart Grid and maybe restricted to only some entities.
• Data Ownership: Data ownership is closely related to
privacy issues and is still a topic under discussion.
One may think that the data should be owned by the
consumers and they should agree to share it with third-
parties or not. On the other hand, this data is crucial
for utilities as it can be used to forecast consumption
and improve the power grid efﬁciency. However, these
two statements are not mutually excluding. A solution
could be that load proﬁles of consumers are owned by
the user but aggregated data of load proﬁles can be used
by utilities for consumption forecasting.
D. Ongoing European Projects
The aim of this section is to provide an overview of some
of the ongoing European Projects dealing with research and
development on the Smart Grid and its ICT aspect. The
projects described below belong to the 7th FWP (Seventh
Framework Programme) and have been paired up with the
functional areas described in Section III-D.

261
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
• BEAMS, Buildings Energy Advanced Management
System [29], 2010-2013: The aim of this project is
to develop an advanced and integrated management
system to enable energy efﬁciency in buildings, indoors
areas and public spaces. This project is takes into
consideration the interaction of the overall system with
the power grid and management of heterogenous loads,
such as public lighting, heating, ventilation and air
conditioning (HVAC), and sources, such as renewable
energy sources (RES) and electric vehicles. The goal
of the project is not to develop new technologies but
to integrate and combine already existing technologies
to reduce the CO2 emissions. This project objectives
are similar to the herein presented HEMS, but aimed
to buildings and public areas instead. Furthermore, it
is related to the integration of ET and DER in the
customers side.
• CASSANDRA, A multivariate platform for assessing
the impact of strategic decisions in electrical power
systems [30], 2011-2014: The goal of this project is to
develop a platform for realistic modeling of the energy
market stakeholder aimed to provide test and bench-
mark working scenarios. This project aims to provide
an aggregation methodology and software platform, and
ﬁnd the key performance indicators. Due to the fact
that it deals with energy markets, this project is a step
forward towards DR.
• HIPERDNO, High Performance Computing Technolo-
gies for Smart Distribution Network Operation [31],
2010-2013: This projects mainly objective is to enable
DGM functionality, and indirectly AMI. This project’s
goal is to develop and demonstrate high performance
computing solutions for realistic distribution network
data trafﬁc and management scenarios. This solution
is based in near to real time data trafﬁc with built-
in security and intelligent communications for smart
distribution network operation and management.
• INTEGRIS, INTelligent Electrical Grid Sensor com-
munications [32], 2010-2012: The aim of this project
is to develop a novel and ﬂexible ICT infrastructure
for the new Smart applications such as as monitoring,
operation, customer integration, demand side manage-
ment, quality of service and voltage control, Distributed
Energy Resources and power system operations man-
agement. Therefore this projects offers the ICT infras-
tructure necessary for WASA and DGM. The Smart
Grid ICT infrastructure developed is based on a hybrid
Power Line Communication (PLC)/ wireless integrated
communications system, which will be able to fulﬁll the
communications requirements foreseen for the Smart
Grid.
• MIRABEL, Micro-Request-Based Aggregation, Fore-
casting and Scheduling of Energy Demand, Supply and
Distribution [33], 2010-2012: This project is closely
related to DR systems and supporting AMI. This is
due to the fact that some of their main objectives are
to: develop a concept of micro-requests to handle the
energy demand and supply on a household level, design
a decentralized scalable distributed system to handle the
data load from customers, to forecast demand and sup-
ply based on historical and additional data (e.i. weather
forecasts) and standardize the exchange of information
between customers and utilities among others.
• OPENNODE, Open Architecture for Secondary Nodes
of the Electricity SmartGrid [34], 2010-2012: This
project has three main goals: 1- develop an open
secondary substation node (SSN), 2- develop a Mid-
dleware to deal with the SSN and the utilities systems
interaction for grid and utility operation, and 3- de-
velop, based on standardized communication protocols,
a modular and ﬂexible communication architecture for
the operation of the distribution grid. Therefore, this
project is linked to DGM functionality.
• SMARTV2G, Smart Vehicle to Grid Interface [35],
2011-2014: The goal of this project is to create a
safe, secure, energy efﬁcient, controlled and convenient
transfer of electricity and data to connect the electric
vehicle to the Smart Grid. In this project, a new gen-
eration of technologies will be developed. This project
aims to allow seamless and user-friendly energy load
of electric vehicles in urban environments in the Smart
Grid context. It is obvious that this project functionality
is ET.
V. CONCLUSION
There is considerable literature on energy management
and Smart Grid. This paper has tried to outline the main
goals that have to be fulﬁlled by the Home Energy Manage-
ment System and the Smart Grids. Additionally, an overview
of the actual power grid and deﬁnitions for the term Smart
Grid have been provided. Smart Grid models from NIST
and ETP have also been presented and the functional areas
of the Smart Grid have been explained. Furthermore, the
role of ICT in the Smart Grid has been introduced and
its beneﬁts have been discussed. This article also presented
some of the issues raised when introducing ICT in the
Smart Grid. In the last section of this article some of
the ongoing European Seventh Framework Programme have
been presented. This projects have been related with the
Smart Grid functionalities described in Section III-D.
When developing systems to reduce or make energy con-
sumption more efﬁcient, such systems usually focus on one
speciﬁc capability. It is important that the overall framework
and objectives are taken into consideration during the design
of such systems to maximize their beneﬁts. This paper can be
used as a guideline of the objectives that should be fulﬁlled
by HEMS and Smart Grid specially regarding ICT.

262
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Furthermore, an interesting aspect of enabling communi-
cation between users and utilities is to use this bidirectional
communication for Demand-Response systems. DR systems
can be as simple as changes in electricity price or more
complex such as the presented in [36]: Incentive-Based
DR Programs, where utilities send a reduction requests to
customers, and Demand Reduction Bids, where customer
sends a demand reduction bid to the utility. An example of
a DR system based on electricity price changes can be found
in [37].
Finally, the authors of this article have developed a home
gateway in JAVA using OSGi and ontologies and knowledge
database. A detailed description of this home gateway can be
found in [4], [38]. This home gateway has been speciﬁcally
designed for HEMS and to help fulﬁll the requirements and
objectives presented in Section II-A. It offers interoperability
at the service level by using ontologies and incorporates a
rule engine. Moreover, this home gateway can be used to
exchange information with the utilities. The customer can
deﬁne rules to automatically react to electricity price changes
and reduction requests from the utility and generate Demand
Reduction Bids.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Rossell´o-Busquet, G. Kardaras, J. Soler, and L. Dittmann,
“Towards Efﬁcient Energy Management: Deﬁning HEMS,
AMI and Smart Grid Objectives,” in The Tenth International
Conference on Networks (ICN 2011), The Netherlands An-
tilles, 2011.
[2] BeyWatch Consortium, “D2.1:Service Requirement Speciﬁ-
cation,” 2009.
[3] European
Commission,
European
Technology
Platform
SmartGrids - Vision and Strategy for Europe’s Electricity
Networks of the Future.
Ofﬁce for Ofﬁcial Publications of
the European Communities, 2006.
[4] A. Rossell´o-Busquet, J. Soler, and L. Dittmann, “A Novel
Home Energy Management System Architecture,” in UkSim
13th International Conference on Computer Modelling and
Simulation, 2011.
[5] D. Bonino, E. Castellina, and F. Corno, “The DOG gateway:
enabling ontology-based intelligent domotic environments,”
Consumer Electronics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 54, no. 4,
pp. 1656 –1664, 2008.
[6] L T McCalley and C J H Midden and K Haagdorens,
“Computing systems for household energy conservation: Con-
sumer response and social ecological considerations,” in in
Proceedings of CHI 2005 Workshop on Social Implications
of Ubiquitous Computing, 2005.
[7] Kistler, R. and Knauth, S. and Kaslin, D. and Klapproth,
A., “CARUSO - Towards a context-sensitive architecture for
uniﬁed supervision and control,” in Emerging Technologies
and Factory Automation, 2007. ETFA. IEEE Conference on,
25-28 2007, pp. 1445 –1448.
[8] S. Grilli, A. Villa, and C. Kavadias, “COMANCHE: An
Architecture for Software Conﬁguration Management in the
Home Environment,” in NBiS ’08: Proceedings of the 2nd
international conference on Network-Based Information Sys-
tems.
Springer-Verlag, 2008, pp. 283–292.
[9] J. Zhang, A. Rossell-Busquet, J. Soler, M. S. Berger, and
L. Dittmann, “Home Environment Service Knowledge Man-
agement System,” in The 11th International Conference on
Telecommunications (ConTEL), 2011.
[10] A. K. Dey, D. Salber, and G. D. Abowd, “A Context-based
Infrastructure for Smart Environments,” Georgia Institute
of
Technology,
Tech.
Rep.,
1999.
[Online].
Available:
http://hdl.handle.net/1853/3406
[11] N. Shah, C.-F. Tsai, and K.-M. Chao, “Monitoring Appliances
Sensor Data in Home Environment: Issues and Challanges,” in
Commerce and Enterprise Computing, 2009. CEC ’09. IEEE
Conference on, 20-23 2009, pp. 439 –444.
[12] M. Shehata, A. Ebertein, and A. Fapojuwo, “IRIS-TS: De-
tecting Interactions between Requirements in DOORS.” IN-
FOCOMP Journal of Computer Science, vol. 5, no. 4, pp.
34–43, 2006.
[13] M. Shehata, A. Eberlein, and A. Fapojuwo, “Managing Policy
Interactions in KNX-Based Smart Homes,” in Computer Soft-
ware and Applications Conference, 2007. COMPSAC 2007.
31st Annual International, vol. 2, 2007, pp. 367 –378.
[14] H. Si, S. Saruwatari, M. Minami, and H. Morikawa, “A
Ubiquitous Power Management System to Balance Energy
Saving and Response Time based on Device-level Usage
Prediction,” IPSJ Journal, vol. 18, pp. 147–163, 2010.
[15] S. K. Das and D. J. Cook, “Designing Smart Environments: A
Paradigm Based on Learning and Prediction,” in International
Conference on Pattern Recognition and Machine Intelligence
(PReMI), 2005.
[16] Greatest Engineering Achivements of the 20th Century.
[Online]. Available: http://www.greatachievements.org/ Ac-
cessed: 25/06/2011
[17] G. W. Arnold, “Laying the Foundation for the Electric Grids
Next 100 Years.”
Presented at ETSI Smart Grid Workshop:
Standards: An Architecture for the Smart Grid Sophia An-
tipolis, France, 2011.
[18] K. Barnes and B. Johnso, “Introduction To SCADA Protection
And Vulnerabilities,” Idaho National Engineering and En-
vironmental Laboratory, Tech. Rep. INEEL/EXT-04-01710,
2004.
[19] European Technology Platform SmartGrids for the Electricity
networks of the Future, “What is a Smart Grid? Deﬁnition.”
[Online]. Available: http://www.smartgrids.eu/?q=node/163
Accessed: 25/06/2011
[20] S. Jim´enez, “Smart Grid Mandate, Standardization Man-
date to European Standardisation Organisations (ESOs) to
support European Smart Grid deployment,” European Com-
mission Directorate-General for Energy, Tech. Rep. Ref.
Ares(2011)233514, 2011.

263
International Journal on Advances in Telecommunications, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[21] “Report to NIST on the Smart Grid Interoperability Standards
Roadmap,” Electric Power Research Institut, Tech. Rep. Con-
tract No. SB1341-09-CN-0031Deliverable 10, 2009.
[22] Department of Energy, “The Smart Grid An Introduction,”
U.S. Department of Energy, 2008.
[23] “Activity Report 2009,” Union of the Electricity Industry -
EURELECTRIC, Tech. Rep., 2009.
[24] National Institute of Standards and Technology, “NIST
Framework and Roadmap for Smart Grid Interoperability
Standards, Release 1.0,” National Institute of Standards and
Technology, Tech. Rep. NIST Special Publication 1108, 2010.
[25] “Smart Grids: from innovation to deployment,” Communica-
tion from the Commission to the European Parliament, the
council, the European Economic and Social Committee of
the Regions, Tech. Rep., 2011.
[26] “The EU climate and energy package,” European Commission
Climate Action, accessed: 25/06/2011. [Online]. Available:
http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/package/index en.htm
[27] A. Rossell´o-Busquet, G. Kardaras, V. B. Iversen, J. Soler,
and L. Dittmann, “Scheduling home appliances usage to re-
duce electricity demand peaks,” in Risø International Energy
Conference 2011: Energy Systems and Technologies for the
Coming Century, 2011.
[28] “Communications Requirements of the Smart Grid Technolo-
gies,” Department of Energy (DOE), Tech. Rep., 2010.
[29] “BEAMS
:
Buildings
Energy
Advanced
Management
System,” October 2010, accessed: 23/01/2012. [Online].
Available:
http://cordis.europa.eu/fetch?CALLER=PROJ
ICT&ACTION=D&CAT=PROJ&RCN=100732
[30] “CASSANDRA : A multivariate platform for assessing
the
impact
of
strategic
decisions
in
electrical
power
systems,” November 2011, accessed: 23/01/2012. [Online].
Available:
http://cordis.europa.eu/fetch?CALLER=PROJ
ICT&ACTION=D&CAT=PROJ&RCN=100985
[31] “HIPERDNO:
High
Performance
Computing
Tech-
nologies
for
Smart
Distribution
Network
Opera-
tion,”
February
2010,
accessed:
23/01/2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://cordis.europa.eu/fetch?CALLER=PROJ
ICT&ACTION=D&CAT=PROJ&RCN=93772
[32] “INTEGRIS: INTelligent Electrical Grid Sensor communi-
cations,” February 2010, accessed: 23/01/2012. [Online].
Available:
http://cordis.europa.eu/fetch?CALLER=PROJ
ICT&ACTION=D&CAT=PROJ&RCN=93726
[33] “MIRABEL: Micro-Request-Based Aggregation, Forecasting
and
Scheduling
of
Energy
Demand,
Supply
and
Distribution,” January 2010, accessed: 23/01/2012. [Online].
Available:
http://cordis.europa.eu/fetch?CALLER=PROJ
ICT&ACTION=D&CAT=PROJ&RCN=93821
[34] “OPENNODE:
Open
Architecture
for
Sec-
ondary
Nodes
of
the
Electricity
SmartGrid,”
January
2010,
accessed:
23/01/2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://cordis.europa.eu/fetch?CALLER=PROJ
ICT&ACTION=D&CAT=PROJ&RCN=93771
[35] “MARTV2G:
Smart
Vehicle
to
Grid
Interface,”
June
2011,
accessed:
23/01/2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://cordis.europa.eu/fetch?CALLER=PROJ ICT&ACTION=D&CAT=PRO
[36] S.
Mohagheghi,
J.
Stoupis,
Z.
Wang,
Z.
Li,
and
H. Kazemzadeh, “Demand Response Architecture: Integration
into the Distribution Management System,” in First IEEE
International Conference on Smart Grid Communications,
2010.
[37] A. Iwayemi, P. Yi, X. Dong, and C. Zhou, “Knowing When
to Act: An Optimal Stopping Method for Smart Grid Demand
Response,” Network, IEEE, 2011.
[38] A. Rossell´o-Busquet, L. Brewka, J. Soler, and L. Dittmann,
“OWL Ontologies and SWRL Rules Applied to Energy Man-
agement,” in Computer Modelling and Simulation (UKSim),
2011 UkSim 13th International Conference on, 2011.

