 
Figure 1.   Handover scenario in femtocell networks 
Handover Scenario and Procedure in LTE-based Femtocell Networks 
 
Ardian Ulvan, Robert Bestak 
Department of Telecommunication Engineering 
Czech Technical University in Prague 
Prague, Czech Republic 
ardian.ulvan@fel.cvut,cz, bestar1@fel.cvut.cz 
Melvi Ulvan 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
The University of Lampung 
Bandar Lampung, Indonesia 
melvi_ulvan@unila.ac.id
 
 
Abstract—The deployment of Femtocell as the emerging 
wireless and mobile access technology becomes a solution for 
the bandwidth limitation and coverage issues in conventional 
mobile network system (macrocell). In this paper the handover 
procedure in femtocell network is investigated. The procedure 
is based on 3GPP LTE specification. Three handover 
scenarios: hand-in, hand-out and inter-FAP are considered 
and analysed. In order to achieve the optimize procedure, the 
handover decision policy based on mobility prediction is 
introduced and proposed. The reactive and proactive handover 
strategy is also proposed to mitigate the frequent and 
unnecessary handover. The result shows that reactive 
handover is the potential mechanism to mitigate the 
unnecessary handover. 
Keywords - handover; femtocell; 3GPP-LTE; reactive 
handover; proactive handover. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Femtocell is the emerging network technology, which is 
defined as a low-cost, low-power cellular base station that 
operates in licensed spectrum to connect conventional, 
unmodified mobile terminals to a mobile operator’s network. 
The coverage ranges of femtocells are in the tens of meters. 
They utilize broadband Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) or 
cable/fiber to the home (FTTH/FTTx)) Internet connections 
for backhaul to the operator’s core network [1]. 
The Femto Access Point (FAP), also known as Home 
Base Station (HBS) or Home Node B (HNB) in 3GPP LTE 
terminology, is a main device in femtocell network that 
provides radio access network (RAN) functionality [1]. The 
FAPs were initially designed for residential use to get better 
indoor voice and data coverage, improving at the same time 
the macrocell reliability and promise to be a cost-effective 
solution. It also increases the peak-bit rate in low coverage 
areas. 
Femtocells and the conventional macrocells are seen as 
isolated networks, but they are not. In this paper, we describe 
the interaction between femtocells and macrocells in term of 
handover. The implementation of femtocell may cover the 
“blank area” and to increase the utilization of wireless 
capacity which is not covered by macrocell base station. 
Nonetheless, the availability of hundreds of FAPs in a 
particular area most likely increases the technological 
challenges in handover procedure. Another challenge is the 
mitigation the unnecessary handover since large number of 
FAPs can trigger the very frequent handovers even before 
the current initiated handover procedure is completed. 
Research and technological development on handovers in 
macrocell network has been going extensively to provide 
better Radio Resource Management (RRM). Most of the 
researches are in the field of cellular networks focused on 
network-controlled horizontal handover where handover is 
executed between adjacent cells of the same network. 
In term of IP-based wireless network, the research on 
handover has been done typically in wireless local area 
network (WLAN) based on WiFi IEEE802.11. Moreover, 
the client-based handover began to be investigated when the 
Worldwide 
Interoperability 
for 
Microwave 
Access 
(WiMAX) IEEE802.16 networks, 3GPP Long Term 
Evolution (LTE)/Long Term Evolution-Advanced (LTE-A) 
as well as Mobile IPv4/IPv6 are introduced. In addition, the 
inter-system handover or vertical handover is also going 
investigated intensively. The research in both layer-1 (L1-
physical) and layer-2 (L2-Medium Access Control - MAC) 
is undertaken in order to achieve the most efficient handover 
and to reduce the handover overhead. 
In this paper, the handover between femtocell and 
macrocell is investigated. Three handover scenarios are 
considered as shown in Fig. 1. Handover procedure is based 
on 3GPP LTE specification. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follow: Section 2 
reviews some related works of handover in femtocel 
network. Section 3 describes the LTE-based handover in 
femtocell network. The handover scenarios and optimization 
proposal are presented as well. In Section 4, the handover 
signalling flow is analyzed in each scenario. Section 5 
provides the proposal of handover optimization algorithm 
and a performance evaluation of the proposed algorithm, as 
213
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

 
Figure 3.   Message sequence diagram of handover Procedure in 
3GPP-LTE [6] 
 
 
Figure 2.  Handover process in 3GPP-LTE 
well as a result of the performance evaluation. We conclude 
our work in Section 6.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In the femtocell network, several research works have 
been published. The authors in [2] overviewed the 3GPP 
LTE and the characteristic of Home-eNodeB (HeNB). Their 
work included the description of mobility support in 3GPP 
LTE, the handover procedure in LTE and the deployment 
scenario of HeNB. In addition, some mobility management 
issues such as handover scenario, mechanism for searching 
the HeNB in the Closed Subscriber Group (CSG), cell 
reselection and handover decision parameters have also been 
described. The work concluded with the recommendation for 
further work to deal with such issues. 
More detail works on handover in femtocell network 
have also been published. In [3], the work focused on the 
handover from the macro-tier to the femto-tier in CDMA 
network. It has been revealed that the User Equipment (UE) 
may be required to scan the whole femto radio spectrum 
when switch form macrocell to femtocell, however it is 
assessed as an expensive operation. To deal with this issue, 
the cache scheme for femtocell reselection is proposed. By 
considering the random walk movement, the three user 
movement models were applied to obtain the UE’s 
movement history. The history included the number of FAP 
that has been visited. The idea behind this scheme was to 
obtain the most recently visited order of FAPs stored in the 
cache. The scheme seems effective in the open subscriber 
group (OSG) femtocell with plenty of FAPs, however it is 
relatively inefficient in the femtocell’s CSG or in the few 
number of FAPs. 
In order to integrate the femtocell into the system, some 
modifications on existing network and protocol architecture 
of Universal Mobile Telecommunication System (UMTS) 
based macrocell network has been proposed in [4]. The 
modifications included the change of signal flow for 
handover procedures and the measurement of signal-to-
interference ratio for handover between macrocell and 
femtocell. The frequent and unnecessary handover is also 
considered. The analysis is taken on the concentrator-based 
and 
without 
concentrator-based 
femtocell 
network 
architecture. The result shown, the call admission control 
(CAC) scheme is effective to prevent the unnecessary 
handover. 
In [5], the handover procedure between the HeNB and 
eNodeB has been proposed to be modified. A new handover 
algorithm based on the UE’s speed and Quality of Service 
(QoS) is proposed. Three different velocity environments 
have been considered in the algorithm i.e., low speed (0-15 
km/h), medium speed (15-30 km/h) and high speed (>30 
km/h). In addition, the real-time and non-real-time traffics 
have been considered as QoS parameters. The comparison 
analysis shown that the proposed algorithm has a better 
performance then traditional handover algorithm in order to 
reducing the unnecessary handovers and the number of 
handovers. However, the assigned user velocities seem 
unrealistic since the HeNB at home deals only with the very 
low speed (0-5 km/h). 
III. 
HANDOVER IN FEMTOCELL NETWORK 
A. Handover in 3GPP-LTE Macrocell 
The 3GPP LTE for the 4G mobile system specifies the 
handover procedure and mechanism that support various 
users’ mobility [6] [7]. Handover process is divided into four 
parts as shown in Fig. 2: UE measures downlink signal 
strength (blue line 1), processing the measurement results (2) 
and sends the measurement report to the serving eNodeB 
(green line 3). The serving eNodeB then makes the handover 
decisions based on the received measurement reports (red 
line 4). 
The message sequence diagram of the LTE handover 
procedure is shown in Fig. 3. The handover procedure 
consists of 3 parts:  
 
Handover preparation; in this part, UE, serving eNodeB 
and target eNodeB make preparation before the UE 
connect to the new cell. The main message and process 
are described as follows: 
1. Measurement control/report (messages 1/2); the 
serving eNodeB configures and triggers the UE 
measurement procedure and UE sends measurement 
report message to serving eNodeB. 
2. Handover decision (messages 3/4); the serving 
eNodeB offers the handover decision based on 
received measurement report message from UE. 
3. Admission control (messages 5/6); the target eNodeB 
UE 
Serving 
eNodeB 
Target 
eNodeB 
MME 
Serving 
Gateway 
214
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

performs the admission control dependent on the 
quality of service (QoS) information and prepares 
handover with L1/L2. 
4. Handover command (message 7); the serving eNodeB 
sends the handover command to UE. 
 
Handover execution; on the execution part, the 
processes are described as follow: 
5. Detach from old cell and synchronize to the new cell 
(messages 8 – 10); UE performs the synchronization 
to the target cell and accesses the target cell. 
 
Handover completion; this part includes the following 
processes: 
6. Handover confirm and path switch (messages 11 – 
16); the serving-Gateway switches the path of 
downlink data to the target side. For this, the serving-
Gateway 
exchanges 
massage 
with 
Mobility 
Management Entity (MME). 
7. Release resource (messages 17/18); upon reception of 
the release message, the serving eNodeB can release 
radio and control of related resources. Subsequently, 
target eNodeB can transmit the downlink packet data. 
B. Handover Scenario in Femtocell Network  
All mobile systems including the femtocell network 
implement a handover procedure to support the user’s 
mobility. The handover, in one side allows communication 
during user’s movement in the network. On the other side, it 
significantly increases signalling overhead in the network. 
According to [8], it most likely that the soft handover 
will not be implemented in femtocell due to limited 
frequency allocation for femtocells. In addition, due to 
technological challenges and system operator requirements, 
the initial 3GPP specification for handover in femtocell 
focused on one direction only that is from FAP to macrocell 
eNodeB [9].  
Despite having some constraints, in this paper we 
consider all possible handover scenarios between eNodeB 
and FAP and between FAPs. There are three possible 
handover scenarios in femtocell, as depicted in Fig. 1:  
 
Hand-in; this scenario presents the handover where an 
UE switch out from macrocell eNodeB to FAP. 
 
Hand-out; represents the handover that is performed 
from FAP to macrocell eNodeB. 
 
Inter-FAP handover; it corresponds to the scenario of 
handover from one FAP to another FAP. In this 
scenario all FAPs are assumed to be placed at the 
same location and served by the same service 
provider.  
C. Decision Policy of Handover  
One of the challenges in the handover procedure is 
corresponded to the handover decision mechanism. The 
common metrics for handover decision mechanism include 
carrier to Interference-and-Noise Ratio (CINR), Receive 
Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) and Quality of Service 
(QoS). However, those metrics are quite demanding to deal 
with advanced handover requirement, for instance the fast 
handover in femtocell network that consist hundreds of 
possible target FAP. Therefore, the new handover decision 
mechanism metrics is necessary to be determined. 
The handover decision option basically are network-
controlled handover in which the decision to implement 
handover is taken by the eNodeB (in case of hand-in) or FAP 
(in case of hand-out and inter-FAP) to which the UE is 
currently attached. However, the support of client-based 
handover in which initiated by the UE becomes more 
common. This option gives the handover process more 
efficient, since any changing of necessary parameters or 
events (such as CINR, RSSI, coverage, the QoS provided by 
the network, the probability of next position, etc.) can be 
monitored by the UE from its wireless interfaces, then use 
them to decide to trigger the handover. 
In network controlled mode, the serving eNodeB decides 
to perform handover to target FAP by comparing the RSSI 
that received by UE and the RSSI from the FAP. However, 
when the CSG is deployed, other parameters e.g., service 
cost, load balancing, and speed status of UE, which might 
influenced the handover decision should also be considered. 
Since the femtocell system offers the different billing 
models, the user’s billing is sum up by whether user is using 
the FAP. Therefore it is important for UE to handover to the 
accessible FAP fast.  
In the load balancing point of view, when a large number 
of active UEs are located in a given cell, available resources 
may be insufficient to meet the QoS for the real time service. 
But, it may offer the good performance for the best effort 
service. Particularly, in the FAP case where the available 
user is limited, if the available resource is too short for UE to 
handover to CSG cell, then it needs to handover to another 
accessible FAP or to macrocell eNodeB. 
D. Proposed Mobility Prediction 
The mobility prediction of UE may also be considered 
for the handover decision. In this paper we introduced the 
movement prediction mechanism as an additional parameter 
for handover decision procedure. This parameter is sent in 
the system information broadcast of serving cell. This 
decision mechanism can be applied on all handover 
scenarios. 
Knowing the current position and velocity of an UE can 
obviously help to estimate where the UE is heading, thus the 
next position of UE to where the handover might be 
performed can be predicted.  
In this handover decision procedure, it is assumed that 
the UE is able to periodically (e.g., every 1s) send its 
position to the serving cell (either eNodeB or FAP) during its 
moving. In the mean time, the serving cell maintains 
database of all possible target cell to where the handover 
might be performed. The probability of transition from one 
cell to another is modelled as a Markov process as 
approximated in (1): 
 
pn  =  [p] x [Pn-1]  =  [pn-1] x [P] 
(1) 
where  pn is denoted as the probability of UE’s position after 
n transitions, p is the initial distribution matrix, Pn-1 is 
215
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

 
Figure 4.   E-UTRAN Architecture including the deployment 
of  Femtocell 
denoted as current transition probability matrix, pn-1 is the 
initial distribution after n transitions and P is the original 
transition probability matrix. Detail of mobility prediction 
method for optimized handover process can be found in [10]. 
Using this method, the likely path of an UE can be 
estimated in advance, so both the handover probability and 
the remaining time before handover can be derived. 
Upon receiving the prediction result, serving cell seeks 
all possible target cells. One of the neighbouring cells is 
assigned as the predicted target cell, to where the handover is 
triggered. Serving cell then performs coordination with the 
predicted target cell via backbone. If the target cell is 
available for handover, the UE will proceed the handover 
process. 
E. Proposed Proactive and Reactive Handovers 
Since the handover procedure may be initiated by either 
the cell (eNodeB/FAP) or the UE, therefore two handover 
strategies i.e., proactive and reactive handover [11] [12], are 
proposed to be applied to trigger the handover  
a) Proactive Handover 
In the proactive handover strategy, the handover may 
occur any time before the level RSSI of current eNodeB 
reaches the handover hysteresis threshold (HHT). The 
proactive handover strategy attempts to estimate network 
characteristics of a specific position before the UE reaches 
that position. Assumed the UE discovered that the new target 
eNodeB’s RSSI (or FAP’s RSSI) overpasses the origin one 
from its serving eNodeB/FAP. The UE calculates the time 
left before the normal handover is triggered, then triggering 
the handover earlier before HHT. This strategy is expected to 
minimize packet loss and high latency during handover. 
b) Reactive Handover 
Due to small FAP’s coverage, its lower power and the 
density of FAPs, the UE in femtocell system will facing the 
very frequent and unnecessary handover since the UE will 
move from one FAP to other FAP repeatedly. To mitigate 
the overhead of handover, the reactive handover scenario is 
applied. Reactive handover tends to postpone the handover 
as long as possible, even though it has discovered the new 
RSSI signal. The handover is triggered only when the UE 
(almost) lose its serving eNodeB/FAP signal. 
IV. 
HANDOVER PROCEDURE AND SIGNALLING FLOW 
The LTE-based handover procedure within the femtocell 
network is obviously intended to minimize the handover 
interruption time. The handovers are also designed to be 
seamless when occur to/from other technology platforms 
(2G/3G, WiMAX, etc.).  
Several functional elements take part during the handover 
process. The evolved UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access 
Network (E-UTRAN) is the key element since it provides all 
system functionalities included the physical (PHY), medium 
access control (MAC), radio link control (RLC), and packet 
data control protocol (PDCP) [13]. It consists a single node 
i.e., eNodeB or HeNB/FAP. It also provides radio resource 
control (RRC) functionality that corresponds to handover 
procedure. 
E-UTRAN interacts with the Evolve Packet Core (EPC) 
system that consist the Mobility Management Entity (MME), 
Serving Gateway (SGW) and Femto Gateway (Femto-GW). 
The interaction between all functional elements of EUTRAN 
and EPC is depicted in Fig. 4. 
Mobility Management Entity (MME) is the key control 
node for the LTE access network [13]. In handover process, 
MME is responsible for choosing the serving-Gateway for an 
UE at the initial attach and at time of intra-LTE handover 
involving Core Network (CN) node relocation. 
Another element that takes part in handover process is 
serving-Gateway that responsible to route and forward user 
data packets. The serving-Gateway is also acting as the 
mobility anchor for the user plane during handovers and as 
the anchor for mobility between LTE and other 3GPP 
technologies.        
The last element is called Femto Gateway that provides 
the gateway through which the FAP gets access to mobile 
operator’s core network. Femto-GW is responsible for 
protocol conversion and also creates a virtual radio network 
control (RNC) interface to the legacy network without 
requiring any changes to CN elements. It is physically 
located on mobile operator premises [14]. 
In addition, 3GPP also specified two standard interfaces 
i.e., X2 and S1 interfaces, for the Evolved Packet System 
(EPS). The X2 interface provides capability to support radio 
interface mobility and shall support the exchange of 
signaling 
information 
between 
eNodeB 
macrocells. 
Therefore, for handover between eNodeB macrocells, the 
procedure 
is 
performed 
without 
EPC 
involvement. 
Preparation and exchange of signaling flows in the handover 
procedure are directly between eNodeB using X2 interface. 
On the other hand, the S1 interface supports many-to-many 
relations between EPC’s elements (MME/SGW) and 
eNodeB. Moreover S1 is also used for the communication 
216
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

 
Figure 5. Signaling flow of  hand-in (handover from macrocell to 
femtocell)  
 
Figure 6. Signaling flow of  hand-out (handover from femtocell to 
macrocell)  
 
Figure 7. Preliminary performance of reactive/proactive handover  
between FAP/HeNB with the MME/SGW through the 
Femto-GW. Specifically, the connection to MME is using S1 
control plane (S1-C) interface and the connection to SGW is 
using S1 user plane (S1-U) interface. 
 
The handover within eNodeB macrocell can happen 
without restriction. In contrast for FAP, since the CSG is 
applied not every UE can access the FAP. The handover 
procedure consist a set of signaling flow that exchanging 
from one element to others. In case of the proposed handover 
scenarios, we also proposed the typical signaling flow for 
each scenario. 
A. Hand-in Procedure 
The handover from macrocell into femtocell is quite 
demanding and complex since there are hundreds of possible 
targets FAPs. In hand-in procedure, the UE needs to select 
the most appropriate target FAP. The interference level 
should be considered as a decision parameter. Moreover, the 
proposed mobility prediction is also considered in handover 
decision to optimize the handover procedure. The signaling 
flows of the proposed handover procedure for hand-in can be 
shown in Fig. 5. 
B. Hand-out Procedure 
Handover procedure from FAP to macrocell eNodeB is 
relatively uncomplicated. The UE has no option to select the 
target cell since there only the macrocell eNodeB. When the 
RSSI from eNodeB is stronger than FAP’s RSSI, the UE will 
be connected directly without a complex interference 
calculation and authorization check as in hand-in scenario. 
The handover signaling flows is depicted in Fig. 6.   
C. Inter-FAP Procedure 
The procedure for inter-FAP handover is similar to hand-
in procedure since the UE will facing hundreds of possible 
target when out of its serving FAP. For this procedure we 
also proposed the mobility prediction as the handover 
decision policy.  
V. 
HANDOVER OPTIMIZATION  
A. Optimization Algorithm 
As already discussed, hand-in and inter-FAP is more 
complex than the handout. The main constrain on those 
scenarios is the handover interruption time due to delay on 
selection of target FAP. Another issue is the possibility of 
unnecessary handover and the very frequent handover due to 
the small coverage and low power of FAP.  
To cope with these constraints, we proposed the mobility 
prediction method as mentioned in previous section. 
Knowing in advance where an UE is heading allows the 
system to take proactive steps. The mobility prediction 
mechanism often involves investigation how UEs physically 
move and it can estimate the final position of the UE. Once 
the final position of the UE is predicted, then the system will 
or decide to perform the handover to the nearest available 
FAP. This method will enhance the conventional handover 
decision mechanism which is based only on signal quality 
(RSSI/CINR) and QoS. The unexpected impact of handovers 
can be mitigated by deploying the reactive handover. In [4] 
217
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

the call admission control has been proposed by forcing the 
UE to stay for the particular time at the new connected FAP 
(typically 10 seconds and 20 seconds have been assigned as 
the threshold time). In reactive handover, the handover will 
be postponed as long as possible until the UE reach the target 
FAP as the result of mobility prediction.  
The pseudo code of optimization algorithm can be seen 
below. For the UE speed, we consider the maximum speed 
of 10 km/h.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. Preliminary Result and Discussion  
In order to verify the performance of handover 
procedure, the proposed algorithm has been analyzed. We 
manage some assumption regarding the UE mobility and the 
femtocell. The movement prediction of UE is approximated 
based on Markov-chain as stated in (1). The random way 
point has been used for the mobility model. Number of FAP 
is assumed 20 and 3 for eNodeB macrocell. The shape of 
FAP coverage area is assumed to be circular, with the 
coverage radius equal to 10 m. All entities are located in the 
area of 1 Km2 with non uniform FAP density. In addition, 
though the random waypoint mobility model is used in the 
prediction process, it can be assumed that the UE does not 
walk randomly, but rather several paths could be followed. 
The result based on Matlab simulation is depicted in Fig. 7. 
As can be seen, the number of handover increases almost 
linearly when the number of FAP is increased. The reactive 
handover has the lowest number of handovers compared to 
other schemes. Though it has proven that the performance of 
reactive handover is better to mitigate the unnecessary 
handover, the further study is still needed when this 
algorithm is integrated with the RF and traffic criteria that 
have been assigned as the handover initiation policy by the 
3GPP standard. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper the handover procedure on LTE-based 
femtocell has been investigated and analyzed in three 
different scenarios, i.e., hand-in, hand-out and inter-FAP. 
The hand-in and inter-FAP scenarios are quite demanding 
than hand-out since plenty of target FAPs were involved in 
the handover process. It is a challenge to make a selection of 
the target FAP. The mobility prediction mechanism can be 
used to predict the heading position of the UE and then 
estimate the target FAP to which the UE may be connected. 
The reactive handover is the potential mechanism to mitigate 
the unnecessary handover. The further work is needed to find 
the most optimize handover procedure by integrating the 
proposed scheme and algorithm with the handover decision 
criteria specified by the standard.    
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper is part of research work that supported by the 
FP7 ICT-248891 STP FREEDOM project funded by the 
European Commission. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Broadband Forum TR-196, “Femto Access Point Service Data 
Model”, April 2009. 
[2] H. Kwak, P. Lee, Y. Kim,  N. Saxena, and J. Shin, ”Mobility 
Management Survey for Home-e-NB Based 3GPP LTE Systems”,  
Journal of Information Processing Systems, Vol. 4, No. 4, pp. 145-
152, December 2008. ISSN 1973-91 3X  
[3] H.Y. Lee and Y.B. Lin,”A Cache Scheme for Femtocell Reselection”, 
IEEE Communication Letters, Vol. 14, No. 1, pp. 27-29, January 
2010. 
[4] M.Z. Chowdury, W. Ryu, E. Rhee, and Y.M. Jang., ”Handover 
between Macrocell and Femtocell for UMTS based Networks”, in 
proceeding 
of 
11th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced 
Communication Technology, Gangwon-Do, South Korea, 2009. 
ISBN: 978-89-5519-139-4. 
[5] H. Zhang, X. Wen, B. Wang, W. Zheng, and Y. Sun, “A Novel 
Handover Mechanism between Femtocell and Macrocell for LTE 
based Networks“, in proceeding of 2nd International Conference on 
Communication Software and Networks, pp 228-231. IEEE Computer 
Society, 2010.  ISBN: 978-0-7695-3961-4/10.  
[6] 3GPP-TS36.300 v8.5.0, “E-UTRAN Overall Description”. 2008. 
[7] 3GPP- TS 23.401 v9.4.0, “GPRS Enhancement for E-UTRAN 
Access”. 2010. 
[8] D. Chambers, “Which Handover Modes do Femtocells Need First?”, 
Think 
Femtocell, 
2008. 
Can 
be 
accessed 
at 
http://www.thinkfemtocell.com/System/which-handover-modes-do-
femtocells-need-first.html. Last accessed on May 2010. 
[9] D.N. Knisely, T. Yoshizawa, and F. Favichia, ”Standardization of 
Femtocells in 3GPP”, Femtocell Wireless Communications, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, September 2009. ISSN: 0163-6804. 
[10] A. Ulvan, M. Ulvan, and R. Bešťák, ”The Enhancement of Handover 
Strategy by Mobility Prediction in Broadband Wireless Access”, In 
Proceedings of the Networking and Electronic Commerce Research 
Conference 
(NAEC 
2009). 
Dallas, 
TX: 
American 
Telecommunications Systems Management Association Inc., 2009, 
pp. 266-276. ISBN 978-0-9820958-2-9. 
[11] P. Bellavista, A. Corradi, and C. Giannelli, “Adaptive Buffering 
based on Handoff Prediction for Wireless Internet Continuous 
Services”, The 2005 International Conference on High Performance 
Computing and Communications (HPCC-05), Sorrento, Italy, 
September 2005. 
[12] A. Corradi, P. Bellavista, and C. Giannelli, “Mobility Prediction 
Project”, 
Universita 
degli 
Studi 
di 
Bologna. 
http://lia.deis.unibo.it/Research/SOMA/MobilityPrediction/. 
Last 
accessed on May 2010. 
[13] Motorola, “Long Term Evolution (LTE): Overview of LTE Air-
Interface“. 
Technical 
White 
Paper. 
Can 
be 
accessed 
at  
http://business.motorola.com/experiencelte/pdf/LTEAirInterfaceWhit
ePaper.pdf . Last accessed on  June 2010. 
[14] 3GPP TS 22.220 v9.4.0, “Service requirements for Home Node B and 
Home eNodeB”. 2010. 
1. 
INITIALISATION # HO algorithm 
2. 
EXAMINE V         # V is the speed of UE 
3. 
IF V > 10 Km/h 
NO HAND-IN 
4. 
ELSE IF V> 5 Km/h 
PERFORM MOBILITY PREDICTION 
IF Traffic = Real-Time 
PERFORM PROACTIVE HO 
 
ELSE IF Traffic = Non Real-Time 
 
 
PERFORM REACTIVE HO 
5. 
ELSE IF Traffic =Real-Time 
PERFORM PROACTIVE HO 
IF Traffic = Non Real-Time 
PERFORM REACTIVE HO 
6. 
ELSE 
PERFORM NORMAL HO 
        RETURN 
218
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

