 Significance of Semantic Web in Facilitating HCI in Mobile and Ubiquitous 
Learning  
Naif R. Aljohani, Hugh Davis  
School of Electronics and Computer Science    
University of Southampton, UK 
{nra1d10, hcd}@ecs.soton.ac.uk   
 
 
Abstract—Mobile devices are being widely used in education 
for many purposes such as an instruction tool for learning. 
However, mobile devices suffer from the limitation of 
capabilities and resources. Potential solutions to this issue must 
consider the mobility and personal characteristics of potential 
education seekers. This paper theoretically describes how 
Semantic Web might be used to facilitate the interaction 
between mobile devices and learners in mobile and ubiquitous 
learning environments to provide mobile learners with the best 
learning experience.    
Keywords- Mobile learning; m-learning; ubiquitous learning; u-
learning;  pervasive learning;  p-learning ;  HCI ;  semantic web. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The rapid development of wireless networks and mobile 
technologies play a vital role in extending the use of mobile 
devices for different purposes. Current mobile devices are 
able to deal almost with any kind of data, ranging from text 
to heavy streams of multimedia. Consequently, this ability to 
deal with a variety of data plays a key role in increasing the 
value of handheld devices. In addition, contemporary 
technological capabilities have encouraged the concept of 
learning through mobile devices, widely known as mobile 
learning or m-learning. They have also encouraged the 
implementation of ubiquitous computing in education, for 
example, to provide context-aware educational applications. 
These are widely referred to as ubiquitous learning (u-
learning), or pervasive learning (p-learning). Mobile device 
has been used to serve many educational purposes such as 
language learning, music education, student reminders and 
personal timetabling, work-based training and lifelong 
learning. All of these approaches are based on a different 
kind of technology of mobile handheld devices. The growth 
in the number of mobile users is rapidly increasing. It is 
estimated that there are over five billion mobile subscriptions 
around the world [1]. The unique characteristics of mobile 
devices play a role in providing new ways of learning and 
training. Indeed, these characteristics facilitate the delivery 
of knowledge to nomadic learners who live remotely or are 
unable to attend classroom-based learning. Five major 
characteristics of mobile devices have been identified as (i) 
portability, mobile devices can be transported with the user 
and used anywhere at any time as a result of their small size 
and weight (ii) social interactivity, mobile devices can 
facilitate any aspect of communication for individuals 
exchanging data, including voice messages which helps 
friends stay in contact(iii) context sensitivity, mobile devices 
can interact with contextual information from their current 
location which  can be achieved by using many integrated 
sensing technologies(iv) connectivity, mobile devices can be 
connected with other devices, data collection tools and 
ordinary networks (v) individuality, mobile devices can 
provide contents that can be personalised to meet individual 
requirements and conditions [2,3]. Despite the physical 
constraints of mobile devices, much research has been 
undertaken which considers the value of this technology in 
the context of the learners’ mobility. However, most of these 
research efforts rely on the bounded group of databases in 
which learners can obtain preloaded learning materials. 
These approaches may have some limitations, such as lack of 
interoperability, scalability, which might make these 
applications limited to specific predetermined restricted 
information. With the current deluge of information from 
disparate resources, a mechanism needs to be developed to 
provide personal information. This mechanism is needed to 
overcome the mobile devices constraints.  Recently, the most 
promising technology to overcome some of these inherent 
mobile device limitations is the Semantic Web [2,4]. The 
Semantic Web consists of a group of technologies and 
standards that facilitate the sharing, organisation, integration, 
matching and reusing of information automatically. These 
facilitations can be justified by looking at the abilities of the 
Semantic Web, in which it provides different methods to 
describe the information to allow the machine to understand 
it [5, 6].This description allows the machine to automatically 
acquire, reuse, evolve and combine knowledge. In this way, 
the Semantic Web can provide “a framework where the 
actual integration details of “mash-ups” can be worked out 
automatically rather than by a programmer”  [2].  
Many studies have shown the benefits of combining the 
technology of the Semantic Web with mobile and ubiquitous 
computing. However, there has been little research to 
determine what mobile learners really need from Semantic 
Web technology. In other words, how can the Semantic Web 
help facilitate the interaction between mobile devices and 
learners in m-learning and u-learning environments. This 
paper theoretically describes how the Semantic Web can be 
used to enhance better interaction between mobile devices 
and learners in both environments.  
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

In this paper the first five sections provide necessary 
fundamental information pertaining to its issues to increase 
the understanding. Section II briefly describes the concept of 
ubiquitous computing. Section III explains the difference 
between the context and the situation. Section IV highlights 
the major activities of mobile learners. Section V briefly 
explains the concept of the Semantic Web along with 
highlighting two of the core elements of the Semantic Web, 
namely Resource Description Framework (RDF) and 
ontology. Section VI describes the concept of linked data as 
a practicable implementation of the Semantic Web and also 
discusses the difference between Web of documents and 
Web of linked data. Finally, Section VII theoretically 
highlights the implications of the Semantic Web in 
facilitating Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) in M-
learning and U-learning environments. 
II. 
UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING 
The concept of ubiquitous computing was originally 
introduced by Weiser: “the most profound technologies are 
those that disappear. They weave themselves into the fabric 
of everyday life until they are indistinguishable from it” [7]. 
He clearly describes ubiquitous computing as a phenomenon 
that takes into account the natural human environment and 
allows the computer itself to fade into the background [8]. 
Moreover, his vision refers to the collaborative or collective 
use of computer devices that might be embedded in a 
specific predetermined physical environment, thereby 
allowing users to interact invisibly with them. The main aim 
of this idea is to create an environment in which the 
connectivity of devices is embedded in such a way that it is 
unobtrusive and always available. Weiser’s vision involves 
introducing computers into people’s lives, that is, putting 
computers into a daily living environment instead of 
representing the everyday environment in the computer [9]. 
When computing becomes ubiquitous, learning may become 
more active and contextual. Moreover, the direct interaction 
between learners and computers is improved by helping 
learners focus more on the task itself rather than on how the 
task is performed. 
III. 
CONTEXT AND SITUATION 
Understanding the context of the entities involved in an 
applied ubiquitous application is the most important 
component of ubiquitous computing which provides learners 
with suitable information. The concept of context can be 
considered differently based on many factors such as the 
circumstance and the intended objectives of the designed 
application. The consideration of what can be regarded as 
context varies from one application to another. However, the 
useful definition of context was defined by Dey: “Context is 
any information that can be used to characterise the situation 
of an entity. An entity is a person, place, or object that is 
considered relevant to the interaction between a user and an 
application, including the user and applications themselves” 
[10]. Considering the context in this way could play an 
important role in increasing the intelligence of the interaction 
between computers and humans, which helps users to focus 
more on performing the intended task to a higher level. Each 
context-aware application is pre-programmed to collect only 
the 
contextual 
information 
needed, 
using 
sensing 
technologies (e.g. Global Positioning System (GPS), 
sensors, Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID), etc.) to 
determine the situation applicable to the current entity. In 
[10], the situation is defined as “a description of the states of 
relevant entities”. Therefore, the relationship between 
context and situation in the ubiquitous environment relates to 
the group of contextual information affecting the intended 
entity that leads to an understanding of the situation. 
IV. 
MAJOR ACTIVITIES OF MOBILE USERS 
Mobile devices are used for many purposes, however in 
this paper two of the major usages of mobile devices by 
users on the move are considered. This is based on the 
scenario in which users use their mobile devices to retrieve 
required information from different resources. These two 
activities are specifically mentioned to draw attention to the 
importance of implementing the Semantic Web [6, 11].  
A. Searching 
As mentioned, mobile devices suffer from many 
limitations. One of these limitations is small screen size. This 
may prevent users interacting with mobile devices for a long 
time, especially for reading. Using the internet to search for 
information for mobile users using search engines is a very 
difficult task. To clarify this, consider a situation in which a 
user wants to find information about the term ‘orange’, but 
with specific reference to the fruit, using the Google search 
engine for example.  
Unfortunately, the number of returned results is about 
1,380,000,000. Most importantly, the returned results will 
not be accurate, as they contain information about any page 
that contains the ‘orange’ term, which could refer to Orange, 
the company; the place named Orange; or the fruit itself.  
There are many problems associated with this method of 
finding information, known as keyword-based search, 
because it only searches the documents that contain the given 
keyword. Mobile users need to spend time to find out the 
required results, which is not an easy task to do. 
B. Data Integration 
The location of mobile users can be specified through the 
utilisation of integrated sensing technologies of mobile 
devices. For instance, it is possible to build a mobile 
application that can send the coordination of mobile devices 
using integrated GPS technology to locate the user. Many 
sensing technologies have been utilised to provide the 
mobile user with the right information based on their current 
context. This is one of the fundamental goals of ubiquitous 
computing.  
To clarify the data integration problem, consider that a 
user wants to find the closest restaurant to his current 
location. Many applications can provide this information. 
However, what if he wanted to find a review of this 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

particular restaurant, or if one of his friends had visited it 
before, or if he wanted to compare the menus of selected 
restaurants.  
Problems arise in this scenario because of the need for 
automatic information integration. Furthermore, retrieved 
information is merely one single page without any intelligent 
relation between information from different sources. Indeed, 
to conduct this kind of information integration manually is a 
somewhat boring and difficult task, especially for mobile 
users.  
V. 
SEMANTIC WEB 
One of the drawbacks of the Web is that it is only 
understandable by humans. Machines cannot understand the 
Web as humans can [5]. Machines deal with the Web as a 
group of connected documents using Hypertext Transfer 
Protocol (HTTP) links. The Web is built for human 
consumption. Therefore, it is difficult to automate the 
integration of information from different resources as well as 
obtaining accurate results when searching the internet using 
keyword-based tools [12]. As mentioned previously, the 
problems encountered in mobile search and data integration 
can be resolved extensively if the resources were 
semantically annotated.  
The term of Semantic Web was originally introduced by 
Tim Berners-Lee: "an extension of the current Web in which 
information is given a well-defined meaning, better enabling 
computers and people to work in cooperation” [5]. The 
Semantic Web provides ways of describing information so as 
to be understandable and readable by machines. The 
Semantic Web aims to allow the seamless interoperability 
among applications to happen. To achieve this goal, the 
Semantic Web does not rely on text-based information, 
which can only be interpreted by humans, but rather it relies 
on structured formats, which can be interpreted by machine. 
This format is presented by RDF.  
Using RDF allows for any piece of information to be 
described or expressed in such a way that it is structured 
enough to processed by machines automatically. The abstract 
module of RDF contains three basic elements (Subject, 
Predicate, Object), whereby each element has its own unique 
identifier in the form of an HTTP Uniform Resource 
Identifier (URI). There are many benefits to using URI as an 
identifier for each element of RDF. Firstly, it helps to avoid 
semantic ambiguity. For instance, consider a situation where 
users are asked to write a review about a restaurant called 
‘food for you’. When people review it, it is quite possible 
that different reviewers may use different names for the same 
restaurant such as ‘food 4 you’; or it might be named 
differently in another documents. Therefore, it will be 
impossible to aggregate the reviews about this restaurant 
without using URI as a unique identifier. Secondly, the 
resources will be reachable and globally accessed.  
Besides using explicit metadata presented by RDF, 
ontology is a core element of the Semantic Web. Kalfoglou 
defined ontologies as follows 
[13]: “…an explicit 
representation of a shared understanding of the important 
concepts in some domain of interest. The role of ontology is 
to support knowledge sharing and reuse within and among 
groups of agents (people, software programs, or both). In 
their computational form, ontologies are often comprised by 
definitions of terms organized in a hierarchy lattice along 
with a set of relationships that hold among these definitions. 
These constructs collectively impose a structure on the 
domain being represented and constrain the possible 
interpretations of terms”. This definition highlights the 
usefulness of using ontologies to have a common 
understanding among different applications to build 
intelligent applications. Ontologies work as a guideline or 
blueprint that provides vocabularies and taxonomical 
conceptual hierarchies. Furthermore, the ontology provides a 
logical statement which clarifies the meaning of terms and 
how these terms are related to each other. The benefits of 
ontologies can be summarised  [6, 11]:  
      Firstly, ontology is domain based, which can be any 
domain, such as education, meaning that it provides the 
description for a specific area of knowledge, so it can be 
reused in many applications to represent this area. Secondly, 
ontology facilitates the interoperability and the sharing of 
understanding among different applications. This can be 
done by mapping the ontologies with each other. In this way, 
the collaborative use of ontologies allows them to extend 
each other to infer new knowledge. Finally, ontological 
description language allows for the encoding of knowledge 
in machine understandable format. Consequently, this plays 
a key role in extending the possibility of automatic wide 
scale machine processing. 
VI. 
LINKED DATA 
Linked data refers to the best practice of publishing 
structured data on the Web and linking them together to 
obtain new knowledge from different resources [14]. These 
sets of structured data are published in such a way that it is 
machine readable. The meanings of these datasets are 
explicitly defined, which allows them to be linked with each 
other forming what is known as the Web of linked data [6, 
15]. These structured data sets are independently available, 
meaning that it is not required to visit a particular website to 
be able to use them. Linked data is a collection of RDFs. 
Each RDF identified by HTTP URI. Each HTTP URI 
uniquely represents the resource which can be anything, such 
as person, event, place, etc.  
The linked data principle was shaped by Tim Berners-Lee 
as a step towards achieving the goal of the practical 
implementation of the Semantic Web. This goal is not only 
about giving a description of data using RDF, but also about 
linking available data to build relationships between them to 
facilitate the acquiring of new knowledge from different 
external or internal resources as mentioned before. The 
common feature between the Semantic Web and linked data 
is that both are based on machine readable data which is 
made to be understood by a machine. However, confusions 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

sometimes arise because of the differences between the Web 
of linked data and the current Web which is called the Web 
of documents. There are many differences between them, 
and four will be outlined [6, 12, 14, 15]. 
A. Freedom of publishing 
In both Web of documents and Web of linked data, users 
are not restricted in the type of resources they publish. 
Neither are they restricted by time or location However, in 
the Web of documents, the published documents can be 
understood by humans and the integration of data is 
performed manually. However, in the Web of linked data, 
the published documents are in the form of RDF documents 
to be consumed by machines, not humans. This allows the 
machine to automatically and actively provide the users with 
the information they need without relying on the text-based 
type of search which leads to retrievals of lots of irrelevant 
results. Furthermore, it allows it to intelligently integrate the 
knowledge based on users’ needs from different resources.   
B. Accessibility of resources 
Both of them offer ways of accessing the intended Web 
resources using Web browsers. However, in the Web of 
documents a browser can understand HTML documents. In 
contrast, the Web of linked data uses a browser that can 
understand the RDF documents.  
C. Everything on the Web is linked together 
This applies to both of them; however the Web of 
documents makes use of HTTP Uniform Resource Locator 
(URL) to identify the page on the Web. Using HTTP URL 
allows access to a resource which can be directly retrieved. 
For instance, we can type any URL to retrieve any personal 
website directly. However, the same URL cannot be used to 
retrieve the person who owns a particular website. In 
contrast, the Web of linked data makes use of HTTP URI to 
retrieve any resource from the Web. For instance, in the 
previous mentioned example, it is possible to assign the 
unique URI identifier to reach the person on the Web. To 
clarify this point, the Web of document uses un-typed 
hyperlinks, whereas the Web of linked data uses typed links 
which can directly denote any resource on the Web. 
D. Both can provide structured data 
Prior to the introduction of the linked data principle, 
although the access to databases through Web Application 
Programming Interface (API) was provided by many major 
Web data sources such as Google, setting hyperlinks 
between data forms different to Web APIs resources was 
possible. However, it has some drawbacks and may lack 
scalability. For instance, each Web API relies on different 
recognition mechanisms and varieties of access mechanisms, 
and it may also have its own way of representing the 
retrieved data in different formats. These issues divided the 
Web into different data soils, which might prevent a 
developer from being able to build applications to retrieve 
data from different data sets provided by different vendors 
on the Web. This collective use of API is called mashups. In 
contrast, in Web of linked data, the mashup is based on the 
semantic meaning of the explicitly provided definition of the 
thing and as such it called semantic mashups. Here, datasets 
interact with each other which allows for the building of 
more scalable applications which do not rely on bounded 
groups of data bases.  
VII. 
DISCUSSION 
It is important to clarify one point as a contextual prelude 
to considering how the Semantic Web might enhance or 
facilitate the interaction between learners and mobile devices 
in mobile and ubiquitous learning environments. In our 
previous work [16], we clarified why understanding the 
nature of interaction between the learner and mobile devices 
in m-learning and u-learning environments is crucial. It plays 
a significant role in drawing attention to the needs of mobile 
learners, the entity of essential importance in these two 
learning environments. The key issue which needs to be 
addressed before designing any application is the analysis of 
learners’ characteristics. All types of learner should be taken 
into account, including children, adults and elderly users, 
especially those who do not consider mobile technologies as 
useful tools for learning or training, or are inexperienced in 
their use. In an m-learning environment the learner needs to 
interact directly with the small screen of a mobile device. 
This interaction is called explicit human computer 
interaction (eHCI) [3]. In this case, the learner is required to 
explicitly provide necessary details to interact with m-
learning applications (for example user name, password, 
etc.). Consequently, the interaction that best distinguishes m-
learning applications is eHCI. In contrast, u-learning 
environment makes use of eHCI and implicit HCI (iHCI), 
which is defined as “the interaction of a human with the 
environment and with artefacts which is aimed at 
accomplishing a goal. Within this process the system 
acquires implicit input from the user and may present 
implicit output to the user” [17]. U-learning applications first 
collect contextual information about many relevant elements 
for the interaction, such as learner identity, location and 
environment to understand the context of the learner. This 
collected contextual information is worked as ‘implicit 
inputs’ which is used for the implicit interaction with 
learners. Then learners can interact with u-learning, 
explicitly eHCI, which will be continually enhanced by the 
implicit HCI (iHCI). In the following points, the value of the 
Semantic Web in enhancing the interaction between mobile 
devices and learners in both m-learning and u-learning is 
explored. There are many values for such a combination 
from different perspectives. However, for the purpose of this 
paper, the problems of learners are considered to be based on 
Figure 1. The interactions between learners and mobile devices in m-learning 
and u-learning environment [16].  
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

the aspects of interaction with mobile devices. 
A. Implications of Semantic Web in facilitating eHCI in M-
learning environment 
In the m-learning environment, the interaction with the 
small screen of mobile devices might be a very difficult task 
for mobile learners. As the mobility of learners increases, the 
need to access information on the move also increases. As 
mentioned, a keyword-based kind of search is an obstacle. It 
makes the obtaining of information a very tedious process. 
Furthermore, it forces the learner to spend much time 
interacting with a mobile device to find the desired 
information. Likewise, the restricted group of m-learning 
materials which can be adaptive, based on learners needs, 
plays a role in restricting the possibility of expanding these 
learning materials despite their benefits. In other words, 
these learning materials are bounded by a restricted group of 
relational databases which need direct human intervention to 
grow. Therefore, the Semantic Web should be considered a 
response to these drawbacks.  
The Semantic Web can help machine and software 
systems to be able to automatically do many tasks ‘on behalf 
of their human users’ [2]. As mentioned before, Semantic 
Web supports the collaborative between human and machine 
toward 
obtaining 
the 
required 
information. 
This 
collaboration is much needed to enable mobile learners to 
learn on the move. The Semantic Web provides many 
benefits to overcome the problems which mobile learners 
have with the eHCI in an m-learning environment. Learners 
in this environment need to be provided with unrestricted 
adaptive learning materials that suit their profile (for 
example learning styles, time preference, proficiency level, 
etc.), and also the functionality of their mobile devices. The 
learning materials which are designed to be presented in 
powerful machines might not be suitable for mobile devices. 
The ability of the Semantic Web to describe knowledge in 
understandable formats for machines has played a role in 
increasing the automatic reasoning of knowledge. For 
instance, one of the core elements of learning is learning 
objects.  
Wiley defines the learning object as a part or element of a 
modern type of instruction, supported and enhanced by a 
computer, which are based on the object-oriented model of 
computer science [18]. Learning objects are considered to be 
small educational materials which can be readily re-used in 
different learning contexts. Therefore, teachers can benefit 
from the size of these educational materials by chunking and 
reassembling them to support individual instructional 
objectives. This can be considered as an entity of digital 
information which can be effectively delivered over channels 
such 
as 
the 
Internet 
to 
benefit 
unlimited 
users 
simultaneously.  
These learning objects can be semantically annotated. 
This annotation allows the machine to automatically link this 
learning following communally a group of agreed ontologies 
without any human intervention. Furthermore, others 
learning resources related to learning objectives can be 
linked too. Consequentially, this allows the automatic 
integration of knowledge from different resources, which 
helps mobile learners to obtain the right information which 
suits their needs directly. Indeed, the use of ontologies 
facilitates the reuse and sharing of these learning objects. 
Furthermore, it increases the accuracy of automatic searches 
for required learning materials adapted to different learners’ 
needs [19]. 
B. Implications of Semantic Web in facilitating the eHCI 
and iHCI in U-learning environment 
Two possible ways of interaction are utilised by u-
learning, namely iHCI and eHCI. Besides providing the 
learner with information which suits their profile, u-learning 
aims to provide learners with information which suits their 
current context. U-learning environments consist of a group 
of devices interacting collaboratively with each other. Their 
interaction is vanished in such a way that makes the learners 
and their tasks the central focus. This interaction involves 
different kind of information originating from different 
resources (for example user, environment, sensors, etc.). The 
problem here is that such information is varied in terms of 
the formats and language, and is not processed by machine. 
This exchanged information should be collected, shared, and 
interpreted against each other to achieve the goal of seamless 
and unobtrusive connectivity of ubiquitous environment.  
The use of the Semantic Web is essential to facilitate the 
interoperability in this heterogeneous environment. Besides 
organising the learning materials, the Semantic Web can be 
used to organise the reasoning of the collected contextual 
information [20]. Many relationships between the elements 
of u-learning heterogeneous environment can be represented 
using groups of ontologies such as learner, context, 
environment etc. Using the Semantic Web, these ontologies 
can then be mapped to each other to provide the learner with 
the needed materials based on their current situation for 
example. This allows the machine to automatically update 
the learning materials without any human intervention 
needed, meaning that learners do not need to concern 
themselves with manual data integration to fulfil their 
learning requirements. In this way the direct interaction 
between the small screen of mobile devices and learners 
might decrease which helps learners to learn in convenient 
ways.   
There are many successful examples of the combination 
of the Semantic Web with mobile devices which make the 
interactions between users and mobile more intelligent. For 
instance, in [21], the Person Matcher mobile application 
allows users to find other users which have the same interests 
in using their FOAF profiles. As the mobile user is walking 
around, the Person matcher application is thus continuously 
provided with FOAF profiles of persons in his vicinity. 
Furthermore, another good example in [22], is the COIN 
(COntext-aware INjection), which was built to make 
existing websites context-aware on-the-fly and to facilitate 
the browsing of websites in a way guided by relevant 
content.  
There are many examples of integration between mobile 
devices and linked data; the most famous example is 
DBpedia mobile, which is a location-centric DBpedia client 
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

application for mobile devices. It consists of a map view and 
a Fresnel-based Linked Data browser. The DBpedia dataset 
is taken from Wikipedia. The location dataset of DBpedia 
contains more than 300,000 locations. Most importantly, this 
dataset is linked to other datasets which enrich its location 
information. This collective use of datasets is a useful way to 
acquire knowledge from different resources. In addition, 
DBpeadia allows the user on the move to publish data about 
his location to be used by others. Indeed, linked data has 
great potential in overcoming the limitation of mobile 
devices and supporting the growth of any application which 
deals with unbounded groups of databases [23].  
VIII. CONCLUSION 
This paper has theoretically provided useful insights into 
the importance of the Semantic Web in enhancing the 
interaction between mobile learners and mobile devices in 
mobile learning (m-learning) and ubiquitous learning (u-
learning) environments. In m-learning environment, learners 
interact explicitly with mobile devices. This is called 
explicit Human-Computer Interaction (eHCI). Whereas, u-
learning makes use of the two ways of interaction: eHCI and 
implicit HCI (iHCI). Both environments suffer from some 
obstacles which might prevent learners to learn effectively. 
For instance, the explicit interaction in m-learning 
environment might be difficult for mobile learners 
especially with a small screen on a mobile device. 
Furthermore, the u-learning environment is heterogeneous 
which makes interaction between learners, mobile devices 
and environment complicated. The Semantic Web can 
address these obstacles in both environments by providing 
different methods to describe information which allows 
machine to understand it. Most importantly, this description 
allows the machine to automatically acquire, reuse, evolve 
and combine learning materials from different resources. 
Furthermore, the Semantic Web organises learning materials 
conceptually based on their meaning, which allows different 
applications to use them by acquiring them semantically 
which helps learners to use learning materials from different 
resources. Moreover, the Semantic Web plays a key role in 
facilitating the sharing of learning applications and services 
in such automated and easy ways. These learning materials 
and services can be integrated by resolving differences in 
terminology through mappings between ontologies across 
applications, thereby providing a more seamless learning 
experience. More research should be conducted to 
investigate the affordability of Semantic Web as a method to 
facilitate the interaction between mobile devices and mobile 
learners and also as a practical way to overcome the 
constraints of mobile devices.  
REFERENCES 
[1] ITU, “The World in 2010: ICT facts and figures,” 2010; 
http://www.itu.int/net/pressoffice/press_releases/2010/39.aspx     
, accessed date,10/07/2011. 
[2] O. Lassila, “Semantic Web Approach to Personal Information 
Management on Mobile Devices,” Procceding of 2th IEEE 
International Conference on Semantic Computing, 2008, pp. 601-607. 
[3] S. Poslad, Ubiquitous computing: smart devices, environments and 
interactions, John Wiley & Sons Inc, 2009. 
[4] M. Siadaty, et al., “m-LOCO: An Ontology-based Framework for 
Context-Aware 
Mobile 
Learning,” 
Procceding 
of 
the 
6th 
International Workshop on Ontologies and Semantic Web for 
Intelligent Educational Systems at 9th Internatonal Conference on 
ITS, Montreal, Canada, Citeseer, 2008. 
[5] T.B. Lee, et al., “The semantic web,” Scientific American, vol. 284, 
no. 5, 2001, pp. 34-43. 
[6] L. Yu, A Developer's Guide to the Semantic Web, Springer-Verlag 
New York Inc, 2010. 
[7] M. Weiser, “The computer for the twenty-ﬁrst century,” Scientiﬁc 
American, vol. 265, no. 3, 1991, pp. 94–104. 
[8] A.K. Dey and J. Häkkilä, “Context-Awareness and Mobile Devices,” 
User interface design and evaluation for mobile technology, vol. 1, 
2008, pp. 205-217. 
[9] S. Loke, Context-aware pervasive systems: architectures for a new 
breed of applications, Auerbach Pub, 2006. 
[10] A.K. Dey, “Understanding and using context,” Personal and 
ubiquitous computing Journal, vol. 5, no. 1, 2001, pp. 4-7. 
[11] G. Antoniou and F. Harmelen, “A Semantic Web Primer, 
(Cooperative Information Systems),” 2008. 
[12] C. Bizer, et al., “Linked data-the story so far,” Internatonal Journal 
on Semantic Web and Information System, vol. 5, no. 3, 2009, pp. 1-
22. 
[13] Y. Kalfoglou, “Exploring ontologies,” Handbook of Software 
Engineering and Knowledge Engineering, vol. 1, 2001, pp. 863-887. 
[14] T. 
Berners-Lee, 
“Linked 
Data 
- 
Design 
Issues,” 
2006; 
http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html 
, accessed date,14/07/2011. 
[15] C. Bizer, “The Emerging Web of Linked Data,” IEEE Intelligent 
Systems, , vol. 24, no. 5, 2009, pp. 87-92. 
[16] N. Aljohani, et al., “HCI as a Differentiator Between Mobile and 
Ubiquitous Learning” Fifth International Conference on Next 
Generation Mobile 
Applications, Services and Technologies 
(NGMAST), 2011 
[17] A. Schmidt, “Interactive Context-Aware Systems Interacting with 
Ambient Intelligence,” In Ambient Intelligence. G. Riva, F. Vatalaro, 
F. Davide & M. Alcañiz (Eds.), 2005. 
[18] D.A. Wiley, “Connecting learning objects to instructional design 
theory: A definition, a metaphor, and a taxonomy,” The instructional 
use of learning objects, vol. 2830, no. 435, 2000, pp. 1-35. 
[19] R. Benlamri and Z. Xiaoyun, “A Global Ontology Space for Mobile 
Learning,” Procceding of Eighth IEEE International Conference on 
Advanced Learning Technologies, 2008. ICALT '08., 2008, pp. 49-53. 
[20] A.V. Zhdanova, et al., “Semantic Web in ubiquitous mobile 
communications,” The Semantic Web for Knowledge and Data 
Management: Technologies and Practices, 2009 
[21] W. Van Woensel, et al., “Applying semantic web technology in a 
mobile setting: the person matcher,” Web Engineering, 2010, pp. 506-
509. 
[22] W. Van Woensel, et al., “A generic approach for on-the-fly adding of 
context-aware features to existing websites,” Proceedings of the 22nd 
ACM Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia (HT'11), ACM, 
2011, pp. 143-152. 
[23] C. Becker and C. Bizer, “DBpedia mobile-a location-aware semantic 
web client,” Proceedings of the Semantic Web Challenge, 2008, pp. 
13-16. 
  
 
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

