Challenges for e-Learning Environments in m-Learning Contexts 
A survey about the hardware, software, and educational dimensions 
 
André Constantino da Silva 
Institute of Computing (PG) 
UNICAMP, IFSP 
Campinas, Brazil, Hortolândia, Brazil 
acsilva@ic.unicamp.br 
 
Heloísa Vieira da Rocha 
Institute of Computing, NIED 
UNICAMP 
Campinas, Brazil 
      heloisa@ic.unicamp.br.br 
 
Abstract— e-Learning environments are applications that use 
the Web infra-structure to support teaching and learning 
activities. Their user interfaces were designed to have good 
usability using a desktop computer with keyboard and mouse 
as input devices and a high resolution medium-size display and 
speak loud as output devices. Devices, such as tablets and 
smartphones, have computational power enough to render 
Web pages, allowing mobile users navigate through the e-
Learning 
environments 
and 
closing 
the 
e-Learning 
environments to the m-Learning contexts. But to have an 
effective 
use 
in 
the 
mobile 
context, 
the 
e-Learning 
environments need to be analyzed in three dimensions: 
hardware, software, and educational. This paper presents a 
survey about works in merging e-Learning environments and 
m-Learning and discusses about challenges such hardware and 
software integration, integration between the browser and the 
environment and changes on the teaching and learning 
activities. 
Keywords-Human-Computer 
Interaction; 
Electronic 
Learning Environment; Mobile Devices; Interaction Styles. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
e-Learning environments, such as Moodle [1], SAKAI 
[2], TelEduc [3], Ae [4], are applications that use the Web 
infra-structure to support teaching and learning activities. 
The e-Learning environments are designed to support a 
variety of users and learning contexts, but they are designed 
to conventional computers, usually equipped with keyboard 
and mouse as input and a medium screen and speakers as 
output; a limited interaction style for nowadays devices. 
These modalities and the technology shape the teaching and 
learning activities done in the e-Learning environments; they 
focus on reading and writing skills. Despites these 
technology impact, the e-Learning environments need to 
have good usability, accessibility, performance, security, 
availability and other software attributes.  
Devices, such as smartphones and tablets, are becoming 
increasingly popular; most of them have touch screen 
displays, access to the Internet and enough computing power 
to process Web pages. So, Web sites and Web applications, 
initially developed to be used with keyboard, mouse and a 
medium size display, are being accessed by small 
touchscreen devices. This can be considered as another 
aspect of accessibility, so the environments´ development 
teams are building solutions to provide access on mobile 
devices, and the use of mobile devices with educational 
purposes is called m-Learning. Two motivations for m-
Learning are to allow participants interact anytime and 
anywhere with the content and with each other. 
The Internet was built to connect many technologies, so 
allowing mobile users to access e-Learning environments 
make the boundary between e-Learning and m-Learning not 
so clear. This brings some challenges for e-Learning 
environments developers and m-Learning practitioners. This 
paper presents a survey about the works to merge these 
fields. Section II presents a literature review about e-
Learning, m-Learning and e-Learning environments. Section 
III presents the three dimensions to analyze the use of e-
Learning environments to support mobile users. Section IV 
presents challenges to have an effective use of the e-
Learning environments in the m-Learning context. Section V 
presents final considerations.  
II. 
E-LEARNING AND M-LEARNING 
e-Learning refers to the use of Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICT) in education. So, e-
Learning is any distributed learning experience through the 
Internet, Intranet, Extranet, CD or DVD-ROM, because the 
e-Learning main concern is related with the teaching form 
and not with technology [5]. The e-Learning term refers 
broadly the terms Web-based learning, Internet-based 
learning, online learning, distributed learning, and computer-
based learning. e-Learning is suited to distance learning, but 
it can also be used in conjunction with face-to-face teaching, 
calling blended learning. 
Online systems that support e-Learning through the Web 
are called e-Learning environments or Virtual Learning 
Environments (VLE) or Learning Management Systems 
(LMS). Moodle [1], SAKAI [2], TelEduc [3] and Ae [4] are 
examples of e-Learning environments.  
The first e-Learning environments are designed to 
integrate the content with communication tools arranged on 
the Internet (such as chat, mail and forum). They evolved 
increasing the number of tools for content publishing, 
participant´s communication and course administration, 
taking advantages of the Web to offer content with text, 
images, audios and videos in a hypertext document. Tools 
like chat, forums, portfolios, repositories are widely used, 
and tools those explore the audio and video resource to user 
communication, such as instant messenger and video-
conferences, 
are 
becoming 
common 
among 
the 
environments. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The environments´ development teams are building 
solutions to provide access on mobile devices, and the use of 
mobile devices with educational purposes is called m-
Learning.  
m-Learning is any kind of learning that happens when the 
learner is not at a fixed, predetermined location, or learning 
that happens when the learner takes advantage of the 
learning opportunities offered by mobile technologies [6]. m-
Learning Technology includes handheld computers, MP3 
players, notebooks, mobile phones and tablets; devices that 
have owner autonomy and it is easy to portable. Two 
motivations for m-Learning is allow the participants 
interacting anytime and anywhere with the content and with 
each other.  
The recent technology forwards brings a broad of new 
applications made to support many areas, such Education. 
One of the mobile devices that are gained repercussion in 
this scenario is the Tablet PC (Tablet Personal Computer), a 
device with height as similar to a notebook and had an input 
device similar a pen. The paper and pen metaphor implies 
that tasks performed before in paper, like draw or manuscript 
writing, can be more natural in the Tablet PC than in the 
another computing devices. Resuming, the Tablet PC has the 
following hardware characteristics: (i) Pen sensitive screen; 
(ii) Screen that allows different positions; (iii) Wireless 
network access by Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) 
and bluetooth technology; (iv) Microphones and embedded 
loudspeakers; (v) Keyboard (some models the keyboard are 
detachable); (vi) Batteries. Usually, the screen size ranges 
from 9 inches to 12 inches. 
Other devices used in m-Learning are smartphones, 
which have touchscreen with computation power enough to 
render Web pages. Usually, the screen size ranges from 3 
inches to 5 inches. Resuming, the smartphones have the 
following hardware characteristics: (i) touch sensitive screen; 
(ii) Screen that allow two different positions (landscape and 
portrait); (iii) Wireless network access by WLAN (Wireless 
Local Area Network), by 3G and bluetooth technology; (iv) 
Microphones and embedded loudspeakers; (v) Virtual 
keyboard (some models have a physical keyboard); (vi) 
Batteries. 
Gay et al. [7] suggest that the introduction of wireless 
computing 
resources 
in 
learning 
environments 
can 
potentially affect the development, maintenance, and 
transformation of learning communities. 
It is possible to use e-Learning environments for support 
m-Learning and three kind of solution are emerging: i) 
specific device application; ii) web site specific for mobile 
devices; and iii) improve the web site for mobile and desktop 
access [8]. Each solution has its vantages and disadvantages 
due the hardware and software restrictions of the mobile 
device. 
Building specific device application allows designing a 
suitable user interface for the device and taking advantages 
of smartphone´s features, such as touchscreen and camera, 
but needs develop an application for each mobile platform. 
So, the applications to be developed needs specific 
knowledge programming skills and increases the code lines 
number to maintain.  Moodle community offers the Moodle 
App [9] and Moodbile [10], two native mobile applications 
with versions for the most popular smartphone´s platforms. 
Moodle, since version 2.1, offers a Web site specific to 
mobile devices, an example for the second type of solutions 
for access e-Learning environments in mobile devices. 
Building a specific Web site to mobile device allows 
designing a suitable user interface for mobile devices taking 
account 
some 
common 
characteristics, 
such 
small 
touchscreen, but depends of the browser to access some 
platform features, such GPS, and increases the code lines 
number to maintain too.  
The latter solution considers that smartphones and tablets 
have enough computational power to render Web pages and 
to do some adaptation if it is necessary, and offer the same 
user interface for any device. But the interaction styles may 
vary, so to design this kind of user interface it is necessary to 
do some usability studies to found barriers or user interaction 
problems for each interaction style. Disadvantages of this 
solution are to depend of browsers to use the mobile features 
and the difficult of consider many interaction styles in the 
same user interface. Da Silva, Freire and da Rocha [8] point 
out some problem that happen when a user interface 
designed to be used with specific interaction hardware is 
used with other interaction hardware. 
Another e-Learning environment characteristic is to be 
used in many of learning contexts, e.g., teacher training, 
undergraduate courses, and team training in all areas of 
knowledge. We call this property as learnability. But, the 
actual hardware of conventional computers increases the 
difficulty to use the environment to produce content for any 
area and support student activities, e.g., to post a mathematic 
exercise that needs write formulas to resolve, the user need 
to use a specific software and post the file since the e-
Learning environments do not support directly this kind of 
content. 
The e-Learning environments need to be usable and 
accessible for many users in many social, physical, 
technological and learning contexts. So, e-Learning 
environments need to be evaluated in the usability, 
accessibility, mobility and learnability dimensions. 
III. 
DIMENSIONS FOR ALLOWING E-LEARNING AND M-
LEARNING MERGING 
Khan [11] defines eight dimensions for a good e-
Learning 
environment: 
Resource 
Support, 
Ethical, 
Institutional, Pedagogical, Technological, Interface Design, 
Evaluation and Management. Since in our work we want to 
use e-Learning environments in m-Learning contexts, the 
Technological, 
Interface 
Design, 
and 
Pedagogical 
dimensions need to be discussed due the impact caused by 
the device changing. We will join the Technological and 
Interface Design dimensions, since there is an intrinsic 
relation between them, and our focus is on mobile users. The 
Pedagogical dimension is related about the teaching and 
learning activities developed by the teachers and done by the 
students. 
For technological dimension, we propose the e-learning 
environments needs to be evaluated about their usability, 
accessibility, mobility, and other software requirements, such 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

performance, scalability and availability. Due the diversity of 
users whom may use the e-Learning environments, these 
systems need to have good usability so that the user interface 
does not prejudice the teaching and learning activities, so the 
user interface cannot be a barrier between the student and the 
content or the users and their goals or injure the course 
activities. 
Nielsen [12] defines usability as a combination of five 
elements: easy to learning, efficient, easy to remember, low 
probability of users do mistakes and user satisfaction. 
Nielsen proposes a method for evaluating the user interface 
usability, and other methods can be found on the Human-
Computer Interaction literature [13] [14].     
Accessibility, another important requirement, is about to 
allow disabled people use the environment, and can be 
understood as to be accessed by anyone, whatever their 
hardware or software. So to have a high level of 
accessibility, a Web page needs to be accessed by computers 
or any other computational device, such the smartphones and 
Tablet PCs, which can have assistive technology installed. 
Some methods can be found to evaluate the application 
accessibility, mainly for Web pages and applications, e.g., 
evaluating the interface conformance with the W3C 
guidelines [15]. 
In the educational dimension, the teacher needs to 
dispose content, to plain activities, to ask questions of the 
students about the activities and the content, to evaluate 
activities and other tasks. Pedagogically, the teacher needs to 
select the tools to be used to dispose the content and to run 
the activities. Usually, due the e-Learning environment tools 
and the hardware used to interact, a desktop computer, the 
activities are discussions by Forums, writing individual or 
collaborative texts. The texts may have pictures, but it is 
similar as works done in presence education, where the work 
can be delivered in a printed format. This kind of work does 
not take advantages of multimedia and the hardware 
available in the mobile devices. We discuss these problems 
in the next sections as challenges for e-Learning 
environments in the mobile contexts. 
IV. 
CHALLENGES FOR E-LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS IN 
THE M-LEARNING 
About the technology issues, it is need to analyze the 
hardware and the software and, since there are a variety of 
computing devices, aspects of human-machine interaction 
(such as ergonomics) and the device characteristics need to 
be considered.  The most visible problem in browsing e-
Learning environments using mobile device is the user 
interface adaptation. One of the adaptation issues is the 
content readability. For tablets it is not a big problem, since 
it is possible render the web page without injure de 
readability; the size of the tablet´s screen is not so small 
compared to the desktop display. But, in the case of 
smartphones, the screen size is not large enough to ensure 
readability, so it is necessary to have a page adaptation or 
techniques to visualize the entire page and use zooming to 
see the page details.  
The user interface adaption is not a trivial task, a 
challenge not only for e-Learning environments, but for the 
Human-Computer Interaction, is to build system with 
adaptive user interface. Bickmore and Schilit [16] present a 
heuristic-based approach for Web page adaptations to be 
rendered in mobile devices with small screens, but their work 
does not consider audio and video adaptation. Zhang [17] 
purposes a framework to do content adaptation for systems 
accessed by a sort of devices (multidevices), increasing 
accessibility and doing a distribution optimization over the 
network. Oliveira and da Rocha [18] purpose priorities for 
consistence in the adaptation to maintain the same 
conceptual model for mutidevices, whom done a study case 
over an e-learning environment. Pyla et al. [19] discuss 
about the task migration between devices: the user starts the 
task in one device, go to another one to perform some sub-
task, and change the device until the task be done.  
But, Web applications should consider the Web 
architecture model, i.e., the client-server, to have a better 
adaptation. Client is responsible to render the user interface 
through a browser. It is in the client side that the user 
interacts with the system using input and output hardware. 
The server is responsible to process client´s requests and data 
persistence, but it knows few about the input and output 
devices in client side. Since the server is responsible to 
produce the user interface code to be displayed on the client, 
the server needs to know about the user device, the user 
location and user preferences to do a better adaptation. The 
generated interface needs to have good usability. 
For example, smartphones are good to read and write 
small texts, such as post-it notes. The tablet with touchscreen 
allows users have mobility and a good readability, but it is 
not so efficient to write texts. The tablets equipped with pen 
sensitive screen should be used to write formulas or do 
sketches, instead of only as a pointing device. Da Silva and 
da Rocha [20] propose the InkBlog tool, a blog tool that 
receives input data from stylus in a pen sensitive tablet so 
that the user can handwriting her posts (Fig. 1a). 
The InkBlog is a tool for the Ae e-Learning environment, 
and take advantages of the Pen-based computing to allow 
users interact with the e-Learning environment with a pen. 
The authors comment that using the InkBlog is possible a 
better support to disciplines such Graph Theory and 
Computer Theory. Without the InkBlog, the user needs to 
use paper and pencil to resolve an exercise and use specific 
hardware, such scanner, to digitalize the solution. Or the user 
needs to use a special application to draw a graph. In both 
solutions, the user posts the picture as an attached file in 
weblog post. Using the InkBlog the user can sketch the graph 
direct on the weblog tool through direct manipulation (Fig. 
1b). InkBlog was tested in iPhone (Fig. 2) and Android 
devices using the stock browser in each device. Both devices 
display correct the posts, but due the platform does not 
distinguish between touch and stylus press, it is not possible 
to handwrite a post in these smartphones; both devices 
recognize the input as page scrolling. This is another 
challenge, the web pages depends on the browser, because 
the browser is responsible to the capture of the user input and 
the page rendering. So, the hardware and the browser needs 
be more integrated to enhance the Web application. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

In the case of use e-Learning environments on mobile 
devices, is important to study the interaction problems that 
happen, since the actual environments was designed to be 
used in a desktop computer, and mobile phones have other 
interaction devices. da Silva, Freire, Arruda and da Rocha 
[21] present some problems when the users uses an mobile 
phone to interact with the Teleduc environment using an 
Android-based mobile device and a iPhone. Da Silva, Freire 
and da Rocha [8] present some problems when user uses an 
android-based smartphone and a Tablet PCs. They present a 
taxonomy about the interaction problems: cross-platform 
problem, cross-modality problem and platform and modality- 
independent problem. These problems are barriers or 
difficulties to the user navigate thought the environment. So 
one challenge is identify these problems and correct.  
The environments need to have good usability and 
accessibility, but the content created inside the environments 
needs to. Since the environments are used by a diversity of 
people, most of them do not have knowledge about Web 
accessibility, they can create content with low accessibility 
in mobile devices. Fig. 3 shows an agenda on a course in 
TelEduc created by the teacher to describe about the topics 
and activities to be done in a week. Some problems when the 
agenda is rendered in iPhone (b) can be viewed with 
compared with the desktop computer (a). So, another 
challenge is to develop authoring tools that easily create 
accessible contents and to develop features to allow the 
mobile users to visualize the published content [22].    
Allowing access by mobile devices is not the only 
challenge to facing it. The mobile devices have specific 
hardware that can be used to produce content and to use to 
interact with the environment. The camera can be used to 
take photos or do videos and the microphone can be used to 
create audio files to be published by the teacher or by the 
students as content in the e-Learning environment. To allow 
this it is necessary to have a better integration between the 
mobile hardware, the browser and the environment to easily 
allow users create content using camera, microphone or any 
other input device. These devices can too be used as 
communication if integrated with communication software. 
The actual versions of e-Learning environments only dispose 
an action button that trigger a dialog box where the user can 
choose the photo or video he want upload. Depending on the 
solution adopted to integrate the environment in the mobile 
device, it is possible to turn the publishing task easier. In the 
case of a specific device application it is possible to 
customize the mobile Operation System and include sharing 
option in the photo and video gallery, similar as Facebook 
app does (Fig. 4). So, the mobile user has options to publish 
the media in her virtual space on the e-learning environment, 
like a Portfolio item on TelEduc environment, or a resource 
item on SAKAI and Ae. 
The TelEduc e-Learning environment has a notification 
tool that send e-mails for the course participants describing 
what happen since the last logging. This feature could be 
integrated with the mobile device advisor management 
system. So one more challenge is identify e-Learning 
features that can be integrated with mobile devices features. 
The e-Learning environment has data about the course 
participants, whom can be added on the mobile device 
  
Figure 2. InkBlog rendered by stock browser on iPhone. 
     
 
 
 
(a)  
(b) 
Figure 1. Using InkBlog to (a) handwriting a post and (b) to share a solution for an exercise about Graph Theory. Both pages rendered by Chrome 
Browser. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Contacts tool to turn easily sent messages between the 
participants. Another one feature is synchronizes the 
activities deadline or important dates to the mobile device´s 
Calendar tool. 
Allowing student to create multimedia content in 
activities, the teacher needs to select the best media or a set 
of them to planning the activities. The student´s works not 
need be more only texts, allowing them to produce videos, 
audios, photos or a multimedia work. If the teachers allow 
user to use the mobile phone, it is important elaborate 
activities that explore the mobile hardware, such take photos, 
make videos or record an audio. The student can write some 
text too, but it is important notice (and this is must be clear 
on the activity) that usually it is not expected a small texts 
for student´s activities; since writing on smartphones can be 
a difficult task, the teacher must specify how long the text 
must be. This perception impacts on the pedagogical use of 
the e-learning environment. 
The actual user interface design techniques take account 
just a limit set of input and output hardware, limited to the 
context, such as techniques to design user interface for 
desktop or for mobile platforms. But, there is a lot of input or 
output hardware in these devices and these techniques are 
asked to consider all of them. Some input and output devices 
are: touchscreen, microphones, pen sensitive screen, 
touchpad, 
TrackPoint, 
accelerometers, 
joysticks, 
loudspeakers, small screen, large screen, printers, etc. One 
solution to deal with this variety of devices is use multimodal 
techniques on the e-Learning environment´s user interface. 
Multimodal interaction is a research proposal to turn the 
interaction between humans and machines more natural, i.e., 
more close to the interactions between two humans, and have 
the benefits to increase the usability, flexibility and 
convenience [23]. According to Oviatt [24] “multimodal 
interfaces process two or more combined user input modes 
(such as speech, pen, touch, manual gesture, gaze, and head 
and body movements) in a coordinated manner with 
multimedia system output”. But, developing multimodal 
interaction systems is a complex task [25]; da Silva and da 
Rocha propose the |Ae| environment, an e-Learning 
environment with multimodal user interface, discuss how 
multimodal architecture changes the e-Learning environment 
architecture. Despite these works, the challenge is to have an 
e-Learning environment to deal with the variety of input and 
output modes in the device, using it in a proper way. 
V. 
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS 
e-Learning is the use of the Web structure to support 
teaching and learning activities. There is some Web-based 
software, the e-Learning environments, which support these 
activities in courses.  Due the technology development, it is 
possible to use mobile devices to teaching and learning 
activities, calling m-Learning. The mobile devices can access 
e-Learning platform, but to an effective course accessed by 
mobile devices it is necessary that the e-Learning does not 
have barriers or difficulties for the mobile devices, and the 
content and activities must be shaped to consider the mobile 
devices and their hardware, such camera and microphone.  
We believe that e-Learning and m-Learning will merge 
in the case of have an environment to support the teaching 
and learning activities and brings benefices on learning. But 
to plain an effective course, it is important to consider the 
hardware and software that the students will used. So, the 
technology needs to be considered in the instructional design 
process, together with the educational issues. Future works 
are detail each part of these dimensions. 
 
 
Figure 4. The integration between iPhone´s Photo Gallery and 
Facebook App. 
     
 
 
(a)  
(b) 
Figure 3. A content created by a user in TelEduc with accessibility problems displayed on desktop computers (a) and on a mobile device (b). 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank the CAPES and CNPq for financial 
support and for FAPESP through TIDIA-Ae Project (n. 
05/60572-1), which provided the equipment. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Moodle Trust, “Moodle.org: open-source community-based 
tools for learning,” Available at <http://moodle.org>. 
[retrieved: Jul. 2013] 
[2] SAKAI Environment, “Sakai Project | collaboration and 
learning - for educators by educators,” available at 
<http://sakaiproject.org>. [retrieved: Jul. 2013] 
[3] TelEduc Environment, “TelEduc Ensino à Distância,” 
available at <http://www.teleduc.org.br>. [retrieved: Jul. 
2013] 
[4] Ae Project. “Ae - Aprendizado Eletrônico Environment,” 
available at <http://tidia-ae.iv.org.br/>. [retrieved: Jul. 2013] 
[5] J. R. Lima and Z. Capitão, e-Learning e e-Conteúdos, 
Portugal: Inova, 2003. 
[6] M. Sung, J. Gips, N. Eagle, A. Madan, R. Caneel, et al., 
“Mobile-IT Education (MIT. EDU): m-learning applications 
for classroom settings,” in Journal of Computer Assisted 
Learning, vol. 21, May 2005, pp. 229–237. 
[7] G. Gay, M. Stefanone, M. Grace-Martin, and H. Hembrooke, 
“The effects of wireless computing in collaborative learning 
environments,” in International Journal of Human–Computer 
Interaction, vol. 13, n. 2, 2001, pp. 257–276, doi: 
10.1207/S15327590IJHC1302_10. 
[8] A. C. da Silva, F. M. P. Freire, and H. V. da Rocha, 
“Identifying Cross-Platform and Cross-Modality Interaction 
Problems in e-Learning Environments,” Proc. of the 6th 
International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human 
Interactions (ACHI 2013), IARIA, Feb. 2013, pp. 243-249.  
[9] Moodle 
Trust, 
“Moodle 
App,” 
available 
at: 
<http://docs.moodle .org/dev/Mobile_app>. [retrieved: Jul. 
2013]. 
[10] M. J. Casany, M. Alier, E. Mayol, J. Piguillem, N. Galanis, et 
al., “Extending Moodle Services to Mobile Devices: The 
Moodbile Project,” Proc. of the 6th International Conference 
on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and 
Technologies (UBICOMM 2012), IARIA, Sep. 2012, pp. 24-
28. 
[11] B. H. Khan, “A framework for Web-based learning,” in Web-
based training, B. H. Khan, Ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Educational Technology Publications, 2001, pp. 75-98. 
[12] J. Nielsen, Usability Engineering, EUA: Morgan Kaufmann, 
1993, 362 p. 
[13] M. G. Helander, T. K. Laundauer, and P. V. Prabhu (Editors), 
Handbook of Human-Computer Interaction, Amsterdam, 
Elsevier Science B. V., 1997. 
[14] J. Rubin, Handbook of Usability Testing: How to Plan, 
Design and Conduct Effective Tests, New York: John Wiley 
& Sons, 1994, 330 p. 
[15] W3C, “Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 
Overview,” available at: <http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG/>. 
[retrieved: Jul. 2013] 
[16] T. W. Bickmore and B. N. Schilit, “DIGESTOR: Device-
independent Access to the World Wide Web,” Proc. of 6th  
International World Wide Web Conference, Elsevier Science 
Publishers 
Ltd., 
Sep. 
1997, 
pp. 
1075-1082, 
doi: 
10.1016/S0169-7552(97)00026-3. 
[17] H. Zhang, “Adaptive Content Delivery: A New Research 
Area in Media Computing,” Keynote Speech on Proc. of the 
2000 International Workshop on Multimedia Data Storage, 
Retrieval, Integration and Applications, Jan. 2000. Available 
at: <http://research.microsoft.com/apps/pubs/default.aspx?id= 
68791 >. [retrieved: Jul. 2013] 
[18] R. Oliveira and H. V. da Rocha, “Consistency Priorities for 
Multi-device Design,” Proc. of 11th IFIP TC 13 International 
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction (INTERACT), 
Springer-Verlag, Sep. 2007. pp. 426-429. 
[19] P. Pyla, M. Tungare, and M. Perez-Quiñones, “Multiple user 
Interfaces: Why consistency is not everything, and seamless 
task migration is key,” Proc. of CHI 06 Workshop on the 
Many Faces of Consistency in Cross-platform Design, vol. 
24, CEUR-WS, Apr. 2006. pp. 55-60. 
[20] A. C. da Silva and H. V. da Rocha, “InkBlog: A Pen-Based 
Blog Tool for e-Learning Environments,” in Bridging 
Disciplinary Boundaries: Issues in Informing Science and 
Information Technology, vol. 10, May 2013, pp. 121-135. 
ISBN: 1932886699. 
[21] A. C. da Silva, F. M. P. Freire, A. V. P. de Arruda, and H. V. 
da Rocha, “Interaction Problems Accessing e-Learning 
Environments in Multi-touch Mobile Devices: a case study in 
TelEduc,” Proc. of the 7th International IADIS Conference on 
e-Learning, IADIS Press, Jul. 2013, pp. 199-206. 
[22] A. C. da Silva and H. V. da Rocha, “Improving TelEduc 
Environment With GPL Software: The Visualization Content 
Case for Computers and Mobile Devices,” Proc. of the 6th 
International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, 
Systems, Services and Technologies (UBICOMM 2012), 
IARIA, Sep. 2012, pp. 222-227. 
[23] D. Lalanne, L. Nigay, P. Palanque, P. Robinson, J. 
Vanderdonckt, et al., “Fusion Engine for Multimodal Input: A 
Survey,” Proc. of the 11th International Conference on 
Multimodal Interfaces (ICMI-MLMI´09), ACM Press, Nov. 
2009, pp. 153-160, doi: 10.1145/1647314.1647343. 
[24] S. L. Oviatt, “Advances in Robust Multimodal Interface 
Design,” in   IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, vol. 
23, 
n. 
5, 
Sep. 
2003, 
pp. 
62-68, 
doi: 
10.1109/MCG.2003.1231179.  
[25] B. Dumas, D. Lalanne, and S. Oviatt, “Multimodal Interfaces: 
A Survey of Principles, Models and Frameworks,” in Human-
Machine Interaction, D. Lalanne and J. Kohlas, Eds.  Berlin: 
Springer Berlin/Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 3-26, doi: 10.1007/978-
3-642-00437-7_1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

