Treating Context Information in a Ubiquitous Virtual Learning Environment 
(UVLEQoC) 
Application of metrics for Quality of Context (QoC) 
 
Felipe Becker Nunes, Gleizer Bierhalz Voss, Andreia Rosangela Kessler Mühlbeier, Fabricio Herpich, Roseclea 
Duarte Medina 
PPGI - Post graduation Program in Informatics 
Federal University of Santa Maria (UFSM) 
Santa Maria, RS 
(nunesfb, gleizer.voss, dehiamuhlbeier, fabricio.herpich, roseclea.medina) @gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—Context 
information 
captured 
by 
computer 
applications, assists in characterizing the momentary situation 
in which the user is located. However, during this construction 
process it must be taken into account not only the context that 
is used, but also the Quality of the Context (QOC) to be 
supplied in order to provide a real contribution to user 
interaction with the environment. This paper presents a study 
on the development of a ubiquitous virtual learning 
environment (UVLEQoC), which performs the processing of 
context information by applying metrics of Quality of Context. 
The environment also integrates two systems:  U-SEA to treat 
computational context and  SEDECA to identify the cognitive 
profile of the user, adapting the contents and tools of the 
environment according to the formulated context. The 
environment will provide a context to guarantee a minimum 
level of quality, adapting their resources according to the 
preferences of the users. 
Keywords- context; quality of context; ubiquitous; moodle 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Given this global scenario that is constantly evolving, it 
is possible to notice  changes in several areas; among them is 
the education, in which there was a paradigm shift from 
traditional learning, exclusively in face-to-face classrooms, 
with the addition of on line tasks. The use of Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICTs) provided the insertion 
of new methods and learning techniques, which aim to help 
users interact with computer applications. 
Ubiquitous computing is an example of an emerging 
area, which, according to Yahya et al. [1], can be described 
as a learning paradigm that uses ubiquitous computing 
environments and allows learning to occur "anywhere and 
anytime". Thus, students have at their disposal in the most 
propitious time, content suitable for their learning, taking 
into account the location and context in which it is inserted. 
One of the key aspects that are directly linked to 
ubiquitous computing is context information, which, 
according to Dey [2], can be defined as any information that 
can be used to characterize the situation of entities that are 
considered relevant to the interaction between a user and an 
application. The origin of this information may come from 
various sources, such as the analysis of users' cognitive styles 
on the environment and the speed of the network connection. 
Examples of computer applications that use context 
information are the Virtual Learning Environments (VLE), 
which have been adapted to suit the needs of users, as seen in 
the work of [3] and [4]. However, the context used in these 
environments are subject to imperfections as explained in 
[5], wherein the context information have a high probability 
of defect or inconsistency caused by inaccuracies in the 
acquisition and maintenance of context. 
This difficulty may reflect in providing a situation out of 
date with respect to the current moment the user is located, 
committing to provide a proper context for the user by the 
application, thus hindering its interaction with the tool to 
perform activities. Subarea Quality of Context aims to 
address this issue, which, according to Krause e Hochstatter 
[6], can be defined as any information describing the 
situation of an entity, i.e., its context, and that can be used to 
determine the value of information for a specific application. 
Thus, the QoC aids for the final result presented by the tool 
reflect more realistically as possible the situation where the 
user is located. 
This paper presents a proposal for the development of a 
ubiquitous virtual learning environment called UVLEQoC, 
which aims to treat the context information by applying 
metrics of Quality of Context. The environment will 
integrate two systems: U-SEA and SEDECA, thus will be 
captured the context information about connection speed and 
type of cognitive profile of the user. The information 
captured pass through an evaluation process, only selecting 
those who achieve a minimum percentage of confidence, in 
order to adapt the resources and tools of the environment 
according to the situation of the user. 
The structure of the paper is organized as follows: in 
section one, an introduction about ubiquitous computing, 
context and quality of context, the problems in these areas 
and the proposed work is presented. Section two presents the 
related work in the area of QOC. Section three  the 
functioning environment, its goals and advantages. Finally, 
section four presents a conclusion and future work. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

II. 
RELATED WORK 
To assist the course of this study, some related works 
were evaluated, and are described following: 
Yasar 
et 
al. 
[7] 
aimed 
to 
provide 
efficient 
communications for the established network; for this 
proposal, the communication was divided into two phases: 
the first is focused exclusively on QOC, while the second 
aims to determine the reputation of the nodes involved in the 
communication. Their contributions are the definitions of 
information acceptable limits, in order to ensure a minimum 
quality, eliminating those that are not within these standards. 
In [8], a context-sensitive framework that supports 
management of QOC in several layers is presented. The 
authors compared the probabilities of the context to be valid 
using different analysis algorithms, such as the selection of 
the newest and largest service relativity. The framework 
allows to evaluate the context in its raw form, discarding 
those that are duplicated or inconsistent to provide context 
information with an acceptable level of quality for 
applications.  
The work of [4] examines the conflicts that can be 
generated in gathering information to support decisions of 
adaptive applications. The authors explain that the QOC 
parameters can be used to perform these tasks, seeking to 
resolve internal and external conflicts based on two 
indicators: the probability of correctness and reliability. 
The solutions presented above cover various application 
domains, such as networks of nodes and vehicular service 
selection, while this proposal is focused in education, with 
the use of virtual learning environments. The application of 
metrics of QoC in the information captured on the ubiquitous 
environment, seeking to enhance the quality of the context 
provided to users, is presented. 
III. 
PROPOSAL 
This study presents a work in progress, which to design a 
Ubiquitous Virtual Learning Environment with Quality of 
Context (UVLEQoC). In this environment, the following 
context information is collected: network connection speed 
and the cognitive profile of the users, applying over them 
quality indicators to ensure the attainment of an acceptable 
level of confidence, selecting the information to be used in 
the formulation of context of the user.  
Once the context has been formulated, the virtual 
environment will modify the materials and tools to display 
them according to the user preferences. For example, it will 
be presented only those materials in video format and chat 
tool instead of long text and forums if the user has selected 
them in its preferences. The access may be accomplished 
either via desktop, or via mobile devices, where the 
environment adapts itself automatically to the device type of 
the user. 
The objective is to create guarantees by using metrics 
such as precision and reliability, so that the environment use 
context information to the appropriate momentary situation 
in which the user is located. Thus, the UVLEQoC performs 
the necessary adjustments, as the selection of features and 
interface, to improve the process of interactive learning. 
Its architecture can be seen in Figure 1, being divided 
into four parts. The first part deals with the information 
extracted from the selected context sources, which were 
based on the work of [3] and [9].  
The data on the speed of the network connection will be 
extracted from the environment U-SEA [3], through an 
algorithm that performs the calculation and determines the 
connection speed of the user. At the same time, the 
information about the cognitive profile of the user is 
collected at SEDECA environment [9] by applying two 
questionnaires. The first one with 16 questions that define 
the type of cognitive style, and  the second one with 13 
questions that define the users preferences for the type of 
materials and tools that are included on the discipline. 
Both environments were developed in Moodle [10], in 
different versions; so, for the development of work, they 
were integrated into a new environment Moodle in its 
version 2.4, serving both as a source of context and to make 
the adjustments made by them. 
 
 
Figure 1 – Architecture of UVLEQoC 
The second part is characterized by the application of 
quality metrics on information collected for the formulation 
of context. They will be inserted in the calculations and 
algorithms designed to assess the quality of the information, 
in which we defined the following quality indicators: 
 
Accuracy: is investigated how these data show the 
reality, so you can see if the data network 
connection, cognitive styles and expertise are in line 
with what is actually happening; 
 
Probability of correctness: 
it analyzes the 
probability that a context information is correct; 
 
Resolution: Sets the level of detail that has the 
context information, so that they can get more and 
more details about the user's context and thus create 
a suitable profile; 
 
Reliability: checks in percent values, how the 
information obtained from the context sources are 
correct. This check is performed based on pre-
defined rules and calculations. 
 
Time Accuracy: are established minimum and 
maximum periods of time, to check if the collected 
information is valid and need to be catched again. 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
Integrity: Checks if the data obtained from the 
context 
sources 
not 
suffered 
unauthorized 
modifications, 
which 
can 
generate 
incorrect 
information. 
The preparation of these quality indicators were based on 
the creation of specific calculations and the use of algorithms 
based on the work of [7] and [11], for the definition of their 
operation and application.  
The third part corresponds to the analysis of the results 
obtained with the calculations performed by checking that 
the verified information has a minimum percentage; so, they 
can be used in the formulation of the user's context. It is a 
decision process, where only those who are within 
acceptable limits will be used to build the user context for 
the environment. 
In the fourth part, based on context information properly 
treated, are performed all necessary changes in the 
environment, as the types of materials (videos, slides, longer 
texts, images, etc.) and the types of tools that (chat, forum, 
task, etc.) that will be displayed, according to the connection 
speed of the user and their cognitive profile. If the network 
connection speed is less than the predetermined value, the 
environment will adapt itself in order to load resources and a 
lighter interface, thus seeking to promote a better user 
interaction with the application. And the materials and tools 
in the environment are loaded according to the preferences 
defined by the User in SEDECA. For this, an additional field 
will be created in the form of insertion of files in the 
environment where it will indicate the type of material that 
by entering, for example, if it is a video, image, long text, 
slides, etc. 
As the technology used to develop this environment, the 
environment Moodle was chosen to be used. Besides the 
aforementioned environment, a tool called Wamp Server 
[12], which integrates three technologies (PHP, MySQL and 
Apache), was chosen to be used. Apache server will act as a 
venue for the hosting environment. For the database, 
MySQL will store all information from AVA. Finally, PHP 
is a programming language used for developing Moodle; 
therefore, it will be used in the development and 
implementation of quality metrics.  
For adaptation in mobile devices, we will use the 
Bootstrap theme, which is integrated into  Moodle 
environment, where the selection of the theme to be used is 
made by the administrator of the environment. In the case of 
access via workstations or laptops the default Moodle's 
common interface is exhibited. However for access via 
mobile devices, the interface is automatically adapted to 
user's device. 
The environment is in development stage and it has been 
integrated into it the theme Bootstrap to make access from 
mobile devices and the module U-SEA, which verifies the 
connection speed of the User. Figure 2 shows the adaptation 
of the environment to mobile devices using Bootstrap, which 
presents only those files that are smaller than 400Kb, 
because the user's connection speed is less than 500Kb. For 
example, the file template.pdf was not made available to the 
user, because its size is larger than allowed. 
 
Figure 2 – UVLEQoC accessed via mobile device with the U-SEA 
UVLEQoC adapts to the cognitive profile of users and 
their technological context, with a guaranteed minimum 
level of quality, with the goal of improving students' 
interaction with the environment. Thus, materials and 
resources best suited to their preferences and needs will be 
inserted by improving the process of teaching and learning, 
in which everyone will know your style, its technological 
limitations and be exempt from the difficulties explained by 
them, as a failure to access the archives of the discipline and 
the types of materials that are not consistent with their 
gender. 
For example, if incorrect information is collected for the 
formulation of context and is not to go through an 
assessment of quality, there is no guarantee of this 
information has a desired level of accuracy. This may impair 
the use of the environment by the user, as in the case of 
adaptation according to their cognitive style and speed of 
network connection, if the collected information is incorrect, 
the environment will adapt erroneously damaging user 
interaction and achievement of their activities.  
With the application of QoC indicators, the UVLEQoC 
provides assurances that the information they are captured, 
will undergo an evaluation process in order to examine 
whether these holds the minimum required level of quality 
and then be used in the construction of the user context and 
more accurately reflect the reality in which it is inserted. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Context information is used to characterize the state of an 
object, reflecting the momentary situation in which it is 
located. One of the problems related to this is the 
inconsistency that these data are subject to, resulting in 
reflection of a state that is not consistent with reality. With 
this, the subarea of Quality Context aims to address this 
information through rules and algorithms verification in 
order to ensure that the information used in the construction 
of the context is correct. 
This paper presented a proposal that is developing a 
virtual learning environment ubiquitous, which handles 
context information by applying metrics of QOC. In 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

addition, it will integrate the modules U-SEA and SEDECA 
to perform the adaptation of resources and tools of the 
environment, according to cognitive style and connection 
speed of the User. 
Thus, we seek to guarantee a minimum level of quality 
for information that are captured, by formulating an 
appropriate context the momentary situation of the user, 
performing a proper adaptation of the environment and 
facilitating their interaction. 
As future work, we intend to finish this development 
environment and to test it with groups of undergraduate and 
graduate students to validate their implementation and fix the 
necessary aspects. In addition, we intend to create activities 
in the virtual world OpenSim to UVLEQoC interconnected 
through technology Sloodle, so that users can interact with 
these two environments. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Yahya, E. Ahmad, and K. Jalil, “The definition and 
characteristics of ubiquitous learning: A discussion”, in  
International Journal of Education and Development using 
Information and Communication Technology. (IJEDICT), 
vol. 6, Issue 1, pp. 117-127, 2010. 
[2] A. Dey, “Understanding and using context”, in Personal and 
Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 5, pp. 4–7, Feb. 2001. 
[3] S. Piovesan, E. Amaral, C. Arenhardt, and R. Medina, “U-
SEA: A learning environment ubiquitous using cloud 
computing”, in International Journal of Engineering and 
Technology (iJET) – Volume 7, Issue 1, 2012. 
[4] J. Filho and N. Agoulmine, “A quality-aware approach for 
resolving context conflicts in context-aware systems”, in 
IEEE/IFIP 9th International Conference on Embedded and 
Ubiquitous Computing (EUC), Melbourne, Australia, pp. 
229–236, Oct. 2011. 
[5] V. Santos, “Context management in collaborative systems”. 
Master's Dissertation, Universidade Federal do Pernambuco 
(UFPE), May 2006. 
[6] M. Krause and I. Hochstatter, “Challenges in Modeling and 
Using Quality of Context (QoC)”, in Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, pp. 324-333, 2005. 
[7] A. Yasar, , K. Paridel, D. Preuveneers, and Y. Berbers, 
“When efficiency matters: towards quality of context-aware 
peers for adaptive communication in VANETs”, in Intelligent 
Vehicles Symposium (IV), pp.1006-1012, Jun. 2011. 
[8] D. Zheng and J. Wang, “Research of the QoC based 
Middleware 
for 
the 
service 
selection 
in 
pervasive 
environment”, in International Journal of Information 
Engineering and Electronic Business (IJIEEB), pp. 30-37, 
Feb. 2011. 
[9] P. Mozzaquatro, F. Franciscato, P. Ribeiro, and R. Medina, 
“Modeling a Framework for adaptation of virtual learning 
environments moving to different cognitive styles”, in 
CINTED UFRGS, Porto Alegre, Brazil, v. 7 nº 3, Dec. 2009. 
[10] Moodle´s Official Website. Last accessed Jul. 2013, at: 
https://moodle.org/ . 
[11] A. Manzoor, H. Truong, A. Malik, and S. Dustdar, “On the 
Evaluation of Quality of Context”, in EuroSSC 2008, LNCS 
5279, pp. 140–153, 2008. 
[12] Wamp Server Official Website. Last accessed Jul. 2013, at: 
http://www.wampserver.com/.
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

