Facilitating Utilization of Public Transportation for Disabled Persons by an Open 
Location-Based Travel Information System for Mobile Devices (VIATOR) 
Wolfgang Narzt 
Department of Business Informatics – Software Engineering 
Johannes Kepler University 
Linz, Austria 
wolfgang.narzt@jku.at 
 
 
 
Abstract — In this paper, we present an open and extensible 
platform for mobile devices that guides disabled (i.e., blind or 
physically impaired) persons on their journeys using public 
transportation. The main objectives of this platform are to (1) 
provide up-to-date intermodal travel information (i.e., connect-
ing vehicles, schedules, and delays) across different transporta-
tion companies, (2) automatically, without manual interaction, 
reroute to alternative transportation options, if required, (3) 
visualize physical obstacles and offer hints for each particular 
target group (e.g., stairs vs. elevators for wheelchair users), 
and (4) provide an open interface for leaving and consuming 
self-created location-bound hints (e.g., blind people guide blind 
people). The platform is called VIATOR (lat.: “the traveler”) 
and has been developed in cooperation with three transporta-
tion companies and three research institutes in Austria. This 
paper presents the technical architecture, shows first results of 
a prototypical implementation and gives user experiences from 
blind and mobility impaired people. 
Keywords-VIATOR; Public Transportation; Disabled People; 
Mobile, Location-Based Servce Platform. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
People with disabilities are disadvantaged when using 
public means of transportation. Wheelchair users, for in-
stance, are severely limited by stairs and raised vehicle en-
trances, whereas blind or visually impaired people are reliant 
on tactile lines or proper path descriptions in order to be able 
to maneuver on their own at public transportation nodes. 
Commercially available travel information- and navigation 
systems for public transportation inform their users about 
departure times, platforms, and type of vehicles. However, 
they lack instructions for handicapped persons on the way to 
and from public vehicles particularly at larger transportation 
nodes. Ponderous and inflexible content management mech-
anisms at the backend of such systems exacerbate mainte-
nance for this task. Moreover, many of the systems use pro-
prietary protocols and are unable to exchange data with or 
connect to competing transportation companies for a closed 
information chain throughout a journey.  
In the course of the research project ways2go [1], within 
the framework of the strategic initiative IV2Splus funded by 
the Austrian government (FFG), a prototype for an open and 
extensible location-based travel information system for disa-
bled persons has been developed guiding each target group 
through stations regarding their needs. It consolidates diverse 
travel information systems and provides navigation instruc-
tions from arbitrary sources, even from the users themselves 
(self-organizing content management) using a mobile client 
prototype with accessible User Interface (UI) elements.  
The technical basis for the implementation of this re-
search topic was a mobile location-based and context-
sensitive information-, communication-, and collaboration 
system (Digital Graffiti, see [2], [3] and [4]) developed by 
the University of Linz, in association with Siemens Corpo-
rate Technology in Munich, and the Ars Electronica Future-
lab also in Linz, which enables its users to place and con-
sume information at arbitrary locations using state-of-the-art 
mobile tracking-enabled cell phones. Travel information 
(including up-to-date actual data of delays, cancellations or 
detours, etc.) was provided, classified and made generic for 
shared networking by the project partners Austrian Federal 
Railways Company (ÖBB), Upper Austrian Transport Asso-
ciation (OÖVG) and Linz AG (a Local Traffic Line Service 
Provider in Linz). In cooperation with the Department In-
tegriert Studieren at the University of Linz and the Central 
European Institute of Technology in Vienna (CEIT Alanova) 
new paradigms for barrier-free interaction have been created, 
not only guiding users, but also offering them an instrument 
to provide self-created content for other users. Blind people 
shall be able to annotate their way for other blind people 
regarding their special needs.  
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 deals with 
selected points of state-of-the-art methods and technology. 
Section 3 gives an insight into the proposed system architec-
ture for VIATOR. Section 4 illustrates the prototype and 
finally, Section 5 concludes the paper, assesses the prelimi-
nary results critically and prospects future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The FH Joanneum in Austria focuses on unaided free 
movement for people with disabilities using public transpor-
tation in a project called NAVCOM [5]. Blind persons are 
required to find the right vehicle or to signal their wish to 
enter or leave a vehicle. The authors propose a WLAN-based 
system communicating between public transportation vehi-
cles and smartphones, an extension to navigation systems for 
pedestrians, the functionality of which ends at the entrance 
door of the vehicles. In general, this project group investi-
gates the potentials of technical support for navigating hand-
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

icapped people in public spaces. Within the project ways4all 
(funded by the Austrian government), they explore indoor 
navigation for visually impaired using Radio Frequency 
Identification (RFID) and navigation instructions with rela-
tive coordinates [6][7].  
A scientific consortium consisting of four universities in 
Japan has developed a different approach supporting blind 
travelers in their navigation. A device with a haptic interface 
(they call it the Future Body-Finger [8]) enables blind per-
sons to perceive their environment, measuring distances to 
obstacles using infrared sensors. 
MoViH [9] is an approach that goes a step beyond. It 
tries to identify both mobility and hindering factors for per-
sons with visual or hearing impairments. The outcome of the 
findings is a catalogue of effective and efficient measures to 
be depicted in recommendations and standards supporting 
public transport companies in planning environments con-
sidering special needs of blind or acoustically disabled per-
sons. BIS – Barrier Information System [10] especially fo-
cuses on the requirements of wheelchair users. The project 
aims at developing a barrier-free interactive routing system 
in close coordination with the target group, technology ex-
perts and administrative and political stakeholders through-
out the research process in order to calculate and visualize 
the most suitable ways to go for wheelchair users. 
Target-oriented automatic delivery of information to the 
traveler (e.g., for indicating a transfer or delay) is the next 
field of investigation. First approaches try to inform travelers 
about entry and exit maneuvers, as an assistive application 
from the Polytechnic Institute of Leiria, Portugal does [11]. 
Most systems, though, do not inform their users about 
changes in the time schedule, once the trip has been calculat-
ed. Travel information has to be requested from scratch at 
every transition point or is difficult to handle due to a com-
plex system of rules across transportation providers. Until 
today, to the authors’ knowledge, there is no automatic mo-
bile travel information system that continuously guides the 
passenger during his journey and context-sensitively keeps 
him up-to-date considering transfers or delays.  
As a summary, we already recognize a series of isolated 
research subjects dealing with navigation aspects for disa-
bled persons or closed information chains. The novelty in the 
VIATOR project is the approach for constructing traffic sup-
port systems, i.e., it utilizes a smart location-based infor-
mation system and a simple processing procedure for trigger-
ing specific actions due to regional closeness of its users to 
selected locations, in contrast to complex rule systems dis-
covered in related projects.  
III. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
The name of this location-based information system is 
Digital Graffiti [2][3][4], a framework that stores 3D spatial 
information elements (e.g., text, images, sound, videos, links, 
or even executable code) in a central database. Every stored 
data tuple (i.e., a geo-position and an attached information 
element – we call it a Digital Graffito) is additionally charac-
terized by a visibility space and a set of recipients. It is trans-
ferred when any of the recipients steps into its visibility 
space. For related developments, see, for example, [12].  
As a special feature, the platform offers automatic control 
of electronic actions (e.g., opening a gate, starting or stop-
ping a machine, triggering a measurement or transaction) 
without any additional manual action, when a given device is 
in the vicinity of a Digital Graffito containing executable 
code (see [13]), presuming adequate access privileges of a 
person, a device, or a software system. 
 
 
Figure 1.  System Architecture for Proximity-Triggered Code Execution 
Figure 1 illustrates the common principles of the soft-
ware architecture enabling proximity-triggered code execu-
tion: A central server system stores geographically linked 
information in appropriate fast traversable geo-data struc-
tures (e.g., r-trees). Clients repetitively transmit their own 
(commonly by GPS-based) position to this server (1) which 
evaluates the geo-data considering visibility radiuses and 
access constraints (2) and transmits the corresponding results 
back to the clients (3). Generally, when the transmitted in-
formation contains conventional text or pictures, it is imme-
diately displayed on the output device of the client (4). The 
basic idea for executing code is to store program fragments 
inside these information elements instead of text or binary 
picture data. Therefore, we propose a web-service-based 
mechanism, which is both effective and simple to extend: 
The information elements contain URL or XML-based web-
requests to a remote web-service, which is the actual compo-
nent to execute the code. When a client receives information 
containing a URL or web-request, it is resolved (5), handled 
internally (6) and finally triggers the desired action at the 
third-party vendor (7). A response back to the client (8, 9) 
can additionally be illustrated as a visual confirmation 
whether the action was executed successfully or not (10). 
This mechanism is fairly simple and handles standardized 
HTTP-requests supported by a majority of currently utilized 
mobile platforms. Important for third-party vendors: Their 
internal data representations, servers and control units are 
hidden from the publically accessible location-based service, 
guaranteeing a maximum of data security for the vendors. 
The architecture provides the basis for a high degree of ex-
tensibility to third-party systems, for the number and variety 
of electronic connections is unforeseeable and simultaneous-
ly enriches the potentials of such a service. 
We have conducted experiments on this innovative inter-
action paradigm: We have put a proximity-triggered code 
element in front of an electronically controllable gate at the 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

University Campus. An authorized person approaching the 
element automatically triggers the execution of the contained 
code, which causes the gate to open. Admittedly, this use-
case is more of a proof of concept than a practical applica-
tion, for GPS-data are not accurate enough to differentiate 
between two cars in a row, however, it demonstrates the po-
tentials of the service enabling its users to initiate any elec-
tronically controllable actions just by their physical presence. 
Applying this service as the technological basis for a mo-
bile public transportation guide means utilizing the location-
based action control mechanism for up-to-date calculations 
regarding transportation schedules. The transportation com-
panies have to provide standardized interfaces for requesting 
their schedules, enabling their users to site-specifically and 
automatically perceive appropriate departure information 
when they arrive at a station or stop (similar to the big 
screens showing the departing trains). The user is conse-
quently able to pick the desired destination by a single click 
and, thus, to anonymously specify a route.  
Concerning intermodal travel routes, the system does not 
invent routing algorithms and scheduling procedures from 
scratch. Instead, it utilizes existing services and triggers them 
on demand in the same way as the time schedule example 
given above. So, the system continuously (and, in particular, 
location-sensitively) re-initiates calculations regarding the 
selected route by the location-based action control mecha-
nism at neuralgic maneuver points during the journey, i.e., at 
train stations, bus or tram stops, etc. In general, neuralgic 
points are particular locations along the route where users 
may enter or leave means of public transportations. This 
means that a user automatically triggers the route planning 
service of the appropriate vendor at spatial proximity to his 
next stop and is informed about his schedule and connecting 
means of transportation, giving the passenger a continuous 
information chain during his journey. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Intermodal Route Recalculations at Neuralgic Points 
Figure 2 gives an impression on the procedure with a fic-
tive example: A user starts his journey at an arbitrary loca-
tion (point A), walks by foot to a tram station (point B), takes 
the tram to the main railway station (point C), uses the train, 
and finishes his journey with a bus (point D, not depicted in 
the figure, anymore). At point A, he initiates the calculation 
procedures (the only manual interaction by specifying the 
desired destination), i.e., the system collects all available 
data concerning the given route from different transportation 
providers (via a Common Transportation Interface) and of-
fers a sequence and a schedule of the involved vehicles. 
Along the route, the system places active Digital Graffiti at 
neuralgic locations, which automatically trigger recalcula-
tions when the user arrives there. 
So, while staying at point A the system continuously (i.e., 
with a time-controlled delay) recalculates the same route 
over and over again, offering the user the chance to specify 
his journey in advance without considering time schedules. 
The system always has the most up-to-date travel infor-
mation for its users. 
When leaving point A, the next neuralgic point along the 
route (i.e., point B in our example) initiates recalculations. 
As this point is also a maneuver point (i.e., where the user 
must enter or leave a vehicle due to his schedule) the system 
not only provides an up-to-date route but also informs the 
user on the departure time by an alert. In our example, the 
first recalculations (schedule #2) produce the same data as 
the initial calculations, indicating that there is no delay or 
change in the schedule. 
While travelling with the tram, the same mechanism is 
repetitively applied at every neuralgic point (exemplarily 
shown by point #1). The corresponding schedule reveals a 
delay for the subsequent train (i.e., the new schedule deviates 
from the last one) and automatically postpones the trip with 
the connecting means of transportation after the newly calcu-
lated arrival time of the train. When schedules differ, the 
system automatically notifies its users by an alert. Alerts are 
also fired when the user is requested to get off at his last stop 
before changing means of transportations. The signal to 
leave is triggered by location and is therefore independent 
from any delays in the time schedules.  
Principally, this procedure with repetitive recalculations 
(done by external schedule calculation services) as shown in 
Figure 2 is the main idea and a new approach for implement-
ing an automatic mobile location-based travel information 
service. A “Common Transportation Interface” consolidates 
proprietary interfaces from different transportation providers 
and delivers up-to-date schedules every time a user ap-
proaches his next neuralgic point along his route. 
In terms of barrier-free routing the same mechanism is 
applied: A handicapped person entering a station or stop 
automatically triggers navigation calculations due to his/her 
user profile (i.e., due to the type of disability), selected route 
and schedule. Users may either receive navigation instruc-
tions along tactile lines or get the quickest route to the next 
elevators. These calculations are externally sourced out to 
special route computing services with centralized data col-
lections to be updated either via Content Management Sys-
tem (CMS) operators or by the users of the system them-
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

selves, who are able to edit these instructions due to their 
experiences on-site via the inherited mechanism of the basic 
system for editing Digital Graffiti information elements. 
Figure 3 illustrates the principle: Every neuralgic point 
stores a set of additional active information elements ad-
dressed to specific profile groups, e.g., blind people, wheel-
chair users, etc., which automatically trigger profile-related 
footpath calculations for the way to the next vehicle. Please 
note that not every point necessarily stores information for 
each profile group. However, every user is capable of adding 
or updating information. Also, note that, for simplicity and 
scalability reasons, these information elements are directly 
linked to neuralgic points; they do not have their own posi-
tion, e.g., in between two bus stops. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Profile-Based Navigation Instructions at Neuralgic Points 
As a summary, the basic mechanism for barrier-free in-
termodal navigation providing up-to-date travel information 
and offering an active notification- and feedback instrument 
for direct interaction and self-organization of the information 
content is based on location-based action control, a function 
available from the basic platform Digital Graffiti. So, the 
VIATOR system does not contain complicated new algo-
rithms for managing complex collaboration of different in-
formation providers. Instead, it utilizes a simple mechanism 
applied for all tasks, which makes the entire system easy to 
understand, maintain and extend. 
 
 
Figure 4.  VIATOR system architecture (simplified excerpt) 
Figure 4 gives an impression on the collaboration of in-
volved components, omitting details due to space limitations: 
The application logic is encapsulated within the main 
VIATOR server component, communicating to its basic plat-
form Digital Graffiti, which remains completely unchanged 
in its elementary behavior and is executed as a separate pro-
cess. The mobile clients connect to the main VIATOR server 
component, which delegates all Digital Graffiti-related func-
tions to its underlying platform, enabling the clients to create 
and consume location-based information elements. The sys-
tem is extended by two separate processes consolidating 
travel information from different transportation providers on 
the one hand (Common Transportation Interface) and provid-
ing barrier-free navigation instructions on the other (left 
side). The latter can either be managed through CMS or via 
the VIATOR application logic indirectly by the clients. 
IV. 
PROTOTYPE AND EXPERIMENTS 
VIATOR has been prototypically implemented using 
JBoss AS7 Java Enterprise Application for the server com-
ponents and Android for the clients. We have conducted sev-
eral tests in the city of Linz arbitrarily using different means 
of transportation from the involved transportation compa-
nies. Figure 5 gives an impression on a typical test run: 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Test Run for Route Recalculations at Neuralgic Points 
We started our journey at the University (A), walked by 
foot to the next tram and bus station (B) and continued either 
by tram or by bus (both options are possible for this route) to 
the main rail station (C), where we stopped our journey (for 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

convenience and time reasons). However, this abbreviated 
trip is enough for evaluating the mechanism when more than 
one vehicle is involved. The picture also gives an idea of the 
position of neuralgic points along our test route. Please note 
that the points are closer along the tram line than along the 
train line. This is due to the distance of stops and stations for 
the different means of transportation. 
At point A, the user enters the desired destination (see 
Figure 6a). The user can either type (and auto-complete) a 
destination or select from a list (considering the transporta-
tion options due to the user’s current location). After clicking 
the START button, a summary of the input, the next station 
and all subsequent maneuvers are listed (b).  
 
      
    
Figure 6.  VIATOR UI: (a) Enter Destination, (b) Display Route  
As the user interface in all figures is kept in German, here 
is a brief translation: The upper input field in Figure 6a con-
tains the current location (“aktueller Ort”) determined by the 
location sensors of the smartphone. The user inputs two let-
ters for the destination (“Ziel”) and is offered a list of op-
tions. The light green section in Figure 6b always displays a 
summary of the specified route. Departure (“Ab”) and desti-
nation (“Nach”) are listed in combination with departure and 
arrival times and a summary of the total travel time 
(“Gesamtfahrtdauer”) and the remaining time (“Dauer bis 
zum Ziel”). The dark green section always shows the next 
maneuver task for the traveler (in this case, the user has to 
take a bus with number 200 at the given bus stop). Finally, 
the remaining white section lists all subsequent maneuver 
tasks including footways. 
So far, VIATOR looks similar to existing travel infor-
mation systems. The first difference is noticeable, though, 
when unforeseen events occur and the route changes (i.e., 
either means of transportation or the schedule). In these cas-
es, VIATOR actively reacts, informs the traveler about the 
change and calculates new options without manual interven-
tion. Figure 7a gives an example of a delay immediately an-
nounced via an acoustic signal and a red marquee text on the 
top. When the app is in foreground, the user is directly con-
fronted with the change.  
    
  
Figure 7.  Alerts: (a) Detour Info, (c) Notification Bar Alert 
In Figure 7a, the user is informed in the black bottom bar 
that the alternative vehicle chosen is also 3 minutes late. 
When the app is in background mode, VIATOR utilizes the 
Android notification bar for alerts and enables the user to get 
back to the app via a single tap (Figure 7b). 
 
     
     
Figure 8.  (a) Select Impairment, (b) Maneuver Instructions for Blind  
In terms of barrier-free usage, VIATOR offers to select 
the type of impairment as part of the user profile. The proto-
type contains three options for blind and disabled persons 
and for persons without disabilities (see top of Figure 8a). 
The middle part of Figure 8a offers to select the preferred 
route calculation method: next, fastest, or direct. At the bot-
tom, the user can select the update frequency – indirectly 
influencing battery consumption. Figure 8b shows a (pre-
tended unstructured) flow of text representing navigation 
instructions for blind people. A visual format is unnecessary, 
though, because this text is meant to be read by screen read-
ers and is only considered for the blind. Exemplary transla-
tion: “Nach der Rolltreppe bitte geradeaus auf 12 Uhr fol-
gen” means: “After the escalator go straight ahead, direction 
12 o’clock”. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 9a gives an impression of an editing tool enabling 
its users to create or update navigation instructions (self-
organization). Users may provide a subject (“Name”), cate-
gorize the information (“Kategorie”) and place it to a desired 
location (“Ort”). Subsequent travelers perceive this infor-
mation automatically when they arrive at this location. The 
screenshots show a simple implementation of the principle of 
self-organization. Of course, voice memos or voice recogni-
tion would probably be the preferred technology. 
 
     
 
Figure 9.  VIATOR UI. (a) Editing Tool, (c) “Get Off” Alert 
When the traveler arrives at a maneuver point (either for 
transfer or at the final destination), VIATOR signalizes to get 
off (“Sie sind am Ziel”, see Figure 9b). This feature distin-
guishes VIATOR from conventional navigation systems, like 
Google navigation, location-sensitively (and therefore at the 
exact maneuver time) telling the traveller what to do next 
without any manual interaction by its users. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The first subjective impressions (no systematic investiga-
tions were conducted so far) prove that the general idea of a 
location-based travel information system for disabled per-
sons is working, however improvements due to experienced 
weak points are still to be incorporated. VIATOR (1) pro-
vides up-to-date intermodal travel information concerning 
connecting vehicles, schedules, and delays across different 
transportation companies, (2) automatically, without manual 
interaction, reroutes to alternative transportation options, (3) 
guides handicapped people due to their needs (e.g., maneu-
ver instructions along tactile lines for blind people), and (4) 
provides an open interface for leaving and consuming self-
created location-bound hints. 
However, the tests have also revealed the first weak 
points of the system: As an example, the navigation instruc-
tions for blind people are in need of improvement (particu-
larly when we consider different types of visual impairment 
and different walking behavior). We also miss a more accu-
rate method for locating users inside buildings (referring to 
approaches of indoor navigation done by [5][6][7][8]). In a 
next step, the consortium focuses on the “bridge” between 
two connecting public vehicles for handicapped people, their 
personal preferences regarding navigation instructions (i.e., 
turn-by-turn vs. “environmental” instructions, etc.), investi-
gating the potentials of categorizing different profiles for the 
same target group for more adequate support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Ways2go, “Innovation and Technology for Evolving Mobility 
Needs,” Funding Programme of the Austrian Federal Ministry 
for Transport, Innovation and Technology, www.bmvit.gv.at/ 
en/innovation/mobility/ways2go/, retrieved: May, 2013. 
[2] G. Pomberger, “Digital Graffiti - A Framework for 
Implementing Location-Based Systems,” in: International 
Journal of Software and Informatics (IJSI), Volume 5, Issue 
1-2 (2011), Part II, ISSN 1673-7288, 2011, pp. 355-377. 
[3] W. Narzt and G. Pomberger, “Digital Graffiti – a Smart 
Information 
and 
Collaboration 
System,” 
International 
Conference on Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, 
EECS 2013, Elsevier IERI Procedia (ISSN: 2212-6678), 
Beijing, China, 2013, in press. 
[4] W. Narzt and W. Wasserburger, “Digital Graffiti – A 
Comprehensive Location-Based Travel Information System,” 
16th International Conference on Urban Planning, Regional 
Development and Information Society (REAL CORP 2011), 
Essen, Germany, 2011, pp. 1239-1243. 
[5] W. Bischof, E. Krajnc, M. Dornhofer, and M. Ulm, “NAV-
COM – WLAN Communication between Public Transport 
Vehicles and Smart Phones to Support Visually Impaired and 
Blind People,” 13th Intl. Conference, ICCHP 2012, Austria, 
July 11-13, 2012, Proceedings, Part II, 2012, pp 91-98. 
[6] M. Kiers, W. Bischof, E. Krajnc, and M. Dornhofer, 
“ways4all - Indoor Navigation without absolute Coordinates 
for the Visually Impaired and Blind People,” FHK 
Conference Vienna, 2011. 
[7] M. Kiers, W. Bischof, M. Dornhofer, and E. Krajnc, “A New 
Approach for an RFID Indoor Positioning System Without 
Fixed Coordinates for Visually Impaired and Blind People,” 
IPIN2010 Conference, Zürich, 2010. 
[8] K. Ito, Y. Fujimoto, J. Akita, R. Otsuki, A. Masatani, T. 
Komatsu, M. Okamoto, and T. Ono, “Development of the 
Future Body-Finger: A Novel Travel aid for the Blind,” 2nd 
Intl. Conf. on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services 
and Technologies, AMBIENT 2012, Spain, 2012, pp. 60-63. 
[9] MoViH, “Mobility for the Visually and Hearing Impaired in 
Public Transport,” Hilfsgemeinschaft der Blinden und 
Sehschwachen Österreichs, Funded ways2go project, 2011, 
http://www.wu.ac.at/prodman/about/research/en/projects/ 
trade/mobility_for_the_visually, retrieved: July 2013. 
[10] BIS, “Barrier Information System,” Funded ways2go project, 
2012, http://www2.ffg.at/verkehr/projekte.php?id=844&lang= 
en&browse=programm, retrieved: July 2013. 
[11] J. Silva, C. Silva, L. Marcelino, R. Ferreira, and A. Pereira, 
“Assistive Mobile Software for Public Transportation,” Fifth 
International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, 
Systems, Services and Technologies, UBICOMM 2011, 
Lisbon Portual, November 2011, pp. 309-313. 
[12] W. Ait-Cheik-Bihi, M. Bakhouya, A. Nait-Sidi-Moh, J. 
Gaber, and M. Wack, “A Platform for Interactive Location-
Based Services,” Procedia Computer Science, Volume 5, 
2011, pp. 697-704. 
[13] W. Narzt and H. Schmitzberger, “Location-triggered code 
execution - dismissing displays and keypads for mobile inter-
action,” UAHCI ’09: 5th Intl. Conf. on Universal Access in 
HCI. Part II. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2009, pp. 374–383. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

