Context Awareness for Service Desk Management 
 
Jaziel Souza Lobo 
Instituto Federal de Sergipe – Campus São Cristóvão 
Aracaju(SE), Brazil 
jaziel.lobo@gmail.com 
Roseclea Duarte Medina 
Centro de Tecnologia-Universidade Federal de Santa Maria 
Santa Maria(RS), Brazil 
roseclea.medina@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a customization of a service 
desk tool inserting some context-aware computing elements 
based on location, temporal and expertise awareness. As main 
result, a context-aware service desk system, that also allows 
access from mobile devices and improves technical calls 
distribution based on professional expertise and geographical 
location, was concept. 
Keywords-Help 
Desk; 
Service 
Desk; 
Context-Aware; 
Location Awareness 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Modern organizations are becoming more dependent on 
Information Technology (IT) day by day, fact that turns 
necessary the implementation of effective IT management to 
justify high investments on this sector and to aggregate 
values for these companies [1]. Second [2], 88% of financial 
executives assert that the existing IT services operation 
efficiency are more worrisome than the attendance of new 
necessities. For Cusick and Ma [3], the “Impact on revenues 
is directly related to system availability” that can be proven 
with facts like the 10 million dollars Symantec company 
prejudice suffered after a sales systems fail [4]. Another 
example is of E-Bay company that had around U$ 3 and 5 
million dollars decrement on its founds and a 26% decline on 
its actions after a 22 hours stop caused by a system fail [2]. 
Thus, when a problem arises that causes abnormal 
functioning of IT services, it is expected that the user has a 
quick response and clear support staff in order to minimize 
the damage that can be caused. The team responsible for 
resolving IT issues, was initially named Help Desk [5], but 
due to its importance and new services added to your area, 
now called Service Desk [6]. 
According to Zahedi et al. [7], time is an important 
parameter considered for the help desk so that the 
technicians of this activity, precisely because of time 
constraints to solve all kinds of problems, often refer to the 
help desk as "hell desk". To [2], one of the key factors for the 
success of a service desk is the allocation of human resources 
that have the appropriate profile for solving different types of 
problems. A service desk technicians whose work without 
any planning, attending calls disorderly, or whose 
technicians are assigned to calls that they do not have the 
expertise (and practical experience) to solve the problem, it 
may cause: for technical loss of time offset by unnecessary, 
for the user to idle due to lack of solution of the incident on 
the first call, and the company recorded losses by stopping 
the services. 
This paper presents the adaptation of a service desk tool 
developed in the program Graduate of Federal University of 
Santa Maria (UFSM) in Brazil. The adjustments involve 
characteristics of computing context-sensitive location, 
adding the time and technical expertise to the context. As 
main results, we obtained a context-sensitive service desk 
system Context Aware Service Desk (CASD), which enables 
your access via mobile devices, with the optimization of the 
distribution of calls across the geographical location and 
expertise of the technician. To validate were inserted dummy 
data so that it was possible to test the behavior and operation 
of the system. The tests were conducted on the campus of 
UFSM with smartphone that had integrated GPS. 
This article is organized as follows: Section 2 presents 
aspects of ubiquitous computing, emphasizing sensitivity to 
context. Section 3 discusses the related work. Section 4 
presents the proposed project, and the changes made to the 
service desk tool. Experiments and discussion of the tests are 
presented in Section 5 and Section 6 presents the 
conclusions. 
II. 
UBIQUITOUS COMPUTING AND CONTEXT AWARENESS 
In 1991, the term Ubiquitous Computing was defined by 
Mark Weiser as a paradigm that enables integration and 
communication of multiple devices and resources (software 
and hardware) in a real environment that would enable the 
user to perform activities without awareness of this usage 
[8][9]. Other paradigms have emerged as Pervasive 
Computing, which provided access to information and 
computing resources for users anywhere, anytime and using 
any device. Currently, the terms Pervasive Computing and 
Ubiquitous Computing are used as synonyms by many 
researchers and so will be considered in this text. 
One of the main research areas of ubiquitous computing 
is Context-Aware Computing in which you want to obtain 
inputs, called contexts, which are current user information, 
contextualizing the environment where it is located and the 
device computational used [10]. To Dey [11], context is any 
information that can be used to characterize the situation of 
an entity where the entity can be a person, place or object 
that is considered relevant to the interaction between a user 
and an application, including the user and the application 
itself. According to the author, a system is context-aware if it 
uses context to provide information and / or services relevant 
to the user, where relevancy depends on the user's task. 
According to Satyanarayanan [9], a system of pervasive 
computing that strives to be minimally intrusive has to be 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

context sensitive and be aware of the state and around its 
user to, based on this information, change their behavior. 
A key component of ubiquitous computing is the location 
awareness that uses a positioning system for the location of 
the user [12]. To Loureiro et al. [10], "a positioning system is 
a tool used to determine and record the location of an object 
on Earth's surface." With the trying to add services and 
business models for ubiquitous devices in the network, the 
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) established in March 
2007, the working group Ubiquitous Web Applications that 
defined an API for Geolocation. This API has a high level 
interface to location information (latitude and longitude) and 
provides support for mobile browsers and applications of 
Location Based Services (LBS) [13] [14]. 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
The search by related work showed that many authors 
approach aspects of how to improve the control of the 
management of incidents or address issues of how best to 
implement the Information Technology Infrastructure 
Library (ITIL). As far where we investigated, there were not 
found studies with different approaches on the optimization 
of the work team to reduce the cost of diagnosis by 
technicians lacking the expertise ideal for the reported 
incident. Following some of the studies reviewed. 
Zahedi, Rahimov and Soleymani [7], proposed a help 
desk that simulates a technical support center via a web site, 
where 
visitors 
ask 
questions 
and 
receive 
advice 
automatically. Already Jäntti [15], explored which are the 
basic functional requirements for an incident management 
system. Bartolini, Stefanelli and Tortonesi [16], present 
HANNIBAL software, a decision support tool for business 
impact analysis and incident management improvement. In 
Marcu et al. [17] it is proposed a method to correlate with 
user called open call by automatically opened monitoring 
systems to avoid loss of events for diagnostic time with the 
same problem. References [3] and [18] discuss what is the 
best way to implement the Information Technology 
Infrastructure Library (ITIL) processes. 
IV. 
CONTEXT AWARE SERVICE DESK  - CASD 
This paper proposes to adapt a service desk system that 
minimizes the occurrence of a second call to the same calls 
that had not been closed for lack of expertise of the 
technician who performed the first service. The Context 
Aware Service Desk (CASD) was designed for smartphones 
and mobile phones with great computing that, in addition to 
the original functionality, have an integrated GPS. In 
addition to this feature, the system proposes to reduce the 
loss of time with unnecessary travel and enable access from 
anywhere at anytime and with any device. Amaral [19] 
presents a service desk system that was integrated into a 
corporate portal for the realization of incident management 
and access rights of the user (authentication, authorization, 
auditing) with collection of data for decision support, based 
on technical multivariate statistics. This was the system used 
for the adaptation in this paper. 
The CASD is divided into two main tasks: Task 1 - 
responsible for identifying a context C and Task 2 - 
responsible for adapting the system to the context. The 
context C is defined by the time the coach makes the access 
to the system and it is composed of location data (latitude 
and longitude) and technical profile and the time of access to 
the system. 
A. Task 1 - Identification of Context 
The proposed work deals with the suitability of a Service 
Desk to provide services relevant to technical support by 
identifying a context C. The system consists of a finite 
technicians set defined as   {          }  with    ; 
expertises defined as   {          }  with    ; 
buildings defined as   {          } with    ; profiles 
defines as      {Rating, Attendance, Administrator, 
Rating_and_Attendance} and priorities defines as     
{         }. 
1) Getting the Geographic Location of the Technician 
The proposal with the W3C Geolocation API is a site 
that, when visited, can get the coordinates (latitude and 
longitude) of the device that is accessing it without any client 
application is installed on this device. This mechanism was 
implemented in the service desk so that when a technician 
logs in to the system, the script runs Javascript: 
navigator.geolocation.getCurrentPosition (position), which 
returns an object by positioning function position. 
2) Access Time 
The access time, to the system, is used to verify if the 
technician is at his work time. The temporal context entered 
here is to allow the support teams distribution per shift scales 
to meet on call 24x7, works like most IT teams. 
3) Technical Profile 
Based on division 
that occurs 
in 
the 
Central 
Appointments User (CAU) UFSM, technicians are mapped 
into four profiles: Technical Classifier, Service Technician, 
Technician and Administrator Meets and Sorts. The 
Technical Classifier is one that is allowed to sort the calls by 
setting the priority and the expertise necessary to solve the 
problem reported. The Technical Assistance will be allowed 
only to view and meet the tickets already sorted. The 
Technician Meets Sorts and builds the permissions of the 
two previous roles and the last technician is one who has 
administrator profile. 
4) Internal or External Access 
It’s possible determine if a technician ti will have access 
to the system when outside the building of the central 
services (external environment) or if it will only have access 
at building's vicinity (indoor). The location inside or outside 
of the coach is given by calculating the distance d, in miles, 
between the technical and building services center. For this 
work, it was found that at a distance of up to 300m (  
   ), which is almost the distance between a building and the 
other on campus, the system will consider that the technician 
is called the internal environment. Otherwise, it is considered 
that the technician is in the external environment. 
5) Distance Calculation between ti and pj 
When reporting an incident, the user has to enter the 
building and room where the problem occurred. The 
buildings must be first registered with their respective 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
coordinates. The calculation of the distance between a 
technician ti and a building Pj is used both to verify that the 
technician is in internal or external environment as to sort the 
list of calls that the technician will attend. Knowing the 
points formed by the ti and Pj, coordinates, apply the 
formulas of spherical trigonometry to calculate the distance d 
in degrees formed by circular arcs between these points and 
these points at point A (Figure 1) [20]. 
Figure 1.   Arcs to calculate the length between two points using spherical 
trigonometry. 
To calculate the distance will be used three equations. 
The first equation is given by the expression: 
   ( )     ( )     ( )     ( )     ( )     (   )

where, 
a  =  BC arc formed by the longitude difference of the 
two coordinates 
b =  AC arc that is equal to 90 - latitude of the 
building support 
c  =  AB arc that is equal to 90 - latitude of technical 
assistance 
The coordinates values in (1) must be reported in decimal 
values and the values received to invoke the W3C 
Geolocation method are in degrees, minutes and seconds, so 
it is necessary to convert to radians. Found the value of 
cos(a) in (1), applies (2) that calculates the arc cosine of the 
value found: 

          (   ( ))

Unlike what happens in (1), the value found in (2), which 
represents the arc formed between the building and technical 
and which is in radians, must be converted to degrees to 
apply in (3). After obtaining the value of the arc in degrees, 
to calculate the distance d in km, you should apply a rule of 
three between this value and the value of the full arc of the 
circumference of the Earth. Knowing that the radius of the 
Earth is 6371 km, the Arco_T= 2 * π * radius = 40,030 k. 
Obtained the value of the full arc of the earth, applies (3) to 
calculate the distance in kilometers of the two points: 
 
  (           )     
(3) 
 
6) Algorithm of Task 1 
The algorithm shown in Figure 2 represents the execution 
for task 1 and is subdivided in three sub-tasks, which are 
inExpedient, inPlace and length, as detailed below: 
 
1. Task 1 – Identify Context 
2. initialize lat  0; Lng 0; 
3.   authentication do 
4.    if getLocate do 
5.       if ti   t then 
6.          if ti.pf = sorter then 
7.             if inExpedient(ti) and inPlace(lat, lng) then 
8.                applyContextSorter(); 
9.             else 
10.              write (“ user outside of working hours or without  
11.                           permission to access this area outside the 
12.                           place of service.”); 
13.        else if ti.pf = attendant then 
14.                   if inExpedient(ti) then 
15.                      applyContextAttendant(); 
16.                   else 
17.                      write (“ user outside of office hours”); 
18.               else if ti.pf = sortAndAttends then 
19.                           if inExpedient(ti) then 
20.                              if inPlace(lat,lng) then 
21.                                 ApplyContextSorter(); 
22.                              else  
23.                                 ApplyContextAttendant(); 
24.                           else  
25.                              write (“ user outside of office hours”); 
26.                      else if ti.pf = admin then 
27.                                 applyContextAdministrator(); 
28. 
29. Task 1.1 – inExpedient(ti) 
30.    initialize now  0; Lng 0; 
31.    now  accessTime; 
32.    if (ti.inputShift1 ≤ now and now ≤  ti.outputShift1) or  
33.       (ti.inputShift2 ≤ now and now ≤  ti.outputShift2) then 
34.       return true; 
35.    else 
36.       return false; 
37. 
38. Task 1.2 – inPlace(lat,lng) 
39.    if length(lat, lng, P1.lat, P1.lng) ≤ 0,1 or ti.outside then 
40.       return true; 
41.    else 
42.       return false; 
43. 
44. Task 1.3 – length(plat, plng, q.lat, q.lng) 
45.    initialize a0;  b0;  c0; cosA0; arcCosA0; 
46.    a = math.radians(plng – qlng); 
47.    b = math.radians (90 – qlat); 
48.    c = math.radians (90 – plat); 
49. cosA=math.cos(b)*math.cos(c)+math.sin(b)*math.sin(c)* 
50.            math.cos(a); 
51.    arcCosA = math.degrees(math.acos(cosA); 
52.    return (40030.00 * arcCosA)/360; 
Figure 2.  Algorithm for Identify Context 
B. Task 2 - Application of the Context 
Defining the profiles of the technician, also defined the 
contexts that should be applied to each of them. It is through 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
the Task 2 that the system will suggest the actions the user 
can do. 
1) Context for the Rating Technician  
The rating technician is who has permission only to 
classify the tickets. This way the system must allow access 
only to view the calls that have been reported, but haven’t 
yet been classified. In addition to this permission, the system 
will react differently if the technician is not in your expedient 
time or if some company considers relevant to this technician 
should not access the system outside of the building of center 
service and define him without permission to extern access. 
2) Context for Attendance Technician  
Unlike that what happens with the rating technician, even 
outside of the expedient time, the technician with profile to 
attendance should be able to access the system, provided that 
it is to complete a ticket or to inform the progress of the call 
and put it on availability to another technician, what is being 
called a shift change. This peculiarity was created for cases 
where the technical have not completed the service, must 
overcome their expedient time to fulfill the Service Level 
Agreement (SLA). This condition is only allowed if the 
technician has any call that is not finished yet. 
3) Context for the Rating and Attendance Technician  
The rating and attendance technician is who can classifier 
and attend the calls. It is during the identification of the 
context that the system will suggest, based on the location of 
the technician, the interface to be used. When it is identified 
that the technician is out of the building of center service, the 
system automatically will show a list of calls for attend, 
suggesting that he is in the external environment and 
probably is consulting new calls to attend. If the technician is 
in the building of center  service, the system will direct you 
to the screen of the classification of the calls. Though the 
system suggests a feature, anytime the technician can switch 
between the two options. 
4) Context for the Administrator Technician 
The technical who has the administrator profile can view 
all calls classified or not, those in attendance and those 
already completed. Apart of observing, the administrator 
technician can classify calls and register the buildings and 
their locations. For this context, the system will show a 
screen with the not attended calls and provide other options. 
V. 
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 
This study makes part of a major project and in this part 
of the project the objective was identification of context. In 
this way, the CASD was developed with the Django 
framework [21], which uses the Python programming 
language [22]. The implementation occurred in Eclipse [23], 
by installing the Pydev plugin that integrates the Python 
programming language and Django framework in the Eclipse 
development environment. For data persistence were used 
the MySQL database and web server like Apache HTTP 
Server. For the tests registered a set of expertises, with 
buildings and technical profile for classification, attendance, 
grading and attendance and administrator profile. A mass of 
data for the different incidents buildings with different 
priorities and expertise was fed. 
The initial tests focused on the consolidation of the 
mechanism for obtaining the location of the technician via 
the mobile device. Figure 3 shows capture screens in this 
initial test phase. 
Figure 3.  Solicitation of permission to access the device localization.   
In the figure, can be seen several devices that are 
displaying the message that prompts the user for permission 
to access your location. The tests proved that the W3C 
Geolocation method is effective and it works effectively 
across multiple devices. The second set of tests aimed to 
validate the formula for calculating the distance between the 
technician and the buildings with calls for service. At this 
stage it created a parallel application with only two 
functions: registering buildings with their coordinates and 
perform a comparison between the buildings registered. The 
register of buildings invoked the W3C Geolocation API and 
comparator used the formula of spherical trigonometry to 
display the registered buildings ordered according to the 
distance between them and a building used as a reference. 
Tests showed that the formula had always used the buildings 
in the correct order of distance from smallest to largest. The 
final stage was used to validate the operation and behavior of 
the system. 
At this last phase, classification, customer attendance and 
administration functionalities have been joined. By admin 
functionality was possible to register the buildings and track 
instances of reported calls in the system. By the 
classification, the technicians defined the priority and 
expertise required for each ticket. About the costumer 
attendance, the tickets were presented to technicians 
according to their expertise and ordered according to the 
priority and the shortest distance between the building and 
location to meet the technician; 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The delay in diagnosis of incidents have generated higher 
losses for organizations and one of the factors that has 
generated this delay is the recurrence of care that is caused 
by the allocation of technicians who do not have the right 
expertise to solve the reported incident. To solve this 
problem were included characteristics of ubiquitous 
computing at the service desk system adaptation. The tests 
were done with six technicians registered at the system with 
different profiles and with five tickets, which were attended 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

at the buildings marked on Figure 4, by different technicians 
with different profiles according to the test plan already 
created. The tests show that using a context that considers 
the location of technical expertise minimizes the recurrence 
of calls since the technicians were allocated according to 
their knowledge to the solution of the problem reported. 
During testing, 100% of calls were allocated to technicians 
with the proper expertise. Even if one has obtained the 
maximum percentage, it is noteworthy that in this case the 
data were fed into the simulation and behaved as expected. 
In a real environment, for this to occur, it is necessary that 
the technician, who will make the classification of tickets, is 
highly qualified for the correct classification of so-called 
reported. 
  
 
Figure 4.  Identification of the buildings with registered tickets for 
attandance. Image adapted from the website of the Federal University of 
Santa Maria. 
Another system's built-in capability is the ability to 
automatically direct the technician to answer calls 
geographically closer, reducing the waist of time with 
unnecessary travel by technician, leaving a building A to 
building B and then was informed that there was another call 
in building A. During testing nearby buildings, facing each 
other, were called were registered and reported in two 
buildings. By the time that a technician, with the called 
expertise, made access to the system and is called for the two 
calls on each side of the street and with equal distances for 
each building, it was identified that the CASD had called the 
building that stood on the same side of the street which was 
positioned the technician. It shows that the implementation 
of context awareness, to reduce unnecessary travel, gave 
greater flexibility in attendance, which enables the company 
to earn by having a lower downtime, and by reducing 
diagnosis time of the incidents. 
Comparing with other similar systems available up to 
date, it is observed that the applications that have some 
mechanism for direct calls triggered by the user, present 
several problems, precisely the user's lack of technical 
support. Another feature present in these softwares is that the 
assignment of the priority of the call is also performed by the 
user. In this case, for the same reason of lack of technical 
knowledge or by having interest in the prompt resolution of 
your problem, users can sort it's calls always with the highest 
priority, impacting on the performance of the IT industry. In 
CASD case, the technical service center has the profile 
classifier that has the responsibility for determining the 
priority and expertise necessary to resolve the reported 
problem. The features like sorting the call according to the 
location of the technician and the definition of work time for 
the technical definition of scales, that are present in CASD, 
were not found in other softwares studied. Considering the 
point of view of implementation, tests have shown that the 
system is technically feasible and that the adjustments made 
in this paper can easily be implemented in different types of 
systems in the same category. 
The results of this study bring expectations for new 
research and future work such as the creation of a knowledge 
base consisting of problems and solutions that help both 
accelerate the process of diagnosing problems as to "retain" 
the knowledge generated by the company. Another point that 
could be addressed in a future work concerns the allocation 
of expertise for calls. It would be interesting to evaluate the 
content of the text entered, in the system, in the description 
of the problem and that before that there were automatically 
determine the expertise required to solve this incident, 
conducting a self-rating of the tickets. 
VII. REFERENCES 
[1] R. V. Ferreira, Impact of Investments in Information Technology on 
Firm Value Generation: multicase study with Baking Companies of  
the State of Minas Gerais, 2010. pp. p. 195. Dissertation 
(Administrator Master’s degree) – Federation University of Paraná, 
Curitiba, PR, 2010. 
[2] I. L. Magalhães and W. B. Pinheiro, IT Services Management: in 
Practice: An approuch based on ITIL, São Paulo: Novatec, 2007, p. 
667. 
[3] J. J. Cusick and G. Ma, "Creating an ITIL inspired Incident 
Management approach: Roots, response, and results," Network 
Operations and Management Symposium Workshops (NOMS 
Wksps), 
2010 
IEEE/IFIP, 
April 
2010, 
pp. 
142-148, 
doi:10.1109/NOMSW.2010.5486589. 
[4] IDG Now, "Problem with antivirus ativation generates a loss of $ 10 
million 
to 
Symantec," 
2011. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://idgnow.uol.com.br/seguranca/2010/10/28/problema-de-
ativacao-gera-prejuizo-de-us-10-milhoes-a-symantec/. [retrieved: Jul, 
2013] 
[5] G. O. T. Cavalari and H. A. X. Costa, "Model and Development of a 
Help-Desk System to  Lavras’ City Hall," doi: 10.5329/RESI, 2005. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://revistas.facecla.com.br/index.php/reinfo/article/view/158/0. 
[retrieved: Jul, 2013]. 
[6] M. Jäntti and J. Kalliokoski, "Identifying Knowledge Management 
Challenges in a Service Desk: A Case Study.," Proceedings of the 
2010 Second International Conference on Information, Process, and 
Knowledge 
Management, 
Feb. 
2010, 
pp. 
100-105, 
doi:10.1109/eKNOW.2010.20. 
[7] M. Zahedi, H. Rahimov and F. Soleymani, "A Two-Level Automatic 
Help Desk Based on a New Statistical Approach," Internet and Web 
Applications and Services, 2008. ICIW '08. Third International 
Conference on, June 2008, pp. 530 -534, doi:10.1109/ICIW.2008.46. 
[8] M. Weiser, "The Computer for the 21st Century," Pervasive 
Computing, IEEE, vol. 1, no. 1, Jan.-March 2002, pp. 19-25, 
doi:10.1109/MPRV.2002.993141. 
[9] M. Satyanarayanan, "Pervasive computing: vision and challenges," 
Personal Communications, IEEE, vol. 8, no. 4, Aug. 2001, pp. 10-17, 
doi:10.1109/98.943998. 
[10] A. A. F. Loureiro, R. A. R. Oliveira, T. R. d. M. B. Silva, W. R. Pires 
Júnior, L. B. R. d. Oliveira, R. A. Moreira, R. G. Siqueira, B. P. S. 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Rocha e L. B. Ruiz, “Context Awareness Computing: Challenges and 
Tendecies,” Brazilian Simposium of Network Computer and 
Distributeds Systems, May 2009, pp.  99-149. 
[11] A. K. Dey, "Understanding and Using Context," Personal Ubiquitous 
Comput, 
vol. 
5, 
no. 
1, 
Jan. 
2001, 
pp. 
4-7, 
doi:10.1007/s007790170019. 
[12] F. O. Akgul and K. Pahlavan, "Location awareness for everyday 
smart computing," Telecommunications, 2009. ICT '09. International 
Conference 
on, 
May 
2009, 
pp. 
2-7, 
doi: 
10.1109/ICTEL.2009.5158609. 
[13] W3CGeo, "W3C Geolocation Working Group," 2008. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.w3.org/2008/geolocation/. [retrieved: Jul, 
2013]. 
[14] S. J. Vaughan-Nichols, "Will HTML 5 Restandardize the Web?," 
Computer, 
vol. 
43, 
no. 
4, 
April 
2010, 
pp. 
13-15, 
doi:10.1109/MC.2010.119. 
[15] M. Jäntti, "Defining Requirements for an Incident Management 
System: A Case Study," Systems, 2009. ICONS '09. Fourth 
International 
Conference 
on, 
Mar. 
2009, 
pp. 
184 
-189, 
doi:10.1109/ICONS.2009.17. 
[16] C. Bartolini, C. Stefanelli and M. Tortonesi, "Business-impact 
analysis and simulation of critical incidents in IT service 
management," Integrated Network Management, 2009. IM '09. 
IFIP/IEEE International Symposium on, June 2009, pp. 9 -16, doi: 
10.1109/INM.2009.5188781. 
[17] P. Marcu, G. Grabarnik, L. Luan, D. Rosu, L. Shwartz and C. Ward, 
"Towards an optimized model of incident ticket correlation," 
Integrated Network Management, 2009. IM '09. IFIP/IEEE 
International 
Symposium 
on, 
June 
2009, 
pp. 
569 
-576, 
doi:10.1109/INM.2009.5188863. 
[18] R. Pereira and M. M. Silva, "ITIL maturity model," Information 
Systems and Technologies (CISTI), 2010 5th Iberian Conference on, 
June 2010, pp. 1-6. 
[19] É. M. H. d. Amaral, Proactive management of security incidents 
through the quantification of data and the use of multivariate 
statistical methods, 2010. pp. p. 137. Dissertation (Master’s degree on 
Production Engineering) - Federal University of Santa Maria, Santa 
Maria, RS, 2010. 
[20] V. L. Silva and M. P. Sucena, "Location of facilities: a case study 
applied to the proper choice of airport for minimizing logistics costs 
of distributing pharmaceutical products," Twenty-Third Congress on 
Transport Research and Education, Nov. 2009.  
[21] Django, “Django Software Foundation,” 2010. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.djangoproject.com/. [retrieved: Jul, 2013] 
[22] Python Software Foundation, “Python,” 2010. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.python.org/. [retrieved: Jul, 2013] 
[23] Eclipse, “Eclipse - The Eclipse Foundation open source community 
website,” 
2010. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.eclipse.org/. 
[retrieved: Jul, 2013] 
 
 
 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

