MagiSign: User Identification/Authentication 
Based on 3D Around Device Magnetic Signatures 
 
 
Hamed Ketabdar 
Quality and Usability Lab, TU Berlin 
Deutsche Telekom Laboratories 
Ernst-Reuter-Platz 7, 
10587 Berlin 
hamed.ketabdar@telekom.de 
 
Kamer Ali Yüksel 
TU Berlin 
Ernst-Reuter-Platz 7 
10587 Berlin 
kamer.yuksel@telekom.de 
 
Amirhossein Jahnbekam, Mehran Roshandel, Daria Skripko 
Deutsche Telekom Laboratories 
Ernst-Reuter-Platz 7 
10587 Berlin 
{amirhossein.jahanbekam, mehran.roshandel, daria.skripko} 
@telekom.de 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we present “MagiSign”, a new user 
identification/authentication technique based on 3D magnetic 
signatures created in the space around a (mobile) device. The 
main idea is to influence magnetic (compass) sensor embedded 
in some mobile devices (e.g., iPhone 3GS, G1/2 Android) using 
a properly shaped magnet. The user draws 3D signatures in 
the 3D space around the device using a magnet (e.g., pen, rod, 
ring shaped). This is what we call as “3D Magnetic Signature”. 
The temporal pattern of change in the magnetic field around 
the device is sensed and registered by the internally embedded 
magnetic 
sensor. 
For 
authentication/identification, 
new 
magnetic signature samples are compared with models created 
based on registered signatures. As the magnetic signature can 
be flexibly created in 3D space, it provides a wider choice for 
authentication. Unlike regular signatures, a hardcopy can not 
be easily generated resulting in higher security. “MagiSign” 
technique 
does 
not 
require 
expensive 
or 
complex 
hardware/algorithm, and does not impose major change in 
hardware or physical specifications of the device. It can be 
especially suitable for small mobile devices. 
 
Keywords-User Identification/Authentication, 3D Magnetic 
Signature, Around Device Interaction, Magnet, Embedded 
Magnetic (Compass) Sensor. 
 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Portable personal devices such as PDAs or mobile 
phones are being widely used during daily life. These 
devices can be used to store or access sensitive information. 
They are frequently used in insecure locations with little or 
no physical protection, and are therefore susceptible to theft 
and unauthorized access. User authentication/identification 
therefore seems to be essential for granting access to certain 
information or services. The authentication is conventionally 
performed using secret codes and personal identification 
numbers (PINs) [1]. However, they can be easily 
compromised, shared, observed, stolen or forgotten. Other 
techniques such as Fingerprint [2], a face profile [3], voice 
based verification [4], or combination has been also 
investigated.  
 
In 
this 
work, 
we 
propose 
a 
new 
authentication/identification technique, mainly for small 
mobile devices, based on interaction with embedded 
magnetic (compass) sensor. This sensor is already embedded 
in some mobile devices (e.g., Apple iPhone and Google 
Android) for navigation purposes. We call the new method 
“MagiSign” or “3D Magnetic Signature”. The user simply 
makes a 3D signature in the space around the device using a 
properly shaped magnet (rod, ring, pen) (Figure 1). 
Movement of the magnet changes temporal pattern of 
magnetic filed sensed by the magnetic sensor integrated in 
the 
mobile 
device. 
For 
signature 
identification/authentication, a new signature sample is 
matched against models created for signatures of users. The 
idea is partly inspired by Around Device Interaction (ADI) 
framework [5][6][7], which propose using space around the 
device for interaction with the device.  
As the magnetic signature can be created in 3D space, it 
provides a very large flexibility for the choice of signature. 
Unlike regular signatures, it is not easy to make hardcopies 
of such a signature. The proposed technique relies only on a 
magnetic sensor (already embedded in some devices mainly 
for navigation purposes), and a magnet as external accessory. 
Compared to camera and fingerprint sensor, a magnetic 
Figure 1:  3D Magnetic Signature 
31
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

sensor can be much simpler, smaller and cheaper, and can be 
internally embedded. It does not impose major change in 
hardware or physical specifications of devices, which can be 
especially important for small mobile devices. Extracting 
useful biometric information from magnetic sensor data can 
be algorithmically simpler than computer vision or audio 
processing techniques and the method is not subject to 
different sources of illumination, occlusion, and audio noise. 
Such an approach opens up a new, simple and effective way 
for user identification/authentication based on 3D Magnetic 
Signatures. Although we mainly talk about mobile devices, 
the presented approach can be also used for other platforms 
in a similar way.  
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes 
the 
idea 
behind 
our 
approach 
for 
user 
identification/verification in more details. Section 3 explains 
feature extraction and signature/user classification. Section 4 
presents experiments and results. An implementation of the 
proposed approach as a demonstrator on Apple iPhone is 
introduced in Section 5, and Section 6 provides conclusions 
and future work tracks 
 
II. 
MAGENTIC SIGNATURE: THE IDEA 
As already mentioned, the basic idea behind our 
approach 
is 
to 
provide 
a 
new 
user 
identification/authentication technique based on the so called 
“3D Magnetic Signature” or “MagiSign”. The user creates 
his own arbitrary 3D signature using a properly shaped 
magnet in the 3D space around the device (Figure 1). 
Movement of the magnet changes the magnetic field sensed 
(registered) by the built in compass (magnetic) sensor. For 
identification/verification, temporal pattern of a new 
signature is compared against a model already created based 
on pre-registered magnetic signature samples of users. Some 
mobile devices such as Apple iPhone 3GS, and Google 
Android are already equipped with compass (magnetic field) 
sensor. The magnet which should be used for creating 
signatures is a regular non-powered magnet in a proper shape 
such as rod, ring or pen. The idea is partly inspired from 
Around Device Interaction framework which proposes to use 
space around the device for touch less interaction with the 
device based on analyzing different sensory information 
[5][6][7].  
The 3D magnetic signature provides a wider choice for 
authentication as it can be flexibly drawn in 3D space around 
the device, and can be consequently very difficult to 
replicate. Additionally, unlike regular signature, no hardcopy 
of the magnetic signature can be easily produced, resulting in 
higher security.  
Although it is potentially possible to capture gesture 
based signatures by e.g., camera [10], getting useful 
information from magnetic sensor is algorithmically and 
technically much simpler than implementing computer 
vision techniques. In contrast to accelerometer based gesture 
recognition techniques [9], our hand gesture recognition 
approach requires a peripheral magnet. Nonetheless, using a 
tiny magnet in our case helps the user not to loose the direct 
sight to the mobile device screen. In addition, for installed 
Authentication/Identification devices in gates, shaking the 
entire device is not possible while a tiny magnet can be 
easily used to draw a signature.  Our method does not 
impose major change in hardware or physical specifications 
of mobile devices. It does not require installing complex, 
expensive, and space occupying sensors which can be critical 
in small mobile devices. It is only based on a magnetic 
sensor which is internally embedded in some new mobile 
devices. For mobile devices such as iPhone and G1/2 
Android, it is only necessary to have a properly shaped 
magnet as an extra accessory. Unlike face and audio based 
authentication techniques, our approach does not suffer from 
illumination variation, occlusion and audio sources of noise. 
Since the interaction in our method is based on magnetic 
field (which can pass through hand, body, clothes and many 
other different objects), even the space at the back of device 
can be efficiently used for signing, yet providing more 
flexibility for authentication.  Additionally, the user can 
interact with the mobile device, even if the device is not in 
the line of sight, or covered (e.g., mobile device in a pocket 
or bag). For instance, the user can activate a service or 
unlock the device without taking it out of his pocket/bag.  
We have built a demonstrator called “MagiSign” (presented 
in Section 5) based on the magnetic signature concept. The 
demonstrator is built as an application for Apple iPhone 
3GS. The application allows recording signature templates, 
and verifying the user identity based on new signature 
samples. A confidence score indicating the match between 
new signature samples and the templates is also provided on 
the screen.  
 
III. PROCESSING MAGNETIC SIGNATURES 
Magnetic signatures are created based on arbitrary 
moving a magnet (a rod or ring) by hand in the space around 
the device along different 3D trajectories (Figure 1). The 
signature can be a simple 3D motion, or the regular signature 
of the user drawn on the air! or any other combination of 
even higher complexity which actively uses all 3D space 
around the device. The rod shaped magnet can be installed in 
a pen. We have used iPhone 3GS as mobile device for our 
studies.  
The embedded compass (magnetic) sensor provides a 
measure of magnetic field strength along x, y, and z 
directions. The values change over a range of -128 to 128.  
In our current setup, the user should press a button during 
performing the magnetic signature, in order to indicate the 
beginning and end of recording magnetic signals. An 
alternative would be automatically detecting begin and end 
of the signature by comparing Euclidean norm of magnetic 
field strength against a pre -defined threshold. 
The embedded magnetic sensor captures temporal pattern of 
change in magnetic field due to the movement of the magnet. 
32
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

Some features are then extracted from signals captured by 
the magnetic sensor. The extracted features are then used to 
train 
reference 
statistical 
models 
for 
different 
users/signatures. During the test of the system, new signature 
samples are matched against the reference statistical models. 
An output score indicating the match between the new 
signature sample and existing models is  then used as a basis 
for identification/verification. 
 
IV. FEATURE EXTRACTION 
Feature extraction allows for preserving information 
which can be discriminative between signatures/users and 
removes redundant information. All the features are 
extracted over samp les in an interval marked by the 
beginning and end of the signature. This interval is divided 
into two equal length windows, and a feature vector is 
extracted for each window. The two feature vectors are then 
concatenated to form a new feature vector to be used for 
signature classification. Dividing the signature interval to 
multiple windows allows for capturing temporal pattern of 
the signature in a more detailed way. Features we have used 
are mainly based on average or variance of magnetic field 
strength in different directions, as well as piecewise 
correlation between field strength in different directions. 
Features used in this study are listed in the following: 
   .  Average field strength along x, y, and z directions (3 features)   
   .  Variance of field strength along x, y, and z directions (3 features)  
   .  Average of Euclidean norm of filed strength along x, y, z (1 feature) 
   .  Variance of Euclidean norm of field strength along x, y, and z (1 feature) 
   .  Piecewise correlation between field st rength along x-y, x-z, and y- z (3 
features) 
These features form an 11 elements feature vector for 
each window. The two window feature vectors are then 
concatenated to form a new 22 elements feature vector for 
each signature.  
Alternatively, all above features can be extracted from a 
time derivative of magnetic signals, instead of raw magnetic 
signals. Applying a derivative operator before feature 
extraction can cancel the effect of magnetic source noises 
(e.g., earth magnetic field). 
 
V. 
IDENTIFICATION/AUTHENTICATION 
The extracted feature vector is used as input to machine 
learning algorithms for signature identification/verification. 
We have studied Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) [8] as the 
classifier. 
Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) is an Artificial Neural 
Network which can realize an arbitrary set of decision 
regions in the input feature space. The feature vectors are 
used to train the MLP. During testing the system, a feature 
vector is presented at MLP input. The MLP estimates 
posterior probability of different signature classes at output 
(each MLP output is associated with one signature/user 
class). The signature/user class with highest posterior 
probability is selected as identification/authentication output. 
 
VI. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 
We have set up signature identification/verification 
experiments in order to evaluate our method. We have 
invited 15 test users for the experiments. Each user is asked 
to make a magnetic signature 15 times using a rod shaped 
magnet. We recorded the signals captured by the embedded 
magnetic sensor using an application developed for Apple 
iPhone 3GS.  
Features are extracted from magnetic signals as described 
in Section 3.1. As already mentioned, the input to feature 
extraction can be raw magnetic signals, or their time 
derivatives. Both cases are studied in the experiments. The 
extracted features are used for signature/user classification 
using MLP. We have used a 10 fold cross-validation scheme 
for managing training and test data.  
Table I shows signature/user identification results using 
MLP as classifier for features extracted from raw, as well as 
derivative magnetic signals. As can be seen in the table, the 
best performance reaches good accuracy of 95.2% for user 
identification. 
Using 
raw 
magnetic 
signals 
slightly 
outperforms the use of derivatives, however we think if the 
identification process is performed in a situation that 
orientation or tilt angle of the mobile device can not be well 
stabilized, derivatives could be more informative. 
Table II shows authentication related measures for the 
experiment, averaged over different users (raw signals are 
used for feature extraction). These measures are area under 
ROC curve, True Positive (TP) rate, and False Positive (FP) 
rate. The authentication results show a good trade -off 
between true and false alarms. 
We have further investigated the issue of user 
identification/authentication using simple and identical 
(among users) 3D gestures instead of personalized 
signatures. For the experiment, we invited 6 users which are 
asked to all draw similar and simple gestures shown in 
Figure 2. These gestures are then used for user identification 
in the same process as explained for personalized signatures.  
Table III shows user identification results for different 
gestures. As it can be seen in the table, even using very 
simple identical gestures, users can be identified with 
relatively high accuracy. This means that the whole process 
extracts biometric information allowing user identification, 
using even identical simple gestures. 
 
TABLE I. Signature/user identification results. The first column shows the 
results when raw magnetic signals are used as input to feature extraction. 
The second column shows results when derivative of magnetic signals is 
used for feature extraction. 
Source 
Raw signals 
Derivati ve signals 
Accuracy 
95.2% 
94.4% 
33
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

 
TABLE II.  User authentication measures, averaged over users. 
Measure  
ROC Area 
TP rate  
FP rate  
Value 
0.991 
0.952 
0.003 
 
 
TABLE III: User identification accuracy for simple identical gestures. 
Gestures are identical among users.   
Gesture ID 
1 
2 
3 
Accuracy 
90.0% 
92.2% 
91.2% 
 
 
 
 
 
VII. DEMONSTATOR 
Based on the idea presented in this paper, we have 
implemented a user verification/identification demo for 
Apple iPhone 3GS.  In our demo program, users are allowed 
to register a few templates of their 3D Magnetic Signature (at 
least two) around the device. Afterwards in user identity 
phase, 
new 
signature 
samples 
can 
then 
be 
recognized/verified against previously recorded patterns . The 
demo application can also provide a confidence score 
indicating the level of match between a new signature 
sample and registered templates. The demo application uses 
dynamic time warping (DTW), a template matching 
approach to match between signature samples and registered 
templates. The accuracy of the signature recognition 
application using 2 registered templates of users’ signature is 
up to 92%. The application also allows the user to adjust 
sensitivity of the algorithm for verifying signatures  by 
filtering the magnetic signals. 
 
 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK  
In this paper, we have studied a new simple yet effective 
technique for identification/authentication based on what we 
call as “3D Magnetic Signature” or “MagiSign”. The user 
can use 3D space around the device to flexibly create 3D 
signatures using a properly shaped magnet. The 3D magnetic 
signature provides a wider choice for authentication as it can 
be flexibly drawn in 3D space around the device. Unlike 
regular signature, no hardcopy of the magnetic signature can 
be easily produced, resulting in higher security. “MagiSign” 
is a touch-less way of authentication. It and does not impose 
major changes in hardware or physical specifications of 
mobile devices. It is only based on a simple, very small and 
internally embedded sensor.  
There are plenty of possibilities for further improving the 
current system. For instance, users can create 3D Magnetic 
Signatures using their own personalized magnet. This 
personalized magnet can be considered as a physical key. 
Shape, polarity, angle of usage (during signing), and 
intensity of the magnet can affect magnetic signature pattern. 
Therefore, the security level of such a signature can be 
reinforced using personalized magnets e.g., with custom 
shape, polarity, intensity, etc. We are also interested to run a 
survey to analysis attacking possibilities by asking the users 
to imitate the signature of other people.  
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
“HP iPAQ Pocket PC h5500 User Guide,” Hewlett-packard Company, 
http://bizsupport.austin.hp.com/bc/docs/support/SupportManual/lpia80
06/lpia8006.pdf, July 2010.  
[2] 
 P. Gupta, S. Ravi, A. Raghunathan , and NK. Jha, “Efficient 
Fingerprint-Based User Authentication for Embedded Systems,” 
Design Automation Conf.,  pp. 244-247, June 2005. 
[3] 
N. Aaraj, S. Ravi, A. Raghunathan, and N.K. Jha, “Architectures for 
Efficient Face Authentication in Embedded Systems,” Proc. Design, 
Automation & Test in Europe, March, pp. 1-6, 2006. 
[4] 
C.C. Leung, Y.S. Moon, and H. Meng, “A Pruning Approach for 
GMM-Based Speaker Verification in Mobile Embedded Systems,” 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3072/2004, pp. 607-613, 
2004.  
[5] 
T. Starner, J. Auxier, D. Ashbrook, and M. Gandy, “The gesture 
pendant: A self-illuminating, wearable, infrared computer vision 
system for home automation control and medical monitoring,” 
International Symposium on Wearable Computing, 2000, pp. 87-94. 
[6] 
S. Kratz, and M. Rohs, “HoverFlow: expanding the design space of 
around-device interaction ,” In Proc. of the 11th International 
Conference on Human Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services,  
Bonn, Germany, pp. 1-8, 2009. 
[7] 
L.S. Theremin, “The Design of a Musical Instrument Based on Cathode 
Relays,” Reprinted in Leonardo Music J., No. 6,  pp. 49-50, 1996. 
[8] 
M.L. Minsky and S. Papert, “Perceptrons,” Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 1969. 
[9] 
P. Keir, J. Payne, J. Elgoyhen, M. Horner, M. Naef, and P. Anderson, 
“Gesture-recognition with Non-referenced Tracking,“ 3D User 
Interfaces 3D User Interfaces (3DUI'06), pp.151-158, 2006. 
[10] Y. Wu, and T.S. Huang, “Vision-Based Gesture Recognition: A 
Review,” Proceedings of the International Gesture Workshop on 
Gesture-Based Communication in Human-Computer Interaction, pp. 
103-115, 1999. 
 
1)
2)
3)
Figure 2: Simple gestures used for user identification.  
34
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

