Healthcare Tomorrow: Toward Self-adaptive, Ubiquitous and Personalized Services
Diletta Cacciagrano, Flavio Corradini, Rosario Culmone, Emanuela Merelli, Leonardo Vito
UNICAM - School of Science and Technology, Computer Science Division,
Via Madonna delle Carceri 9, 62032 Camerino, Italy
{name.surname}@unicam.it
Abstract—Ubiquitous computing is shifting welfare for el-
derly from traditional models, like family and in-hospital care,
toward self, mobile, home and preventive care. This evolution
is expected to be supported by Ambient Intelligent systems,
embedded in smart homes and providing personalized services
at the right time, place and manner.
This is the vision of our proposal, an innovative method-
ological approach for designing and developing personalized
and ubiquitous healthcare services that autonomously adapt at
run-time to changes of the user needs and of the environment
where he lives, so that improving the quality of its life.
Keywords-Ubiquitous computing; Self-adaptive systems; Am-
bient Assisted Living; Semantic Web.
I. INTRODUCTION: THE NEED OF NEW DELIVERY
MODELS FOR HEALTHCARE
Due to a substantial decline in the age-speciﬁc mortality
of people within the last 50 years, elders have become the
fastest growing age segment in most European populations.
With advancing age, older people are increasingly likely to
suffer from various conditions which can impair independent
living.
Community care policies and socio-cultural values make
family care the predominant model of welfare support for
elderly people across Europe. This model also fulﬁlls the
wish of many elders, who prefer to safely live at their home,
keep their own social context, socialize with family members
and friends, and cultivate their own interests and hobbies.
Within a familiar home environment they receive support
for their loneliness and possibly for their chronic illnesses.
During recent years, however, the global increase in
divorce rates, family mobility, women in the workforce
and higher average age of retirement for women have
altered family patterns and, as a consequence, it is becom-
ing unfeasible to provide care to the elderly according to
the classical model. Furthermore, governments are under
economic pressure to keep under control the costs of the
public welfare system, that is usually committed to providing
in-hospital care, day services, institute-based respite care,
holiday respite and home-based sitting services.
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) are
expected to address this challenge by supporting a paradigm
shift in welfare delivery focused on the autonomous citizen
and on the independent and high quality living model, so that
alleviating pressure on the overburdened welfare system as
well as satisfying the involved users.
This can be achieved only providing a new generation
of services that distinguish from traditional ones for their
ability to be personalized (i.e., customized to the speciﬁc
individual needs), self-adaptive (i.e., able to adapt, at run-
time, to changes of the user needs), ubiquitous/pervasive
(i.e., available at any place and at any time).
The integration of different technological approaches,
such as mobile computing, social networking, sensing com-
ponents, knowledge management, Semantic Web, can fulﬁll
the above requirements and also provide a context-aware
world of ubiquitous computing, as described in [1].
A. Contribution of the paper: a methodological approach
for personalized, self-adaptive and ubiquitous services
Our aim is to support a paradigm shift in welfare delivery
focused on the autonomous citizen and on an indepen-
dent, high-quality living model. We address this challenge
merging social networking, pervasive/ubiquitous computing,
self-adaptiveness, workﬂows and Semantic Web (see Figure
1) in a 3-layered methodological approach (see Figure 4)
for designing and developing personalized and ubiquitous
healthcare services, able to autonomously adapt at run-time
to changes of the user needs and of the environment where
he lives.
The ﬁrst feature to be noticed, is what and how data
are extracted and collected from the environment. The
Application Layer aims at extracting and gathering sufﬁcient
information of the user’s environment through a number of
pervasive (i.e., sources of information by static and mobile
ICT devices enabling innovative environment functionalities)
and social sensors (i.e., sources of information that can be
identiﬁed in modern social networking and Internet services
expressing some situation and fact about users).
Another interesting feature is the way how input data
(i.e., data coming from the Application Layer) are managed,
organized and constrained (in our case, conceptualized in
a Conceptual Model by suitable domain ontologies) in the
Logic Layer, as well as processing and elaborated in the
Physical Layer.
A domain expert platform, integrating a Semantic Knowl-
edge Management System (SKMS) with a Semantic Work-
245
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 1.
A new model for healthcare delivery.
ﬂow Management System (SWMS)1 allows domain experts
to specify services as semantic-driven personalized work-
ﬂows, which can be i) executed in the Physical Layer
as multi-agent systems, ii) conceptualized as a procedural
knowledge in the Logic Layer and iii) published in the form
of SaaS (Software as a Service) in the Application Layer.
The core of the proposed approach is a reasoning and
planning engine (Figure 3 (a)). It is based on an adaptive
planning solver and on decision making algorithms (Figure 3
(b)). Thus, the engine can provide personalized and adaptive
services at run-time, i.e., speciﬁc solutions are given to reach
the same user goal depending on its continuously changing
needs and states. For instance, if the service is a Web
Service, then the planning solver can exploit the run-time
orchestration of services, with the aim of delivering the best
service for the user under consideration and according to its
current context.
B. Plan of the paper
Section 4 brieﬂy describes the 3-layer architecture of our
approach and its subsequent technology. Section III is fully
devoted to describe the core of the approach, namely the
reasoning and planning engine. A possible application of
1The platform is actually available for the bioinformatic domain at
http://cosy.cs.unicam.it/ubiolab. Currently, we are deﬁning
the Conceptual Model for the healthcare domain.
our approach is described in Section IV. Finally, Section V
closes the paper.
II. THE ARCHITECTURE FOR MANAGING USER-CENTRIC
SELF-ADAPTIVE SERVICES
In the following, we describe in detail Figure 4, which
illustrates the functional architecture of the proposed ap-
proach, together with its subsequent technology.
A. Application Layer
Mobile devices are nearly ubiquitous and can be leveraged
to provide location and announce a user’s identity/presence
in a room or place. In addition, mobile smartphones, en-
hanced with a variety of sensors (accelerometers, micro-
phones, cameras, and even digital compasses) can be mined
to infer actions or even orientation.
Static sensor networks embedded in the local smart space
can obtain temperature, humidity, infrared, audio and video,
to more fully characterize the individual’s context.
Thin RFID devices, which can be easily attached to either
people or objects, can be used for tagging and locating
objects in the space using ﬁxed readers (special-purpose
radios) and, as a natural consequence, can be exploited to
statically prevent/detect dangerous spatial/temporal object
conﬁgurations [2].
However, pervasive devices alone cannot provide a full
picture of the context, and in particular have a difﬁcult
246
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 2.
High level multilayer architecture of our methodological approach.
time inferring an individual’s tastes. On the other hand,
social networks (like Facebook, Twitter, MySpace, LinkedIn,
etc.) are rich with detailed contextual information describing
individual’s personal interests and preferences as well as
friendship relationships.
All two classes of pervasive and social sensor data, when
temporally archived, provide historical perspectives that even
further enhance the understanding of context.
It is the combination of these two key data streams
that permits effective location-aware and preference-aware
adaptation by software to effectuate a context-aware action
in the vicinity of the user.
B. Logic and Physical Layers
Logic and Physical Layers combine knowledge manage-
ment, Semantic Web, workﬂows, self-adaptivity and agent-
based techniques for managing distributed domain and op-
erational knowledge, as well as for efﬁciently deﬁning,
executing, storing and publishing self-adaptive ubiquitous
services as semantic-driven workﬂows. We remand to [3]
for the details. Here we brieﬂy recall the main features of
such a framework, instantiated for the AAL domain.
Physical Layer: At this level, the Application Layer objects
are represented as software components (i.e., agents exe-
cuted in an active middleware) representing sensors (smoke,
temperature, door status, location of the user, and so on),
actuators (speech synthesizer, device regulators, emergency
calls, and so on) and services and interacting with each other.
An Agent-based middleware2, implementing a migrating
workﬂow model [5], provides the run-time environment
for executing services as mobile and distributed code. In
particular, it enables, transparently to users, the interaction
with the external resources, i.e., invoked applications, and
the agent migration to different sites.
Logic Layer: It pivots on a Conceptual Model aiming at
solving the semantic heterogeneity of all the (Application
Layer) resources and activities, as well as at allowing
the realization of well-formed, ubiquitous and self-adaptive
services from (semantically) heterogeneous, distributed and
constantly updated resources and activities.
A Semantic Knowledge Management System (SKMS)
allows to describe and annotate in a multi-level concep-
tual model any (Application Layer) environmental/emotional
data (in Human Ontology and Environment Ontology) and
activities (in Task Ontology).
2Due to the lack of space, middleware architecture is not discussed here
and we refer to [4] for further details.
247
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

It aims at solving, in a transparent and automatic way,
factors like semantic (meaning) and computational (interface
of invocation) heterogeneity, level of awareness, physical
distribution of resources, etc.
In particular, the input data heterogeneity is solved intro-
ducing an abstract concept of sensor. According to its vision,
the general concept of entity is used to identify any kind of
object either physical, artifact or abstract:
- Physical and artifact entities (e.g., people, smartphones,
domestic appliances, air conditioning, automatic doors,
and so on) play the role of pervasive sensors, that is,
they are equipped with a traditional device permitting
identiﬁcation and/or transmission of signals (e.g., RFId,
GPS, Wi-Fi, and so on);
- Abstract entities, including social networking activities
such as Facebook and Skype, act as social sensors,
gathering information about the way the user is feeling.
The Semantic Workﬂow Management System (SWMS)
is the component which allows to edit services as semantic-
driven personalized workﬂows, to monitor their execution,
to conceptualize them as a procedural knowledge and to
publish them in the form of SaaS.
A Web-based graphical interface enables to edit health-
care services as XPDL[6] workﬂow speciﬁcations, simply
dragging-and-dropping resources and activities from the
Conceptual Model. It also enables the execution of edited
and already published services, the monitoring of their
execution state and the management of the produced results.
An XPDL compiler translates workﬂow speciﬁcations into
interactive component-based speciﬁcations and generates the
code to be executed on the agent-based middleware. The
associated workﬂow speciﬁcation is the coordination model
that describes how the generated agents cooperate to reach
a particular goal, when executed on the agent middleware.
The operator signature available in the SWMS has been
deﬁned with the purpose to be a language-independent
kernel. As a consequence, any workﬂow speciﬁcation can
be also automatically conceptualized according to a corre-
sponding BPMN (Business Process Modeling Notation) [7]
Ontology kernel and stored as a SaaS concept in the Task
Ontology.
A healthcare expert can edit a workﬂow, selecting the
appropriate and involved environment, human and task
concepts, associate speciﬁc goals and store them. Service
exceptions are managed at two (cooperating) levels: either
at the editing level - where the semantic layer naturally
allows exceptions to be handled as explicit and user-deﬁned
workﬂow activities - or at the middleware level - where a
special agent is devoted to handle exceptions in according
to different behaviors (invocation of equivalent activities,
activity stop/pause/resume etc.).
III. TECHNIQUES AND METHODS FOR SELF-ADAPTIVE
SERVICES
Self-adaptive planning is a vital aspect of self-adaptive
systems. Self-adaptive systems should autonomously adapt
at run time to changes in their operational environment,
guided by the goals assigned by their stakeholders [8].
Following Ganek and Corbi [9], we deﬁne self-adaptive
services as services that can automatically take the correct
actions based on their knowledge of what is happening
in the environment, driven by the events and activities as
well as by the goals the stakeholders (healthcare domain
experts) assigned to them. In other words, self-adaptive
services can modify its behaviour in response to changes
in its environment to better meet users’ requirements [10].
From an architectural viewpoint, a self-adaptive service
needs to implement some form of built-in feedback loop - by
collecting information, analysing it, deciding on further and
better actions to reach the goal - for tuning itself according
to the user needs.
Continuous interaction, collecting and conceptualization
of information, detailed user’s status and appropriate user’s
proﬁling are just the key issues to address the needs of
elderly users at home, as well as experts at the healthcare
centers, relatives or friends somewhere by mobile devices
or Web interfaces, that can beneﬁt to other appliances to
make smart decisions making and to provide/exploit ser-
vices highly aware of their context of use and self-adaptive
accordingly.
Applying formal languages such as XPDL, PDDL (Plan-
ning Domain Deﬁnition language) [11] and BPMN, enriched
with semantics given by the Conceptual Model (i.e., Hu-
man, Environment and Task Ontology), agents can infer
new knowledge useful to personalize a healthcare service.
Figure 3 (a) describes the self-adaptive planning approach
as a business process.
In the following, the main activities in Figure 3 (a) are
described:
- Identifying (user) needs: this activity extracts from the
Conceptual Model the user needs reasoning over the
knowledge base (i.e., T-box and A-box);
- Context-awareness: this activity allows to contextualize
the user’s proﬁle in a speciﬁc context looking at social
and pervasive sensor input data;
- Goal: this activity adapts a generic (target) goal to a
speciﬁc user’s proﬁle according to its needs;
- Adaptive planning: this activity generates a tailored
personal healthcare service speciﬁed as a workﬂow. In
this task we use NuPDDL [12], semantically annotated
with input data and activities, and a BPM solver for
determining the personalized healthcare service (see
Fig.3 (b)).
- Service Brokering: this activity determines what ser-
vices, platforms, infrastructures, contents are needed for
248
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 3.
(a) High level Business Process approach to self-adaptive services; (b) Planning approach of a personalized self-adaptive service.
reaching the goal;
- Service Providing: this activity provides the ﬁnal per-
sonalized service to the user;
- Negotiation: this activity allows the user to tune and
further customize the service.
IV. POSSIBLE SCENARIO: PRIVATE HOME WITH AN
ELDERLY PERSON WITH MCI
Elen is 83 years old and lives alone in an apartment in
a nice small village. Elen has cognitive impairments; she
starts to loose short memory. She is also loosing the ability
to walk. She is very worried for her own health condition,
but at the same time she wants to maintain her independence.
She knows that mild cognitive impairment increases the risk
of later developing dementia, including Alzheimer’s disease,
especially when the main difﬁculty is with memory. For
these reasons she decides to try a technological assistance.
Once technicians have installed the RFID framework, they
have to annotate personalized sensors and biosensors w.r.t.
Elen’s needs. Then, they deploy the Elen’s self-adaptive
service by specifying the Elen’s proﬁle. After that, a set of
rules will be speciﬁed expressing qualitative and quantitative
constraints to the virtual living space w.r.t. Elen’s actions and
physiological parameters.
For example, R1: do not permit Elen to forget taking
drugs; R2: when Elen drinks water be sure that the tem-
perature is less than 10; R3: do not allow that Elen remains
without drugs; R4: regulate the amount of drugs that Elen
must take by reasoning over her physiological parameters.
The self-adaptive service will monitor her physiological
parameters in order to suggest proper drugs to be taken
and, especially, it will prevent her from doing actions (take
the wrong medicine or the wrong amount of medicine or
the wrong combination) arising dangerous situations. During
Elen’s every-day life, will act as a caregiver watching.
While she lives, the system will reason over her healthy
status using the rules it has been given and inferring
new ones. It will predict dangerous situations and, through
actuators, will regulate the arising unwanted conﬁguration
by creating events that constraint the environment (drug
dispenser) to adapt Elen’s needs.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper suggests a methodological approach for de-
signing self-adaptive ubiquitous and personalized services
in the healthcare domain. Following Ganek and Corbi [9],
we have deﬁned self-adaptive services as services that can
automatically take the correct actions based on their knowl-
249
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 4.
The skeleton of the Elen’s service, edited by the SWMS graphical interface.
edge of what is happening in the environment, driven by the
events, the activities and the goals the stakeholders assigned
to them.
It is worth noting that such an approach can be extended
without effort to any domain, simply conceptualizing it in
a proper way and instantiating the Conceptual Model with
the speciﬁc ontologies.
Currently, our approach is partially implemented and is
being used in the healthcare domain for the development
of a drug dispensary service for people with mild cognitive
impairment (MCI). What should be done in a near future is
to experiment the system in a real home.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is partly supported by the JADE project
Joining innovative Approaches for the integration and De-
velopment of transnational knowledge of clusters policies
related to independent of Elderly (FP7-Capacities, 2011-
2013).
REFERENCES
[1] M. Weiser, “Whatever happened to the next-generation inter-
net?” Commun. ACM, vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 61–68, 2001.
[2] D.
Cacciagrano,
F.
Corradini,
and
R.
Culmone,
“Resourcehome: An rﬁd-based architecture and a ﬂexible
model
for
ambient
intelligence,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
2010
Fifth
International
Conference
on
Systems,
ser.
ICONS
’10.
Washington,
DC,
USA:
IEEE
Computer Society, 2010, pp. 6–11. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICONS.2010.9
[3] D. Cacciagrano, F. Corradini, E. Merelli, L. Vito, and
G. Romiti, “Resourceome: a multilevel model and a Semantic
Web tool for managing domain and operational knowledge,”
in The Third International Conference on Advances in Se-
mantic Processing (SEMAPRO 2009), P. Dini, J. Hendler, and
J. Noll, Eds.
IEEE Computer Society, 2009.
[4] F. Corradini and E. Merelli, “Hermes: Agent-Based Middle-
ware for Mobile Computing,” in SFM, 2005, pp. 234–270.
[5] F. Corradini, R. Culmone, and M. R. D. Berardini, “Code
mobility for pervasive computing,” in WETICE.
IEEE
Computer Society, 2004, pp. 431–432.
[6] “Xml process deﬁnition language.” [Online]. Available:
http://xml.coverpages.org/XPDL20010522.pdf
[7] “Business process modeling notation.” [Online]. Available:
http://www.bpmn.org
[8] N. Khakpour, S. Jalili, C. L. Talcott, M. Sirjani, and M. R.
Mousavi, “Pobsam: Policy-based managing of actors in self-
adaptive systems,” Electr. Notes Theor. Comput. Sci., vol. 263,
pp. 129–143, 2010.
[9] A. G. Ganek and T. A. Corsi, “The dawning of the autonomic
computing era,” IBM Systems Journal, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 5–
18, 2003.
[10] A. Lapouchnian, Y. Yu, S. Liaskos, and J. Mylopoulos,
“Requirements-driven design of autonomic application soft-
ware.” In H. Erdogmus, E. Stroulia, and D. A. Stewart,
editors, CASCON, IBM, pp. 80–94, 2006.
[11] D. Mcdermott, M. Ghallab, A. Howe, C. Knoblock, A. Ram,
M. Veloso, D. Weld, and D. Wilkins, “PDDL - The Planning
Domain Deﬁnition Language,” Tech. Rep., 1998. [Online].
Available: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=
10.1.1.37.212
[12] “NuPDDL.” [Online]. Available: http://mbp.fbk.eu/NuPDDL.
html
250
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

