A Musical Feast 
How Musical Performance Using Playful Utensils Can Enrich the Cooking and Dining Experience 
Cao Yan Yan 
Graduate School of Media Design 
Keio University 
Yokohama, Japan 
yanyan.cao@gmail.com  
Jeffrey Tzu Kwan Valino Koh 
NGS, Keio-NUS CUTECenter 
National University of Singapore 
Singapore 
jtkv.koh@gmail.com
Abstract-Playful Utensils is a system of music-enabled, eating 
and food preparation utensils that facilitate light-hearted 
interaction and communication in the kitchen and dining 
room both locally and remotely. In order to understand the 
use of utensils to support communal behavior in dining 
situations, three design studies were conducted. Addressing 
the need for a new direction for food research in HCI, Playful 
Utensils aims to draw attention away from contemporary 
kitchen and dining media research, which focuses too acutely 
on ubiquitous sensory overload, to make apparent the need 
for socially communicative, emotional assets investment 
regarding communities in the kitchen and dining space. 
Keywords-dining; playfulness; performance 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Appearing to be and functioning as everyday 
household cooking and dining utensils such as 
forks, knives, spoons and chopsticks, Playful 
Utensils is a system of music-enabled, eating and 
food preparation utensils that facilitate light-
hearted interaction and communication in the 
kitchen and dining room. When Playful Utensils 
are activated, they create a ubiquitous wireless 
mesh network in which each utensil talks to one 
another via a host server. This enables the 
musically augmented utensils to be orchestrated 
by family members at the dinner table or remote 
locations. The light-hearted interactions will 
enrich cooking and dining experience and 
enhance emotional connections among family 
members. 
Traditionally, in Asian households, the kitchen 
and dining room has been a place for families to 
connect and engage with one another, yet today’s 
accelerated lifestyle endangers such nurturing 
activities. The generation gap between children, 
adults and the elderly is ever increasing, partly 
due to the fact that the experience of communal 
cooking and dining by adults is often at odds with 
the technological pursuits of children. The desire 
to revive nostalgic sharing among family in 
modern domestic space poses new challenges and 
requirements [1, 2, 3].  
You might remember playing drums with your 
chopsticks and bowl and getting a slap from your 
mother, but many cultures, in fact, practice 
performative eating and dining and Asian cultures 
are no exception. We only need to look to Korean 
Nanta and Japanese Teppanyaki to see that 
playful cooking and dining has been nurtured by 
the diversity of Asian cultures and is alive and 
thriving, sometimes even facilitating big business. 
Not only do such practices improve the 
communication between all participants, but it 
also makes food actually taste better; at least, in a 
psychosomatic way, as the people involved enjoy 
the company of one another on a dimension that 
transcends the basic and sometimes mundane 
activity of cooking and eating [4].  
What if playful interaction was introduced as a 
new behavioral model to improve communication 
between children, adults and the elderly within 
the kitchen and dining room at home? Playful 
Utensils aims to be a system to promote 
interaction between members of the family who 
experience such a generation gap. Everyday 
cooking and dining utensils become intuitive 
musical instruments so that the very act of eating 
and 
food 
preparation 
becomes 
fun 
and 
communally interactive for the whole family. 
Working in tandem, a collection of Playful 
Utensils becomes an orchestra of harmonious, 
generative musical instruments in which the 
whole family can play with. Using the traditional 
and intuitive actions that each utensil was 
purposely built to function as, ambient dining 
music can be created adding a new dimension to 
196
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
family-centered interaction in a communal and 
playful way. This method of playful interaction 
aims to improve the communication and 
enjoyment of preparing and eating food in the 
family household. 
The paper is presented in eight sections. In 
Section II, we presented our motivation along 
with related works in cooking and domestic 
space. We present key feature and novelty of 
Playful Utensils in Section III and show details of 
three qualitative user studies in Section IV. 
Section 
V 
describes 
current 
design 
and 
implementation of Playful Utensils, followed by 
future work and possible scenarios in Section VI, 
with major contribution of research described in 
final Section VII. 
II. 
MOTIVATION AND RELATED WORKS 
Rich and robust telecommunication tools such 
as mobile phone technology, audio/video online 
chat and email have facilitated our mastery of 
audio and visual communication. Yet even with 
these systems in place, we still have some 
difficulty choosing what to talk about. “Small 
talk” and discussion about the weather can only 
take a conversation so far. By injecting light-
hearted playful and educational activities into an 
online conversation, it is our hopes to further 
engage 
people, 
especially 
within 
remote 
communications situations that include cross-
generational relationships. 
Many works in domestic space involve 
exploration with robotic cooking assistants, but 
they do not address the need for interpersonal 
relationships in regards to the preparation of food, 
nor the sharing of recipes, meals and traditions 
across generations [17]. Numerous projects 
address the need for contextually rich information 
while cooking without addressing the need for 
building social capital nor facilitating family 
intergenerational bonding [5]. These could 
overload the user with superfluous data. Other 
systems provide the technology needed to achieve 
what Playful Utensils aims to do, but does not 
provide an adequate application in order facilitate 
family and intergenerational bonding. 
Digital media is seemingly rebounding in 
regards to its shift from the digital and ephemeral, 
back to the physical and tangible [10, 14, 15]. 
Synesthetic and multimodal implementations to 
improve memory have been proposed for 
augmented object interaction and the television 
[12], yet sound still continues to be illusive in 
regards to navigation and accessibility [18]. Yet 
there is no doubt that sound can enhance family 
remembering [9]. 
Other studies include the need to address the 
heritage of cooking and recipe transmission 
practice, but most of the time cooking is seen as 
laborious and often outside the domain of 
entertainment in many households, leaving young 
people without the necessary skills to equip 
themselves for independence [13, 16]. 
The Playful Toothbrush system developed at 
the National Taiwan University is most similar to 
our offering by presenting the user with the 
opportunity to be persuaded into better habits 
using ubiquitous computing [7]. Our system also 
has persuasive qualities, but is geared more 
towards collaborative interaction between many 
people, where as Playful Toothbrush concentrates 
more on the individual user. 
Our system aims to build upon all these works 
in order to address issues of interpersonal 
relationships in families, activity and alternative 
means of learning, and address the new direction 
for food research in HCI [11]. 
III. KEY FEATURE OF PLAYFUL UTENSILS 
A. Playfulness 
Mostly referring to animals, the psychologist 
Gordon M. Burghardt (1984) outlined a working 
set of characteristics for play [6]. He mentioned 
among other things that play: 
• 
Has a pleasing effect 
• 
Is sequentially variable 
• 
Is stimulus seeking 
• 
Is quick and energetically expensive 
behavior 
• 
Involves exaggerated incompetent or 
awkward  
movements 
• 
Is most prevalent in juveniles 
• 
Has special “play” signals 
• 
Has a background role in relationships 
• 
Is marked by a relative absence of threat 
or sub- mission 
• 
Is marked by a relative absence of final 
 
consummatory behavior. 
   Most of his work was derived from the 
observation of animals, but at least some of these 
197
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
characteristics for play can be applied to the way 
human beings play. Although children and adults 
alike can sometimes be seen as “messy beasts” if 
they do not observe the proper table manners, 
most of the time children at play can be seen as 
quite graceful, if you are not the one doing the 
cleaning up, that is [8]. 
   For the purposes of Playful Utensils, 
Burghardt’s characteristics of play outline a 
possibly revolutionary way to socialize at the 
dinner table. Children love to play and although 
they may not admit it, adults like to play just as 
much. Studies have shown that mothers often 
signal children as young as 3 months that it is 
time to play [19]. Playful interactions strengthen 
the bond between children and adults, so it would 
only make sense that this type of playful 
understanding could be expressed when using 
Playful Utensils. 
B. Learn by Object 
Think back to when you first purchased the 
mobile phone that is sitting in your pocket. The 
chances that you actually read the instruction 
manual for that phone is probably pretty low, 
unless you work for IEEE or derive enjoyment 
from 
comparing 
low-level 
technical 
specifications. A more likely scenario is that you 
probably learned how to use said phone by 
pressing some buttons, exploring the menus, 
generally ignoring the user’s manual, and poked, 
prodded and played your way to an understanding 
with the device until you learned enough to 
satisfy your need of knowledge regarding its 
functionality relevant to your context. 
For children, playing is one of the most 
effective ways to learn all sorts of useful 
knowledge. Any object has the potential to teach a 
myriad of things and children can transform 
anything into a toy. By using a tangible set of 
objects, Playful Utensils not only offers an 
analogue way to learn about cuisine and music, 
but also teaches children how to interact in 
tandem, with one another and even with their 
sometimes less imaginative, adult counterparts. 
Co-operation is one of the main learning features 
in the Playful Utensil system and with this tool, 
children have the chance to teach adults as well as 
learn from them. 
Speaking of adults, for most of us, objects that 
were once filled with playfulness fade away into 
the depths of functionality. These everyday 
objects become invisible until we need them to 
perform a specific task. By redesigning not only 
the objects but also the way adults use these 
objects, we can make something that both 
children and adults can play with. Even the 
elderly could benefit from the stimulation that 
Playful Utensils could provide, as the mere act of 
eating would activate the system and the 
interactions designed around it using minimal 
energy. If grandma had a chance to rock-out with 
her knife and fork while negotiating her pork-
chops, mashed potatoes and green peas, everyone 
at the dinner table would have a good time. 
C. Tools for Knowledge Sharing & Healthy 
Eating 
As a tool, Playful Utensils can be used to 
associate healthier meals with favourite songs. 
This could be used to promote nutrition for say, 
children who do not want to eat their broccoli. By 
pairing favourite and fun songs with particular 
dishes in a meal, parents can add another 
dimension to dining in order to promote healthier 
eating. 
As a learning objective, parents could also pass 
on the knowledge of certain recipes that would 
only normally be conveyed through word-of-
mouth. Bringing children into the kitchen in the 
first place is hard enough, but by making the 
activity of food preparation and cooking more 
engaging and entertaining, teaching a child or 
teen how to compose a particular dish could be 
assisted by an associated song. People could 
eventually learn how to prepare all sorts of dishes 
based on the songs that are produced from a 
recipe. 
D. Simple Functions for Complex Lifestyles 
Video games such as RedOctane’s Guitar Hero 
[20] and Harmonix Music System’s Rockband 
[21] have successfully merged the activities of 
musical performance and gaming to entice new 
and meaningful ways for people to interact and 
engage with technology and one another. Much 
like a collection of instruments can play 
compositions collectively as an orchestra, in the 
Playful Utensils system each utensil has a simple 
function but when used in tandem can produce 
recipes and dining experiences of exponential 
variety. 
198
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
The arrangement of musical notation can be 
treated as a recipe to cook a song. A food recipe 
can be seen as the sheet music to orchestrate a 
meal. For Playful Utensils, these two linear 
formulas are interchangeable in a way so that 
everyday dishes can be prepared and eaten in 
regards to what songs the family wishes to re-
enact. In a similar fashion, picking a favourite 
song to play together becomes associated with a 
favourite dish or meal. 
Much like the movements in an opera, courses 
of a meal could also be seen as operatic chapters. 
As the courses of a meal progress, new 
movements in the harmony could act as markers 
for a meals’ development. 
E. How to Make & Orchestrate? Other 
Instrument in the Family? 
A fork is used differently, then a spoon, 
compared to a knife and so on. By analysing the 
basic uses and functions of each utensil we can 
begin to extrapolate a set of triggers based on 
natural uses specific to the utensil and how they 
are used for particular eating situations. For 
instance, one would use chopsticks to eat rice 
from a bowl in a specific manner that is unique to 
that action. Eating noodles with the same set of 
chopsticks in turn expresses a different way to use 
them, thus offering another dimension of 
harmonic music triggering. 
F. Music Generation 
Of course, any musician will tell you that 
actually playing the piano, violin or any other 
instrument well takes a lifetime of practice and 
hard work. The initial model of Playful Utensils is 
not meant to be a pure musical instrument in this 
respect, as the learning curve for such a device 
would discourage some people from using them 
in the first place. In its initial mode, Playful 
Utensils will simply activate tones and sequences 
harmoniously as opposed melodically to create 
interactive ambient music for cooking and dining,  
using the most natural and intuitive motions that 
these two activities are already synonymous with. 
Concentrating on performing music that 
doesn't leave a bad taste in everyone's mouth can  
be a stressful task. Objectives such as playing in 
key, maintaining synchronicity, timing and so on 
can actually act adversely to having a pleasurable 
experience. 
Considering 
these 
problematic 
outcomes, a central server in which the timing and 
key are always assisted in an advantageous way 
monitors each item in the Playful Utensils system. 
This is achieved by using harmony as the main 
vehicle to drive musical performance. Even if a 
member of the family does happen to play "out of 
step" or accidentally, dissonant notes can actually 
introduce 
interesting 
highlights 
within 
the 
composition. In this manner, “free-styling” and 
improvisation is actually promoted and rewarded.  
Each pair of chopsticks acts as an instrument in 
an orchestra and is wirelessly connected to a 
server, much like an individual node in an ad-hoc 
network. Working in tandem, they create music. 
MAX-Stream 
Xbee 
modules 
complete 
the 
wireless network by broadcasting data to the 
server. Multiple pairs of chopsticks will stream 
data synchronously to the server. This enables 
collaboration in the creation of sound. 
IV. QUALITATIVE USER STUDIES 
To understand how to support communal 
behavior in dining situations, and find new 
opportunities for designing the system, three 
qualitative user studies were conducted before 
development our prototype. 
The first two studies took into account cross-
generational 
co-cooking 
scenarios 
using 
a 
computer-mediated environment through the 
Internet using the teleconferencing tool, i.e: 
Skype. Shared activity, i.e.: co-cooking game and 
instructional co-cooking respectively was taken 
into account in order to ascertain the level of 
engagement when compared to cross-generational 
interaction using online tools without a pre-
defined activity. 
The third gestural study looked at how people 
eat together. Chopstick usage was analyzed and 
interpreted into a general family of gestures, 
which were then used to define the functions and 
actuations of the current prototype. 
The first study implied hypothesis that a 
communal and synchronized activity supports 
communication shared between generations over 
long distances, engagement could be more lasting 
compared to telecommunication without shared 
activities. 
The second study implied the hypothesis that 
learning would be more effective using enactive 
199
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
cognitive theories when designing a computer-
mediated interaction. 
The third study confirmed the assumption that 
gestural data in using chopsticks are rich for 
extrapolation. 
These studies informed our design for the 
current prototype of Playful Utensils. They were 
designed to enable new communication activities, 
encourage people to join in sound and music 
creation, and at the same time, encourage 
communal playing. This will enrich engagement 
between parties who reside at different locations 
through gestural behavior, but may not have the 
means to physically be present to share these 
experiences. 
A. Qualitative Study One: Cross-Generational 
Instructional Co-Cooking Game Between 
Grandmother and Grandchildren  
In the first study, grandmother will teach 
grandchildren how to assemble their sandwich 
using real food. The first study consisting of two 
scenarios was conducted between grandmother 
and grandchildren in order to test our first 
hypothesis; whether communal, synchronized and 
shared activity between generations over long 
distances could increase engagement duration and 
quality. As a comparison, both parties played 
face-to-face for fifteen minutes, and were then 
separated in the second scenario and continued to 
play over the Internet using a computer-mediated 
environment facilitated by Skype.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Grandmother instructing grandchildren over the Internet using 
Skype and real food 
1) Description of Participants 
We chose participants who has experience 
living apart from their close family members and 
are used to telecommunication. In this study, the 
chosen family crosses three generations, the 
grandmother in her 60’s visiting from the USA; 
two kids – 5-year-old boy and 3-year-old girl. The 
family has multi-culture background, as father is 
from Spain and mother is American Hungarian.  
It is assumed that each subject has some 
measure of experience playing with one other and 
that a socio-political framework involving each 
family member individually and in tandem has 
been established prior to this study. 
2) Observations and Learning 
According to observations from parents and 
grandmother, the children became more engaged 
with tele-presence communication through task-
oriented play. 
Communication 
between 
children 
and 
grandparents were more engaging, they both are 
strongly engaged with the game and shared the 
interactive narrative. This differs from the 
reflections of all parties when recounting 
conventional interaction previously shared using 
Skype without a shared activity.  
There was some disparity between looking at a 
video stream and using objects. The girl tended to 
engage with the grandparent visually through 
video conferencing, while the boy tended to 
engage with the make-belief toys and followed 
audio cues from the grandmother as apposed to 
using video and visual cues.  
People became more engaged with tele-
presence communication through task-oriented 
play. “Small-talk” and “chit-chat” was eliminated, 
replaced by an interactive narrative shared 
between parties. 
Using a playful interactive learning toy, 
instructional embodying tasks can assist play, 
which are normally communicated verbatim, 
using tangible objects instead.  
Toys 
should 
assist 
instruction 
using 
multimodal feedback; therefore objects should 
embody multimodal communicative qualities 
such as haptic, sound and lights. 
This could provide a seamless and engaging 
experience that moves focus away from mono-
directional, 
instructional 
learning 
towards 
experiential and enactive methods of cognition.  
200
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
B. Qualitative Study Two:Cross-Generational 
Instructional Co-Cooking Using Real Food 
Between Mother & Daughter via Skype 
The second study was designed to test co-
cooking activities via telecommunication channel. 
The aim of the daughter, who has basic cooking 
knowledge, wants to learn more sophisticated 
recipes from mother using a computer-mediated 
environment.  
1) Description of Participants 
   In order to understand how computer-
mediated 
environments 
affected 
established 
relationships, subjects with close relationships 
were chosen. The chosen subjects were mother 
aged 58 and daughter aged 26. 
Mom lives in Shanghai while daughter lives in 
Singapore. Although there was no temporal 
distance, geographically, the distance was real, 
which added to the experience of the experiment 
subjects.  
The mother had sophisticated skills in cooking, 
whereas the daughter was familiar with cooking 
simple dishes. Both mom and daughter have had 
some experience cooking together before but 
never through the Internet via a computer 
mediated environment. Both mom and daughter 
have had no formal cooking instruction training. 
2) Observations and Learning 
During the exercise, both experimenters noticed 
and participants reflected that communication was 
mostly to convey control timing and temperature, 
order of actions and amount of ingredients.  
Both parties we mostly occupied by audio 
cueing and did not paying attention to the video 
 
 
Figure 2.  Mother and daughter co-cook using Skype on Internet 
stream during the cooking phase. This could be 
because of the physical coordination needed in the 
cooking process, as well as the attention to things 
such as colour of food, taste while cooking, etc. 
Participants naturally developed easy-to-follow 
expressions for measuring.  For example “throw 
in three spoons of sugar; mix with one spoon of 
water; warm up the oil for three minutes; now is 
about right”, etc. 
Both mom and daughter mentioned that they 
wish that the video camera was better placed, as 
opposed to physically attached to their display on 
the notebook computer, suggesting that current  
technology does not adequately support such 
types of interaction.  
Follow up results reveal that daughter has built 
up confidence for learning more sophisticated 
recipes using this type of communication. She 
also expressed confidence in recreating the dish 
because she has the opportunity to cook together 
with her mom, albeit through use of the Internet 
and not face-to-face. Both parties also expressed 
that the experience was enjoyable and it was good 
to be engaged with an activity as an alternate 
means to spend time together using a computer-
mediated environment over long distances. 
These outcomes support the second hypothesis 
that learning could be enhanced using enactive 
and multi-modal activity, even when using a 
computer-mediated environment. 
C. Qualitative User Study Three: Gestural Study 
Using Chopsticks 
Finally, in order to understand how users 
would negotiate food with chopsticks specifically,  
 
 
Figure 3.  Video still of chopstick use gesture analysis 
201
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
we conducted an observational study of groups of 
people eating food with the utensil. The 
observations we recorded and analysed in order to 
extrapolate specific gestures that were used with 
the utensil. These gestures were then mapped to 
specific actuations in our prototype that triggered 
sounds produced by our software server-side. 
Corresponding food attuned to the utensil was 
used, in this case Chinese food. 
V. 
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
Chopsticks embodied the first prototype of the 
playful utensils system. Chopsticks were chosen 
for its potentially rich and diverse set of gestures. 
It also addresses a cultural significance in regards 
to Asia in which the Playful Utensils system was 
developed for.  
To make each utensil easy to use, only the 
power supply, gestural data acquisition module 
and wireless unit are located on the chopsticks. 
The server side software sub-system running 
Cycling ’74’s Max/MSP is used to analyse 
gestural data and generate music. More details are 
introduced in the next section. 
A. Hardware Design 
The system electronics are divided into two 
main subsystems. Built from proven, off-the-shelf 
hardware, the system is very robust. The two 
main subsystems, which are the utensils and the 
server, are described below. 
1) Utensils 
As seen in Figure 4, this is the third iteration 
prototype, which is lightweight to achieve robust 
gestural capturing during use, reliable network 
performance 
and 
low 
power 
consumption. 
 
Figure 4.  The Playful Utensils prototype system 
 
2) Sensing 
After experimentation with different sensing 
methods 
such 
as 
photometers 
and 
linear 
potentiometers, 
accelerometer 
and 
compass 
sensing was finalized for the actuation translation 
of gestures. This decision provides a fluid and 
easy way for users to interact with the system 
without having to press a complex series of touch-
points as found in a linear potentiometer, and is  
independent of ambient lighting as photometers 
often are. 
The accelerometer and compass units are 
connected to a custom-made circuit. We use the 
Analogue Device ADXL345 3-way accelerometer 
for our current sensing needs. This provides us 
with a small, thin, low-powered unit with 13-bit 
resolution and tilt and dynamic acceleration 
sensing capabilities. 
3) Networking 
     Also attached to the breadboard is an Xbee 
wireless module that uses the 802.15.4 protocol 
stack on the 2.4GHz wideband spectrum, 
providing the utensils with simple and reliable, 
low-power, wireless connectivity to the server. 
4) Power Supply 
     A 
quick-charging, 
flat, 
compact 
and 
regulated, 3.7v, 110mAh lithium ion battery 
powers the entire utensil unit.  
5) Server 
To achieve real-time processing of signals, as 
human hearing could detect tiny time delays in 
sound feedback, all data processing is streamed 
onto a server. An off-the-shelf, late 2010 
Macbook Pro computer provides enough  
 
 
Figure 5.  Diagram of the Initial Prototype 
202
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
Figure 6.  Gestural data acquired from utensil-embedded accelerometer in 
Max/MSP 
processing power for real-time performance, and 
is a reliable platform to run music generation 
programs.  
The Playful Utensils system server runs 
Cycling ’74’s Max/MSP. The program co-
ordinates the utensils, as well as plays audio 
according to the gestural information. All data is 
transferred wirelessly to an Xbee receiver 
attached to the server via USB.  
B. Software Design 
The software sub-system that controls the 
analysis of gestures and playback of appropriate 
audio was written in Cycling ‘74’s Max/MSP. 
Max/MSP. It was chosen because it is a high-
level, object-oriented programming environment 
designed for creative practitioners.  
The visually oriented interface is relatively 
easy to use, is well supported by the software 
developers who publish it. It also has a strong 
community of end-users. For these reason it is an 
ideal development platform for other developers 
to appropriate and modify our system in order to 
promote 
widespread 
adoption 
for 
research 
purposes. 
When food is prepared or eaten with the 
utensils, the gesture data is recorded by the 
accelerometer and is transported over serial  
connection using wireless network connectivity. 
This data is placed in a list and is decoded then 
filtered by the software, triggering audio in the 
pentatonic scale within a ± 2-octave range. A 
digital-to-analogue converter built into the 
software platform interprets the data, which then  
 
Figure 7.  The Playful Utensils Cycling ’74’s Max/MSP patch 
plays the appropriate frequency through output 
speakers. 
VI. FUTURE WORK 
We are currently looking into the technologies 
needed to achieve the most nurturing and intuitive 
user interaction possible for the Playful Utensils 
system. A prototype has been recently developed 
and once more affordances in relations to the 
above-mentioned 
studies 
are 
considered, 
researchers can further work with families to 
accurately design the user experience that is 
needed to express the objectives of the Playful 
Utensils system. 
The initial prototype will also be shared with 
chefs in order to extrapolate an accurate way to 
generate sounds within the boundaries of use for 
each 
utensil 
that 
is 
explored. 
Game-like 
functionality will also be explored. Finally, 
composers and musicians will be consulted so that 
researchers can begin to create a new type of 
cooking and dining musical notation based on the 
Playful Utensils systems which will hopefully 
lead to the publication of a Playful Utensils song 
and recipe book. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
We presented a qualitative study regarding 
intergenerational co-cooking, instruction and 
leaning using a computer-mediated environment, 
which lead to the design and implementation of 
an activity based utensil. 
We have learned that playful activity can 
improve 
the 
quality 
of 
engagement 
and 
communication. 
203
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
Using these findings, we have developed an 
initial prototype, which we will use to further 
study shared, communal and collaborative activity 
in a co-cooking and co-dining environment using 
computer-mediated environments. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This research is carried out under CUTE Project 
No. WBSR-7050000-100-279 partially funded by 
a grant from the National Research Foundation 
(NRF) administered by the Media Development 
Authority (MDA) of Singapore. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Tee, A.J. Bernheim Brush, and K. M. Inkpen, “Exploring 
communication and sharing between extended families,” Int. 
J. Hum.-Comput. Stud., vol.67, Feb. 2009, pp. 128–138, doi: 
10.1016/j.ijhcs.2008.09.007 
[2] S. Lindley, R. Harper and A. Sellen, “Desiring to be in touch 
in a changing communications landscape: attitudes of older 
adults,” Proc. SIGCHI Conf. Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI 09), ACM Press, Apr. 2009, pp. 1693-1702,  
pp. 10.1145/1518701.1518962 
[3] T. K. Judge, C. Neustaedter, and A. F. Kurtz, “The family 
window: the design and evaluation of a domestic media 
space,” Proc. SIGCHI Conf. Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI 10), ACM Press, Apr. 2010, pp. 2361-2370, 
doi:10.1109/SCIS.2007.357670. 
[4] P. Barden, R. Comber, D. Green, D. Jackson, C. Ladha, T. 
Bartindale et al., “Telematic dinner party: designing for 
togetherness through play and performance,” Proc. ACM 
Conf. Designing Interactive Systems (DIS 12), ACM Press, 
Jun. 2012, pp. 38-47, doi: 10.1145/2317956.2317964 
[5] C. Jackie Lee, L. Bonanni, J. H. Espinosa, H. Lieberman, T. 
Selker, “Augmenting kitchen apliances with shared context 
using knowledge about daily events,” Proc. ACM Conf. 
Intelligent User Interface (IUI 06), ACM Press, Jan. 2006, 
pp. 348-350, doi: 10.1145/1111449.1111533 
[6] G. M. Burghardt, The Genesis of Animal Play: Testing the 
Limits. Cambridge, MIT Media Press, 2006. 
[7] Y. Chang, J. Lo, C. Huang et al., “Playful toothbrush: 
ubicomp technology for teaching tooth brushing to 
kindergarden children,” Proc. SIGCHI Conf. Human Factors 
in Computing Systems (CHI 08), ACM Press, Apr. 2008, 
pp.363-372, doi: 10.1145/1357054.1357115 
[8] D. Cohen, The Development of Play. New York, NY, 
Routledge, 2006. 
[9] L.Dib, D. Petrelli, S. Whittaker, “Sonic souvenirs: exploring 
the paradoxes of recorded sound for family remembering,” 
Proc. ACM Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW 
10), 
ACM 
Press, 
Feb. 
2010, 
pp.391-400, 
doi: 
10.1145/1718918.1718985 
[10] D. M. Frohlich, Audiophotography: bringing photos to life 
with sounds. Dordrecht, The Netherlands, Kluver Academic 
Publisher, 2004. 
[11] A. Grimes and R. Harper, “Celebratory technology: new 
directions for food research in HCI,” Proc. SIGCHI Conf. 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 08), ACM 
Press, 
Sep. 
2008, 
pp. 
467-476, 
doi: 
10.1145/1357054.1357130 
[12] E. Hoven, and B. Eggen, “Informing augmented memory 
system design through autobiographical memory theory,” 
Personal Ubiquitous Comput., vol  12, Aug. 2008, pp 433-
443, doi: 10.1007/s00779-007-0177-9 
[13] L. Yeung, W. Ling, “A study of perceptions of food 
preperation skills in Hong Kong adolescents,” Journal of the 
HEIA, vol. 14, no. 2, 2007, pp. 16-24 
[14] M. Nunes, S. Greenberg, C. Neustaedter, “Sharing digital 
photographs in the home through physical mementos, 
souvenirs, and keepsakes,” Proc. ACM Conf. Designing 
Interactive Systmes (DIS 08), ACM Press, Apr. 2008, pp. 
250-260, doi:10.1145/1394445.1394472 
[15] D. 
Petrelli, 
S. 
Whittaker 
and 
J. 
Brockmeier, 
“Autotopography: what can physical mementos tell us about 
digital memories?” Proc. SIGCHI Conf. Human Factors in 
Computer Systems (CHI 08), ACM Press, Apr. 2008, pp. 53-
62, doi: 10.1145/1357054.1357065 
[16] S. Rumsey, “Cooking, recipes, and work ethic: passage of a 
heritage literacy practice,” Journal of Literacy and 
Technology, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 69-9, Apr. 2009 
[17] Y. Sugiura, D. Sakamoto, et al. “Cooking with robots: 
designing 
a 
household 
system 
working 
in 
open 
environments,” Proc. SIGCHI Conf. Human Factors in 
Computer Systems (CHI 10), ACM Press, Apr. 2010 pp. 
2427-2430, doi: 10.1145/1753326.1753693 
[18] Whittaker, S., Hirschberg, B. Amento, L. Stark, M. 
Bichianni, P. Isenhour et al.,  “SCANMail: a voicemail 
interface that makes speech browsable, readable and 
searchable,” Proc. SIGCHI Conf. Human Factors in 
Computer Systems (CHI 02), ACM Press, Apr. 2002, pp. 
275-282, doi: 10.1145/503376.503426  
[19] L. M. Youngblade, J. Dunn, “Individual differences in young 
children’s pretend play with mother and sibling: links to 
relationships and understanding of other people’s feelings 
and beliefs,” Child Development, vol. 66, Oct. 1995, 
pp.1472-1492, doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.1995.tb00946.x 
[20] Guitar Hero http://hub.guitarhero.com/ 
[21] Rock Band http://www.rockband.com/ 
[22] Skype http://www.skype.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
204
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

