WSN Trends: Sensor Infrastructure Virtualization as a Driver Towards the Evolution 
of the Internet of Things 
 
Andreas Merentitis, Florian Zeiger, Marco Huber, Nick Frangiadakis, Kostas Mathioudakis,                                  
Konstantinos Sasloglou, Georgios Mazarakis, Vangelis Gazis, Zachos Boufidis 
AGT International 
Darmstadt, Germany 
{amerentitis, fzeiger, mhuber, nfrangiadakis, kmathioudakis, ksasloglou, gmazarakis, vgazis, zboufidis}@agtinternational.com 
Abstract— Fueled by advances in microelectronics, wireless 
communications and the availability of affordable mobile 
connectivity, the last decade has seen a rapid increase in the 
number of devices connected to the Internet. This evolution is 
part of the transition to the Internet of Things (IoT), which 
envisions connecting anything at any time and place. While it can 
be argued that the IoT is already here, the next paradigm shift is 
already emerging on the horizon, targeting yet another order of 
magnitude increase in the number of interconnected devices and 
promising to bring people and processes in the equation. 
However, before such a paradigm shift can be realized, 
significant challenges with respect to scalability, cooperative 
communications, energy consumption, as well as convergence of 
sensor and analytics trends have to be resolved. Sensor 
Virtualization Technology capturing both the Virtual Sensors 
and Virtual Sensors Networks aspects, promises to alleviate or 
resolve these challenges, and pave the way towards the evolution 
of the Internet of Things. 
Keywords-Sensor Networks, Sensor Virtualization; Machine to 
Machine Communications; Internet of Things; Future Internet. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Technological advances in the fields of sensor technology, 
low power microelectronics, and low energy wireless 
communications paved the way for the emergence of Wireless 
Sensor Networks (WSNs). These networks are currently used 
in a wide range of industrial, civilian and military applications, 
including 
healthcare 
applications, 
home 
automation, 
earthquake warning, traffic control and industrial process 
monitoring. A WSN is a system composed of small, wireless 
nodes that cooperate on a common distributed application 
under strict energy, cost, noise and maintenance constraints 
[1], [2]. Although many interesting applications have been 
implemented/developed for WSNs, further work is required 
for realizing their full potential as “the next big thing” that will 
revolutionize the way we interact with our environment. 
As a promising step in this direction, during the last decade 
there has been a growing research interest in the Internet of 
Things (IoT), ranked as a disruptive technology, according to 
the US National Intelligence Council [3]. An early definition 
for the IoT envisioned a world where computers would relieve 
humans of the Sisyphean burden of data entry, by 
automatically recording, storing and processing all the 
information relevant to the things involved in human 
activities, while also providing “anytime, anyplace [...] 
connectivity for anything” [4]. 
Henceforth, and depending on the viewpoint, different 
understandings and definitions have been reported in the 
literature [5]-[7] regarding what the Internet of Things is 
about. However, while it is possible to argue that the IoT is 
already here [8], the next (r)evolutions are already on the 
horizon, ranging from the open effort to the Future Internet up 
to industry driven initiatives such as the National Instruments 
Data Acquisition Technology Outlook [9], the General 
Electric concept of “Industrial Internet” [10], and the CISCO 
initiated “Internet of Everything” [8], [11]. Such initiatives 
have differences in flavor and focus; yet, it is possible to distil 
the general trends and enablers that need to be in place for 
successfully realizing the shift to the next networking 
paradigm, whichever form it might take. In this paper, we 
argue 
that, 
among 
these 
enablers, 
Sensor 
Network 
Virtualization is a technology that has the potential to augment 
and unlock advances in several other fronts (e.g., scalability, 
cooperation, low energy solutions and convergence of Sensor 
Network and Data Analytics trends) that will pave the way 
towards this paradigm shift. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
presents some of the key networking trends that are commonly 
captured in several independent views for the next networking 
paradigm evolution. It finishes with a selection of four core 
areas where significant challenges remain unresolved. The 
selected areas and the nature of the challenges in each of them 
are then discussed in more detail in Sections III-VI. Section 
VII elaborates on the different aspects of sensor infrastructure 
virtualization. Their advantages are captured and the potential 
of using different virtualization flavors to address the 
challenges described earlier is explained. Finally, Section VIII 
concludes the paper. 
II. 
IDENTIFICATION OF NETWORKING TRENDS  
In parallel with the efforts towards interconnecting a 
myriad of smart devices according to the IoT vision, the 
Future Internet stands as a general term for research activities 
and communication paradigms towards a more up to date and 
efficient Internet architecture. Approaches towards the “Future 
Internet” cover the full range from small, incremental 
evolutionary steps up to complete redesigns (clean slate) of the 
core architecture and the underlying mechanisms, where the 
applied technologies are not to be limited by existing 
standards or paradigms (e.g., the client server networking 
model might evolve into co-operative peer structures). In 
general, most of the work in this area is summarized by the 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Future Internet Assembly (FIA) [12], where it is underlined 
that whatever form the Future Internet may take, a set of core 
principles need to be preserved: 
 
Heterogeneity support principle, refers to supporting a 
plethora of devices and nodes, scheduling algorithms and 
queue management mechanisms, routing protocols, levels 
of multiplexing, protocol versions, underlying link layers 
or even administrative domains and pricing structures. 
 
Scalability and Amplification principle, describing the 
ability of a computational system to continue operating 
under well specified bounds when its input is increased in 
size or volume. 
 
Robustness principle, ensuring that each protocol 
implementation must transparently interoperate with 
other implementations. 
 
Loose Coupling principle, describing a method of 
interconnecting architectural components of a system so 
that those components depend on each other to the least 
extent practicable. 
 
Locality principle, which in the computer science domain 
focuses on the design of thrashing-proof, self-regulating, 
and robust logical systems. 
However, apart from these principles that should only 
undergo small incremental changes (if any) a list of additional 
principles that need to be significantly adapted/relaxed or 
augmented is also provided. Here, we focus on a subset of this 
list that is related or overlapping to the IoT evolution: 
 
Keep it simple, but not “stupid” principle [12], which 
refers to the fact that in current Internet design, the 
complexity belongs always at the edges, while in a more 
flexible architecture inherently supporting heterogeneous 
“Things” this might not always be the case. 
 
Polymorphism principle, which refers to the ability to 
manipulate objects of various classes, and invoke 
methods on an object without knowing that object’s type. 
The idea is to extend this principle to allow the same 
abstract components exhibiting different functional and 
non-functional 
behavior 
in 
case 
of 
changing 
environments or circumstances [12]. 
 
Unambiguous 
naming 
and 
addressing 
principle, 
establishing that protocols are independent of the 
hardware medium and hardware addressing scheme. The 
proposal of the FIA initiative is to extend this principle in 
order to also capture the data and services. 
Even more recently than the FIA initiative, CISCO has 
evangelized the Internet of Everything (IoE) as the next wave 
in the evolution of the networking paradigms [8]. With a clear 
all-IP focus, building on the same principles as Machine to 
Machine Communications (M2M) and the Internet of Things 
but extending them, the IoE envisions to increase the number 
of connections by yet another order of magnitude (from ~10 
billion currently connected “Things”). However, arguably the 
biggest innovation is that it targets to include processes and 
people in the loop, facilitating and enabling communications 
that are more relevant in order to offer new capabilities, richer 
experiences and unprecedented economic opportunities.  
In all the previous activities, as well as in various 
independent research efforts, it has already being identified 
that in future large-scale heterogeneous networks, the adoption 
of mechanisms achieving scalable, predictable and self-
adaptive network behavior (“more relevant” in CISCO IoE 
terminology, “pushing the boundaries” in the GE Industrial 
Internet notion) will be a key enabler [8], [10], [11], [13], [14]. 
At the same time, with systems becoming continuously more 
complex in terms of scale and functionality, reliability and 
interoperability are getting increasingly important. Therefore, 
techniques for achieving dependable system operation under 
cost and energy constraints will be an important evolutionary 
step [2], [13], [14].  
Current wireless network development is guided by 
horizontal mass-markets (“one size fits all”). More often than 
not, different verticals and niche markets require dedicated 
applications [14]. Consequently, the deployment or evolution 
of a wireless network in these areas often demands for 
expensive infrastructure replacement. Moreover, extending 
system and network capabilities, switching services or 
adopting the purpose of an operational network consisting of 
heterogeneous “Things” usually calls for costly (manual) 
reconfigurations and upgrades, while it often results in 
temporary unavailability of system services. On the other 
hand, dynamic changes during operation typically allow for 
only a limited subset or scope of updates. Solutions for such 
problems 
require 
capabilities 
for 
spontaneous 
ad-hoc 
cooperation 
between 
objects, 
self-adaptive 
behavior, 
exploitation of dynamic information, predictability of non-
functional properties (e.g., energy consumption), and on-the-
fly reconfiguration [13], [14], [15].   
Summarizing, first and foremost, scalability is the key 
enabler for facilitating the (r)evolution of the Future Internet 
as the number of interconnected devices is expected to rise by 
yet another order of magnitude. The vast majority of these 
devices will be smart sensors with relatively limited 
computation resources. Thus, key challenges lie in efficient 
cooperation of heterogeneous network elements in order to 
realize advanced capabilities and services. Furthermore, 
innovations to low energy solutions create an attractive 
business case by offering benefits in terms of operational cost, 
long-term product reliability and increased lifetime of wireless 
and mobile elements (especially relevant for a significant 
portion of the myriad of electronic “Things” that will be 
battery powered). Last but not least, as the number of 
interconnected devices will increase a convergence of the 
Sensor Network and Data Analytics trends is required for 
effectively bringing processes and people into the equation. 
An overview of the respective trends, including some of the 
main open issues, is provided in the sequel of this section. 
III. 
SCALABILITY OF COMMUNICATION AND MANAGEMENT 
In order to realize the vision of ~50 billion devices 
connected to the Internet by 2020 [8], several scalability 
enablers need to be in place. One can argue that some of them 
are already here and they have driven the evolution towards 
the estimated ~10 billion interconnected devices that we have 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

currently reached [8], [11]. Hardware node miniaturization, 
node capability enrichment and cost reduction, all fueled by 
Moore’s law, are a good example of such enablers. Processing 
and storage availability are also improving thanks to the cloud 
computing paradigm. On the network protocol naming and 
addressing part, the transition to IPv6 has to take place sooner 
than later in order to facilitate the next jump in number of 
interconnected devices.    
However, apart from the hardware node and protocol/ 
communication part, efficient management of this huge 
number of heterogeneous devices is also a big challenge. The 
concept of network management traditionally captures the 
methods and tools that are related to the operation, 
administration, maintenance, and provisioning of networked 
systems. In this context, operation is related to keeping the 
network 
working 
according 
to 
the 
specifications; 
administration is dealing with resource tracking and 
utilization; maintenance is concerned with changes and 
upgrades 
to 
the 
network 
infrastructure; 
and 
finally 
provisioning addresses dynamic, service-based resource 
allocation. However, catering for heterogeneous sensors and 
actuators 
with different 
requirements and operational 
properties calls for a paradigm shift; higher layers need to 
efficiently capture the changing dynamics of the systems and 
the lower layers need to transform this information into 
appropriate action, in an autonomous and scalable fashion. 
In recent years, several extensions have been proposed to 
the traditional definition of network management that are 
specifically designed to address the topic of ever increasing 
network management complexity. The Self-Organizing 
Network (SON) notion was introduced by the 3rd Generation 
Partnership Project (3GPP) and targets to constitute future 
radio access networks easier to plan, configure, manage, 
optimize and heal compared to current state of the art. In 
similar direction, Autonomic Networking, inspired by the IBM 
initiated vision for Autonomic Computing [16], has been 
proposed as a means to create self-managing networks able to 
address the rapidly growing complexity of modern large scale 
networks and to enable their further growth, far beyond the 
size of today. The four main pillars of Autonomic Networking 
are self-configuration, self-healing, self-optimization, and self-
protection, known also as self-CHOP features. However, the 
related technologies have so far found their way mostly in 
cellular networks or in smaller scale ah-hoc sensor networks. 
Frameworks for configurable and, to some extent, reusable 
deployment of SON functionality would be an important 
evolutionary step in the direction of scalable network 
management and lower maintenance cost.  
IV. 
COOPERATIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING  
Close 
cooperation 
between 
network 
elements 
is 
increasingly seen as an important driver for further evolution. 
In the FIA recommendations, it is referenced, for example, 
that the traditional client-server model will at least partially 
evolve into co-operative structures between peer entities.  
Cooperation frameworks cover the full range from information 
exchange, 
actions 
coordination 
and 
decision 
making. 
Moreover, such aspects are expected to be utilized in different 
context, thus spanning different communication layers and 
capabilities. A taxonomy of cooperative and collaborative 
frameworks was presented in [13]. 
In order to achieve cooperation between networks in multi-
stakeholder networking environments, proper incentives need 
to be in place. Such incentives formulate the expected 
networking benefits that a single network can derive from its 
cooperation with another. Networks are only motivated to 
cooperate with other networks when this cooperation improves 
their performance according to such incentives [13]. However, 
in order to be effective and support generalization in a large 
scale dynamic environment, the incentives should not express 
low-level performance metrics, but instead indicate high level 
functional and network requirements. An incentive formulates 
a reason for cooperation between networks (i.e., if cooperation 
with another network can improve this high level objective, 
cooperation might be viable). Example incentives are (i) 
increasing coverage (to reach more clients), (ii) reduce energy 
consumption (to increase battery life), and (iii) increasing QoS 
guarantees (higher throughput, higher reliability, lower delay, 
etc.), among others [13]. 
Deciding, however, on the most beneficial cooperation 
settings requires mechanisms such as negotiation [13]. During 
negotiations, independent devices or complete networks with 
the required capabilities are identified and the utility of the 
cooperation is derived also as part of the cooperation incentive 
[17]. While significant research efforts have been invested in 
this area, large scale commercial application is still limited. 
Variations in the realization of the cooperation mechanisms 
and compatibility problems between the early products of 
different vendors are among the more important inhibitors, 
therefore ways to alleviate them will be particularly beneficial.  
V. 
LOW ENERGY SOLUTIONS 
Energy efficiency is commonly perceived as one of the 
most important design and performance factors of a Wireless 
Sensor Network (WSN). This fact is only expected to increase 
in relevance as a myriad of additional mobile and portable 
devices will be connected to the Future Internet. The desired 
low energy behavior can be achieved by optimizing the sensor 
node as well as the communication protocol [18]. The goal is 
to reduce energy consumption and, consequently, increase the 
lifetime of the system.  
At the level of the independent nodes, the fundamental 
limit of the energy requirements is calculated by taking into 
account the energy consumption of every hardware (HW) 
component on a WSN node like sensors and conditioning 
electronic circuitry, processing and storage, radio, etc. The 
components selected in the final node architecture will have a 
significant impact on the nodes’ capabilities and lifetime. 
Thus, a holistic low-power system design should be pursued 
from the very beginning, creating the correct HW 
infrastructure base for further network, protocol, software and 
algorithmic energy efficiency optimization.  
This holistic low-power system approach can further 
incorporate methods for energy harvesting from the 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

environment in order to utilize ambient energy sources (e.g., 
mechanical, thermal, radiant and chemical) that will allow 
extending lifetime and minimizing or possibly removing the 
need for battery replacement. Such a scenario would enable 
the development of autonomous wireless sensor networks with 
theoretically unlimited lifetime. Still focused on the sensor 
node level, but on the algorithmic part, ongoing efforts are 
made to design the sensor nodes in an inherent power-aware 
approach. The goal is to develop an adaptable system that is 
able to prioritize either system lifetime or output quality at the 
user’s request. The radio communication and network protocol 
part is the other major source of energy consumption that can 
be targeted for optimization. Optimizing the network protocol 
is typically done with respect to a specific application domain, 
usually to favor bursts of transmission followed by cycles of 
low or no activity. As the range of transmission is also a very 
important parameter, low energy operation of a specific 
protocol version is often achieved only for a selected range, 
whereas other protocols are more efficient beyond that range. 
Optimizations for low energy are a relatively mature field 
that has been (in different forms) around for a long time. 
However, most of the available solutions are customized for 
specific applications and are not directly transferable across 
different verticals and application domains. For example, a 
low energy protocol is typically “optimal” only with respect to 
a specific communication range and bandwidth, while other 
solutions might be preferable outside of this area. This implies 
that making the best selection usually requires a thorough 
understanding of the specific requirements and peculiarities of 
the targeted application domain and environment, so that the 
energy optimization can be appropriately tailored to these 
parameters. 
Therefore, 
a 
more 
transparent 
on-the-fly 
mechanism for node reconfigurations between different 
Pareto-optimal states is required to enhance sensor node 
reusability in the context of different vertical applications.  
VI. 
CONVERGENCE OF THE SENSOR NETWORK AND DATA 
ANALYTICS TRENDS 
 In order to efficiently integrate processes and people in 
the IoT (as envisioned by the Internet of Everything), 
connected 
“Things” 
will 
need 
to 
share 
higher-level 
information with distributed peer entities, as well as with 
centralized processing units or people for further evaluation 
and decision making. This transformation from data sharing to 
information sharing is considered as particularly important in 
the IoE notion because it will facilitate faster, more intelligent 
decisions, as well as more effective control of our 
environment [8]. Similarly, in the field of industrial 
automation, there is clear movement towards keeping the pace 
with the rapidly increasing data footprint by a paradigm shift 
in data acquisition and processing [9].  
In parallel with these activities, a significant evolution is 
taking place in the data analytics domain. In this case, the 
trend is to evolve from “descriptive analytics” that capture 
what is happening to “predictive analytics” that describe what 
is likely to happen. Similarly, a little further down the road is 
the progress from “diagnostic analytics” that describe why 
something is happening to “prescriptive analytics” that 
describe what should happen. Fusion of “hard” data coming 
from sensors with “soft” data from e.g., social networks is 
another important trend in this domain, which is already going 
in the direction of bringing humans into the equation. 
“Pervasive analytics” (in some cases even referenced as 
“butler analytics”) are envisioning to bring the power of 
analytics in an ever increasing range of day-to-day 
applications and make them available to non-experts. The 
relation between sensor and analytic trends is depicted in 
Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1.  Convergence between sensor and analytic trends 
The desired destination in this convergence is a framework 
of abundant sensor information taping at the “anytime, 
anyplace […] connectivity for anything” notion of the IoT 
combined with advanced analytic models that can provide real 
insight (in the form of human-consumable prediction and 
recommendation) for any situation and usable by everyone.  
However, significant steps need to be taken before this 
vision is realized. “Analytics” is a very broad and varying 
field, and while wrapping them in a user friendly package is 
easy, using them in an irresponsive way without knowledge or 
respect for possible limitations or model constraints, to be the 
recipe for disaster [19]. Frameworks that can provide different 
tradeoffs of accuracy and execution time or easiness to 
interpret and (even more importantly) can at least make the 
users aware of model limitations and constraints would be an 
important driver towards approaching this vision.      
VII. SENSOR INFRASTRUCTURE VIRTUALIZATION AS A 
DRIVER TOWARDS THE FUTURE INTERNET 
Achieving a significant progress in the four open 
challenges identified in the previous sections calls for 
frameworks that either facilitate innovation or minimize the 
cost/risk for each of the four pillars identified previously 
(scalability, 
cooperation, 
low 
energy 
solutions 
and 
convergence of Sensor Network and Data Analytics trends). It 
is also important to underline that these pillars are not 
completely autonomous, but are mutually dependent. For 
example, one of the objectives of cooperation might be low 
energy operation, while the cooperation process by itself has 
to be scalable. Therefore, an important constraint is that 
possible solutions for each challenge are as transparent as 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

possible to the other topics, to avoid setbacks in other fronts. 
A promising paradigm for addressing challenges in terms of 
decreasing the cost/risk as well as facilitating innovation in 
some of the topics identified previously is virtualization. 
Several types of virtualization can be distinguished, including 
Virtual Machines and OS Virtualization [20], Sensor 
Virtualization [21], and Sensor Network Virtualization [22].  
While the first two types of virtualization have found their 
way into mainstream applications and are arguably the driving 
forces behind the cloud computing paradigm, the other two 
types are still not so widely used and there is some ambiguity 
in their definition in related literature.  In this paper, we use 
the term Virtual Sensor (VS) to refer to a software entity that 
can serve as an aggregation point for multiple sensors, using 
physical sensor entities and a computational model to combine 
their measurements. There are several points that need to be 
elaborated in this definition. The Virtual Sensor can exist 
either in-field as a thin layer of virtualization software that is 
executed on physical sensors or it can be a mathematical 
model for aggregating information residing in a sensor 
management platform similar to [23]. Moreover, in both cases, 
the virtual sensor is doing more than interpolating values of 
physical sensors measuring the same phenomenon, as 
translation between different types of physical sensors is a far 
more interesting topic when models for the relations between 
the underlying phenomena are available. For example, one can 
estimate car pollution based on a model that combines car 
counting and weather conditions, while possibly utilizing on 
also the information from the few available pollution sensors.  
Beyond independent Virtual Sensors, Virtual Sensor 
Networks (VSNs) are emerging as a novel form of 
collaborative wireless sensor networks [24] that can provide 
the common layer over which the evolution from connecting 
“Things” to the efficient interaction of the “Things” with 
processes and people can be realized. To some extent, VSNs 
are an evolution of the overlay network principle, which 
describes a network built on top of another network. The main 
differentiator of VSNs to overlays is that the latter are 
typically realized in the application layer only and constitute a 
temporary solution of true virtualization of the sensor network.  
A VSN can be formed by providing logical connectivity 
among collaborative sensors [22], [25]. Nodes are grouped 
into different VSNs based on the phenomenon they track (e.g., 
number of cars vs. NO2 concentration) or the task they 
perform (e.g., environmental monitoring vs. traffic control). 
VSNs are expected to provide the protocol support for 
formation, usage, adaptation, and maintenance of the subset of 
sensors collaborating on a specific task(s). Even nodes that do 
not sense the particular event/phenomenon (directly or 
indirectly by the notion of Virtual Sensor) could be part of a 
VSN if they allow sensing nodes to communicate through 
them. Thus, VSNs make use of intermediate nodes, networks, 
or other VSNs to deliver messages across VSN members [22].  
However, the main goal of VSNs is to enable and promote 
sensor 
reusability 
and 
facilitate 
resource 
efficient, 
collaborative WSNs. By collaboration, nodes achieve 
application objectives of different use cases in a more resource 
efficient way. These networks may also evolve into a 
dynamically varying subset of sensor nodes (e.g., when a 
phenomenon develops in the spatial domain, the sensors that 
can detect it change over time). Similarly, the subset of the 
users having access to different subsets of the VSN can vary 
(e.g., the people that have access to the network change with 
time or specific operations on a sensor network subset are only 
available to specific groups of people based on their access 
rights, etc.). Finally, combined with the Virtual Sensor notion 
described earlier, VSNs can enable the same physical sensor, 
i.e., an induction loop or an LPR (License Plate Recognition) 
camera to support its primary application of traffic control, but 
also secondary applications such as environmental monitoring. 
With respect to the challenges identified in previous 
sections of this paper, different flavors of sensor virtualization 
can provide answers to different facets of the open problems. 
For example, the Sensor Virtualization aspect that is based on 
introducing a thin abstraction middleware is a promising way 
to address sensor configurability and deployment issues 
related to network scalability, while it can also reduce the 
risk/cost of supporting a closed manufacturer solution 
(identified as an inhibitor for early adoption of related efforts). 
Moreover, to the extent that the sensors can execute different 
virtualization 
middleware 
versions 
with 
different 
configurations, 
performing 
on-the-fly 
reconfigurations 
between different Pareto-optimal states of energy/performance 
or accuracy/execution time will be easier. Finally, the virtual 
sensor aspect that aggregates sensor measurements to 
compensate for missing physical sensors of a given type is a 
significant step towards the vision of converged sensor and 
analytics in the IoE and the pervasive analytics notions.   
On the VSNs side, a Virtual Sensor Network is inherently 
a collaborative networking paradigm that promotes node 
reusability in a resource efficient way. Thus, they are a 
particularly promising base for cooperative communications 
but also as a way to streamline sensor operations related to the 
management part of network scalability. Taking this property 
of VSNs (see first paragraph of Section IV) into account, an 
updated model of the 3D cooperative methods taxonomy 
introduced in [13] that also captures the different virtualization 
aspects described above and is provided in Figure 2.  
 
Figure 2.  Sensor Infrastructure Virtulization depicted over the 
various dimensions of cooperative decision making and control.  
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The figure captures the scope of the cooperation as planes in a 
3D space (information exchange, decision and configuration 
control, and layer mechanisms), where each dimension is 
associated with a set of enablers and technical areas.  
Finally, with respect to the convergence of sensor and 
analytic trends, it is the most promising but arguably the most 
challenging of the four pillars. Bringing together in a 
dependable way an ever increasing number of sensor 
networks, owned from different stakeholders and forming on 
top of this infrastructure subsets of sensor nodes based on 
various criteria (e.g., temporal, spatial, thematic, etc.) is a 
good basis to generate an abundance of diverse data. Analytics 
can be applied in this ocean of data to make predictions by 
aggregating or excluding WSN subsets, fusing the data or the 
decisions of different subsets (according to the “analytics at 
the edge” notion [26], etc.). Nevertheless, any model can be 
misused if its constraints are ignored; making such limitations 
visible to the user is feasible (and virtualization can help), it is 
however his final responsibility to adhere to them.   
VIII. CONCLUSION 
The rapid proliferation in the number of devices connected 
to the Internet that occurred during the last decade is expected 
to continue, targeting yet another order of magnitude increase 
and promising to bring people and processes in the equation. 
However, in order to realize this paradigm shift, important 
challenges 
with 
respect 
to 
scalability, 
cooperative 
communications, energy consumption, as well convergence of 
sensor and analytics trends need to be addressed. In this paper, 
we have elaborated on the different flavors of Sensor 
Infrastructure Virtualization as a powerful enabler that can 
pave the way towards the Future Internet. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Zhang, Z. Zilic, and K. Radecka, “Energy Efficient Software-Based 
Self-Test for Wireless Sensor Network Nodes”, VLSI Test Symposium 
(VTS), 2005, pp. 186-191. 
[2] A. Merentitis, N. Kranitis, A. Paschalis, and D. Gizopoulos, “Low 
Energy On-Line Self-Test of Embedded Processors in Dependable WSN 
Nodes”, IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, 
2011, pp-86,100 
[3] National Intelligence Council, “Disruptive Civil Technologies: Six 
Technologies with Potential Impacts on US Interests out to 2025,” Apr. 
2008. [Online]. http://www.dni.gov/nic/confreports disruptive tech.html, 
last access: July 2013. 
[4] International Telecommunication Union “The Internet of Things” 2005. 
[5] L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The internet of things: A survey,” 
Computer Networks, vol. 54, no. 15, 2010, pp. 2787–2805. [Online]. 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1389128610001568, 
last access: July 2013. 
[6] D. Miorandi, S. Sicari, F. D. Pellegrini, and I. Chlamtac, “Internet of 
things: Vision, applications and research challenges,” Ad Hoc Networks, 
vol. 
10, 
no. 
7, 
2012, 
pp. 
1497–1516. 
[Online]. 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1570870512000674, 
last access: July 2013. 
[7] J. Gubbi, R. Buyya, S. Marusic, and M. Palaniswami, “Internet of 
Things (IoT): A vision, architectural elements, and future directions,” 
Future Generation Computer Systems, 2013, pp. 1645-1660 [Online]. 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167739X13000241, 
last access: July 2013. 
[8] D. Evans, “The Internet of Everything: How More Relevant and 
Valuable Connections Will Change the World”, CISCO White Paper 
[Online]. http://www.cisco.com/web/about/ac79/docs/innov/IoE.pdf, last 
access: July 2013. 
[9] National Instrumnets, Data Acquisition Technology Outlook 2013, 
[Online]. http://www.ni.com/daq-trends/, last access: July 2013 
[10] P. C. Evans and M. Annunziata, “Industrial Internet: Pushing the 
Boundaries of Minds and Machines”, GE White Paper, Nov. 26, 2012, 
[Online]. http://www.ge.com/docs/chapters/Industrial_Internet.pdf, last 
access: July 2013. 
[11] J. Bradley, J. Barbier, and D. Handler, CISCO White Paper, “Embracing 
the Internet of Everything To Capture Your Share of $14.4 Trillion”, 
[Online].http://www.cisco.com/web/about/ac79/docs/innov/IoE_Econo
my.pdf, last access: July 2013. 
[12] Future Internet Architecture (FIArch) Group, “Future Internet Design 
Principles”, 
January 
2012, 
[Online]. 
http://www.future-
internet.eu/uploads/media/FIArch_Design_Principles_V1.0.pdf, 
last 
access: July 2013.  
[13] G. Koudouridis, et al., "Enablers for Energy-Aware Cooperative 
Decision and Control in Wireless Networks", Vehicular Technology 
Conference C2POWER Workshop, May 2011, pp.1-5, Budapest, 
Hungary. 
[14] N. Alonistioti, et al., "Towards Self-Adaptable, Scalable, Dependable 
and Energy Efficient Networks: The Self-Growing Concept", 
UBICOMM, 25-30 October 2010, pp. 324-327, Florence, Italy. 
[15] E. Patouni, A. Lilis, A. Merentitis, N. Alonistioti, C. Beaujean, D. 
Bourse, and E. Nicollet, “Protocol Reconfiguration Schemes for Policy-
based Equipment Management”, Vehicular Technology Conference 
(VTC), September 2006, pp.1-5, Montréal, Canada. 
[16] B. Jacob, R. Lanyon-Hogg, D.K. Nadgir, and A.F. Yassin, 
“A practical guide to the IBM autonomic computing toolkit” 
IBM, International Technical Support Organization, 2004. 
[17] K. 
Chatzikokolakis, 
R. 
Arapoglou, A. 
Merentitis, and 
N. 
Alonistioti, "Fair Power Control in Cooperative Systems based on 
Evolutionary Techniques", UBICOMM, September 2012, pp. 111-116 
Barcelona, Spain. 
[18] G. Anastasi, M. Conti, M. D. Francesco, and A. Passarella, “Energy 
Conservation in Wireless Sensor Networks: a Survey” Journal of Ad 
Hoc Networks, Volume 7 Issue 3, May, 2009, pp. 537-568. 
[19] N.N. Taleb, “The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable”, 
Random 
House 
Digital, 
Inc., 
2010, 
ISBN 
978-1400063512, 
doi=10.1007/s00362-009-0226-8.  
[20] S. Crosby and D. Brown. “The Virtualization Reality.” Queue 4, n.10, 
December 2006, pp. 34-41, doi=10.1145/1189276.1189289.  
[21] S. Kabadayi, A. Pridgen, and C. Julien, "Virtual sensors: abstracting data 
from physical sensors", WoWMoM 2006, pp. 587-592, Buffalo-Niagara 
Falls, NY 
[22] H. M. N. D. Bandara, A. P. Jayasumana, and T. H. Illangasekare, 
“Cluster tree based self organization of virtual sensor networks,” 
GLOBECOM Workshops Nov. 2008, pp.c 1-6, New Orleans USA.  
[23] V. Gazis, K. Sasloglou, N. Frangiadakis, P. Kikiras, A. Merentitis, K. 
Mathioudakis, and G. Mazarakis, “Architectural Blueprints of a Unified 
Sensing Platform for the Internet of Things” – International Conference 
on Computer Communications and Networks (ICCCN), 30 July – 2 
August, 2013, Nassau, Bahamas. 
[24] L. Sarakis, T. Zahariadis, H. Leligou, and M. Dohler, “A framework for 
service provisioning in virtual sensor networks” EURASIP Journal on 
Wireless Communications and Networking 2012, pp. 1-19. 
[25] N. M. M. K. Chowdhury and R. Boutaba, "A survey of network 
virtualization," Computer Networks, vol. 54, no 5, Apr. 2010, pp. 862–
876. 
[26] Distributed Data Mining and Big Data, Intel White Paper [Online]. 
http://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/white-
papers/distributed-data-mining-paper.pdf, last access: July 2013. 
 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

