ConstruNET - A Collaborative Tool to Provide Offers of Construction Supplies
André Praça de Almeida Pinheiro, Jeverson de Sousa Barbosa Lima, Mardenn Robledo Rodrigues Coelho and
Rafael Pereira Trancoso Borges
Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology (IFTO), Palmas, Brazil
E-mails: {apracapinheiro, contatojeverson, mardennsk8, rafaelptb}@gmail.com
Abstract—This article deals with the theoretical and practical
aspects of developing an app called ConstruNET. It was
created by a research group in the Graduate Program in
Telematics of the Federal Institute of Education, Science and
Technology of Tocantins, Brazil (IFTO). This solution was
developed with available Web applications and has the goal of
providing users with information about offers from a list of
construction supplies sold by stores in the city of Palmas -
Tocantins - Brazil. The purpose is to show the importance of
an app such as ConstruNET to aid the search for building
material products, as well as to avoid the waste of time and
money in construction activities. This article demonstrates the
planning, conception and utilization of ConstruNET as a
mobile technology app directed towards civil engineering
construction supplies.
Keywords-Collaborative tools; App; Construction; Mobile
Devices; Internet.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The advent of globalization has brought access to
various technologies that greatly facilitate communication
and interaction between people. Today, people have several
services at their fingertips in ways that were impossible ten
years ago. This is because of the opportunity for acquiring
mobile devices and Internet access services.
The use of smartphones and tablets has increased the
production of applications, making it possible to solve day-
to-day problems. Today, it is possible to verify the prices of
several products online, as well as to compare them,
evaluating them and pointing out what needs to be
improved.
This paper is structured into six parts. After the
Introduction, in Section 2, the publications related to this
research are presented. In Section 3, we present the problem
and its justification, besides the general and specific
objectives established for the project. In that section, we
describe how we used the physical relationship diagram and
virtual tools in meetings of the research group. In Section 4,
we present the online survey and statistical graphics. In
Section 5, we present our overview of ConstruNET.
II.
RELATED WORKS
Mobile
devices
play
a
fundamental
role
in
the
information dissemination process.
Research works are aimed at finding a solution that
would allow people to search prices of civil engineering
construction supplies in a given region. Appsheet® [1] was
the main tool for development of mobile applications
because it is easy to use and low-cost.
The authors in [2] show how the Appsheet® tool was
used for calculating water consumption of the reference
plants, presenting an easy way for data storage and for
developing an application. The tool is an alternative for data
storage and management.
The researchers in [3] use the Appsheet® tool for
developing a solution for providing a low-cost electronic
data collection tool for a health facility survey study. They
created an online application using the Appsheet® tool
functionalities.
In [4], the authors use the Appsheet® tool to develop a
Web solution to support decision-making. The Appsheet®
tool was used as the main tool for development and the
authors realized the advantages of the Appsheet® tool,
considering its operation and ease of programming, as well
as its database robustness.
The researchers in [5] present a database model totally
based on the Appsheet® tool, showing its performance and
ease of operation. They address the use of the Appsheet®
tool in building a database for facilitating location and
development of a warehouse management system.
The use of a mobile application that aims to save time
and money for users when they need to search prices for
products and / or building materials in their city is the focus
of this paper.
III.
PROPOSAL
According to Meireles [6] citing the 29ª Annual Survey
of Information Technology (IT) Usage conducted by GVCia
(Center for Applied Information Technology of the Getúlio
Vargas Foundation), in the year 2018, Brazil already has
about two hundred and twenty million active smartphones,
proportionally well over one smartphone per inhabitant.
Even with this information and the increasing use of mobile
applications, there is a lack of tools that facilitate daily
tasks. For example, when there is a need to make a small
renovation,
there
is
almost
always
inconvenience
in
obtaining
offers
of
construction
materials,
tools
and
accessories from the stores, along with the best prices.
ConstruNET was born with the proposal of presenting
to the user a solution that uses a mobile application to
facilitate access to a list of offers of construction material
products from several stores in Palmas, the state capital of
Tocantins.
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The general purpose of this article is to provide an app
for the population that allows a comparison of prices of
construction materials in the main stores of a given locality,
allowing the consumer to quickly find a better price, thus
reducing the time spent on construction or remodeling.
Additionally, there are three specific objectives of our
work:
●
Allow the consumer to
register
the building
material
products
whose
information
will
be
shared.
●
Provide
a
list
of
products
containing
their
respective prices and the stores that are offering
them.
●
Provide maintenance tips that will assist the
consumers
in
resolving
minor
repairs
or
renovations to their homes.
A. Materials
ConstruNET was planned and documented using tools
from the Google family (Docs [7], Sheets [8], Slide [9],
Classroom [10] and Forms [11]). We considered User-
Experience and Usability for developing the APP using a
spreadsheet with Nielsen Heuristics [12] and a document in
Card-sorting format.
The ConstruNET app prototype was created using the
AppSheet® tool. The physical resources used during
development included mobile devices for tests such as a
Samsung® GT-7102 smartphone, a Motorola® MOTO G5
Plus smartphone, a Samsung® A9 Pro smartphone and a
Samsung® Galaxy S7 smartphone, all of them connected in
WI-FI 802.11n internal networks and 3G and 4G mobile
networks.
All physical equipment was from the Telematics and
Application
Laboratory at
IFTO (Federal Institute of
Education, Science and Technology of Tocantins).
B. Methods
The idea of ConstruNET was conceived during face-to-
face meetings and through distance learning (Google
Classroom tool) in the graduate program in Telematics,
carried out at the Telematics and Applications in Education
Laboratory at the Federal Institute of Education and
Technology, Palmas, Brazil from March to August of 2018
and was based on the Problem Based Learning (PBL)
methodology.
The data collection instrument consisted of an online
questionnaire from the Google® Forms tool, shared and
answered by one hundred and seventeen users in Palmas and
who evaluated the feasibility of creating an application that
could offer prices from construction materials. During the
Telematics Graduate classes, the Google Docs tools were
used to prepare documents that supported the application
test, Google Sheets spreadsheets for the AppSheet® tool
Database and the results were shown using Google Slide.
The Google Classroom tool served as the basis for
communication between the teacher and the students.
In the second stage of planning, the skeleton, design and
usability plans, and the Nielsen Heuristics worksheet based
on the needs of the online survey constructed using the
Google Sheets and Google Forms tools, were also thought
out and idealized through card-sorting for ten users with the
objective
of
testing
their
views
regarding
issues
of
application navigability. The presentation of the results was
done by the Google Slide tool.
In the creation phase, the ConstruNET prototype was
designed, using the AppSheet® tool. The application was
initially created with four screens, where the offer list
sessions,
stores,
products
and
categories
were
made
available. Given its hybrid nature, the AppSheet® tool made
it possible to make use of the application on the Android®
and IOS® platforms through its access database.
As a result of the planning and design processes,
ConstruNET was designed and operates according to the
diagram in Figure 1 below:
Figure 1. Relationship Diagram.
When the users run the ConstruNET application, they
view the list of available products sorted in alphabetical
order and from the lowest to the highest price. In the initial
screen, the user can search for a product (product module),
category (category module) or company (company module).
On the initial screen, the user can also select the module
tips, answer survey, company, category and products for
visualization.
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

If the user has selected the item related to the company
search, the search result will be the company entered by the
user. As a result, detailed company data such as name,
address, telephone number, storefront photo, map with
company location and available company products will be
shown. Also in relation to the company, the application uses
a map to invoke the Google Maps® [13] tool and a route is
drawn from the user's GPS location to the company
location.
When the user chooses a category search, the application
shows the categories of products available, e.g., hydraulic or
electric and when a category is selected, a list is shown with
all products registered in the selected category.
If the user chooses the tips module, the APP will present
a list with simple maintenance procedures that can be
performed by the user without the need of a professional.
When the user selects a tip, the system loads the YouTube®
[14] video for viewing within the ConstruNET application.
The module responds, when accessed by the application
user, by loading a form created in the Google Forms® tool,
which contains a survey on the use of the ConstruNET
application, which may or may not be filled out by the user.
The products module is the most important of the
application, because it is what contains the information for
which the system is intended to be created. The user, when
accessing this module, can register a product, view product
details and view the company that sells the product. In the
product details is presented an image of the product, the
selling price, the company that offers the product, technical
specification and description and the category of the
product. Also in the product description, the user can access
data for the company that sells the product and the category
of the product, presenting all products registered in the
category.
In the main list with the products registered, the user has
the option of registering a new product. In the product
register, it is necessary to fill in the product, price, company
and category fields. Optional fields are image (product
photo), description and specification.
For tests using the ConstruNET functionality, a copy of
the application in developer mode and six copies of it in a
limited mode for six invited users in the city of Palmas-
Tocantins were installed in four smartphones of the graduate
students.
IV.
RESULTS
ConstruNET
was
conceived
during
face-to-face
meetings through distance learning (Google Classroom
tool) of the Graduate Program in Telematics, held at the
Telematics and Applications in Education Laboratory of the
Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology,
Palmas, Brazil, during the period from March to August of
2018 and was based on Problem Based Learning-PBL
methodology.
The data collect instrument consisted of an online survey
from the Google® Forms tool, shared and answered by one
hundred and seventeen users in Palmas, which evaluated the
development viability of creating an application that could
provide prices / offers of construction materials.
TABLE I . SURVEY QUESTIONS
Number
Questions
1
Gender
2
Age
3
Have you bought any kind of construction and / or
maintenance material?
4
At home, who usually performs minor repairs / maintenance?
5
How do you usually buy your materials, tools and / or
accessories to use in your building or home?
6
How much do you use building and / or maintenance
materials?
7
Would a search application that provides information on
building and/or maintenance materials be useful when
shopping?
8
Would you like an app that shows the lowest price of a
building material, tool or accessory for maintenance in the
stores in your area?
9
Would you like to receive a quote for all the materials you
need, at the lowest prices, from the application?
10
Would you like the application to show tips about minor
repairs that you can do yourself?
11
Would you like the app to showcase supplies, tools, and / or
accessories for stores in your area?
12
How much do you think the app will help in saving time and
money at the time of purchase?
The initial study pointed to a need for the application
and in light of the results, the prototype of the ConstruNET
has the following functionalities:
●
Product registration.
●
List of products and information of companies that
sell them.
●
List of companies that sell building materials.
●
List of categories.
●
Viewing details of a product.
●
Viewing details of a company.
●
View of the route of a customer to a selected
company.
●
Maintenance tips.
Some screenshots of functionalities in the ConstruNET
prototype are shown in Figures 2 and 3.
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 2. List of products
Figure 3. List of companies
A. Data Analysis
In Figure 4, we can see that 67% of the public, who
answered the survey are male with an average age of about
18-40, as shown in Figure 5.
Figure 4. User gender
Figure 5. User ages
According to Figure 6, 91% have already bought some
type of construction material, about 46% have already made
minor repairs to their home and only 26% call a specialized
professional.
Figure 6. Users who purchased materials
An interesting figure is that 78% buy building materials
from physical stores and about 95% would find it much
more interesting to have an app that could resolve budgets,
make
comparisons,
and
show offers
for
construction
materials from a variety of stores for a possible future
purchase.
Figure 7. Users would like an application that helps them save time and
money
It is also worth mentioning in Figure 7 that 60.8% of
those interviewed would like an application that helps them
save time and money when shopping.
In addition to the results presented, ConstruNET will
provide the features of:
●
Informing the location of the closest companies
that contain the product searched by the user.
●
Generating a budget
●
Comparing prices.
●
Ranking the users in relation to the veracity of the
information inserted.
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

●
Authentication
of
the
user
through
Social
Networks.
Additionally,
application
features
will
be
verified
through field testing to assess usability and user acceptance.
V.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Usability issues in ConstruNET were handled with due
attention by the application development team. In evaluating
it, several techniques were used that inform indicators to be
improved, both in navigability, as well as design and
interaction with the end user.
Jakob Nielsen's Heuristics were used in the application,
with the evaluation of some specialists and light of the
result, it was verified that ConstruNET has a good set of
colors that assist its users, besides providing a better
visualization of the app at any time of the day, in addition to
saving the battery of the mobile device on which it is
installed. Another positive point is that the application has a
unique font, making it easier to identify, changing only the
font size, and the words are well associated with their
respective
functions. The
structure of the
screens is
consistent,
which
facilitates
learning
how
to
use
ConstruNET.
Points for improvement are the inclusion of titles and
sections informing where the user is and translation of help
and error messages. Images should be standard size and
aligned on all screens. One point also to be improved is
understanding of the product screen in relation to the
information that should be highlighted.
As assessed in the evaluation, the application should also
go
through
future
implementations,
such
as
social
networking login and migration from the Appsheet® tool
(where it currently is) to the Ionic platform.
Although the prototype was developed with limited Web
applications, ConstruNET presents itself as a good solution
to the proposal for which it was conceived. In future
updates, the suggestions captured by the users will be
covered through research and testing using the application
during the prototyping phase.
ConstruNET is at the service of users of mobile
technology, and through its announced offers it facilitates
the planning of small reforms, as well as expediting
decision-making
in
the
acquisition
of
materials
for
construction.
REFERENCES
[1]
Appsheet,
Available
from:
<https://www.appsheet.com/>.Accessed: Nov, 2018.
[2]
Phairoj Samutrak and Chalit Kangvaravoot, “Application to
Calculate Potential Evapotranspiration”. International Journal
of Applied Computer Technology and Information Systems,
Vol 7. No.1, 2017, pp.35-40.
[3]
Sylim PG, Santos-Acuin CC. "Development of A Low-Cost
Electronic Data Collection Tool for A Health Facility Survey
Study: Lessons Learned in the Field". J Int Soc Telemed
eHealth 2016; 4:e27.
[4]
Quinn
Alexander
J.,Bederson
Benjamin
B.
"Appsheet:
Efficient use of web workers to support decision making".
Available
from:<http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/trs/2011-
26/2011-26.pdf>. Accessed: Nov, 2018.
[5]
Ojha, Vinit. "Facility location and development of warehouse
management system for cross channel Business Model".
Available
from:
<http://14.139.205.163:8080/jspui/bitstream/123456789/92/1/
2015PGMFMS03.pdf>. Accessed: Nov, 2018.
[6]
F. S. Meireles, “29th Annual Survey of IT Usage 2018”,
Available
from:
<https://eaesp.fgv.br/sites/eaesp.fgv.br/files/pesti2018gvciapp
t.pdf>. Accessed: Nov, 2018.
[7]
Google
Docs,
Available
from:
<https://www.google.com/docs/about/>.
Accessed:
Nov,
2018.
[8]
Google
Sheets,
Available
from:
<https://www.google.com/sheets/about/>.
Accessed:
Nov,
2018.
[9]
Google
Slides,
Available
from:
<https://www.google.com/slides/about/>.
Accessed:
Jun,
2018.
[10] Google
Classroom,
Available
from:
<https://classroom.google.com>. Accessed: Nov, 2018.
[11] Google
Forms,
Available
from:
<https://www.google.com/forms/about/>.
Accessed:
Oct,
2018.
[12] J. Nielsen, Usability Engineering. Academic Press, Boston,
ISBN 0-12-518405-0 (hardcover), 0-12-518406-9 (softcover).
Japanese translation ISBN 4-8101-9009-9.
[13] Google
Maps,
Available
from:
<https://www.google.com/maps/about/>.
Accessed:
Jun,
2018.
[14] Youtube,
Available
from:
<https://www.youtube.com/>.
Accessed: Oct, 2018.
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

