 
 
Development of m-Sahayak- the Innovative  Android based Application for  Real-time 
Assistance in Indian Agriculture and Health Sectors
 
Biswajit Saha, Kowsar Ali, Premankur Basak, Amit Chaudhuri 
ICT & Services 
 Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC), Kolkata  
Kolkata, India 
e-mails: { biswajit.saha, kowsar.ali, premankur.basak, amit.chaudhuri }@cdac.in 
 
 
Abstract—Mobile or Smart phones (Android based) is 
becoming an essential device for all types of people irrespective 
of the age group and literacy (literate or illiterate). In India, 
mobile technology has unleashed a paradigm shift in the 
communication medium to reach out to the masses. 
Crops/plants need regular physical and scientific handling for 
proper growth. Extension of mobile-phone based any-time, 
any-where scientific expert advices to the farmers is a 
possibility in India, i.e., information was available earlier for 
electronic processing, and now, communication is merged with 
Information Technology to create ICT impacts as a whole. ICT 
enabled environment is becoming a day-to-day reality 
everywhere 
in 
India. 
Tele-health 
allows 
health 
care 
professionals to diagnose and treat patients in remote locations 
using ICT. In this paper, the development of a special 
Android-based application is reported. The application takes 
care of certain problems in agriculture and health care by 
concurrently capturing images, audio and video and sending 
them to a specified server. Agricultural Scientists or doctors 
can view or listen to this images/video/audio information and 
provide proper solutions, accordingly. The development was 
tested satisfactorily. The paper will report on system concepts, 
design details and results. 
Keywords-Android; Mobile Application; Remote area; Real-
time Assistance; Telehealth 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The agriculture sector is changing the socio-economic 
environments of the population due to liberalization and 
globalization. About 75% people are living in rural India and 
still depend on agriculture. About 43% of India’s 
geographical area is used for agricultural activity. The 
agriculture  continues to play a major role in Indian 
economy,  by contributing  1/6th of the export earnings. 
Agriculture is crucial to India’s economy, as it provides 20% 
of GDP and employs 60% of the workforce. However, most 
of India’s poorest people are subsistence farmers who have 
little or no access to technology  for their proper solution of 
the damaged crops. Farmers lack knowledge on medicine or 
procedure to control the plant damages [1]. Every year, 
significant amounts of agricultural products are lost in India 
due to some critical diseases and improper maintenance. In 
remote areas, very often, the farmers do not get any 
suggestion regarding the correct scientific procedure to be 
followed for a particular cultivation. For this reason, they  
produce lesser  amounts of crops by incurring more 
expenditure. 
Sahayak, in some Indian languages, means ‘Assistant’. 
Therefore, the application we present has been given a local 
name,  Mobile Sahayak or m-Sahayak. In India, problems 
are faced by common people in rural  areas in the health 
sector, too. In urban areas, people get better facility in health 
care. However, the qualified doctors are not always willing 
to go to serve in  remote rural  areas. Many patients in 
remote villages die without proper treatment [11].  The 
population is increasing day by day, but the number of 
physicians, doctors, nurses or government hospitals serving 
rural population is not increasing proportionately. Therefore, 
the health care needs of rural population are not being 
addressed properly [12]. In remote areas, there is a dearth of 
modern healthcare facilities. This situation demands 
introduction of tele-medicine support in order to provide fast 
and high quality medical consultancy covering broad areas. 
The significant increase of capabilities in modern 
telecommunication and data processing enables advanced 
tele-service solutions to assist medical treatment at remote 
locations [9]. As an affordable and accessible means of 
communication, rural communities are realizing the potential 
of mobile telephony to create economic opportunities and 
strengthen social networks. Mobile telephony effectively 
reduces the "distance" between individuals and expert 
scientist/doctors, making the sharing of information and 
knowledge easier and more effective. It is hoped that the 
development of this  Android-based application can be 
widely implemented in the near future. This will benefit 
people in rural areas. Even rehabilitation centres, village 
schools, mobile health care units and industrial units like 
mines [5] of developing countries may use the application. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
In recent days, there has been an attempt to assist the 
farmer by telephony service but, this service is not 24X7 
hours service. Sometimes, the farmers are not able to connect 
with experts due to communication failures [6]. Another  
important problem is that in a critical situation, if the farmers 
are not able to explain or if the disease is a new one, then 
farmers would not be able to identify the diseases of the 
crops [1][2][4][9]. Captured images from crop surfaces can 
provide a better solution where the remote agri-scientist can 
see instantly the image for disease diagnosis.  Similarly, 
133
Copyright (c) The Government of India, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
captured skin, face, or other images through the developed 
application may be sent to expert doctors to extend tele-
health  advice  to remote areas. 
III. 
SYSTEM  ARCHITECTURE 
The overall architecture of the developed system includes 
Google Application Engine(GAE) and Google Web 
Toolkit(GWT) functioning as server . 
The real-time assistance ensures information flow to 
remote areas using internet (GPRS) or via SMS. Mobile 
application can go beyond restricted information flow adding 
real values to the information transferred. 
Figure 1 shows overall flow chart of the system. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.   Overall Flow Chart for Real-time Assistance in Remote 
Figure 1 shows the overall flow of the process. Depending 
on the user's selection, the process will execute. 
This flow chart clearly shows the whole system flow of our 
developed application. As soon as the application starts, it 
will check for the images, which are needed to be 
transmitted to the centralized Server. Depending on the user 
action, the application will capture new data or will transfer 
the captured data on the centralized Server. It allows the 
user to capture data repeatedly and stores the data locally 
even after transmitting the data to the centralized server. 
After the particular file has been transmitted, the details of 
the file will be deleted from the spinner so that the user can 
have the actual list of images, which needs to be transmitted 
to the centralized server. 
A. m-Sahayak System overview for Farmers 
 
Figure 2.  m-Sahayak System Architecture for Farmers 
Figure 2 shows the architecture of m-Sahayak for Indian 
Farmers. The farmers can capture the picture with Android-
based mobile handset with the developed Android 
application. Within the application, there is a provision to 
customize the camera settings like pixel resolution, flash, etc. 
When the application executes, it shows all the supported 
properties and the user can set them as required [7]. If the 
GPRS connection is slow, low resolution should be used. All 
the data (video, audio, image) are sent to the specified Server 
via HTTP connection using GPRS. On the server side the 
agricultural scientist is able to see all incoming data and 
images and provides proper solutions accordingly by call or 
sms. 
B. m-Sahayak System overview for Tele-Health Care 
 
Figure 3.  m-Sahayak System Architecture for Telehealth Care 
134
Copyright (c) The Government of India, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
Figure 3 shows the system architecture of m-Sahayak for 
tele-health service. Even today, in many places in India, 
there is a local health center but not any physician on 24x7 
basis. The paramedical personnel who are normally available 
in the local health centers can use the developed android-
based application [3]. The paramedical staff may capture the 
picture (photo) and send to the server. On the server side, the 
corresponding expert doctor could then view the patient’s 
specific zone of the body and give expert guidance to those 
patients in the remote area.  
IV. 
DESIGN CONCEPT AND SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT 
m-Sahayak is based on client-server architecture. At the 
server side related doctors or scientists can retrieve all the 
incoming problem data from server. The application  has the 
following technologies and user features  [5]. 
 
The application has easy to use Graphical User 
Interface (GUI) with the capability of providing the 
information about the image when it will be captured 
and stored  in the mobile device. 
 
It’s Graphical User Interface (GUI) is very simple to 
use, even the illiterate person can use it very easily.  
The picture can be captured  by pressing a single 
button and  then can be sent by pressing another . 
 
The data (video, audio and image) are transmitted  
through GPRS. The connection cost in this case is 
reduced to a minimum since only those few bytes 
requested by the user will be downloaded to the 
mobile phone. 
 
The data response comes through  call or sms. All 
the information or advices are provided to the user 
by Call/SMS at 24X7 hours from the experts.  
 
Security: A secured connection using HTTP protocol 
would be there to prevent information fraud. 
 
Durability: In this application, the image will be 
saved in a directory after it is captured. Till the 
image is completely sent, the application will not 
begin to send any other image from any other 
directory. So there would be no ambiguity so as to 
which image has been sent and which one has not 
been sent. 
The vital part of the application is the data transfer part. In 
this mechanism at first, it will connect to the central server 
through HTTP call and connect to [13]. Some source codes 
for transferring image data to the server are exemplified as 
below. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
135
Copyright (c) The Government of India, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
V. 
 TESTING , RESULTS AND DEPLOYMENT 
The application is tested on HTC Wild Fire Handset and 
the application is developed for Android 1.5 to 2.2 Version. 
Some of the screen shots of the application are given in 
Figure 4, Figure 5 and  Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Screen Shot for Application start 
 
Figure 5.  Screen shot of main Application layout 
  
 
Figure 6.  Demo application Web Screen using google application engine 
(GAE) at  [13] 
Figure 4 shows the initial screen of the Application when 
it is initiated by the user in the Android mobile set. When the 
“Start” button (as shown in Figure 4) is pressed the next 
screen which is provided to the users is about the parameters 
which needed to be configured (as shown in Figure 5). These 
parameters are for basic camera settings like resolution, 
Flash etc.  The spinner titled “Image to Send”(as shown in 
Figure 5) shows the file name which will be transferred 
when the “Send Image” button (as shown in Figure 5) is 
pressed by the user. On successful transmission of all the 
images to the Central Server this spinner list will be empty. 
This helps the user to keep a track of pending data which 
needs to be transferred to the Central Server. This happens 
when no GRPS/Wifi/3G i.e., internet service is not available 
on the mobile handset and the transmission of data fails. The 
mobile handset stores the data in its internal memory and 
transmits it when the service is available. In this way it helps 
the user from repeatedly capturing the data. The spinner 
titled “Send Images” (as shown in Figure 5) holds the list of 
filenames which have been successfully sent to the central 
server. A button titled “Capture” (as shown in Figure 5) is 
provided to capture the real time scenario by the user. 
Another button titled “AudioRecord” (as shown in Figure 5) 
is provided to record the voice or query of the user along 
with the captured image. This button causes to open a new 
screen along with user setting to record the voice and also 
having a button to send it to the central server.   A copy of 
the data which has been sent is available on the mobile 
handset also . Figure 6 shows the administrative screen of the 
m-Sahayak application available on the field experts 
terminal. On the basis of the available data, a solution is 
provided to the corresponding users. The service is available 
to registered users only. The current centralized server is 
based on google application engine (GAE) and the data 
which needs to be viewed by the field experts is available 
over HTTP [13].  
136
Copyright (c) The Government of India, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
Testing of the developed application is done on Android 
2.2 Emulator. The test result on the emulator comes out with 
satisfactory outputs. The whole application is broken into 3 
main units i.e., the capturing of the image, recording of the 
voice and sending of the data. When tested individually these 
units show satisfactory results on an emulator. After the 
successful testing on an emulator, we have installed the 
application on the HTC Wildfire handset having Android 
2.2. The behavior of the application is satisfactory in the 
initial stage that has been mentioned. This application is also 
compatible with higher versions of Android (2.2 and above).     
The m-Sahayak prototype has been deployed in the 
experimental site i.e., a garden near the design lab. Field 
conditions in this garden were similar to the real farming 
site. The natural capturing of images from at least 5 types of 
plants were examined from a distance by agricultural 
experts. Final deployment in a district of the state of West 
Bengal, India is under consideration through m-Governance  
scheme initiated by the Government of West Bengal, India. 
VI. 
FUTURE WORKS 
The proposed architecture is at the initial stage of 
development whose results have been mentioned. The 
deployment of the application in the experimental site is 
successful. Using the current version of the application, the 
architecture of the systems stands firm.  
VII. CONCLUSION AND REMARKS 
The application m-Sahayak would be a boon to Indian 
farmers as well as common people in the remote areas. 
Those who are already using an Android phone, can register 
with their phone number and get an account. The data sent 
by them will be stored in the corresponding account. The 
experts may provide their advice to that particular phone 
number. By this application, the health care units, may be 
able to provide better treatment using limited resources to the 
Indian common people. Using this application, farmers nay 
control the crop damage and prevent the food problem. 
Special features which would popularize the application 
are 
 
Simple Graphical User Interface (GUI) that can 
be used by everybody. 
 
“One Stop Solution” to all kinds of disease 
problem in crops and tele health care for people. 
 
User   cost (GPRS) is minimal. 
The most common benefit of mobile devices, as found by 
the survey is its penetration in rural India as the largest basic 
medium of basic communication. The mobile phone is the 
only convenient mode of communication to which farmers 
have   access. So it would help the farmers and the rural 
people if used properly and would be beneficial to most of 
them. 
As far as infrastructure is concerned in India, the Mobile 
communications services reach to each and every remote 
place. We have surveyed the current market which shows  
the basic requirement for running the application is available 
easily which Indian rural people can afford.           
REFERENCES 
[1] Manav Singhal, Kshitij Verma, and Anupam Shukla “Krishi 
Ville – Android based Solution for Indian agriculture,” 
Advanced 
Networks 
and 
Telecommunication 
Systems 
(ANTS),  2011 IEEE 5th International Conference, pp. 1-5, 
Dec 2011, Bengaluru, India 
[2]  Daniel Schuster, Thomas Springer, and Alexander Schill 
“Service 
based 
Development 
of 
Mobile 
Real-time 
Collaboration Applications for Social Networks”, Pervasive 
Computing and Communications Workshops (PERCOM 
Workshops), pp. 232-237, 2010 8th IEEE International 
Conference, March-April 2010. 
[3] Octavian Postolache, Pedro S. Girão, Mário Ribeiro, 
Fernando Santiago, and António Pena “Enabling telecare 
assessment with pervasive sensing and Android OS 
smartphone” 
Medical Measurements 
and 
Applications 
Proceedings (MeMeA), 2011 IEEE International Workshop, 
pp. 288-293, May 2011. 
[4]  Ralph Morelli, Emmet Murphy, and Trishan de Lanerolle 
“An Open Source Mobile App for Assisting Health andAgricu
ltural Aid in Haiti” 
Global 
Humanitarian 
Technology 
Conference (GHTC), 2011 IEEE , pp. 102-107, Oct-Nov 2011 
[5] Eko Supriyanto and Head of Advanced Diagnostics and E-
Health Research Group ”A Suitable Telehealth Model for 
Developing Countries” 2011 International Conference on 
Instrumentation, Communication, Information Technology 
and Biomedical Engineering, pp. 414, 8-9 November 2011, 
Bandung, Indonesia 
[6] Ivo M. Lopes, Bruno M. Silva, Joel J.P.C. Rodrigues, Jaime 
Lloret, and Mario L. Proença Jr “A Mobile Health Monitoring 
Solution for Weight Control” Wireless Communications and 
Signal Processing (WCSP), 2011 International Conference, 
pp. 1-5, Nov 2011. 
[7] Yu-Hsien Chu, Yen-Chou Hsieh, Chia-Hui Wang, Yu-Chun 
Pan, 
and 
Ray-I 
Chang  
“UPHSM:  Ubiquitous personal health surveillance andmanag
ement system via WSN agent on open sourcesmartphone” e-
Health Networking Applications and Services (Healthcom),  
13th IEEE International Conference, pp. 60-63, June 2011. 
[8] Charalampos 
Doukas, 
Thomas 
Pliakas, 
and 
Ilias 
Maglogiannis “Mobile Healthcare Information Management 
utilizing Cloud Computing and Android OS ” 32nd Annual 
International Conference of the IEEE EMBS Buenos Aires, 
Argentina, pp. 1037-1040, August 31 - September 4, 2010. 
[9] Matthias Görs, Roland Marx, Michael Albert, Markus 
Schäfer, and Klaus Schilling “Tele-Medicine Techniques for 
Remote Support of Patients in Dialysis and COPD” 2011 
International Conference on Instrumentation, Communication, 
Information Technology and Biomedical Engineering, pp. 23-
28,  8-9 November 2011, Bandung, Indonesia 
[10] Ben Falchuk “Visual and Interaction Design Themes in 
Mobile Healthcare”, Mobile and Ubiquitous Systems: 
Networking & Services, MobiQuitous, 2009. MobiQuitous 
'09. 6th Annual International, pp. 1-10, July 2009, Telcordia 
Technol., Piscataway, NJ, USA.  
[11] Mei-Ying Wang, John K. Zao, P.H. Tsai, and J.W.S. Liu  
“Wedjat: A Mobile Phone Based Medicine In-take Reminder 
and Monitor” 2009 Ninth IEEE International Conference on 
Bioinformatics and Bioengineering, pp. 423-430, June 2009 
Comput. Sci. Dept., Nat. Chiao Tung Univ., Taiwan . 
[12] Feming Pang, Linying Jiang, Liu Yang, and Kun Yue  
“Research of Android Smart Phone Surveillance System” 
2010 International Conference On Computer Design And 
Applications (ICCDA2010), pp. V2-373 - V2-376, June 2010, 
Software Coll., Northeastern Univ., Shenyang, China.    
[13] http://msahayak.appspot.com/upload [ retrieved: Aug, 2012 ].
 
137
Copyright (c) The Government of India, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

