 
M2Learn Open Framework: Developing Mobile Collaborative and Social 
Applications 
 
Sergio Martin, Gabriel Diaz, Elio Sancristobal, 
Rosario Gil, Manuel Castro, Juan Peire 
Computer and Electrical Engineering Department 
UNED – Spanish University for Distance Education 
Madrid, Spain 
{smartin, gdiaz, elio, rgil, mcastro,jpeire}@ieec.uned.es 
Ivica Boticki 
Learning Sciences Laboratory, National Institute of 
Education 
Nanyang Technology University of Singapore 
Singapore, Singapore 
ivica.boticki@nie.edu.sg
 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents M2Learn framework as an 
open platform, which facilitates the development of mobile 
learning and ubiquitous applications. The main features of this 
framework are: (a) transparent management of multiple 
location-based technologies including GPS and cell towers; (b) 
identification of objects through RFID; (c) support for motion 
sensors (e.g., G-Sensor); (d) interoperability with Moodle e-
learning platform; and (e) support for widely accepted e-
learning standards, including LOM for learning objects, and 
IMS-QTI for assessment. To demonstrate the benefits of the 
M2Learn system, a MobileTwitter microblogging application 
had been developed. The benefits of the application relying on 
the M2Learn’s infrastructure are discussed and experience in 
designing the system presented. 
Keywords - mobile learning; collaborative learning; 
M2Learn framework; microblogging. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Mobile computing is one of the fastest growing 
technology industry areas worldwide. Mobile device 
adoption rate in western countries is 90%, with the youngest 
generations as the leading users [1]. One of the reasons for 
this success is the improvement in the devices’ technical 
features and their low prices. The new generations of mobile 
devices have wider and touch screens, built-in digital 
cameras, and support Wi-Fi and 3G web connectivity. Most 
devices are equipped with GPS (Global Positioning System) 
receivers, RFID (Radio Frequency IDentification), NFC 
(Near Field Communication) readers or smartcards. All these 
new embedded technologies make a platform for the new 
generation of applications to be used in all kinds of 
environments. These applications are context-aware and 
benefit from the internet connection anytime anywhere.  
There is a significant body of research witnessing these 
devices can be used is education in order to enhance the 
learning and teaching processes. Coupled with the 
proliferation of mobile devices, this causes the increase of 
the demand for mobile learning application development. 
Due to heterogeneous nature of the devices, frameworks 
which ease the development tasks have emerged. These 
systems are created to decrease the inherent complexity of 
the technologies 
brought 
into the 
mobile 
learning 
development. In this paper we present such a framework 
named M2Learn and an exemplary application for 
microblogging, which can be used to support a diverse set of 
learning and teaching scenarios. 
The paper is organized in three main parts: introduction 
(chapter II), which describes how social interaction can 
improve the learning experience; architecture description 
(chapters III and IV), where an open framework to simplify 
the development of mobile applications is described; and 
finally the results; where an application built over the 
proposed framework is shown. 
II. 
ENHANCING LEARNING EXPERIENCES WITH SOCIAL 
LEARNING 
The term „Web 2.0“ was introduced in 2005., denoting a 
shift in perception of the World Wide Web, which becomes 
regarded as a lot more than just a passive source of 
information - it becomes a platform, a user-oriented 
environment where people interact and actively participate in 
content creation [2]. One of the most important and well 
known components of the Web 2.0 concept is the so called 
“social software.” [3]. Examples of social software can be 
found in tools and applications such as wikis, applications 
designed for collaborative work allowing a number of users 
to edit online content; blogs; online diaries; podcasting, a 
new type of online media transferring using syndication 
feeds; sites like del.icio.us [4] and Flickr [5], which use a 
concept called "folksonomy," a style of a collaborative 
categorization of content using tags; content sharing tools 
such as YouTube, MySpace and RSS, allowing users to 
subscribe to a website's content and receive notification each 
time the page changes; e-portfolio applications etc. 
The impact of the Web 2.0 concepts on e-learning is 
summarized in the term e-learning 2.0 [6]. Tools like wikis, 
blogs, podcasting, e-portfolios etc. are used both in formal 
education and informal learning. The rise of importance of 
student-centred learning can be noticed: the learner is no 
longer a passive consumer of information but an active and 
engaged participant in the learning process who creates his 
or her own content and constantly interacts with other users. 
59
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

Control of the learning process has been placed „into the 
hands of the learner,” communication and collaboration 
being the key components [6].  
In the era of pervasive and ubiquitous computing, where 
learning is not restricted to one single place and has become 
integrated into our daily lives, the importance of mobile 
learning is rapidly rising due to the numerous possibilities 
mobile devices have to offer as means of supporting the 
learning process [7]. Due to their unique characteristics they 
provide new possibilities for interaction, collaboration 
amongst learners, informal learning and are, in the same 
time, user – centred and personal. Therefore, they naturally 
coexist and supplement the idea of e-learning 2.0. 
III. 
OBJECTIVES: TOWARDS AN OPEN FRAMEWORK FOR 
THE DEVELOPMENT OF MOBILE LEARNING APPLICATIONS 
Mobile devices present an attractive tool for learners 
since they integrate several well known functionalities: 
videogames; watching videos; communication via mobile 
devices; and collaborative technologies (e.g., blogs, wikis, 
mash-ups and social networks). All these, supplemented with 
an adequate learning activity design, transform learners from 
mere listeners towards active participants in the learning 
process engaged in interaction in the way are already used to. 
Therefore, learners feel more motivated and engaged in 
learning. 
M2Learn project makes a step further in the state of the 
art design of mobile learning applications. It supports the 
development of innovative mobile learning applications that 
complement and enrich learning experiences encouraging 
learning “anywhere, anytime”, improving the social 
interactions, providing personalized educative experience to 
each learner, and reaching to places where traditional or on-
line learning cannot reach. M2Learn middleware is devoted 
to helping mobile learning best supporting education, 
complementing traditional and on-line learning instead of 
replacing them, thereby promoting blended approaches.  
The main contributions of the M2Learn should be: it is 
an open framework which simplifies and facilitates the 
development of complex mobile learning applications both 
“lowering the floor” (i.e., makes it easier for designers to 
build applications) and “raising the ceiling” (i.e., increases 
the ability of designers to build more sophisticated 
applications). The M2Learn’s framework should: 
• 
Provide an interface towards some services in the 
existing e-learning platforms (currently Moodle). This 
feature allows external applications, such as mobile 
learning applications and games, to interact with the 
services. Currently, the supported services are focused 
on collaboration, communication, and assignments 
methods.  
• 
Gather students’ e-portfolio from an external e-learning 
platform regardless the application source (e.g., games, 
mobile applications, e-learning platforms, and etc).  
• 
Enable transparent sensor data acquisition, supporting 
location GPS, cell towers, Wi-Fi; identification through 
RFID; and motion recognition thanks to accelerometers, 
and digital compasses. 
• 
Be released as source code, under a GNU GPL v3 
licence. 
It is our main goal to create a framework with inherent 
reduced inner complexity of location techniques, easy 
accessible 
learning 
services, 
context-awareness 
and 
management of e-learning resources, facilitating the 
development of m-learning projects within educational 
institutions. 
IV. 
THE M2LEARN FRAMEWORK 
Successful adoption of mobile devices in education 
requires the development of applications which adequately 
support mobile learner. Thus, authors have committed to 
create the M2Learn framework, supporting the development 
of the new generation of mobile learning applications [8]. 
Being scalable and reusable, the framework supports plug-
and-play configuration by the consistent use of standards and 
definitions of public interfaces. This allows for adding of 
new services to the system without changing the software 
structure (Figure 1).  
 
 
Figure 1.  M2Learn architecture includes location technologies and 
integrates various services, some of them coming from e-learning 
platforms.  
 
The framework supports user-driven collaboration and 
communication by integrating content into blogs, chats, and 
forums already supported by the existing e-learning 
platforms in organizations (at this stage only support for 
Moodle had been developed). M2Learn promotes the P3 
social networking (i.e., People-People-Place) driving the 
participation in mobile social learning-oriented communities, 
mainly due to its interface towards e-learning platforms and 
location technologies [8].  
A. A Context-aware approach 
M2Learn provides easy access to sensors and multi-
modal interfaces (e.g., accelerometers), having the potential 
of improving student engagement in content and activities. It 
enables invisible switching between various location-based 
technologies (e.g., GPS, cell towers-triangulation, WiFi) and 
supports the “Internet of Things” paradigm by integrating a 
RFID reader management module. All this sensor data is 
aggregated into users’ context and complemented with the 
60
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

access to services devoted to translating identifications (e.g., 
coming from RFIDs) or latitude and longitude coordinates 
(from GPS or cell towers) into an area name (e.g., room, 
building, street, city, and country) which can then be 
associated to 
services 
or 
contents. The contextual 
information can be also used to simplify the development of 
augmented reality applications since developers use the 
provided API (location and motion) to acquire the 
information to be superimposed to the camera images. 
All the contextual information (e.g., location, time, 
profiles, schedule, surrounding people or preferences) can be 
used to personalize the access to content and services. The 
M2Learn framework includes a module for content and 
service discovery based on spatial and temporal variables 
(associating 
resources 
to 
time 
and 
places); 
yields 
personalized context-aware search results and integrates 
mainstream and social media through the use of data feeds 
(RSS). 
B. Towards integrated learning services and mashups 
The M2Learn framework supports fundamental e-
learning standards, such as LOM for Learning Objects and 
IMS-QTI for assessment. It is able to communicate with the 
services offered by the existing e-learning platforms such as 
calendar, chat, forum, blog, assignments, and wiki. Logs 
from external applications can be used to put together 
students’ e-portfolios and triangulate it with the educational 
experience coming from a mobile application, game, or an e-
learning platform. 
What is more, the framework allows the creation of 
mashups by offering its contextual information through an 
external publicly available interface. Figure 2 represents an 
example of such an environment where two mobile 
applications are built on top of the M2Learn Framework 
interact via the services offered by an e-learning platform. 
These applications compile contextual information from 
different sensors and send it to the Context Hub, which then 
distributes it to the rest of the group or other external 
applications to support the creation of mashups. A key 
element in this ecosystem is the Contextual Service 
Directory which provides information about the available 
services for each user according to the location and time. 
This architecture simplifies the development of mobile 
learning mashup applications considerably. For example, 
users will be able to create a mash-up system using the 
predefined location information APIs instead of dealing with 
intricacies of the NMEA protocol and GPS protocols; or 
dealing with complex communication mechanisms through a 
serial port with an RFID controller in order to read 
information from an RFID tag and interpret it accordingly.  
As an example of added value and the ease of use, users 
will be able to create a mobile blog using the services 
provided by an e-learning platform, but they will not need to 
create any web service in the language of the platform or 
understand how the database is structured. They will be able 
to reuse simple existing interface with information and 
services provided by the M2Learn middleware.  
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Overview of a mobile ecosystem built on top of the M2Learn 
Framework. 
 
Although the M2Learn framework is already developed 
and deployed, mobile learning applications that rely on it are 
currently being designed. It has to be noted that every new 
mobile learning application cannot be conceived as an 
isolated entity, but as a live ecosystem of both services and 
users. With M2Learn this is indeed possible since it 
facilitates the coexistence of multiple users that interact, 
collaborate and communicate with each other minding 
group’s context.  
V. 
DEVELOPING A MICROBLOGGING APPLICATION USING 
THE M2LEARN FRAMEWORK 
In order to evaluate the ease, effectiveness and the 
appropriateness of the M2Learn framework, 7 students 
taking a distance learning course in mobile programming 
were each assigned a task of developing an application 
using different kinds of mobile technologies (i.e., Web, 
.NET, Android). All these applications have one thing in 
common: they are based on the M2Learn framework and 
reused its APIs in order to build higher level application 
services. 
One of the applications deals with microblogging and is 
inspired by ever-so-popular web service Twitter [9]. It is 
based on M2Learn’s context aware modules and is 
connected to an e-learning platform. From an educational 
point of view, the application could be used for out-of-the-
classroom activities in which students microblog their 
opinions or answers in different context and locations. 
Students collaborate in situ depending on the task assigned 
by the teachers and are latter debriefed in the classroom by 
the teachers who reviews their contributions through an e-
learning platform 
The MobileTwitter microblogging application created by 
the students encapsulates the following functionalities: (a) a 
user is able to post a message; (b) the posted message is 
61
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

stored into the central server space; (c) other users are able 
to read the message by connecting to the system. 
These mechanisms are similar to the well known web 
service Twitter. In order to put the educational benefits in 
the first place the following modification were introduced. 
Each time a user posts a message the application 
automatically associates a location tag with it. The location 
appears regardless of the position of users posting the 
message – they can be indoor or outdoor. As an example, a 
microblogged sentence ”I’m going to start the practice!” is 
transformed into “Sergio@Juan del Rosal 12, Madrid: I’m 
going to start the practice!” prior to the submission into the 
centralized online repository. In this case M2Learn 
framework is used to contextualize student generated 
artifacts and to store them into the Moodle platform ready 
for the teacher and students post-activity debriefing session. 
Throughout the process, all the activity is logged into the 
M2Learn platform step-by-step contributing to building 
students’ e-portfolios.  
The MobileTwitter application is composed out of three 
main modules: configuration, message publishing (used by 
the students in order to send messages), and message review 
(reviewing others’ messages) (Figure 3). 
 
 
Figure 3.  The MobileTwitter microblogging application developed by the 
students of Mobile Programming distance learning course 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The paper presented M2Learn framework which provides 
an infrastructure for the development of mobile learning 
applications. The infrastructure makes the use of context-
aware 
information 
(such 
as 
location 
information) 
straightforward and the access to external e-learning 
repositories much easier due to the definition of externally 
accessible interfaces. 
These benefits can be used by the developers of mobile 
learning system in order to build mobile learning 
applications quicker and to benefit from the centralized 
online repositories which not only store user artefacts, but 
which automatically create on-line user portfolios and 
aggregate contextual information to provide higher level 
application services. As an example we present a 
microblogging application built on top of the framework 
making use of the contextual information in enhancing 
mobile learning experiences. 
The authors nevertheless acknowledge that the design of 
learning environments should lead the development of 
mobile learning applications. In that sense, M2Learn 
framework can contribute by structuring and simplifying the 
usually troublesome mobile learning activity design 
procedure. 
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Authors would like to acknowledge to the Spanish 
Science and Innovation Ministry for the support in the 
project TIN2008-06083-C03/TSI “s-Labs – Integración de 
Servicios Abiertos para Laboratorios Remotos y Virtuales 
Distribuidos” and to the CYTED-508AC0341 “SOLITE- 
SOFTWARE LIBRE EN TELEFORMACIÓN” project 
support.  
Also authors would like to acknowledge the support of 
the Project 142788-2008-BG-LEONARDO-LMP mPSS – 
mobile Performance Support for Vocational Education and 
Training Project and IPLECS Project – Internet-based 
Performance-centered Learning Environment for Curricula 
Support 
Project 
ERASMUS 
141944-LLP-2008-1-ES-
ERASMUS-ECDSP. Finally authors want to acknowledge 
the support provided by e-Madrid Project, S2009/TIC-1650, 
“Investigación y Desarrollo de tecnologías para el e-learning 
en la Comunidad de Madrid”. 
REFERENCES 
 [1] Vidal, F. and Mota, R., “Encuesta de Infancia en España 2008”. 
Fundación SM, Universidad Pontificia Comillas-ICAI-ICADE y 
Movimiento Junior, pp. 1-16, 2008 
 [2] T. O'Reilly, “What Is Web 2.0 - Design Patterns and Business Models 
for 
the 
Next 
Generation 
of 
Software”, 
2005, 
http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/oreilly/tim/news/2005/09/30/what-is-
web-20.html 
[3]  B. Alexander, “Web 2.0: A New Wave of Innovation for Teaching and 
Learning?”, EDUCAUSE Review, vol. 41, no. 2 (March/April 2006): 
32–44, 2006. 
[4] Delicious. On-line resource, accessed on February 15, 2010. URL: 
http://delicious.com/ 
[5] Flickr. On-line resource, accessed on February 15, 2010. URL: 
http://www.flickr.com/ 
[6] 
S. 
Downes 
“E-learning 
2.0”, 
eLearn, 
2005, 
ACM 
Press, 
http://www.elearnmag.org/subpage.cfm?section=articles&article=29-1 
[7] Jacobs, J., and Polson, D., “Mobile learning, social learning”, 
Proceedings of Learning On The Move OLT Conference, 26 
September 2006, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane. 
[8] Martín, S., Diaz, G., Sancristobal, E., Gil, R., Castro, M., and Peire J., 
“Supporting M-learning: The location challenge”, Proceedings on the 
2009 IADIS Mobile Learning Conference, January 2009, Barcelona. 
[9] Twitter. On-line resource, accessed on February 15, 2010. URL: 
http://twitter.com/ 
 
62
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

