Design of Multiple Clouds based Virtual Desktop Infrastructure Architecture  
for Service Mobility 
 
Dongjae Kang, Sunwook Kim, Youngwoo Jung 
High Performance Computing Research Department 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Daejeon, Korea 
e-mail: {djkang, swkim99, ywjung}@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract—Cloud service mobility has been more and more 
important for the next-generation Cloud service to support 
limitless movement and stable Quality of Service (QoS). But, 
existing virtual desktop infrastructure (VDI) solution has  been 
provided from the fixed and dedicated single Cloud. In the 
situation, it makes several issues to long distance service users 
in aspect of response time, performance and QoS and so on. To 
improve the upper needs and problems, we propose multiple 
Clouds based virtual desktop infrastructure architecture and 
its functional blocks. Finally, we described use case of the VDI 
service in the proposed environment. The proposed VDI 
architecture can significantly improve the response time and 
stability of VDI service in case user moves to cross-border 
location. 
Keywords-Virtual desktop infrastructure; Cloud service 
brokerage; Multiple clouds; Service mobility; Interoperability. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recently, many companies and organizations start to use 
smart 
work 
environment 
through 
virtual 
desktop 
infrastructure (VDI) service to reduce the cost of 
management and infrastructure itself. And it is helpful for 
enhancing security level and realizing green computing. 
Moreover, the client devices of VDI service are transferring 
to diverse mobile devices from static PC and server 
according to mobile work trend. The VDI service may 
include company-specific business applications with high 
level security, office SW to handle various documents or 
favorite personal applications and so on.  
In case that the employees in Korea leave on a business 
trip to another country, e.g., Germany, they still want to use 
their own VDI service to continuously perform the business 
work, to access to specific data or to enjoy favorite personal 
application. But, QoS of VDI service in Germany will be 
very serious because of degraded response time and 
performance by long distance transferring. Although this 
kind of inconvenient situation is occurred, they have to 
connect to the VDI service provided from Korea. This is 
very time consuming and troublesome job. 
To ease the upper problems, we proposed the architecture 
and functional blocks of virtual desktop infrastructure in the 
multiple Clouds environment for enhancing the degraded 
QoS of VDI service when the user moves to another place, 
e.g., border-across movement. In the proposed architecture, 
the VDI service can be freely transferred among multiple 
Clouds according to user location (User Neighboring 
Service) and it makes the user to get more stable and high-
quality VDI service in anywhere regardless of location. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
A. Cloud Service Brokerage 
According to Gartner [2],  Cloud service brokerage 
system is a role of intermediary, in which a company or other 
entity adds value to one or more cloud services on behalf of 
one or more consumers of those services. The Cloud service 
brokerage system offering will also often include some 
combination of capabilities that fall under three primary roles, 
aggregation brokerage, integration brokerage, customization 
brokerage. Gartner's Intermediation encompasses these three 
primary roles.  
In [4], open source based Cloud service brokerage 
solutions are compared, according concerns like, system 
category and type, core capabilities, core features and 
advanced features, architecture and interoperability, service 
languages, programming model and service engineering, and 
quality. In this research, the authors place emphasis on the 
emergence of cloud service brokerage solutions on top of 
cloud management, the need for further separation of 
marketplaces and cloud service brokerage solutions and 
service description mechanisms to commoditize the cloud. 
Several organizations active in the cloud technology area 
have identified cloud service brokerage as an important 
architectural challenge. Architecture and programming 
model concern is key enabler of any service brokerage 
solution that mediates between different providers by 
integrating, aggregating and customizing services from 
different providers [5]. 
Cloud service brokerage system generally consists of 
three main parts that include user portal, brokerage core 
engine and Cloud connection management [3]. User portal is 
the front-end of the Cloud service brokerage system for 
Cloud service consumers and providers and it includes 
various business support functionalities. Brokerage core 
engine supports key functionalities for service brokerage, 
such as request verification, service provisioning, arbitrage, 
monitoring, service lifecycle management and so on. Finally, 
Cloud connection management is in charge of the interaction 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

between Cloud service brokerage system and Cloud 
infrastructures by IaaS providers. 
B. Virtual Desktop Infrastructure Service 
Virtual Desktop Infrastructure (VDI) is used to run 
desktop operating systems and applications inside virtual 
machine that reside on servers. The desktop operating 
systems inside the virtual machines are referred as the virtual 
desktops. Through network, users access to the virtual 
desktops using VDI client that can be thin client, zero client 
or PC client. The client receives screen data of VM and 
displays it to the client display. Keyboard and mouse input of 
the client are captured and transmitted to the VM. Nowadays, 
there are several VDI solutions provided by VMware, Citrix, 
Microsoft, and KVM. The VDI systems are combination of 
the hypervisor and the VDI protocol. The representative VDI 
protocols are PCoIP, ICA/HDX, and RDP/RemoteFX. In the 
VDI system, Network Interface Card (NIC) for the virtual 
desktop is emulated by the hypervisor in software, and the 
emulated NIC is called as vNIC (Virtual NIC) [6].  
The service flow of virtual desktop in single cloud is 
shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. General VDI service architecture in single Cloud 
VDI hosts a virtual desktop environment in a virtual 
machine that runs on a centralized or remote server. And 
user may access to the assigned VDI service through a 
variety of terminals.  In general, VDI has three components 
as follows: one is a VDI client, which is user devices to 
connect to the VDI service, a VDI server in which user’s 
virtual desktop exists, and a VDI manager that administrates 
and controls virtual desktop system. Virtual desktops in VDI 
server are transmitted to users’ terminal using display 
protocol on network. These components are interconnected 
to support VDI service on network.  
C. Nested Virtualization 
In classical machine virtualization, a hypervisor runs 
multiple operating systems simultaneously, each on its own 
virtual machine. These solutions lack interoperability with 
each other, meaning that a VM running on one hypervisor 
cannot be easily migrated to another hypervisor, because it 
differs in several aspects, e.g., virtualization technique, 
virtual hardware devices, image formats and so on [7]. In 
nested virtualization, a hypervisor can run multiple other 
hypervisors with their associated virtual machines. It enables 
complete abstraction of underlying cloud infrastructure from 
the application virtual machines and allows deployment of 
existing VMs into the cloud without any modifications, 
mobility between the clouds and easy duplication of the 
entire deployment [8]. In this work, using multi-dimensional 
paging and multi-level device assignment, it can run 
common workloads with overhead as low as 6-8% of single 
level virtualization. 
III. 
THE ARCHITECTURE OF MULTIPLE CLOUDS BASED 
VIRTUAL DESKTOP INFRASTRUCTURE 
In this section, we proposed the architecture of multiple 
Clouds based VDI and its functional blocks. 
A. Architecture of multiple Clouds based VDI  
In this section, we describe the concept and whole 
architecture design of multiple Clouds based VDI service. 
The 
system 
enables 
the 
unified 
management 
of 
heterogeneous cloud service providers and make VDI service 
to be moved across the diverse Clouds. 
 
 
Figure 2. Architecture for multiple Clouds based VDI service 
As showed in Figure 2, multiple Clouds based VDI 
service is consist of three separated parts, user devices, 
multiple Cloud based VDI management and Multiple Clouds 
Infrastructure. User devices are a kind of service terminal for 
VDI service users and it can be personal computer, thin 
client, laptop, mobile devices and others. Multiple Clouds 
based 
VDI 
management 
supports 
provisioning 
and 
management of the VDI host server and VDI service on 
multiple cloud environment. It interacts with diverse Cloud 
infrastructures and connects to the agent in each VDI host 
server for controlling VDI service lifecycle. Nested 
virtualization based host server is a shape of virtual machine 
including VDI host server. It enables complete abstraction of 
underlying cloud infrastructure from VDI host server in 
virtual machines and allows deployment of existing VDI 
host server into the cloud without any modifications between 
different hypervisors, e.g., KVM, Xen, VMware. Multiple 
Clouds Infrastructure consists of the diverse Cloud 
infrastructures provided by private and public Cloud service 
provider, that is, Amazon, KT, Rackspace, OpenStack and so 
on. And each part requires below features. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

1) User devices 
- Browser-based client system using HTML5 
- Adaptive client service based on client resources 
- On/Offline virtual desktop service 
2) Multiple Cloud  based VDI management 
- Hierarchical management structure for large scale 
system 
- Modular architecture for easy and quick virtual desktop 
provisioning 
- Fast user image management system 
- Web-based management interface 
3) Nested Virtualization based Host Server 
- Nested hypervisor, virtual hardware, network and 
storage configuration support 
- Ability to run multiple VDI service on single host 
virtual machine 
- Common abstraction and decoupling virtualized VDI 
server from resources provided by IaaS providers 
4) Multiple Clouds infrastructure 
- Diverse resource specification support 
- Geographically dispersed Cloud resources 
- Price, resource, security and other features can be 
selectable 
B. Functional blocks of the multiple Clouds based VDI 
management 
Multiple Clouds based VDI management is the essential 
part in the proposed VDI architecture and it intermediates 
most functions between user device and Multiple Clouds 
Infrastructures. In this section, we explained role of the 
detailed functional blocks in the Multiple Clouds based VDI 
Management. Figure 3 and figure 4 show its details and 
relationships between blocks. 
VDI user portal receives various requests from users in 
the defined form and returns processed result via GUI 
interfaces. Users can control and manage their provisioned 
VDI services on multiple Clouds through it. User 
authentication and management has two kinds of roles, one 
is user authentication for VDI service and the other is 
account mapping between VDI service and each user or user 
group. Service provisioning is initial process to provide VDI 
service to user. It includes finding best-fit Cloud 
infrastructure for VDI services and makes required 
configuration and deploys VDI service on the selected 
Cloud infrastructure. VDI service lifecycle management 
reacts from monitoring alert, especially, SLA status 
monitoring and applies pre-defined policies to maintain 
recommended QoS. Possible reaction can be restart, stop, 
resume, suspend and move to another Cloud. User system 
image management is a kind of image repository which 
stores and retrieves VDI host server and VDI service image 
from/to IaaS provider’s infrastructure. And it manages the 
version of specific user or tenant’s VDI service image to 
keep the final updated information on the image. VDI 
service monitoring is responsible for measuring the Key 
Performance Indicators (KPIs) of the VDI services. In the 
proposed systems, it provides the data primarily for service 
accounting / billing and SLA management. Monitoring 
helps to diagnose hardware and software problems, to 
enhance the resource utilization and to ensure the service’s 
performance and security. 
 
 
Figure 3. Functional blocks of multiple Clouds based VDI management 
 
Figure 4. Relationship among main functional blocks 
Multiple Cloud connection management deals with the 
interoperability interface between the VDI management 
system and the collection of heterogeneous Cloud providers. 
This component translates the requests from the provisioning 
and configuration component into understandable provider 
API calls. And connection proxy abstracts the existing API’s 
heterogeneity through a common framework in the proposed 
system. It is also in charge of connection and management of 
VDI host server through connection broker with host server 
agent. 
IV. 
USE CASE 
In this section, we described the use case of the multiple 
Cloud based VDI service. In this use case, we assumed VDI 
service user moves to EU from Korea and wants to use his 
preferred existing VDI service in EU without service delay. 
Figure 5 shows overall operational sequence for the use case. 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

VDI Management server can interacts with diverse Cloud 
infrastructures 
through 
Multiple 
Cloud 
Connection 
Management block and communicate with deployed 
virtualized VDI host servers on it by host server agent. 
Virtualized host server is created by using nested 
virtualization technique. It enables complete abstraction of 
underlying cloud infrastructure from virtual VDI host servers 
and allows deployment of existing host server into the cloud 
without any modifications between the Clouds. The use case 
sequence is as below. 
 
 
Figure 5. Use case for multiple Clouds  based VDI service  
1) User login VDI Management server to uses VDI 
Service in Korea.  
2) VDI Management server deploys a VDI service in 
Korea Cloud and returns connection information to the user. 
3) User connects to the allocated VDI service and uses it. 
4) Service user has business trip to EU from Korea. 
Before moves to EU, user connects to VDI Management 
Server and finds best-fit Cloud infrastructure where user’s 
VDI service will be migrated. To search best-fit Cloud, 
users can inputs diverse conditions, e.g., location, price, 
security level, usage period and so on. 
5) VDI Management server recommends several EU 
Cloud infrastructures satisfying user’s requirements and 
user selects and confirms the best one. 
6) VDI Management server deploys VDI host server 
using existing virtualized server image. 
7) VDI Management server connects to the agent in 
deployed virtualized host server and creates new VDI 
service. And it reflects differential data from existing VDI 
service to new created VDI service to maintain up-to-date 
status. 
8) VDI Management server stop the existing VDI service 
in Korea and launches new VDI service in EU. 
9) User in EU login VDI Management server and it 
returns new connection information to user. 
10) 
User enjoys same VDI service from another Cloud 
infrastructure in EU without additional delay.  
V. CONCLUSION 
Most people have used the diverse and huge number of 
personal devices and they move frequently from one area to 
another. So, Cloud service mobility is very important for the 
next-generation Cloud service to support limitless movement 
and stable QoS. To satisfy the upper described needs, we 
proposed the architecture of multiple Clouds based VDI 
service and use case on its environment and designed the 
functional blocks of multiple Clouds based VDI management 
and defined the relationships among them. The proposed 
system architecture can improve the mobility and stability of 
VDI service in case the user move to cross-border location. 
Multiple Cloud based VDI service supports flexible service 
mobility using geographically dispersed Cloud providers and 
can be dynamically brokered to the best-fit Cloud 
infrastructure according to emerging demands.  
In future plan, to verify usability of this work, we will 
compare service performance and stability between 
traditional VDI and the proposed VDI service. And we also 
consider container based architecture for better performance. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the European Union’s 
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under 
grant agreement no. 723131 and from ICT R&D program of 
Korean Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning no. 
R0115-16-0001 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Grozev, and R. Buyya, “Inter-Cloud architectures and 
application brokering : taxonomy and survey,” Software 
Practice and Experience, March 2014, Vol. 44, Issue 3, pp. 
369–390, doi: 10.1002/spe.2168. 
[2]  “The Role of CSB in the Cloud Services Value Chain,” 
Gartner, G00218960, Oct. 2011. 
[3] S. H. Son, D. J. Kang, S. P. Huh, W. Y. Kim, and W. Choi, 
“Adaptive trade-off strategy for bargaining-based multi-
objective SLA establishment under varying cloud workload,” 
Journal of Supercomputing, April 2016, Vol. 72, Issue 4,  pp. 
1597–1622, doi:10.1007/s11227-016-1686-y. 
[4] F. Fowley, C. Pahl, and L. Zhang, "A Comparison Framework 
and Review of Service Brokerage Solutions for Cloud 
Architectures," Service-Oriented Computing, 2014, LNCS 
Vol 8377, pp. 137-149, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-06859-6_13. 
[5] J. Tordsson, R. S. Montero, R. Moreno-Vozmediano, and I. M. 
Llorente, “Cloud brokering mechanisms for optimized 
placement of virtual machines across multiple providers,” 
Future Generation Computing Systems, 2012, Vol. 28, Issue 2, 
pp. 358-367, doi:10.1016/j.future.2011.07.003. 
[6] D.-A. Dasilva, L. Liu, N. Bessis, and Y. Zhan, "Enabling 
Green IT through Building a Virtual Desktop Infrastructure," 
2012 Eighth International Conference on Knowledge and 
Grids (SKG), Oct. 2012, pp. 32-38, doi:10.1109/SKG.2012.29. 
[7] A. Fishman, M. Rapoport, E. Budilovsky and I. Eidus, “HVX: 
Virtualizing the Cloud,” 5th USENIX Workshop on Hot 
Topics in Cloud Computing, June 2013. 
[8] M. Ben-Yehuda, M. D. Day, Z. Dubitzky, M. Factor, N. 
Har'EI, A. Gordon, A. Liguori, O. Wasserman and B.-A. 
Yassour, “The Turtles project: Design and implementation of 
nested virtualization,” 9th USENIX conference on Operating 
systems design and implementation, Oct 2010,  pp. 1-6.
 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

