Gas-TO - a Case Study in Project-based Learning
José Itamar M. de Souza Júnior, Diego Ferreira de Miranda, Yuri Antonio S. de Souza
Federal Institute of Science and Technology of Tocantins
Palmas, Brazil
E-mails: {jhoseju, diegofinformatica, yantonio1992}@gmail.com
Abstract—This paper presents a case study of Project-based
Learning
applying
translational
research.
The
novelty
proposed consists in how the Project-based Learning approach
can be used to obtain a solution for a problem in society. The
supporting project is a real-life problem, about filling up on
gas. Its development was planned in phases: bibliographical
research, survey for obtaining the level of interest for the
solution proposed, prototype and deployment of Gas-TO. We
employed strategies to ensure that the proposed development
methodology
can
be
carried
out
by
any
academician,
regardless
of
their
area
of
training,
thus
ensuring
an
interdisciplinary methodology for developing solutions for the
community.
Keywords-Project-based
Learning;
methodology;
mobile
technologies; application.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, quick and easy access to information has
become a necessity [1] and has motivated the development
of applications used by users in general [2].
In this scenario, when we consider applications that have
information about filling stations in state of Tocantins in
Brazil, we identify that there are no instruments to provide
online and cooperative information about filling station
locations and fuel distributor names and about how much
fuel there is in each one. This was confirmed by searching
for this kind of application on Play Store and App Store.
Therefore,
our
goal
is
to
apply
the
concept
of
translational research [3] in order to obtain a solution to the
problem described. To that end, all authors use the
knowledge they have acquired beforehand in writing
contributions. We use Project-based Learning - PBL to
integrate the several life and technical backgrounds of our
team members [4][5], in order to find a way to achieve a
positive and collaborative solution for informing people
where it is less expensive to buy gasoline.
Therefore, we have developed an application named
Gas-TO.
Our
goal
was
to
develop
a
collaborative
application [6], in which data updates can be made by the
users [7]. Thus, through PBL we have developed a solution
that offers users the price, location, and distributor name of
each filling station. In developing of this app, we used tools
that made it possible to develop an app without high-level
programming [8].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section
II, we present some relevant related work. In Section III, we
present the proposal of the article and the methodology
used. Next, in Section IV, we show the results obtained.
Finally, in Section V, we discuss the results and conclude
with possible future directions.
II.
RELATED WORK
In this section we will present some works that use the
Google Appsheet as an easy way for developing solutions
involving database and cellular applications, in order to
show the real importance of the Google AppSheet tools for
facilitating database development and operation.
Thus, the authors in [9], show how the AppSheet was
used for calculating water consumption by the reference
plants, presenting an easy way for storage and development
an application.
In the same way, the authors in [10], address use of the
AppSheet for building a database for facilitating location
and development of a warehouse management system. The
authors present a database model totally based on Google
Appsheet, showing its performance and ease of operation.
The authors in [11] address a low-cost electronic data
collection tool for a health facility survey study. They used a
Google Appsheet to develop this tool, using the appsheet
functionalities for create an online application, showing its
efficiency.
On the other hand, the use of Google Appsheet is shown
in [8], where the authors use the tool for development a web
solution to support decision making. In this work, Google
Appsheet is used as the main tool for development and the
authors note the advantages of the Appsheet, considering its
operation and programming facility, as well as the its
database robustness.
III.
PROPOSAL
Our proposal can be described as an application for
showing information about price, location and distribution
of
filling
stations
at
Tocantins
State
-
Brazil.
This
application was created using a cooperative approach. That
means the users can update the data according to their
experiences as customers.
The app enables easy navigation for the user and has a
structure and mechanisms that aim to encourage user
collaboration. The app was developed in order to ensure that
the user is able to view of the registered filling stations, and
is thus able to choose to register a new filling station, verify
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

the prices by type of fuel and/or update information, as
represented in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Flowchart.
A. Materials
The choice of tools was strongly influenced by the
limiting factor of technical feasibility, considering the
heterogeneity of the group, as well as the weekly workload
that each member of the group had available for developing
the application. The selected tool (AppSheet) supports the
methodology proposed in this work and was presented to
the Telematics class. It was used as the main tool for
development of the Gas-TO application.
The AppSheet is defined as a smart platform that does
not need to use a programming language to obtain apps,
enabling people
who
are not experts in Information
Technology to use it without difficulty [12]. The AppSheet
has a simple structure, as shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2. AppSheet Architecture.
The development of this work, would not be possible if
we used a complex development tool or if we needed to use
programming languages, considering the time we had.
Because of that, we choose to develop Gas-To with
AppSheet, which allowed us to develop the app within the
scheduled time.
After choosing the development tools, we conducted a
survey with possible future users of the application to
measure the degree of interest in the proposed solution.
71.6% of them indicated that they would use an application
like the one presented in this solution. For applying all the
surveys, we used Google Forms, a free service for creating
forms online. With Google Forms, the user can produce
multiple-choice searches, make discursive questions, request
numerical-scale evaluations, and use other options [13].
Consequently, we obtained feedback on a number of issues
that guided the development of our work and validated our
methodology.
IV.
RESULTS
We applied an online form for drivers in Tocantins State
to verify their interest in using the application and to
indicate what information about filling stations is most
important for them. With the survey we obtained 74
answers. These answers influenced the development of the
application, since they demonstrated the real degree of
interest in it.
Figure 3 presents the answers to the question: When you
are you going to fill your tank, what is most relevant to you?
For 59.5% it is the price, for 27% it is the distributor and
13.5% answered that distance is the most important factor.
Figure 3. What is most import when filling up?
Figure 4 presents the answers to the question: Would
you use an application that tells you about fuel prices, and
the location of the filling stations? Zero means little interest
in the use and 10 much use interest. The maximum level of
interest was shown by 71.6% of the drivers; 13.5%
answered 9; 6.8% answered 8; 5.4% answered 7; 1.4%
answered 6 and 1.4% answered 1.
Figure 4. Would you use an application that tells you about fuel prices, and
the location of the filling stations?
We considered the answers shown in Figures 3 and 4, in
implementing the function to present the ranked list of the
filling stations, as shown in Figure 5.
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 5. App screen.
Figure 6 presents a summary of the answers to the
question: What type of fuel do you use in your vehicle? We
can see that 90.3% answered that they use regular gasoline,
22.2% said they use premium gasoline, 20.8% answered that
they employed ethanol and 5.6% answered that they used
diesel.
Figure 6. What type of fuel do you use in your vehicle?
Figure 7 presents the answers to the question: Do you
fill up your vehicle at filling stations: on the way home, to
work, school or place that you regularly go to? As shown in
Figure 7, 36.5% answered that they fill up when they are on
the way home, 32.4% said when they are on the way to
work, 24.3% said they fill up in other circumstances and
6.8% answered that they stop at the filling station on their
way to school or college.
Figure 7. On the way home, to work, school or place that you go to
regularly?
We considered the answers for adding a function to the
app, so that users can see the location of the filling station
registered using Google Maps and even request a route to
reach the selected filling station. The screen with this
function is represented in Figure 8.
Figure 8. App screen - Map
Figure 9 shows the list of application menus, used to
access all the features of the application.
Figure 9. App screen - Menu.
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 10 shows the query screen for the filling station.
Figure 10. App screen - Fuel Station.
Figure 11 presents the Flag Menu (Fuel Distributors),
meaning that the filling stations are grouped according to
their distributors.
Figure 11. App screen – Flag Menu.
Figure 12 shows the screen for editing filling station
information.
Figure 12. App screen - Editing Fuel Station.
In developing this application, our priority was to
provide a user interface similar to the most commonly used
applications. WhatsApp was chosen as the designer model,
as represented in Figure 13.
Figure 14. Comparison Screen WhatsApp - Screen Gas-TO.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The methodology used illustrates the feasibility of
developing solutions for society, enabling students from
different areas of knowledge to create tools that can be used
as facilitators for the daily life of their communities. This
challenges
the
pervasive
current
thinking
that
only
information technology professionals with a focus on
programming can be providers/developers of technological
solutions.
In addition, it is very important to emphasize that
through the translational methodology used in this work, it
was possible to traverse all the stages of project-based
learning,
starting
from
the
acquisition
of
theoretical
knowledge, passing through definition of the project, until
the development and obtention of a solution.
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Through the feasibility study, it was possible to verify
that future users of the app believe that the application will
contribute information that will provide input for their
decision-making regarding where to refuel their vehicles
In view of this, because it is an application with a
collaborative bias, the user is the centerpiece; in other
words, without this collaboration, this solution becomes
obsolete and unfeasible to maintain. This means that the
major challenge is yet to come. That is, to put Gas-TO into
production and stimulate the collaboration of users to ensure
its viability.
As for implications for future work, although the Gas-
TO application was developed in Palmas, Tocantins, and
Brazil; this solution can also be distributed in other regions.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. M. Lynch. The online educator: A guide to creating the
virtual classroom. Routledge, 2002.
[2]
T. R. Oliveira and F. M. R. Costa. Development of mobile
reference application on vaccination in Brazil. Journal of
Health Informatics, vol. 4, no. 1, 2012.
[3]
R. Guimarães. Translational Research: an interpretation.
Ciência & Saúde Coletiva 18 2013, pp. 1731-1744.
[4]
N. Berbel N. A. Methodology of Problematization in Higher
Education and its contribution to the plan of praxis. Semina.
Londrina. vol.17, pp. 7-17, 1996.
[5]
P. Letouze, J. I. M. de Souza Júnior, and V. M. Silva.
Generating software engineers by developing web systems: a
project-based learning case study. Software Engineering
Education and Training (CSEET), IEEE 29th International
Conference on IEEE, pp. 194-203, 2016.
[6]
C. Ciurea. The development of a mobile application in a
collaborative banking system. Informatica Economica, vol.
14, no. 3, p. 86, 2010.
[7]
C. Cheong, V. Bruno, and F. Cheong. Designing a mobile-
app-based
collaborative
learning
system.
Journal
of
Information Technology Education: Innovations in Practice,
vol. 11, pp. 97-119, 2012.
[8]
A. J. Quinn and B. Bederson. Appsheet: Efficient use of web
workers to support decision making. University of Maryland,
2017.
[9]
P. Samutrak and C. Kangvaravoot. Application to Calculate
Potential Evapotranspiration. International Journal of Applied
Computer Technology and Information Systems, vol. 7.1,
2017.
[10] V. Ojha. Facility Location and Development of Warehouse
Management System for Cross Channel Business Model,
2017.
[11] P. G. Sylim and C. Cristina Santos-Acuin. Development of a
Low-Cost Electronic Data Collection Tool for a Health
Facility Survey: Lessons Learned in the Field. Journal of the
International Society for Telemedicine and eHealth, vol. 27,
2016.
[12] M. Ludloff. AppSheet Named A Leader Among Mobile Low-
Code Platforms for Business Developers by Independent
Research Firm. 2018.
[13] L. A. Heidemann, A. M. M. de Oliveira, and E. A. Veit.
Online tools in science education: a proposal with Google
Docs. Física na escola. São Paulo. Vol. 11, n. 2, 2010, pp. 30-
33 2010.
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

