From Heterogeneous Sensor Sources to Location-Based Information 
Tracking and support of service technicians in an industrial environment  
 
Mareike Kritzler 
Institute for Geoinformatics 
University of Münster 
Münster, Germany 
kritzler@uni-muenster.de 
 
Andreas Müller 
Advanced Technologies and Standards 
Siemens AG, Industry Sector 
Nürnberg, Germany 
Andreas_w.Mueller@siemens.com
 
Abstract—This paper describes the transformation process 
from spatio-temporal coordinates to location-based support. 
This transformation is described as a workflow starting with 
heterogeneous sensor sources, which provide spatio-temporal 
data. As a next step, data fusion operations provide a precise 
and accurate location. This location is subsequently enriched 
with context information. The main contribution is to establish 
a dynamic link between the spatio-temporal aspects of a smart 
industrial indoor environment and its descriptive semantic 
information model in order to enable location-based support of 
service technicians with mobile devices. 
Keywords - Tracking, Sensors, LBS, Georeferencing. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Smart indoor environments are used in multi-disciplinary 
research areas and different contexts like Smart Homes, 
Classrooms or Industrial Environments. They are equipped 
with different technologies, sensors and actors. The purpose 
of Smart Environments is to support human beings in their 
daily life in real time [1].  
A. Problem 
Smart environments are equipped with different sensor 
sources. Location and tracking technologies collect spatio-
temporal data in the form of three-dimensional coordinates. 
Single sensor sources are not precise and accurate enough 
but the combination of various technologies and different 
levels of instrumentation allows an exact indoor positioning. 
In this context three major problems arise: 
 
Without the fusion of all obtained spatio-temporal 
data, the exact spatial position of tracked items 
cannot be determined. The resulting Cartesian 
coordinates describe a position at a certain 
timestamp based on a known reference system in the 
environment. 
 
Without the enrichment of fused positions with 
context information, we would lack information 
about the current spatial context, which is required 
for different subsequent tasks. 
 
Without the deployment of applications (to support 
users) for mobile devices, the context coordinate 
cannot be used to obtain location-based information 
in a smart environment.  
B. Motivation 
To provide location-based support for human beings in a 
Smart Environment, the transformation from fused spatio-
temporal coordinates to context information can deliver 
necessary location-based information. A workflow from 
coordinates to information is needed to be applicable to 
Smart Environments in different contexts. Location-based 
information is necessary in all kinds of applications.  
For example, smart industrial work environments require 
service technicians to be constantly provided with correct 
instructions for performing various maintenance tasks. 
Service technicians use mobile devices for in-situ context-
sensitive information provision. Especially in dynamic 
environments the applicability of work instructions is 
strongly dependent on the technician's spatial position. 
However, location-based information can only be provided 
if individual positions are known exactly. The consideration 
of the associated contexts allows to close the gap towards a 
semantically meaningful processing. 
The presented work is motivated by the need for spatial 
support for service technicians in an industrial environment 
to efficiently and safely accomplish their maintenance work.  
C. Background 
Information required by service technicians is always 
dependent on prior phases in the plant lifecycle (see Figure 
1). 
 
 
Figure 1. Plant lifecycle (adapted from [10]) 
 
During 
the 
phases 
Conceptual 
Design, 
Basic 
Engineering, and Detail Engineering, plant drafts, designs, 
and documentation of the plant are created. These are 
essential information sources for maintenance tasks. Among 
others, these include topological, structural and functional 
information, stored in different formats such as visual 
representations, e.g., 3D computer-aided design (CAD) 
367
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

models or floor plans, or text-based semantic information 
models. Thus, spatial knowledge is created and used for the 
respective plant prior to the Operation, Maintenance and 
Modernization phase. However, each phase relies on 
individual specialized information representations, resulting 
in a heterogeneous information landscape. Product/Plant 
Lifecycle Management (PLM) systems attempt to cope with 
this heterogeneity by employing a more unified information 
model over the entire plant lifecycle, making task-specific 
information available for all phases on request. Still, when 
performing maintenance tasks, a service technician needs to 
use floor plans, maps or other navigational means in order to 
reach and identify a component to be serviced and to 
subsequently access the related information from a PLM 
system. By connecting these capabilities and information 
warehouses 
with 
localization 
and 
spatio-temporal 
information processing, service support systems can benefit 
from unified access to all necessary PLM information based 
on the technician’s current position, thus being transformed 
into location-based services (LBS) for maintenance tasks.  
The proposed problems were addressed in a joint project 
that took place in cooperation between the Institute for 
Geoinformatics and the Siemens AG. At the Siemens 
location in Nürnberg Moorenbrunn an industrial research 
facility, called the Smart Automation Center (SmA), is 
operated (see Figure 2). The SmA, which is equipped with 
different kinds of sensors, serves as a lab environment for 
the development of various conceptions and technologies in 
the field of manufacturing automation. There, among others, 
conceptions for multi-modal support of service technicians 
are developed. 
 
 
Figure 2. Picture of the SmartAutomation Center in 
Nürnberg Moorenbrunn 
 
D. Outline  
Section II gives a short description of further smart 
environments. In section III the setup of the smart 
environment with the sensors and use cases is shown. 
Section IV describes the architecture and the components, 
which are used to get from heterogeneous sensor sources to 
location-based information. In the last section V the paper is 
concluded and an outlook is provided.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Smart Environments are developed and established for 
various purposes and with different contexts. Homes 
become smart with intelligent surfaces, wall displays or by 
monitoring the movement of their inhabitants [2]. This 
paper focuses on the smart industrial environment available 
at the Siemens laboratory. In the following, further 
examples for smart research laboratories are listed:  
A. SmartFactory [3] 
The 
SmartFactory 
is 
a 
manufacturer-independent 
European demonstration factory for industrial applications 
of modern information technologies. The factory aims at the 
development of innovative technologies for industrial 
plants. Furthermore, applications for different industrial 
branches are developed. The work done in the SmartFactory 
is divided into five parts:  
 
Localization services 
 
Virtual factory 
 
Control systems 
 
Mobile devices  
 
Basic technologies 
B. Living Lab Innovative Retail Laboratory [4] (IRL)  
The IRL is a research laboratory, which focuses on 
topics related to intelligent shopping support systems. The 
assistance systems are tested concerning their suitability for 
daily use. Different forms of interactions with consumers 
like speaking products as well as intelligent shopping carts 
are developed. Furthermore, indoor positioning and 
navigation are part of the research.  
C. Bremen Ambient Assisted Living Lab [5] (BAALL) 
BAALL is a 60 m² big apartment, which is invisibly 
equipped with different technologies. The apartment is 
disability-friendly and in accordance with the requirements 
of elderly people. The idea behind the project is that elderly 
persons can stay as long as possible in their own apartments, 
which are able to assist and support the inhabitants when 
they need help. Focus lies on the mobility assistance and on 
environmental 
support. 
For 
mobility 
assistance, 
an 
intelligent walker has been developed [6]. Furthermore, a 
controller for an automatic wheelchair was developed for 
smart driver assistance [7].  
The interoperability and standardization of the inbuilt 
components are an important requirement for the 
development of assistance systems.  
III. 
SETUP  
The SmA allows the addressing of different challenges 
along the plant lifecycle. In the following the purpose of the 
SmA, the applied technologies and a use case, which is 
taking place in the SmA are described.  
368
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

A. Smart Automation Center  
With its different functional modules, the SmA realizes a 
complete exemplary product lifecycle by filling, inspecting, 
commissioning, and recycling bottles with various products. 
For the entire plant, highly detailed 3D CAD models are 
available (see Figure 3), as well as PLM information models 
for selected components. 
 
 
Figure 3. 3D CAD model of the SmA 
 
Among other activities, ideas for the improvement of multi-
modal support for service technicians are developed in the 
SmA. These include ideas how to:  
 
obtain proper / correct instructions, so-called task 
flows, in dynamic working environments 
 
efficiently place and use digital notes on 
components as a means of collaboration support 
 
obtain necessary component-related information, 
dynamically adapted to individual situational 
needs. 
The SmA is equipped with various kinds of sensors, which 
are discussed in the next section. 
B. Tracking and localization technologies in the SmA  
Different tracking and localization technologies are 
integrated in the SmA to obtain spatio-temporal data (see 
Figure 4). In this scenario, Ultra Wide Band (UWB) 
(Ubisense) and RFID technology are in use. Installed 
keystroke sensors, which have a fixed location are also used 
for location determination. Additionally, localization via 
Wireless Local Area Network (WiFi) Fingerprinting is 
possible as well. 
 
UWB: This generic term characterizes radio systems 
with huge bandwidths [8]. The Ubisense [9] system 
(Series 700), which uses UWB radio signals, is 
established for multi-user tracking in the SmA. The 
mobile location tags transmit UWB radio signals to 
four receivers installed in the SmA. This allows 
three-dimensional indoor localization. Empirical 
experiments in the SmA show a precision of approx. 
20 cm on the horizontal plane and approx. 30 cm 
along the vertical axis. Unfortunately, in some areas 
of the SmA, positioning is strongly impaired because 
of shielding due to metallic materials (like in the 
high rack storage). 
 
RFID: The RFID system, which is in use in the SmA 
is installed as a terminal approach. This means that 
the positions of the RFID readers are dynamic while 
the positions of the RFID tags remain static. The 
RFID readers are attached to mobile devices and 
change their locations in time with the user. The 
RFID tags are placed in the SmA at different 
components and have fixed positions (a three- 
dimensional coordinate). The position has to be 
taken a priori and stored in a database. The 
timestamp of the reading event together with the 
identifier of the RFID-reader are used for tracking.  
 
Keystroke sensors: All mechanical sensors, which 
can be used by human beings are summed up as 
keystroke sensors, e.g., the emergency stop button, 
the control panel of the bottle picker or the touch 
panels, which control components of the SmA. All 
of these sensors have a fixed position. Furthermore, 
their usage can be logged. The position has to be 
taken a priori and stored in a database. The keystroke 
sensors can be used as a source for precise 
positioning in the SmA because the exact location is 
known as well as the time stamp when it was in use. 
However, the localization is anonymous and in a 
multi-user scenario the coordinates can only be 
assigned to a single user if other tracking and 
localization technologies are in use at the same time.  
 
 
Figure 4. Schematic overhead shot map of the SmA with integrated sensor 
sources for location determination 
 
 
WiFi: Data collection via WiFi fingerprinting uses 
the received signal strength (RSS) of access points, 
which are installed in the building hosting the SmA. 
The fingerprints have to be taken a priori with a 
mobile device for the whole SmA. The precision of 
the localization depends on the amount of taken 
369
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

fingerprints. Furthermore, the strength of WiFi 
signals is variable and can lead to imprecision. 
C. Use cases 
Service technicians are supposed to have in-situ access 
to all required information and directly use all required 
information on both the maintenance task to be 
accomplished and the component to be serviced. Hence, 
several fundamental use cases have to be considered in 
terms of such mobile support for service technicians (see 
Figure 5).  
Although the SmA serves as a relatively small lab 
environment, the use cases considered here are equally valid 
for full-size industrial plants and other smart environments. 
 
Determine meaningful
spatial context of 
technician
Access location-based
plant service information
Service 
Technician
Determine exact
current position 
of technician
<<include>>
<<include>>
 
Figure 5. Main use cases considered in the scenario  
displayed in UML notation 
 
Firstly, the technician’s exact current spatial position 
needs to be determined. However, not all localization 
technologies are equally well-suited for an entire plant. 
Instead there are different areas within the plant where some 
localization technologies typically show better performance 
than others. For instance, high rack storage areas might 
block UWB localization. In such cases, making plant 
components directly identifiable by equipping them with 
e.g., RFID tags would be useful. However, this would result 
in high effort for the plant operator, especially when carried 
out after plant construction. From this point of view, 
different localization technologies have to be considered in 
a combined approach in order to compute the actual current 
position. 
Afterwards, the semantically meaningful spatial context 
of the technician’s position has to be determined. This is 
necessary because of the nature of issues in the field of 
service support. For instance, service technicians might need 
to ask for the components that a specific to-be-serviced 
component in front of them is connected with, e.g., 
electrically (“Which components are powered by this power 
supply?”) or even in terms of the entire production process 
(“What are the effects of shutting down this conveyor 
belt?”). The service phase is part of the plant lifecycle. In 
this context usually semantic models are employed for the 
representation and management of this type of service-
related plant or component information. Such semantic 
models are the basis of PLM systems. However, due to their 
origin, these models typically do not rely on spatial 
information but instead use unique names (URIs) for the 
identification of the described components and their 
relations. If at all, spatial information is merely provided as 
an optional attribute and thus cannot be used as 
identification criteria. Furthermore, the required domain 
logic for handling spatial issues is typically not part of PLM 
systems or other semantic information management 
systems. Therefore a contextual link between the purely 
spatial world and the world of semantic plant information 
management has to be introduced. 
Finally, the determined contextual meaning of the 
position needs to be used for location-based access to 
service-related information. Since the service technician 
moves within a semantically described plant, his movements 
and position in the vicinity of components can be used to 
provide him with location-based information from a plant 
information management system.  
IV. 
ARCHITECTURE 
This work consists of three different parts. First, the 
spatio-temporal data has to be collected and fused. Second, 
the Cartesian coordinates have to be enriched with context 
information. Third, the coordinate has to be used as an input 
for applications on the mobile device (see Figure 6).  
 
 
Figure 6. Flow of the Cartesian coordinates for mobile support 
 
A. SmaTrac – Handling of tracking data  
Smart Environments are equipped with different kinds of 
sensor sources. The SmaTrac framework was developed to 
integrate and process spatio-temporal data obtained by 
heterogeneous sensor sources from moving items (e.g., like 
service technicians). This framework, which was implemented 
in Java does not rely on, nor is it limited to, one tracking or 
positioning technology but instead considers the combination 
of several technologies to calculate the best positioning result. 
SmaTrac is scale-independent (in space and in time) and 
considers different sizes and characteristics of the tracked items 
as well as different tracking environments or contexts. The 
framework consists of four parts: 
370
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

 
Data collection: 
The framework has to be able to use data obtained by 
heterogeneous sensor sources and has to provide 
common storage for the data. 
The implementation provides a universal data schema 
for a relational database. This schema is able to store 
both data, which has to be taken a priori and spatio-
temporal data, which is taken in real time. The data 
scheme stores localization events, which consist of 
timestamps and IDs for the sensor sources. The sensor 
source ID is the key to the coordinates. Furthermore, 
the schema allows the storage of metadata concerning 
the tracking or localization technologies, which is 
important for further processing.  
 
Data processing: 
The processing has to enable the combination of data 
obtained from different technologies.  
The spatio-temporal data is processed in a core 
component. The core is able to use different sensor 
fusion approaches, but in the first implementation the 
position is calculated by the arithmetic mean. For 
more advanced fusion approaches, the precision and 
accuracy are taken into account when new 
coordinates are calculated from coordinates, which 
were obtained by different sensor sources.  
 
Data providing: 
The framework has to be able to fetch data out of a 
relational database as well as to provide it to external 
applications. 
The framework provides different internal and 
external interfaces. Internal interfaces enable the 
retrieval of stored data from the database and provide 
the fused data to different applications. External 
interfaces are used to provide the processed data (the 
output of the framework) to external applications as 
their data input. The data is provided in Extensible 
Markup Language (XML) format to make the reuse 
of the processed data with already implemented 
software possible.  
 
Data usage: 
The framework needs to use calculated coordinates 
for further domain-specific applications. 
One application, which can be used for different 
contexts and tracked items is the visualization 
application. The use of Java 3D and the Virtual 
Reality Modeling Language (VRML) makes the 
display of all kinds of three-dimensional context 
models of different environments possible.  
Other applications analyze large amounts of data, for 
example via machine learning techniques, to find 
patterns of tracked items. 
B. Geolocation Server – Giving tracking data a meaning 
Most tracking or localization technologies use a 
coordinate-based approach to provide locations. Available 
indoor localization and tracking systems offer coordinates in 
a predefined reference system. SmaTrac uses and calculates 
Cartesian coordinates. Cartesian coordinates describe 
locations by a set of numerical values. Positions are 
determined 
sufficiently 
by 
that 
approach 
but 
the 
circumjacent context is neither described nor known. The 
Geolocation Server overcomes this lack of contextual 
awareness. It introduces a service layer, which enriches 
Cartesian coordinates with context information. The usage 
of well-known standards allows its introduction into any 
service chain, and therefore the enhancement of traditional 
tracking with context-based information. The Geolocation 
Server is mainly divided into two functional parts:  
 
Data processing: 
Context information has to be assigned to specific 
coordinates (by annotation of coordinates with 
object references of their surrounding context) to 
realize a LBS, which provides context information.  
In this implementation, the Geolocation Server uses a 
Web Feature Service (WFS) and Filter Encoding 
(FE). Existing CAD files (see Figure 3) were 
converted into 2.5D shapefiles (these are models of 
the environment) and annotated with Unique 
Resource 
Identifiers 
(URI) 
pointing 
toward 
additional information stored in ontologies. The 
usage of FE permits to query for a set of 
coordinates. The retrieved context of the coordinate 
is transmitted, encoded in the Geographic Markup 
Language (GML) and serves the URI along with 
the geometry of nearby objects.  
 
Data providing: 
The identified entities of the circumjacent context 
of the coordinates have to be communicated via a 
machine readable interface. The interface has to 
provide the logical entities’ geometry and a set of 
attributes, which can be used to obtain further 
information 
like 
electrical 
or 
mechanical 
connections. 
The implementation uses the URIs to gain 
additional needed information of any kind. This 
approach allows one to use this LBS – the 
Geolocation Server – as a machine-readable 
middleware layer for other applications assisting 
users at their task. 
It is possible to obtain information about the 
surroundings of the coordinates by blending 
existing blueprints and floor plans with the tracked 
coordinates in a common reference system. 
Annotations in the blueprints point toward 
additional resources, which can hold functional 
descriptions or topological information. 
C. Application – Providing location-based information  
On this level, a variety of applications are possible. This 
could include the display of electrical or mechanical 
connections of a component, the provision of maintenance 
371
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

instructions, the adaptive display of floor maps, or the 
handling of digital notes attached to components. 
Two different applications have been created: 
 
The SCADA system SIMATIC WinCC [11], which 
is installed in the SmA for plant control, represents 
plant areas and components by means of operable 
image elements. This control system was extended by 
an ontology describing structural and functional 
aspects of SmA components. Subsequently, the image 
elements were enriched by mappings to features 
identifiable by the Geolocation Server and to 
individuals in the ontology. In this scenario, the 
service technician can learn about the exact location 
of a specific SmA component and its vicinity along 
with its structural and functional aspects by selecting 
the corresponding image element onscreen. By using 
extensions of WinCC for mobile devices and 
transferring the respective images, it is also possible 
to e.g., highlight certain image elements on the 
mobile devices according to the technician’s current 
position. 
 
As part of the German Federal Ministry for 
Research and Education (BMBF)-funded project 
AVILUS [12], semantic enhancements of digital 
graffiti – so-called “Virtual Post-It” – have been 
researched. By means of Virtual Post-It, service 
technicians can attach semantic descriptions of the 
actions performed during service tasks directly to 
plant components. These Virtual Post-Its can 
subsequently be used by the technicians for 
collaboration purposes as well as for dynamic 
adaptation of location-based service information 
situationally supplied by PLM systems. Here, the 
setup provides essential localization information, 
since both the technician’s position and the locations 
of affected components need to be determined 
constantly.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
This paper describes the architecture of a dynamic link 
between different sensor sources and a location-based 
application in the case of indoor tracking of service 
technicians in an industrial smart environment. Cartesian 
three-dimensional coordinates obtained by heterogeneous 
sensor sources are first fused to get the best (that means the 
precise and accurate position) indoor location. The new 
coordinate is then used in a georeferencing process to gain 
access to location-based and context-related information, 
which is provided by a mobile device.  
The main contribution of this work is the architecture of 
a transformer from Cartesian coordinates to location-based 
information. The architecture is independent of both the 
used localization and tracking technologies and the smart 
environment. Thus, semantic information models describing 
a smart environment become accessible on grounds of a 
user’s spatial position.  
In addition to it, this paper shows the results of a 
productive cooperation between theoretical university 
research and industrial application, which are in use in 
industry.  
In future, the development of Virtual Post-It will 
continue. Furthermore, extending the setup with prediction 
of specific tasks and likely maintenance workflows is being 
considered. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank the members of the Siemens AG, Industry 
Sector, Advanced Technologies and Standards for their 
support and we thank the AVILUS team for providing us 
with data. We also thank Antonio Krüger for his research 
advising. 
REFERENCES  
[1] P. Mikulecký, T. Lišková, P. Cech, and V. Bureš. “Book Series on 
Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments”. Published by IOS 
Press. Volume 1: Ambient Intelligence Perspectives. 2009. 
[2] A. S. Taylor, R. Harper, L. Swan, S. Izadi, A. Sellen, and M. Perry. 
“Homes that make us smart”. Journal Personal and Ubiquitous 
Computing, Springer, London, Volume 11, Number 5, pp 383-393, 
June, 2007.  
[3] Homepage of SmartFactory: http://www.smartfactory-kl.de/. Date of 
access: 2010-05-23 
[4] Homepage of IRL: http://www.dfki.de/web/living-labs-de/irl. Date of 
access: 2010-05-23 
[5] Homepage 
of 
BAALL: 
http://baall.informatik.uni-
bremen.de/en/index.php/Main_Page. Date of access: 2010-05-23 
[6] T. Röfer, T. Laue, and B. Gersdorf. “iWalker - An Intelligent Walker 
providing Services for the Elderly”. In Technically Assisted 
Rehabilitation 2009. 
[7] T. Röfer, C. Mandel, and T. Laue. “Controlling an Automated 
Wheelchair via Joystick/Head-Joystick Supported by Smart Driving 
Assistance”. In Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE 11th International 
Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics, pp. 743–748, 2009. 
[8] K. Siwiak. “Ultra-wide band radio: introducing a new technology”. 
Vehicular Technology Conference, 2001. VTC 2001 Spring. IEEE 
VTS 53rd. Vol 2. Pp 1088-1093. 
[9] Homepage of Ubisense System: http://www.ubisense.net/en/products. 
Date of access: 2010-05-23 
[10] VDI-Richtlinie 4499 Blatt 2: “Digitale Fabrik – Digitaler 
Fabrikbetrieb“. December 2009. 
[11] Homepage of WinCC SCADA: 
http://www.automation.siemens.com/mcms/human-machine-
interface/de/visualisierungssoftware/scada-wincc/Seiten/Default.aspx. 
Date of access: 2010-05-23 
[12] Homepage of AVILUS: http://www.avilus.de. Date of access: 2010-
05-23 
 
 
372
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

