Modeling Energy Consumption for RF Control 
Modules 
Barış ORHAN 
VESTEL Electronics 
Manisa, Turkey 
baris.orhan@vestel.com.tr 
Engin KARATEPE 
Dept. of EEE, Faculty of Engineering 
Ege University Izmir, Turkey 
engin.karatepe@ege.edu.tr 
Radosveta SOKULLU 
Dept. of EEE, Faculty of Engineering 
Ege University Izmir, Turkey 
radosveta.sokullu@ege.edu.tr 
 
 
Abstract — Due to the restricted energy capacity of wireless 
nodes, development of strategies and protocols to reduce power 
consumption is a current research topic. Providing a simulation 
model of the power consumption of a wireless node taking into 
consideration the specifics of its hardware platform profile and 
the algorithm, which is running on it before the design stage will 
help designers predict the possible problems and adaptivity of the 
software and hardware with less time and effort. In light of this, 
the article presents a Semi-Markov Chain based model and the 
related lifetime analysis of a wireless module operating in an 
event-triggered application scenario. The wireless node’s 
operation pattern is modeled mathematically and equations are 
derived to provide its lifetime prediction using MATLAB.  The 
lifetime is examined as a function of the channel noise and the 
arrival rate with defined hardware and software parameters. A 
case study is presented with simulation results and real life 
measurements, based on SoC (System on Chip) ICs (Integrated 
Circuits), communicating using RF4CE(Radio Frequency for 
Consumer Electronics) protocol. 
Keywords - Energy consumptio, Node Lifetime, RF4CE, Semi 
Markov Chains 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In the last couple of years, a combination of consumer 
demand for more efficient integrated home networking 
systems and a steep drop in the price of hardware fueled by 
manufacturing process improvements has resulted in a 
noticeable upward cycle of research in the field of RF (Radio 
Frequency) devices for consumer electronics. Because of the 
increased range of applications and the inherent physical 
restrictions, wireless networks and RF communications 
continue to attract the attention of the research community. 
Major design factors like limited power capacity and long 
lifetime necessity combined with the variability of the wireless 
communication media push further the search for new 
hardware platforms to meet these requirements. This 
continuous cycle of adapting new platforms to new wireless 
applications requires minimization of the design and 
evaluation time, which in turn creates the demand for suitable 
models and tools to assure that. 
 
In this paper a numerical and simulation model for the 
estimating the lifetime of wireless RF control modules used in 
consumer electronics is presented. The paper is organized as 
follows: in the first part a short survey of related work is 
provided followed by detailed description of the proposed 
mathematical 
model. 
Section 
IV 
presents 
real 
life 
measurements taken to validate the proposed model. In 
Section V, the simulation results are presented followed by 
discussion on the specific relation between the RF module’s 
hardware platform lifetime, the event arrival rate and the 
communication 
channel 
characteristics. 
Hardware 
and 
software parameters are defined for the MATLAB simulation 
model based on datasheets of the considered hardware 
platforms and the RF4CE specifications. [1-3] 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK  
The technological restrictions inherent to the IR (InfraRed) 
devices used in consumer electronics, together with the fact 
that the components used in the production of the RF devices 
have come to a price level suitable for mass production have 
triggered the design and development of new RF devices for 
consumer electronics [4]. Among the major advantages the RF 
technology brings to the market are the increased functionality 
and the potential for reducing power consumption. This in turn 
makes the question of wireless modules’ power consumption 
design and analysis an important research issue [5]. However, 
research on wireless nodes so far has focused mainly on 
extending the lifetime of the network as a whole, thus research 
attention has been predominantly given to the MAC(Media 
Access Control) layer and network layer operation, protocols 
and optimization [8-10]. Together with this, little has been 
done related to modeling, studying and comparing the 
performance of different wireless node platforms from the 
point of view of long term lifetime evaluation.  In some recent 
sources [6, 7, 11] the question of power consumption of 
wireless modules at the hardware level and its more detailed 
139
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

functioning has been modeled and investigated with the 
purpose of defining ways for its possible reduction. Several 
different suggestions can be found regarding the way power 
consumption at the hardware level should be modeled. In [6] 
analysis of the network wide power consumption is carried out 
based on hybrid automata modeling and the calculation of the 
consumption of each node. The lifetime of the network is 
evaluated as a function of the distance from the nodes to the 
sink. The authors of [7] propose Markov Chains to be used 
where each possible state of the operation cycle is modeled as 
part of the chain. For their study the authors define 6 energy 
states and the transitions between them. In another work, [11], 
details of PowerTOSSIM, a simulation tool specifically 
oriented towards modeling power consumption in wireless 
sensor 
networks 
is 
presented. 
In 
calculating 
power 
consumption PowerTOSSIM provides possibilities for taking 
into consideration the details of the hardware characteristics of 
the nodes. Different from these the authors of [12, 13] present 
a model for evaluating the network lifetime based only on the 
hardware characteristics of the nodes and the application 
scenario. According to them the combination of hardware 
characteristics and the requirements imposed by the 
application scenario are the most important factors in 
determining the lifetime of a wireless node.  
 
Wireless sensor networks design and operation is strongly 
application oriented. Thus, since most applications can be 
classified as either monitoring or event tracking, their 
operation can be related to either scheduled or event triggered 
scheme. For the RF control module under consideration the 
wireless node operates in an event triggered mode. In this 
mode the node spends a comparatively long time in sleep or 
idle mode in order to preserve energy and wakes up for 
receiving or transmission only when there is an event detected. 
After processing the event and transmitting the required 
information to the sink or to a neighbor node it returns to low 
power state. On the other hand monitoring applications require 
that the node awakes at specific predefined intervals to collect 
and process information. While the aim in event triggered 
operation is optimizing both the sleep and processing energy 
consumption, in schedule driven operation most important is 
optimizing the schedule of each individual node in order to 
increase the lifetime of the network as a whole.  
 
In this work, we present a Semi-Markov Chain based 
model of a wireless module, the new generation RF remote 
control module, which has recently become very popular in 
consumer electronics. Furthermore we use this model and the 
specific hardware characteristics of two well accepted 
hardware platforms to analyze its long term power 
consumption, especially stressing on its relation to the event 
arrival rate and the conditions of the transmission 
environment.  The model is based on wireless SoC (integrated 
CPU(Central Processing Unit) and radio modules), ,which are 
among the latest achievements in consumer electronics 
hardware and the only accepted so far in this field network 
communication standard, RF4CE [1]. 
III. 
MODEL OVERVIEW 
In this section, the proposed Semi-Markov Chain model of 
the wireless node is discussed. A wireless sensor node’s main 
functions are to sense an event and transmit information about 
it. For event based applications, like the one discussed in this 
paper, each event will trigger a sequence of operations to be 
carried out, which form an application specific execution 
cycle. Furthermore, the cycle can be decomposed into a series 
of computational and communication tasks. Each of the tasks 
in its turn can be further broken down into states related to the 
operation of the CPU, the radio and the specific 
communication standard used like receiving, listening to the 
channel, transmitting and processing. Each state can be 
uniquely associated with a specific power mode. These states 
(power modes) are defined in Table 1. The long term power 
consumption of the node will depend on the specific state, its 
duration and the number of times it is executed. So our aim is 
to model these states from their power consumption point of 
view taking into account their duration and frequency of 
occurrence. For this purpose the following assumptions have 
been made: a) the arrival of the events is assumed to be 
Poisson distributed b) the duration of time a node spends in 
each of the states is random.  
TABLE 1 POWER STATES OF THE RF MODULE 
 Power Mode 
CPU 
Radio 
S1 
OFF 
OFF 
S2 
ON 
OFF 
S3 
IDLE 
TX 
S4 
IDLE 
TX 
S5 
IDLE 
TX 
S6 
IDLE 
OFF 
S7 
IDLE 
RX 
S8 
IDLE 
RX 
S9 
IDLE 
RX 
 
In the long run, the randomly distributed times a node will 
be found in each of the above states and the duration spent in 
each state for a certain time interval will reach a steady state. 
Based on the assumptions made in [12], such a process can be 
described as a Semi-Markov process with Poisson event 
arrivals. A Semi-Markov process is a stochastic process that 
changes states in accordance with a Markov chain but takes a 
random amount of time between changes.  
 
According to the application discussed, the operation of the 
wireless node is event-triggered and so it keeps its CPU and 
radio at the lowest power level to reduce power consumption 
until it detects an event. Thus a simple Semi-Markov Chain 
model is given in Fig. 1. 
 
For the transmission procedure, according the RF4CE 
standard, CSMA(Carrier Sense Multiple Access) is used with 
ARQ(Automatic Repeat Request) retransmission mechanism. 
States S1, S2, S3 correspond to sleep, processing and 
transmission, while S4 and S5 are virtual states, which 
140
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

represent the ARQ mechanism. The maximum number of 
retransmissions without acknowledgment is 3. If unsuccessful 
the packet is dropped and the node returns to its initial state. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.Simple Semi-Markov Chain model of event triggered operation 
 
As defined by the algorithm of the underlying MAC 
protocol radios should sense the channel before transmission 
they tend to spend considerable energy listening to the 
channel. In [14] it is stated that nodes using IEEE 802.15.4 
spend less than 50 percent of the energy for actual 
transmission, while channel listening accounts for more than 
40 percent of the energy consumption. During the transmission 
radios are actually switching between listen and transmit states 
(S7, S8, S9) because of the requirement to sense the channel 
before actual transmission of the packet and to listen waiting 
for acknowledgement after the packet has been transmitted. 
On the other hand, the CPU makes transitions from processing 
to idle state while processing (S2-S4). By adding these factors 
into account, the Semi-Markov diagram is further detailed and 
updated with embedded chains as shown in Fig. 2.  
 
 
 
Figure 2.Semi-Markov Chain model with embedded chains 
 
Based on the assumptions and the state definitions for the 
embedded Semi-Markov Chain made above we now proceed 
with the analytical model. Let X(t) denote the power state at 
time t, then {X(t), t≥0} is a Semi-Markov process [15], where 
the expected value is calculated as; 
 
 
 
(1) 
 
and 
 is the random time the semi-Markov process spends in 
state i before making a transition; 
 denotes the nth state 
visited by the Markov Chain. 
, n≥0 forms a Markov Chain 
with transition probability   
, where 
is the time between 
successive transitions into state i and its expected value is 
 
 
 
(2) 
 
Let
, be the total time in i during [0,t], then the overall 
time spent in i over the combined time spent in all states (long 
term amount of time in i) is given by: 
 
 
 
(3) 
 
If we suppose that the embedded Markov Chain is positive 
recurrent for n≥0, a stationary probability exists, which is the 
frequency of visiting each state for a given infinite time 
duration. Then 
 is the stationary distribution of the 
embedded Markov chain j≥0. 
 has a unique solution: 
 
 
 
(4) 
 
, can be interpreted as the proportion of transitions into 
state j over the sum of all state transitions. Then the following 
equation holds: 
 
 
 
(5) 
 
The proportion of time spent in i to the time spent in all 
states could be found using (4) and (5). Considering the initial 
simple model in Fig. 1 and using (2), we can compute: 
 
 
(6) 
 
 
=1 
(7) 
 
(6) and (7) has the unique solution 
 
  
 
 
 
(8)    
 
 
 
141
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

  
 
Let 
 be the steady state of Semi-Markov Chain, 
average sleep time,  average processing time and
 
average communication times, then: 
 
 
=
 
(9) 
 
 
 (10) 
 
If T is long enough, the total time elapsed in state i is 
. Thus, the total consumed energy in state i. is  
 
 
 (i
) and also transition energy 
from state i to j can be calculated by multiplying one transition 
cost by the average number of transitions from state i. to j. In 
state transition calculations, we will only use the wake up 
costs (
) because the sleep cost for both 
the CPU and the radio is negligible. 
 
Thus, to summarize, the wireless node’s long term lifetime 
estimation can be defined based on three distinct components: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, as can be seen from the model in Fig. 1 and 
Fig. 2, the CPU and the radio have to wake up for entering 
states S2 and S3. Since 
, average number of cycles 
during T is  
 
 
: Total transition energy cost during T 
k(T): average cycle number during T 
 
By observing the limiting behavior of the function in (11), 
 
 
 
(11) 
 
 
the total amount of energy spent at each state, 
and the 
transition energy,
 over T, the average power consumption 
for an event-triggered node can be calculated as follows:  
 
 (12) 
 
]) 
 
 
 
(14) 
 
From the initial model presented in Fig. 1 we can deduct 
the time dependent state/energy consumption representation 
given in Fig. 3 for the power profile of an event-triggered 
wireless node. The average processing and communication 
time is very small compared to the average sleep time (time 
when the module is waiting for an event), thus the average 
sleep time for one cycle is equal to the event inter-arrival time.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.Basic power profile of the event triggered node 
 
If denotes the arrival rate and 
 then:  
 
  
  (13) 
 
Thus (13) is the direct analytical expression corresponding 
to the basic model in Fig. 1. However, taking into account the 
more detailed model in Fig. 2 we can derive the time 
dependent representation given in Fig. 4. It has been extended 
with the inclusion of the embedded states S6, S7, S8 and S9 
for the processing and communication tasks.  
 
 
 
Figure 4.Embedded chains of Markov-chain model 
 
So, the average processing power 
and the average 
processing time, 
, respectively 
 and 
 are: 
 
 
 
(15) 
 
 
 
 
(16) 
 
 
 
(17) 
 
 
 
(18) 
 
where  is the average time the CPU spends in idle states,  is 
the average time the radio spends listening, 
 is the average 
number of CPU’s idle states, 
 is the average number of the 
radio’s idle states. Thus for the average power consumption 
using (15), (16), (17) and (18) in (14), we get (19): 
 
 
142
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

 
  
 
 
] 
(19) 
 
Dividing the total power by equation derived in (19), the 
average lifetime for an event-triggered node is calculated as: 
 
 
 
(20) 
IV. 
MODEL VALIDATION 
 
In this part, we present some real life measurements in 
support of the suggested model, taken using wireless node 
platforms CC2530 and MC13213. The experimental setup 
includes a serial 10Ω load. The resulting time-voltage graphs 
in response to an event are given in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6. When 
turning the radio on, the node performs a sequence of 
transitions between different states as shown below.  
 
 
 
Figure 5.Oscilloscope output for a noise-free channel 
 
Fig. 5 corresponds to the case when the channel is clear 
and the first time a packet is transmitted a positive 
acknowledgement is received. Fig. 6 presents the case when  
 
 
 
Figure 6.Oscilloscope output for a noisy channel 
due to a noisy channel the first transmission was unsuccessful 
and following retransmissions were required. The states S1 to 
S7 are as defined earlier in Table 1. The measurements support 
our selection and definition of the states and the required 
transitions, given in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. When the node is not in 
use it is in state S1, which is the lowest power state, in order to 
enable long battery life. This state is defined as the deepest 
possible sleep, using min power. However, coming out of that 
state is inherently associated with unwanted effects as input 
jitter. When an event occurs (a key is pressed), the device 
wakes up on a key press and sets the sleep timer to expire in 
25 ms, entering back sleep mode. After this timer expires, the 
CPU wakes up, reads the pressed key, prepares the packet to 
be sent, the radio listens to the channel and transmits waiting 
for acknowledgement. Upon receiving the acknowledgement 
the CPU and the radio enter back into deep sleep state (S1). In 
case the first attempt to send the packet is unsuccessful (Fig. 
6), the radio and CPU will return to state S7, attempt a second 
and third retransmission and if again unsuccessful will force 
return to sleep state. So, when retransmission is required, it is 
visible that the node does not return to sleep state S1 between 
the successive trials. It only returns to the initial, low power 
state (S1) after a successful transmission or if the maximum 
number of allowed retransmission attempts is reached, which 
proves the need to define additional states S7, S7 and S9. 
V. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
In this section, the RF control module lifetime is 
investigated for two different scenarios for the two wireless 
platforms CC2530 and MC13213. Our main goal is to 
examine the dependence of the lifetime as a function of the 
event arrival rate and the channel conditions and then compare 
the two platforms.  
 
Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 present the results as the number of 
arrival events per hour increases from 0 to 40 in case of 
transmission success ratios set to 0.2 and 0.8 respectively. We 
notice that the lifetime decreases for both platforms as the rate 
increases and the channel quality is decreased. While the 
CC2530 platform achieves a determinedly longer lifetime for 
low arrival rates (5 – 7 events per hour), the decrease in 
lifetime duration for high event arrival rate (35 events per 
hour) is higher (nearly 71% compared to 55% for the 
MC13213 platform). In the long run, the CC2530 platform is 
more sensitive to channel noise and event arrival rate than the 
MC13213 platform. Results are given in Table 2. 
 
TABLE 2 PERCENTAGE LIFETIME COMPARISON 
 
Platform  
 
 
0.2 
0.8 
12 
4 
CC2530  
71% 
78% 
25% 
17% 
MC13213 
60% 
64% 
20% 
11% 
 
 
143
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

 
 
 
Figure 7.Lifetime prediction for α=0.2 
 
 
 
Figure 8.Lifetime prediction for α=0.8 
 
 
 
Figure 9.Lifetime prediction for λ=12 
  
 
 
 
Figure 10.Lifetime prediction for λ=4 
 
Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 give the lifetime prediction for the two 
platforms as a function of the channel conditions (transmission 
success ratio) for two fixed event arrival rates 4 and 12 events 
per hour. MC13213 platform shows less sensitivity to both 
varying arrival rate and channel conditions. However CC2530 
has a longer lifetime for all conditions better performance for 
all cases. It is worth nothing that the arrival rate is more 
determinant parameter than channel noise.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper we have suggested a mathematical model, 
based on embedded Semi-Markov Chains, for the evaluation 
of the lifetime of an RF wireless module operating in an event-
triggered mode. The model is validated using real time 
measurements for two hardware platforms compatible with the 
newly approved standard, RF4CE, for RF devices for 
consumer electronics. Furthermore, simulation results have 
been presented showing the dependence of the two platforms 
on the event arrival rate and the channel conditions with the 
assumption that CSMA with AQR is used. 
VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMETS 
 
The work presented in this paper was partially supported by 
SAN-TEZ funds, project no 00446.STZ.2009–2. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] ZigBee RF4CE Specification, ZigBee Alliance document 094945r00ZB 
[2] CC2530 Datasheet, SWRS081A–April 2009 
[3] MC13213 Datasheet, MC1321x Rev 1.8 08.2009 
[4] www.audioholics.com/news/editorials/rf-remote-controls-is-it-time-for-
you-to-step-up (Accessed: 06.02.2010) 
[5] http://techon.nikkeibp.co.jp/article/HONSHI/20071127/143101/ 
(Accessed 06.02.2010) 
[6] S. Coleri, M.Ergen, and T. Koo, Lifetime analysis of a sensor network 
with hybrid automata modeling,  1st ACM International Workshop, 2002 
[7] R. Mini, F.,Machado, M. V., Loureiro, F. A., and Nath, B. Prediction-
based energy map for wireless sensor Networks,  Elsevier Ad-hoc 
Networks Journal, 2005 
[8] K. Negus, A. Stephens and J. Lansford, HomeRF: Wireless Networking 
for the Connected Home, IEEE Personal Communications, pp. 20 – 27, 
2000 
[9] K. Watanabe, M. Ise, T. Onoye, H. Niwamato and I. Keshi, An Energy 
Efficient Architecture of Wireless Home Network Based on MAC 
Broadcast and Transmission Power, IEEE Transactions on Consumer 
Electronics, Vol. 53, No. 1, 2007 
[10] Bahareh Gholamzadeh and Hooman Nabovati, Concepts for Designing 
Low Power Wireless Sensor Network, Vol.35, 2008 
[11] Shnayder, V., Hempstead, M., Chen, B., Werner-Allen, G., and Welsh, 
Simulating the power consumption of large-scale sensor network 
applications, ACM Conference, 2004 
[12] D.Jung, T. Teixeira and A. Savvides, Sensor Node Lifetime Analysis: 
Models and Tools, ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol.5, No.1, 
2009 
[13] D. Jung and A. Savvides, An Energy Efficiency Evaluation for SN with 
Multiple Processors, Radios and Sensors, pp. 1112- 1120, In the Proc. of 
the IEEE INFOCOM, 2008 
[14] B. Bougard, F. Cathhoor, D.C. Daly, A. Chandrakasan and W. Dehaene,  
Energy efficiency of the IEEE 802.15.4 standard in dense wireless 
microsensor networks: Modeling and improvement perspectives. In 
Proceedings of the Design, Automation, and Test in Europe, pp. 196–20, 
2005. 
[15] Introduction to Probability Models, Sheldon M. Ross, Elseveir, 9th 
Edition, 2007 
 
 
 
 
 
144
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

