Pervasive Social Network
Alexiei Dingli
University of Malta
Msida, Malta
Email: alexiei.dingli@um.edu.mt
Daniel Tanti
University of Malta
Msida, Malta
Email: daniel.tanti.11@um.edu.mt
Abstract—Social Networking sites like Facebook and Twitter
have become extremely important and are used by millions of
people worldwide. In addition, the advent of mobile technology
coupled with advances on the communications front, means that
technology has started to move away from the traditional desktop
setting and is becoming more pervasive. This research aims
to show how a big screen setup in a public space, displaying
a stream of comments from an online social network, can be
utilised by the general public. The goal is to ﬁnd whether such
a system is able to instigate discussions between people - both
physically and virtually, on the social network. The evaluation of
privacy concerns, related to such a system in comparison with
traditional social networks, will also be an important focus of
this research. Similar work has already been done in particular
contexts such as a classroom or a conference, however we aim in
ﬁnding speciﬁc uses for such a system where the context is not
as clearly deﬁned. In order to achieve this, we created a social
network called Occupy. The study described in this paper took
place at the University of Malta, where a big screen projecting the
stream of comments from our online social network was setup
for discussion among those people on campus and those from
outside. 66% of the users of our system believe that a pervasive
social network adds value to traditional social networks, mainly
by merging virtual discussions happening on the social network
with physical discussions between groups of people. Through the
use of a survey, analysis of the collected data and a focus group,
beneﬁts regarding the use of a pervasive social network can be
presented.
Keywords–Pervasive Technology; Social Network; Comments
Stream; Big Screen; Privacy
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the last few years, technology has started to shift from
the traditional desktop setting and is becoming more pervasive.
The rapid development of mobile technology combined with
advancements in communication capabilities meant that people
can have access to technology wherever they may be, at all
times. This new kind of technology is referred to as Pervasive
Technology and examples of this can be clearly seen in modern
devices such as smart phones and tablets. These devices
have excellent computational capabilities and are network-
enabled. This means that their users are constantly connected
to the internet and to each other. Social Networking Websites
like Facebook, Twitter and Google+, have become extremely
important over the years and are used by millions of people
worldwide. In addition, Social Networking Websites are now
starting to exploit the pervasiveness aspect of technology by
developing mobile applications [1]. These applications allow
users to be constantly connected with the social network
through their pervasive devices.
A pervasive social network is an extension of the traditional
social network. The most important aspect borrowed from the
traditional social network is the recent intrusion in the ﬁeld of
mobile technology - mobile social networks. In addition, the
basic structure of posting, retrieving and rating of comments
is also common to both types of social networks. A pervasive
social network also provides a mechanism for the creation of
connections with other users as well as the browsing of these
connections.
On the other hand, there are a variety of differences
between the two types of social networks. The ﬁrst of these
differences is the fact that comments are displayed on a
physical big screen placed in a speciﬁc location. This means
that the discussions are not restricted to those users who are
participating online. Instead, anyone who happens to be near
the big screen may follow the discussions and participate.
In addition, the fact that the screen is tied to a particular
location, means that the topics of the discussions might be
“hijacked” by the context of the screen. Furthermore, the
pervasive social network will post speciﬁc comments itself to
try and instigate discussions between its users. In addition, the
pervasive social network will try to suggest users in the vicinity
who may be interested in starting a particular discussion by
providing the location of the particular users.
The research that will be presented in this paper aims at
ﬁnding new ways of extending social networks, so that they
exploit the functionality offered by pervasive technology. We
aim at identifying ways in which a big screen set up in a public
space, displaying a stream of comments, can be used by the
general public. Moreover, we aim to describe the reaction of
the general public to such a system, in comparison to the way
they normally use traditional social networks. The evaluation
of the issues related to privacy as mentioned in [2] and [3] is
also one of the main focuses of this research.
The reminder of the paper is structured as follows. Section
II presents the Aims and Objectives, followed by the Literature
Review in section III. In section IV we explain the Methodol-
ogy with the Evaluation in Section V. Finally we present the
conclusion and future work.
II.
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
The research question for this project is the following:
“How can a big screen set up in a public place, displaying
a stream of comments, be utilised by the general public?”.
The following is a list of goals that must be achieved in order
for this project to be successful.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

1)
Identify Uses: The main aim of our research is to
identify ways in which such a pervasive social net-
work can be utilised by the general public. Moreover,
we aim to describe the reaction of the general public
to such a system, in comparison to the way they
normally use traditional social networks.
2)
Merging Virtual and Physical Interactions: An-
other important goal is to assess whether a pervasive
social network can be successfully used to merge
virtual interactions happening on the social network,
with physical interactions between groups of people.
Furthermore, the social network we add further in-
formation to the social graph such as location, thus
allowing nearby users to ﬁnd each other.
3)
An Active Social Network: To further enhance
the quality of the discussions, the proposed social
network must be able to play an active role in the
users’ discussions, and so we will assess the users’
reaction to such interactions.
4)
Privacy Concerns: The evaluation of the issues
related to privacy is also one of the main focuses of
this research. We will compare the users’ perception
of our social network in comparison to other social
networks.
III.
LITERATURE REVIEW
A. Social Networking
A social network is a web-based service that enables a
user to hold a public (with optional limitations) or semi-public
proﬁle. It also allows the user to maintain a set of connections
with other users with the added possibility of viewing and
managing his/her list of connections and connections made by
others [4]. The way this web service is handled varies from
one social network to another [5] [6] [7]. The main goal behind
social networks, apart from allowing individuals to meet other
people, is to provide the users a way to create and make public
their own social networks.
There are many different types of social networks available
on the internet, some of which are built for a speciﬁc purpose,
while others are built for general connections. The most pop-
ular general purpose social networks are Facebook1, Twitter2
and Google+3.
The normal procedure of interacting with a social network-
ing website, is to ﬁrst create an account. This can be done in
a number of ways, but the most popular format is to provide
answers to speciﬁc questions posed by the website. This helps
in creating a web-based proﬁle of the individual for other users
to see and react to. Some social networks even allow the user
to upload a proﬁle picture or an avatar of themselves [8].
The users can then create links with other users which can
be bi-directional on some websites or unidirectional on others.
Moreover, users are also able to post content on the website
which may be viewed by other users on the social network.
Additional features such as the posting of photos and tagging
of users may be present in certain types of social networks.
For social networks to be useful to our purpose, we must
ﬁnd ways of interacting with them and gaining access to as
1https://www.facebook.com
2https://twitter.com
3https://plus.google.com
much information as possible from these valuable sources. The
reason why we need to interact with these social networks,
is that the users provide information about themselves and
the connections that they have with others. More importantly,
we can make use of existing, tried-and-tested technologies for
developing a social network, without having to reinvent the
wheel [9]. Several of the most popular social networking web
sites are now launching what are called social network connect
services [9]. Some examples of these connect services are
Facebook Platform4, Google+ API5 as well as Twitter’s API6.
B. Pervasive Technology
The main idea behind the pervasiveness of technology is
that as the years go by, technology and communication capa-
bilities would be found in every environment imaginable, while
at the same time, they are able to integrate seamlessly into the
human users’ everyday life [10]. It is now extremely common
to integrate computing devices into anything electronically-
based: we have programmable fridges and washing machines,
smart phones and even smart TVs. Furthermore, social net-
works are also becoming pervasive through the development
of mobile applications.
In Pervasive Computing, we can outline the accomplish-
ments and the remaining challenges in these main areas:
Context-Awareness, Automated Capture and Access to Live
Experiences, Privacy, Time and Natural Interfaces [11].
A phenomenon that has happened in most of the major
cities in the world and is now also spreading to Malta is
what is known as Digital Signage. This is a fast growing
market which aims at replacing the traditional poster billboards
with electronic public displays [12]. This can already be seen
in urban areas such as Shibuya Crossing, Tokyo and Times
Square, New York, where the landscape is ﬁlled with large
displays showing adverts from major companies [13]. Until
now, these screens have been used for marketing purposes;
however in this project we will propose a social network that
can make use of such public displays.
C. Related Work
The literature we have found is mainly related to education,
more speciﬁcally, the context of a conference [14]. Our system
will not be tied to a particular context and as such, it will be
designed differently and we expect that it will also behave
differently.
The ﬁrst interesting aspect that we noted out of the various
research papers that we studied [15] [16] was the fact that
most of them used a microblogging type of social network
such as Twitter. However, we believe that by developing a
custom social network, we will have more control over the
discussions. Moreover, we will also be able to include more
features that may be of interest to our research, but are not
present in existing tools.
The ﬁrst of these experiments was conducted at the ED
MEDIA 2008 Conference in Vienna [17]. The focus of this
study was to establish whether a microblogging website can be
used to enhance a live event. To address this issue, a Twitter
stream was set up during the ED MEDIA 2008 conference,
4https://developers.facebook.com
5https://developers.google.com/+/
6https://dev.twitter.com
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

and all the conference participants were invited to follow
this channel and participate. In addition, this Twitter stream
was projected during the conference’s keynote session and
breaks, using an application called TwitterCamp [18], so that
the online conversation among members of the audience using
Twitter, could be displayed to the rest of the audience that were
not using Twitter. The participants of this experiment, were
asked to append the #edmedia08 hashtag in order to group the
comments related to the conference together.
This experiment was redone a year later at the ED MEDIA
2009 Conference with a similar setting to the one done in
2008. However, an attempt to engage the audience more by
keeping the Twitter Feed on for the entire duration of the
conference was done [19]. In addition, the system was given
more publicity than the year before in order to attract a larger
audience. Another change from the previous year was the use
of the #edmedia tag instead of the #edmedia08.
The following is a list of categories of comments identiﬁed
by various studies [17] [20] [19] conducted on such experi-
ments:
1)
Concerning the presentation: Comments directly
related to the presentation or any of the presenters.
2)
Discussion: Interaction between two or more users.
3)
Links: These comments contain links to online con-
tent that may or may not be relevant to the presenta-
tion.
4)
Comments: This category encompasses feelings,
thoughts and opinions of the members of the audience
that are not necessarily related to the presentation.
5)
Establish Online Presence: This is a very interesting
point which can be deﬁned as posting for the sake of
posting.
6)
Pose Organisational Questions: These are questions
related to the logistics of the conference and its
proceedings but not directly linked to the conference’s
topic as such.
7)
Exchange of Social Activities: This category entails
the setting up of social activities outside of the
conference with other members of the audience. An
example given by Ebner and Reinhardt [19] is that
of inviting another person to go sightseeing.
8)
Arrange Short Meetings: This means that users used
Twitter to arrange meetings amongst themselves to
perhaps continue their discussion about the confer-
ence privately.
9)
Documentation of Conference Activities: Linked
to the sharing of resources highlighted by [17] [20]
but is related to the actual resources used for the
conference.
All of these experiments tested the activity on the Twitter
channel, before, during and after the conference. It is in-
teresting to note that all experiments show an increase in
participation when the conference starts in comparison to the
activity before, and a decline in participation after it ends.
This greatly suggests that such a system is indeed effective in
creating discussion during conferences and live events.
IV.
METHODOLOGY
For the purpose of this research, we created a pervasive
social network called Occupy which is made up of two main
parts. The ﬁrst part is a traditional online social network that
enables users to communicate through the use of comments.
Furthermore, this social network enables users to create con-
nections with other individuals, most importantly, those users
that are within their vicinity. The second part of this social
network is another website, which we refer to as the Interactive
Wall. This website is responsible for extracting a stream of
comments posted by the users of our system. This stream
of comments is then displayed onto a big screen which is
placed in a public space. Apart from displaying the stream of
comments, the Interactive Wall will also try to play an active
role in the discussions by displaying articles relevant to the
current discussion on the wall (which are selected from news
sources using artiﬁcial intelligence techniques).
Figure 1. High-Level Block Diagram of the system
This system’s design is split into two main partitions -
a back end and a front end - as shown in Figure 1. These
two partitions, which are further subdivided into modules,
communicate with each other using the REST architecture7.
This type of architecture enables the separation of speciﬁc
roles between the server and the clients, by restricting the
communication to standard methods.
The back end of the system - also referred to as the server -
is responsible for handling all the functionality related to data.
This is done in order to encapsulate the inner complexities of
the system from the front end applications, so that they can
then focus entirely on the graphical user interface and general
client-side functionality. In addition, it also allows cross-
platform compatibility since the client-side applications do not
have to use a particular programming language to access and
7Representational State Transfer (REST) is a programming architectural
ideology that works on the principle of sharing references to the data rather
than a copy of the data itself
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

manipulate data. The front end of the system - also referred to
as the client - is responsible for exposing the system’s feature
in a user-readable format, namely the two websites mentioned.
The front end does not perform any complex functions and
more importantly it does not communicate directly with the
database. It communicates with the back end in order to
delegate the necessary functions requested by the users. Web
sockets were also used to facilitate the exchange of certain
types of real-time messages between the two parts.
The social network website includes three main features.
The ﬁrst feature is that of a Newsfeed where all the comments
posted by the users of this system are displayed, sorted by
a custom ranking algorithm that takes into consideration the
number of likes, dislikes and comments as well as the time
elapsed since its creation. This was done in order to keep
the discussions ﬂowing. The Newsfeed allows the users to
contribute to the discussions by posting either a completely
new comment or a reply to a previous comment. These
contributions can also include an image. To give the users
some measure of control over their content, the possibility
of deleting comments was also included. Similar to the way
other social networks operate, the comments are saved with the
Global Positioning System (GPS) coordinates of the location
from where the comment was created. However, to protect the
privacy of the users, this feature can be switched off.
The second feature is that of a Users page. This allows
users to see a list of people that have joined this social network,
highlighting those that are currently online. To further protect
the privacy of the users, only basic public information, such
as the name, gender and locality, are displayed. Apart from
giving the ability to see Users and Friends (and also creating
new friendships), this system includes a feature that shows an
individual what users are currently in his/her physical vicinity
(Nearby Users).
The third feature is a map that is able to show the locations
of some of the latest comments posted. Of course, since the
users can opt not to share their location, only those comments
originating from users giving the system their consent to track
them are shown. Apart from the comments, the map also
displays the location of the users that have agreed to share
their location. This feature, together with the Nearby Users
feature, were created in an attempt to investigate whether such
a system is able to merge virtual discussions on the social
network with physical discussions. The hypothesis is that by
utilising this feature, people may confront a person (whom they
may not know) posting on the social network, to continue the
discussion privately.
The next part of our pervasive social network is the
Interactive Wall, which is a website containing a stream of
comments from our social network, that is displayed on a big
screen. This wall is the main focus of our research, as it is
the enabler of discussions, both physically and virtually. To
further enhance this social network, we decided to make the
Wall active in the discussions. This is done by allowing the
social network to scan the different keywords attached with the
comments posted on the system and retrieve a related article
from an online source. This article is then posted to the social
network as a contribution to the discussions. We will study the
effect of such a system over the general public and what, if
any, their reactions will be to such contributions coming from
the system itself.
V.
RESULTS AND EVALUATION
A. Evaluation Methodology
An experiment was carried out on the University of Malta
campus, where a big screen showing our social network’s
interface was set up in a prominent place on campus. This
experiment was held during the second week of January over
a stretch of ﬁve days. It is important to note that this was
during an exam period and so it might have introduced some
bias to our study. Data obtained from this experiment was
used as a valuable source of information for the purpose of
this research, however we believe that this data alone is not
enough to be able to draw conclusions. Similar to the previous
work done in this area of research [19] [17] [16], we decided
to conduct an online survey with the users of our system.
Questions relating to the usage of this system as well as any
concerns for privacy were put forward so that we would gather
a general understanding of the public’s view of our system
and be able to draw conclusions based on this information. In
total, the survey consisted of 21 questions that were split into
three main sections – questions relating to demographics, to
the usage of our system, and to privacy concerns. Apart from
the survey, we also conducted a number of interviews during
the experiment, so as to gather a better understanding of the
users’ ﬁrst impressions in relation to our system. The same
questions used for the online survey were asked during these
interviews.
The last part of our research consists of a focus group,
where a number of questions related to our system and how it
compares to other similar systems were posed. The discussion
generated in this focus group is also a major part of the
evaluation of our research. The participants of this focus group
were chosen based on their activity during the experiment and
a total of six individuals took part.
B. Results
The response to our university experiment was highly
satisfactory. A total of 425 unique users registered to our social
network, 34% of which were females. Interestingly, only 35%
of these users were active participants in this experiment and
provided a total of 422 comments. In comparison to Facebook,
our social network was outperformed in the percentage of
users that are active in the discussions. In fact, 60% of all
the users registered with Facebook are active participants in
discussions [21]. We believe that the reason for this, is that
people might feel apprehended when trying to post a comment
to this social network. Other social networks may give a false
sense of security and so people express their opinions freely
without thinking that other users will see their comment. On
the other hand, our system makes it explicit that whatever you
will post, will inevitably be seen by a large number of people.
Another point raised during the focus group is the fact that our
social network is public. In other words, whatever a user posts
will be seen by all the other users indiscriminately, while also
including those individuals that are not part of our system, but
can simply view the comment on the Interactive Wall. This
further adds to the apprehension that users may feel, since
they are sharing their information not only with their circle of
friends but with virtually anyone who is either using the social
network or is standing near the screen.
276 of the comments posted, introduced a unique topic
to the social network, while the rest were a continuation
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

of previous discussions. The vast majority of the comments
posted (94%) were text-only comments, while the remaining
6% included images. Figure 2 shows the usage of our system
over a period of time. This includes a day before the actual
start of the experiment, and a period of three days after it had
ended.
Figure 2. Usage of the system over time
From this graph, it can be clearly seen that the users of
the system were most active during the experiment, at which
time the screen with the comment stream was on. There was
an immediate decline in usage after the screen was removed
from campus, suggesting that this social network really does
engage more with its users in its pervasive form rather than in
its traditional form.
The topics discussed by the users varied, ranging from
events related to the university, news from around the world,
sports and other more general topics. Figure 3 shows the
categories of comments that we identiﬁed during the exper-
iment. Due to the fact that this was a new concept, a large
portion of the comments posted were related to the system
itself. When compared to the content uploaded to other social
networks, the comments posted to our system seem to be
heavily inﬂuenced by events taking place near the Interactive
Wall. In fact, 68% of the comments posted are directly related
to events that happened near the wall. Furthermore, despite
the fact that the majority of the comments were posted by
people who were near the wall (72 %), there was a small
number of comments that were posted from other locations,
including three comments from foreign countries. While the
comments generated near the wall mostly had to do with
events that happened near the wall, the other comments were
largely personal advertisements. However, it is interesting to
note that some of these comments were indeed linked to events
happening near the wall, but in a different way. Instead of
describing the events, these comments asked questions about
them, and thus they created a real-time connection between
people near the wall, and those at other locations.
As was expected, most of the participants of this experi-
ment (48%) got to know of our system through word of mouth
as well as through online media (31%), mainly Facebook. The
poster set up to attract the users’ attention and instruct them
on how to interact with the system was not as effective as
we had hoped, since only 12% of the users got to know of
the system through it. It is interesting to note that 66% of the
people who used our system believe that a pervasive social
network adds value to traditional social networks. The most
popular reason given for why it adds value, is the fact that it
Figure 3. Purposes of using Occupy
enhances communication between those users who are online
on the social network, to those users who are physically near
the Interactive Wall. In fact, 73% of these users, believe that
this social network is effective in merging virtual interactions
with physical interactions.
A number of particular uses for such a system were
identiﬁed during the focus group. The ﬁrst of these uses is
that it might be a tool for uniting people about a speciﬁc topic
E.g. discussing the forthcoming exams (since the system was
installed in a University during the exam period). Other social
networks display content and comments that are relevant to you
or your circle of friends, however, our system displays the same
content to each one of its users. This may lead to a system that
is able to reach a very wide audience with a single comment
and so it can then be used to organise protests or similar
gatherings. Another purpose identiﬁed during the focus group,
is that you can immediately gather feedback about a particular
topic, from a targeted sector of the population (within the
context of the screen), simply by posting a comment. In
addition, some users noted the fact that this system would be
an ideal tool during academic conferences or cultural debates.
In fact, the literature presented in this research shows evidence
of the effectiveness of such a system in these contexts. This
idea was developed even further and some people suggested
that it might be a useful tool during concerts or political rallies.
Moreover, contrary to our hypothesis, the contributions
made by the system (32 in total), went largely unnoticed. In
fact, only one reply was made to a comment posted by the
system, meaning that this feature was largely ineffective. In
addition, 65% of the respondents answered that the discussions
initiated by the pervasive social network were not effective
in creating discussions. The reason we identiﬁed for this, is
the fact that the source chosen for the harvesting of online
information is not a local website, meaning that some of the
articles extracted from this source were not relevant to the
University of Malta’s context.
Another question that we asked our respondents was
whether our system’s Nearby Users feature and the Map
functionality were effective in creating physical discussions
with people in the vicinity. 66% of the users of our system
believe that they were indeed very useful features in that they
allow you to continue discussions privately with people that
are commenting on the social network. These users argued that
these features extend traditional social networks in the sense
that they make the communication on them more natural.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

79% of the users of our system were concerned about their
privacy when using any of the social networks. Furthermore,
74% of these users were aware that they have some measure of
control over their own privacy. Interestingly, 52% of our users
believed that our pervasive social network further invades their
privacy, mainly because it constantly tracks their location and
that they have no control over who sees their comments. This is
a very interesting point, because although a large percentage of
our users claimed that they were aware that they have control
over their own privacy (switching off location-tracking and
deleting comments), they still believed that our pervasive social
network poses a greater risk to their privacy than other social
networks. On the other hand, some users identiﬁed the fact
that traditional social networks offer a false sense of security
to their users. They claimed, that through the use of a pervasive
social network, this false sense of security is not present, and
so people are more careful of what they post.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
A. Future Work
Despite the fact that the evaluation carried out proved that
this system has met most of the goals set at the beginning
of this ﬁnal year project, some improvements can always
be made. In this section we will be describing some of the
improvements that were identiﬁed by ourselves or else sug-
gested by the respondents of the survey or from the discussion
generated during the focus group. The following is a list of
future improvements that can be applied to this project:
1)
Automated Moderation: Since this system is setup
in a public place, there is no way of controlling
who is actually viewing the content on the Interactive
Wall. Some of this content may not be appropriate
for minors within the audience and so some sort
of moderation is required. Despite the fact that we
employed manual moderation over the content being
posted we believe that automated moderation would
be far more effective.
2)
More Interactive Walls: Another interesting sugges-
tion that emerged during the focus group, was to
include more than one Interactive Wall. Each wall
would have its own URL and the comments are
grouped together based on the URL they are originat-
ing from. This would be very interesting because we
can then compare the different discussions originating
in different contexts.
3)
More Informative Posters: Based on the low per-
centage of users who got to know of our system
through the informative poster, we think that more
of these posters would help to attract the people’s
attention even more and as a consequence the activity
rate increases.
4)
Hash-tag Functionality: The users of our system
are able to reply to existing comments and the
topic of the original comment is assigned to the
replying comment. However, this functionality was
not clearly understood by the users. Instead of re-
plying to comments through our reply functionality,
the users created new comments and attached the
original comment’s topic manually. By removing this
functionality, and employing a system of Hash-tags
similar to that employed by Twitter, these comments
can then be grouped together based on the topic
given, and the discussions could then ﬂow much
better. In other words, the users would then be able
to view comments that are related based on the topic
chosen.
B. Conclusion
The purpose of this research was to analyse the ways in
which a big screen, set up in a public place, displaying a
stream of comments can be utilised by the general public.
For this purpose, we created a pervasive social network that
is embedded in the environment and which is also context-
aware and active in the discussions being held on the social
network. We have thus attempted to ﬁnd ways in which such
a system could be used and assess its value in comparison
to other social networks. Although not all of the goals set at
the beginning of this paper were met, a number of positive
points emerged, mainly the fact that it successfully merges
virtual discussions happening on the social network to those
happening physically between groups of people. In addition,
this social network helped in raising awareness on privacy
concerns related to social networks. Through the use of our
system, the users paid more attention to the content that they
post as they were constantly aware that whatever they will post
will inevitably be seen by a large number of people. The main
result obtained from this research is that this system can be
a very useful extension to traditional social networks, given
that the content being uploaded is moderated in some way.
Furthermore, the research question proposed for this project
was answered successfully as we identiﬁed a number of uses
for such a social network.
REFERENCES
[1]
W. Dong, V. Dave, L. Qiu, and Y. Zhang, “Secure Friend Discovery
in Mobile Social Networks,” in INFOCOM, 2011 Proceedings IEEE.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1647–1655.
[2]
O. Mabrouki, A. Chibani, and Y. Amirat, “Privacy in pervasive social
networks,” in Constructing Ambient Intelligence.
Springer, 2012, pp.
296–301.
[3]
M. Jadliwala, J. Freudiger, I. Aad, J.-P. Hubaux, and V. Niemi, “Privacy-
triggered communications in pervasive social networks,” in World of
Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks (WoWMoM), 2011 IEEE
International Symposium on a.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–6.
[4]
D.
M.
Boyd
and
N.
B.
Ellison,
“Social
Network
Sites:
Deﬁnition, History, and Scholarship,” Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication, vol. 13, no. 1, 2007, pp. 210–230. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1083-6101.2007.00393.x
[5]
F. Schneider, A. Feldmann, B. Krishnamurthy, and W. Willinger,
“Understanding Online Social Network Usage from a Network
Perspective,” in Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGCOMM Conference
on
Internet
Measurement
Conference,
ser.
IMC
’09.
New
York,
NY,
USA:
ACM,
2009,
pp.
35–48.
[Online].
Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1644893.1644899
[6]
A. Yamada, T. H.-J. Kim, and A. Perrig, “Exploiting Privacy Policy
Conﬂicts in Online Social Networks,” Technical Report, Carnegie
Mellon University, Tech. Rep., 2012.
[7]
S. B. Mokhtar, L. McNamara, and L. Capra, “A middleware service for
pervasive social networking,” in Proceedings of the International Work-
shop on Middleware for Pervasive Mobile and Embedded Computing.
ACM, 2009, p. 2.
[8]
J. Sunden, “Material Virtualities : Approaching Online Textual Em-
bodiment,” Ph.D. dissertation, Link¨oping University, Department of
Communications Studies, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, 2002.
[9]
M. N. Ko, G. P. Cheek, M. Shehab, and R. Sandhu, “Social-Networks
Connect Services,” Computer, vol. 43, no. 8, 2010, pp. 37–43.
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

[10]
F. Michahelles, S. Karpischek, and A. Schmidt, “What can the internet
of things do for the citizen? workshop at pervasive 2010,” Pervasive
Computing, IEEE, vol. 9, no. 4, 2010, pp. 102–104.
[11]
G. D. Abowd and E. D. Mynatt, “Charting Past, Present, and Future
Research in Ubiquitous Computing,” ACM Transactions on Computer-
Human Interaction (TOCHI), vol. 7, no. 1, 2000, pp. 29–58.
[12]
M. Strohbach, E. Kovacs, and M. Martin, “Pervasive display newtorks–
real-world internet service for public displays,” in Proc. of 4th European
Conference on Smart Sensing and Context, 2009, pp. 35–38.
[13]
J. M¨uller, J. Exeler, M. Buzeck, and A. Kr¨uger, “Reﬂectivesigns:
Digital signs that adapt to audience attention,” in Pervasive computing.
Springer, 2009, pp. 17–24.
[14]
S. Johnson, “How twitter will change the way we live,” Time Magazine,
vol. 173, 2009, pp. 23–32.
[15]
J. Letierce, A. Passant, J. Breslin, and S. Decker, “Understanding how
twitter is used to spread scientiﬁc messages,” 2010.
[16]
J. Letierce, A. Passant, J. G. Breslin, and S. Decker, “Using twitter
during an academic conference: The# iswc2009 use-case.” in ICWSM,
2010.
[17]
M. Ebner, “Introducing Live Microblogging: How Single Presentations
Can be Enhanced by the Mass.” Journal of Research in Innovative
Teaching, vol. 2, no. 1, 2009.
[18]
D. Dura, “TwitterCamp at Daniel Dura,” Nov. 2008. [Online].
Available: http://www.danieldura.com/code/twittercamp
[19]
M.
Ebner
and
W.
Reinhardt,
“Social
Networking
in
Scientiﬁc
Conferences–Twitter as Tool for Strengthen a Scientiﬁc Community,”
in Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Science, vol. 2,
2009, pp. 1–8.
[20]
M. Ebner, G. Beham, C. Costa, and W. Reinhardt, “How People are
Using Twitter during Conferences,” Creativity and Innovation Compe-
tencies on the Web, 2009, p. 145.
[21]
C.
Smith,
“By
the
Numbers:
89
Amazing
Facebook
User
Statistics
(updated
march
2014),”
Mar.
2014,
retrieved
from:
http://expandedramblings.com/index.php/by-the-numbers-17-amazing-
facebook-stats/.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

