Modeling Uniﬁed Interaction for Communication
Service Integration
Juwel Rana
CSEE Department
Lule˚a University of Technology
SE-971 87, Lule˚a
Email: juwel.rana@ltu.se
Johan Kristiansson
Ericsson Research
SE-971 28, Lule˚a
Email: johan.j.kristiansson@ericsson.com
Kare Synnes
CSEE Department
Lule˚a University of Technology
SE-971 87, Lule˚a
Email: kare.synnes@ltu.se
Abstract—Social network inspired communication services has
made tremendous success, allowing users to communicate and
share user generated contents in an efﬁcient way. At the same
time, Tele-com services are becoming more open, which makes
it possible to develop improved social networking services. One
of the problem that needs to be addressed for developing such
services is how to fetch useful social information and make it
available for the services running in the Cloud or personalized
devices. This paper presents a generalized On-line interaction
model that collects useful information from well known so-
cial networking services, and transforms the information into
uniﬁed interaction patterns, which can be utilized for social
data propagation or for discovering communication patterns.
Ultimately, this allows the applications to incorporate social data
for enabling smarter functions. The proposed interaction model
is useful for presenting information about callers or propagating
presence information to the classical address book, prioritizing
information, inviting user for forming micro-communities.
Keywords-interaction patterns; social networks; communi-
cation services; communication pattern discovery
I. INTRODUCTION
Today, Internet and computers has become essential part
of every-day life. More and more users are using Web based
social networking and communication services to interact and
sharing information about their life [1] [2] and [3]. This trend
leads towards the success of today’s social networking services
(e.g., Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, MySpace, and so on). For
example, today Facebook has more the 500 million active
users, and this number is increasing rapidly everyday.
At the same time as communication services has become an
essential element of everyday life, the mobile handset industry
is experiencing a paradigm shift towards open and more
powerful mobile platforms [4]. These new open platforms
are mainly driven by Internet companies such as Google and
Apple that want to provide a rich Web experience anytime
and anywhere, while reaching even more users. Ultimately, by
providing a one-click-away Web experience users can better
control their digital life and easier upload information at
the point of inspiration, making today’s Web services even
stronger.
DISCLAIMER: The work has been carried out as part of an academic
research project and does not necessarily represent Ericsson views and
positions.
While the technological revolution toward open and powerful
mobile platforms opens up for new types of pervasive services,
it also opens up for the possibility to enrich classical mobile
applications with social information [4] [5]. For example,
classical address book in mobile phones may updated automat-
ically with information obtained from social networks, image
hosting services, Web forums, etc. Another example could be
communication services that automatically determine where
the users are located by analyzing status updates obtained from
sensors and social networks, and then set up dynamic groups
[6]. Implementation of such customized mobile applications,
has been restricted for a long time by the device manufacturers
and operators, but now it is possible to the developers to
innovate new applications for the mobile devices.
Considering the huge amount of social data that is available
on the web and the multitude of On-line communities adopted
by the users, it is still a difﬁcult task to extract useful social
information and integrate it with the applications [7]. For
example, some users might be using Twitter while other users
might be using Orcut or Facebook, which makes it difﬁcult to
provide an uniﬁed solution that ﬁts all users. Social data can
also be differently formatted, and contain different type of in-
formation, or including conﬂicting information [8]. Therefore,
there is a need for a software component that can automatically
extract information from various social networking services
and then summarize it in a machine interpretable format.
The ultimate goal of this paper is to enable communication
services to be completely integrated with third party appli-
cations (i.e., mobile phone software or applications). As a
step towards this goal, the paper addresses the problem of
how to collect data from different communication services and
get valuable information about users and platforms. Another
problem addressed in the paper is how to transform the
collected data into a machine interpretable format in an uniﬁed
manner that can be consumed by the application developers.
This problem can be described by the following scenario.
Peter has different contacts in different pervasive services.
Some of them are friends, some other are colleagues, and some
other may have similar interests and so on. For example, he
has different friends in Facebook, Twitter, or in mobile phone’s
contact application. Peter uses a service to associate his social
contacts. Due to tremendous information ﬂow from all his
373
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

pervasive services, he wants to have assistance to prioritize
his contacts and ﬁlter information/content overload based on
social strength and context. He expects to have a service which
keep track of all his interactions and automatically prioritize
contacts based on social strength. The service collects Peter’s
social interactions based on his preferences and contexts and
infers that information for social ranking, dynamic grouping
or recommending contacts.
To face the challenges expressed above, we investigated the
following research questions:
• How can on-line interaction be modeled in a uniform way
to enable identiﬁcation of users’ individual communica-
tion pattern?
The paper is organized as follow: Section 2 discusses
related work, Section 3 provides an On-line interaction model,
Section 4 presents an early evaluation and Section 5 provides
a discussion together with future work.
II. RELATED WORKS
A. Communication Services in Context of Social Networking
In communication services, social context opens new chal-
lenges and possibilities to design mobile applications with
more intelligent functioning [9]. Although, adding social con-
text increases security and privacy risks, but it also increases
social interaction and collaboration in the Web [10] [11].
Andrew T. et.al, proposed ”CenceMe” system, which is able
to propagate user’s presence status using the mobile sensors
automatically to social networks [12]. Comparing with such
system, the proposed approach is managing user presence
information by aggregating presence information from dif-
ferent social networks and exposes this information to the
social graph in an uniﬁed manner. Communication in CenceMe
system is single-user basis (i.e., owner of the mobile device),
while communication in our system is multi-user basis as
the system is being able to collect status information for the
contact lists.
B. Dynamic Group Discovery
The proposed work is not focusing dynamic group discov-
ery, yet the solution can be associated in discovering dynamic
group. Dynamic group can be formed based on social data
in the Web contents as well as data generated by pervasive
services [13] [6] and [14]. Zin Li et al., proposed social interest
discovery mechanism based on user-generated tags [14] [15].
In that approach, user tags are considered as main data
for discovering groups. To simplify such approach, proposed
solution provides an uniﬁed data model for representing On-
line interactions associating user’s current context. Therefore,
by using the data model, the dynamic group discovery can be
simpliﬁed in large scale. In the proposed solution, collected
data is aggregated and represented as MXML based data set
to which provides a machine readable view of the data set for
the third party applications.
C. Social Data Collection
Social Web API’s are not enough to collect social data for
analysis from social networking services due to lack of stan-
dardization, data formats, and user-understandable data model
and access policies. It needs some form of format to continue
analysis smoothly [16]. Although, there is a proposal for open
social speciﬁcation but the commercial social network owner
has very little adherence to that speciﬁcation. To analyzing
social data, there are also dependencies on social network
owners [17]. Consequently, collecting social data in a simple
and efﬁcient way is a research challenge.
D. Social Data Aggregation
Use of semantic Web in social networking perspective is
very promising [18] [19]. Sharing social data in the Web ben-
eﬁts the users for connecting, communicating and managing
relationship automated and efﬁcient ways. FOAF ontology
is well-recognized to represent relationship of people in the
Web [20]. But, the speciﬁcation is not generalized enough for
automatic mapping (from user perspective) of different kinds
of Social Networks to discover relationship. In the current
applications, FOAF is used to specify people relationships in
terms of community. But there is need of a mapping which
may map or collect social data from different social networks
in semantically meaningful way. Therefore, the proposed ser-
vice also contains a FOAF engine which is being able to
interpret generic social data in FOAF data set and map among
different social data sources.
The main contribution in this paper are (1) a generalized
and simpliﬁed model for on-line interactions to generate
most of the interaction using on-line communication tools,
(2) possible communication patterns discovered using process
mining tools, and (3) a study that evaluates social strength
from multiple perspectives. Social strength is discussed in
[21].
III. MODELING ON-LINE INTERACTION
On-line communication is mostly driven by different form
of interactions (e.g., Email, SMS, Face-booking, Twitter-
ing).These interactions are instrumented by different kind of
technological support and forms actionable tools for communi-
cation. In the paper, interaction models for on-line interactions
provides the way of transforming different form of interactions
in a uniﬁed format. Uniﬁed form of interaction is necessary for
processing and analyzing the social data. Figure 1 depicts three
main stages of modeling and generating on-line interactions.
Generation of on-line interaction is important to support
ASG framework by providing tremendous interactions logs.
Consequently, it provides a uniform way of representing on-
line interactions. For the analysis of communication history
for generating social strength, a uniform representation of
interaction is very important, because it provides a systematic
way of creating data-sets of interaction logs in a uniﬁed
manner (i.e., interactions from different sources are uniﬁed
in a single data-source). The ﬁrst stage is an interaction
life cycle where each interaction is initiated by a user of
374
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

the communication service towards a contact or a group of
contacts of the same or different services. The interaction
pattern model is also designed to represent ﬂow of activities
in interactions. Format of interaction logs are discussed for
capturing interactions from different sources for monitoring
and analyzing communication history. Details of each of these
steps are given below.
Fig. 1.
On-line Interaction Building Blocks
A. Interaction Life-cycle
Figure 2 depicts the interaction life-cycle. The model simply
generates one-to-one interaction, one-to-many interactions or
bi-directional interactions which form conversation. To seg-
regate conversations from interaction logs, co-relation among
interactions need to be discovered. Due to simplicity, interac-
tion is considered as a unique communication unit by ignoring
conversations. This simpliﬁes the counting of the usage of
communication tools from communication history by provid-
ing a straight forward way. The interaction is initiated by the
user of the service through a service client (e.g., Facebook’s
iPhone application). The service might be able to capture
location data (with sensor’s associated with application carrier)
and time for instance to propagate the content (e.g., picture)
via communication platform (e.g., Facebook) using a particular
tool (e.g., Facebook/Photo-share). In addition, other examples
are SMS, MMS, phone call, audio ﬁle sharing application,
video sharing application, commenting, social tagging, tweets,
or re-tweet, etc.
Fig. 2.
On-line Interaction Life-cycle
B. Interaction Patterns
Interaction patterns provides the main steps to accomplish
an interaction (e.g., initiation, tool selection, propagation,
reception, etc) and may differ from platform to platform and
on selection of tools. Some interactions are unidirectional
which never return reply or response. On the other hand,
some interactions implicitly need conﬁrmation for inviting
colleagues to participate in meeting. For example, public tweet
and @receiver communication tools of Twitter application
are quite different. Public tweets are initiated for a group of
users while @receiver is for a particular user and it might
form as a conversation at the end[22]. And eventually, it
becomes more different in comparison with different tools of
different communication services for instance, in Facebook
and Twitter. Thus, to the aim of discovering communication
patterns, we propose simpliﬁed on-line interaction patterns
which comply with interaction life-cycle, vice-versa able to
represent most of the communication tools by this. Figure
Fig. 3.
Interaction pattern.
3 show communication pattern models which can be easily
interpreted to form Twitter message and Facebook message.
The pattern could be also used for interpreting phone calls,
SMS and MMS. Interaction patterns tell the users about their
communication habit. Therefore, it is important to identify
communication patterns discovered from interaction logs for
the recommending better communication tools and services to
the speciﬁc users.
C. Interaction Log
Interaction logs contain communication history of the indi-
viduals. Table 1 shows the simple view of the interaction logs.
Here we mention the basic properties/features for forming
interactions. The table contains only interactions. For example,
if a user replies to a corresponding message, the system
considers the follow up replies as a unique interaction. Here,
the sender contains information of message initiator, time and
location. Action is name of the tools (SMS), platform can
be Facebook or Twitter, and receiver contains the information
of receiver, time and location. From Table 1, it is easier to
measure frequency of interactions, platforms which helps to
measure social strength.
D. Overview of the System Architecture
The proposed interaction model can be applied in the
traditional aggregator services for simplifying analysis of
social data. In general, aggregator services are responsible for
collecting interactions from different communication services.
To analyze these interactions, the aggregator services have to
rely on some uniﬁed format. The proposed model is used to
representation all the interactions in uniﬁed format. Figure 4
depicts overall system architecture where the proposed inter-
action model can be easily deployed. In the ﬁgure, different
communication services are connected with the social data
375
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

TABLE I
SAMPLE INTERACTION LOGS
Sender
Tool
Platform
Tool
Receiver
Kare:Time:Lulea
SMS
Telecom operator
Reply
Peter:Time:Stockholm
Johan:Time:Lulea
Phone call
Telecom operator
Receive
Peter:Time:Stockholm
Josef:Time:Lulea
Tweet
Twitter Web Application
Reply
Peter:Time:Sttorckholm
Juwel:Time:Stockholm
SMS
Telecom operator
Reply
Peter:Time:Stockholm
aggregator service. The aggregator service interprets all the
collected interactions in the uniﬁed format. The social network
miner uses the uniﬁed datasets to analyze interaction for
mining communication patterns or supporting other third party
services. Finally, client applications can be designed to get
various services from pervasive service miner.
Fig. 4.
System Architecture
IV. EVALUATION
A. Experimental Data Collection
An experiment was set-up to evaluate the interaction model.
In the experiment, an interaction simulator is implemented to
generate data-sets randomly. The simulator follows Weibull
distribution to generate realistic interactions. Although there
are Web-APIs (e.g., Facebook API) available for accessing real
interaction data, but most of the cases, they are protected by
strict privacy policy and user-speciﬁc authentication key [23].
Therefore, to run the experiment with fair amount of social
data, a large number of user’s interactions in different services
are needed. However, these amount data could be managed
by the communication services owner via publicly accessible
interface. In practice, both of these options are not feasible
to build the data-set considering the fact of privacy policy.
Therefore, the pre-generated interaction data-set is used to run
the experiment. For communication pattern mining purposes,
these interactions are transformed to MXML form to make
it machine readable [24]. Moreover, all these interactions are
generated on the basis of proposed interaction model. Table
1, represents sample data which forms frequency log.
B. Implementation
Figure 5 depicts the ASG Powered Twitter Client for the
Android Operating Systems mobile devices. The application
is implemented for accessing the interaction data. The appli-
cation shows how different kind of groups can be formed with
social strength of relationship (high, medium or low strength),
preferences and contexts. Therefore, information overload can
be controlled by offering presence information in different
groups based on social strength. In the current prototype, it is
possible to generate dynamic group by aggregating presence
information from different communication services, where the
interaction model helps to represent the presence information
in an uniﬁed view.
Fig. 5.
Prototype of ASG Powered Twitter Client
C. Experiments using PROM process mining tool
The
uniﬁed
interaction
model
simpliﬁes
social
data
processing and analysis. For instance, using a process mining
tool called PROM [24], the proposed model provides good
result for discovering communication patterns. In PROM,
each interaction in the interaction log is considered as a
process instance in MXML form. The process is considered
as all of the possible communication path. The experiment is
run to discover communication pattern of the user from the
process instance.
In PROM, MXML formed interaction logs are used to
discover communication pattern. An example of MXML
376
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

based interaction logs is illustrated in Figure 6, which contains
three events. Each event represents a process instance. In
the ﬁrst instance, the user Juwel sent a Facebook message
from the location Gotenberg at time 2009-1-1-T0:0:10 to his
contact Johan. Johan received the message at location Lund
in time-period 2009-1-1-30.
The process work-ﬂow miner module of the PROM tool
is
used
to
discover
user
communication
patterns.
The
tool is capable to illustrate the discovered communication
patterns analyzing interaction logs. This technique helps
to automatically initiate new interaction towards the user
in his/her preferable communication tool discovered using
PROM. Referring back to Peter scenario mentioned in
Section 1, where he wants to know his communication
patterns towards all his contacts, now he is able to view a set
of communication patterns using his previous communication
history.
<ProcessInstance>
<AuditTrailEntry>
<WorkflowModelElement>Initiate
</WorkflowModelElement>
<EventType >Facebook\Message
</EventType>
<Timestamp>1900-1-1T:0:0:10
</Timestamp>
<Originator>Juwel</Originator>
<Location>Gotenberg</Location>
</AuditTrailEntry>
<AuditTrailEntry>
<WorkflowModelElement>Propagate
</WorkflowModelElement>
<EventType >complete
</EventType>
<Timestamp>1900-1-1T:0:0:20
</Timestamp>
<Originator>Facebook</Originator>
</AuditTrailEntry>
<AuditTrailEntry>
<WorkflowModelElement>Receive
</WorkflowModelElement>
<EventType >Facebook/ACT</EventType>
<Timestamp>1900-1-1T:0:0:30
</Timestamp>
<Originator>Johan</Originator>
<Location>Lund</Location>
</AuditTrailEntry>
</ProcessInstance>
Fig. 6.
Process Instances in MXML format
D. Results
One of the main contributions of this paper is to provide
a
new
simpliﬁed
approach
of
Web
data
aggregation,
representation and analysis for discovering communication
patterns or measuring social strength. However, collecting
Web data can be easily tackled by using vendor speciﬁc
Web-APIs while the real challenge still remain in merging
such data for forming an aggregated social data-set, which
can be used for mining and analysis purposes. To be able to
accomplish this challenge, this paper contributed a generalized
interaction model to capture all social data in a uniﬁed format.
To test the interaction model, different type of interactions
from different communication sources are interpreted in
MXML format. The interaction model is able to discover
user-speciﬁc
communication
patterns
(tested
in
PROM
tools). To reach that result, different test operations were
done on different MXML ﬁles with different number of
interaction instances and found that, all identical patterns are
discovered. Therefore, the on-line interaction model performs
signiﬁcantly well in generalizing on-line interactions and
discovering identical communication patterns. Figure 7 elicits
a discovered communication pattern using PROM process
mining tool. Here, the user uses Facebook Messaging, Photo-
sharing and Photo-commenting tools for communication
purposes.
Fig. 7.
Discovered Interaction Patterns
V. DISCUSSION
Analysis of on-line social interaction is one of the key
elements of measuring social strength [1] [2] and [8]. There-
fore, a generalized model is very important to represent on-
line interaction. The proposed mode is able to aggregating
interactions generated by different communication and social
networking services and represents those in a uniﬁed format
for further analysis and data mining purposes. For instance, the
model is quite effective discovering communication patterns.
In the previous section, the MXML form of interactions is
evaluated for discovering communication patterns. However,
377
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

considering only on-line interactions limit the reliability as
large portion of daily interactions (driven by face-to-face) in
the physical world which are not detected by the system.
Therefore, there need to be some tools to fetch physical world
communication. We consider this as a challenging problem,
which remain as future work. Another limitation of the work
is that the experiment is run based on emulated social data
with the assumption that social data are fetched from the cloud
(i.e., contact lists and interaction logs). However, the proposed
interaction model is able to interpret most of the interactions
in the social media, for example in Facebook, Twitter and even
interactions using Mobile phones.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
Due to immersive growth of Web-based communication ser-
vices, there is an emergent need of integrating communication
services by user-speciﬁc social data (i.e., social strength) to
predict user’s preferences and to ﬁlter information-overloads
(i.e., micro-blogs, news feed, etc). The proposed on-line in-
teraction model provides a simpler way of aggregating on-
line interactions from large number of communication services
in a uniﬁed manner. Initial prototype infers that the model
is useful to work in the real-life, although there are some
challenges (e.g., capturing real-world interactions, preserving
user privacy) need to be addressed before the practical use of
such model.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded by the Research Area Multimedia
Technologies of Ericsson Research, where Stefan Hkansson
has been vital for the direction and execution of the research.
The work was also supported by the Centre for Distance-
spanning Technology (CDT) at Lule University of Technology
and by the European regional (Mal-2) project Satin-II, funded
by the Swedish Agency for Economic and Regional Growth,
the County Administrative Board of Norrbotten, Norrbotten
County Council, and the City of Lulea.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Ankolekar, G. Szabo, Y. Luon, B. A. Huberman, D. Wilkinson,
and F. Wu, “Friendlee: a mobile application for your social life,” in
MobileHCI ’09: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2009, pp. 1–4.
[2] R. Grob, M. Kuhn, R. Wattenhofer, and M. Wirz, “Cluestr: mobile
social networking for enhanced group communication,” in GROUP ’09:
Proceedings of the ACM 2009 international conference on Supporting
group work.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2009, pp. 81–90.
[3] J. Rana, J. Kristiansson, H. Josef, and K. Synnes, “Challenges for mobile
social networking applications,” in EuropeComm 2009: Proceedings of
the First International ICST Conference Communications Infrastructure.
Systems and Applications in Europe.
Communications Infrastructure.
Systems and Applications in Europe: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009,
pp. 275–285.
[4] S.
Poslad,
Ubiquitous
Computing:
Smart
Devices,
Environments
and
Interactions,
1st
ed.
Wiley,
May
2009.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=citeulike07-
20&path=ASIN/0470035609
[5] N. Banerjee, D. Chakraborty, K. Dasgupta, S. Mittal, S. Nagar, and Sa-
guna, “R-u-in? - exploiting rich presence and converged communications
for next-generation activity-oriented social networking,” in MDM ’09.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2009, pp. 222–231.
[6] J. Hallberg, M. B. Norberg, J. Kristiansson, K. Synnes, and C. Nugent,
“Creating dynamic groups using context-awareness,” in MUM ’07: Pro-
ceedings of the 6th international conference on Mobile and ubiquitous
multimedia.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2007, pp. 42–49.
[7] J. Rana, J. Kristiansson, J. Hallberg, and K. Synnes, “An architecture for
mobile social networking applications,” in CICSYN ’09: Proceedings of
the 2009 First International Conference on Computational Intelligence,
Communication Systems and Networks.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE
Computer Society, 2009, pp. 241–246.
[8] B. Aleman-Meza, M. Nagarajan, L. Ding, A. Sheth, I. B. Arpinar,
A. Joshi, and T. Finin, “Scalable semantic analytics on social networks
for addressing the problem of conﬂict of interest detection,” ACM Trans.
Web, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–29, 2008.
[9] J. H¨akkil¨a and J. M¨antyj¨arvi, “Developing design guidelines for context-
aware mobile applications,” in Mobility ’06: Proceedings of the 3rd
international conference on Mobile technology, applications & systems.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2006, p. 24.
[10] G. Broll, E. Rukzio, M. Paolucci, M. Wagner, A. Schmidt, and H. Huss-
mann, “Perci: Pervasive service interaction with the internet of things,”
IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 13, pp. 74–81, 2009.
[11] M. Samulowitz, F. Michahelles, and C. Linnhoff-Popien, “Adaptive
interaction for enabling pervasive services,” in MobiDe ’01: Proceedings
of the 2nd ACM international workshop on Data engineering for wireless
and mobile access.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2001, pp. 20–26.
[12] A. T. Campbell, S. B. Eisenman, K. Fodor, N. D. Lane, H. Lu,
E. Miluzzo, M. Musolesi, R. A. Peterson, and X. Zheng, “Cenceme:
Injecting sensing presence into social network applications using mobile
phones (demo abstract),” 2009.
[13] J. Seo and W. B. Croft, “Blog site search using resource selection,”
in CIKM ’08: Proceeding of the 17th ACM conference on Information
and knowledge management.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2008, pp.
1053–1062.
[14] X. Li, L. Guo, and Y. E. Zhao, “Tag-based social interest discovery,” in
WWW ’08: Proceeding of the 17th international conference on World
Wide Web.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2008, pp. 675–684.
[15] F. Fuchs, D. Berndl, and G. Treu, “Towards entity-centric wide-area
context discovery,” Mobile Data Management, IEEE International Con-
ference on, vol. 0, pp. 388–392, 2007.
[16] J. Heer and D. Boyd, “Vizster: visualizing online social networks,” in
Information Visualization, 2005. INFOVIS 2005. IEEE Symposium on,
Oct. 2005, pp. 32–39.
[17] B. A. Huberman, D. M. Romero, and F. Wu, “Social networks that
matter: Twitter under the microscope,” ArXiv e-prints, December 2008.
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/0812.1045
[18] P. Mika, “Social networks and the semantic web,” in WI ’04: Pro-
ceedings of the 2004 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web
Intelligence.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2004,
pp. 285–291.
[19] U. Boj¯ars, J. G. Breslin, V. Peristeras, G. Tummarello, and S. Decker,
“Interlinking the social web with semantics,” IEEE Intelligent Systems,
vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 29–40, 2008.
[20] L. Ding, L. Zhou, T. Finin, and A. Joshi, “How the semantic web is
being used: An analysis of foaf documents,” in In Proceedings of the
38th International Conference on System Sciences, 2005.
[21] J. Rana, J. Kristiansson, and K. Synnes, “Enriching and simplifying
communication by social prioritization,” Social Network Analysis and
Mining, International Conference on Advances in, vol. 0, pp. 336–340,
2010.
[22] M. Cheong and V. Lee, “Integrating web-based intelligence retrieval and
decision-making from the twitter trends knowledge base,” in SWSM ’09:
Proceeding of the 2nd ACM workshop on Social web search and mining.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2009, pp. 1–8.
[23] E.-A. Baatarjav, R. Dantu, and S. Phithakkitnukoon, “Privacy manage-
ment for facebook,” in ICISS ’08: Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Information Systems Security.
Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer-Verlag, 2008, pp. 273–286.
[24] A. Rozinat, M. T. Wynn, W. M. P. van der Aalst, A. H. M. ter Hofstede,
and C. J. Fidge, “Workﬂow simulation for operational decision support,”
Data Knowl. Eng., vol. 68, no. 9, pp. 834–850, 2009.
378
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

