The Use of E-portfolio as Collaborative Tool for a Creative Economy
Arich Andrade Rocha, Irlley José A. C. Branco,
Jonh Leno Fernandes and Mauro Henrique L. de Boni
Federal Institute of Sciente, Technology and Education
Palmas, Tocantins, Brazil
E-mails: arichandrade@gmail.com, irlleyjacb@gmail.com,
jonhleno.fer@gmail.com, mauro@ifto.edu.br
Abstract—This article presents a tool for helping someone
who needs to hire a freelance worker. Through a research
performed by the authors, the results show that the
Tocantins, the newest Brazilian state, has a big number of
migrants from other states who have difficulty getting into
the job market because they have no references. It also
contributes to adaptation difficulties. Thus, the app can help
both the local economy and the migrants by giving them an
opportunity to take care of their families with dignity. To
accomplish
that,
we
used
a
tool
called
AppSheet,
a
framework based on components, to develop a prototype
and verify the acceptance of the proposal.
Keywords-E-portfolios;
Collaborative;
Professionals;
Freelance; Sharing Economy; Opportunity.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Currently, the inevitable and constant interactions
between human being and technology haves increased in
proportions never verified before. The use of smartphones
has become as common as the tradition of sending letters
in the last century. Smartphones are not only useful for
sending messages, they perform many functions that
transform them into an important tool for data storage,
content creation, media access and collaboration with
other persons.
According to IBGE (Brazilian Institute of Geography
and Statistics) [1] by 2015, approximately 88% of the
Brazilians who have a smartphone do not leave their home
place without it, which proves how dependent society is on
this device and indicates to the internet has allowed almost
97% of the Brazilian population to obtain access to
information in real time, share their information as well,
and interact with people and make transactions in various
perspectives.
Given this, the rise of the Collaborative Consumption
(CC) or sharing economy, the peer-to-peer-based activity
of obtaining, giving, or sharing the access to goods and
services, coordinated through community-based online
services has been noticed. It has been motivated mostly by
economic gains. In Brazil, this environment is promising
to freelance workers.
In this sense, questions arise: “what to do when we
have leaking in the kitchen, air conditioning that does not
work, malfunctioning power sockets, a poorly finished
floor, torn clothes, etc.?” These may be very common
problems, but are not simple tasks to find a professional
who can solve them and, even more difficult, to know
whether the work offered is reliable. It is even harder to
identify how reliable a given worker is when the usual
method for finding professionals is based on WhatsApp
groups, family opinion and store catalogues.
Based on this common problem of thousands of
people, and thinking of providing a practical and safe
solution for hiring freelance workers, it was decided to
develop an application that unites several types of
information in a single place, either for those who need to
find a freelance worker and also for those who intend to
offer their services. The application main goal is to make
easier the professionals’ meeting with potential clients.
This application is a showcase for the freelance
workers, a place where all the information, such as the
description of the work offered and the professional
agenda will be detailed for anyone who accesses it. It will
also make it more practical since it will optimize the
search for a given professional, for example to fix the
problems described before. The advantage of e-portfolio is
that it provides a powerful way to collect and share
information from professionals, gathers in one place, jobs,
knowledge, skills, and attributes acquired during the
person’s
lifetime,
generating
enormous
potential
in
attracting many more clients. In the context of the search
for optimizing the time and quality of the work effort,
technology has proven to be an excellent ally in the life of
the freelance workers and their clients. Currently, it is
possible to have applications that facilitate and organize
the entire work routine, and so, the idea of the ‘TÔ aqui’
(meaning: I’m here – in Portuguese) App came up.
In order to address this subject and report on the
experience, the rest of the paper is organized as follows: in
Section II, relevant related work on the topics is presented;
in Section III, we discuss the research paper proposal, with
specifications for materials and methods; in Section IV,
the results of the research are presented, through analysis
of the data collected and the development tool; in Section
V, we present our final conclusions.
II.
RELATED WORKS
To check if the goals of the users are reached, Maguire
[2] shows that the development team must visualize the
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

translation of functional requirements into technical
requirements and prototypes. To do this, mock-ups,
storyboards,
or
prototypes
are
created
and
tested
sequentially and iteratively with intended users. Wong [3]
introduced a method that address an applied user-centered
and user-experience product development. The Designers
need to identify their target users during the design
process either in design, system or interface. These user
profiles are based on the characteristics, interest, cultural
beliefs, gender, social groups and lifestyle of the target
group.
A good user experience is very important for the
success of interactive products. Schrepp [4] demonstrates
that user experience questionnaire can be used to help the
design team measure the user experience of a product
quantitatively.
Peer-to-peer markets, as showed by Zervas [5], have
emerged as alternative suppliers of goods and services
traditionally provided by long-established industries. The
authors explore the economic impact of the sharing
economy by studying the case of Airbnb, a platform form
short-term accommodations.
III.
PROPOSAL
Tocantins is one of the 27 states of Brazil. As the
newest state in the country, it is a developing frontier area,
and its inhabitants historically have been mostly of
Indigenous and mixed European-Indigenous ancestry and,
in 2015, its population was approximately 1.497 million
people.
To
better
understanding
the
situation,
the
migration of different people from different regions causes
a conflict because of few references in people lives. One
example is, the lack of reliability when choosing a
professional to perform a particular service.
Imagine the following situation: A housewife needs a
plumber as it is leaking in the kitchen. How does she find a
professional of her confidence, since she has no technical
knowledge about the problem, and especially since she is
new in town, and does not know any professionals in the
area?
Taking advantage of this problem, we are working on
the development of a application for mobile devices, such
as tablets and smartphones, that can gather information on
a single platform, bringing reliability when choosing a
freelance worker to proceed with the execution of a given
service. In Section A we will work with more details about
the application.
A. Materials
In order to create this app, we used the AppSheet, a
web application development platform that does not
necessarily require advanced programming knowledge to
quickly and easily transform an idea into an app. This tool
was chosen, since it is a
tool that promotes the
manipulation
of
information
in
a
ubiquitous
way:
visualization, insertion, editing, and deletion of data at
any time, since the given platform connects to highly
available tools, such as the Google Drive. The Google
form is a free tool that has enabled us to extract the
information outside the academic field, helping us to
define and model the application’s visual display with
more specific content.
The application is made available in a collaborative
perspective. That means that the information presented in
the application will not be responsibility of the creator of
the
application.
Collaborative
Consumption
(CC)
is
increasingly
transforming
human
interaction;
one
example is the exchange of experiences, services, and
products; what is called Sharing Economy when it is
related to financial gains.
Thus, the application can reach a huge number of
users: those looking for a professional and / or those
professionals
who
wish
to
expand
their
business.
Furthermore, for the best application navigation and to
encourage
the
user
to
contribute
with
relevant
information,
all
views
of
the
application
will
be
developed with the purpose of making it intuitive for
users, to make sure they will have no problem in finding
any particular data, and to ensure a good user experience
(UX). The screens and the icons are easy to identify,
allowing the customer to register, view, and update the
information.
Figure 1. Views Flowchart example
As showed in Figure 1, the navigation from login
screen and a given registered professional screen is made
in only three clicks. The usability of the application was
simplified as much as possible. So, even the users without
experience
in
using
apps
will
successfully
find
a
professional according to their needs.
B. Method
After choosing the platform, the app interface has
been defined in a collaborative way through presentations
and discussions during the Telematics Post-Graduation
Program classes in order to provide a user-friendly visual
experience that meets the previously identified need
which is, in this context, to provide to the potential clients
the information they need to establish contact with a
professional who can execute a given work.
To identify the need of such an app, it was made a
query application. It was developed as a survey with 10
questions, which can be seen in Table 1. Those questions
were inserted in Google Form platform. In order to serve
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

a larger audience, the online link of the form was made
available through the social networks, such as Facebook,
WhatsApp, and Instagram. With the data collection at the
end of the questionnaire, answered by a total of 83 people,
we were able to provide a solution to the problem
presented.
IV.
RESULTS
The use of technology in solving problems has
become a common thing in people’s lives. Mobile devices
are a technology that can, ubiquitously, enable fast access
to information, exchange of messages, payments, among
others. To make sure there is a need of an app to help
people to find a freelance worker with the needed
capabilities we applied a survey showed at the Table 1.
This survey has ten questions about how often people
need freelance workers, how they find them, and their
opinion on an app that could help them in these situations.
The
results
of
this
research
were
obtained
by
interpreting the data collected by a survey evaluation
developed in Google Forms. This was done to verify the
viability of the application on the market, since until then
we were basing ourselves solely on our own need. The
questions involved topics about the customer’s need to
search for a professional, how often they would use the
app, which are the most wanted professionals, among
others.
TABLE I.
QUIZ
Query
1. How old are you?
2. How often do you need a freelance worker?
3. When you need a freelance worker, which resource or method do you
use to find one?
4. Would you use, or do you already use, an app on your smartphone to
find freelance workers?
5. Which categories of professionals do you need most often?
6. What information about this professional would be essential for you
to hire a service?
7. How often do you use your smartphone?
8. For what purpose to you use your smartphone the most?
9. As for the number of apps on your smartphone, how many would you
say you have installed?
10. How would an application about freelance workers be considered by
you?
A. Data Analysis
According to Figure 2, we conclude that the app would
be feasible, since approximately 80% need a freelance
worker from time to time.
Figure 2. Result of the survey applied.
Other needs verified:

Identification
of
the
most
wanted
freelance
services:
The results showed that the four most sought after
professions are: Masons, Electricians, Mechanics, and
Computer Science Technicians;

The app user possible age range:
By weighted average, it was verified that the average
age of our possible users is 32 years;

Essential information the app most provide for
supplying a service:
As can be seen in Figure 3, potential users consider
important information to qualify the professional, such as
vocational courses, technical courses, or even a higher
level course; professional experience such as, places where
they have already performed some service; and lastly the
one that stood out most as requirements by the users,
evaluation of the professional by other people, that is, the
importance of the evaluation influences when choosing a
professional.
Figure 3. Result of the survey applied.

And finally, how necessary would this app be:
According to Figure 4, the evaluation of possible users
regarding the need for such an app, the result shows that
approximately 85% of people questioned consider the app
to be essential or necessary.
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 4. Result of the survey applied.
B. Development Tool
Since it is a development tool based on visual
components and the organization of the data arranged in
the spreadsheet, here are some screens of the application
and the development process.
Figure 5 show the app screens: first, the list of
freelance
workers
category,
the
second
shows
the
registration screen of a given freelance worker category,
such as “mason”, for example. And lastly, the list of
professionals registered in a certain profession category.
Figure 5. App Screens
Figure 6 shows the professional registration screen,
and the description of a particular professional.
Figure 6. App Screens
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
Apps are used for a variety of services around the
world. In this scenario, the “TÔ aqui” project presents
itself as a reliable and viable option for a person looking
for a professional to do domestic chores, as for the
professionals who need to advertise their activities and
work to earn a living. In an unstable job market, offering
options for people to work and thus survive, motivate us
to contribute even more to the development of this app.
Therefore, in order to continue pointing towards the
use of mobile applications to solve problems, from the
perspective of mobility, this work presents the possibility
of gathering information on trust and credibility in a
collaborative environment that will bring more security to
the user at the moment of choosing a professional by
showing suggestions, evaluations, and opinions left by
other users.
REFERENCES
[1]
Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics. IBGE:
National Household Sample Survey. [Online]. Available
from:https://ww2.ibge.gov.br/english/estatistica/indicadore
s/trabalhoerendimento/pnad_continua/default.shtm
[2]
M. Maquire, “Methods to support human-centered design”
International Journal of Human-Computer, vol. 55, pp.587-
634. 2001. doi:10.1006/ijhc.2001.0503 .
[3]
M. C. Wong, C. W. Khong and H. Thwaites “Applied UX
and UCD Design Process in Interface Design,” Procedia –
Social and Behavioral Sciences, vol. 21, pp.703-708. 2010.
doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.08.228.
[4]
M. Schrepp, A. Hinderks and J. Thomaschewski “Applying
the User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ) in Different
Evaluation Scenarios” International Conference of Design,
User Experience, and Usability. pp.383-392. 2014. doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-07668-3_37
[5]
G. Zervas, D. Proserpio and J. W. Byears, “The Rise of the
Sharing Economy: Estimating the Impact of Airbnb on the
Hotel Industry” Journal of Marketing Research, vol. 54,
pp.687-705. 2017. doi: 10.1509/jmr.15.0204
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

