Analyzing Moodle/LMS Logs to Measure Mobile Access 
 
 
María José Casany, Marc Alier, Nikolas Galanis, Enric Mayol, Jordi Piguillem 
 Department of Service and Information System Engineering 
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya 
Barcelona, Spain 
e-mail: {mjcasany, ludo, ngalanis, mayol, jpiguillem}@essi.upc.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract—Most Educational Institutions worldwide have 
deployed web based Learning Management Systems (LMS) as 
a means to provide support for their presence-based lectures 
and offer online-exclusive learning. These LMSs were designed 
and developed for users accessing the system through web 
browsers on desktop computers or laptops.  However, over the 
last years, an increasing percentage of the registered accesses 
to various LMS platforms have been from mobile devices such 
as smartphones.  While tackling the problems arising through 
the design of a mobile client for the Open Source LMS Moodle 
called Moodbile, the question of how to decide which services 
of Moodle could be accessed from smartphones became very 
relevant. This paper presents a data analysis study conducted 
on the Moodle server logs of the Universitat Politècnica de 
Catalunya - Barcelona Tech (UPC) virtual campus, Atenea, 
and the insight gained regarding the particular characteristics 
of the accesses from mobile devices. The main achievement of 
this study is that it provides insight of the use of the university 
LMS from mobile devices. 
 Keywors-M-Learning; LMS; Moodle; Web analysis; Activity 
Logs. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
With the vast majority of learning institutions around the 
world embracing e-learning as a valid avenue for knowledge 
dissemination, there is an ongoing struggle of a number of 
Learning Management Systems (LMS) for a piece of the 
market. Moodle is one of the largest open source LMSs with 
a registered user base of more than 57 million people and 
more than 66,600 registered and verified sites as of 
December 2011 [1]. 
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya UPC – Barcelona 
Tech is one of the institutions that opted to move to Moodle 
from a proprietary LMS. The migration to this new Moodle-
based platform named Atenea, was carried out in stages, 
starting in 2004 and completing in 2007. Since then, there 
has been a dramatic rise in the usage of the services provided 
by UPC’s virtual campus both on-site and off-site and 
currently Atenea gives service to more than 30.000 students. 
Parallel to the establishment of Atenea and the surge of 
activity in this new platform the smartphone market emerged 
from its shy beginnings to become an important part of the 
mobile device market [2], [3]. This soar in the number of 
users owning a smartphone over the past few years has 
inevitably been noticed in the general usage statistics of 
Atenea, where we detect that a small but not negligible 
percentage of all user accesses is done from smartphones. 
This observation poses a series of interesting questions as 
to the nature of these smartphone accesses, their success rate 
and any special requirements they impose upon the LMS 
compared to traditional desktop usage. The predominant 
concern is whether Moodle in general, and Atenea in 
particular, are ready to cater effectively to the needs of 
smartphone users. This concern arises not only from a 
software development perspective, but also from the learning 
design of the activities. 
Tackling the issue of the emergence of mobile users in 
the Open Source LMS Moodle, the Moodbile project 
proposes a Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) in order to 
provide mobile learning applications with a set of Web 
Services that give access to a set of Moodle functionalities, 
while keeping these services as abstract and decoupled as 
possible, so that they could easily be ported to other LMSs if 
necessary [4]. Once the project started, the question of how 
to prioritize the services of Moodle became very relevant.  
To study this question, this paper presents a data analysis 
study conducted on the server logs of Atenea. This study 
tries to answer several research questions: What tasks do 
mobile and desktop users perform on Atenea? Are there any 
significant differences between the tasks performed by 
mobile users and desktop users? Are short access time tasks 
the best ones for mobile users? And, what tasks are more 
suitable to be adapted for mobile access?. One of the results 
of this study shows that mobile sessions are shorter than 
desktop sessions. In fact mobile users usually access the 
Atenea/Moodle server to do only one task. This and other 
results are discussed in this paper. 
The organization of the paper is the next: since our 
general goal is to integrate m-learning applications with 
Moodle, the related work regarding this integration is 
summarized in section two. After that, to decide which 
services of the LMS may be adequate for mobile devices, the 
data analysis of the Atenea server logs is presented and 
organized in two sections; section three presents the research 
questions and method to analyze the data and section four 
presents the results we found. Section five presents a 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

discussion of the most relevant issues and finally section six 
presents the conclusions and further work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The integration between m-learning applications and 
LMS is not an easy task, because LMS do not usually 
include interoperability standards to communicate with 
external applications; they are usually designed as 
monolithic or layered systems [5]. This section analyses 
some of the previous projects that have extended the LMS to 
the mobile scenario.  
This extension is based on the creation of m-learning 
applications that extend the scope of the LMS. Such mobile 
applications usually follow one of two different approaches. 
The first approach focuses on engagement with mobile 
devices and mobile native applications. The benefits of this 
approach include access to engaging design, free use of 
hardware features and fast and lightweight technology. 
However, the main limitation is that applications are device 
specific, which usually requires high development costs. The 
second approach focuses on the interaction with a browser, 
so the technology is ubiquitous and device-independent. 
However, it may also be slower and it may be harder to 
access for some smart phones.  
Usability and online/offline work are important issues 
when extending LMS to the mobile world. Specific 
restriction on mobile devices to display information and to 
interact with the user must be taking into account, and 
properly adapted. Some m-learning applications allow 
offline work when network coverage is not available or 
expensive. 
Offline 
work 
also 
implies 
that 
mobile 
applications must, at some point, synchronize the data stored 
locally on the device with the data stored on the LMS [6]. 
 Lehner and Nosekabel [7] did one of the first studies 
about mobile devices that interact with virtual campuses. In 
this study, m-learning complements traditional learning. The 
Welcome system was developed to offer access to certain 
contents and services (such as calendars or events) of the 
virtual campus of the Regensburg University using mobile 
devices. The communication between the virtual campus and 
the mobile device is done mainly using SMS messages. 
A classification of the services and functionalities of a 
LMS are presented in [6] and [8]. LMS functionalities are 
separated in four groups: data resources, e-learning specific 
services, 
common 
services 
(such 
as 
authentication, 
authorization or event management) and presentation of 
contents. They also identify the main issues of a LMS’s 
architecture that may be resolved to offer these services to a 
mobile device. These architectural issues are: 1) context 
discovery (the system must check automatically the mobile 
device features and decide which services may be provided), 
2) adaptation of contents and 3) synchronization between the 
mobile device and the LMS. They present a custom-made 
LMS developed in the University of Trento that follows this 
architecture in order to support mobility. 
Hinkelman [9] developed, in Japan, a module of Moodle 
1.6 to do testing using mobile devices. This version mainly 
offered testing services and feedback to students. Due to 
technological issues, this project was developed to work with 
Japanese mobile phones (because the tool is based on 
CHTML and 98% of the Japanese mobile phones supported 
this language). Afterwards, a study to adapt Moodle to 
mobile devices centered in the adaptation of contents is 
presented in [10]. 
The Open University has been working on Moodle 
extensions to mobile devices for quite long time. At 2009 
they presented Mobile VLE for Moodle, a m-learning 
application to access Moodle from mobile devices. This 
application provides a subset of Moodle functionalities to be 
accessed by means a mobile device. This selection was done 
by popular polls to students. Students rated very high the 
following LMS functionalities as candidates to be the mobile 
services: assessment scores, messages (read course messages 
and unread forum posts), tasks, planning (see current week 
and its tasks, also the following weeks and the whole course) 
and resources (read resources from mobile devices and 
download if it is supported by the mobile phone) [11]. 
Momo [12] (Mobile Moodle) and MLE  [13] (Mobile 
Learning Engine) projects developed m-learning applications 
to access some Moodle 1.9 functions. The Momo m-learning 
application is based on J2ME (Java 2 micro edition, a java 
version for mobile devices) while the MLE project 
developed a J2ME client application and an additional web 
version to access Moodle courses from mobile browsers. 
Some of the Moodle modules/activities supported by this 
project are the following: lesson, quiz, task, resource, forum, 
survey, choice, wiki (read only), database (search and query) 
and message.  
Project MPage [14] develops a Moodle 1.9 client for 
iPhone. Some of the Moodle modules/activities supported by 
this project are the following: view course categories, access 
MyMoodle, edit events, access to resources in different 
formats, chat, choice, forum and Quiz. 
Moviltest [15] is a J2ME application to download 
Moodle 1.9 tests and execute them in the mobile phone. 
After finishing the test, the results can be sent back to the 
Moodle server. 
Moodle.org [16] has published a list of functionalities for 
an iPhone client for Moodle. The main functionalities they 
want to offer are the following: 1) To upload video, audio 
and other file formats to the user’s private space in the 
Moodle server. 2) To view courses where the user is enrolled 
as well as to view other users enrolled in the same courses. 
3) To view activities and content of a course and to 
download these contents to the mobile client. 4) To view 
user grades for students. 5) To receive notifications from the 
Moodle server, as well as to create and send new internal 
email messages. 6) To view forums, discussions and create 
and reply posts. 7) To view calendar events and assignments 
deadlines. 
The current version of the prototype designed by 
Moodle.org only allows uploading files to the user’s private 
space in the Moodle server, viewing course participants and 
view the list activities and contents of a course.  
The related work is summarized in Table I. The table 
contains the studies that extend LMSs to the mobile scenario. 
The respective functions of the LMS involved in the study 
are listed. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

TABLE I.  
SUMMARY TABLE OF THE DIFFERENT STUDIES INVOLVING 
EXTENDING THE LMS TO THE MOBILE WORLD. 
LMS Functionalities from Related Work 
Source 
LMS functionality 
[8] 
Upcoming Calendar events 
[7][9] 
Create an LMS adapted to info mobility from the scratch 
[10] 
Quiz 
[12] 
Resource, assessment, assignment, messages, posts 
[13][14] 
Quiz, lesson, assignment, resource, forum, survey, choice, 
message, wiki 
[15] 
Course activities, myMoodle, event, resource, chat, choice, 
forum, quiz 
[16] 
Quiz 
[17] 
View course participants, upload files, list course activities 
 
III. 
RESEARCH AND DESIGN METHOD 
A. Research questions 
This work tries to analyze the characteristics of mobile 
users who access the LMS (Moodle) trough mobile web 
browsers and has been focused in answering the following 
research questions: 
1. Which are the tasks performed by users from mobile 
browsers and from desktop or laptop browsers (referred to 
as desktops for the remainder of the paper for brevity)? 
2. Is there any significant difference between the tasks 
performed from mobile devices and the tasks performed 
from desktops? 
3. Are short access time tasks the best-suited ones for mobile 
devices? 
Which tasks are more suitable to be adapted for mobile 
devices? 
B. Related work 
Several sources can be used to identify the basic patterns 
of mobile users accessing the LMS and which activities are 
more used from such small devices. The most popular 
approach is to make a survey for students and teachers [11], 
[19]. 
However, recently, new less intrusive and less subjective 
approaches are being adopted to gather data or requirements 
[20], [21]. These approaches include data analysis from 
different sources such as web server logs or LMS logs. Web 
server logs are vast collections of data about accesses to 
specific web pages. The main limitation of analyzing web 
server logs is that they contain only low-level data. LMS log 
files are perhaps the most promising source of automatic 
gathered online learning data. Since students typically login 
on such systems, the LMS logs keep track of users and 
sessions. These logs also gather a range of relatively high-
level student data such as grades, posts in a forum etc. These 
data are more focused on student activity than web server 
logs. In [22], there is a summary of several alternative 
approaches to automatically analyze e-learning data as well 
as the different data sources used for the analysis. 
Nevertheless, in the above approaches, only one data 
source was used. The challenge with respect to data 
gathering is the interrogation of several data sources. If the 
LMS data were correlated with additional information 
gathered from other systems, a richer picture of student 
learning process could be generated [23]. In our study, the 
data from the LMS and web server has been merged in order 
to gather information about the client operating system. 
Another limitation of the previous approaches is that none of 
them are specifically designed to analyze mobility and LMS. 
C. Data sources and analysis 
This study was conducted using Moodle/Atenea logs and 
web server logs of the first academic semester of 2011. More 
than 15 million entries/registers were analyzed. We have 
addressed the analytical process in the following three 
phases, shown in Fig. 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Data analysis phases. 
1. Data Pre-Processing:  that includes selection and capture 
of data. During this step, data is cleaned from empty or 
useless web server log entries. Some derived information 
is calculated or aggregated from web server log entries 
(see Table II). All this information is stored in a relational 
DB and merged with the entries provided by the LMS log. 
The merging criteria take into consideration data and 
time, IP-address and Moodle module accessed or type of 
action performed (view, add, update, etc.). 
TABLE II.  
EXAMPLE OF PRIMARY AND DERIVED VARIABLES FORM 
WEB SERVER AND LMS LOG. 
Variable name 
Description 
Type 
(Primary/Derived) 
Course  
Moodle course id 
Primary 
Module  
Moodle module accessed 
Primary 
Action 
Moodle action performed 
Primary 
Operation System 
Type of operating system 
Derived 
Year period 
Exams or lectures 
Derived 
Day slot 
Morning, 
midday, 
afternoon, evening, night 
Derived 
 
2. Data Processing. In this phase, data of the database is 
processed and aggregated accordingly to facilitate the 
generation of partial reports to support the analysis and to 
answer our research questions. 
3. Data Analysis. In this phase, data is analyzed based on the 
previously generated reports and conclusions of the 
analysis are presented. 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

IV. 
RESULTS AND FINDINGS 
The analysis of the data retrieved from both sources 
points out that most of the accesses to the LMS (96,21%) are 
performed from desktop or laptop computers, while only 
3,48% are from mobile devices and 0.28% from tablets. 
Three distinct types of accesses to the LMS have been 
identified: queries, updates and logins/logouts. Fig. 2 shows 
the relative percentages of the three types of accesses for 
desktops and mobile devices. 
 
Figure 2.   Relative percentages of the three types of accesses for desktops 
and mobile devices. 
Regarding mobile Operating Systems, more than half 
(58.49%) of the registered accesses were from an iOS device 
followed by Android devices (18,67%) and Blackberry OS 
(12%). Fig. 3 presents a detailed breakdown of the various 
OS percentages. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Breakdown of logged events by mobile OS. 
The number of logins from mobile devices is very high 
compared to the total number of mobile operations. 
Therefore, we have isolated the average % of mobile logins 
and we detected that the mobile sessions are very short, 
almost atomic: 45,15% of the average events recorded from 
mobile devices are logins, while only 23,74% of the logged 
events from desktop computers are logins. This situation is 
similar in almost all the mobile operating systems (except 
from Windows CE and Android mobiles where the average 
% is a little lower). Therefore, we can state that many times 
the mobile users try to login to the LMS without success and 
when they do succeed; they only do one action (the average 
number of actions per session from mobile devices is 1,12 
compared to 3,21 in desktop). In this sense, we hypothesize 
that Mobile users usually access the LMS from a link to do 
one single action. Additionally, logs state that the usual 
entrance point to the LMS is not the main course page, 
because only 20% of the logged events correspond to the 
“course view” action. 
Finally, we have analyzed which actions mobile users 
and desktop users perform in the LMS. In general, the most 
frequently used LMS activity modules are quiz, assignment, 
forum, course, resource and the access to the user profile, as 
it is shown in Fig. 4. Among update actions the most 
attempted action from mobile devices are “answer the quiz” 
followed by “post in a forum”. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Percentages of query actions carried out. 
To analyze the actions with a higher percentage of 
mobile users, actions have been divided in two groups: 
updates and queries. Action-updates with a higher 
percentage for mobile users compared to desktop ones are 
quiz attempts with 86,85% from mobile devices compared to 
67,12% from desktop users, followed by forum accesses for 
discussion/post creation with 10,51% vs. 5,27%. Action-
queries with a higher percentage include course view with 
20% vs. 15 user profile view 4,87% vs. 3,96% and finally, 
consulting grades with 2,44% vs. 0,96%. Another 
observation is that “view resources”, which is the second 
most queried activity, has a similar percentage across both 
platforms (50,5% for mobile compared to 51% for desktop). 
Furthermore, we have analyzed and compared the data 
retrieved during spring lecture season (February - May) of 
2011 and of the exams season of autumn semester (January 
2011) of 2010 and the spring semester (June) of 2011. 
61,86% of the total registered accesses were during the 
spring lecture season and the 38,14% were during the two 
exam periods. Table III shows the relative percentages of the 
accesses during these two periods. We have also included 
activity from tablets for completion purposes. 
TABLE III.  
BREAKDOWN OF ACCESSES REGISTERED DURING LECTURE 
AND EXAM PERIODS. 
 
Exams (E) 
Lectures (L) 
Desktop 
95,34% 
96,75% 
Mobile 
4,29% 
2,98% 
Tablet 
0,32% 
0,25% 
 
From the table data, we observe that although the activity 
from desktops remains almost unchanged during the two 
periods, there is a roughly 50% increase in activity from 
mobile devices. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figs. 5 and 6 present the variations in activity for mobile 
devices and desktops across these two periods. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Desktop activity during exams (refered as E) and lectures 
(refered as L). 
 
Figure 6.  Mobile activity during exams (E) and lectures (L). 
From Fig. 6, we see that during the exams period, mobile 
users mainly consult grades followed by course view and 
resource view. 
Finally, we divided the day into 5 time periods: 
• 
Early morning (0:00 – 7:00) 
• 
Morning (7:00 – 13:00) 
• 
Midday (13:00 – 16:00) 
• 
Afternoon (16:00 – 20:00) 
• 
Night (20:00 – 24:00) 
In general, we notice that activity is higher during the 
afternoon (34,47%) followed by morning (28,58%), midday 
(18,28%), night (13,33%) and finally, early morning 
(5,33%). Fig. 7 shows a rise in mobile activity during the 
night hours while desktop activity drops during the same 
hours. 
 
Figure 7.  Breakdown of mobile activity during the different time periods. 
Analyzing the mobile activity in more detail, we notice 
that queries and updates increase considerably during night 
hours (7,15% of the updates and 9,07% of the queries), 
followed by morning activity (0,49% of the updates and 
3,45% of the queries). 
 During night hours the most accessed activities are: view 
grades, view course, view wiki, view user profile, view 
choice, enroll into course, add posts or discussions in a 
forum, and view task. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The first interesting observation is that most of the 
Atenea modules that are accessed using computers seem to 
be used as well from mobile devices. One explanation could 
be that the Atenea has been modified by UPCnet to improve 
accessibility and usability. These improvements include 
adding caption fields to tables, links and figures, adding 
explanations to popup menus, etc. [24]. 
Another issue is the high percentage of login activity 
from some mobile devices. The login activity represents 
approximately 45% of the mobile activity. From this we 
deduce that many times the mobile user cannot log in to 
Atenea. Fig. 8, shows the percentage of mobile activity 
dedicated to login attempts. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Percentage of mobile login activity. 
From the related work and the Atenea log analysis, we 
have found that the following Moodle features are the most 
accessed from mobile devices. 
TABLE IV.  
MOODLE FEATURES TO BE USED FROM MOBILE DEVICES. 
 
From 
Related 
Projects 
From 
Atenea/Moodle 
log 
Analysis 
Internal Message 
x 
 
Forum 
posts 
and 
discussions 
x 
x 
Task /assignment 
x 
x 
Resource (view) 
x 
x 
Choice and quiz 
x 
x (quiz only) 
Course activities (view) 
x 
x 
Course participants (view) 
x 
 
Grade (view) 
x 
 
 
 So, we have considered the following Moodle features 
as necessary to be includes in the Moodbile project 
development pipeline: view course activities, view course 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

participants, view student’s grades, view resources, view and 
upload tasks, access forums and discussions, read and reply 
posts, do quizzes, view upcoming calendar events and view 
user profiles. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In the analysis of the logs of Atenea, only 3,48% of 
accesses came from mobile devices; but in spite of this, it is 
fair to assume that this percentage is going to grow 
significantly. Relative large screens (4,3 inches and above) 
that replace the cheap feature phones are starting to show up 
on the smartphone market. Some market studies show how 
tablets (with screens from 7 to 10 inches) are cannibalizing 
the market of cheap netbooks that students used to buy 
during the last four years [25].    
From the results of the study, we find especially relevant 
our hypothesis that mobile users usually access the LMS 
from a link to do one single action. This hypothesis is based 
on the fact that mobile sessions are very short (about 1.2 
logged actions per session) and that from the logs we know 
that students do succeed in doing this action. From this we 
conclude that the navigation design of the LMS needs to be 
tailored for this quick usage pattern.  
Another issue is the fact that almost half of the actions 
performed from mobile are to log in and out. Mobile LMS 
front-ends should automatically login the student/teacher, 
cache the contents of the LMS, and make it available offline 
when connection is unavailable, slow or expensive.  
Finally, teachers need to be aware that students access 
their online courses through mobile devices, and make their 
online courses more mobile friendly. Learning design has to 
take this issue into deep consideration.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been funded by the  “Spanish Ministry of 
Science and Innovation” in project  MiPLE code TIN2010-
21695-C02-02.8. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Wexler, S., Grey, N., Miller, D., Nguyen, F. and Barnevelda, 
A., Learning Management Systems: The good, the bad, the 
ugly... and the truth. E-learning Guild, 2007. 
[2] IDC Press release: Smartphones sales worldwide. IDC Press. 
http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS23123911 
(retrieved: may 2012) 
[3] Gartner newsroom: Smartphones sales worldwide. Gartner 
Inc. 
http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1924314 
(retrieved: may 2012) 
[4] Casany, M.J., Alier, M., Mayol, E., Piguillem, J., Galanis, N., 
Conde, M.A. and García-Peñalvo F. J., “Moodbile: A 
Framework to integrate m-learning applications with the 
LMS,” In Journal of Research and Practice in Information 
Technology (2012) in press. 
[5] Sclater, N., “Web 2.0, personal learning environments, and 
the future of learning management systems,” In Research 
Bulletin, 13, pp. 2008-2009.  
[6] Trifonova, A., Ronchetti, M., “A general architecture to 
support mobility in learning,” In Proceedingsof the IEEE 
International 
Conference 
of 
Advanced 
Learning 
Technologies, 2004, pp. 26-30.  
[7] Lehner, F., Nosekabel, H, “The role of mobile devices in E-
Learning first experiences with a wireless E-Learning 
environment,” In Proceedings of the IEEE International 
Workshop of Wireless and Mobile Technologies in 
Education, 2002, pp. 103-106.  
[8] Colazzo, L., Molinari, A., Ronchetti, M., Trifonova, A., 
“Towards a multi-vendor mobile learning management 
system,” In Proceedings of the ED-Media, 2003, pp. 121-127.  
[9] Hinkelman, D., “Moodle for Mobiles Project”, 2005. 
Available 
at: 
http://moodle.org/mod/forum/discuss.php?d=33033 
(retrieved: may 2012) 
[10] Cheung, B., Steward, B., Mcgreal R., “Going mobile with 
Moodle: First steps,” In Proceedings of IADIS International 
Conference on Mobile Learning, Dublin. International 
Association for the Development of the Information Society, 
2006.  
[11] Thomas.,R.C., “Mobilizing the Open University: case studies 
in strategic mobile development,” In Journal of the Research 
Center for Educational Technology, 6(1), 2010, pp. 103-110.  
[12] Mobile 
Moodle. 
http://www.mobilemoodle.org/momo18/ 
(retrieved: may 2012) 
[13] Mobile 
Learning 
Engine. 
http://mle.sourceforge.net/ 
(retrieved: may 2012) 
[14] Mpage. 
http://massmedia.hk/moodle/course/view.php?id=2 
(retrieved: may 2012) 
[15] Cosme, C.A., Pedrero, A., Alonso, V., ”Moviltest: adaptación 
de cuestionarios de Moodle para dispositivos móviles,” V 
Simposio Pluridisciplinar sobre Diseño y Evaluación de 
Contenidos Educativos Reutilizables (SPDECE’08), 2008. 
[16] Moodle.org mobile. http://docs.moodle.org/dev/Mobile_app 
(retrieved: may 2012) 
[17] Alier, M., Casany, M.J. and Piguillem, J., “Towards mobile 
learning applications integration with learning management 
systems,” Multiplatform e-learning systems and technologies: 
mobile devices for ubiquitous ICT-based education, 2009, pp. 
182-194.  
[18] Alier, M., Casany, M.J., Conde, M.A. and García-Peñalvo, 
F.J.G., “Interoperability for LMS: the missing piece to 
become the common place for e-learning innovation,” 
International Journal of Knowledge and Learning, 2010, 6(2), 
pp. 130-141.  
[19] Mills, K., “M-Libraries: Information use on the move,” A 
report from the Arcadia Programme. Cambridge, UK: 
University of Cambridge, 2009.  
[20] Sinickas, A., “Keeping Keeping score: Making performance 
data more compelling Part 1,” In Strategic Communication 
Management, 11(4), 2007, pp. 32–35. 
[21] Gofton, K., “Data firms react to survey fatigue,” In 
Marketing, 3, 1999, pp 29-30. 
[22] Black, E.W., Dawson, K., Priem, J., “Data for free: Using 
LMS activity logs to measure community in online courses,” 
In The Internet and Higher Education, vol. 11(2), 2008, pp. 
65-70, Elsevier. 
[23] Dawson, S., “‘Seeing’ the learning community: An 
exploration of the development of a resource for monitoring 
online student networking,” In British Journal of Educational 
Technology, vol. 41(5), 2010, pp 736-752. 
[24] UPCnet, 
“Experiencias 
de 
mejora 
en 
usabilidad 
y 
accesibilidad 
en 
Moodle,” 
In 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
MoodleMoot-Spain 2011, San Sebastian, Spain. 
[25] Gartner newsroom: Tablets market share forecast. Gartner 
Inc. 
Available 
at:. 
http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1800514 
(retrieved: 
may 2012) 
 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

