Primary Access Procedures in M2M Networks 
Abdullah Balcı, Radosveta Sokullu  
EEE Dept., Faculty of Engineering, Ege University 
Izmir, Turkey 
email : abdullah.balci@ege.edu.tr, radosveta.sokullu@ege.edu.tr
Abstract — The immensely increased number of networked 
devices in the last several years is believed to be only the 
beginning of a new era of machine-to-machine (M2M) 
communications, where billions of devices will connect over the 
network and react to events in the environment without human 
intervention. This emerging technology poses new challenges to 
the existing connectivity mechanisms. Current network access 
methods rely on random access (RA) back-off based 
mechanisms with inherent control of the congestion and the 
delay. In M2M communications, devices will be sending only 
very small amounts of data (several bytes so several kilobytes) 
but their excessive numbers and the possibility that many of 
them will try to connect simultaneously will cause high collision 
rate and unacceptable delays. A lot of active research is directed 
to these subjects and the goal of this paper is to summarize and 
classify the suggested methods in order to provide a clear 
picture of the open research issues.  
Keywords-M2M communications; random access procedure; 
congestion; delay 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A lot of research in recent years is concentrated on new 
technologies, enabling the communication between “things”, 
“machines” and “devices” like “the Internet of Things” (IoT), 
“Machine-to-Machine” (M2M) and Device-to-Device (D2D) 
communications. The basic idea behind these concepts is that 
“things” or “objects” will be able to communicate with each 
other and perform actions without human intervention [1]. In 
2015, 604 million machines were connected to the internet 
and the number is predicted to rise over 3,075 million by 2020. 
This amazing growth in terms of number of devices and data 
volume is faster than the growth of human population and 
consequently has resulted in a new paradigm defined as M2M 
communications [2][3]. 
The aim of M2M networks is to connect devices together 
and enable them to make smart decisions based on the 
generated and transferred data. The characteristic of these 
M2M networks are quite different from those of current wired 
and 
wireless 
networks. 
Human-to-human 
(H2H) 
communications focus on high data rates and high QoS, while 
M2M communications aim generally at low data rates with 
very strict time constraints. Furthermore, because of the large 
number of devices, the number of simultaneous attempts to 
connect to the network will be much greater than those in H2H 
centered networks. This renders existing access algorithms 
ineffective resulting in high collision rate and extreme delays 
and has forced major standardization organizations such as 
ETSI and 3GPP to concentrate their efforts on these issues 
[4]. Specifically 3GPP is working on network architectures 
that allow the integration of M2M communications with 
cellular networks such as LTE and LTE-A. In LTE, the 
devices have to perform the RA procedure to connect to the 
network using the Physical Random Access Channel 
(PRACH) in the uplink direction. With H2H communications 
this procedure gives satisfactory results but is not suitable for 
M2M scenarios. Furthermore, since both H2H and M2M 
devices will perform this procedure on the same uplink 
resources, it will also cause significant degradation in the 
QoS for H2H users and this is quite an active research area 
[4]. 
In this paper, we focus on the challenges arising in the RA 
procedure due to the introduction of an extremely large 
number of M2M devices. The paper is organized as follows: 
first a brief overview of the RA procedure in LTE is 
presented, then in Section III, the RA challenges are defined 
and the existing solutions are summarized introducing a clear 
taxonomy of the suggested methods. Section IV concludes 
the paper by defining the major open research issues. 
II. 
RANDOM ACCESS PROCEDURE IN LTE 
The two most important situations when the Random 
Access (RA) procedure is initiated by a device are: when it is 
turned on and it has no allocated uplink resources, and when 
handing over from one eNB to another. The devices can send 
their access request only on the allocated PRACH, which 
consists of 6 Resource Blocks (RB). There are 16 different 
RA resource configurations for different system bandwidth 
and different number of cells per eNB. LTE allows two types 
of RA procedure: contention based where the devices 
compete for the channel access, and contention-free. The first 
one is used by UEs for initial establishing a connection and 
synchronization, while the second one is reserved only for 
new downlink requests or handover, which are very time-
sensitive operations [6]. The contention-based RA procedure 
has four steps: 
Step 1: Preamble Transmission: The RA procedure begins 
with the selection (from a predefined set) of a preamble, 
which is used as a signature.  Each device randomly selects 
one of the 64-Ncf orthogonal pseudo-random preambles, 
reserved for contention-free requests, without knowing 
which is already selected or used. When the cell size is large, 
a longer preamble will improve the reliability of reception at 
the cell edge. If a preamble is selected by more than one 
device, a collision can occur in step 3. Otherwise, the 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

different preambles are easily detected by eNB because of 
orthogonality. After the transmission is completed, the device 
waits for the response from eNB.  
Step 2: Random Access Response: For each successfully 
decoded preamble, the eNB sends a random access response 
(RAR) on the PDSCH, and a Random Access Radio Network 
Temporary Identifier (RA-RNTI), which identifies the time-
frequency slot where the preamble was detected. The RAR 
message includes the identity of the detected preamble, a 
timing alignment instruction to synchronize the uplink 
transmission, an initial uplink resource grant for transmission 
of the “step 3” message, an assignment of a temporary Cell 
Radio Network Temporary Identifier (C-RNTI), and a back-
off indicator, which determines the waiting time before a new 
RA attempt. Each device expects to receive the RAR within 
a time window, specified and broadcasted by eNB. The  
earliest subframe can occur 2 ms after the end of the preamble 
sub-frame but typical delay is 4 ms. If the device does not 
receive a RAR within this time window, it selects and 
transmits another preamble. If multiple devices select the 
same preamble in the same time-frequency resource, they 
would both receive the same RAR. 
Step 3: Connection Request: The “step 3” message is the 
first scheduled uplink transmission on the Physical Uplink 
Shared Channel (PUSCH) sent using HARQ. It conveys the 
C-RNTI and the actual RA message, such as Radio Resource 
Control (RRC) connection request or scheduling request. If 
multiple devices select the same preamble in step 1, these 
devices will be allocated the same time-frequency resource 
by eNB, and a collision will occur at the eNB. If no 
acknowledgement is received by the eNB, the devices will 
retransmit the same message after the timeout expires.  
Step 4: Contention Resolution Message: The contention 
resolution message is addressed to the C-RNTI as an answer 
to the connection request message, which is sent in step 3. 
Upon reception of the contention resolution message there 
are three possibilities: 1) the UE correctly decodes the 
message, detects its own identity and sends back a positive 
ACK; 2) the UE correctly decodes the message, discovers 
that it contains another device’s identity, then it sends nothing 
back; 3) the UE fails to decode the message or misses the 
resource allocation.  
III. 
RACH CHALLENGES AND POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS 
A. RACH Challanges 
As mentioned above, one of the major characteristic of 
M2M communication is the unprecedented high number of 
devices which leads to much higher access request rate as 
compared to H2H communication. Many devices may 
simultaneously try to connect to the network to send only 
small amounts of data. So the bottleneck is not high network 
traffic in general but the burst traffic created during accessing 
the channel. The high collision probability (CP) and low 
success rate in network access will cause unexpected access 
delays, waste of resources, and extra energy consumption. 
Our simulation results (Table 1) confirm that while for 
uniform distribution of the access requests (typical for H2H 
– light grey) the burst arrival traffic (typical for M2M – dark 
grey) creates much larger CP and AD for large number of 
devices.  
TABLE I.  
RACH RESULTS FOR UNIFORM AND BURST ARRIVALS 
Performance 
Metrics 
 
Number of Devices 
5000 
15000 
25000 
30000 
Collision Probability 
(CP) 
0.005% 
0.05% 
0.16% 
0.23% 
0.39% 
5.23% 
42.63% 
46.49% 
Access Success 
Probability 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
99.9% 
38.34% 
29.11% 
Number of Preamble 
Transmissions 
1.42 
1.46 
1.49 
1.5 
1.55 
2.12 
3.36 
3.28 
Access Delay (AD) 
(ms) 
26.61 
27.67 
28.63 
28.87 
30.23 
47.45 
75.7 
80 
 
The RA procedure allows some devices to establish 
connections but does not solve the overload of repeated 
attempts. The results in Fig.2 show the increased number of 
unsuccessful attempts for burst arrival traffic. 
 
 
            Figure 1. Number of successful and collided preambles for burst 
traffic 
B. Suggested Solutions 
Efficient overload mechanisms are required for M2M 
communication over LTE. In [7], the authors suggest 
application level schemes to control the congestion by 
scheduling the M2M devices in less loaded periods 
(midnights), but these solutions bring inconvenience to the 
end user and greatly limit the application areas of M2M 
communication, making them undesirable for providers and 
costumers. 3GPP [8] defines the following major criteria for 
access methods to be used with M2M communications:  
§ 
M2M integration shouldn’t affect the H2H performance,  
§ 
Access delay should be considered predicting the 
behavior of M2M device in the radio access network 
§ 
Access methods should be easy to integrate and 
minimize the effect M2M have on the existing network. 
Complying with these major criteria there are a number 
of various solutions proposed for the primary access to the 
RACH. The main goal of our paper is to present a taxonomy 
that allows comparing these solutions and pointing out the 
areas where more research is needed. The general structure 
of the suggested taxonomy is provided in Fig.2. 
 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
Figure 2. Random Access Methods  
C. Access Class Barring Schemes 
A large group of solutions is based on Access Class 
Barring (ACB) access algorithm, where the eNB groups 
incoming requests into several classes according to their 
service requirements and broadcasts a barring factor (ACB 
parameter) and a barring time. When a device initiates the RA 
process, it draws a random number and compares it with the 
barring factor. If the number is less than the barring factor, it 
continues with its RA process, otherwise, it waits for a period 
equal to the barring time before reinitiating the RA process. 
Since the probability of collision is reduced, the throughput 
of RACH is improved but barring increases the access delay 
because devices may be barred for an undesirably long time. 
A version of ACB, the Extended Access Class Barring 
(EACB) is proposed in which delay-tolerant applications are 
not permitted to perform the RA process if there is 
congestion. [5] Thus the number of channel access attempts 
as a whole is reduced at the price of increased access delay 
for delay-tolerant applications.  
Lien et al [10] proposed a Cooperative Access Class 
Barring (CACB) scheme in a heterogeneous multi-tier 
network with picocells and macrocells. In this scheme, 
neighboring eNBs select the barring factor jointly based on 
the network congestion level. CACB achieves around 30% 
improvement both in the average access delay and the worst 
case delay performance. A major drawback is that it requires 
devices to be located in more than one eNBs coverage area. 
Hsu et al [11] proposed the Enhanced Cooperative ACB 
(ECACB), where they add the number of M2M devices 
attached to an eNB to determine the M2M device access 
probability and obtain the barring factor. The ECACB  
 
continues to monitor the M2M resource allocation after the 
devices have been successfully attached to network. It 
presents a new RRM method that reserves a fixed amount of 
Physical RBs (PRBs) for M2M devices. The number of 
reserved PRBs is based on the access rate of M2M device. 
Results show that ECACB has a lower access delay than 
CACB even in the worst case scenario. Duan et al [12] 
proposed a Dynamic ACB (DACB) scheme to reduce the 
congestion in RACH.  Their goal is to manage the access 
attempts of the M2M devices instead of dismissing the access 
requests. They propose a novel algorithm that reduces both 
congestion and access delay by changing the barring factor 
adaptively. As expected reducing of access delay is reduced 
but at the price of increased complexity since continuous 
monitoring is required. The authors of [13] use ACB 
mechanism together with timing advance information to 
reduce the RA overload. A novel algorithm is proposed to 
estimate the number of devices requiring access to the eNB 
in a given RA slot. They try to find the optimal ACB using 
the fact that for stationary devices propagation delay is nearly 
constant. Each device stores the timing advance value for a 
successful RA run, and compares it with the timing advance 
value in the next RA run. If the two are the same, the device 
continues to send the connection request message in step 3. 
Results show that using ACB together with time advance 
information allows around 50% of the RA slots be saved for 
M2M devices when compared to other schemes, which use 
only timing advance information, only ACB, or only 
cooperative ACBs.  
The main advantage of ACB based solutions is the 
decreased probability of collision; however, the access delay 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

may be increased a lot and is difficult to predict. This is 
unacceptable for delay-intolerant emergency applications 
and event-driven applications where the congestion can rise 
considerably in very short periods of time. An interesting 
point is covered in the [14]. Using simulation, the study 
investigates the RACH performance based on a combination 
of different barring factors (0.9, 0.7, 0.5) and different RA 
attempt periods (10 s, 60 s). While almost all devices access 
the network successfully when the attempt period is set to 60 
s, for the same barring factor the access probability falls to 
60-70% when the attempt period is reduced to 10 s, i.e., for 
short attempt periods the barring factor considerably affects 
the collision rate and the access probability. The results 
provide valuable insight into the operation of ACB schemes 
under light and congested conditions. 
D. Slotted Schemes 
In telecommunication systems, media access is either 
contention-based (Aloha, CSMA in IEEE 802.11), or is 
channelized, where the frequency or time is shared between 
users based on pre-defined slots (FDMA, TDMA). The main 
advantages of TDMA-type access methods are that there is 
no collision and slots can be assigned on demand. However, 
slotted-type methods require very precise synchronization. 
3GPP proposed [5] a slotted access method for RA in which 
the slots are dedicated to M2M devices and each M2M device 
only accesses in its dedicated slot.  However, such 
contention-free mechanisms are exclusive to two use cases: 
when the device is in connected state but needs uplink 
synchronization information to be able to transmit positive or 
negative ACK or when the device is performing handover 
from one cell to another.  
Slotted mechanisms, well known from many MAC layer 
protocols, solve collision issues but for their operation the 
number of participating devices has to be known ahead. 
Previous research in some related areas (i.e., wireless sensor 
networks) has shown that very good results in terms of 
resource efficiency can be achieved if slotted schemes are 
combined as two stage solutions with contention based 
methods. How approaches like these can be utilized in the 
context of M2M communications is a research area to be 
exploited in the future.  
E. Preamble Splitting Schemes 
One of the main criteria for integrating M2M 
communication over LTE is minimizing the effects of M2M 
communication on H2H communication performance. 3GPP 
described 64 different preambles for random access 
procedure that are used by both M2M and H2H devices. So 
the probability of selecting the same preamble will increase, 
degrading H2H devices. For this reason, some researchers 
investigate the possibilities for separation of RA preambles 
for M2M and H2H devices as an indirect way of reducing 
congestion and ensuring QoS. Lee et al [15] compare the 
throughput of two methods for separating RA preambles. The 
first method is to completely split the set of available RA 
preambles into two disjoint subsets one for M2M and one 
H2H communication. The other method is split the set into 
two subsets – one individually for H2H devices, the other 
common for both H2H and M2M devices. They demonstrate 
that method 2 is slightly better than method 1, but their 
proposal does not examine the effects on decreasing the 
congestion. Another study on splitting preambles is [16], 
where Kim et al propose the Adaptive RA Preamble Splitting 
(PS) to evaluate three history-based PS schemes in terms of 
access success rate by using the ratio of non-contention based 
RA preambles to the total number of RA preambles. These 
and some other studies using PS show that access success 
probability can be increased but they do not discuss the 
effects these methods have on delay performance.  
F. Resource Allocation 
Another approach to combat congestion on the RACH 
channel is to separate the RACH resources for H2H and 
M2M devices [17]. If RACH resources are shared between 
M2M and H2H devices, the large amount of M2M devices 
will negatively affect the performance of H2H devices. The 
RACH resources may be wasted by collisions created by the 
enormous amount of M2M devices trying to access the 
network. 3GPP proposed a general algorithm, Dynamic 
Separate RACH resources (DSRR) in which M2M devices 
are categorized by types and only devices of the same type 
contend for the PUSCH resources. Each M2M device listens 
to the environment before accessing the channel. If there is 
any activity from devices of the same type, it starts a 
contention process with them on the dedicated resources; 
otherwise it is permitted to contend with H2H devices in the 
PRACH by following the normal RA procedure. Separating 
M2M from H2H devices in the uplink and classifying the 
M2M devices increases the access probability for both M2M 
and H2H devices as well as ensures the performance and 
access delay for H2H communication. In [18], the authors 
focus on RA opportunities (RAOs) for group paging. Group 
paging is a RAN overload control scheme that uses a single 
paging message to inform a group of M2M devices for 
system information changes and emergency notifications. In 
group paging, the eNB assigns a unique group identity to a 
group of M2M devices. When the group of devices receives 
the paging message, the devices simultaneously transmit 
randomly chosen RAOs in the first RA slot. The RA 
preamble is determined in terms of RAOs and the number of 
RAO is equal to the number of frequency bands in RA slot 
times the number of preambles. When a collision occurs, the 
collided M2M device will perform the back-off algorithm 
and perform RA procedure with a new chosen RAO in a new 
RA slot. Because with group paging the number of devices 
decreases, it is suggested to dynamically allocate RAOs in 
each RA slot. The proposed method improves the utilization 
of resources by at least 65% compared to static RAO 
allocations. Oh et al [19] propose a Dynamic Access Control 
and RACH Resource Allocation algorithm, which has two 
phases; “estimating the number of M2M devices” and 
“access control and RAOs allocation”. The last two studies 
are similar in the sense that they adjust the RAOs, however 
the first one applies it to group paging, while the other one 
integrates it with an ACB mechanism. Both show that 
improving the utilization of RAOs maximizes the RA 
efficiency while guaranteeing the average delay. Lo et al [20] 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

propose a novel overload control scheme called Self-
Optimizing Overload Control Scheme (SOOC). SOOC 
integrates several multiple control schemes (RACH resource 
separation scheme, the ACB, the SAS and the p-persistent 
scheme) in order to provide a more efficient, step-by-step 
congestion control. A M2M device can easily detect an 
overload on the PRACH channel when it fails to receive a 
response in the step 4. It assumes there is a state ofnetwork 
overload and performs an ACB algorithm as described 
before. Since the collided devices would collide again in the 
next RA slot, the p-persistent algorithm is used to minimize 
the chance of a second collision. In the p-persistent algorithm, 
a device senses the medium and if found idle, transmits with 
probability p, or else keeps sensing the medium continuously 
until it becomes idle and then transmits with probability p. A 
small p leads to long access delay. In SOOC, each device 
keeps track of the overload indicator and increases it when an 
access attempt fails. This situation also means that the 
congestion level of the PRACH channel is rising. That is why 
each device includes the overload indicator in the step 3 
message and according to that the eNB dynamically increases 
or decreases the number of RA-Slots for PRACH. 
Unfortunately, the algorithm proposed in this paper is not 
supported by any simulation or theoretical results.  
Separating RACH resources can reduce the impact on 
H2H devices by only slightly reducing the M2M 
communication performance as compared to the non-separate 
RACH case [14]. However, the improvement is limited at 
high congestion levels. The study also shows that while the 
dynamic allocation of RACH resources increases the general 
performance, under heavy traffic the PUSCH resources are 
extensively allocated for RA procedure.  
G. Back-off Scheme 
The methods in this group explore different possibilities 
of adjusting back-off time after collision to regulate the RA 
procedure. In [21], it is proposed to prioritize H2H devices 
by using a separate back-off scheme. If the random back-off 
time for M2M devices is based on a separate back-off 
parameter, larger than the one assigned to H2H devices, 
M2M devices will perform RA after a longer time. This 
increases the success probability for H2H devices. Jian et al 
[22] suggest M2M class-dependent back-off prioritization to 
reduce the RACH overload in RAN. They also propose to 
combine back-off scheme with ACB to control the number of 
devices that are allowed to start the RA procedure. The 
suggested algorithm consists of two stages; the ACB stage 
and the class-dependent back-off stage. The results show that 
the probability of collision is reduced and the throughput 
improved by 2-5%. But the disadvantage of this algorithm is 
increasing the access delay. Bello et al [23] propose a Q-
learning based RA scheme (QL-RACH) where a virtual RA 
slot frame (M2M-frame) is designed specifically for M2M 
devices. Each RA slot keeps a value according to the success 
probability in the virtual frame and this value is used in the 
future to find the best slot for placing an access request. Here 
the back-off scheme is implemented on top of QL-RACH. 
Both H2H and M2M devices can use the same frame for 
initial access. However, after a collision, H2H and M2M 
devices use different back-off frames, which are restricted for 
each group, M2M devices cannot transmit in H2H frames and 
vice versa.  The results show an enormous throughput 
increase by around 70%, but the incurred access delay is not 
discussed.  
Back-off based schemes have only limited potential to 
improve overall performance and cannot handle overload if 
the intensity of arrivals is very high. However, they give good 
results when combined with other schemes; a research 
question, which can be pursued further [13]. 
H. Group&Cluster-Based Scheme 
In many cases it is required that applications are grouped 
into clusters based on a specific criteria like; geographic 
location, application type, QoS requirements, etc. and it is 
convenient that M2M devices access the RA slot as a group. 
In the M2M architecture proposed by 3GPP, the resource 
restricted M2M devices connect to an M2M gateway, which 
communicates with the eNB on their behalf. Cluster-based 
access methods have been exploited in WSN quite a lot to 
provide promising results (e.g. the LEACH protocol, which 
introduced a revolutionary distributed cluster formation 
technique enabling self-organization of large number of 
nodes [24]). Such ideas are quite relevant to M2M 
communications where clusters can be help increase the 
efficiency in using the RACH. Kim et al [25] propose to use 
spatial clustering of devices for preamble reuse during the RA 
procedure (ERA SGRPA). Preamble reuse for two different 
devices is suggested when the difference of preamble 
detection time is larger than the delay spread. All group 
parameters such as number of groups, a set of group distance, 
and a set of preambles allocated for each group are 
broadcasted by eNB. Each device knows its distance from the 
eNB through the RSS value and determines the affiliated 
group in a distance based manner. Then, each device selects 
a preamble set, allocated for its group to start the RA 
procedure. The proposed method reduces the probability of 
collision to 1.65% when the number of devices in a cell is 
50.000, which is about 9 times less than conventional RA 
schemes. Another scheme proposed by Lee et al [26] uses 
location information to form groups. Changes in the RA 
procedure adapt it to group-based communication. An M2M 
device periodically transmits the group preamble on behalf of 
all members. When the eNB receives the group preamble, it 
sends multiple RARs, which carry information for uplink 
grant in a RAR-window. Then, each device selects a RAR in 
the frame and gets the uplink grant. The results show 
considerable enhancement in the access delay where 95% of 
the devices successfully complete the RA procedure within 
200 ms, which is 40% higher than the devices in legacy RA 
procedure. A main drawback is that the number of devices in 
each group must be known before dedicating the resources.  
Kao et al [27] propose a two-stage group based RA scheme 
to reduce the collision of M2M devices. The RA procedure is 
controlled by the M2M gateway for each group. The first 
M2M device to send a RA request becomes a group leader 
(M2M gateway) and the eNB broadcasts its identity to all 
group members. Data transmission is done at two stages: 
Local Network Stage (LNS) – between M2M device and 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

M2M gateway - and Global Network Stage (GNS) - between 
M2M gateway and eNB. Devices contend to send requests to 
the M2M gateway and the M2M gateway assigns them a RA 
slot. Each M2M device waits for the arrival of the allocated 
RA slot and an ACK from the M2M gateway. Finally, the 
device can perform the ordinary RA procedure on the 
allocated RA slot. There is no priority between M2M devices 
and they perform the local contention within the group before 
GNS. The results show that the access probability is 
increased nearly 7 times compared to traditional schemes; 
however the authors do not discuss the delay problem.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In this study, we have discussed existing methods for 
controlling the RA procedures in M2M networks. We have 
pointed out three major problems arising from the abundance 
of devices trying to connect to the network simultaneously: 
increased collisions creating congestion and extreme delays, 
reduced throughput and reduced QoS for H2H users. We 
have suggested a taxonomy of the existing solutions and 
provided their comparative evaluation. ACB based methods 
alleviate collisions, preamble splitting methods help preserve 
the H2H QoS but both lead to uncontrollable delays. 
Resource allocation methods score well on both counts but 
reduce the general throughput, similar to back-off based ones. 
Finally, most promising are cluster based and adaptive, two-
stage solutions, which require further research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The Internet of Things: 
a survey,” Computer Networks, vol. 54, no. 15, pp. 2787–
2805, Oct. 2010.  
[2] 
Cisco Systems, Visual Networking Index. Available: 
http://www.cisco.com/c/dam/assets/sol/sp/vni/forecast_highli
ghts_mobile/index.html, July 2016. 
[3] 
G. Andrews, H. Claussen, M. Dohler, S. Rangan, and M. C. 
Reed, “Femtocells: Past, present, and future,” IEEE J. Sel. 
Areas Comm., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 497–508, Apr. 2012. 
[4] 
3GPP TR 22.868 V8.5.0, “TSG Service and System Aspects,” 
Study on Facilitating M2M Comm. in 3GPP Systems, Mar. 
2007. 
[5] 
3GPP TR 37.868, “RAN Improvements for Machine-type 
Communication”, 3GPP Technical Specification Group 
Services and System Aspects (Release 11), 2011. 
[6] 
S. Sesia, I. Toufik, and M. Baker, Eds., LTE, the UMTS long 
term evolution: From theory to practice. UK, Wiley-
Blackwell, pp. 371-406, 2011.  
[7] 
33GPP:TSG-RAN-WG2-69, “RACH congestion for MTC,” 
3GPP TSG RAN WG2 69bis,Beijing, China, 2010.  
[8] 
3GPP:R2-105623, “Comparison on RAN loading control 
schemes for MTC,” Alcatel-Lucent, Alcatel-Lucent Shanghai 
Bell, 2010.  
[9] 
3GPP:R2-100182, “Access control of MTC devices,” 3GPP 
TSG RAN WG2 Meeting 68bis, Valencia, Spain, 2010. 
[10] S.Y. Lien, T.H. Liau, C.Y. Kao, and K.C. Chen, “Cooperative 
access class barring for M2M communi-cations,” IEEE Trans. 
Wireless Comm., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 27–32, Jan. 2012.  
[11] Y.H. Hsu, K. Wang, and Y.C. Tseng, “Enhanced cooperative 
access class barring and traffic adaptive radio resource 
management for M2M communications over LTE-A,” 
APSIPA, pp. 1–6, Oct. 2013.  
[12] S. Duan and V.W.S. Wong, “Dynamic access class barring for 
M2M communications in LTE networks,” Proc. of IEEE 
GLOBECOM, Altlanta, GA, Dec. 2013.  
[13] Z. Wang and V.W.S. Wong, “Optimal Access Class Barring 
for Stationary Machine Type Communication Devices with 
Timing Advance Information,” IEEE Trans. On Wireless 
Comm., vol. 14, no. 10, pp 5374-5387, Oct. 2015. 
[14] 3GPP:TSG-RAN-WG2-71, “MTC simulation results with 
specific solutions,” 3GPP TSG RAN WG2 #71, Madrid, 
Spain, 2010. 
[15] K.-D. Lee, S. Kim, and B. Yi, “Throughput comparison of 
random access methods for M2M service over LTE 
networks,” Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM Workshops, pp. 373-
377, Dec. 2011.  
[16] D. Kim, W. Kim, and S. An, “Adaptive RA preamble split in 
LTE,” 9th IWCMC, pp. 814–819, July. 2013.  
[17] 3GPP:R2-113328, “Dynamic separate RACH resources for 
MTC,” 3GPP TSG RAN WG2 74, Institute for Information 
Industry (III), Coiler Corporation, 2011. 
[18] R.Cheng, F.A.Taee, J.Chen, and C.Wei, “Dynamic resource 
allocation scheme for group paging in LTE-A networks,” 
IEEE IoT Journal, vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 427–434, Oct. 2015.  
[19] C. Oh, D. Hwang, and T. Lee, “Joint Access Control and 
Resource Allocation for Concurrent and Massive Access of 
M2M Devices,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. PP, no. 
99, pp. 4182–4292, Aug. 2015.  
[20] A. Lo, Y. Law, M. Jacobsson, and M. Kucharzak, “Enhanced 
LTE-Advanced Random-Access Mechanism for Massive 
Machine-to- Machine (M2M) Communications,” Proc. 27th 
Meeting of Wireless World Research Form, Oct. 2011.   
[21] 3GPP:TSG-RAN2-70, “Separate backoff scheme for MTC,” 
3GPP TSG RAN2 70bis,Stockholm, Sweden, 2010.  
[22] X. Jian, Y. Jia, X. Zeng, and J. Yang, “A novel class-
dependent back-off scheme for machine type communication 
in lte systems,” Wireless and Optical Communication 
Conference (WOCC), pp. 135–140, 2013.  
[23] L.M. Bello, P. Mitchell, D.Grace, and T. Mickus, “Q-Learning 
Based RA with Collision free RACH Interactions for Celullar 
M2M,” Next Gen. Mobile App. Services and Tech., pp. 78-
83, 2015. 
[24] W. B. Heinzelman, A. P. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, 
“An application-specific protocol architecture for wireless 
microsensor networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Comm., vol. 1, 
no. 4, pp. 660 – 670, Oct. 2002.  
[25] T. Kim, H. S. Jang, and D. K. Sung, “An Enhanced Random 
Access Scheme with Spatial Group Based Reusable Preamble 
Allocation in Cellular M2M Networks,” IEEE Commun. 
Lett., vol. 19, no. 10, pp. 1714-1717, 2015. 
[26] K. Lee et al., “A group-based communication scheme based 
on the location information of MTC devices in cellular 
networks,” Proc. IEEE ICC, pp. 4899-4903, Jun. 2012. 
[27] H.W. Kao, Y.H. Ju, and M.H. Tsai, “Two-stage radio access 
for group-based machine type communication in LTE-A,”  on 
IEEE International Conference on Communications, pp. 
3825-3830, June 2015. 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

