Intelligent Wearables
Alexiei Dingli
University Of Malta
alexiei.dingli@um.edu.mt
Luca Bondin
University Of Malta
luca.bondin.13@um.edu.mt
Abstract— Wearable devices are ever more becoming an asset
in our everyday lives. This shift to ubiquitous computing has
also led to the development of systems that make these
wearable devices behave intelligently according to a user’s
need,
when
deployed
in
various
scenarios.
The
system
discussed here, is envisaged to be deployed in a tourism
environment as a personalized suggestion generation that
relays information back to the user through an Augmented
Reality framework. The implementation explored the use of
various techniques in literature, and a series of tests were
performed in order to evaluate the system’s personalization
capabilities and its perceived efficiency. The Precision rate
obtained was 81%, while Recall and F-Measure, stood at 60%
and 65% respectively. Future work on this study opens the
door to the implementation of such systems that allow for the
development of intelligent wearable devices that can be both
useful in increasing accessibility or simply entertainment.
Keywords-
Profiling;
Ontology;
Augmented
Reality;
Intelligent recommendations; Implicit data gathering; Explicit
data gathering; rule-based approach; Synsets; Precision; Recall;
F-measure; tf-idf
I.
INTRODUCTION
Artificial
Intelligence
(AI)
“is
the
science
and
engineering of making intelligent machines, especially
intelligent computer programs” [1]. Therefore, it is fair to
conclude that the design and implementation Intelligent
Wearable devices, devices that can adapt to the user’s needs
and behavior, is at the very core the field of Artificial
Intelligence. We are now witnessing a shift to ubiquitous
computing that has made it possible to have intelligent
systems operate as effectively on mobile devices, and
deployed in various scenarios without compromising on
performance while incorporating new technologies such as
Augmented Reality. One scenario where such systems can be
deployed effectively is in the tourism domain in the form of
Landmark Recommendation engines for tourists.
The tourism industry is an ever growing industry which
caters for people of all ages, who come from various areas of
life and more importantly, whose travel interests tend to
differ. One such major difference would be that, while
members of the older generations tend to prefer going on
organized tours where a person is giving out information
about any landmarks in the surroundings, members of the
younger generation would rather roam freely about the city
discovering what there is to be discovered by themselves. In
addition, people tend to look out for different attractions
when they are abroad which vary from tourist to tourist
depending on the person’s interests.
The development of wearable devices that behave
intelligently, and that can be deployed in such scenarios
would not only be interesting from the point of view of
research, but also a step into what will soon be the norm for
most devices we have around us [6][8]. The aim of this
research is to make such wearables act intelligently by
having the device generate recommendations tailor made for
the
individual.
Acting
intelligently
also
involves
the
presentation of relevant information to the user at the time
when this is actually required. Such tasks involve the
implementation of user-profiling mechanisms in order to be
able to understand the traits of the user and in turn generate
recommendations that are as accurate as possible. Deployed
in the aforementioned domain, such devices would ensure
that any tourist visiting a foreign city gets the opportunity to
explore the city better, without hindering his visit with the
cumbersome tasks of having to carry with him devices which
are not very user friendly. Therefore, finding the right
techniques with which to gather information, present it in
structured formats, and, more importantly, infer user traits
from the data at hand, is pivotal in the creation of such
systems.
Section 2 gives an insight into the Aims and Objectives
that this paper aims to achieve. While Section 3 provides an
overview of related work, Sections 4 and 5 provide a
description of the design and the implementation of the
system respectively. Section 6 presents the results from the
evaluation carried out and Section 7 provides an insight into
future work. Finally, Section 8 provides a conclusion for the
work carried out.
II.
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
The aim of this research is to investigate the best
practices and techniques of building an accurate user profile
from social media, to provide accurate recommendations that
will sustain the operations of the intelligent wearable device.
In order to achieve this, the following objectives were
identified:
1.
Building and representing a user profile from any
source of data relevant to the cause and ensuring that
mechanisms employed keep a representative profile which is
up-to-date. Returning the recommendations of landmarks
which
may
be
interesting
to
a
user,
and
extracting
information from web sources to be returned to the system
user.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

2.
Through the use of the mobile application notify the
user whenever he is close to the landmark and provide on
screen tailored information through an augmented reality
framework.
The extent to which each of these objectives was satisfied
by this study is as follows:
•
The first objective was ultimately achieved through
the personalization component. Through the tests performed
accuracy results for this component were recorded at 0.81
precision average, 0.6 recall average and 0.65 f-measure
average.
•
The second objective was achieved through the
information visualization component.
III.
RELATED WORK
Research
carried
out
focused
primarily
on
personalization systems, mainly on how to construct efficient
and effective user profiles. The ultimate goal of user-
adaptive systems is to provide users with what they need
without them asking for it explicitly. The idea of Automatic
Personalization is central to such systems [2]. The ability of
a personalization system to tailor content and recommend
items implies that it must be able to infer what a user
requires on previous and current interactions with the user.
Tourist recommendation systems are all the more becoming
an integral contributor to the concept of e-tourism services.
Most recommendation systems tend to focus on helping the
user select the travel destination while others tend to focus
only on some aspects of the holiday. For example, Entrée [3]
uses domain knowledge about restaurants, foods and cuisines
to recommend restaurants to users while MastroCARonte
provides personalized tourist information (hotels,restaurants,
places to see or visit) on-board vehicles. In 2012, F.-M. Hsu
et al. [9], came up with an intelligent recommendation
system for tourist attractions [8]. Similarly, one can find
CAPA, a personalised restaurant recommender that rather
than being browser based, works on a mobile device.
Systems such as the GUIDE system [4] and WebGuide [5]
give the user a personalised experience when visiting cities
such as Lancaster, Heidelberg and Vienna, through the way
in which information is fed back to him. Other systems such
as IMA provide services in a wide geographical area.
CRUMPET
proposes
touristic
sights’
and
uses
advertisements to promote all kinds of services that may be
helpful to any tourist [9].
IV.
DESIGN
For development purposes, the system was drawn up into
a
number
of
components
and
subcomponents
that
communicate with each other to achieve the final goal of an
application that works on a wearable device. Figure 1, shows
an abstract representation of the proposed system and its
main components. For the scope of this study, Android
mobile applications, especially in view of the ease with
which to create such applications, are ideal to implement the
application component while Apache servers provide an
ideal platform on which to host server side scripts that help
the application with its tasks. Having the system planned out
in this manner return provides many advantages mainly for
the fact that by delegating the heaviest tasks to the server, the
application on the mobile device can focus its resources on
other areas. Also, any future updates to the system would
Login Handler
Information
Extraction
Component
Information
Visualization
Component
Data Transmitter
Personalization
Component
Landmark Detection
Component
Suggestion
Generation
Component
Landmark Database
Two way
communication
between
Application and Server
Preprocessed data is sent on
for suggestions to be generated
Detected landmarks are
stored in the database
Landmark information
is sent
over to be suggested
Login Handler gives
access to Facebook profile
Component passes on user info
to be transmitted to the server
Retrieved information is
sent on for visualization
Apache Linux Server
Android Application Component
Figure 1. A diagram of the proposed system.
require the alteration of some scripts on the server rather than
having to modify the application’s structure.
The first major component of the system is the Android
Application
component,
which
is
first
and
foremost
responsible for handling login operations that will in turn ask
for information from a about the user and then triggering and
handling the results obtained by the operations of the other
sub components. For this function, social media was
considered, mainly due to the fact that social media accounts
tend to have an enormous amount of wealth of information
about the user. The second component is an Apache Linux
server component that through communication with the
application that will be deployed on a wearable device,
reduces much of the computational burden from the
application
side
by
handling
the
more
cumbersome
components of the system mainly, the personalization
component. This component is also responsible for handling
the presentation of the final system results.
The application component, as shown in the diagram
below has a number of sub-components each responsible for
handling specific tasks that give the application, and the
whole system, its functionality. These components include a
login
handler
component,
an
Information
Extraction
component, a JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) transmitter
and an Information Visualization Component. The Login
Handler component, as the name suggests is responsible for
handling social media login requests by the user and works
in tandem with the Information Extraction component to
obtain the required information from the social media
profile. Given that the application must in some form or
another send and also receive data from the second
component, the JSON transmitter component is critical for
what the system is trying to achieve. This component
provides
the
means
of
communication
between
the
application and the server through the device’s network
services. The final module in the application component is
the Information Visualization component. This component is
responsible for displaying graphically the information that
the application component receives from the server. Taking
into consideration the various types of wearable devices, the
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

most suitable device for such this proposed system is a head-
mounting device. However, this is not its only use, as this
component is also responsible for handling location tracking
for
the
device
and
also
for
performing
arithmetical
operations to know when the device is actually required to
display the retrieved information.
The server component has a number of sub-components
as well, which components are responsible for handling
specific tasks in relation to the personalization capabilities of
the system. These components include a personalization
module that prepares the received data for the generation of
recommendations, and a Suggestion Generation module. The
latter is tasked with building the user profile from the
information retrieved from the application, and generating
the suggestions based on the user profile built earlier. These
suggestions are then transmitted back to application. In
addition to these two modules, the server component also
consists of a database that contains the information about
landmarks in the city being visited, from which the
suggestions are to be drawn.
V.
IMPLEMENTATION
A.
Information Gathering
The first task of the application is to gather information
about the user. As previously discussed, this information is
to be extracted from social media profiles and for this reason
Facebook was chosen as the platform from which to gather
the required information. The choice to go for this particular
social media platform stems from the fact that as of 2016 it is
estimated that Facebook has 1.59 billion users and therefore
it is fair to say that it is one of the most popular platforms in
the area. More importantly, Facebook profiles tend to be
much more indicative about their users given the type of
information people share.
Facebook’s Graph API is
therefore used to obtain the desired information which
information varies from personal information, such as
demographics, to particular likes such as interests, artistic
groups, and so on. The information is supplemented with
information from the user’s social media feed in order to
ground it within a temporal context. The idea is to make the
harvesting of the information as implicit as possible
requiring only a minimal amount of explicit data input from
the user.
The user’s 100 most recent likes and 25 most
recent posts to his or her social media profile are taken into
consideration and are later on analyzed to achieve the
personalization objective. This amount of data is ideal since
it finds a balance between having just about the right amount
of data to be able to perform user profiling without
overloading the application with information to be sent to the
server, and eventually read back, making the application
process too slow. In addition, this amount of information
provides an ideal temporal context that makes sure that the
information being used to achieve personalization is in fact
based on the user’s most recent activity which is indicative
of his or her present interests.
B.
User Personalisation
The first step in user personalization involves preparing
the data for analysis. Essentially what this step does is that it
receives the data and performs tokenization and stop-word
removal. For the purpose of this implementation sentences
were tokenized in order to be able to see the data in the form
of words which makes it more practical to analyze. Stop-
word removal, on the other hand, removes from a list of
words very commonly occurring words that more often than
not do not have any relevance to the subject of the sentence.
Through
the
application
of
stop-word
removal
it
is
ascertained that the tokens that will be analyzed actually
have a certain degree of importance and would actually
contribute to the end result to be obtained by the system.
Finally, after applying the aforementioned techniques, the
system uses an ontology, in this case WordNet, in order to
find the synonyms of all the remaining tokens in the
gathered data. At the end of this process, the system is left
with two data items that are crucial for the continuation of
the profiling process. These are the list of remaining words
after applying stop-word removal and a list of words with
their synonyms.
Upon termination of the first phase, the
data next needed to be passed on for further processing.
C.
User Profiling
User profiling can only start taking place when the data
is
properly
prepared
after
completion
of
the
above
mentioned steps. However not until a further few steps are
carried out, can the actual task of building the user profile
be carried out. The first of these steps involves the
introduction of tf-idf in order to be able to classify the words
in the gathered data according to their importance.
What
this means is that if a word occurs more times than others
then it will have a higher tf-idf value than the other words,
which is precisely what is needed in this case.
For the
purpose of this implementation, the corpus includes all the
information retrieved from the user’s profile.
Through
calculation of tf-idf values the system creates a data
structure consisting of data-pairs where each pair contains
the word and its perceived importance, and how it is able to
identify the most commonly occurring words. These words
are considered to be the most important words which in turn
will be used to base any assumptions for building the user
profile. This reasoning stems from the thought that if a
person talks or searches about some specific things, then
one can deduct that the person is interested in these things.
Consequently, these most commonly occurring words are
considered to be indicative of the user’s interests. For the
purpose of this study the 200 most commonly occurring
words are taken into consideration. It was felt that such a
dataset size can give a sufficiently vast dataset on which to
perform the remaining tasks.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

1)
Building the user profile
User-profiling
adopts
a
hybrid
approach
between
Weighted
Key-word
representation
and
the
Semantic
representation. It finally employs categorization into specific
groups in order to improve uniformity.
There are twelve
identified categories which are: “photography”, “shopping”,
“history”, “military”, “food”, “religion”, “art”, “technology”,
“science”, “music”, “sport” and “nature”. These identified
categories also correspond to the categories of landmarks as
classified by TripAdvisor.
For each interest category
identified, the synonyms were also identified once again
through WordNet as a reference ontology, and the use of
Node.js modules.
The profiling process is split up into three phases in order
to ensure utmost veracity when the final results are achieved.
The first stage involves comparing a set of words, deemed to
be the most frequently used words by the user after analysis
of the gathered data to the groups that correspond best to the
landmark categories. Thus if the list of most commonly
occurring words contains some word that is found in the list
of identified interests, then that particular interest category is
marked as relevant. Although this is one form of classifying
the user, it was deemed too trivial and too risky when
considering the result accuracy.
As a second measure of
profiling the word ontology results are introduced by which
the system compares the synonyms of the most frequently
used words to the stereotype categories.
To further
complement this, in the final stage of categorization, the
system also looks at the synonyms of the landmark types and
performs one final check in order to categorize the user into
the most representative categories based on his interests.
This ensures that if the list of most commonly occurring
words does not contain the exact name of an interest field,
then more checks are carried out to increase the chances of
obtaining a hit. At the end of this cycle the result would be a
user profile consisting of the interest fields that are deemed
to be of interest to the user.
2)
Generating suggestions
The only remaining task to do at this stage for the system
is to generate the recommendations. The identified interest
fields have a set of allocated landmarks which will, in turn,
be recommended to the user by the wearable device.
For
example, if the user profile has the ‘food’ category ticked,
then the system will return to the user a list of all the
landmarks that fall under the ‘food’ category in the landmark
database.
This database is generated through calls to the Google
Places API. These calls in addition to returning the name of
the landmark, its geographical location and reviews about the
place, also returns a list of categories under which these
landmarks can be classified.
It is through these returned
categories that the landmarks are classified in the landmark
database and eventually recommended back to the user. This
component makes the system extremely flexible, in the sense
that with just a simple update of the landmark database
through API calls, the system can be deployed virtually
everywhere that is covered by Google Maps.
These
suggested landmarks are then returned to be visualized on
screen.
D.
Information Visualization
The final component of the system is the Information
Visualization
component,
which
is
responsible
for
visualising the suggestions on the wearable device and
which is implemented in its entirety on the application side.
In order to achieve a functional Location-based Augmented
Reality,
which
is
the
approach
chosen
for
this
implementation, the undertaking of the following steps was
necessary prior to the actual Augmented Reality framework
construction:
• Getting the GPS location of the device
• Getting the GPS location of destination point
• Calculation of the theoretical azimuth based on GPS data
• Getting the real azimuth of the device
• Comparing both azimuths based on accuracy to then call
an event
1)
User Location and Azimuth Angles
Keeping
in
mind
the
application’s
objective,
it
is
imperative for the application to constantly know the user’s
location in order to be able to augment the user’s view with
information that is relevant to landmark which is in view.
Location details are obtained through the device’s GPS
whereby, with the use of listeners, the user’s coordinates are
updated
periodically.
This
was
implemented
by
GoogleApiClient requesting location updates at a predefined
interval between each request. When the application senses
that there is a change in movement, location is updated.
The system must also calculate the user’s azimuth angle
since the implementation approach chosen is based on the
geodesy theory. Calculation of this angle is necessary for
triggering the on-screen visualization of the landmark
information, and the process of getting this calculation relies
heavily on the use of the device’s sensors.
2)
Object Identification
Location data is pivotal to achieve whatever needs to be
done in this component since the system adopts a Location-
based Augmented Reality approach.
What this approach
entails is that the device does not know what the landmark
actually looks like, but rather where it is. Since the system is
being deployed in a scenario where it is required to suggest
landmarks to its user, this approach fits the requirement
perfectly because a landmark is hardly ever going to move,
and should it move, for example if a restaurant relocates, the
system can work just as fine with a simple update of the
landmark database.
As already mentioned the system keeps track of the
user’s location at regular intervals and this data is, in turn,
used to augment the screen with the landmark information.
Apart from this it also makes sure that whatever data is
presented on screen, it is relevant to the landmark actually in
view.
In order to be able to function, the Visualization
Component relies on the landmark data file transmitted by
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

the server.
As soon as this is available the component
becomes active. It first reads every suggested landmark from
the retrieved list, and then creates a data structure of
landmark objects where each object contains the landmark
name, its location and any relevant reviews. When the
application is fully aware of what landmarks exist then
visualization can begin.
The aim of the application is to be able to return
information on screen whenever a landmark is in view. It
does not require to have multiple pieces of information about
various landmarks at any one time on screen. This, however,
required the implementation of a method that is able to
identify the nearest Point Of Interest (POI) which would
allow the application to augment the screen with the relevant
information pertaining to the landmark which is closer to
where the user is at a point in time. It is in this manner that
Object Identification was implemented.
The application
constantly updates its knowledge about the landmarks. At
any one time it knows that when a user is at a particular
location, the nearest location is the object whose information
is to be visualized.
However, although this already achieves, to some degree,
the Object Identification requirement, it is still not enough to
display the information correctly on the screen. It is for this
reason that the application also calculates the landmark’s
azimuth angle. The application gets the co-ordinates of the
POI and forms a right angled triangle between the user’s
location, a point directly in front of the user projected on the
plane that the POI is on, and the POI location itself. Using
conventional trigonometric functions the azimuth angle is
calculated and the system would know whether to display
information on the screen or not depending on the resultant
azimuth angle.
Figure 2. Calculation of Azimuth Angle in principle. If A is where the
device is and B is the landmark, then the azimuth angle is the angle
between AB and AK.
In this manner, the application is able to perform Object
Identification quite effectively. When an augmentation is
indeed triggered, a marker appears on screen showing the
landmark together with the relevant reviews.
Figure 3. Output of the Visualization Component where the landmark is
pointed out by the icon appearing at the center of the view, and the
landmark name and any reviews are displayed at the bottom.
VI.
RESULTS AND EVALUATION
In order for the system and methodology of this study to
be evaluated properly, a number of different aspects were
analyzed. The first tests were carried out in order to analyze
the performance of the system’s personalization capabilities,
more specifically, the system’s ability to generate accurate
user profiles representing its users. In order to complete this
evaluation,
a
number
of
individuals
were
invited
to
participate in the process. Through this crowdsourcing, data
could be gathered which would in turn mock a real world
scenario where the system would be deployed, and the
system’s performance could then be analyzed.
The second tests carried out focused more on the general
deployment of such a system to a wearable device and how
would the general public, when given a wearable device that
performs in this manner, reacts to its use. This evaluation
focused on the complete package that includes both the
personalization components, and the landmark detection and
Augmented Reality components of the system, and again
involved the participation of a number of users
A.
Crowdsourcing demographic analysis
In order to determine the quality of the relevance of the
data obtained through crowdsourcing, and thus evaluate the
completion of both objectives, it is essential to analyze the
background of the test subjects that provided it. Sixty people
were
invited to participate in the evaluation through
completion of the questionnaire. The information extracted
from the demographic part of the questionnaire, consisting of
age and the user’s perceived level of use of social media, was
thus extracted and analyzed.
As can be seen from the charts in Figures 4. and 5., the
majority of the participants were between 20 and 30 years
old. The people belonging to this age group are considered to
be the most avant-garde when it comes to trying out new
technologies and are also the most active on social media
[10]. Therefore, they provide an ideal basis on which to build
the evaluation. However, other age groups were also taken
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

into
consideration
in
order
to
evaluate
the
system’s
performance according to different user behavior.
Figure 4. Pie chart showing age distribution between participants in this
study. (Source: Luca Bondin, Intelligent Wearables)
Figure 5. Pie chart showing distribution of participants according to
perceived use of Facebook (Source: Luca Bondin, Intelligent Wearables)
As for the test users’ level of use of social media, the
questionnaire asked users whether they consider themselves
as frequent Facebook users. 34 respondents said they were
regular
Facebook
users
while
the remaining
26
said
otherwise. This distribution was ideal as while the system
and the methodology could be evaluated on profiles that are
regularly updated, it could also be evaluated on other profiles
whose owners do not share as much information frequently.
B.
Profiling accuracy analysis
In order to complete the evaluation of the profiling
components of the system the participants were first asked to
explicitly mark which of the interest fields they thought best
described their interests. Next, they were asked to make use
of the system, through the aforementioned web agent, that
makes use of the system’s scripts to extract the participants’
social media profiles and generate a user profile accordingly.
The generated user profile is then compared to the interest
fields marked by the user. Given the set-up of the system and
what the system is aiming at achieving, it was decided that
calculation of Precision and Recall values was the optimal
way of evaluating the accuracy and suitability of the system
for the purpose it is intended. Finally, F-Measure is used to
provide a single measurement for the system.
The average Precision rate obtained by the system was
0.81 meaning that there is an 81% chance that the system
will at least classify the user into one correct category and
return relevant suggestions. On the other hand the Recall
values returned by the system were somewhat smaller.
Although the highest Recall value achieved is 1.0, the
average Recall value obtained stood at 0.60 meaning that
there is a 60% probability that a relevant interest field is
found in the user profile. Again these results may have been
compromised with previously mentioned issues with users
not sharing information which is entirely relevant and
indicative of their interests. Surprisingly though, the system
still performed reasonably well in cases when the test user
listed down that he or she was not a frequent Facebook user.
Therefore, one may speculate that rather than being a case of
whether a user is making frequent use of his profile or not, it
is rather the case of what content the user decides to share
through the social media profile. The average f-measure
value obtained from the conducted tests stands at 0.65.
TABLE I. THE RESULTS AFTER EVALUATION
C.
System Design Evaluation
The second evaluation included the evaluation of the
system as a whole and how people would react at being
given the opportunity to use such a system. In order to
complete this evaluation, the participants were presented
with a scenario where such a system could be deployed on a
wearable device, and were presented with the system’s
abilities when making use of it. The participants were then
asked a number of questions to determine whether they
would make use of such a system, whether they would feel
comfortable using such a system due to issues that may arise
with the way the system is designed to work, and finally
whether they think that such a device would truly enhance
their visit to a city and why.
The results for this evaluation are overwhelmingly
positive. All the participants think that such a system does
indeed enhance one’s visit to a city and would indeed be
willing to use such a device should it be given to them.
While some mention that such a device would allow them to
roam freely without following tours, others mention that
such a device would render their lives easier in the sense that
it reduces the need for them to do endless research before
going on their trips. This trend is evident amongst all age
groups. However, some issues do seem to exist as people of
all ages are becoming more conscious of what information
Minimum
Maximum
Average
Precision
0.33
1
0.81
Recall
0.17
1
0.60
F-Measure
0.29
1
0.65
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

they share and who they share this information with. These
issues arise due to the system’s use of a user’s personal data.
A number of people express their concern at such systems
requiring, and eventually extracting, personal information
from
their
social
media
profiles
to
achieve
their
functionalities.
Upon analysis, the results obtained provide further
indication that the objectives set out at the start were indeed
reached. For the purpose of this
implementation
the
efficiency of implicit data gathering could be deduced from
the
results
obtained
through
the
evaluation
of
the
personalization components. This evaluation shows that
taking into consideration the various limitations that exist,
especially with the user data, the implementation still yielded
satisfactory results, most notably through the fact that the
system provided suggestions for all the test profiles. There
were occasions where it managed to profile the user
perfectly. On the whole, the 81% precision rate was quite
good,
although
the
recall
rate
achieved
was
slightly
disappointing. As mentioned, there are quite a good number
of variables that may in fact influence these results and all in
all, considering the effort done in trying to overcome any
issues that the approach adopted might have, the results
obtained were satisfactory. Certainly, with more uniform
information fed to the system to perform personalization, the
results are bound to improve even further.
VII.
FUTURE WORK
More work could be done to improve the performance of
the system with respect to its personalization capabilities,
more
specifically,
to
improve
on
the
Ontology-based
approach adopted in this study. The first issue that should be
tackled is the cold-start problem that the system might
encounter when working on some profiles. This problem
could be tackled by looking at alternative sources through
which it could acquire data for personalization, which may
be other social media platforms or through mild forms of
explicit data gathering. Also, the use of a hybrid approach to
personalization would perhaps be ideal. At the moment, the
system
performs
profiling
by
performing
comparisons
between words and their synsets to the interest fields and
their synsets, but what if the system could analyze whole
sections of data and know what they actually are? For
example, if a person writes about some football team then
the system knows that what the user has written about is
actually a football team and it determines that the user is
interested in sport without actually finding the exact word
“sport” or a word pertaining to its synset.
Boosting the personalization capabilities of the system
could also be achieved through obtaining more information
about the user from other sources. There is a reluctance to
move towards explicit data gathering but the need for better
input data is clear. This can be achieved from other sources
such as a user’s browser history and from some form of mild
explicit data gathering.
Secondly, work could be done to improve both the
Augmented Reality approach of the implementation as well
as some minor tweaks that make the implementation work
more intelligently such as the ability for the system to know
in which city it is at a point in time, and automatically make
calls to the Google API and update the landmark database
with landmarks that are in the vicinity. Also, the Location-
based
approach
could
be
strengthened
with
an
implementation of computer vision methods in order to
improve performance.
Finally, when the hardware is available the system should
be deployed on a wearable device that could satisfy the
system requirements and allow it to operate at its full
computational abilities.
VIII.
CONCLUSIONS
The approach chosen for implementation was able to
produce a system that can profile a user to a reasonably high
degree of precision. The rule-based approach, aided by traits
derived from both the weighted key-word profile and the
ontology-based approach to personalization systems was
pivotal in achieving the set objective, and the 81% Precision
rate and 60% Recall rate prove the efficiency of the said
approach. A definite strong point of the system is however
its flexibility of the system in terms its structure and the way
it is intended to work. As shown from the evaluation results,
such a system deployed on a wearable device would greatly
enhance a person’s visit to a new city, increasing both
accessibility and comfort, while the fact that it is able to be
deployed in any city around the world with the same
performance results sets it apart from other systems of its
kind.
This study opens the door to a better understanding on
how intelligent systems that are designed to work on a
wearable device may be implemented, which is a positive
step in the development of such devices which are becoming
ever more popular and essential. Along with improvements
on the approach taken and future work cited, such a system
would
be both revolutionary, as well as provide an
innovative solution on how such systems could be developed
to act intelligently with respect to the user’s ever changing
demands.
REFERENCES
[1]
J.
McCarthy,
[Online].
Available:
http://www-
formal.stanford.edu/jmc/whatisai/node1.html [30/9/2016]
[2]
B.
Mobasher,
2007.
Data
mining
for
web
personalization. In The adaptive web (pp. 90-135). Springer Berlin
Heidelberg.
[3]
R. Burke, 2002. Hybrid recommender systems: Survey
and experiments.User modeling and user-adapted interaction,
12(4), pp.331-370.
[4]
K. Cheverst, N. Davies, K. Mitchell, A. Friday, and C.
Efstratiou, 2000, April. Developing a context-aware electronic
tourist guide: some issues and experiences. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp.
17-24). ACM.
[5]
J. Fink and A. Kobsa, 2002. User modeling for
personalized city tours. Artificial intelligence review, 18(1), pp.33-
74.
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

[6]
https://www.microsoft.com/microsoft-hololens/en-us
[30/9/2016]
[7]
A. Pretschner and S. Gauch , 1999. Ontology based
personalized search. InTools with Artificial Intelligence, 1999.
Proceedings. 11th IEEE International Conference on (pp. 391-
398). IEEE.
[8]
S. Poslad, H. Laamanen, R. Malaka, A. Nick, P. Buckle,
and A. Zipl , 2001. Crumpet: Creation of user-friendly mobile
services personalised for tourism.
[9]
M. Van Setten, S. Pokraev, and J. Koolwaaij, 2004,
January. Context-aware recommendations in the mobile tourist
application COMPASS. In Adaptive hypermedia and adaptive
web-based systems (pp. 235-244). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[10]
http://www.statista.com/statistics/187041/us-user-age-
distribution-on-facebook/ [30/9/2016]
[11]
M. Pazzani and D. Billsus, 1997. Learning and revising
user profiles: The identification of interesting web sites. Machine
learning, 27(3), pp.313-331.
[12]
S. Gammeter, A. Gassmann, L. Bossard, T. Quack, and
L. Van Gool, 2010, June. Server-side object recognition and client-
side object tracking for mobile augmented reality. In Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW), 2010 IEEE
Computer Society Conference on (pp. 1-8). IEEE.
[13]
H. Bay, T. Tuytelaars and L. Van Gool, , 2006. Surf:
Speeded up robust features. In Computer vision–ECCV 2006 (pp.
404-417). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[14]
M.
Minio
and
C.Tasso,
1996.
IFT:
un’Interfaccia
Intelligente
per
il
Filtraggio
di
Informazioni
Basato
su
Modellizzazione d’Utente. AI* IA Notizie IX (3), pp.21-25.
[15]
S.E. Middleton, N.R. Shadbolt and D.C. De Roure, 2003,
October. Capturing interest through inference and visualization:
Ontological
user
profiling
in
recommender
systems.
In
Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on Knowledge
capture (pp. 62-69). ACM.
[16]
S. Fox, K. Karnawat, M. Mydland, S. Dumais and
T.White, 2005. Evaluating implicit measures to improve web
search. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), 23(2),
pp.147-168.
[17]
K.
Kabassi,
“Personalising
Recommendations
For
tourists,” Telematics and Informatics, pp. 51-56, 2009.
[18]
M. Wasim, I. Shahzadi, Q. Ahmad and W. Mahmood,
2011, December. Extracting and modeling user interests based on
social media. In Multitopic Conference (INMIC), 2011 IEEE 14th
International (pp. 284-289). IEEE.
[19]
S. Schiaffino and A. Amandi, 2009. Intelligent user
profiling. In Artificial Intelligence An International Perspective
(pp. 193-216). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[20]
A. Ansari, S. Essegaier and R. Kohli, 2000. Internet
recommendation systems. Journal of Marketing research, 37(3),
pp.363-375.
[21]
M. Montaner, B. López, and J.L. de la Rosa, 2004, April.
Evaluation of Recommender Systems Through Simulated Users. In
ICEIS (3) (pp. 303-308).
[22]
P. Srisuwan and A. Srivihok, 2008. Personalized trip
information for e-tourism recommendation system based on Bayes
theorem.
In
Research
and
Practical
Issues
of
Enterprise
Information Systems II (pp. 1271-1275). Springer US
[23]
A. Jagielski, 2014. Geodezja II. Wydawnictwo
[24]
R. Malaka, 2000. Artificial intelligence goes mobile. In
R. Malaka (Ed.) Artificial Intelligence in Mobile Systems–
AIMS2000, Workshop in conjunction with ECAI 2000 (pp. 5-7).
[25]
R.D. Burke, K.J. Hammond, and B.C. Young, 1996,
August. Knowledge-based navigation of complex information
spaces. In Proceedings of the national conference on artificial
intelligence (Vol. 462, p. 468).
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

