Towards Self-Organizing Network Orchestration Management for LTE Mobile 
Communication Systems 
Javier Rubio-Loyola and Hiram Galeana-Zapién 
Information Technology Laboratory 
CINVESTAV Tamaulipas 
Ciudad Victoria, Tamaulipas, México 
{jrubio, hgaleana}@tamps.cinvestav.mx 
Ramón Agüero 
Telematics Engineering Group 
Universidad de Cantabria 
Cantabria, Spain 
ramon@tlmat.unican.es
 
 
Abstract—Self-organizing network (SON) functions of Long 
Term Evolution (LTE) systems have been traditionally studied 
in isolation even when it is widely accepted that they need to 
work together to provide the next generation mobile services 
and applications. This paper describes a novel QoS- and 
resource-oriented SON orchestration SON management 
framework in favor of convergence to trade-offs between 
service level requirements and network performance targets in 
LTE systems. In order to orchestrate SON functions of LTE 
networks it is needed consider standalone optimization 
processes as well as QoS- and resource-aware tradeoffs 
between service level requirements and overall network 
resource performance.  
Keywords – Long Term Evolution; Orchestration; Self-
organizing networks; Quality of Service 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Mobile 
communication 
systems 
are 
continuously 
evolving to provide higher data rates and to pave the way for 
ubiquitous, high speed broadband wireless coverage. 
Nowadays, the Long Term Evolution (LTE) technology [3], 
[4]  is recognized as the most outstanding technology to meet 
these goals, and it is considered as the next generation 
mobile technology that will dominate the worldwide mobile 
ecosystem in the next decade and beyond. 
LTE is a complex system where a large number of 
control mechanisms are executed at different nodes in the 
architecture to perform resource allocation tasks at different 
levels of granularity (in terms of the time-scale they operate). 
Algorithmic solutions for resource management operate in a 
highly dynamic environment where network resources (e.g., 
transmission power), services and applications (e.g., offered 
service quality), and user behavior (e.g., user mobility) 
experience changes over time. Those changes can degrade 
network performance and perceived QoS. 
The research community has highlighted the need and 
value of LTE self-organizing capabilities, commonly 
referred to as Self Organizing Network (SON) capabilities. 
SON capabilities in the network will lead to higher end-to-
end QoS and reduced churn [2] (i.e., a measurable metric of 
the migration of users from one service provider to another, 
mostly due to dissatisfaction with perceived QoS), thus 
allowing for overall improved network performance in terms 
of network quality and reliability. Finally, SON is hyped to 
provide higher performance from adapting the network to 
variations in loading and other dynamic operational 
conditions.  
Although there is a clear definition of the most prominent 
SON functionalities, their implication with service quality 
provision and management has not been studied in the 
literature. The modeling and performance evaluation of SON 
functions are normally addressed following a standalone 
approach where a given function is assumed to work 
independently of other SON functions. The collateral effects 
among SON functions are neglected to make tractable the 
design of algorithmic solutions for LTE. As there is mutual 
dependency 
among 
network 
parameters, 
conflicting 
situations among SON functions may take place. 
This paper presents a work in progress that aims at 
investigating novel self-optimization and management 
solutions to provide enhanced support for QoS of next-
generation services in LTE systems. In order to address the 
interdependency of SON functionalities, this research will 
develop a coordination management framework aimed to 
cope with system’s instabilities due to potential conflicting 
decisions among SON management functions. After this 
Introduction, Section II presents the application domain of 
the research. Section III presents the foreseen technical 
approach and Section IV presents the related work. Finally, 
Section V concludes the paper. 
II. 
APPLICATION DOMAIN OF THE RESEARCH 
A. LTE SON Functionalities 
Self-Organizing Networks (SON) is seen as one of the 
main promising areas for operators to save on operational 
expenditures. SON is currently discussed in 3GPP 
standardization [3]. Furthermore, the NGMN group has 
made recommendations [4] and 3GPP has written some use 
cases into the SON standards for LTE release 8, LTE release 
9, as well as in release 10 (LTE-A). However, the SON self-
optimization algorithms are not standardized or defined step-
by-step. Figure 1 illustrates the SON use case functionalities 
envisioned by the 3GPP. The interested reader can find 
extended descriptions of all functionalities in reference [3]. 
This work focuses on Mobility Load Balancing Optimization 
and Mobility Robust Optimization, whose main goals are 
briefly described hereafter [3]. 
Mobility Load Balancing Optimization. The goal of 
this 
use 
case 
functionality 
is 
to 
optimize 
cell 
reselection/handover parameters to cope with the unequal 
190
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

traffic load and at the same time the minimization of the 
number of handovers (HO) and redirections needed to 
achieve the load balancing.  
Mobility Robust Optimization. Manual setting of HO 
parameters in current 2G/3G systems is a time consuming 
task. For some cases, RRM (Radio Resource Management) 
in one eNodeB can detect problems and adjust the mobility 
parameters, but there are also examples where RRM in one 
eNodeB cannot resolve problems. The objective of this use 
case functionality is to automatically adjust the mobility 
parameters in those cases that cannot be done by RRM. 
 
SON 
functionalities
Coverage and 
capacity 
optimization
Energy 
savings
Interference 
minimization
Auto-configuration 
of physical cell 
identity
Mobility load 
balancing 
optimization
Automatic 
neighbor 
relation function
RACH 
optimization
Inter-cell 
interference 
coordination
Mobility 
robustness 
optimization
 
Figure 1.  SON use case functionalities 
Each of the SON functionalities operates at different time 
scales of network operation, from short-term to long-term, 
and each will cause changes in network configuration at 
different levels of granularity. SON functionalities exhibit a 
certain degree of interdependency and it is proven that some 
of them may have an impact on the configuration of the same 
network parameters which can result in conflicting 
situations. 
B. Orchestration mechanisms between SON functions 
The analysis of the different functionalities of the SON 
architecture and their specific characteristics has opened a 
big opportunity area for the implementation of optimization 
techniques. However, this is not a simple task, every SON-
functionality has an interrelation with at least another one, 
therefore it may be found that an optimal solution for one 
SON function could be controversial for other functionalities 
sharing the same control parameters.  
For example, SON functionalities Mobility Load 
Balancing and Mobility Robust Optimization shown in 
Figure 2 both modify inter-related parameters (Handover 
parameters). The Load Balancing (LB) algorithms in SON 
Function 1 may want to decrease the handover offset to 
optimize the load distribution between cells, while Handover 
Optimization algorithms in SON Function 2 may want to 
increase the handover hysteresis to reduce Ping-Pong effects, 
thus both would eventually change the condition on which 
handovers are taken [5]. The modified values of the 
Handover parameters that give the best performance from 
the perspective of the Mobility Load Balancing may affect 
negatively the final performance of the Mobility Robust 
Optimization function. 
There is a need to find a way to orchestrate the different 
functionalities by means of a coordination management 
entity that can adjust the conflictive SON decisions and that 
can decide when to intervene in the optimization process of 
the SON functionalities because every process in LTE 
technology has a different time scale and it is important to 
act at the right moment. Orchestration functionalities will 
take advantage of the best set of values for improving the 
performance of the network. Moreover, there is a need for 
this orchestration functionality to consider the operator 
quality of service concerns during the SON self-* 
optimization process. 
 
 
SON Function 2:  
Mobility Robustness 
Optimization
Handover 
parameters
SON Function 1: 
Mobility Load Balancing
Transmit 
power 
parameters
Load 
Threshold 
Settings
…
ORCHESTRATION 
MECHANISMS
 
Figure 2.  SON-Functionalities in the need for orchestration mechanisms 
III. 
FORESEEN TECHNICAL APPROACH 
This research aims to investigate novel self-optimization 
and management solutions to provide enhanced support for 
QoS of next-generation services in LTE systems. In order to 
address the interdependency of SON functionalities this 
research will develop a coordination management framework 
aimed to cope with system’s instabilities due to potential 
conflict decisions among SON functions. This section 
presents the foreseen technical approach towards this 
complex task. Namely, we present the LTE system model 
and the corresponding optimization problem that we are 
targeting. 
A. LTE System Modeling 
This section presents the modeling of SON functions in 
LTE, considering the mapping of service characteristics and 
requirements with resource management mechanisms 
responsible of allocating available network resources to 
users. This research concentrates on the Mobility Robust 
Optimization and Mobility Load Balancing Optimization 
SON functions, since they have a high degree of dependency 
and rely on a common management policy (namely, 
handover or base station assignment procedure) to achieve 
their corresponding goals.  
The LTE system is modeled attending to the downlink 
performance of an OFDMA-based cellular network. The 
considered system model [6], illustrated in Figure 3, consists 
of N eNodeBs that cover a geographical area in which there 
are M active users. It is assumed that each user i has a 
minimum data rate requirement, denoted as Ri
min, which 
must be satisfied irrespectively of the assigned eNodeB. The 
arrows connecting users and eNodeB’s in Figure 3 indicate 
possible eNodeB assignment choices. 
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The overall network uses a single frequency channel with 
a total bandwidth BW that is divided into K OFDM 
subcarriers so that each eNodeB j can operate a subset of Kj 
subcarriers. Radio and transport resources are assumed to be 
allocated to each user in a single eNodeB, due that LTE 
systems do not consider macro-diversity support (i.e., only 
hard-handovers are allowed). The model considers that each 
eNodeB is constrained by a limited amount of radio 
resources and a limited amount of transport resources. As to 
radio resource constraints, each eNodeB in the LTE system 
is assumed to be able to allocate simultaneously a maximum 
of Kj subcarriers and to having a maximum downlink 
transmission power limitation Pj
max. The radio channel gain 
between eNodeB j and user i is modeled by a vector 
Gij

={Gi,j,1,…,Gi,j,K}, where Gi,j,k denotes the radio channel 
gain over subcarrier k{1,…,Kj}.  
 
 
 
Figure 3.  LTE System Model 
The amount of radio resources needed to fulfill users’ 
rate service requirements could be quite different depending 
on the selected eNodeB’s. So, for each possible assignment, 
it is necessary to determine which “resource cost” it has in 
terms of resource consumption. To that end, we define a 
radio cost, denoted as αij, and a transport cost indicated as βij 
to quantify resource consumption when assigning user i to 
eNodeB j. The eNodeB assignment problem should try to 
find a feasible assignment (i.e., radio costs do not exceed 
their respective constraints) so that users’ rate requirements 
are satisfied. Additionally, when several feasible eNodeB 
assignments solutions exist (i.e., there are several ways to 
allocate all the users without exceeding network resources), 
we are also interested in finding the “best” of these possible 
solutions. This can be modeled using the concept of utility 
function, which allows us to quantify the appropriateness of 
assigning user i to eNodeB j by means of a magnitude 
denoted as uij, so that uij > uil would indicate that eNodeB j is 
more appropriate than eNodeB l to serve user i. As well, uij > 
ulj would indicate that is better to assign user i to eNodeB j 
than user l. Details of utility and resource cost functions 
envisaged so far are provided in the following. 
B. Resource Cost and Utility function. 
Before presenting the resource cost function definition, 
we provide a brief review of basic concepts concerning the 
LTE’s air interface evaluation metrics.  
In a cellular OFDMA system like LTE, the computation 
of the signal to interference and noise ratio (SINR) achieved 
at subcarrier k in the receiver of user i served by eNodeB j, is 
obtained as follows: 
 
, ,
, ,
, ,
, ,



i j k
i j k
i j k
i j k
G
P
SINR
I
 
(1) 
 
where Gi,j,k is the radio channel gain between eNodeB j and 
user i over subcarrier k, Pi,j,k is the transmit power of 
eNodeB j on subcarrier k allocated to user i, η is the thermal 
noise per subcarrier, and Ii,j,k is the co-channel interference 
power received by user i in that subcarrier. The value of the 
co-channel interference Ii,j,k can be computed as: 
 
, ,
, ,
, ,
1,




 
n N
i j k
i n k
m i n k
n
n
j
I
G
P
 
(2) 
 
where Pi,n,k is the transmit power of interfering eNodeB n, 
on subcarrier k assigned to other user m≠i. Equation (1) that 
models the SINR denotes the channel frequency response of 
user i on subcarrier k, and the achievable transmission rate 
ri,j,k on this subcarrier of user i assigned to BS j is given by: 
 


, ,
2
, ,
log 1



i j k
i j k
BW
r
SINR
K
 
(3) 
 
For illustration purposes, if all resources of eNodeB j were 
allocated to user i, the maximum achievable rate would be: 
 
,
max
, ,
1

j
i j
K
i j k
k
R
r
 
(4) 
 
In this context, considering that an eNodeB dynamically 
shares transmission resources between assigned users by 
allocating a given amount of subcarriers to user i, denoted as 
Kij, being Kij < Kj, during a given amount of transmission 
time, denoted as ΔTij, being ΔTij < Ts, where Ts is a 
scheduling reference time, we could relate the achievable 
rate to the amount of used subcarriers and the amount of 
allocated transmission time to meet users’ minimum rate 
requirements: 
 
max
min


ij
ij
ij
i
j
s
K
T R
R
K
T
 
(5) 
 
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

From the previous expression, the radio resource cost is 
defined directly as: 
 
min
max
1
i
ij
ij
ij
ij
j
s
R
K
T
R
K
T





 
(6) 
 
Note that αij=1 would mean that serving user i in eNodeB 
j makes use of all available radio resources at the eNodeB. 
Attending to practical considerations, it is considered that 
there is a limited set of modulation and coding schemes 
(MCS) that must be used in each subcarrier, thus reducing 
the output of expressions (3), (4) and (6) to a set of discrete 
values. 
On the other hand, to quantify the appropriateness of 
each eNodeB assignment, a utility-based framework is used. 
Different types of utility functions have been used in 
resource allocation problems. Commonly, a utility function 
is a non-decreasing function of the amount of allocated 
resources and its shape (e.g., step, convex, concave or 
sigmoid are often used) depends on the expected benefit that 
resource allocation can bring into a given system (e.g., a step 
function can be used to model a system where allocating 
resources below a given threshold has no utility at all but the 
maximum utility is just achieved when reaching this 
threshold). In our case, we formulate the utility function to 
reflect the bit rate efficiency of the allocated resources to 
supporting the data transfer of a user assigned to a given 
eNodeB. Hence, as to the air interface, the efficiency is 
directly obtained according to Shannon’s law from 
expression (3) as log2(1+SINRij) (the bigger the SINR, the 
less amount of resources are needed to fulfill user’s 
requirements). Hence, the utility function can be defined as: 
 
2
2
log (1
)
(
)
log (1
)



ij
ij
ij
SINR
u SINR
SNR
 
 
 
 
      (7) 
 
where SNR is the signal to noise ratio achieved in case of 
no co-channel interference. 
C. Optimization Problem Formulation 
Using both the resource cost function and utility-based 
function, it is possible to formulate the base station 
assignment problem as an optimization problem aiming to 
maximize the utility of the assignments while not exceeding 
radio capacity limits at each BS. Defining the BS assignment 
matrix B = {bij}MxN, with iϵ{1,…,M} and jϵ{1,…,N}, where 
the assignment indicator variable bij equals to 1 if user i is 
assigned to BS j, or zero otherwise, the BS assignment 
problem can be formally written as: 
 
1
1
max









M
N
ij ij
ij
i
j
u b  
 
 
 
      (8) 
s.t.       
1
1
1,...,





M
ij
ij
i
b
j
N  
 
      (9) 
           
1
1
1,...,
N
ij
j
b
i
M




 
 
    (10) 
          
min
i 
i
R
R
 
 
 
 
    (11) 
          


ijb  0,1
 
 
 
 
    (12) 
 
The above optimization problem aims to maximize the 
total welfare utility, as defined in (8), of the assignments in 
the system. Under the considered objective function, the 
assignments that lead to have a most efficient connection, in 
terms of the bit rate efficiency of the allocated radio 
resources, are preferred. The set of constraints considered in 
(9) assures that no more resources than available are 
assigned to each BS. The second set of constraints (10) is 
used to indicate that all users need to be assigned to a single 
BS, while constraint (11) indicates the individual rate 
required by each user. Moreover, to avoid splitting or partial 
assignment of users, constraint (12) is used, which however 
leads to the combinatorial nature of the problem with 
exponentially growing complexity in the degrees of freedom. 
Problem 
(8)-(12) 
is 
a 
non-linear 
combinatorial 
optimization problem since entries in the assignment matrix 
B can only take integer values. Notice that utility and 
resource cost functions are non-linear functions that depend 
on the SINR values, which in turn depend on the eNodeB 
assignment solution because of the co-channel interference, 
resulting in a mutual dependency. So, both utility and radio 
resource cost function values are coupled with the 
assignment of the users in the system, making the eNodeB 
assignment problem very hard to tackle. 
The above optimization problem formulation resembles 
the behavior of the Mobility Robust Optimization 
functionality, where the underlying idea is to find the base 
station assignment for each mobile user so that the overall 
system’s utility is maximized and network constraints and 
users’ requirements are satisfied. This problem formulation 
is valid whenever a standalone implementation of a single 
SON function is performed. 
As a result, in order to analyze both the Mobility Robust 
Optimization and the Mobility Load Balancing Optimization 
in a coordinated framework, a multi-objective optimization 
should be defined. This latter type of approaches has not 
been addressed in the literature to simultaneously perform 
different self-organizing management tasks. With this regard, 
Figure 4 illustrates the case where two SON functionalities 
co-exist and work together in an orchestrated manner. More 
specifically, the Mobility Load Balancing Optimization aims 
to distribute traffic among the cells in the LTE system, so 
that unbalance conditions are, at some extent, prevented or 
mitigated. For instance, this can be achieved by controlling 
193
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

the amount of resources allocated to mobile users (i.e., 
transmit power that is related to constraint (9) in our system 
model), and/or manipulating the load threshold values used 
to trigger appropriate load balancing actions in LTE. In any 
case, notice that actions performed by SON function 1 
indirectly impact on control parameters been directly 
reconfigured by the SON function 2. With this regard, direct 
influences can be seen as a controllable behavior, whereas 
indirect impacts are actually uncontrollable behavior. 
Therefore, 
management 
solutions 
encompassing 
orchestration mechanisms are required to allow a seamless 
integration and coordination of two different SON functions, 
and particularly to prevent any potential conflict among 
considered objectives. The orchestration mechanisms can be 
realized by having a feedback loop between both 
functionalities, so that the actions taken by a given function 
are properly send to the input of the other function. 
IV. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Zhan et al. [7] proposed an algorithm for the Mobility 
Load Balancing where load balancing actions are triggered 
by cells experiencing a relatively low load. In practice, the 
objective of this approach is that an underutilized cell 
anticipates to an eventual congestion situation in a 
neighboring cell. Although it is clear that a handover 
mechanism is used to steer users to the lightly loaded cell, 
this work does not provide details about the selection choice 
of uses that are likely to be handed over by the proposed 
approach. 
Sas et al. [8] analyzed the problem of dynamic admission 
control threshold settings and handover parameters. In this 
sense, the admission procedure is assumed to have a reserved 
amount of resources that can be allocated to users for which 
a handover has been performed. Depending on the perceived 
network conditions, the proposed solution is able to modify 
admission control thresholds. The main drawback of this 
approach is that the policy used to set threshold values does 
not consider minimum QoS requirement as our research 
proposal. 
 
SON Function 2:  Mobility 
Robustness Optimization
Handover 
parameters
Objective  of SON 
Function 2: 
Maximize Handover 
performance
SON Function 1: 
Mobility Load Balancing
Transmit 
power 
parameters
Load 
Threshold 
Settings
Objective of SON 
Function 1: Balance 
Load
…
ORCHESTRATION 
MECHANISMS
 
Figure 4.  Interdependencies between two SON functions 
Hu et al. [9] aim at improving the functionality of 
Mobility Load Balancing by introducing a handover penalty 
function in the handover decision making process.  Ewe and 
Bakker [10] proposed a handover optimization procedure 
performed distributed to base stations of the radio network. 
However, none of these previous works evaluate or address 
the combination or analyze the performance of their 
solutions together with other LTE SON function, e.g. 
Mobility Robust proposed in this work.  
Zhang et al. [11] detected the load conditions of eNodeBs 
by making use of the sizes and shapes of cellular coverage. 
Coverage can be adjusted automatically according to load 
conditions, so as to balance load. However, this work does 
not take into account quality of service and does not consider 
the impact that their methods will have on other 
functionalities that our proposal does. 
Handover 
parameter 
optimization 
algorithms 
are 
commonly used in the literature in order to tune handover 
related parameters, namely, hysteresis and time-to-trigger. 
The work presented by Jansen et al. in [12] falls into this 
category. However, the work lacks from a formal analysis on 
how the proposed solution could be integrated with other 
SON functionalities, which are the advantages of our 
proposal. 
V. 
EXPECTED CONTRIBUTIONS AND CONCLUDING 
REMARKS 
In order to orchestrate SON functions of LTE networks it 
is needed consider standalone optimization processes and 
overall network performance to drive their decisions. It is 
also needed to find QoS- and resource-aware tradeoffs 
between service level requirements and overall network 
resource performance. We have presented a work in progress 
towards a novel QoS- and resource-oriented SON 
orchestration 
management 
framework 
to 
drive 
the 
optimization procedures of the Mobility Robust and Load 
Balancing SON functions, that exploits computational 
intelligence algorithms in favor of convergence to trade-offs 
between 
service 
level 
requirements 
and 
network 
performance targets in LTE mobile communication systems 
environments. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is partially supported by the LACCIR Project 
No. R1211LAC005, the project TEC2009‐14598‐C02‐
02 granted by the MEC Spanish Ministry and partially 
funded with FEDER funding, and the CONACYT FOMIX 
Project No. 190552.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. M. Graybeal and K. Sridhar, “The Evolution of SON to Extended 
SON”, Bell Labs Technical Journal, 2010, pp. 5-18 
[2] 
S. K. Das, H. Lin and M. Chatterjee, "An econometric model for 
resource management in competitive wireless data networks", IEEE 
Network, vol.18, no.6, Nov.-Dec. 2004, pp. 20- 26 
[3] 
3GPP Technical Report 36.902 V9.3.1, “Self-configuring and self-
optimizing network (SON) use cases and solutions (release 9)”, 
March 2011, pp 1 – 21 
194
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

[4] 
Next Generation Mobile Networks (NGMN Deliverable), “Next 
Generation Mobile Networks Use Cases related to Self Organising 
Network, Overall Description”, May 2007, pp1- 17 
[5] 
L.C. Schmelz, M. Amirijoo, A. Eisenblaetter, R. Litjens, M. Neuland 
and J. Turk, "A Coordination Framework for Self-Organisation in 
LTE Networks”, IFIP/IEEE International Symposium on Integrated 
Network Management (IM), 23-27 May 2011, pp193-200 
[6] 
H. Galeana-Zapién and R. Ferrús, “Design and Evaluation of a 
Backhaul-Aware Base Station Assignment Algorithm for OFDMA-
Based Cellular Networks”, IEEE Transactions on Wireless 
Communications, vol. 9, no. 10, Oct. 2010, pp. 3226-3237 
[7] 
M. Zhang, W. Li, S. Jia, L. Zhang and Y. Liu, “A Lightly-loaded Cell 
Initiated Load Balancing in LTE Self-Optimizing Networks”, 6th 
International ICST Conference on Communications and Networking 
in China, 2006, pp. 421-425 
[8] 
B. Sas, K. Spaey, I. Balan, K. Zetterberg and R. Litjens, “Self-
optimisation of admission control and handover parameters in LTE”, 
IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, 2011 pp 3026-3031 
[9] 
H. Hu, J. Zhang, X. Zheng, Y. Yang and P. Wu, “Self-Configuration 
and Self- Optimization for LTE Networks”, IEEE Communications 
Magazine, February 2010, pp. 94-100 
[10] L. Ewe and H. Bakker, “Base Station Distributed Handover 
Optimization in LTE Self-Organizing Networks”, in Personal Indoor 
and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), 2011,  pp 243-247 
[11] H. Zhang, X. Qiu, L. Meng and X. Zhang, “Achieving Distributed 
Load Balancing in Self-Organizing LTE Radio Access Networks with 
Autonomic Network Management”, IEEE GLOBECOM, 2010, pp 
454 - 459 
[12] T. Jansen, I. Balan, S. Stefanski, I. Moerman and T. Kurner, T.; 
“Weighted Performance based Handover Parameter Optimization in 
LTE”, IEEE 73rd Vehicular Technology Conference, May 2011, pp 
3267 - 3271 
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

