Enhancing the Affective Sensitivity of Location Based Services Using
Situation-Person-Dependent Semantic Similarity
Antonios Karatzoglou1,2, Michael Beigl2
1Robert Bosch GmbH
Corporate Sector Research and Advance Engineering, and
2Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Germany
Email: antonios.karatzoglou@de.bosch.com, antonios.karatzoglou@kit.edu
Email: michael.beigl@kit.edu
Abstract—Location prediction plays a steadily growing role in
Location Based Services (LBS), as these try to be more proactive
and improve in this way the quality of service provided. Although
recent location prediction systems go beyond just location data
and build upon a wide range of models that describe semantic
locations and personal preferences, none of them considers
locations from the view of the user. Moreover, none takes
into account the variance in people’s way of perceiving and
understanding concepts (locations in our case) depending on
the situation. Minsky referred to this as (cognitive) frames. This
paper posits that a dynamic semantic-similarity-based clustering
of locations can be used for mining such location-speciﬁc frames,
e.g. the varying meanings that people give to locations over time
depending on the situation, their personality and their emotional
state. The resulting situation-person-speciﬁc frames can in turn
be used to enhance the location prediction.
Keywords–LBS; Location Prediction, Ontologies, Dynamic Se-
mantic Similarity, Personality Traits, Emotional State, Personaliza-
tion, Cognitive Frames.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Emerging context-aware systems and applications are ca-
pable of offering intelligent and personalized services that are
tailored to the users and their current environment. Recently,
in order for such systems to provide an even better quality
of service to the users, developers aim at making them more
proactive by giving them the ability to take the initiative,
instead of just reacting. This is attempted by applying various
context prediction techniques. Location represents a particu-
larly important context information type. There exist numerous
applications and services by now, so called Location Based
Services (LBS), that are premised on the users’ current or future
location, like location-based advertising and marketing. Social
networks experience nowadays a signiﬁcant upgrade as well
through utilizing the current location of their users. In this
case these are referred to as Location-Based Social Networks
(LBSNs). The location information is provided either manually
by the users (e.g. Foursquare [1]) or sensed automatically from
the users’ personal devices. Furthermore, predictive location
awareness can also contribute to a more efﬁcient resource man-
agement, e.g. in intelligent navigation and trafﬁc management
scenarios or in communication networks.
Location reveals not only the whereabouts, but also the
what, the when and eventually the who you are. By knowing
the location, we humans are able to extract even more informa-
tion than just the location itself; information that can be used
to model and identify behavioral patterns. So, we could, for
instance, derive a certain activity (what) related to a particular
location, or the time of visit (when). Moreover, we humans
could even draw conclusions regarding the users’ temporary
mental state and their overall personality proﬁle (who) from
knowing their locations and how they move between them.
Vice versa, by knowing all this “metadata” about a person,
we could assume to be able to provide an at least rough
estimation about her current or future location. Nathan et al.
support this theory by interpreting movement as the outcome
of the synergy of four components [2]: the internal state of
the individual, its motion capacity, its navigation capacity and
potential external factors, whereby internal state addresses
the reason and the motive for the individual to move and
visit a certain location, which in turn reﬂects his/her needs,
preferences and personality.
The key phrase here is knowing the location. Knowledge
is deﬁned as [3]:
Facts, information and skills acquired through
experience or education; the theoretical or practical
understanding of a subject
So, each and every type of knowledge acquired by a person
refers to the result of personal experience and interpretation. In
the special case of location information, this can be interpreted
as follows:
The same place or location has potentially a
different meaning to different people
For example, while a guest normally sees in a restaurant a
place to eat, the same restaurant stands for a working place to
the cook working there. Moreover,
A place may even have many different meanings
to the same person depending on the situation and/or
her mental and emotional state
People tend to employ cognitive frames in order to interpret
their experiences [4]. Minsky introduced ﬁrst in [5] the concept
frame in the 1970s’ as a dynamic structure to be used when
“one encounters a new situation or makes a substantial
change in one’s view of the present problem” underpinning our
statement. For example, a company building, which is usually
sensed as a working location, turns into a space of leisure and
entertainment during the ﬁrm’s Christmas party. Similarly, the
location hotel is usually strongly correlated with a stay over
the holidays by a tourist, while it is perceived as a place of
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

work for someone working there as a bellboy or for someone
who often visits conferences and/or has business lunches there.
Furthermore, a person that enjoys having a drink at the bar of
a particular hotel in his hometown (without necessarily being
a guest) and a person that makes use of the hotel’s Sunday’s
brunch offer, would associate a hotel on one hand more with
night life locations, like a bar or a club, and on the other hand
more with a cafe or a restaurant, respectively. A preliminary
user study in which we asked 20 people to interpret various
locations on their daily routes conﬁrmed the dynamic nature
of how people perceive locations. This varying perception of
locations could be used to enhance location prediction.
The majority of the existing location prediction systems
rely on statistical and machine learning based algorithms in
order to estimate the current or predict the future location
of a user. These systems recognize and model regularities in
the movement patterns of one or more users to provide their
estimations. Some use solely recorded trajectories (sequences
of locations in form of Global Positioning System (GPS)
coordinates or cell IDs and time), while other utilize further
information, such as transportation mode and proximity of
social contacts among others. However, these systems come
with two major drawbacks; ﬁrst, they are a black box to the
user. The users don’t really have insight into the estimation
mechanism. Second, they work only at that particular regions
well, for which they have been trained for. Recently, a new
generation of location prediction systems tries to overcome
these shortcomings through the use of semantics and so
called semantic trajectories. The corresponding algorithms
yield good results even in regions or cities that users have never
visited before and offer (human-understandable) transparency
at the same time. Under normal circumstances both approaches
are capable of providing good, yet perfectible results. This is
principally due to both their incapability of handling irregular
human behavior and exceptional situations, as well as to the
lack of ﬂexibility and dynamics in their semantic knowledge
representation of locations in their models, which makes them
incapable of covering the varying perception of locations
mentioned before.
We hypothesize that a dynamic and stochastic semantic-
similarity-based clustering that takes both the person her-
self, as well as the current situation into consideration when
grouping locations, instead of just categorizing them into
ﬁxed hierarchies, can lead to capturing the person-situation-
dependent varying perception of locations, and consequently
to a more accurate estimation of the users’ intention to visit
a certain region or location. Here, person refers, on one hand,
to the users? preferences and interests, and, on the other hand
to their personality traits, while situation includes both context
information (time, certain event, purpose of visit, activity, etc.)
and mental state of the users. Our hypothesis could also be
expressed by the following two propositions:
•
Dynamic semantic similarity can be used for mining
location-speciﬁc (Minsky’s) cognitive frames from the
user’s semantically enriched and ontology-structured
context & tracking data, and
•
A (cognitive) frame-based location prediction yields
higher prediction accuracy
We aim at modeling the variety in people’s way of seeing
and understanding things (locations in a ﬁrst case) in order to
achieve a higher adaptivity and personalization on the part of
the application. After all, what is more personal and human,
than the trait of changing our point of view about things,
sometimes more and sometimes less, depending on the moods
and the events of the day?
This paper is structured as follows. Section II gives a brief
summary of the related work. Next, in Section III we describe
in detail our approach. Finally Section IV and Section V pro-
vide a preliminary evaluation and our conclusions respectively.
II.
STATE OF THE ART
According to Glassey and Ferguson [6], there exist four
representation model types for describing locations: The geo-
metric, the symbolic the hybrid and the semantic model that
considers the relationship of entities in space among others.
Our work concentrates on the semantic-enhanced location
prediction. Usually, systematic approaches that leverage se-
mantic information for destination prediction base on trajectory
mining and analysis, but there exist also other ways for
incorporating semantics as we shall see next.
Ying et al. [7] introduced one of the ﬁrst semantic trajectory
mining based approaches, which is based on a Geographic
Semantic Information Database (GSID) in order to have the
recorded GPS or Cell-ID trajectories semantically enriched.
Patterns mined in the resulting trajectory data base are in turn
converted into Semantic Pattern Trees to ﬁnally provide the
next place prediction. In [8], they extend their approach by
taking temporal information into account as well. Samaan et
al. describe buildings and road network elements semantically
by using spatial conceptual maps in [9]. Furthermore, they
utilize a context knowledge base formulated in XML, which
contains the users’ preferences, schedule, tasks and goals
among others, to leverage their system’s performance. The
underlying algorithm is probabilistic, based on the Dempster-
Shafer Theory (DS-Theory). In [10] and [11] they illustrate the
same algorithm, only that now, the locations are represented by
Cell-IDs assigned by the corresponding cell towers. Ridhawi
et al. follow in their work, [12] and [13], a similar direction
for improving their indoor tracking and prediction algorithm.
Their system uses the Dempster-Shafer Theory as well, but, in
contrast with Samaan et al., the knowledge is structured and
stored by means of ontologies. These include proﬁles of users,
their location history and some activities. Wannous et al. base
their framework also on an ensemble of ontologies, as well
as on a set of rules in order to represent and estimate future
movement and activity patterns of marine mammals [14]. They
deﬁned their rule base with the help of a group of experts and
subdivided it into a spatial, a domain-speciﬁc and a temporal
set of rules, respective each time to the applied ontologies.
Long et al. base their work, [15], on a probabilistic model
called Latent Dirichlet Allocation (DLA). DLA is used in
text mining and takes the documents’ topics into account in
order to cluster these accordingly. Long et al. use DLA to
extract so called geographic topics from the text entered by
Foursquare users in their check-ins based on their popularity.
By using these geographic topics, their system becomes more
adjustable, since in this way, they move away from a static
location categorization, like the one provided by Foursquare.
Krishnamurthy et al. rely their work on a social network
as well [16]. They analyze the Tweets of Twitter [17] users
to predict their locations. Speciﬁcally, they deﬁne a metric
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

(localness) to formulate the vicinity of special terms (local
entities), which appear in Tweets, to particular geographic
regions or towns. Various measures including two semantic
relatedness measures, the Jaccard and the Tversky Indices
were examined for this purpose. By determining all localness
scores between geographic regions and the corresponding local
entities in the Tweets of a user, they are ﬁnally able to provide
an estimation of the location of the users.
Mabroukeh et al. explore a semantic-enhanced method in
order to mine Web usage patterns and to be able to predict
the next visited Web page at the same time [18]. They use
semantic relatedness to adjust their probabilistic model accord-
ingly in order to raise the prediction performance. In [19], a
time-dependent semantic similarity measure is introduced by
Zhao et al. for describing the dynamic nature of Web search
queries over the time. In addition, they place their trust in a
probabilistic similarity measure that reﬂects the Web queries’
frequency distribution.
The person-situation debate addresses the challenging
question of what inﬂuences the humans’ behavior at most; is it
their personality or the situation in which they ﬁnd themselves?
While personality trait theorists believe that people’s behavior
is guided by consistent and stable in time traits (habitual
patterns of behavior, thought, and emotion [20]), situationists
argue that people are rather inconsistent in their behavior
depending on the situation [21]. Meanwhile, current behavior
researchers accept that both of them contribute to a person’s
behavior [22]. Buss states further that the effect of personality
on behavior depends on the situation and vice versa [23].
Numerous works exist, which pursuit and substantiate this
subject like Jacquard’s [24] and Borkenau’s [25]. Therefore,
one could easily assume that knowledge of both personality
and situation, as well as their interrelation, builds a solid
prerequisite to predict one’s behavior and intentions. In this
paper, we claim that this fact could be further exploited for
raising the location prediction accuracy. On the other hand,
there exists research that goes in the opposite direction as well.
Adali et al. and Staiano et al. attempt for instance to infer
the personality from the behavior [26] and the social network
structure [27], respectively.
All existing location prediction approaches constrain them-
selves to static location deﬁnitions and hierarchies without con-
sidering the users’ varying perception of locations over time
and situation. This leads to non-adaptive and thus perfectible
location modelling and prediction algorithms.
III.
PROPOSED APPROACH
The location prediction framework that we propose in this
paper is illustrated in Fig. 1. Our approach is hybrid and
consists of two parts. One part takes over the semantical
processing of the input stream (top branch), while the other
one takes charge of the actual users’ future location prediction
(bottom branch).
Recorded data like location and time (e.g., GPS readings),
low level activity (e.g., through accelerometer and gyroscope
measurements) and biometric data (e.g., pulse, perspiration),
together with user-speciﬁc high level data retrieved either
directly through the users’ feedback or indirectly from their
calendar, e-mail and social media communication data, are
being fed to two separate paths simultaneously (top and
bottom branch respectively). On one hand, these are being
semantically annotated and stored in our so called Semantically
Annotated Database (SADB). The annotation takes place semi-
supervised partly by the user (through an Android app running
on the smartphone or the smartwatch), partly by utilizing a
(geographic) Linked Open Database (LODB), like the OS-
Monto [28], and partly through an internal loop considering
the existing ontology so far, as well as the similarity analysis
taking place in a next step. The annotated data are then
used to propagate our Ontology-Suite-based Knowledge Base
(OSKB) described in III-A. The reasoner attempts to derive
the current mental state and the overall personality of the user
from the available data among others and plays therefore a
signiﬁcant role (see III-C) in order to achieve our goal of
correlating locations with the users’ experience and building
that way location-speciﬁc cognitive frames. PSSSA is the core
component of our approach and refers to the Person-Situation
Semantic Similarity Analysis component. It is responsible for
awarding our approach with a highly personal and human-like
dynamic view of locations at anytime. Details about PSSSA
can be found in Section III-B. The bottom branch of our
framework includes the actual location prediction model. This
could be for instance a probabilistic graph, as the Markov
model we use at this phase. But other machine learning based
prediction models like Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs) are
also to be considered and shall be explored in the future. The
prediction model is ﬁrst being trained with the available data.
In a next step, the trained model is being optimized through
the customization of its (previously learned) parameters by
taking the current semantic similarity scores of the locations
into account. Section IV provides a brief description of the
customization process based on a Markov Chain model. Fi-
nally, the customized PSSSA prediction model estimates the
users’ future location.
A. Ontology suite
We propose a modular ontology that consists of following
ﬁve major ontologies:
1)
Spatial ontology
2)
Location ontology
3)
Activities & Actions ontology
4)
Person, Personality & Mood ontology
5)
Temporal & Event ontology
The Spatial ontology describes core geospatial concepts
and properties, like building, park, street, etc. and close to,
near, etc., respectively. The Location ontology represents a
taxonomy of various location types, like night life locations,
club, bar, restaurant, dinner, fast food restaurant, etc. The
Activities & Actions ontology includes both complex activities,
as well as elementary actions of which they are composed. A
complex activity represents in our case a high level purpose of
visiting a certain location. For instance, the activity celebrate
a birthday covers the actions meet friends, meet family, eat,
drink, etc. Person, Personality & Mood ontology proﬁles the
user. This ontology models the user from both a “shallow”, as
well as a “deeper” point of view and comprises demographic
information (age, sex, profession, etc.), hobbies and interests
up to personality traits (extroversion, openness, etc.) and men-
tal states (emotions, moods, ...) respectively. In both last two
cases, our focus lies on features that can affect the social and
particularly the movement behavior of the user. Our personality
and mental state models build upon the work of Vidacek-
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 1. Situation-person-dependent semantic-similarity-based location prediction framework, whereby SADB refers to Semantically Annotated Database,
OSKB to Ontology suite Database and PSSSA to Person-Situation Semantic Clustering of Locations respectively.
Hains et al. [29] and Hastings [30] respectively. Finally, the
Temporal & Event ontology describes time from a human point
of view, considering a human-like time granularity. Beside
time in general, a particular attention is paid to the temporal
entity event, which refers to special events like anniversaries,
birthdays, public holidays, etc. that are strongly related to
irregular behavior.
The ontology ensemble is instantiated by the users data.
For the moment, changes in their lives, like moving to another
town or streets, must be stated explicitly by the users. However,
we plan to use online pattern mining algorithms to detect such
kind of changes in the users’ regular movement patterns and
update our ontology base automatically.
B. Semantic similarity & probabilistic approach
Our goal is to capture and encapsulate the varying human
perception of locations in order to cluster them in a more
personalized manner based on the users’ current experience.
The general idea is to build location-speciﬁc cognitive frames
by tying together situation, purpose of visit, activity, mental
state of the user, his/her personality traits and locations using
semantic similarity measures. These resulting location-speciﬁc
frames will engender a dynamic and highly personalized
method of modeling and storing location information. Beyond
that, the usage of such location-speciﬁc frames complies to the
Ontology Design Pattern (ODP) method [31], whereby such
objects are used to encapsulate complex knowledge and/or to
overcome the n-ary relation representation issue in the Web
Ontology Language (OWL).
There are two different ways of specifying to what degree
one term associates with another. On one hand semantic
relatedness determines the relation between two concepts. On
the other hand, semantic similarity refers to how similar, how
likely two concepts are. For instance, a car is related to
its driver but rather similar to another vehicle like a truck.
The Person-Situation Semantic Similarity Analysis attempts
to mine dynamic similarities between locations that vary in
relation to the current situation, the personality and the mental
state of a user. To this end, it mines and makes use of the
interconceptual semantic relatedness between the respective
locations and other classes/concepts in the ontology suite (like
the activities and time). Even locations, which normally do not
belong to the same type, can ﬁnd their way in such situation-
person-depended groups. For instance for a user that is jogging
in a park, the park gets semantically closer to a gym than
usual. We propose a hybrid and stochastic semantic similarity
measure that takes both the topology, as well as the eventual
underlying uncertainty into consideration. Thus, our proposed
similarity metric consists of the following four parts:
1)
Topological similarity measures are applied on on-
tologies and consider on one hand the relations
between locations and the type of relation itself
(edge-based measures) and on the other hand the
surroundings of the locations (node-based measures).
Wu & Palmer in [32] propose with the formula (1)
an edge-based similarity measure that takes depth
into account as well, providing by this means better
results. The fact that it is already normalized and
can never be zero serves additionally our overall
framework because the similarity scores are used to
adapt the parameters of the location prediction model.
A zero could lead to “broken” inference chains.
SW &P =
2 ∗ depth(LCS(l1, l2))
length(l1, l2) + 2 ∗ depth(LCS(l1, l2))
(1)
•
LCS: Least Common Subsumer
•
depth: Length from a node up to the root
•
l1, l2: 2 locations
Lin [33], on the other hand introduced a similarity
measure based on the information content:
SLin = 2 ∗ logP(LCS(l1, l2))
logP(l1) + logP(l2)
(2)
•
−logP(l) = IC(l): Information Content of
location l in the corresponding ontology
2)
A particularly important type of similarity measures
for our work are the so called feature-based similarity
measures. These measures deﬁne similarity based on
the set of common features between two objects (lo-
cations in our case). The Jaccard Coefﬁcient, adapted
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

for our case in (3), is such a measure:
SJaccard = |l1 ∩ l2|
|l1 ∪ l2|
(3)
•
|l1| and |l2|: Feature sets of locations l1 and
l2 respectively
The features are in our case both user-dependent, such
as purpose of visit and correlated emotions (among
others), and user-independent, like time of day.
3)
At the same time, we plan to treat the available sensor
input data as text and the daily semantic enriched
trajectories of the user as sentences about locations
and project them onto a vector-space model. This can
help us to learn and to determine non-predeﬁned sim-
ilarities from the data in an unsupervised manner by
analyzing the frequency distribution of locations and
their properties in the ontology (statistical similarity).
Latent semantic analysis and cosine similarity in
combination with term-frequency-inverse document
frequency (tf-idf) adjusted to our case would be a
solid basis to begin with.
4)
Finally, a conditional probabilistic kernel, such as
the marginalized kernel from Tsuda [34], will be
employed to counteract on one hand the “soft” cate-
gorization of locations mentioned in Section I and on
the other hand the general underlying uncertainty in
humans’ behavior. Kernels represent principally the
similarity between two objects (in our case locations)
and is deﬁned as the dot product in the feature space.
Tsuda’s kernel employs both visible and hidden in-
formation for its calculation.
By fusing the above four types of similarity measures, we
expect to overcome the single drawbacks that come when each
of them is used alone. In tangible terms, our plan is to imple-
ment and evaluate each of them separately ﬁrst. Then, the best
of them will be selected and incorporated into our algorithm.
Majority voting and/or a hierarchical decision making process
shall be considered and investigated for determining the ﬁnal
similarity score.
C. Social behavior from personality and mental state and vice
versa
Our focus rests on the group of personality traits and
mental states that correlate stronger with the disposition for
changing between locations. There are two directions one can
go and we plan to consider both. On one hand, we want to
derive movement behavior and consequently locations from
them. This is done indirectly by taking them into consideration
at the semantic clustering process mentioned in the previous
Section. On the other hand, we want to use the available data
to infer these automatically in the ﬁrst place. Here comes
axiomatic or rule-based reasoning into play. The rules shall
regard all available information and knowledge at the time
of the inference process. Two simpliﬁed Semantic Web Rule
Language (SWRL) [35] rule examples in a human readable
syntax are shown below:
Person(?p) ∧ hasHighWorkload(?p) =⇒ hasStress(?p)
and
Person(?p) ∧ PersonalityTrait(?t) ∧ introversion(?t)
∧ hasPersonalityTrait(?p, ?t) ∧ Situation(?s)
∧ hasCurrentLocation(?p, ?l) ∧ isPArk(?l) ∧ isAlone(?p)
=⇒ hasStress(?p)
The second rule describes implicitly the assertion that an
introvert person, in contrast to an extrovert one, seeks more
probably space and distance when he feels he is stressed, rather
than company.
IV.
FIRST RESULTS
A ﬁrst light draft of our ontology suite has already been
implemented in OWL2 with Protege [36]. At this stage, it
consists of four of the overall ﬁve aforementioned major
ontologies; the Location, the Person, Personality & Mood,
the Activity & Actions and the Temporal & Event ontology.
Right now, we use a hybrid semantic similarity metric, which
takes both the common features of locations, as well as the
topology into account to cluster the available locations and
create our corresponding location-speciﬁc frames with regard
to time, activity, action and/or a certain event. Then, we employ
the measured semantic similarity scores to update a 1st Order
Markov Chain model by applying the following formula:
p(lcur)i,new = p(lmaxSim) × Sim + α × p(lcur)i,old
(4)
•
p: Transition probability of the Markov Model
•
lcur: Current location
•
lmaxSim: Most similar location to lcur
•
Sim: Semantic similarity score
•
α: Offset parameter
Since, to the best of our our knowledge, there is no
open dataset containing the semantic information, we need to
evaluate our approach, we preliminary tested it on a 5-week
long real life dataset, which consists of semantically annotated
locations and the respective purpose of visit and activities of
4 users. The data were collected during a user study by using
an Android tracking and annotation App we designed. Table I
illustrates the performance of our ﬁrst draft approach compared
to the standalone Markov model and the semantic trajectory
based approach of Ying discussed in Section II.
TABLE I. EVALUATION TABLE. PSSSA vs. 1st ORDER MARKOV
MODEL vs.YING’S APPROACH (min. support=0,01, a=0,2 and b=0,8).
Metrics
ACC
F-measure
Precision
Recall
U1 (1), Markov
0,32
0,46
0,38
0,75
U1(1), PSSSA
0,29
0,42
0,33
0,79
U1 (1), Ying
0,27
0,29
0,29
0,36
U5 (2), Markov
0,23
0,37
0,33
0,56
U5 (2), PSSSA
0,28
0,45
0,40
0,66
U5 (2), Ying
0,2
0,2
0,2
0,53
U2 (3), Markov
0,39
0,55
0,43
0,87
U2 (3), PSSSA
0,37
0,52
0,42
0,87
U2 (3), Ying
0,2
0,2
0,2
0,2
U4 (4), Markov
0,20
0,24
0,23
0,60
U4 (4), PSSSA
0,21
0,24
0,23
0,6 1
U4 (4), Ying
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
As we can see, our approach clearly outperforms Ying’s
framework, which performs extremely weak, especially in the
sparse data case. Our approach achieves a f-score of 0.52, the
overall second highest score behind the Markov with 0.55.
At the same time, it outperforms all other approaches with
respect to recall. This reﬂects the fact that our approach can
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

handle extremely good sparse data sets. However, table I also
points out that in two of the cases, the Markov can provide
slightly better results than our approach. This can be in part
attributed to the similarity threshold we used (0.5%) and in
part to the small and unfortunately incomplete semantically
annotated data set due to recording inconsistencies during the
user study.
V.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This research is centered around the following research
question: Does Semantic Similarity Analysis lead to a more
human-like representation of locations? Moreover, does this
approach provide us with a solid basis for predicting loca-
tions more accurately? Some ﬁrst fundamental steps towards
answering the above two questions have already been made.
Promising preliminary results underpin our hypothesis and
point the way to a clearly structured future work to come.
First of all, we plan to reﬁne and ﬁnish up our ontology
suite. After that, we want to investigate various similarity met-
rics, such as the marginalized kernel discussed in Section III-B.
Then we plan to focus further on the personality-situation
debate, because we believe it is a “cherry on the top” feature on
the way to reaching personalization and building a preferably
human-like Human-Machine Interface. For this purpose we
collaborate with a team of psychologists in order to extend
our ontological model accordingly. At last, we plan to work on
an automated method of propagating our ontology suite with
the available data. Various ontology learning methods shall be
investigated and tested. Calendar entries, Email content and
Reminders or Todo Check List apps shall be used to support
this attempt.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Foursquare,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.foursquare.com/
[2]
R. Nathan et al., “A movement ecology paradigm for unifying organ-
ismal movement research,” vol. 105, no. 49, 2008, pp. 19 052–19 059.
[3]
“Oxford english dictionary,” September, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/deﬁnition/knowledge
[4]
C. J. Fillmore and C. Baker, “A frames approach to semantic analysis,”
in The Oxford handbook of linguistic analysis, 2010.
[5]
M. Minsky, “A framework for representing knowledge.”
Cambridge,
MA, USA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1974.
[6]
R. Glassey and R. Ferguson, “Modeling location for pervasive environ-
ments,” in 1st UK-UbiNet Workshop, 2003.
[7]
J. J.-C. Ying, W.-C. Lee, T.-C. Weng, and V. S. Tseng, “Semantic
trajectory mining for location prediction,” in Proceedings of the 19th
ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geo-
graphic Information Systems, ser. GIS ’11.
New York, NY, USA:
ACM, 2011, pp. 34–43.
[8]
J. J.-C. Ying, W.-C. Lee, and V. S. Tseng, “Mining geographic-temporal-
semantic patterns in trajectories for location prediction,” vol. 5, no. 1.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, Jan. 2014, pp. 2:1–2:33.
[9]
N. Samaan and A. Karmouch, “A mobility prediction architecture based
on contextual knowledge and spatial conceptual maps,” vol. 4, no. 6.
Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Educational Activities Department, Nov.
2005, pp. 537–551.
[10]
N. Samaan, A. Karmouch, and H. Kheddouci, “Mobility prediction
based service location and delivery,” in Canadian Conference on Elec-
trical and Computer Engineering 2004 (IEEE Cat. No.04CH37513),
vol. 4, May 2004, pp. 2307–2310 Vol.4.
[11]
N. Samaan, B. Benmammar, F. Krief, and A. Karmouch, “Prediction-
based advanced resource reservation in mobile environments,” in Cana-
dian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2005., May
2005, pp. 1411–1414.
[12]
Y. A. Ridhawi, I. A. Ridhawi, A. Karmouch, and A. Nayak, “A context-
aware and location prediction framework for dynamic environments,”
in 2011 IEEE 7th International Conference on Wireless and Mobile
Computing, Networking and Communications (WiMob), Oct 2011, pp.
172–179.
[13]
I. A. Ridhawi, M. Aloqaily, A. Karmouch, and N. Agoulmine, “A
location-aware user tracking and prediction system,” in 2009 Global
Information Infrastructure Symposium, June 2009, pp. 1–8.
[14]
R. Wannous, J. Malki, A. Bouju, and C. Vincent, “Trajectory ontology
inference considering domain and temporal dimensions: Application to
marine mammals.”
Elsevier, 2016.
[15]
X. Long, L. Jin, and J. Joshi, “Exploring trajectory-driven local
geographic topics in foursquare,” in Proceedings of the 2012 ACM
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, ser. UbiComp ’12.
New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2012, pp. 927–934.
[16]
R. Krishnamurthy, P. Kapanipathi, A. P. Sheth, and K. Thirunarayan,
“Knowledge enabled approach to predict the location of twitter users,”
in The Semantic Web. Latest Advances and New Domains: 12th
European Semantic Web Conference, ESWC 2015, Portoroz, Slovenia,
May 31 – June 4, 2015. Proceedings. Springer International Publishing,
2015, pp. 187–201.
[17]
“Twitter,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.twitter.com
[18]
N. R. Mabroukeh and C. I. Ezeife, “Using domain ontology for semantic
web usage mining and next page prediction,” in Proceedings of the 18th
ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM
2009, Hong Kong, China, November 2-6, 2009, 2009, pp. 1677–1680.
[19]
Q. Zhao et al., “Time-dependent semantic similarity measure of queries
using historical click-through data,” in Proceedings of the 15th interna-
tional conference on World Wide Web.
ACM, 2006, pp. 543–552.
[20]
S. Kassin, “Psychology.”
Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2004.
[21]
D. Funder, “The personality puzzle.”
W. W. NORTON & Company
Incorporated, 2015.
[22]
W. Fleeson, “Toward a structure-and process-integrated view of person-
ality: Traits as density distributions of states.” vol. 80, no. 6. American
Psychological Association, 2001, p. 1011.
[23]
A. R. Buss, “The trait-situation controversy and the concept of interac-
tion,” vol. 3, no. 2.
Sage Publications, 1977, pp. 196–201.
[24]
J. J. Jaccard, “Predicting social behavior from personality traits,” vol. 7,
no. 4.
Elsevier, 1974, pp. 358–367.
[25]
P. Borkenau, “To predict some of the people more of the time,” in Fifty
Years of Personality Psychology.
Springer US, 1993, pp. 237–249.
[26]
S. Adali and J. Golbeck, “Predicting personality with social behavior:
a comparative study,” vol. 4, no. 1, 2014, p. 159.
[27]
J. Staiano, B. Lepri, N. Aharony, F. Pianesi, N. Sebe, and A. Pentland,
“Friends don’t lie: Inferring personality traits from social network
structure,” in Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous
Computing.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2012, pp. 321–330.
[28]
M. Codescu, G. Horsinka, O. Kutz, T. Mossakowski, and R. Rau,
“Osmonto – an ontology of openstreetmap tags,” 2014.
[29]
V. V. Hainˇs, S. Lovrenˇci´c, and V. Kirini´c, “Personality model represen-
tation using ontology.”
[30]
J. Hastings, W. Ceusters, B. Smith, and K. Mulligan, “Dispositions
and processes in the emotion ontology,” in Proceedings of the 2nd
International Conference on Biomedical Ontology, 2011, pp. 71–78.
[31]
A. Gangemi and V. Presutti, “Ontology design patterns,” 2009.
[32]
Z. Wu and M. Palmer, “Verbs semantics and lexical selection,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 32Nd Annual Meeting on Association for Computational
Linguistics, ser. ACL ’94.
Stroudsburg, PA, USA: Association for
Computational Linguistics, 1994, pp. 133–138.
[33]
D. Lin, “An information-theoretic deﬁnition of similarity,” in Proceed-
ings of the Fifteenth International Conference on Machine Learning.
San Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1998,
pp. 296–304.
[34]
K. Tsuda, T. Kin, and K. Asai, “Marginalized kernels for biological
sequences,” vol. 18, no. 1, 2002, pp. S268–S275.
[35]
“Swrl: A semantic web rule language,” 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://www.w3.org/Submission/SWRL/
[36]
“Protege,” 2017. [Online]. Available: http://protege.stanford.edu
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

