Immersive Virtual Environment and Artiﬁcial Intelligence:
A proposal of Context Aware Virtual Environment
Fabr´ıcio Herpich∗, Gleizer Bierhalz Voss†, Felipe Becker Nunes†, Rafaela Ribeiro Jardim∗
and Roseclea Duarte Medina∗
∗ PPGI - Computer Science Post Graduate Program
Federal University of Santa Maria (UFSM)
Networks Group and Applied Computing (GRECA)
Santa Maria, RS, Brazil
† PPGIE - Computer Education Post Graduate Program
Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS)
Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil
( fabricio.herpich, gleizer.voss, nunesfb, rafa.rjardim, roseclea.medina )@gmail.com
Abstract—Virtual worlds has emerged as an environment of
great interaction and immersion, where students have at their
disposal different types of tools which are necessary for carrying
out its activities. The objective of this paper is to present a
proposal for developing an immersive environment for teaching
Computer Networks that ﬁts to the context and cognitive proﬁle
of the student. For this, the OpenSim [1] virtual world and the
environment Moodle [2] are connected by the technology Sloodle
[3]. In the immersive environment, agents with rules of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI), which offer support to learners according to
these cognitive characteristics and their level of expertise.
Keywords–Virtual World; Artiﬁcial Intelligence; Cognitive Pro-
ﬁle; Expertise; Computer Networks.
I.
INTRODUCTION
With the increasing use of Information and Communication
Technologies (ICT) in the educational scenario, several needs
were emerging and making necessary a reﬂection on the new
paradigms of computing in education. In this context, many
studies have been conducted in immersive virtual environments
to be able to provide the student interaction with learning
objects and the ability to be immersed in the environment
[4][5][6].
Through the virtual worlds, for example, Second Life [7],
OpenSimulator [1] and OpenWonderland [8] it is possible to
create immersive virtual environments. However, the creation
of immersive environments focused on education requires
many factors to be considered, such as educational objectives
and teaching strategies based on well-deﬁned learning theories,
friendly design and objects that are able to encourage the
interaction and collaboration among users.
This paper aims to present an immersive virtual environ-
ment in development, which not only includes features of
an educational environment, but too characteristics of con-
text awareness, because it provides personalized assistance to
students according to their cognitive proﬁle and their level
of expertise. For that, Intelligent Pedagogical Agents (IPA),
has been implemented through rules of AI, since, according
to Soliman and Guetl [9], in an Immersive Virtual Learning
environments, it is expected that the learner will have great
ﬂexibility, faced with numerous learning opportunities and
therefore it requires intelligent support and guidance.
Immersive experiences tend to further the engagement
between students with the objectives established in the en-
vironment; thus, it is also possible to claim that the IPA could
contribute signiﬁcantly in helping the students, because accord-
ing to Soliman and Guetl [9], IPA can act as a teacher, learning
facilitator, or even a student peer in collaborative settings.
The IPA will guide the learner in the virtual environment,
explain topics, ask questions, give feedback, help the learner
collaborate with others, provide personalized learning support,
and act upon the learner in different times and in virtual places.
This paper is organized as it follows: theoretical references
are presented in Section II, which exposes some concepts about
immersive virtual environments and artiﬁcial intelligence; in
Section III, a metodology is presented. Section IV presents
the proposal and related work. Conclusion and future work
are discussed in Section V.
II.
THEORETICAL FOUNDATION
This Section aims to identify the main concepts related to
the use of AI in Immersive Environments for supporting the
processes of teaching and learning.
A. Virtual Worlds
Also known as immersive virtual environments or meta-
verse, virtual worlds are tools that simulate the real world
environment in three dimension (3D), providing the user with
a controlled environment experience with many possibilities.
According to Bainbridge [10], they are deﬁned as persistent
online computer-generated environments where people can
interact in a comparable way to the real world, either for work
or for leisure.
Virtual worlds allow performing many activities, including
training and tasks of educational character. According to
Valente et al. [11], 3D virtual worlds enable the inclusion
and practice of activities for experiential learning, simulation,
modeling of complex scenarios, among others, with oppor-
tunities for collaboration and co-creation that cannot easily
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

be experienced on other platforms. Medina [12] reinforces
this by stating that the learning gained through the personal
experiences of the participants and their interactions with
other participants, becomes more productive, dynamic and
consolidated.
We can quote as examples of metaverse Second Life,
OpenSim and OpenWonderland. This project will work with
OpenSim because it is open source, it has extensive documen-
tation, and also, according to Voss et al. [13], it allows the
creation of the virtual world, in which all desired objects are
placed, such as the creation of classroom, chairs, interactive
scripts, among others. Also, this tool is used by the research
group in which the authors of this paper belong to.
B. Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Artiﬁcial Intelligence is an area of computing that for years
has been devoted to propose methods, techniques and tools that
may be able to represent human knowledge in artiﬁcial sys-
tems. Besides, according to Liu et al. [14], artiﬁcial intelligence
is the science of research, design and application of intelligent
machines or intelligent system to simulate intelligent human
capabilities and extension of human intelligence.
Filho [15] suggested that these methods and techniques
should allow the computer to simulate the behavior aspects of
intelligence, such as playing chess, proving logical theorems,
understanding speciﬁc parts of a natural language, for example,
Portuguese, among others.
However, other authors such as Liu et al. [14], Pollock [16],
and Singh and Gupta [17], state that the AI should also be
able to be aware of and demonstrate cognitive skills (problem
solving, reasoning, and be autonomous to the point of being
self-taught) and not just replicate knowledge.
C. Intelligent Agents and IPAs
Intelligent agents in the educational context are widely
used as tools to support students with the goal of supporting
the student interaction with the environment they are situated,
providing personalized learning. In this context, Tyugu [18]
understands that intelligent agents are software components
that possess some features of intelligent behavior that makes
them special: proactiveness, understanding of an agent com-
munication language (ACL), reactivity (ability to make some
decisions and to act).
Some authors such as Guetl and Soliman [9] and Garrido
et al. [19] deﬁne intelligent agents used in education as IPAs,
which, according to Guetl and Soliman [9], IPAs combine
different characteristics including artiﬁcial intelligence capa-
bilities to enrich the learning environment. Already Garrido et
al. [19], states that they are software agents, which have ed-
ucational purposes. They are able to communicate, cooperate,
discuss, and guide other students or agents.
Moreover, Soliman and Guetl [20], elect ﬁve Pedagog-
ical Agents Functional Requirements, which are: Learner
interface requirements, Autonomy, Cognitive abilities, Agent
Social Abilities, Environment and Context Awareness. For
the development of this research, were approached three of
these concepts: Autonomy, Cognitive Abilities, Environment
and Context Awareness. The autonomy of the IPA is critical
because that is how you will give origin to the processes of
learning in virtual worlds, through interactions, explanations
of classes, 3D objects or scenes. Another interesting point
related to this research is the question of Context Awareness,
because, according to Soliman and Guetl [20], inside a virtual
world, this is related to the ability of the agent being able
to discovering, constructing or suggesting learning resources,
scenarios or scenes that are suitable to learner abilities and
goals.
D. Context Aware
Context aware computing is characterized by performing
the collection of various information involving the user, i.e.,
computational context of the user, physical and time. Thus,
information is collected about the environment, in which its
location and computational device used. According to Dey
[21], context is any information that can be used to characterize
the situation of entities that are considered relevant to the
interaction between an user and an application.
Systems that use context information to provide personal-
ized services to users, such as the adaptation of content and
tools according to the user preference, may be considered
a sensitive environment to the context. For Baldauf et al.
[22], these are able to adapt their operations to the current
context without explicitly requiring the user intervention, thus
seeking to maximize their usability and effectiveness, taking
into account the environmental context. Possible applications
are the tour guides, restaurants, smart homes, among others.
According to Knappmeyer et al. [23], context area can be
considered as an interdisciplinary ﬁeld of research involving
artiﬁcial intelligence, mobility, human-machine interaction,
among others, in which, many researches have been conducted
to overcome existing challenges.
In this aspect, information about the context of the cog-
nitive proﬁle of the user and their level of expertise will
be used, which will be incorporated into the API from the
implementation of rules on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, as described
in Section IV.
III.
METHODOLOGY
The development of this study arose from the need of a
tool that can contribute and assist students in their learning
process in the discipline of Computer Networks. This research
proposes a different approach to the theory-practice relation-
ship in the discipline of Computer Networks approach through
an immersive virtual environment. For this purpose, a set of
steps that the environment should suit were developed, as it
follows:
The ﬁrst phase was characterized by a survey of the theoret-
ical reference about the topic, where also the technologies that
would be used in the development of this work were deﬁned,
as shown in Figure 1.
The technologies discussed were WampServer [25], Moo-
dle [2], OpenSimulator [1], Sloodle [3] and Firestorm [26]:
•
WampServer was selected because it is free, hosts
the necessary applications for the operation of tech-
nologies and includes three elements: MySQL, PHP
and Apache. It creates a local server that will host
the MySQL database application of OpenSim and the
learning environment Moodle.
•
Virtual Learning Environment (VLE) Moodle was
selected because it is open source and widely used
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 1. Technologies used. [24]
by the research institution of the authors, as well
as OpenSimulator. Moodle materials and activities
related to the discipline of Computer Networks were
available and they were displayed to the students
through Sloodle technology.
•
Sloodle technology was chosen because it is open
source and its performs integration between OpenSim
and Moodle, thus enabling the display and interaction
of materials available on the VLE for users of Open-
Sim. As for the Firestorm viewer, which is used in the
projects of the research group of the authors, it has the
function of making the connection to the virtual world,
plus allowing importation of several objects, as already
discussed by Nunes et al. [27], which highlighted the
importance in choosing a viewer.
The second phase addressed the implementation of immer-
sive virtual environment in OpenSim. In addition, a course
was created in Moodle, inserting contents about Computer
Networks.
As the research is still in progress, other phases will be dis-
cussed: lesson plan, learning objects in 3D, instructional design
and theories of learning in immersive virtual environments,
and ﬁnally, evaluating the environment with undergraduate
students.
IV.
PROPOSAL
This study presents a work in progress, which involves the
development of an immersive virtual environment for teaching
Computer Networks. In this environment, it will be used
context information of students for the adaptation of materials,
tools and activities to their cognitive proﬁle. This same context
information will also be used to deﬁne the level of expertise
of the student. Such context information is very important
for the process of teaching and learning of students, because
through the adaptations of contents to the students and the
support offered by the intelligent agent, it is possible to offer an
appropriate, personalized and objective support to the learner.
In addition to the cognitive proﬁle information and level
of expertise, this environment also aims to gather information
about the progress of the process of student learning through
Sloodle Tracker, where it is possible to monitor the progress of
students within the immersive environment. With this tool, it
is possible to obtain location information of the student within
the environment and monitor their activities. In this sense, it
is intended to make the intelligent agent follow the student
activities and offer him support in cases of difﬁculty.
Thus, the environment will advance to collect information
about the cognitive proﬁle and level of expertise (Figure 2).
Later, it will collect information about the student learning pro-
cess. From this information and with the formulated context,
it will be possible to implement via AI, rules so that the IPA
can offer adequate support to the needs of the student, thus
providing a personalized education.
Figure 2. Structure of the proposal.
To this end, in addition to the IPA, the immersive envi-
ronment as a whole offers ﬁve regions, which are: Serialist,
Holistic, Reﬂective, Divergent and Computer Networks. From
this perspective, when the student accesses the immersive vir-
tual environment, he will be directed to the area of Computer
Networks (Figure 3), in which the person has to answer a
questionnaire, so one can set his cognitive proﬁle. Then, the
student will be teleported to the region that ﬁts its cognitive
proﬁle; but, it is important to note that the student will not be
prevented from viewing the other regions, providing freedom
of choice to the user.
Figure 3. Immersive virtual environment.
Furthermore, immersive environment will also use infor-
mation from the user’s context to make adjustments to the im-
mersive environment and IPA characteristics. This is essential
to the process of personalized teaching and learning. Also, it is
essential to identify the cognitive proﬁle of the student and his
level of expertise. In addition,in order to provide an adequate
level of education based on the experience of the student, it is
also possible to focus the teaching on the student’s preferences
and/or needs.
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
With the integration of new educational technologies in
the teaching context, new paradigms of teaching and learning
that are transforming traditional education scenario emerged.
Thus, the creation of new methods and instructional strategies
that address the extent of teaching beyond the classroom
environment and the use of technology in education become
necessary.
Given this context, this paper has proposed a work in
progress toward the teaching of Computer Networks. To pro-
vide resources and establish an immersive virtual environment
to the students, integration of Moodle with OpenSim has been
accomplished by Sloodle tool. These immersive environments
allow educators to create new teaching alternatives, through
simulations of equipment and performing experiments.
In this research, it was observed as a general result, the
existing potential in immersive virtual environments focused
on education. This case could corelate theoretical concepts
with practice, not only because of the immersive environment,
but also because of the personalized support offered by the
IPA, the content presented in Computer Networks, and the
tools available to the student.
Moreover, the fact that the immersive environment uses
context information of the user to perform the adaptation
of their characteristics is fundamental to the process of per-
sonalized teaching and learning, as well as to identify the
cognitive proﬁle of the student. It is also capable to identify
their level of expertise and thus, in addition to it, provide an
adequate education for the level of the student experience. It
is also possible to do a more focused teaching based on their
preferences and/or needs.
According to what has been presented, this study proposed
to cover as future work the implementation of other features
and functionality in the immersive virtual environment.
It will be validated with the use of the students that
are taking Computer Networks at the undergraduate level. A
comparison will be performed based on the knowledge level of
the students before and after the use of the environment. This
way we can show and prove the efﬁciency of the use of virtual
worlds for education. The control group for this comparison
will be the students who did not use the virtual lab. There is
also the intention to tailor the user interface environment using
instructional design concepts supported by theories of learning
and their use in virtual worlds.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Open Simulator,” 2014, URL: http://www.opensimulator.org [accessed:
May/2014].
[2]
“Moodle,”
2014,
URL:
http://www.moodle.org.br
[accessed:
April/2014].
[3]
“Sloodle,” 2014, URL: http://www.sloodle.org [accessed: May/2014].
[4]
M. Callaghan, K. McCusker, J. L. Losada, J. Harkin, and S. Wilson,
“Integrating virtual worlds & virtual learning environments for online
education,” 2009 International IEEE Consumer Electronics Society’s
Games Innovations Conference, Aug. 2009, pp. 54–63.
[5]
F. M. Schaf, S. Paladini, and C. E. Pereira, “3D AutoSysLab Prototype
A Social , Immersive and Mixed Reality Approach for Collaborative
Learning Environments,” iJEP, vol. 2, no. 2, 2012, pp. 15–22.
[6]
F. B. Nunes, S. Stieler, G. B. Voss, and R. D. Medina, “Virtual Worlds
and Education: A Case of Study in the Teaching of Computer Networks
Using the Sloodle,” 2013 XV Symposium on Virtual and Augmented
Reality, May 2013, pp. 248–251.
[7]
“Second
Life,”
2014,
URL:
http://secondlife.com/
[accessed:
July/2014].
[8]
“Open Wonderland,” 2014, URL: http://openwonderland.org/ [accessed:
July/2014].
[9]
M. Soliman and C. Guetl, “Intelligent pedagogical agents in immersive
virtual learning environments: A review,” MIPRO, 2010 Proceedings of
the 33rd, 2010, pp. 827–832.
[10]
W. S. Bainbridge, “Online Worlds: Convergence of the Real and the
Virtual,” Human-Computer Interaction Series. Springer-Verlag London
Limited, 2010, p. 318.
[11]
C. Valente and J. Mattar, “Second Life e web 2.0 na educao: o potencial
revolucionrio das novas tecnologias,” Novatec, 2007.
[12]
R. D. Medina, “ASTERIX: Aprendizagem signiﬁcativa e tecnologias
aplicadas no ensino de redes de computadores: integrando e explo-
rando possibilidades,” Tese de Doutorado. Universidade Federal do Rio
Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, 2004, p. 174.
[13]
G. B. Voss, F. B. Nunes, A. R. Muhlbeier, and R. D. Medina, “Context-
Aware Virtual Laboratory for Teaching Computer Networks: A Proposal
in the 3D OpenSim Environment,” 2013 XV Symposium on Virtual and
Augmented Reality, May 2013, pp. 252–255.
[14]
Q. Liu, L. Diao, and G. Tu, “The Application of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
in Mobile Learning,” 2010 International Conference on System Science,
Engineering Design and Manufacturing Informatization, Nov. 2010, pp.
80–83.
[15]
C. F. Filho, “Histria da Computao. O caminho do pensamento e da
tecnologia,” Porto Alegre: EDIPUCRS, 2007, p. 205.
[16]
J. L. Pollock, “How to Build a Person: A Prolegomenon,” Cambridge:
MIT Press, 1989.
[17]
V. K. Singh and A. K. Gupta, “From artiﬁcial to collective intelligence:
Perspectives and implications,” 2009 5th International Symposium on
Applied Computational Intelligence and Informatics, May 2009, pp.
545–550.
[18]
E. Tyugu, “Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Cyber Defense,” 3rd International
Conference on Cyber Conﬂict, vol. 3, 2011, pp. 1–11.
[19]
P. Garrido, F. J. Martinez, C. Guetl, and I. Plaza, “Enchancing Intelligent
Pedagogical Agents in Virtual Worlds,” in Proceedings of the 18th
International Conference on Computers in Education, 2010, p. 8.
[20]
M. Soliman and C. Guetl, “Evaluation of intelligent agent frameworks
for human learning,” 14th International Conference on Interactive Col-
laborative Learning (ICL2011)
11th International Conference Virtual
University (vu’11), 2011, pp. 191–194.
[21]
A. K. Dey, “Understanding and Using Context,” Personal and Ubiqui-
tous Computing, vol. 5, no. 1, 2001, pp. 4–7.
[22]
M. Baldauf, S. Dustdar, and F. Rosenberg, “A survey on context-aware
systems,” Int. J. Ad Hoc Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 2, 2007, pp. 263–
277.
[23]
M. Knappmeyer, S. L. Kiani, E. S. Reetz, N. Baker, and R. Tonjes,
“Survey of Context Provisioning Middleware,” IEEE Communications
Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 15, no. 3, 2013, pp. 1492–1519.
[24]
F. Herpich, R. Ribeiro, F. B. Nunes, G. B. Voss, L. M. Fontoura,
and R. D. Medina, “Virtual Lab: An Immersive Tool to Assist in the
Teaching of Software Engineering,” XVI Symposium on Virtual and
Augmented Reality (SVR), 2014, pp. 118–126.
[25]
“Wamp Server,” 2014, URL: http://www.wampserver.com/en [accessed:
April/2014].
[26]
“Firestorm,” 2014, URL: http://www.ﬁrestormviewer.org [accessed:
May/2014].
[27]
F. B. Nunes, G. B. Voss, F. Herpich, A. R. Muhlbeier, C. C. Possobom,
and R. D. Medina, “Viewers para ambiente virtuais imersivos: uma
an´alise comparativa te´orico-pr´atica,” RENOTE - Novas Tecnologias na
Educac¸˜ao, vol. 11, no. n. 1, July, 2013, pp. 1–10.
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

