M-learning as a Motivational Method for Adult Basic and Professional 
Education 
 
 Claysllan Ferreira Xavier, George Mendes Teixeira Santos, Selmon Franco Mascarenhas, Mauro Henrique Lima 
de Boni, Adelino Rodrigues Soares 
 
Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology of Tocantins 
Palmas, Brazil 
  
Emails:  {claysllan, mhldeboni, adelinorsoares}@gmail.com, selmon01@uol.com.br, mtgeorge_@hotmail.com 
 
 
Abstract​—It is very important to find ways to improve the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
teaching methods of adult students enrolled in basic and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
professional
education
programs,
since
these
students
 
 
 
 
 
 
generally have a deficient education to start with. One way to
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
do so may be using technology to make it easier to access the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
content to be studied. A mobile application, built according to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
user-centered design, allows students who own a smartphone
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
to access videos chosen by teachers. In addition, students can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
answer quizzes as a way to test what they have learned. This
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mobile application could help these students with the basics of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mathematics. After presenting and testing the proposed tool,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55.7% of the students evaluated the tool in a positive way and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
reported that it improved their understanding of the subject
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
studied. 
Keywords-Mobile Learning; Technology; Education; Adult
 
 
 
 
 
Education. 
I.
 INTRODUCTION 
The National Program of Brazil for the Integration of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Basic Education and Vocational Education into the Youth
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and Adult Education Mode (in Portuguese PROEJA)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
established by Decree nr. 5.840 [1], of July 13, 2006, has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the aim of combining Youth and Adult Education courses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with Professional education. PROEJA seeks to teach young
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people and adults who have not had the opportunity to study
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
in middle and/or high school at the regular age and who also
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
seek to enter a profession. Thus, the youngest age for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
entering in PROEJA is 18 years old [2]. 
In general, PROEJA is a modality of teaching involving
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
young people and adults. Thus, teachers must find ways to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pass the contents to students in a manner that is dynamic
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
and easy to understand. Especially with this group of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
students, the creation of a new model of teaching and
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
studying is vital. 
Technology
enables
the
use
of
slides,
 
 
 
 
 
 
video-conferencing,
collaborative
tools,
among
other
 
 
 
 
 
technological solutions that can aid the teachers in applying
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
content and improve student's learning experience. Another
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
important point in this learning experience is Mobile
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learning (M-learning). It is a research field that looks at how
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
mobile applications can collaborate in student learning.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M-learning is a very rapidly developing area that has been
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
considered as the future of learning. Mobile devices enhance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learning at any moment or place, providing access to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learning resources, even outside the school. This flexibility
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
makes it possible for adult learners to minimize their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unproductive
time,
which
may
enhance
their
 
 
 
 
 
 
work-education balance [3]. 
PROEJA students, in general, have had a precarious
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
basic education. This makes the teaching activity even more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
challenging for the teachers of this program. With math,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
particularly, this becomes more visible, considering the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
nature of the competencies acquired. This paper lays out the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
process for producing a mobile application using available
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
open and free technologies for supporting the teaching and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learning process in Mathematics at the Federal Institute of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Education, Science and Technology of Tocantins (IFTO).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An important objective is to make the contents of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subject attractive and easier for the students.  
Therefore, we sought to gather data with the purpose of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
answering the following research problem: Can the use of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology help teaching math in PROEJA? To do this, we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developed an application with a user-centered design so that
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
it was possible to analyze the user experience from the use
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of this software. 
For
developing
the
present
study,
we
used
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bibliographical and field research, as well as a case study.
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
The
bibliographical
research was based on scientific
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
publications on user experience and user-centered design.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We developed the case study in its entirety through field
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
research at IFTO, campus Palmas, involving the students’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
profile, their expectations about the tool, general evaluation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the tool and satisfaction survey. 
 This paper is divided into the following sections:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 2 presents the work related to the problem; Section
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
3 describes the proposal presented to solve the problem and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 4 presents the method used to develop the solution;
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 5 reports the results and presents analysis and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discussions, and finally, Section 6 draws conclusions about
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
the project and future work. 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

II.
RELATED WORK 
Silva et al. [4] argued the need to search for new
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
methodologies which value learning in order to discover a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
form of learning that would be significant for
PROEJA
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
students. In the study, it was possible to show that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mathematical calculations represent the area of study that is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the most challenging to the students of this class. Therefore,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the authors concluded that they are dealing with a unique
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
audience that needs to be distinguished from the students of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other modalities of teaching in several aspects, such as,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
limited time in the classroom and difficulties in performing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
work outside the school. 
In [5], the authors discussed the effect of M-learning on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mathematics learning. The result of this paper showed that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
utilization of mobile devices increases the motivation of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
students. It means that there is a direct and significant
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
relationship between use of mobile devices and student
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
motivation towards mathematics. The authors concluded
 
 
 
 
 
 
that M-learning can help to improve students' academic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
performance. 
Saccol et al. [6] perform a real experience in M-learning
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
for training Information Technology (IT) professionals. For
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this purpose, they developed and implemented a virtual
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
mobile learning environment called COMTEXT, which was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
designed to support competence development for workers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
using PocketPCs. In this study, the learners showed interest
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and
excitement
for
the
innovation
characteristic
of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M-learning,
especially
because
they
could
become
 
 
 
 
 
 
connected and use learning resources in different settings. 
Mehdipour et al. [7] state that M-learning is emerging as
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
one of the solutions to the challenges faced by education.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The main purpose of their study was to describe the current
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
state of mobile learning, benefits, challenges, and barriers to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
supporting teaching and learning. They concluded that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
use of M-learning in classrooms helped the students
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
working interdependently, in groups, or individually to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solve problems, to work on projects, to meet individual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
needs, and to allow for student voice and choice. With
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
access to so much content anytime and anywhere, there are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plenty of opportunities for formal and informal learning,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
both inside and outside the classroom. 
In
[8],
Mahamad et al. proposed M-learning for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mathematics by allowing the extension of technology in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
traditional classroom in terms of learning and teaching. A
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
survey has been conducted to investigate the use of mobile
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
devices and to determine if primary school students were
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
ready for mobile learning. The result of the survey shows
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that mobile phones can be useful in learning mathematics as
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
most of primary school students already use them through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
many communication activities. 
 
III.
PROPOSAL 
The teaching of mathematics to students through the use
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of communication technologies is currently widespread in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
all social strata and is associated with the vast content of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information available on the Internet. 
Our proposal is to develop an application for mobile
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
devices (App), such as smartphones and tablets, which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
makes it easy and practical for students to use specific
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
content and mathematics classes, according to the program
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
content, material available on the Internet and free access. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
addition, the application will offer quizzes to help students
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
test their knowledge, correct any mistakes in understanding,
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
and allow the teacher to give tests for assessing student
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
performance. 
The assumption was that an easy-to-use application
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
containing contents taught in video-lessons for better
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding and quizzes to test knowledge could help
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
students in learning math. Carvalho et al. [9] make it clear
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
that theories and practice associated with information
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology in education have repercussions worldwide,
 
 
 
 
 
 
precisely because the technological tools offer academic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
content,
objects,
spaces,
and
instruments
capable
of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
renewing situations for interaction, expression, creation,
 
 
 
 
 
 
communication and information. All this makes learning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
very different from what has traditionally been grounded in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
writing and print media. 
A. Operating Structure 
In general, the system and the App will use the concept
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of client-service architecture. In this format, the database
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resides on a remote server and its information is shared
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through services that are located on the same server as the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
application's Web service. This Web service will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exposing the services through a RestFul API (Application
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Programming Interface), which will be used by both the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Web system and the App. 
According to [10] RestFul API is an architectural pattern
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
that exposes data and functionality through resources
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accessed via dedicated URLs over HTTP. REST services
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
feature a request-response pattern, where the HTTP methods
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Post, Get, Put, and Delete on a given resource are mapped to
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
the respective CRUD operations: Create, Read, Update, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Delete. Service responses contain the representation of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requested resource presented in CSV, JSON, XML, or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
similar formats. This architecture provides greater data
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
integrity because all users are working with the same
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information. 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
Figure 1. Software Structure. 
 
As can be seen in Figure 1, the system has two aspects:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
teacher and student. The teacher will be using a Web
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
system, accessed by the browser, and through it will post
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
videos and quizzes for the application. It will also be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possible to manage registered students with the application.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
On the other side will be the students who will use the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system through the application that will consume all the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information registered by the teachers. 
 
 
Figure 2. Video Screen. 
As can be seen from Figure 2, the video screen lists the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
video lessons related to the content selected by the student.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
They will help the student understand the content, thus
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
taking away the doubts that came after the lesson. 
We created one server containing all the online services
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the application. The database is MongoDB [11] in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
version 3. We implemented the Web system and Web
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
service using the NodeJS [12] version 8. To develop the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
application,
we
used
the
Ionic
Framework
[13]
of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development for mobile applications. The exchange of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information from the server to the application is done
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through JSON files. 
IV.
METHODS 
In order to increase the value of this research, we used a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
case study as a data collection technique. The case study
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
took place a time when it was necessary to survey the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
current PROEJA scenario, specifically, the mathematics
 
 
 
 
 
 
class at IFTO. Based on thisthat could help the students
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improve in this subject. survey, we develop a tool to solve
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
the problem and check the users’ experience with it. 
The main aim of this case study was to verify how
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developing an application helps PROEJA students with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learning mathematics as a way to improve their general
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
education, with the purpose of validating the benefit of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding clearly the basic concepts of mathematics at
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the IFTO, Campus Palmas, in Palmas, Tocantins, Brazil, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2018. 
First, we used a printed questionnaire about the students'
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
expectations of the proposed tool containing 16 questions;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70 students, 44 women and 26 men, in three PROEJA
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
classes answered the questionnaires. The questions were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
objective and for most of them we used the Likert scale.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This scale ranges from 1 to 5, where 1 represents no interest
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
 
or total disagreement, level 2 indicates a little interest, level
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
3 some interest, level 4 interest", and level 5 a lot of interest
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
or totally agree. 
After
obtaining
the
results
of
the
expectation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questionnaire,
we
performed
an
interview
with
the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mathematics teachers of the classes to find out what were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the greatest difficulties in teaching of mathematics to this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
particular group of students and what would be the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suggestion of content that could help the students improve
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in this subject. 
Teachers suggested content that was added to the tool’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Web system so that it would be consumed by students
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through the application. Content was written about basic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mathematics:
operations
of
addition,
subtraction,
 
 
 
 
 
multiplication, and division; as well as content related to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
empowerment.
After
the contents were finalized, we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presented the application in the classroom using a digital
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
slide projector. 
After presenting the functionalities of the application
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through the projector, the App was installed on the students’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cell phones, to be tested by them. The students watched the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
videos recorded on the content of basic math operations and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

soon afterwards they answered quizzes about the proposed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subject. The students tested the tool for 2 hours. 
Next, a satisfaction questionnaire and conversation with
  
 
 
 
 
 
students about software improvements were performed. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questionnaire was given to the same 3 groups of students
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
who answered the previous questionnaire and it was used to
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
analyze user experience and validation of the tool. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questionnaire had 18 objective questions, some subjective
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questions, and most of them used the Likert scale. 
In conclusion, the information was obtained in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensitive manner through two questionnaires of 16 and 18
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questions respectively, related to the proposed tool, applied
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to mathematics students of the IFTO, Campus Palmas. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
research was carried out from April 15, 2018 until June 8,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2018, when the students were available. 
The research has a 90% degree of reliability of the data
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presented and analyzed since, for a total of 90 students with
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
a sampling margin of 5% and with a confidence level of
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
90%, we would need to reach a sample of 68 answers of the
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
students and we obtained a total sample of 70 answers
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
through the two questionnaires. The sample calculation was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
automated based on a sample calculation tool published by
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
[14]. 
V.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
In the questionnaire of expectation, the students were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
asked which types of mobile device they usually take to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
school, and it was possible to select more than one option. 
 
Figure 3. Types of mobile devices usually taken to school. 
 
It can be seen in Figure 3 that all PROEJA students take
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
their mobile devices to school with 83.1% taking their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
smartphones, followed by 7.2% taking Netbook, 6% taking
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their laptop and 3.6 % carrying their tablet. It is worth
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mentioning that developing the mobile application was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possible, since the students possessed the devices and took
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
them to the classroom. 
Another question from the same questionnaire that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
students were asked was when they needed to study, but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they had to search to find some material if it was more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
productive to use a smartphone than a computer. 
 
Figure 4. Productivity of the cell phone relative to the computer. 
 
In Figure 4, it can be seen that 51.4% totally agree that a
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
cell phone to study was more productive than using a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
computer, 14.3% agree with such a statement, 22.9% are
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
indifferent and 4.3% disagree, followed by the 7.1% who
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
disagree completely. It is worth mentioning that adding the
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
agreements gives a percentage of 65.7% of the students.
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Therefore, it is validated once again that a mathematical
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
study application for the mobile phone would be of great
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
use to students. 
 Furthermore, some features were presented in which the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
application would make available in an organized way many
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
videos selected by the teacher as a quiz, through a smart
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
phone, where the student could see the videos and the quiz
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
published by the teacher. In this way, still in the expectation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
questionnaire,
the
students
were
asked
if
these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
characteristics made the application a useful tool for the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
student. 
 
Figure 5. Agreement about application features. 
 
It can be seen from Figure 5 that 72.9% of students agree
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
fully with these characteristics, followed by those who
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
agree, 17.1%, the indifferent add up to 7.1% and those who
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
disagree totaled 1.4%. It is worth noting that adding up only
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
agreement with the first characteristics of the tool accounts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for 90% of the students making it possible to create the
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
application again. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Finally, the last question in the expectation questionnaire
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
asked the students if they were interested in using the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
application as a tool that would help in their classes. Figure
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 depicts the result of this question. 
 
Figure 6. Interest of students regarding the tool. 
 
It can be observed that 85.7% were very interested in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
tool as an aid in their classes, 5.7% of them had an interest
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the tool, 7.1% are indifferent and only 1.4% of them had
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
no interest in the proposed tool. It is worth mentioning that
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
93.4% of the students had some interest in using the tool
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and with this we verified that the students' expectations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were high about the proposed application. 
 After developing the application, presenting to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
students and carrying out the tests done by them, we gave a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
questionnaire
of
their
satisfaction
with
the proposed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
application. Students were asked how satisfied they were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with the proposed application. Figure 7 depicts the results of
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
this question. 
 
Figure 7. User satisfaction. 
 
It can be observed that 30% of the students were very
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
satisfied with the tool, followed by 35.7% of the students
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
who were satisfied, 15.7% were indifferent, 12.9% were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unsatisfied and 5.7% very dissatisfied. The satisfaction was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
obtained from 65.7% s of the students, and if one subtracts
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
those who were
indifferent, only about 18.6% of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
students were not satisfied with the tool. We found,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
therefore, that the overall level of student satisfaction was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
high. 
In order for us to verify whether the application met the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expectation created by the students, we asked them in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
question in the questionnaire using the Likert scale again.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The result can be seen in Figure 8. 
 
Figure 8. Approval of user expectations. 
 
It can be seen that 20% of the respondents stated that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
application was far above their expectations, 40% stated that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the application was above their expectations, about 28.6%
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
declared themselves indifferent, 5.7% said the tool was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
below expectations and another 5.7% said it was far below
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
expectations. It is worth noting that 60% of the respondents
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stated that the application exceeded their expectations and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
only 11.4% stated that the application did not meet their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expectations. We therefore found that the application has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
achieved
a
good
user
experience
by
evaluating the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
application before with the expectation search, during the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tests of the users and at the end with the satisfaction survey,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
the majority of users declared themselves satisfied with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposed tool. 
Finally, to confirm whether the tool would help students
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in mathematics teaching, students were asked if the use of
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
the tool allowed them to have contact with the same subject,
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
but in a clearer way. 
 
Figure 9. Application learning aid. 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

According to Figure 9, it can be seen that 30% of the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
students totally agreed that the application helped them to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more clearly understand a math content, 25.7% agreed,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
27.1% were indifferent, 8.6% disagreed and another 8.6%
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
disagreed completely. It is worth noting that a total of
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
55.7% of students agreed that the application made learning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the content clearer and easier to understand and only 17.2%
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were not satisfied. We found that the application brought
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
some benefits for students, such as, learning the content
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more clearly and easily. 
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Developing the present study allowed an analysis of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
needs of PROEJA students and their difficulties in learning
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
mathematics, while allowing us to create an application on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
demand that could be a tool to aid students in learning. The
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
application is not replacing the teaching models already
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used, but will be an aid for the class in reinforcing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
content studied. 
Overall, teachers have shown an interest in working on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the topic in the classroom and are looking for ways to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
up-to-date, but they still have some difficulties, such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
students' lack of knowledge about basic mathematics.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Teachers were eager to feed information to the toll by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
posting a video for the students and questions for practicing
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
math concepts. 
Students have also shown considerable interest in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subject and will look through the application to learn about
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the content. Based on the research data, it can be concluded
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
that 55.7% of the students evaluated the tool positively and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reported that it improved their understanding of the subject
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
studied. This way, the application will be a great tool to help
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
students learn, because we concluded that the application
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
had a positive user experience and helped them to learn the
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
content. 
Given the importance of the theme, it is necessary to
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
carry out the suggestions and functionalities suggested by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the students to make the application a better tool and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provide
a
better
user experience, besides conducting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
research with the teachers about the Web tool that will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used by them, in order to bring new contents to the students. 
In this sense, the application of teaching mathematics in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROEJA
will
allow
teachers
to
mediate
the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
teaching/learning
process
in
a
more
enriching
way,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
motivating the student to have more desire to learn and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
helping make learning really meaningful. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1]
Brazil, Federal Law nr. 5.840 from July 13th, 2006, Section
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1, Page 7 ed., Brasilia, July 2006, official Diary of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Federative Republic of Brazil. 
[2]
M. R. d. Silva, “The policy of curricular integration within
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROEJA:
between
discourses,
subjects
and
practices,”
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ensaio: aval. pol. pbl. Educ.,vol. 19, no. 71, June 2011, pp.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
307–326 
[3]
A. Drigas and M. Pappas, “A review of mobile learning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applications
for
mathematics,”
International
Journal
of
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interactive Mobile Technologies(iJIM), vol. 9, no. 3, 2015,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pp. 18–23. 
[4]
E. O. Silva and E. A. M. Monteiro, “Significant learning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in
proeja: Experiences
of
mathematics teaching,” Cycle
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Magazine,  vol.  1,  no.  2, 2016. 
[5]
Z. Taleb, A. Ahmadi, and M. Musavi, “The effect of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M-learning on mathematics learning,” ICPEESY, 2015. 
[6]
A. Z. Saccol, N. Reinhard, E. Schlemmer, and J. L. V.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Barbosa, “M-learning (mobile learning) in practice: A training
 
 
 
  
  
 
experience with it professionals,” Journal of Information
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Systems and Technology Management, vol. 7,
nr. 2, 2010,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pp. 261–280. 
[7]
Y. Mehdipour and H. Zerehkafi, “Mobile learning for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
education: Benefits and challenges,” International Journal of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computational Engineering Research, vol. 3, June 2013, pp.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
93–101. 
[8]
S. Mahamad, M. N. Ibrahim, and S. M. Taib, “M-learning: A
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
new
paradigm
of
learning
mathematics
in
malaysia,”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International journal of computer science & information
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technology, vol. 2, nr. 4, August 2010. 
[9]
A. B. G. o. Carvalho, F. M. C. d. S. C. o. Moita, and R. P. d.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
o. Sousa,Tecnologias digitais na educação. Campina Grande:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SciELO, 2011. 
[10] L. C. Smith and M. A. Wong, Reference and Information
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Services: An Introduction: An Introduction. ABC-CLIO,
 
 
 
 
 
 
2016. 
[11] Mongo, "Open Source Document Database", MongoDB,
 
 
 
 
 
 
2018.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.mongodb.com/.
 
 
 
 
[Accessed: 11- Nov- 2018]. 
[12] N. Foundation, "Node.js", Node.js, 2018. [Online]. Available:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://nodejs.org/en/. [Accessed: 11- Nov- 2018]. 
[13] Ionic, "Build Amazing Native Apps and Progressive Web
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Apps with Ionic Framework and Angular", Ionic Framework,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2018.
[Online].
Available:
https://ionicframework.com/.
 
 
 
 
[Accessed: 11- Nov- 2018]. 
[14] G. E. d. O. Santos. “Sample calculation: online calculator”. ,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Amostral
Calculus,
2018.
[Online].
Available:
 
 
 
 
 
http://www.publicacoesdeturismo.com.br/calculoamostral/ 
[Accessed: 11- Nov- 2018]. 
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

