Enabling Mobile Access to Distributed Recycling Knowledge 
 
Sönke Knoch 
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence 
Research Department Intelligent User Interfaces 
Saarbrücken, Germany 
soenke.knoch@dfki.de 
Alexander Kröner 
Georg Simon Ohm University of Applied Sciences 
Department of Computer Science 
Nuremberg, Germany 
alexander.kroener@th-nuernberg.de
 
 
Abstract—From the consumer perspective, classifying a 
product regarding its environmental impact is a difficult task 
because relevant knowledge is usually not only diverse, but 
also distributed over several information sources. In this work, 
an analysis of mobile “green” applications formed the basis of 
a mobile application, which aims at providing all recycling-
related information in-situ.  Its domain model integrates 
recycling knowledge from several information sources and is 
capable of decomposing a product into its elementary parts. 
The mobile application enables the user to initiate interaction 
with this model over three different ways of describing a 
product. Beside insights concerning information access and 
user interaction, a first evaluation of the prototype indicates 
that the employed fused domain model may outperform results 
achieved with a traditional approach to web-based information 
search concerning recycling information. 
Keywords-Sustainability; 
decision 
support; 
mobile 
computing; case study 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Limitation of natural resources affects everyday decision 
making in diverse ways: indirectly through increasing costs 
for products, e.g., based on oil, or directly due rationale 
insight and ecological awareness. Unfortunately, such 
sustainable decision making is a non-trivial task for various 
reasons. For instance, a product has to be chosen that should 
be “easily” recyclable. From the viewpoint of sustainability, 
recycling is affected by materials the product is consisting of, 
the recycling process for decomposing the product, the 
extent such decomposition is possible, and even the 
(potentially future) context that determines efforts needed to 
insert the product into the recycling process. 
In order to make an informed decision, the decision 
maker may have to acquire all of that knowledge – and to 
fuse it: While there are efforts towards the integration of 
sustainability-related information along the supply chain [1], 
community-driven 
information 
sources 
may 
provide 
additional hints [2], and of course, the current context (e.g., 
location) may bias the sustainability of a decision.    
This complexity partially explains why expert advice in-
situ may increase people’s will to do such decisions [3]. 
Information has to become more available [4], and be 
explained to the user [5]. Thus, it is little surprising that there 
exists a considerable amount of “green” mobile applications, 
which seek to support their user in-situ in solving tasks 
related to sustainability. 
This article reports on user feedback concerning a mobile 
application and a linked information service, which address 
decision making concerning consumable products based on 
recycling-related information. In the following, Section II 
reviews typical characteristics of such mobile applications. 
Then, Section III reports on a data mashup, which seeks to 
fuse 
different 
kinds of 
recycling-related 
knowledge 
originating from potentially distributed sources. It produces a 
domain model, which is accessed by a mobile information 
service, which combines the services of various previously 
reviewed applications at a single point. Afterwards, Section 
IV reports on user feedback concerning the interaction with 
the new service in comparison with alternative ways of 
acquiring similar information. Finally, the article closes in 
Section V with a summary of achieved results and an 
outlook on future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In 2011, a preparatory internal study addressed the state-
of-the-art of mobile applications supporting sustainable 
decision making. The survey comprised mobile applications 
offered at the Android Market and the Apple App Store. 
Search 
terms 
were 
“energy 
consumption”, 
“energy 
efficiency”, and “green life” and led to a result of 23 relevant 
mobile applications in the Android Market and 25 mobile 
applications in the Apple App Store. The result was sorted 
into four categories: 
Promotion (4 mobile applications). Mobile applications 
in this category, typically, promote energy saving 
technologies, such as solar energy systems, low-energy 
devices of certain product classes (e.g., fridges, air 
conditioning systems, etc.), or energy saving techniques 
(e.g., monitoring tools and programmable thermostats). For 
example, the mobile application Lennox [6] calculates the 
energy savings achievable by a new air conditioning system, 
provides product information and directs the user to the next 
local dealer. 
Education and Information (20 mobile applications). 
References, encyclopedia, decision support systems, and 
games form a category on its own. The majority of such 
mobile applications provide information in form of 
references, tips, or links and news collections. For example, 
the mobile application “this is green” [7] offers information 
that is thematically organized by a picture of a layout of a 
common one family house. If the user tabs on the garage he 
will find information on fuel consumption of the car, if he 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

tabs on the bathroom information on how to save water is 
provided. The application “low carbon life” [8] is a 
collection of little games that tries to teach the user, e.g., how 
to use the washing machine in an efficient way and how to 
recycle trash that occurs in a common household.  
Calculators (9 mobile applications). Other mobile 
applications support the user in calculating balances 
concerning sustainability-related factors. They can be 
distinguished in mobile applications meant for the private 
and for the business domain. The former ones focus on an 
individual’s habits and objects, e.g., flights and TV. The 
latter ones focus on business branches such as architecture or 
lamp industry. In general, the user has to enter data manually 
into the respective mobile application, which is a major 
difference to mobile applications classified as “monitoring 
and controlling”. For example, the “green footprint 
calculator” [9] is filled manually with data such as monthly 
bills (oil, gas, and electricity), number of flights, and 
recycling behavior. Once filled with this data, the mobile 
application calculates the yearly carbon footprint and 
visualizes it with a maximum of six green trees if the carbon 
footprint is very good/small. The application “MeterRead” 
[10] captures energy consumption. The number of kilo watts 
is synchronized manually with the electrical meter over a 
graphical meter that looks similar to the one that can be 
found in households. After data gathering, the mobile 
application provides a prediction for the consumption over 
the next 30 days. 
Monitoring and Controlling (15 mobile applications). 
Finally, there are mobile applications which connect to 
energy consuming devices in the private and the business 
domain. In the private domain, they focus on devices 
common for an individual’s environment, e.g., house, car, 
and mobile phone. In the business domain, such mobile 
applications focus on branches, e.g., IT, manufacturing 
industry, and facility management. For example in the 
private domain, the “power tutor” [11] analyzes system and 
power usage of the mobile device and provides chart views 
e.g., for the consumption of the LCD, CPU, and Wi-Fi. The 
“green gas saver 1.0” [12] shows the greenest way of 
acceleration in a car and a lot of mobile applications 
visualize energy consumption (electricity, oil, and gas) and 
provide remote control features (e.g., switch on/off, timer 
configuration, etc.) and alarms when consumption exceeds a 
defined threshold, e.g., “GSH ienergy” [13] from the 
business domain and “DONG Energy eFlex” [14] to control 
home environments in the private domain. Community 
features are included in some mobile applications, where the 
user’s green performance can be compared to the 
performance of the user’s friends. 
General observations included that mobile applications 
for sustainable decision making were either highly 
specialized (focus on product advertisement or industrial 
applications) or very general (dictionaries, household / 
lifestyle consulting). Furthermore, the reviewed applications 
rely on data from a single information source, which does 
not reflect diverse and distributed character of such 
information mentioned in the beginning. Finally, despite the 
mobile platform, there was little use of the mobile sensing 
capabilities. 
This article reports on how these gaps could be addressed 
for a specific application scenario: an “Eco-Advisor” should 
support consumers in ranking products according to their 
environmental impact, and in making informed decisions 
concerning recycling options regarding a product at hand 
using information from distribute recycling knowledge. An 
overview of related work in the area of mobile mashups was 
already provided in previous work (cf. [15]). 
III. 
FUSION OF RECYCLING KNOWLEDGE 
According to the previously introduced classification of 
related work, the Eco-Advisor could be categorized in the 
first place as an “information and education” service, which 
includes aspects of a “calculator”. While the service as such 
could be employed also for user support in non-mobile 
scenarios, its particular focus is on decision support 
concerning a product “at hand”. 
Therefore, the service has to support the user in 
establishing a link between the subject of interest – a 
physical product instance – and relevant information 
concerning this individual artifact. This information may 
originate from distributed sources, and may differ in format 
and semantics. It may describe aspects of the artifact, this 
kind of artifacts, resources used for creating the artifact, and 
related services. Efforts needed in performing this task 
strongly depend on the way data are organized and structured 
by the service – its domain model.    
A. Requirements 
As the mobile application is meant to provide 
information for products, its domain model has to be capable 
to represent a product’s most important properties. The 
model is kept as generic as possible because it is a storage 
for all kinds of data, structured and unstructured. 
A product is defined in an economic sense as the output 
which is the result of the transformation that was initiated by 
humans. This transformation consumes scarce resources, 
such as materials and energy. In this article, we will focus on 
physical products and exclude virtual products, such as 
information or services. 
Three core requirements for the model were identified: 
 
Requirement 1: The domain model has to carry 
information in form of various data patterns from 
distributed sources on an abstract and a concrete 
level and is open for extensions. 
 
Requirement 2: The domain model has to enable a 
disassembly of products in terms of kind and amount 
of materials included in the product’s (current) 
physical form. 
 
Requirement 3: The domain model has to match the 
interaction implemented by the mobile application. 
Requirement 1 asks for a domain model which supports 
the mapping of a product at hand to recycling-related 
information. As recycling information is not provided by all 
manufacturers, such information can be found on the abstract 
level in the absence of manufacture specific information. If 
product specific information is available, it is stored on the 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
Figure 2.  Entity Relationship Model (ERM) of the domain model 
(most relations and attributes are faded out). 
 
Figure 1.  Ontology representation of the product structure. 
instance level. Additionally, the model has to ensure a degree 
of extensibility which allows an adaption for specific needs. 
The last criterion is related to the open/close design principle 
from object-oriented programming. To integrate data from 
distributed sources, the model has to be able to carry data in 
heterogeneous patterns, and to make information available in 
a unified format. 
Requirement 2 demands a domain model able to reveal a 
product’s components and materials down to an elementary 
resource level. For example, a beverage can consists of 
aluminum, which is a chemical element in the boron group 
with the symbol Al, the third most common element, and 
most abundant metal in the Earth’s crust. Such information 
can be employed by the service in order to perform 
calculations involving a product’s durability, kind of 
resources used, and recycling potential. Thus, while a 
resource used within a product may be scarce, this may be 
less crucial if the resource can be extracted with limited 
efforts during recycling for later reuse. 
Requirement 3 demands that the domain model supports 
the particular kind of user-product-service interaction that 
forms the background of the envisioned kind of support. In 
order to communicate with the service, the user has to 
communicate the product to be investigated. Ideally, this 
product will be at hand, and even be shipped with a label 
(e.g., Radio-frequency identification (RFID) referenced as 
ISO 14443, Quick Response (QR) Code referenced as ISO 
18004) describing the individual product instance. Other 
situations may widely differ, and require the user to describe 
in some way the product. Therefore, the overall system 
provides the user with three ways of initiating interaction 
with the service (search by text, search by category, and 
search by image). The domain model has to reflect this 
diversity with an organization, which facilitates information 
retrieval starting from unique identifiers, visual features, 
keywords and product categories. 
B. Designing the Domain Model 
The assembly information on a product was modeled in 
the Ontology Web Language (OWL) [16]. In the model 
shown in Figure 1, a product is an instance of a sub class of 
recycling objects, which consist of one or multiple 
substances of a certain type.  
According to Requirement 1, the final domain model is 
open for extensions; it was developed as an onion layered 
architecture. In the innermost layer lies the core, most 
abstract model which is the nucleus of the model that is 
visualized in Figure 2, the “abstract object world”. Objects 
consist of different Materials, the bill of materials, and have 
thereby a certain composition (Requirement 2). This kind of 
product assembly is discussed for electromechanical 
products by Rachuri et al. [17], an extension of the Core 
Product Model 2 (cf. Fenves et al. [18]) that covers a 
product’s function, form, and behavior. The entities in the 
next layer, the “concrete product world”, form the world of 
products and contain all entities from the object world. 
Objects are manufactured differently by different companies 
under different Brands. The combination of the entities 
Brand, Object, and Material forms a Product. These two 
worlds, the object and the product world, represented by the 
two innermost layers can be transferred on numerous use 
cases where product data is involved. Two kinds of products 
are allowed: products with a structure of certain materials 
and products that provide a structure under a certain brand. 
All products can contain sub-modules. This hierarchical 
modelling approach, indicated by the part-of relation, allows 
the subordination of sub-products which are produced under 
a different brand by a certain supplier. A similar 
classification hierarchy was provided by Pels [19], which 
distinguishes between product instances, classes, and types 
to reduce the complexity of product models. In a similar way 
substances, contained in a material are modeled which 
allows the decomposition of a product in its most atomic 
elements. In the outermost layer, the most specific one 
(“specific recycling world”), the entities for the use case at 
hand are modeled and set in relation to the entities in the 
other layers. The entity Tip contains creative recycling tips, 
the transformation of old objects into something new, for 
Products, Objects, and Materials. Location contains 
recycling points where Products, Objects, and Materials can 
be recycled. The specific (recycling) world is open for more 
extensions to extend the Object and Product worlds 
according to specific needs. The decision for an onion 
layered design of the domain model supports extension of 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
Figure 3.  Composition, detail, and location view for a Thing/Object. 
the model: it is possible to add layers for specializing the 
model and to remove layers for generalizing the model. A 
similar way of abstraction was provided by Lee et al. [20], 
which proposed a generic and independent multilevel 
product model that is divided into data, model, and 
metamodel level. 
To support the interaction (Requirement 3), textual 
definitions from WordNet [21] are used to identify the 
entities Object, Material, and Brand that are denoted as 
things following the notion “Internet of Things”. This kind of 
identification allows text searches on the IDs and users to 
find the Object, Brand, or Material of interest. The relation 
among those three entities allows the presentation of related 
Materials and Brands when an Object is searched, the 
presentation of related Brands and Objects when a Material 
is searched, and the presentation of related Objects and 
Materials when a Brand is searched. Related products from 
the overlapping of all three entities can be presented. 
Additionally to the concept of definitions, word forms – a set 
of synonyms – are assigned to Objects, Materials, and 
Brands, respectively. These synonyms support a query 
expansion mechanism that guarantees search results for a set 
of valid search terms. For example, “Al” leads to the same 
result as “aluminum”, “aluminium”, or “atomic number 13”. 
Recycling Tips are assigned to Objects and Materials. A 
product taxonomy is used to categorize Products, which 
allows a search for products by category. Products have 
additional attributes which are amount and unit. This allows 
for storing information on the quantity of materials which are 
obstructed in one object. Locations own the additional fields 
latitude and longitude to store the GPS position. 
C. Implementation 
The mobile mashup was realized as a mobile application 
that combines the contents of multiple heterogeneous and 
distributed information sources. It was decided to integrate 
all such source into one database, which allows faster query 
responses and limits the access to one interface. For that 
reason, the ontology model depicted in Figure 1 was 
transferred to a relational database according to the ERM in 
Figure 2. The integration and adaptation of information, for 
example recycling tips were retrieved from World.org [2], 
was described from a technical perspective in [15] by the 
authors of this paper. In the database, per default, each entry 
consists of the tuple {ID, Name, Description, Image}. The 
ID is a unique identifier, Name depicts the designation of the 
data entry, and Description contains a long text that helps to 
characterize the thing. An Image visualizes the entity and can 
be stored in form of a file path. Each entity is expandable by 
additional attributes that might be appended to the 4-tuple. 
The application that runs on a mobile device with 
Internet connection communicates with the backend that runs 
as a web service and is accessible over a REST interface. 
The user interacts with the mobile device and things – in our 
scenario for the experiment an aluminum can, a plastic or a 
glass bottle. Three ways of interaction were realized, search 
by text, search by category, and search by image. Search by 
image was realized by using the IQEngines API, which 
delivered acceptable results (in most cases the labels and not 
the things are recognized) that can be improved by training 
the image recognition algorithm. Search terms from all three 
ways of interaction are expanded by synonyms from the 
WordNet [21] dictionary to match additional entries in the 
database. The system architecture is kept modular to support 
adding and removing information sources. The system 
architecture, navigation, and interaction are described in 
detail in [15]. A screenshot from the mobile application is 
presented in Figure 3 and shows the search result for an 
aluminum can manufactured by a certain brand. 
IV. 
CASE STUDY 
In the following, a survey is presented that evaluates the 
mobile mashup and its underlying data mashup built on top 
of the domain modelin terms of usability and usefulness. 
First, the user interface is evaluated to check if the 
navigation and interaction method is easy to handle for the 
user. Second, the data mashup stored in the aforementioned 
domain model is evaluated to find out if the integrated 
information sources are helpful (1) in the way they are 
presented, (2) while the user has to solve different tasks from 
the recycling domain. 
A. Research Question and Experimental Design 
When the first running prototype of the Eco-Advisor 
mobile application was finished, feedback was gathered by 
involving a small probe of people in order to validate 
concept and basic design decisions. The main question the 
experiment sought to answer was the following one: 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Do the mobile mashup and the domain model help a user 
to achieve recycling goals more efficiently compared to a 
stationary Web browser? 
Here, “efficiency” comprises various facets of the 
original task, including quality of result (subjective measures 
such as user satisfaction, objective quality of recycling), 
efforts required to perform this kind of recycling, as well as 
efforts needed to deal with the application (time, interaction 
steps). In addition, the experiment aimed at gathering 
information concerning the preferred way of interaction with 
such a service. Acquiring information from such a service 
can be realized in quite different ways of interaction ranging 
from search by text, category, to image taken from the 
subject of interest. 
In order to address these questions, three experimental 
tasks were defined, which had to be executed by participants 
of an experiment. These tasks had to be solved with the 
mobile application on a mobile device (“app variant”), and 
with a regular web browser (“browser variant”), respectively. 
The web browser was installed on a regular desktop PC in 
order to remove effects from potential issues specific to the 
interaction with mobile web browsers from the experiment 
(e.g., entering URLs, need for zooming gestures). 
Furthermore, the web browser was pre-configured in order to 
support participants in the requested tasks. This setup was 
chosen based on the assumption that users interested in 
recycling would have created bookmarks and other pointers 
to knowledge relevant for performing such tasks. Thus, the 
browser configuration seeks to reduce search for information 
sources as such, and instead to leverage search for 
information using these sources. 
During Task1 (Conventional Recycling), the participant 
is confronted with an object that has to be recycled in a 
conventional way in the vicinity. In the browser variant, the 
participant will find his or her location in an opened Google 
Maps tab and additional tabs with websites about recycling. 
The offer of opened websites on a workstation instead of an 
empty browser on the mobile phone makes the comparison 
between browser and app variant fairer and prevents the 
occurrence of a bias. During the study of results, the reader 
should keep in mind the difference between the two settings.  
During Task2 (Environmental Impact), the participant 
is confronted with a set of objects and is asked to choose the 
most environmental-friendly one among them. During task 
execution in the browser variant, the participant can continue 
his or her Web browser session from Task1. 
During Task3 (Creative Recycling), the participant is 
confronted with one of the objects from Task2. For this 
object, the participant should search a creative way of 
recycling which stands in contrast to conventional ways of 
recycling in Task1. 
During the three tasks, the main factor is the Search for 
Information regarding the domain of sustainability. Every 
participant interacts on both levels Web browser and mobile 
application. Each task is related to one particular hypothesis: 
H1: The mobile application supports a more efficient 
search for conventional ways of recycling than a common 
stationary Web browser.  
H2: The mobile application supports the user in judging 
an object’s environmental impact more efficiently than a 
common stationary Web browser. 
H3: The mobile application supports a more efficient 
search for creative recycling methods than a common 
stationary Web browser. 
For measuring support of these hypotheses in the 
respective tasks, the study relies on several parameters: one 
measurement is time. The time a participant takes to 
accomplish one task is measured and allows for comparing 
which kind of search method (stationary browser/mobile 
application) leads faster to results. Another measurement is 
the satisfaction of the user concerning search result and 
interaction comfort. The participants are asked to rank their 
opinion in both categories (satisfaction and comfort) on a 
five point Likert scale (ranging from 1 (disagree) over 3 
(neutral) to 5 (fully agree). To check a user’s preference, the 
participant has to select the preferred search variant per task 
(stationary browser/mobile application). To check if the 
domain model and the information it provided was helpful, 
each 
participant 
specified 
the 
criteria 
taken 
into 
consideration for the decision eventually made at the end of 
each task. 
To receive feedback on usability related aspects, a user 
rating in the dimensions usefulness, readability, navigation, 
and visualization is gathered on a 5 point Likert scale, 
respectively.  
Questions about the preferred search mechanism (by text 
/ by category / by image) and ideas for improvement are 
meant to provide the developer some feedback for further 
improvements. 
The (potential) persuasive nature of the mobile 
application is tested by asking about the influence of the 
mobile application on the participant’s current recycling 
behavior: if the information offered by the mobile 
application would be available during decision making, 
would people expect a change in their behavior? 
Finally, at the end of the study, an overall preference 
(stationary browser versus mobile application) is asked for. 
B. Setup 
The experiment was conducted in-lab under the 
supervision of one instructor. The participants sat at a table 
in front of a common PC workstation. On the workstation, 
participants filled out questionnaires and solved the tasks in 
the browser variant. The instructor guided through the 
experimental procedure, explained the tasks, and answered 
questions. For the mobile setting the mobile device Google 
Nexus S by Samsung was used. 
The objects during task execution contain three objects 
from the category soda pop beverages. It was decided to use 
beverages from one well-known brand, to allow a brand 
specific search and to avoid that an unknown product will 
confuse a user. As questions of the survey are answered on 
the workstation, it can be profited by the advantage of fast 
result analysis and automated time measurements during the 
experiment. Most of the questions were of closed nature, 
while in some cases open questions were asked where the 
participant had to fill in an answer into the text field, for 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

example the result of each task. All questions were 
mandatory, except the questions for problems during 
execution and ideas for improvement. During operations in 
the browser variant, the browser’s history was used to log 
visited pages and used search terms. During operations on 
the mobile phone, search terms and navigation paths were 
logged on server-site. 
C. Procedure 
The experiment was divided into three phases: In the first 
phase, the participant had to answer a set of questions on his 
or her demographical background, the experience level 
concerning computer, mobile phone, and Internet usage, and 
the knowledge about recycling.  
In the second phase, all participants had to solve three 
tasks. To solve these tasks two tools were provided: a Web 
browser on the workstation and a mobile phone with an 
application. For each task the participant had to use the Web 
browser in the first run and the mobile application in the 
second. After each run the participant had to answer a set of 
questions. In order to balance competition of mobile 
application and browser variant, in the latter one, 7 Web 
pages were already open in the browser’s tabs once a session 
started. Those pages contained the same content that is 
integrated in the data mashup behind the mobile application. 
However, during task execution the participants were 
allowed to open new tabs and to start an own free search. 
In the third phase, the study concluded with questions 
about the preferred search method, problems during task 
execution, and ideas for improvement. Additionally, it was 
asked if the presented mobile application could influence the 
participant’s recycling behavior and if he or she preferred the 
mobile application over the stationary browser or not. 
D. Result 
The study lists 22 records, 2 experts and 20 non-experts. 
The average participant was 26 (median) years old. In the 
following presentation of the results percentages are rounded 
to integers. 13 female (59%) and 9 male people (41%) took 
part. Regarding the occupation, among the participants were 
2 pupils (9%), 18 students (82%), and 2 professionals (9%, 
one software engineer and one researcher). Areas of work are 
wide spread and include linguistics and translation, computer 
science and IT, literature and culture, business administration 
and economics, and education. 
The technical experience level regarding the usage of 
stationary and moveable computers was relatively high. 22 
(100%) use a computer that is connected to the Internet, 16 
(73%) use a mobile phone with Internet. On the stationary 
computer 8 (36%) surf more than 20 hours per week and 8 
(36%) less or equal than 10 hours per week. On the mobile, 
only 4 (25%) spent more than 10 hours per week in the 
internet, while 8 (50%) are only between 0 and 2 hours 
online. While browsing the Web on the mobile, 4 out of 16 
(25%) use predominantly applications. 4 (25%) additionally 
search for information about products during a shopping trip. 
The participants’ recycling knowledge was diverse. 19 
(86.36%) are recycling their trash, 13 (68%) self-motivated, 
and 11 (58%) through regulation (multiple selections 
possible). 13 (68%) consider a product’s environmental 
impact while coming to a decision during a shopping trip. 
Those who do, consider all different kinds of factors, energy 
consumption during operation as well as production and 
packaging. Those who do not, don’t have time, are not 
informed enough, or have other reasons. Additionally, 8 
(36%) knew what a carbon footprint is and were able to 
explain it, in most cases precisely. 
Task1: Browser. All participants except one (the 
participant was not really motivated to spend some minutes 
on a location search) found a location for the glass bottle. 
The average distance to the user location was 0.71 miles. 
Two locations (9%) were subtracted out, one location was a 
container service and the other a junk hauling service. 4 
(19%) identified trash cans, 5 (24%) chose supermarkets, 
and 10 (48%) identified a recycling center as point of 
disposal. Decision criteria were distance in most cases (15 / 
71%), deposit value in 4 cases (19%), the “fastest result” in 2 
cases (9%), and missing information on trash cans in 1 case. 
Task1: Mobile application. All participants found a 
location for the glass bottle. The average distance to the user 
location was 0.36 miles, 0.35 miles lower compared to the 
results from the browser search. Distance was the most 
frequently mentioned decision criteria. Only one participant 
named carbon emissions associated with the trip as a 
decision criterion. 
The preferred search method for Task1 was the mobile 
application (15 votes out of 22 / 68%). 
Task2: Browser. All participants except one were able 
to identify one product out of three (glass bottle/plastic 
bottle/aluminum can) as the most environmental friendly 
one. 12 (57%) decided for the glass bottle, 6 (29%) for the 
plastic bottle, and 3 (14%) for the aluminum can. The 
decision criteria were carbon footprint (17 / 77%), the 
product’s composition into materials (6 / 27%), and studies 
found through a search engine (1 / 5%). One participant said: 
“glass bottle is re-usable and I am safe from molecules from 
the plastic bottle entering my drink”. 
Task2: Mobile application. All participants were able to 
identify one product out of three (glass bottle/plastic 
bottle/aluminum can) as the most environmental friendly 
one. 9 (41%) decided for the glass bottle, 10 (45%) for the 
plastic bottle, and 3 (14%) for the aluminum can. While 43% 
of the participants changed their mind, 57% kept the decision 
from the browser variant. 
The preferred search method for Task2 was the mobile 
application (16 votes out of 22 / 73%). 
Task3: Browser. All participants except one (95%) 
found a creative way of recycling for the aluminum can. 
Several creative ways of recycling were discovered: potting 
plants, lanterns, aluminum boat, pen and pencil holder, build 
a children’s telephone, tinker decorative items, sculptures, 
art, camping cooker, solar furnace, ashtray, money box, and 
so on. Asked, if the knowledge about reusing a product 
would influence the participant’s buying decision was 
approved by 5 out of 21 / 24%). 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
Figure 4.  Satisfaction (1=not satisfied, 2=satisfied in parts, 
3=indifferent, 4=satisfied, 5=very satisfied) and comfort (1=not 
comfortable, 2=comfortable in parts, 3=indifferent, 
4=comfortable, 5=very comfortable) during task execution. 
Task3: Mobile application. All participants identified a 
creative way of recycling for the aluminum can. Additional 
results were a children’s drum set, a candy box, a seed 
storage, a picture frame, gift wrapping, hooks, and film 
canisters. All participants except 3 (86%) found a new 
creative way of recycling different from the one they found 
in the browser variant. Knowledge about reusing the product 
could influence the participant’s buying decision in 9 (41%) 
out of 22 cases, 17% more compared to the browser variant. 
The preferred search method was the mobile application 
(14 votes out of 22 / 64 %). 
Satisfaction and Comfort during the tasks is shown in 
Figure 4. The time measurement during the tasks resulted in 
the values that are presented in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
AVERAGE EXECUTION TIME IN MINUTES 
 
Browser 
Application 
Task1 
8:17 min. 
7:10 min. 
Task2 
7:09 min. 
5:17 min. 
Task3 
6:26 min. 
5:25 min. 
 
The concluding questions showed that most participants 
preferred the traditional search mechanisms “search by text” 
(13 / 59%) to the “search by category” (4 / 18%) and the 
uncommon “search by image” (5 / 23%). In the four 
categories 
usefulness, 
readability, 
navigation, 
and 
visualization the lowest average rating received the 
navigation (3.27) on a scale between 1 (worst) and 5 (best). 
Visualization was rated with 3.36, usefulness with 4.05, and 
readability with 4.14. Many participants experienced 
problems to find information placed at the leaf level of the 
navigation tree although a legend with hints on the 
underlying content was given on the screen. Room for 
improvement was seen in the navigation (“too complicated”, 
“less clicking”). One participant suggested placing favorites 
on the home screen. Another one suggested integrating more 
pictures to improve the visualization, e.g., to visualize the 
creative ways of recycling. Asked if the mobile application 
could influence the participants recycling behavior, 73% 
responded with “yes”. After all, the mobile application was 
mentioned as the preferred method of acquiring recycling 
information (15:7 / 68% : 32%). 
E. Findings and Discussion 
Feedback obtained in the categories navigation and 
visualization indicates that potential for improving the 
mobile application lies in the optimization of navigation 
concept and the presentation of content. For example, some 
participants had difficulties to find the content that was 
necessary to solve the task. Especially pieces of information 
on recycling locations which is provided in bubbles on the 
map, for example information on carbon emissions 
associated with a trip from the user location to the recycling 
location, are hard to discover. This information lays 5 
navigation steps away from the start screen and hidden 
behind a 4 categories menu, which is too far. Especially 
users not familiar with mobile applications in general 
became frustrated very fast, as they did not understand the 
mobile application’s concept.  
An interesting phenomenon is the development of time 
that was necessary to solve the tasks (cf. Table I). The first 
task took in average 7:10 minutes on the mobile application. 
For Task2 and 3 the duration lowered by about 2 minutes. 
This fact supports the statement of one participant who said, 
“after I was used to the mobile application I found it very 
helpful”. However, since a mobile application might be 
installed right before a situation where its support is needed, 
it should be usable with little to no training. Therefore, this 
barrier has to be overcome. It has to be mentioned that in this 
experimental setting only a brief introduction to the mobile 
application was given. Usually, the user reads a description 
from the app store and may have a better understanding of 
the mobile application in advance. Thus, further experiments 
should start with an informing page about the mobile 
application as it is common in the big mobile application 
portals. 
Nevertheless, having a look on the average task 
execution times in the stationary browser and the app variant, 
the app variant outperforms the browser variant in all three 
tasks. This result underlines that, after understanding the 
mobile application, the participants were able to find 
information faster using the mobile application than using 
the Web browser. Having a look at the level of satisfaction 
concerning the investigated result in Figure 4, the level of 
satisfaction was higher for the mobile application in all tasks. 
The perceived comfort during task execution was also higher 
when searching with the mobile application. The fact that the 
average distance to the identified recycling location during 
Task1 was about 0.35 miles lower in the app variant, while 
distance was the most important criterion for the participants 
shows that the implemented map visualization was easy to 
understand. These aforementioned results show that the three 
task-related hypotheses are supported in all categories, time, 
satisfaction, comfort, and user preference. Table II depicts 
the “delta” in all categories that were used to measure 
hypotheses support. Only some users used the uncommon 
search method “search by image”. People with a great 
interest in technics found this search variant “very nice”.  
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

TABLE II.  
HYPOTHESES MEASUREMENTS APPLICATION VS BROWSER 
Deltaa 
Time 
Satisfaction 
Comfort 
Preference 
H1 
-1:07 min. 
+0.71 
+0.36 
+36% 
H2 
-1:52 min. 
+0.05 
+0.53 
+46% 
H3 
-1:01 min. 
+0.45 
+0.15 
+28% 
Avg. 
-1:20 min. 
+0.40 
+0.35 
+37% 
a. Delta = Measurement(Browser) - Measurement(Application). 
16 out of 22 (73%) participants reported that the mobile 
application could influence their recycling behavior. 15 
(68%) participants reported that the mobile application is the 
preferred method of research for the tasks given. Both facts 
together support the appropriateness of the provided kind of 
support and indirectly of the employed domain model.   
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Sustainable behavior requires people to take a 
considerable amount of diverse information from distributed 
sources into account for decision making. This article 
reported on a domain model for a mobile mashup, which 
integrates such sources automatically. In order to gain 
feedback concerning the appropriateness of model and 
system architecture, a case study was conducted. In an 
experimental setup, participants had to perform recycling-
related tasks with a mobile application implementing the 
mobile mashup approach, and with a browser-based solution 
on a desktop PC providing similar, but non-integrated 
features. Findings include that participants were able to find 
faster more accurate results when using the mobile 
application. Beyond, they were more satisfied with the 
mobile application’s results and with the way of interaction 
provided by the mobile application.  
Thus, the mobile mashup concept turned out to be of 
value for supporting people in making recycling-related 
decisions. However, this conclusion is limited in some ways. 
For instance, the user group shares certain demographic 
aspects, and the experiment did not involve true real-world 
interaction, where time pressure, interruption, and cognitive 
load might influence the results. Consequently, potential 
directions of future research should include a revision of the 
proposed interaction method in order to support new users in 
getting familiar with the mobile application. Furthermore, 
positive feedback obtained during the experiment indicates 
that persuasive technics might combine well with the mobile 
application concept. A context model could help to involve 
more user related constraints during decision support. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was funded in part by the German Federal 
Ministry of Education and Research under grant number 
01IA11001 (project RES-COM) and 01IS12050 (Software 
Campus project OMM++). 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. 
Hornberger, 
“SustainHub 
project,” 
URL: 
http://www.sustainhub-research.eu, accessed at 07/09/2013. 
[2] WORLD Environmental Organization, “Recycling Database – 
Reduce, 
Reuse, 
Recycle,” 
URL: 
http://www.world.org/weo/recycle, accessed at 02/07/2013. 
[3] S. M. Burn and S. Oskamp, “Increasing Community 
Recycling with Persuasive Communication and Public 
Commitment,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology, vol. 16, 
no. 1, Feb. 1986, pp. 29-41. 
[4] E. M. Huang and K. N. Truong, “Sustainably Ours: Situated 
sustainability for mobile phones,” ACM interactions, vol. 15, 
no. 2, Mar.-Apr. 2008, pp. 16-19. 
[5] V. Margolin, “The Waste Manifesto,” ACM interactions, vol. 
16, no. 4, Jul.-Aug. 2009, pp. 12-15. 
[6] Lennox 
Industries, 
“Lennox,” 
URL: 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.lennox.len
noxmobile, accessed at 05/06/2013. 
[7] This 
Is 
Green, 
Inc., 
“This 
Is 
Green,” 
URL: 
https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/this-is-green/id337495391, 
accessed at 05/06/2013. 
[8] Adbrownies Advertising Ltd., “Low Carbon Life,” URL: 
http://www.appleapp.com/low-carbon-life.html, accessed at 
05/06/2013. 
[9] SampathG, 
“Green 
Footprint 
Calculator,” 
URL: 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.virdea.mob
ile.android.carbonfp, accessed at 05/06/2013. 
[10] M. 
Barton, 
“MeterRead,” 
URL: 
http://www.macworld.com/product/71548/meterread-sale-go-
green-save-money-save-earth-.html, accessed at 05/06/2013. 
[11] PowerTutor.org, 
“PowerTutor,” 
URL: 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=edu.umich.Pow
erTutor, accessed at 05/06/2013. 
[12] The Apple Seed Store, “Green Gas Saver 1.0,” URL: 
http://iphone-apps.toptenreviews.com/green/3015-green-gas-
saver-screenshot4.html, accessed at 05/06/2013. 
[13] GSH 
Group, 
“GSH 
ienergy,” 
URL: 
https://itunes.apple.com/en/app/gsh-ienergy/id377909195, 
accessed at 05/06/2013. 
[14] GreenWave Reality, Inc., “DONG Energy eFlex,” URL: 
http://dong-energy-eflex.topapp.net/, accessed at 05/06/2013. 
[15] S. Knoch and A. Kröner, “A mashup supporting sustainable 
decision making,” Proc. 2013 ninth International Conference 
on Intelligent Environments (IE13), IEEE Press, Athens, 
Greece, 16-17 Jul. 2013, pp. 274-277. 
[16] World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), “OWL Web Ontology 
Language,” URL: http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-ref/, accessed 
at 08/12/2013. 
[17] S. Rachuri et al., “A Model for Capturing Product Assembly 
Information,” Journal of Computing and Information Science 
in Engineerning, vol. 6, Mar. 2006, pp. 11-21. 
[18] S. Fenves, S. Foufou, C. Bock, N. Bouillon, and R. Sriram, 
“CPM2: A Revised Core Product Model for Representing 
Design Information,” National Institute of Standards and 
Technology 
(NIST), 
Gaithersburg, 
MD, 
NIST 
Interagency/Internal Rep. (NISTIR) 7185, Oct. 2004. 
[19] H. J. Pels, “Classification Hierarchies for Product Data 
Modelling,” Production Planning Control, vol. 17, no. 4, June 
2006, pp. 367–377. 
[20] J. H. Lee et al., “A Semantic Product Modeling Framework 
and Its Application to Behavior Evaluation,” IEEE 
Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, vol. 9, 
no. 1, Jan. 2012, pp. 110-123. 
[21] G. A. Miller, “WordNet: A Lexical Database for English,” 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 38, no. 11, Nov. 1995, pp. 
39-41. 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

