Ubiquitous Learning – Treating the Context of Students Learning Styles  
 
 
Andreia Rosangela Kessler Mühlbeier, Felipe Becker Nunes, Gleizer Bierhalz Voss,  
 Rafaela Ribeiro Jardim, Roseclea Duarte Medina 
 
PPGI - Programa de Pós-Graduação em Informática 
UFSM - Universidade Federal de Santa Maria  
Santa Maria - Brasil 
{dehiamuhlbeier, nunesfb, gleizer.voss, rafa.rjardim, roseclea.medina}@gmail.com 
 
Abstract— The increasing use of mobile devices and the wide 
dissemination of learning environments encourage educators to 
find methods that involve mobile and ubiquitous computing. 
This scenario allows the development of environments geared 
to teaching, in which characteristics of the context information 
from the student should be treated apart. Thus, it arises a new 
paradigm, ubiquitous learning, and enabling differentiated 
instruction. This article presents a survey that has founded, by 
analyzing evidential theory and practice, the similarity 
between the different dimensions of learning styles, presenting 
an adaptation of the ubiquitous environment seamlessly with 
the style of the predominant user. 
 
Keywords-learning 
styles; 
ubiquitous 
learning; 
mobile 
computing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Technological development boosts the appearance of 
several tools that give students and teachers the ability to 
create various teaching methodologies in virtual learning 
environments, these in different ways to compose and 
accommodate formal education immersed in the educational 
environment. 
However, by using new methodologies and aiming 
access everywhere at every moment, facilitates the 
unification of resources and experiences that are fundamental 
to identify the learning styles of the students, thus enabling 
the building of a customized environment, which can 
contribute to achieving good results in the educational 
process. 
Mobile learning (of English Mobile Learning or m-
Learning) allows learning to occur anytime and anywhere. 
However, despite providing mobility, it does not provide an 
apprenticeship able to consider the context-sensitive 
information of the student [1]. 
In this sense, through studies listed on the work of [2] 
and [3], there are some important questions: the use of 
various styles in the detection of student’s profile can be an 
obstacle in the definition of his way to learn? Which style 
would be adopted in the adaptation of a virtual learning 
environment?  
This article presents a survey that shows by evidential 
theory and practice analysis the similarity between the 
different dimensions of learning styles, presenting an 
adaptation of the ubiquitous environment seamlessly with the 
style of the predominant user. 
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we 
introduce the theory base for ubiquitous learning. In Section 
III, we introduce the study of learning styles. In Section IV, 
we introduce the results and discussions. In Section V, there 
are partial considerations and at the last Section are 
presented the references. 
II. 
UBIQUITOUS LEARNING 
Ubiquitous learning or u-learning is viewed these days 
as a new learning paradigm. This expansion of previous 
learning paradigms goes from conventional learning to e-
learning (e-learning), as well as from e-learning to mobile 
learning (m-learning) and currently, called u-learning [1]. 
From Yahya et al. [4], the definition for ubiquitous 
computing environment is "an area that incorporates a set of 
embedded systems (computers, sensors, user interfaces, and 
service infrastructure), which is enhanced by computing 
communication technologies."  
However, 
to 
provide 
customized 
environments 
according to the profile of each student, it is necessary to 
collect information from the technological context in which 
each is located. According to Gasparini et al. [5], in order to 
be considered U-learning a system must meet at least two 
requirements: 
 
In must capture the context of the student without 
him noticing through devices or command lines; 
 
It must adapt the interface, content, presentation or 
navigation considering the user’s profile. 
 
 
In turn, Quinta [6] points out in his system for capture of 
context that, first, must be considered "for whom" will be 
held this adaptation, bringing the capture of the user's 
context through the standards of the World Wide Web 
Consortium (W3C) XML reading. In second place, it is seen 
"where" content will be adapted that could happen on the 
server, the client or intermediary agent (proxy). The next 
stage acts "when" this adjustment is made, before the 
requisition, or during the two cases, and thus can take better 
advantage of each adaptation depending on the media file. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Then, it is chosen “what” will be adapted and if indeed 
this adaptation is necessary and lastly “how” will be 
realized this conversion.   
III. 
LEARNING STYLES 
Learning may be conceptualized as a natural process in 
the life of every human being and completed in adulthood. 
People of the same class, age, nationality, race and / or 
religion prefer to learn in different ways, in other words, 
they have their own preferences at the time of learning. 
Is important to know how to identify the learning styles 
of students, since the more strategies he has developed, the 
chances of developing various forms of presentation of 
information in learning situations experienced by him will 
be greater [7]. Thus, the teacher is able to plan and 
encourage students to develop their skills according to their 
learning skills. 
Learning styles are divided into dimensions in order to 
detect the prevalence of individual approaches of learning. 
A large number of them are available in the literature, with a 
tendency to merge styles presented by each author in their 
models. 
According to Buther [8], "learning style is the consistent 
and personnel way in which people use their qualities and 
skills to define themselves, to find, evaluate and process 
information." 
According to Honey and Mumford [9], "It is admitted 
also that each person is able to identify the characteristics of 
various learning styles, although generally, each person has 
a dominant style." 
     The author Felder and Soloman [10], understands the 
learning styles as preferences and dominant features in the 
way that people receive and process information. For him, 
"learning styles are skills that can and should be developed 
in the subject." 
Already the author Kolb [11], "Notes that each 
individual develops a particular learning style, giving 
priority to certain skill." 
According to Bariani [12], "examines that the forms are 
stable in relation to the characteristics of the cognitive 
structure of a person and which are modified from the direct 
or indirect influence of new events through culture and 
relate data of reality elaborating conclusions about them”. 
Table 1 shows the main characteristics associated with 
each of the styles. 
The learning style refers to the preferences of the subject 
in the learning process. Based on the concepts of authors on 
learning styles, you can identify your own style. 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION AND RESULTS 
The study consisted of a videntiary-theoretical – 
practical analysis of the similarity between different 
dimensions of learning styles in order to prove that a person 
can have interwoven styles, as well as detect which 
dimensions are most suitable to use in a virtual learning  
environment. 
The developed research integrated a master's dissertation 
entitled "Adaptation of Mobile Learning Engine Moodle 
(Moodle Mle) to different cognitive styles by using adaptive 
hypermedia" [2] in which the mobile MLE Moodle VLE it 
was adapted to different learning styles using adaptive 
hypermedia techniques. It was created and applied an Expert 
System for diagnosing styles, denominated SEDECA. The 
learning style was identified through the Instrument 
"Questionnaire" based on the research instruments proposed 
by [9], [12], [13] and [14]. The author Mozzaquatro [2], 
worked with four dimensions of learning styles: Reflective, 
serious, Holistic and Divergent in order to support the 
modeling process and implementation of the AVA to be 
adapted. The questionnaire was given to students of 
Undergraduate and Graduate distance learning mode. 
The second work integrated to the research was the 
thesis entitled "Learning Styles and Strategies customized to 
students the methods and distance" [3] that addressed 
seventeen dimensions of learning styles, implementing a 
computer system that detects preferred styles and 
recommends different learning strategies to present 
educational materials and teaching resources according to 
the individual preferences of students. A system of objective 
questions was created: The SDLS (Learning Styles Detector 
System) consisting of a "Questionnaire", composed by 
sixty-one issues based in the research instruments proposed 
by [8], [9], [10], and [11]. The result of the test identified 
preferences 
regarding 
the 
following 
dimensions: 
Accommodating, 
Analytical, 
Assimilating, 
Active, 
Convergent, 
Divergent, 
Global, 
Intuitive, 
Personal, 
Pragmatic, Realistic, Reflective, Sensory, Sequential, 
Theoretical, Verbal, Visual. 
The described researches have been validated by 
teachers and students of Graduate and Postgraduate 
modalities and distance education. After analysis of the 
characteristics, preferences and state of the different 
dimensions of learning styles, can confirm the similarity 
between of the aforementioned models. 
The study shows that the styles are interwoven, and 
every person has more than one learning style, but each 
person has only one style of predominance, as shown in 
Figures 1 and 2. 
 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As shown in Figure 1, three styles have been 
interwoven, in other words, the results of the population on 
the survey showed by Mozzaquatro [2], demonstrate that 
subjects tended to predominate in the following styles: 
Holista (44%), Style Divergent (32 %) and reflective style 
(24%). 
Figure 2 illustrates the analysis of the research 
developed by Mühlbeier [3], that presents the chance of  the 
student to present learning style interwoven in which one 
style becomes predominant. It can be observed that the 
population interviewed presented five interwoven learning 
styles: Verbal (24%) Reflective (22%), Sequential (20%), 
Visual (18%) and Sensorial (16%). 
As seen in Figure 3, the learning style Global 
approached by Felder and Silvermann [11],  presents as the 
vision the whole approach. Compared to the learning 
Holistic style, integral of the Bariani Model [12], it was 
found that both have similar characteristics, with emphasis 
on the global context. Based on this assumption it is 
conclude that an individual with the Holistic Learning Style 
has the same preferences as a Global Style one. 
 
Figure 3 – Similarity Global and Holistic. 
 
 
Figure 4 –  Similarity Intuitive and Active. 
 
Figure 4 illustrates the intuitive and active learning 
styles and members of the Felder and Silvermann Model 
[10], which mention individual characteristics motivated by 
new experiences and innovations. Concluding that people 
with such characteristics can suit both dimensions. 
 
 
Figure 5 – Similarity Pragmatic and Realistic. 
 
 
 
Figure 6 – Similarity Reflective and Analytic. 
 
The realistic style of the Buther integral Model [8], 
presents itself as characteristic to resolve practical 
situations. The Honey and Mumford Model [9],  shows the 
pragmatic dimension that has experience and theories 
applied to practice. It was noted that both dimensions have 
similarity between them, as shown in Figure 5. In Figure 6 
we observe that Buther’s Analytical Model dimensions and 
Reflective Model Honey and Mumford, have as a common 
characteristic "focus", meaning that reflective or analytical 
individuals think hard before reaching a conclusion. 
 
 
Figure 7 – Similarity between Sequencial and Serialistic. 
 
As shown in Figure 7, the sequential and serialist 
learning styles integrates Felder - Silvermann and Bariani 
Figure 1 – Interwoven Learning Styles: Divergent – Holistic – Reflective. 
 
Figure 2 – Interwoven Learning Styles: Reflective- Sequential – Sensory – 
Verbal -Visual. 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

models present as individual preferences analysis in 
sequential steps, in other words, a step by step. 
Characteristics prevalent in individuals who are also 
sequential serealists. 
After analyzing the similarities between all surveyed 
dimensions, it was proven that to adapt a virtual learning 
environment, it is necessary to build a system that detects 
learning styles using a wide range of dimensions, since both 
have similarities, influencing positively the relation cost-
benefit. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Virtual learning environments haves been lately focused 
to the functional aspects, looking to evolve through 
recommendations to become closer to classroom teaching 
with the use of mobile devices. A ubiquitous learning 
environment is able to meet the needs of students, exploring 
their preferences of learning styles. 
It is believed that the presented research achieved its 
objectives, contributing to a development of the adaptation 
of virtual learning environments for different learning 
styles. The main contribution of this work was to prove the 
similarity between the different dimensions of learning 
styles addressed by the authors of the studied models, so 
there is no reason to use a wide range of dimensions of 
learning styles. 
Based on the developed research, it was possible to 
verify the existence of interwoven styles, in other words, 
every person has predominance in one dimension, but 
integrates others in lesser extent. The study shows that 
diagnosing learning styles is a complex task, and requires 
analyzes in order to offer to the student an individualized 
learning experience, showing them the information in a 
personalized and targeted way. The identification of 
prevalent learning styles now has a key role on enabling 
more consistent educational practices with actions that 
prioritize autonomy and cooperation in the process of 
teaching and learning environment by adapting the student's 
predominant  ubiquitous model.  
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  K. Mandula, S. R. Meda, and R. Kambham, “Implementation of 
Ubiquitous Learning System Using Sensor technologies , In: IEEE 
International Conference on Technology for Education, Hyderabad, 
India: IEEE Computer Society, pp. 142-148, 2011. 
[2]   P. M. Mozzaquatro, “Adaptation of Mobile Learning Engine Moodle 
(MLE Moodle) to different cognitive styles by using adaptive 
hypermedia”, Dissertation - Federal University of Santa Maria 
(UFSM), 2010. 
[3]   A. R. K. Mühlbeier, “Personalized Styles and Strategies Learning to 
students from the classroom and distance teaching”, Conclusion Work 
Course - University of Cruz Alta (UNICRUZ), 2010. 
[4]   S. Yahya, E. A. Ahmad and K. A. Jalil, University Teknologia 
MARA, “The definition and characteristics of ubiquitous learning: A 
discussion”, International Journal of Education and Development 
using Information and Communication Technology (IJEDICT), vol. 
6, Issue 1, 2010, pp. 117-127. 
[5]  I. Gasparini, A. P. Kemczinski and M. S. Oliveira, “User model 
sensitive to the cultural context in an adaptive e-learning system”, 
Computers in Education: Theory and Practice, vol. 14, n. 1, UFRGS, 
2011, Available: <http://seer.ufrgs.br/InfEducTeoriaPratica/article/vi 
  ew/21974> Retrieved: April, 2013. 
[6]   M. R. Quinta, “Adaptation of content to multiple contexts - ODIN 
system”, Federal University of Goiás - Institute of Informatics, In: 
2011, 
Available: 
<http://www.inf.ufg.br/mestrado/sites/www.inf.ufg.br.mestraof/files/u
ploads / dissertations / MarceloQuinta.pdf>. Retrieved: May, 2013. 
[7]  L. C. B. Cavellucci, “Learning Styles: in search of individual 
differences”, 
2006, 
p. 
10-12. 
Available: 
<http://www.iar.unicamp.br/disciplinas/am540_2003/lia/estilos_de_a
prendizagem.pdf>. Retrieved: April, 2013. 
[8]  K. A. Buther, “Learning Styles: the dimensions psychological, 
cognitive and affective”, Translated by Renata Costa de Sá Bonotto 
and Jorge Alberto Reichert. Porto Alegre: Editora UFRGS, 2003. 
[9] P. Honey, A. Mumford, “The Learning Styles helper’s guide”, 
Maldenhead Berks: Peter Honey Publications, 2000. 
[10] R. M. Felder and B. A. Silvermann, “Index of Learning Styles 
Questionnaire”. Department of Chemical Engineering North Carolina 
State 
University 
Raleigh, 
NC 
27695-7905, 
1993. 
Availeble:<http://www.engr.ncsu.edu/learningstyles/ilsweb.html>.  
Retrieved: April, 2013. 
[11] D. A. Kolb, “Experiential Learning: experience as the source of 
learning and development”. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1984. 
[12] I. C. Bariani, “Cognitive Styles of College and Initiation Scientific”, 
Campinas UNICAMP. Thesis (Ph.D. in Education), Faculty of 
Education, University of Campinas, 1998. 
[13] R. M. Felder, “Reaching the Second Tier: learning and teaching styles 
in college science education”, Journal of College Science Teaching, 
vol. 
23, 
n. 
5, 
pp. 
286-290, 
1993, 
Available: 
<http://www.ncsu.edu/felderpublic/Papers/Secondtier.html>, 
Retrieved: April, 2013. 
[14] M. Geller, “Distance Learning and Cognitive Styles: building a new 
look at virtual environments”, Porto Alegre: UFRGS, Thesis (Ph.D. in 
Computer Education), Graduate Program in Computer Education, 
Federal 
University 
of 
Rio 
Grande 
do 
Sul, 
2004.
 
 
 
 
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

TABLE I.             DIMENSIONS OF LEARNING STYLES. 
 
Dimensions 
Characteristics 
 
Butler Model 
 
Realistic 
Members with learning style Realist see the world as a place orderly and predictable facts, actions and results. 
They are guided by experience; follow guidelines and make sure that others are aware of the actions that 
practiced; dislike change for change or fix what is not in trouble. 
 
Analytic 
The members of the analytical learning style perceive the world as a logical system that can be understood 
through analysis and constant study, have a theory for almost everything, like the scientific method, technical 
information and evidence. 
 
Pragmatic 
Pragmatists members see the whole world to the parts and the parts to the whole world, simultaneously, have 
the ability to adapt and adapt; attribute the same weight to facts and values, formulate strategies and tactics to 
make things happen; suffer less with the incompatibilities of styles. 
 
Personal 
Members with personal style have the following characteristics: to understand the world as a place where 
harmony is essential and the prevalence is up to the well. These guys love to be seen as helpful, supportive, 
open and trustworthy; welcome multiple points of view and then assimilate. 
 
Divergent 
The divergent perceives the world as a place of infinite possibilities, where imagination and experimentation 
combine themselves to test and find out what may prove to be, like change, dissent and novelty seeking.  
 
Honey and 
Mumford 
Model 
Active 
They prefer new experiences, have an open mind, are enthusiastic about anything new, are sociable and engage 
constantly with others, try to be the center of all activities, are interested in challenges and problematic 
situations, manifest strong implication in action. 
 
Reflective 
The prioritize members observe before action, like to observe the experiences of diverse perspectives, focus on 
reflection and meaning making, gather information both from their own experience as the experience of others, 
they prefer to think before coming to any conclusion. 
 
Theoretical 
Tend to establish relationships, deduce, integrating the facts in coherent theories, tend to be perfectionists, they 
like to analyze and synthesize. Their approach to problems are consistent and logical. They seek rationality and 
objectivity, they are uncomfortable with subjective conclusions, lateral thinking or surface appearance. 
 
  Felder and 
Silvermann 
Model 
 
Sensory 
Sensory members enjoy learning facts; solve problems with established methods without complications and 
surprises, they are more finicky, and do well in practical work (laboratory, for example). 
 
Intuitive 
 
Members of intuitive group prefer to discover possibilities and relationships; enjoy newness and get bored with 
repetition, they feel more comfortable to deal with new concepts, abstractions and mathematical formulas, are 
faster and more innovative work. 
 
Visual 
Members of the visual group remember more of what they see - pictures, diagrams, flow charts, films and 
demonstrations. 
 
Verbal 
Members of this group take greater advantage of verbal words - written or oral explanations and mathematical 
formulas. 
 
Active 
Active members tend to comprehend and retain information more efficiently discussing, applying concepts and 
/ or explaining to others, enjoy working in groups. 
Reflective 
Reflective members need time to reflect on the information received; They prefer individual jobs. 
 
Sequential 
They prefer to learn sequential linearly, logically sequenced steps in; tend to follow logical paths to find 
solutions. 
 
Global 
Global members tend to learn at random, forming a vision of the whole, are able to solve complex problems 
quickly, but have difficulty explaining how they did. 
 
Kolb Model   
Divergent 
Divergent members prefer to learn by concrete experience and reflective observation. They show up skilled in 
situations that require new and creative ideas, are able to analyze situations from different points of view and 
relate them in an organized whole, comprise people. Question feature WHY? 
Assimilating 
Assimilators members learn by reflective observation and abstract conceptualization. They use inductive 
reasoning, respond to information in a logical way, when they have time to reflect, they have facility to create 
abstract models and theoretical and they do not worry about the practical. Question feature WHAT? 
Converging 
Convergent members use deductive reasoning, with practical application of ideas, learn by trial and error, are 
skilled to solve problems and make decisions. Question feature HOW? 
Accommodating 
Members of these group prefer this style based on learning and active experimentation in concrete experience, 
adapt to immediate circumstances; like challenges, act more by feeling than by logical analysis. Question 
feature THAT WAY? 
 
Bariani Model   
Reflective 
They reflect before taking a particular course of action, have more organized thoughts. People whose thoughts 
are more organized, sequenced and that are weighted thoughts, previous response, reflexives are considered. 
Serialist 
The serialist people are tighter focus on separate topics and logical sequences, searching later, patterns and 
relationships in process to confirm or not their hypothesis. They choose simple hypothesis and a logical-linear 
(a chance to another step-by-step). They are often good and skilled analysts on solving problems. 
Holistic 
The holistic group gives greater emphasis to the global context, from the beginning of a task, examining 
preferences in a large amount of data looking for patterns and relations between them. They can solve complex 
problems quickly or put together things and are often good with synthesis. 
Divergent 
The members of divergent group perceive the world as a place of infinite possibilities, where imagination and 
experimentation combine to test  and find out what may prove to be, like change, dissent and novelty seeking. 
Source: Adapted from [2]. 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

