A Case Study on Understanding 2nd Screen Usage during a Live Broadcast  
A Qualitative Multi-Method Approach 
Mari Ainasoja, Juhani Linna 
School of Information Sciences 
University of Tampere 
Tampere, Finland 
firstname.lastname@uta.fi 
Päivi Heikkilä, Hanna Lammi, Virpi Oksman 
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland 
Tampere, Finland 
firstname.lastname@vtt.fi 
 
 
Abstract— Media multitasking with different 2nd screen devices 
– i.e., with tablets, smartphones and laptop computers that are 
used simultaneously with viewing a television broadcast – has 
rapidly become a common user behavior. While this behavior 
can be measured quantitatively in several ways, fairly little is 
known about the reasons and motives behind it. To compose a 
better understanding of the role that 2nd screens have in the 
viewing experience of the user, we conducted a case study with 
12 participants by using a combination of qualitative data 
collection methods. Through thematic analysis we combined 
four ideal types, Commentator, Analyzer, Home Gamer and 
Active Follower, which exemplify the different meanings that 
2nd screen usage has for the viewer. 
Keywords-media multitasking; 2nd screen; case study; user 
types. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The emergence and evolution of mobile technology and 
mobile services have changed the media landscape 
irrevocably. Media users can now “go online” virtually in 
and from anyplace and have nearly unlimited access to 
media content and services from myriads of providers. 
Media businesses – from newspaper companies and TV 
broadcasters to digital content providers – are trying to re-
invent their products and business models to suit the 
evolving needs of the mobile user. This re-invention needs 
empirically supported knowledge from all aspects of mobile 
device use. 
Using mobile devices simultaneously with other media 
content is a change in user behavior that has emerged rather 
recently. An estimation from Nielsen [1] suggests that 69 % 
of US users aged 13 and above use tablets while watching 
TV at least several times per week. Google’s survey [2] 
suggests that 81 % of smart phone users used it 
simultaneously with TV. These figures may be among the 
highest estimations, but it is nonetheless safe to say that this 
type of multitasking has become common very rapidly. 
We call tablets, smartphones and laptop computers that 
are used simultaneously with TV viewing as 2nd screens. 
While media multitasking is an old phenomenon on a non-
specific level (e.g. reading a magazine while listening radio), 
the fact that 2nd screens have the capability to be connected 
to the same media experience in a personalized way creates a 
whole new design paradigm for both media business and 
media research.  
Currently, users’ behavior with 2nd screen services is 
tracked through a variety of quantitative variables – e.g. 
amounts of downloads, clicks, traffic sources and use flows. 
These variables are mainly used for measuring service 
performance and the business impact of a specific service. 
Researchers, whose goals tend to be wider and more of a 
theoretical nature, have used mainly surveys and laboratory 
experiments to study the use of 2nd screens. 
While quantitative methods such as tracking digital 
footprints or conducting online surveys may be the only 
practical way to study media use among the masses, our case 
study takes a qualitative perspective on 2nd screens and thus 
contributes to understanding reasons and motives behind the 
usage figures. In order to design 2nd screen services that 
support or enhance users’ ways of using media, we need to 
understand why 2nd screens are used and how they could 
potentially change the media experience. These issues are 
particularly interesting in the context of live broadcasts, as 
they make synchronized information flow between the 
broadcaster and the 2nd screen possible. Consequently, our 
research question is defined as follows: 
What kind of role does the 2nd screen have in the users’ 
viewing experience during a live broadcast? 
An entertainment program called the Voice of Finland 
(VoF) served as a practical setting for the research. We 
selected a sample of 12 adults aged from 20 to 38 years who 
considered themselves “followers” of the show and studied 
their 2nd screen use relating to the show. We used a mixture 
of data collection methods – media diaries, theme interviews 
and on-site observations – to provide a broad perspective on 
the research problem. 
The article proceeds as follows: the next Section 
summarizes earlier research on 2nd screen usage, and Section 
3 elaborates the qualitative case study approach and the 
combination of data collection methods utilized in this study. 
Empirical results are described in Section 4 and discussed 
further in Section 5. In Section 6, implications and 
limitations are considered. 
II. 
STUDIES ABOUT THE USE OF 2
ND SCREENS 
A. Media multitasking as a general phenomenon 
In research, media multitasking has been the most 
common viewpoint used to describe multiple media use. This 
concept covers a broad phenomenon including different 
196
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

media channels and both non-media [3] and media [4] 
multitasking activities: In this article, we concentrate on the 
latter: “the practice of participating in multiple exposures to 
several media forms simultaneously” [4].  
Media multitasking has been on the research agenda for 
around 10 to 15 years; for example, Pilotta et al. [5] found 
out already in 2004 that only 16 percent of the US media 
population did not engage in simultaneous media usage. 
Popular viewpoints in prior research on media multitasking 
include the ability to process information and perform tasks 
in multitasking environments, gaze distribution between 
media and age-based differences in multitasking behavior 
[6]. 
Our case study focuses on multiple media use that is 
related to a specific, live TV program. In a more general 
laboratory study on concurrent TV and laptop use, Brasel et 
al. [6] found out that participants switched their attention 
between a television and a laptop at an extremely high rate. 
The computer dominated the television for visual attention, 
and the gazes captured by the television were shorter than 
gazes captured by the laptop. However, the time was split 
between more web pages than channels.  
B. From media multitasking to program-related 2nd screens 
Most of the media multitasking around TV – say, email 
checking or online shopping  – is unrelated to TV watching 
and only part of it enriches the actual program content and 
watching experience [7][8]. The simultaneous, program-
related  use  of  other  devices  during  a  TV  broadcast  has  
gained less attention in academic research than the wider 
phenomenon of media multitasking. To date, studies taking 
the user perspective have been conducted mainly at the level 
of industry reports using the terms 2nd screen or social TV 
[9], and academic studies are still scarce. 
One stream of research has focused on developing and 
designing 2nd screen devices and solutions both for 
controlling TV programs/services and for enriching TV 
programs with interactive features such as quizzes and voting 
[10].  Cesar  et  al.  [7]  summarize  the  roles  of  a  program-
related 2nd screen through a taxonomy of three activities: 
content control, content enrichment and content sharing. 
Another stream of academic studies on 2nd screens has 
focused on social media (e.g. Twitter, Facebook or instant 
messaging) usage during TV broadcasts. For example, Han 
et al. [9] used a qualitative convenience sample consisting 
mainly of students and found five motivational categories for 
the complementary use of text-based media (mainly instant 
messaging and social media) during live TV broadcasts: 
communicating 
about 
impressions 
of 
a 
broadcast, 
information sharing and seeking, feelings about co-viewing, 
curiosity 
about 
others’ 
opinions 
and 
program 
recommendations.  
In addition to established social media channels, some 
research has also been done on social TV applications such 
as GetGlue, Intonow and Miso in the US. Basabur et al. [11] 
emphasized in their field trial that program-related use of 
social TV applications is characterized by the innate need for 
social validation: a place to show off the knowledge, 
compete on who makes the funniest comment, and validate 
the feeling that friends think alike and belong together.  
More recent academic research has focused on 2nd screen 
applications that are offered by TV companies to enrich the 
viewing experience of one specific program (like the VoF 
and the HomeCoach application in our case study). The use 
of these applications is in line with more general media 
multitasking: interest in 2nd screen applications and the 
intention to use them is higher among people who are used to 
using other media during television viewing [12]. However, 
some studies have pointed out a critical view on the potential 
of program-related 2nd screens, emphasizing the strengths of 
TV as a low-effort medium and reporting fairly low usage 
rates of interactive features unique to specific TV programs 
[10][13]. Also in the study of Courtois et al. [12], 
respondents were only slightly interested in using program-
related 2nd screen applications and preferred using 
established social media channels instead of specially 
designed applications. On the other hand, in the study of 
Basabur et al. [11], participants appreciated the idea of 
getting different aspects of the 2nd screen  in  the  same  
application if the integration with established social media 
was smooth. 
C. 2nd screen and entertainment programs 
The program genre plays an important role in, for 
example, the use of TV in general, and more particularly in 
the use of social TV [11][14][15]. For example, the genre of 
television content had stronger effects on gaze duration 
distributions than individual psychological differences in the 
study by Hawkins et al. [16]. 
Social features have been pointed out to be especially 
suitable for sports, reality TV, quizzes and home decorating 
shows [14][15]. A study by Geerts et al. [15] relates this to 
the plot structure of a show claiming that people do not talk 
while engaged to a plot. Also Basabur et al. [11] concluded 
in their field trial that the program genre affected how much 
effort users were ready to put on making and reading 
comments on the 2nd screen. If the program required a lot of 
attention, like dramatic shows, users experienced creating 
links and informational posts to a 2nd screen as distracting;  
however, simple commenting was still accepted and fans of 
shows knew the patterns of the shows and became skillful in 
knowing when they can take their eyes off from primary TV 
content. 
In a qualitative study by Han et al. [9], it was reported 
that communication about one’s impressions of a broadcast 
was the strongest motivation for using instant messaging 
and/or 
social 
media 
during 
entertainment 
program 
broadcasts. This motivation means exchanging mutual 
thoughts or opinions, developing a bond of sympathy, using 
the content of a broadcast as a topic of conversation and 
talking about persons on air. The second most frequent 
motivations with entertainment programs were ‘information 
sharing and seeking’ and ‘feelings of co-viewing’. 
III. 
QUALITATIVE CASE STUDY APPROACH 
Earlier research has used mainly surveys and laboratory 
experiments to study the use and users of 2nd screens. Our 
197
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

goal was to compose a deeper and more coherent 
understanding of the role that 2nd screens can have in the 
personal viewing experience – not to generate statistically 
generalizable results from a specific form of data or evaluate 
the performance of the 2nd screen application itself. A 
qualitative case study approach was found to best suit the 
purpose of our research: Case studies focus on understanding 
the dynamics that are present in single settings [17], and 
qualitative data offer insight into complex processes that can-
not be reached with quantitative data [18].    
The advantages of qualitative data collection methods are 
known, but so are their disadvantages. Reflective methods 
like interviews, where the respondent reflects his or her 
media experiences, are known to have reliability issues [6]. 
Respondents do not remember their doings correctly, and nor 
are they aware of everything they do [19]. On the other hand, 
direct observational methods do not reveal the motivational 
background or users’ own interpretations. Further, data 
collection that is conducted in laboratories or in controlled 
settings fails to address the natural complexity of the media 
experience in an interpersonal context [20], for example. 
Based on the rationale above, we designed a research 
framework that had its groundings in contextual inquiry. 
Contextual inquiry is an ethnographic research method that 
aims to find naturally used roles, attitudes and behaviors to 
support design work [19]. We collected the data with 
multiple qualitative methods, both observational and self-
reflective methods, to overcome the disadvantages that a 
single method may have had. All prerequisites and 
requirements relating to 2nd screen devices or their use were 
discarded once the participants were chosen. In other words, 
we encouraged natural use of 2nd screens – in contrast to 
Brasel et al. [6] and Tsekelevs et al. [10], for example.  
A. Case: The Voice of Finland 
The VoF offered versatile possibilities for 2nd screen 
interaction and thus also a rich practical setting for the 
research. The show is based on a Dutch concept, the Voice 
of Holland, developed by Talpa Holding NV in 2010 and 
now franchised to over 20 countries. In the show, a group of 
amateur singers compete against each other under the 
guidance of professional artists. In Finland and in several 
other countries it is one of the most popular shows on TV. 
The VoF’s 2nd screen channels included active and actively 
promoted 
Twitter 
and 
Facebook 
channels, 
partly 
simultaneous broadcasting with different content through the 
program’s web page, and a specifically developed, free and 
interactive 2nd screen application – HomeCoach – that was 
synchronized with the live broadcast (Figure 1). The 
application (Kotivalmentaja in Finnish) was freely available 
for Android and iOS smartphones during the season and it 
offered different functionalities in different phases of the 
VoF, from guessing the course of the show to evaluating the 
performances and cheering the contestants. In a sentence, at 
the time of the study the VoF was the most comprehensive 
attempt to bring together TV broadcast and 2nd screens into 
one rich media experience. 
B. User participants 
The user participants for the study were chosen from a 
participant  pool  which  was  formed  on  the  basis  of  a  
recruitment questionnaire. The questionnaire was advertised  
 
Figure 1.  The VoF and the official 2nd screen channels 
on the VoF Facebook page. Besides demographics, we 
collected information about general 2nd screen use and 
watching habits. From the 261 people that filled in the 
questionnaire, we picked 12 adults who watched the show in 
different social settings and whom we regarded as early 
adopters or early majority (as defined by Rogers [21]) in 
broadcasting-related 2nd screen application adoption. The 12 
participants who resided in Southern Finland and were aged 
from 20 to 38 are summarized in Table 1. 
C. Media Diaries and Contextual Interviews 
All participants were asked to fill in a qualitative and 
mostly open-ended media diary for seven consecutive days, 
and they were interviewed both in the beginning and at the 
end of the diary period. 
TABLE I.  THE PARTICIPANTS OF THE STUDY INCLUDED NINE 
FEMALES (F) AND THREE MALES (M). 
 
Age 
Household type; 
living 
Described typical VoF 
watching situation 
Home
Coach 
F1* 
20 
With a friend 
With a friend 
Yes 
F2* 
20 
With a spouse 
With a spouse 
Yes 
F3* 
24 
Alone 
With a group of friends 
Yes 
M1 
28 
Alone 
Alone or with a friend 
Yes 
F4* 
32 
With a spouse 
Alone 
Yes 
F5 
34 
Alone 
Alone or with a friend 
Yes 
M2 
35 
With a spouse and 
2 children 
With family 
No 
F6* 
35 
Alone 
With a friend 
Yes 
F7 
35 
With a spouse and 
2 children 
With family 
Yes 
F8 
36 
With a spouse and 
2 children 
With family or with a spouse 
No 
F9* 
37 
With a spouse and 
3 children 
With family 
No 
M3 
38 
With a spouse and 
3 children 
With family or with a spouse 
Yes 
* Participated in the on-site observation 
198
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The first interview happened in all but one occasion in 
the participant’s home, i.e., in the context where she or he 
viewed the VoF. In the interview we were interested in the 
personal 2nd screen usage motives and habits on one hand, 
and in the social context (both virtual and physical) in which 
this usage happens on the other. We encouraged the 
participants to provide their own interpretations, e.g. by 
asking “How would you describe your use” instead of “How 
do you use (the 2nd screen device in a certain situation)”. All 
interviews were recorded and transcribed for further analysis. 
The main purpose of the pre-structured media diaries was 
to provide a longer temporal viewpoint on the research 
question: While the weekly live broadcasts were in the 
central focus of the study, show-related 2nd screen channels 
were active also between the shows. The content of the 
media diaries was walked through with the participants to 
ensure that they understood what was required from them. In 
the diaries we asked the participants to make notes on their 
2nd screen use before, during and after a chosen TV viewing 
event, and the tasks they did relating to VoF each day. We 
also asked the participants to describe the social setting 
where the viewing happened, and even the emotions and 
feelings that were attached to the situation. With the question 
setting we also aimed to provide rich stimuli for the second 
interview, which was conducted on the basis of the filled-in 
diary.  
D. On-Site Participant Observations 
In addition to media diaries and contextual interviews, 
we conducted six participant observations in the participants’ 
homes – i.e., in their typical watching environment – during 
the VoF live broadcasts on Friday nights.  
Two researchers were present in each observation. The 
observation sessions started with an explanation of the 
process (i.e., research methods and use of data) and were 
followed by an interview, as described in the previous 
section. The participants and other people present were free 
to ask questions at any time. These discussions that preceded 
the observation also served as a way of building trust – or 
rapport, as described by Guest et al. [22] – with the 
participants. This trust-building session was an essential part 
of the participant observation, since natural behavior was 
encouraged. The main challenge of participant observation, 
namely, the possible impact of the observer on the behavior 
of participants, was recognized. However, it was justified to 
use this method because asking clarifying questions 
immediately on-site enabled us to study the motivational 
background and users’ own interpretations, which are central 
to our research question. Additionally, in this multi-method 
approach, the results do not build solely on observation, but 
the diaries and interviews complemented the picture.  
During the VoF live broadcast, the researchers took notes 
on the behavior of the participant, from time to time asking 
clarifying questions; for example, when it was unclear what 
the participant did with the 2nd screen. It was agreed 
beforehand that the other researcher would focus especially 
on the 2nd screen use, while the other observed the social 
context of the viewing event. All the observations were 
videotaped, with the permission of everyone involved. 
After the broadcast, the participants were briefly 
interviewed on the basis of the observations. This was done 
to asses both the typicality of the viewing event and the 
validity of the researchers’ interpretations. 
E. Thematic Analysis 
Thematic analysis is a flexible analysis method that 
allows the use of different types of qualitative data. There is 
no explicit way of practicing this widely used method, but as 
a general definition it is used for identifying, analyzing, and 
reporting patterns (i.e., themes) within the data [23]. 
In this study the collected data – i.e., the transcribed 
interviews, media diaries and observation reports – were first 
initially coded separately by the researcher who interacted 
with the participant in question. The results were then shared 
and discussed within the team to build mutual understanding 
between the researchers. These discussions were especially 
important since the research team was a multidisciplinary 
one with backgrounds in psychology, marketing and 
technology. 
From the initially coded data, we identified themes that 
would most clearly define the role of the 2nd screen use in the 
viewing experience. From these themes we combined four 
ideal viewer types and named them as Commentator, 
Analyzer, Home Gamer and Active Follower. The purpose 
of these ideal types is to illustrate the different roles that the 
2nd screen serves in a TV viewing experience. Ideal types are 
common mental constructs in social sciences; they do not 
conform to reality in detail, but rather approximately [24]. 
Each of these types has a different use motivation and a 
different way of using 2nd screens. 
IV. 
RESULTS: DIFFERENT VIEWER TYPES 
A. Commentator 
A  Commentator  mainly  uses  the  2nd screen because of 
two reasons: it provides social amusement and gives novelty 
value. Commentators like to watch interesting TV shows 
with others and they enjoy observing and commenting on 
various aspects of the show spontaneously as they pop up. In 
the case of the VoF, they are not only interested in the music 
or the competition but also in the styling, musicians, 
audience and the speakers. Some Commentators searched 
these details online while watching. The show provides a 
forum for spotting interesting people and trends and the 2nd 
screen can support this. As the 2nd screen solution of the VoF 
did not support this kind of trend spotting, some 
commentators felt that it is irrelevant or disturbing, as it 
interferes with observing and commenting. For this user 
group, information on their interests, such as brands of 
clothing or members of the house band, could make the 2nd 
screen more attractive. 
For Commentators, watching TV and using 2nd screens is 
often a social event. Watching the show together with others 
gives a possibility to spontaneously exchange opinions of 
anything seen in the show. Commentators are also willing to 
try  out  new  things,  and  2nd screen applications are one 
opportunity that they want to check out with their friends or 
family. 2nd screens can be used together or at least shown to 
199
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

others once in a while. For those commentators who watch 
TV alone, Facebook, instant messaging and Twitter can 
serve as the social aspects. Commentators are an optimal 
target group for social 2nd screen solutions or social media 
which give interesting information on trends and various 
aspects of the show. However, the 2nd screen should not 
require intense concentration, as there may be interesting 
issues on TV to observe any time. Some commentators 
fluently use several 2nd screens, social media and 2nd screen 
applications during one TV show, while some prefer to 
concentrate on the main screen – in order not to miss any 
important moments. 
The following observational note demonstrates how 
Commentators constantly comment on the different aspects 
of a program and how the use of a 2nd screen together with a 
friend blends in with this commenting: 
One of the competitors, Eve Hotti, has started to sing. “I 
would like to win a prize that includes a stylist that would style 
us like that, looking so nice.” Annikki says. Annikki and Mira 
compliment Eve’s make-up and clothes. Mira sings along with 
the song and comments on the name of the performer: “It 
would be nice to be Mira Hotti.” [The last name refers to “hot” 
in Finnish]. Annikki evaluates the performance with the 
HomeCoach application as good and tells this evaluation to 
Mira. When one of the judges gives the feedback in the show, 
Annikki comments: “He [the judge] has become more 
masculine. That hair fits him well.” 
(Observational note, Annikki 35 years) 
B. Analyzer 
For an Analyzer, the 2nd screen  serves  as  a  tool  for  
obtaining relevant additional information related to the 
content of the TV program. In the case of the VoF, this 
information helps them in analyzing the potential success of 
contestants. Receiving real-time updates of other viewers’ 
reactions to the performances gives them a means to 
anticipate the results of the show and compare the general 
reaction of the audience to their own opinions. It is typical of 
them to ponder on the reasons for the success of certain 
performers – whether it is due to song selections, feedback 
from coaches or lack of similar contestants. 
Analyzers  are  not  only  interested  in  seeing  other  TV  
viewers’ responses, but they also want to express their own 
opinions and thus have an impact on the statistics of the 
show. As they value the accuracy of the information, it is 
also characteristic of them to evaluate performances 
precisely and even fine-tune their evaluations several times 
during a performance. Their commenting has a wider time 
frame: Analyzers may even compare the program content to 
previous 
program 
seasons, 
while 
Commentators 
spontaneously comment on things as they pop up in the 
program. As analyzing requires concentration on the 
program in question, Analyzers mainly use one 2nd screen at 
a time and are an optimal target group for program related 
2nd screen applications. The 2nd screen application related to 
the VoF was especially liked by Analyzers. 
The following observational note illustrates how 
Analyzers really put their effort into expressing their opinion 
precisely with a 2nd screen and how comparing one’s own 
opinions to those of other viewers’ becomes a part of 2nd 
screen usage: 
Tiina and Kimi are listening to performances closely and 
Tiina evaluates each with the HomeCoach during the song. 
They discuss about the song choices and the competitors that 
they believe will continue the competition from each team. 
During the performance of Antti Railio, Tiina first gives a 
rating with the HomeCoach that the performance is excellent. 
While the song goes on, she fine-tunes the evaluation and 
finally  decides  to  use  the  Wow  button  [the  best  rating  in  the  
application] and tells about it to Kimi: “I will give him a Wow”. 
Before the song ends, Tiina shows Kimi the evaluations that 
others have given with the application: “See, almost everyone 
says that this was excellent.” 
(Observational note, Tiina 20 years) 
C. Home Gamer 
For a Home Gamer, the 2nd screen brings engaging extra 
activity besides watching the show. Home Gamers are 
excited about possibilities which support playful competition 
between the TV viewers. Although Home Gamers are 
naturally interested in the competition between the 
contestants of the show, they may be even keener on 
competing with other TV viewers through the 2nd screen or 
on their own gaming habits that they have generated around 
the program. When competing with other TV viewers, it is 
important to see one’s own points and placement in the 2nd 
screen application, for example. Good rewards or recognition 
through the application may also motivate them. 
As the VoF was broadcasted on Friday nights, it was also 
a time for starting a weekend with the family or getting 
together with friends. In these contexts, a well-designed 2nd 
screen application can give an extra spice for watching the 
show together and create playfulness in the audience. For 
example, one group of four friends organized ‘VoF parties’ 
to watch the show, eat and chat together. Each one of them 
used her own iPhone to guess which contestants can continue 
in the show. The answers were first hidden and then revealed 
simultaneously. Although the 2nd screen application did not 
actually support this kind of competition, it encouraged them 
to play together. 
Some  home  gamers  wished  for  a  2nd screen solution 
which would truly support them in competing with each 
other – not only competing with other TV viewers. In some 
families or friend groups, the gaming habits could reach even 
a bit more serious level. For example, in one family 
everyone’s guesses were recorded to an excel sheet to 
calculate the points and the winner was announced after the 
show with excitement. In another family, children had their 
own competition: they guessed which contestants continue 
and bet on their last candies. In guessing competitions the 2nd 
screen and social media sometimes served as a way to 
receive extra information – publicly or secretly - for 
supporting one’s guess, but it could be designed to support 
these playful activities in a much more focused and engaging 
ways. 
The following observational note and interview quotation 
demonstrate  how  a  2nd screen application can enable 
playfulness even if the person is watching TV alone: 
200
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Heli is really focused on watching the the VoF in her 
favorite armchair. She uses the HomeCoach application actively 
during the program and rates each competitor as quickly as 
possible at the beginning of each song. Right after the show, she 
checks her points and placement in the weekly competition like 
she does every week: “It brings more excitement, a new twist 
when you can’t wait to see if you guessed right. I actually won 
one weekly competition. I got some kind of widget but I sold it. 
But it feels great to be right.” 
(Observational note and interview quotation, Heli 32 
years) 
D. Active Follower 
For an Active Follower, the primary role of the 2nd 
screen is to follow and walk along the journey of certain 
personas in the program. In the case of the VoF, these 
personas were competitors, coaches and/or hosts. The 2nd 
screen becomes meaningful to Active Followers through 
showing support to one’s favorites and becoming an active 
fan. It provides an opportunity to get closer to the people in 
the program than by watching traditional linear broadcast 
without a 2nd screen. 
Through 2nd screen usage, Active Followers look for 
additional information about the facts, backgrounds, 
learning, history and career development of their favorite 
personas. They are looking for an insider feeling, a feeling of 
being a part of the program and the lives of people in it. The 
interest in personas is not limited to the broadcast or the 
program season: they are also interested in getting updates 
about the life and career of their favorites after or outside the 
program. They follow contestants through different media, 
both traditional and digital, during the whole program 
season. TV broadcasts are already enriched by magazines, 
tabloids and websites, and the 2nd screen adds an extra spice 
to that. 
Active Followers want the possibility to participate in 
live broadcast, discuss and cheer their favorite performers. 
Social media is an important part of 2nd screen usage through 
the willingness to express and share the support of persons 
with other viewers or friends. This need can be fulfilled by 
using Twitter or Facebook or by using program-related 
applications. For Active Followers, an ideal 2nd screen 
application would be one that gives an opportunity to follow 
your favorites during and outside the broadcasting time.  
The following interview quotations illustrate the central 
role of following certain persons in the program and how it is 
reflected in the use of the 2nd screen: 
”I think this year they have managed to promote the career 
of all artists slightly better than last year. Their personality has 
been shown and I have seen that they have got gigs.” … “I did 
not use the application anymore during the final week because 
my favorite performers were not in the competition anymore” 
… “I tried sharing the HomeCoach results in Twitter, but I was 
disappointed that it did not share who I was cheering.” 
(Interview quotations, Anna 34 years) 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Table 2 summarizes the key differences between the 
ideal user types that stem from the data. The role of the 2nd 
screen for each type is further elaborated by describing the 
key contextual aspects and motivational factors. Motivations 
for 2nd screen usage are categorized by following the well-
established research stream of uses and gratifications. This 
research perspective emphasizes that the audience may use 
the same media in different ways and to meet different needs 
according to their own wants and contexts (cf. Katz et al. 
[25]). It has been widely used especially in assessing 
motivations to use media [26]-[29], and in different studies 
they are roughly categorized into motivations related to 
information benefits, entertainment benefits and social 
benefits [9]. A similar categorization can be also found in the 
literature of perceived value, in which categories are named 
after utilitarian, hedonic and social value, respectively [30]. 
Compared  to  the  majority  of  earlier  research  in  2nd screen 
usage [10]-[13], our results describing the different roles, 
contexts and motivations that 2nd screen have in the users’ 
viewing experience shift the emphasis from usage intention 
figures and interface design to understanding user 
experience. 
The primary role of the 2nd screen in the viewing 
experience is different for different viewer types. Our results 
include all three activities from the taxonomy of Cesar et al. 
[7], namely content enrichment, content sharing and content 
control, but give more detailed description of different role 
these activities can take in viewing experiences. For 
Commentators, the 2nd screen supports first and foremost the 
social aspects and commenting. It can be used together in 
order to strengthen the social ties in the living room or alone 
in order to avoid the feeling of watching alone. Key 
contextual aspects include other people and the role of 
different 2nd screens. Analyzers, instead, use the 2nd screen to 
support the analysis and anticipation of results. In their 
context the program content, directing the subject of 
analysis, has a more central role in 2nd screen usage. In 
addition to reality shows, detective stories, for example, 
could have suitable program content for this kind of 2nd 
screen usage. For Home Gamers, the competition and social 
gatherings or parties organized around the program are 
essential for using the 2nd screen. Finally, Active Followers 
concentrate on following persons in the program, and their 
context for the 2nd screen is influenced by multiple media 
channels in addition to TV. 
Viewer types can be roughly compared by concluding 
that Commentators emphasize social motivations, Analyzers 
are motivated mainly by information and Home Gamers 
emphasize entertainment. However, all 2nd screen user types 
have motivations related to all three aspects: information, 
entertainment and social aspects.  
From the information viewpoint, Commentators are 
interested in spotting trends and getting conversation topics 
from funny details in the program. The motivation of 
communication about impressions of a program, which was 
pointed out in earlier research as a strongest motivation in 
case of entertainment programs [9], applies especially in this 
user category in our study. Analyzers are more interested in 
accurate information and statistics from the program, while 
Home Gamers appreciate information related to competitions 
and quizzes between viewers. Active Followers want to get 
to know their favorite persons in the program in detail.  
201
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Entertainment is especially important for Home Gamers 
who look for playfulness and additional activity from 2nd 
screens. It is also characteristic of Commentators who look 
for humorous comments and want to keep up-to-date. 
Analyzers are entertained by the feeling of acquired expertise 
and correct analysis. 
The social motivations of Commentators and Home 
Gamers focus more on their own social circle, typically 
people in their own living room. Instead, Analyzers and 
especially Active Followers are keener on a wider social 
circle formed by the program viewers. The latter types are 
also interested in participating in the program through a 2nd 
screen but the emphasis differs: Analyzers want to contribute 
to results, while Active Followers want to feel that they are 
part of the program and live broadcast. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
A. Academic Implications 
From an academic point of view, we qualitatively 
explored a phenomenon of 2nd screen usage to address the 
lack of published studies. The limited prior research has 
focused more on the simultaneous use of social media with 
TV,  but  our  research  covered  a  broader  set  of  2nd screen 
activity 
including 
a 
show-specific 
application 
with 
synchronized content. The described viewer types and the 
motivations that drive their behavior in the context of media 
use can serve as one viewpoint for further academic debate 
considering 2nd screens. In addition, our findings contribute 
to the body of knowledge regarding the wider phenomenon 
of media multitasking. 
B. Practical Implications 
From a practitioner’s point of view, TV broadcasters and 
application developers can use our results in developing 2nd 
screen solutions that serve better the needs of different user 
types. Rich, contextual data helps designers to emphasize the 
role of service users and gives inspiration for enhancing the 
user experience of designs. Understanding the different 
tendencies and habits that viewer types have is necessary in 
designing and targeting future applications – especially since 
2nd screens also provide new possibilities for advertisers. Our 
results are applicable especially to reality TV, but to some 
extent also to the entertainment program genre more 
generally. 
C. Research Limitations and Future Research Directions 
This case study has four limitations. Firstly, it focuses on 
only one TV show with a limited number of participants that 
were considered both as followers of the show and active 2nd 
screen users. The insights of this study help in understanding 
and targeting different 2nd screen user types, but forming 
statistically 
justified 
design 
principles 
or 
business 
calculations would require the results to be tested with a 
larger sample size and quantitative analysis in the future. The 
future study with more participants also could reveal new 
viewer categories for example from the late adopters of 2nd 
screen applications excluded in this study. Secondly, as the 
program genre, for example, has been suggested to affect the 
use of 2nd screens [9], the viewer types could be refined 
and/or compared through a study that would target different 
genres. Thirdly, although the limitations of data collection 
methods – e.g. the researchers’ influence in participant 
observation – were narrowed down in this study by using a 
combination of complementary methods, the results could be 
validated in the future through a research with different 
methodological choices like video ethnography. Fourthly, 
and since TV and media concepts are often international, 
cross-cultural research would be highly desirable. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study received financial support from the Finnish 
Funding Agency for Technology and Innovation (TEKES) as 
part of the Next Media research programme, initiated by 
Digile Ltd. 
TABLE II. DIFFERENT ROLES OF 2ND SCREEN IN THE VIEWING EXPERIENCE 
 
Commentator 
Analyzer 
Home gamer 
Active follower 
Role of the 2nd screen 
social amusement and 
commenting  
support for analysis and 
anticipation of results 
tool for playful competition 
following and supporting 
persons in the program 
Key contextual factors 
for the 2nd screen 
other people, social media, 
different 2nd screens 
program content, 
other viewers’ opinions 
social gathering / party 
around the program 
different media channels around 
the persons 
Motivation: 
information 
spotting trends, information 
about various aspects of the 
program  
accurate information and 
statistics that support analysis 
 
information about points 
and placement in the game, 
inside information to 
support one’s guess 
background information of 
personas 
Motivation: 
entertainment 
trying out new things, 
keeping up-to-date, humor 
expertise, joy of successful 
evaluation 
playfulness, 
additional activity 
getting closer to persons, feeling 
of being part of the program 
Motivation: social 
experience of watching 
together, 
using the content as a topic of 
conversation, using the 2nd 
screen together 
possibility to influence and 
contribute, curiosity about the 
opinions of others, analyzing 
further 
competing with others, 
spending time together, 
rewards and recognition 
participating in live broadcast, 
feeling of community / fan 
group around the program 
202
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

REFERENCES 
[1] Nielsen, “State of the Media Spring 2012 Advertising & 
Audiences, Part 2: By Demographic”, April 27, 2012. 
http://www.nielsen.com/content/dam/corporate/us/en/news
wire/uploads/2012/04/nielsen-advertising-and-audiences-
spring-2012.pdf 
[2] Google, “The New Multi-screen World: Understanding 
Cross-platform 
User 
Behavior,” 
August 
2012. 
http://services.google.com/fh/files/misc/multiscreenworld_f
inal.pdf 
[3] S.-H. Jeong, and M. Fishbein. “Predictors of multitasking 
with media: Media factors and audience factors”, Media 
Psychology, vol. 10, issue 3, pp. 364-384, 2007. 
[4] F. Bardhi, A.J. Rohm, and F. Sultan, “Tuning in and tuning 
out: media multitasking among young users”. Journal of 
User Behaviour, vol. 9, issue 4, pp. 316-332, July/August 
2010. 
[5] J.J. Pilotta, D.E. Schultz, G. Drenik, and R. Philip, R. 
“Simultaneous media usage: A Critical User Orientation to 
Media Planning”. Journal of User Behaviour, vol. 3, issue 
3, pp. 285-292, 2004. 
[6] S.A. Brasel, and J. Gips, “Media multitasking behaviour: 
concurrent 
television 
and 
computer 
usage”, 
Cyberpsychology, Behaviour, and Social Networking 14 
(9), pp. 527-534, 2011. 
[7] P. Cesar, D.C.A. Bulterman, and J. Jansen, “Leveraging 
user impact: an architecture for secondary screens usage in 
interactive television”, Multimedia Systems, vol. 15, issue 
3, pp. 127-142. 2009. 
[8] V. Oksman, M. Ainasoja, J. Linna, M. Alaoja, P. Heikkilä 
and K. Alijoki K., “2nd screen usage while watching TV: 
An ethnographic study”, TIVIT Next Media Deliverables, 
2013. (http://www.nextmedia.fi) 
[9] E.
 Han,
 and
 S.-W.
 Lee,
 “Motivations
 for
 the
 
complementary use of text-based media during linear TV 
viewing: An exploratory study”, Computers in Human 
Behavior vol. 32 (March), pp. 235-243, 2014. 
[10] E.  Tsekleves,  R.  Whitman,  K.  Kondo,  and  A.  Hill,  
“Investigating media use and the television user experience 
in the home”. Entertainment Computing, vol. 2, issue 3, pp. 
151-161, 2011. 
[11] S.  Basabur,  H.  Mandalia,  S.  Chaysinh,  Y.  Lee,  N.  
Venkitaraman, and C. Metcalf, “FANFEEDS: Evaluation 
of socially generated information feed on second screen as 
a TV show companion”, In Proceedings of EuroITV’12, 
July 4-6 2012, Berlin, Germany, pp. 87-96, 2012. 
[12] C. Courtois, and E. D’Heer, E. “Second screen applications 
and tablet users: Constellation, awareness, experience, and 
interest”, Proceedings of EuroITV’12, July 4-6 2012, 
Berlin, Germany, pp. 153-156, 2012. 
[13] L. Cruickshank, E. Tsekleves, R. Whitham, A. Hill, K. 
Kondo, “Making interactive TV easier to use: Interface 
design for a second screen approach”, The Design Journal, 
vol. 10, issue 3, pp. 41-53, 2012. 
[14] G.  Harboe,  N.  Massey,  C.  Metcalf,  D.  Wheatley,  and  G.  
Romano, “The uses of social television”. ACM Computers 
in Entertainment, vol. 6, issue 1, 2008. 
[15] D. Geerts, P. Cesar, and D. Bulterman, “The implications 
of program genres for the design of social television 
systems”, In Proceedings of the international conference on 
designing interactive user experiences for TV and video, 
pp. 71-80, 2008. 
[16] R. Hawkins, S. Pingree, J. Hitchon, “What produces 
television attention and attention style? Genre, situation and 
individual 
differences 
as 
predictors”, 
Human 
Communications Research, vol. 31, pp. 162-167, 2005. 
[17] K.M. Eisenhardt, “Building theories from case study 
research,” Academy of Management Review 14 (4), pp. 
532-550, 1989. 
[18] K.M. Eisenhardt and M.E. Graebner, “Theory building 
from cases: Opportunities and challenges”, Academy of 
Management Journal, 50 (1), pp. 25–32, 2007. 
[19] H.R. Beyer, and K. Holtzblatt, “Apprenticing with the 
customer,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 38, issue 5, 
pp. 45-52, May 1995. 
[20] L. Jayasinghe, and M. Ritson, “Everyday advertising 
context: An ethnography of advertising response in the 
family living room”, Journal of User Research, vol. 40, 
issue 1, pp. 104-121, 2013. 
[21] E.M.  Rogers,  Diffusion  of  Innovations,  4th ed,  The  Free  
Press, New York, 1995. 
[22] G. Guest, E.E. Namey, and M.L. Mitchell, “Participant 
observation,” in  Collecting Qualitative Data: A Field 
Manual for Applied Research. SAGE Publications, Inc., 
Thousand Oaks, pp. 75-112, 2013. 
[23] V. Braun, and V. Clarke, “Using thematic analysis in 
psychology”, Qualitative Research in Psychology, vol. 3, 
issue 2, pp. 77-101, 2006. 
[24] Ideal type. (n.d.). Encyclopedia Britannica, Inc.. Retrieved 
June 
25, 
2014, 
from 
Dictionary.com 
website: 
http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/ideal type 
[25] E. Katz, J.G. Blumler, and M. Gurevitsch, Utilization of 
mass communication by the individual. In: Blumler, J.G. & 
Katz,  E.  (Eds.).  The  Uses  of  Mass  Communications:  
Current Perspectives on Gratifications Research. Beverly 
Hills, Sage, pp.19–32, 1974. 
[26] C.R. Bantz, “Exploring uses and gratifications: A 
comparison of reported uses of television and reported uses 
of favourite program type”, Communication Research, vol. 
9, issue 3, pp. 352-379, 1982. 
[27] J.C. Conway, and A.M. Rubin, “Psychological predictors 
of television 
viewing motivations”, Communication 
Research, vol. 18, issue 4, pp. 443-463, 1991. 
[28] T.F. Stafford, 
M.R. 
Stafford, 
and L.L. 
Schkade, 
“Determining uses and gratifications for the internet”, 
Decision Sciences, vol. 35, issue 2, pp. 259–288, 2004. 
[29] A. Quan-Haase, and A.L. Young, “Uses and gratifications 
of social media: A comparison of Facebook and instant 
messaging”, Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society, 
vol. 30, issue 5, pp. 350-361, 2010. 
[30] B.J. Babin, W.R. Darden, and M. Griffin, “Work and/or 
fun: measuring hedonic and utilitarian shopping value”, 
Journal of User Research, vol. 20, issue 4, pp. 644–656, 
1994.
 
 
203
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

