A Distributed  Infrastructure for Real-time Continuous VOC Monitoring  
in Hazardous Sites
 
 Gianfranco Manes, Giovanni Collodi  
Francesco Chiti, Romano Fantacci 
MIDRA Consortium  
Via di S.Marta 3, 50100 Florence, ITALY 
gianfranco.manes@unifi.it; giovanni.collodi@unifi.it  
francesco.chiti@unifi.it; romano.fantacci@unifi.it  
 
 
 
 
 
Rosanna Fusco, Leonardo Gelpi 
Health, Safety, Environment and Quality, eni SpA 
Piazzale E. Mattei, 1 00144 Rome, ITALY 
rosanna.fusco@eni.com; leonardo.gelpi@eni.com  
 
Antonio Manes 
Netsens Srl 
via Tevere 70, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino (FI), ITALY 
antonio.manes@netsens.it 
 
Abstract-The real deployment is described of a distributed 
point source monitoring system based on wireless sensor 
networks in an industrial site where dangerous substances are 
produced, used and stored. The system consists of a Wireless 
Sensor 
Network 
using 
Photo-Ionisation 
Detectors, 
continuously monitoring the Volatile Organic Compound 
concentration in the petrochemical plant at unprecedented 
time/space scale. Internet connectivity is provided via TCP/IP 
over GPRS gateways at a one-minute sampling rate; thus, 
providing plant management and, possibly, environmental 
authorities with an unprecedented tool for immediate warning 
in case of critical events. The platform is organised into sub-
networks, each including a gateway unit wirelessly connected 
to the WSN nodes, hence providing an easily deployable stand-
alone infrastructure featuring a high degree of scalability and 
reconfigurability, with minimal intrusiveness or obtrusiveness. 
Environmental and process data are forwarded to a remote 
server and made available to the authenticated users through a 
rich user interface that provides data rendering in various 
formats and worldwide access to data. Experimental results 
show an excellent efficiency of the WSN system in terms of 
communication, making it a very flexible and cost-effective 
tool for environmental monitoring issues. 
Keywords–distributed VOC monitoring; wireless sensor 
networks; photoionisation detectors. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) are widely used in 
industries 
as 
solvents 
or 
chemical 
intermediates. 
Unfortunately, they include components that, if present in 
the atmosphere, may represent a risk factor for human 
health. VOCs are also found as contaminants or by-products 
in many processes, i.e., in combustion gas stacks and 
groundwater clean-up systems. Detection of VOCs at sub-
ppm levels is, thus, of paramount importance for human 
safety, and, consequently, critical for industrial hygiene in 
hazardous environments [1][2]. The most commonly used 
portable field instruments for VOC detection are the hand-
held Photo-Ionisation Detectors (PIDs), which may be fitted 
with pre-filter tubes for specific gas detection. Wireless 
hand-held PIDs have recently become available on the 
market, thus providing ubiquitous operation, but they have a 
limited battery life, in addition to being relatively costly. 
This paper describes the implementation and on-field results 
of an end-to-end distributed monitoring system using VOC 
detectors, capable of performing real-time detection of gas 
emissions in potentially hazardous sites at minute data rate 
[3][4]. This paper describes the implementation of a 
distributed network for precise VOC monitoring installed in 
a potentially hazardous environment. The system consists of 
a WSN infrastructure with nodes equipped with weather-
climatic sensors, as well as VOC detectors and fitted with 
TCP/IP over GPRS gateways to forward the sensor data via 
Internet to a remote server. The continuous monitoring of 
benzene emissions from a benzene storage tank is also 
demonstrated, using a unique wired/wireless configuration 
installed in ATEX Zone 0. 
A user interface then provides access to the data, while 
offering various formats of data rendering. This prototype 
was installed in the eni Polimeri Europa (PEM) chemical 
plant in Mantova, Italy, where it has been in continuous and 
unattended operation since April 2011. The pilot site is 
currently testing and assessing both communications and 
VOC detection technologies. 
II. 
SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
A. The distributed VOC monitoring infrastructure 
The distributed point sources method was chosen for this 
application as it provides reasonable installation and 
maintenance cost, a high scalability/reconfigurability and 
real-time data acquisition. A general overview of the 
deployed system is represented in Fig. 1.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Installation overview; the grey circles indicate the position of 
each SNU; the blue arrows show wind direction. 
 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Close-up of SNU and ENU deployment around one of the 
chemical plants (left) and the pipeline (right); maps are oriented according 
to plant‟s axes rather than cardinal directions. 
 
First off, representative locations were identified along 
the perimeter of the industrial area, along with several 
specific internal sites where hazardous emissions might 
potentially occur. Owing to the extension and complexity of 
the Mantova plant, covering some 300 acres and featuring 
complex metallic infrastructures, it was decided to subdivide 
the area involved into 7 different sub-areas. Each sub-area is 
covered by a sub-network consisting of a Sink Node Unit 
(SNU) equipped with  weather-climatic sensors, such as 
wind speed/direction and relative air humidity/temperature 
(ENI 1 to ENI 7 in Fig. 1), and End Node Units (ENUs) 
equipped with VOC detectors. In addition, the ENI 2 unit is 
equipped with a rain gauge and a solar radiation sensor.  
Each SNU is connected to one or more ENUs (see Fig. 2, 
for an example of configuration), appropriately distributed 
across the plant area. This modular approach allows the 
system to be expanded and/or reconfigured according to the 
specific 
monitoring 
requirements, 
while 
providing 
redundancy in case of failure of one or more SNUs. 
Since the potential sources of VOC emissions in the 
plant are located in well-identified areas, such as the 
chemical plant and the benzene tanks, the deployment 
strategy includes a number (6) of VOC sensors surrounding 
the chemical plant‟s infrastructure, see Fig. 2, thus resulting 
in a virtual fence capable of effectively detecting VOC 
emissions on the basis of the concentration pattern around 
the plant itself. The SNUs forward meteorological data, as 
well as VOC concentration data, to a remote server; as noted 
above, Internet connectivity is provided via TCP/IP over 
GPRS 
using 
the 
GSM 
mobile 
network. 
Wireless 
connectivity uses the UHF-ISM unlicensed band. Electrical 
power is provided by both primary sources (batteries) and 
secondary sources (photovoltaic cells), as mentioned above.  
VOC concentration and weather-climatic data are 
updated every minute. This intensive sampling interval 
allows the evolution of gas concentrations to be accurately 
assessed. Furthermore when all the weather-climatic 
measurements are collected, they provide a map of the 
relative 
air 
humidity/temperature 
(RHT) 
and 
wind 
speed/direction (WSD) in the area, that are crucial for 
providing accurate VOC-sensor read-out compensation [5]. 
The need for so many wind stations across the plant 
property is justified by the turbulent wind distribution in the 
area, as it can be observed by the different orientations of 
the blue arrows representing wind direction in Fig. 1. 
Three of the ENUs, ENI 1, ENI 2 and ENI 3 were 
deployed along the perimeter of the plant to locally monitor 
VOC concentration while correlating it with wind speed and 
direction; the other seven were placed around the chemical 
plant and in close proximity of the pipeline, that are possible 
sources of VOC emissions. 
 In Fig. 2, the layout of the two sub-networks deployed 
around the chemical plant is represented. The sub-networks 
consist of two SNUs, ENI 6 and ENI 7, equipped with 
weather sensors (air/wind), each connected with three ENUs 
spaced at tens of meters from each other. The third sub-
network located in the pipeline area consists of two ENUs 
located in close proximity of the end of the pipeline and 
connected to ENI 5. Sampling the VOC concentration at 
intervals of tens of meters allows the dispersion of VOC 
emissions to be evaluated; in addition, information about 
wind speed/direction allows the emission‟s source to be 
identified. 
 
B. Storage Tank monitoring infrastructure 
Storage tanks represent a potential source of VOC 
emissions and, thus, need to be appropriately monitored.  
The emissions from tanks can vary signiﬁcantly depending 
on the size and design, liquid properties, tank maintenance, 
tank level, wind direction, wind speed, and whether the tank 
is filling, stable, or emptying. Benzene storage tanks in this 
settlement are of floating roof type, and are located in highly 
hazardous areas; the electrical equipments to be operated in 
those areas need a special safety certification for use in 
potentially explosive atmospheres. Certification ensures that 
the equipment or protective system meets the safety 
requirements and that adequate information is supplied with 
it to ensure that it can be used safely. 
The lay-out of the Storage Tank Monitoring Network 
(STMN) is displayed in Fig. 3. The STMN consists of three 
Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) units, each equipped 
with a Photo-Ionisation Detector (PID) and a computational 
unit, serially interconnected by wire and connected to the 
Wireless Unit (WU), providing both power and wireless 
connectivity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Schematic of the Storage Tank Monitoring Tank. 
 
 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The WU is connected to the GPRS unit (ENI 3 in Fig. 1), 
which provides Internet connectivity via TCP/IP over GPRS. 
The reason for choosing such a hybrid wired/wireless 
configuration is related to the VOC detector energy budget. 
The PID, in fact, when operated at very low VOC 
concentration levels and in diffusion mode, requires to be 
continuously powered-on. Discontinuously operating the 
PID results in stabilisation times of the order of several tens 
of minutes for achieving a stable and reliable read-out. 
That feature conflicts with the requirement of sampling 
the VOC concentration at minute data rates, a mandatory 
constrain for this application. Accordingly, it turns-out that 
the most suitable operation mode for the PID is the 
continuous power-on mode. In that mode, the current 
consumption for the VOC unit rises up to 50 mA, thus 
resulting in the need of a primary energy source with at least 
80Ah capacity for ensuring a 60 days battery life; the 
requirement of bimonthly replacing 3 batteries on the top of 
the storage tank with skilled personnel was considered 
unpractical and too costly. On the other hand, the option of 
equipping the unit with a secondary energy source like a 
photovoltaic panel, thus prolonging the battery life, was 
discharged as it is hardly compatible with safety 
requirements of operation in ATEX Zone 0 and 
installation/maintenance above the benzene thank. 
As a result, the hybrid configuration of Fig. 3 was 
envisaged, where the VOC units and communication/power 
supply units are split. 
As it can be observed in Fig. 3, the three VOC detectors 
are located in Zone 0, very high level of protection, while the 
WU, along with the power unit consisting of the battery and 
the photovoltaic panel, is located in the non-ATEX area. 
This allows for using a secondary energy source and for 
easily replacing the primary energy source as required by the 
maintenance programme.   
 
III. 
THE COMMUNICATION PLATFORM 
 
The distributed communications platform, already 
described [3][4], is able to support a scattered system of 
units collecting VOC emission data in real-time, while 
offering a high degree of flexibility and scalability, allowing 
for other monitoring stations to be added, as needed.     
Furthermore, it provides reconfigurability, in terms of 
data acquisition strategies, while being more economically 
advantageous than traditional fixed monitoring stations. 
A GSM mobile network solution featuring a proprietary 
TCP/IP 
protocol 
with 
DHCP, 
provides 
Internet 
connectivity. Dynamic re-connectivity strategies provide 
efficient and reliable communication with the GSM base 
station. All the main communication parameters, such as IP 
address, IP port (server‟s and client‟s), APN, PIN code and 
logic ID can be remotely controlled. Wireless connectivity 
between SNUs and ENUs is  preformed in the unlicensed 
ISM UHF band (868 MHz).  
 
A. The SN and WI units 
The block diagram of the SNU is represented in Fig. 4. 
It consists of a GPRS antenna, a GPRS/EDGE quadriband 
modem, a sensor board, an I/O interface unit, and an ARM-
9 micro-controller operating at 96 MHz. 
The system is based on an embedded architecture with a 
high degree of integration among the different subsystems. 
The unit is equipped with various interfaces, including 
LAN/Ethernet (IEEE 802.1) with TCP/IP protocols, USB 
ports and RS485/RS422 standard interfaces. The sensor 
board is equipped with eight analogue inputs and two 
digital inputs. The SNU is also equipped with a Wireless 
Interface (WI), shown in Fig. 4 right, which provides 
wireless connectivity with the ENUs.  
 
B. The EN unit 
The block diagram of the EN is shown in Fig. 5; it 
consists of a VOC sensor board and a VOC detector. The 
acquisition/communication subsystem of the ENU is based 
on an ARM Cortex-M3 32-bit micro-controller, operating at 
72 MHz, which provides the necessary computational 
capability on the limited power budget available. 
The block diagram of the ENU is shown in Fig. 5; it 
consists of a WI, similar to that previously described, and 
includes a VOC sensor board and a VOC detector. The 
acquisition/communication subsystem of the ENU is based 
on an ARM Cortex-M3 32-bit micro-controller, operating at 
72 MHz, which provides the necessary computational 
capability on the limited power budget available. 
To reduce the power requirement of the overall ENU 
subsystem, two different power supplies have been  
implemented, one for the micro-controller and one for the 
peripheral units. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Block diagram of an SNU (left) and a WI unit (right). 
 
The microcontroller is able to connect/disconnect the 
peripheral units, thus preserving the local energy resources. 
The VOC detector subsystem is powered by a dedicated 
switching voltage regulator; this provides a very stable and 
spike-free energy source, as required for proper operation of 
the VOC detector itself. 
The communication between the ENU and the VOC 
detector board is based on an RS485 serial interface, 
providing high-level immunity to interference as well as 
bidirectional communication capability, which is needed for 
remote configuration/re-configuration of the unit. 
 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

C. Network structure and routing schemes 
A multiple GPRS gateway approach overcomes those 
limitations; even in the case of failure of one or more 
gateway units, Internet connectivity would be provided by 
the others still in operation, while the issue of the obstacles 
is circumvented.  
Concerning the lower tier comprised of ENUs, it has 
been adopted the IEEE 802.15.4 standard to implement the 
communications features. This is motivated by the 
interoperability properties and flexibility when operating 
under different conditions [10]. In particular, the adopted 
MAC layer scheme follows the beacon enabled  approach, 
in which a coordinator (SNU) periodically broadcasts a 
beacon packet for synchronizing the other nodes (ENUs) 
and arbitrating the access  to the wireless shared medium 
through CSMA/CA protocol. 
In designing the routing protocol, the IPv6 Routing 
Protocol for Low Power and Lossy Networks (RPL) has 
been adopted [11]. This recently standardized approach has 
been proposed to meet the forwarding requirements for 
Low Power and Lossy Networks (LNNs). In particular, 
RPL is a Distance Vector IPv6 routing protocol for LLNs 
that specifies how to build a Destination Oriented Directed 
Acyclic Graph (DODAG, sometimes referred to as a graph 
in the rest of this document) using an objective function and 
a set of metrics/constraints to prevent loops creation. The 
objective function operates on a combination of metrics and 
constraints to compute the „best‟ path. There could be 
several objective functions in operation on the same node 
and mesh network because deployments vary greatly with 
different objectives and a single mesh network may need to 
carry traffic with very different requirements of path 
quality, involving, for example, latency, throughput, battery 
consumption or load balancing issues.  
 As for the wireless connectivity, a star configuration 
was preferred to a mesh configuration, given the limited 
number of nodes and the need to keep latency at a 
minimum. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Block diagram of the ENU (left) and the VOC detector unit 
(right). 
D. Protocols and WSN services 
  Two levels of communication protocols, in a mesh 
network topology, were implemented. The upper level 
handles communications between the SNUs and the server; 
it uses a custom binary protocol on top of a TCP layer. This 
level was designed and calibrated for real-time bidirectional 
data exchange,  where periodic signalling messages are sent 
from both sides. Since our sensor network necessitates a 
stable link, quick reconnection procedures, for whenever 
broken links should occur, were especially important. To 
ensure minimal data loss, the SNUs have non-volatile data 
storage, as well as automatic data packet retransmission 
(with timestamps) after temporary downlink events. 
Furthermore, this design is well suited for low-power 
embedded platforms like ours, where limited memory and 
power resources are available. In fact, our protocol stack 
currently requires about 24 KB of flash memory (firmware) 
and 8 KB RAM. 
The lower level, in contrast to the upper one, concerns 
the local data exchange between the network nodes. Here a 
cluster tree topology was employed; each node, which both 
transmits and receives data packets, is able to forward 
packets from the surrounding nodes when needed. In this 
specific application, the topology and routing schemes are 
based on an ID assigned to each EN unit, where the ID can 
be easily adjusted using selectors on the hardware board. 
This choice allows for easy support and maintenance, even 
when non-specialized operators have to install, re-install or 
service one or more units.  
 
E. Energy budget issues 
Energy budget plays a key role in the maintainability of 
the WSN [6].  In our case, this is made even more critical 
by the necessity of providing stand-alone operation with 
periodic maintenance intervals exceeding four months. 
Since electrical energy from the plant could not be used, 
secondary sources had to be locally available; photovoltaic 
panels (PVP) fit the bill. The SNUs are all equipped with 
PVPs, as they have to support a number of functions, 
including connectivity and data collection from sensors. 
The ENUs, when equipped with low-energy demanding 
sensors, have 3 to 5 years of battery life using primary 
sources. However, in this installation the ENUs have to 
support the power-hungry VOC sensors. For this reason, the 
ENUs  are also equipped with PVPs. 
The ENUs have been fully deployed since May 2011; 
since that time we have noticed that the VOC sensor energy 
budget 
is 
predominant 
compared 
to 
that 
of 
the 
computational/communication unit. This is a critical issue 
for the ENUs, as the PIDs used for reading the VOC 
concentration need to be continuously powered-on to 
operate efficiently.  The actual current drawn by the PIDs 
resulted in some 30 mA, corresponding to 720 mAh a day, 
almost 
twice 
the 
amount 
required 
by 
the 
communication/computational units, ranging to some 360 
mW a day. The ENU‟s primary source capacity is 60 Ah, 
which provides more than 2 full months of continuous 
operation.   
To rely on autonomous energy resources, while 
providing continuous operation, a secondary energy source 
was integrated into the ENU in order to supply the 360 
mW+ 720 mW average power required. A 5 W photovoltaic 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

panel can fulfil the task only under ideal sunlight 
conditions, i.e., in summer, but hardly at all in winter. The 
photovoltaic power supply unit includes a charge regulator, 
which was specifically designed to provide maximum 
energy transfer efficiency from the panel to the battery 
under any operative condition. Great attention was paid to 
the design of the voltage regulator, as the secondary energy 
source plays a key role in ensuring the stand-alone and 
unattended operation of the communication platform.  
Fig. 6 displays the battery voltage plots of the ENUs 
connected to SNU 1, 5 and 6. As it can be observed, the 
ENUs exhibit quite satisfactory charge conditions. ENU 10 
(eni 6 nodo 10) exhibits a lower voltage level, probably due 
to a deployment in a partially shadowed area. For the other 
two ENUs, the battery voltage remains above a 11.6 V 
value, with a slight decreasing trend, in the period 
December 2011-January 2012. due to the lower solar energy 
because of the onset of wintertime.  
 
F. The VOC detector 
The VOC detector is a key element for the monitoring 
system‟s functionality. For this application two criteria were 
considered mandatory. The first is that the VOC detector 
should be operated in diffusion mode, thereby avoiding 
pumps or microfluidic devices, which would increase the 
energy requirements and make the maintainability issues 
more critical. The second criteria was that the system 
should be able to operate in the very low part per billion 
(ppb) range, with a Minimum Detectable Level (MDL) of 
some 2,5 ppb with a ± 5% accuracy in the 2,5 to 1000 ppb 
range, which represents the range of expected VOC 
concentration. The Photo-Ionisation Detector (PID) fulfils 
most of the above requirements [7][8].  
 
 
 
Figure 6. Battery voltage of the ENUs of the ENI 1, 5 and 6 sub-networks 
from July 18th 2011 to March 9th 2012. 
 
A high sensitivity PID was chosen, featuring the 
specifications listed above [9]. Two major issues were 
identified; however, that could potentially affect the 
efficient use of the PID in our system. The first issue was 
that in the low ppb range the calibration curve of the PID 
shows a marked non-linearity; this would require an 
individualized, meticulous multipoint calibration involving 
high cost and complexity. The second issue was that, when 
operated in diffusion mode at low ppb and after a certain 
time in power-off, the detector requires a stabilisation time 
of several minutes, hence it wouldn‟t be able to operate at 
our required one-minute intervals. 
Since both of the above-mentioned limitations are 
intrinsically related to the PID‟s physical behaviour, this 
was carefully investigated and a behavioural model of the 
PID was developed to explain these phenomena. As a result, 
a mathematical expression of the PID calibration curve was 
derived. Accordingly, the PID calibration procedure could 
be performed by measuring only two parameters i.e., the 
zero gas voltage and the detector sensitivity in mV/ppm. 
 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
A. Long term operation 
Data gathered from the field are forwarded to a central 
database for data storage and data rendering. For this 
purpose, the system has a web based interface for retrieving 
and displaying data and for post-processing.  
The interface features different formats to display the 
gathered data. It is possible both access to raw data, and 
generate summary reports relating to specific periods and 
specific network areas. All monitored parameters can be 
geo-referenced. 
Data from the individual sensors deployed on the field, 
either micro-climatic or VOC, can be directly accessed and 
presented in various formats. Fig. 7 shows the VOC 
concentration read-out of one of the VOC detector deployed 
in the PEM settlement. The graph shows undiscontinued 
operation over a period of ten months (May 2011-March 
2012); the background concentration value is below 150 
parts per billion (ppb), as expected. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. VOC concentration read-out during the period May 2011, March 
2012. 
 
The spikes observed in the graph are probably related to 
some operation and/or maintenance running in the plant. 
Fig. 8 shows the trend of VOC concentrations values 
(detected by the six PIDs deployed around the chemical 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

plant) in a monthly period of almost two months (January 
15th 2012-March 10th 2012). Background measured values 
are coherently comparable to each other, demonstrating the 
effectiveness of the calibration procedure. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Graph of VOC concentration measured by six detectors 
deployed around the chemical plant (two months). 
 
In Fig. 9, the VOC shows the concentration 
background, that is around 50 ppb; thanks to the very 
intensive sample-interval, 1 minute, the evolution of the 
concentration in time, along with other relevant meteo-
climatic parameters can be very accurately displayed; it 
should be noted that the spikes, which can be observed in 
the blue trace, Fig. 13 left, have a duration of some 3 
minutes. The multi-trace graphic feature is very useful to 
perform correlation between different parameters. 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Graph of VOC concentration measured by six detectors deployed 
around the chemical plant (5 hours) 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Graph of VOC concentration measured by a peripheral VOC 
detector over a period of four months. 
 
Fig. 10 shows VOC concentrations in the long term (5 
months) for a sensor positioned along the perimeter of the 
industrial area.  
As it can be observed, data show an increase of the 
background value during the summer, due probably to 
higher temperatures. 
 Values tend to decrease from September.  Peak value 
shown around 25th of September (concentration greater than 
500 ppb) is due to meteorological conditions that may affect 
the dispersion of pollutants. 
 
B. VOC concentration and weather-climatic variations  
Correlating the microclimatic and wind parameters (air 
temperature/humidity and wind speed/direction) and VOC 
concentration proved to be very effective for increasing 
VOC read-out accuracy and, moreover, to map the VOC 
concentration with respect to wind direction, in order to 
identify possible VOC source. 
When VOC sources need to be identified, in fact, the 
correlation between wind/speed direction and VOC 
concentration is vital. For this reason, a graphic 
representation that relates these two parameters can be very 
useful for interpretation of results. 
An example of that possibility is given by the plots of 
Fig. 11.  The graph represents the trend of VOC 
concentrations values (detected by the six PIDs deployed 
around the chemical plant) in a five days period.  
With reference to the lay-out of Fig. 2, the VOC read-
outs from the array deployed in the northern side of the 
plant are represented in Fig. 11 up, while the VOC read-
outs from the array deployed in the southern side of the 
plant are represented in Fig. 11 down. The wind direction is 
also plotted in both the graphs of Fig. 11; it turns-out that in 
the most of the period the wind blows from south to north; 
By comparing the VOC read-out of the two arrays it is 
observed that the values of the former exhibits a much 
higher mean value than the latter; this is consistent with the 
direction north-south of the wind and demonstrates the 
effectiveness of the correlation between wind direction and 
speed to identify possible VOC sources. 
 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
Figure 11. Source identification by correlation between VOC concentration 
read-outs and wind direction. 
 
In 
Fig. 
12 
different 
representations 
of 
VOC 
concentrations combined with the wind direction data is 
shown for one of the detectors located on the left side of the 
plant perimeter, namely ENI 1.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 12. Plot in polar coordinates of the relationship between wind 
direction (angle) and concentration (radius). 
 
The plot, in polar coordinates, represents the wind 
directions referenced to the North and the VOC 
concentration in ppb. This type of representation allows to 
quickly identify the wind directions corresponding to the 
higher levels of concentration, giving an overview of the 
predominant orientation of the VOC flux during the day. 
 
The plot in Fig. 12 left represents the concentration along 
24 hours in a working day, while the plot in the right 
represents the same on a Sunday. As the detector eni 1 is 
located at the western side of the plant, see Fig. 1, it turns 
out that the concentration in the III and IV quadrants of the 
plot represents the contribution of the VOC sources outside 
the plant, while the concentration in the I and II quadrants 
represents the contribution of sources inside the plant. 
 
Sources outside the plant are very likely the benzene 
emission by vehicles running on the motorway in direction 
North-South, along the western side of plant, or possible 
emissions from other industrial sites 
 
Thermohygrometric parameters are useful to compensate 
for the air temperature/ relative humidity variations. Fig. 13 
represents the typical relative response of PID as a function 
of temperature and relative humidity. It turns-out that, 
particularly in summertime, the  climatic conditions  in    the 
plant can significantly affect the accuracy of the detected 
VOC concentration and need to be compensated for. This 
seems to be confirmed by the observation that the emissions 
in the III for IV decrease on Sunday, with respect to the 
working day, and by the highest value of the emission, 60 
ppb in the left against 30 ppb in the right. 
 
Fig. 14 shows the effect of thermohygrometric 
parameters on VOC detector read-out on three different 
VOC detectors located in the southern side of the chemical 
plant; see Fig. 2. 
 
 
 
  
Fig. 13. VOC detector relative response as a function of thermohygrometric 
parameters (courtesy of Alphasense Ltd). 
 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
Figure 14. Correlation between air temperature/relative humidity and VOC 
detector read-out. 
 
Maximum air temperature is as high as 30°C in the day, 
while air humidity reaches almost the 100% in the night. The 
predominant factor is the relative humidity; it is clearly 
observed that the VOC concentration values of all the three 
detectors follows the behaviour of the relative humidity, in 
accordance to what predicted by the plots of Fig. 13. 
A post processing algorithm was implemented at the 
server side to compensate for the previously described 
effect. Fig. 15 shows the effect of the compensation, which 
results in smoothing the previously illustrated day/night 
effect. 
C. Monitoring the benzene Tank 
The network infrastructure displayed in Fig. 3 and 
previously described was operated starting from December 
2011. 
The VOC concentration recorded by the three detectors 
located on top the tank are plotted in Fig. 16, in the period 
December 11th 2011-March 15th 2012. The monitoring 
network installed in the proximity of the benzene storage 
tank roof proved to be very useful to identify and keep 
under control the process steps more significant in terms of 
emissions.  
 
 
 
Figure 15. Compensation of the effect of thermohygrometric conditions. 
 
 
 
Figure 16. Graph of VOC concentration measured by three detectors 
deployed on top the benzene storage tank (December 11th  2011- March 15th  
2012). 
 
Periodic concentration peaks are observed, see Fig. 15, 
after complete filling of the tank; in such condition, the 
floating roof is located closer to the sensors and this allows 
to verify, along the perimeter of the roof, if there are sealing 
problems due to wear or deformation of the seals. 
In the summer period the high volatility of the 
compounds could lead to variations in significant 
concentrations even during the emptying of the tank. The 
values found are in any case widely acceptable, since it is a 
direct emissions source. 
D. Communications performance analysis 
Before evaluating the performance of the proposed 
communications architecture, it has been addressed the 
available band the WSN is able to provide. In Fig. 17, a 
single-sink scenario where IEEE 802.15.4 nodes transmit 
data to the sink through one link (star topology), or possibly 
two-hops (3-level tree, rooted at the sink), is considered. A 
network composed of 30 nodes, working in beacon-enabled 
mode is accounted for. The throughput as a function of the 
size of the packets transmitted by nodes.  
The throughput here represents the number of bits (of 
the payload) per second correctly received by the sink when 
all the 30 nodes try to access the channel and transmit their 
packets, assuming that nodes transmit packets of the same 
size. 
It is possible to notice that, for low values of the packet 
size, star topology outperforms tree, whereas trees perform 
better when the packet size increases, since less nodes 
compete to access the channel at the same time (nodes are 
split in two levels). The optimal performance can be 
achieved for tree topology with super-frame order (SO) 
equal to zero and beacon order (BO) equal to two [10], 
which represents the best compromise between the duration 
of the active part of the sink super-frame (where level one 
nodes transmit) and that of the inactive part (where level 1 
super-frames are located). 
With the aim of characterizing the performance of the 
communications architecture proposed is presented, with 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

regard to the fault tolerance. As a matter of fact, the RPL 
protocol is able to update the routing tables, thus facing 
frequent disconnections and node failures. 
 
  
Figure 17. Throughput as a function of packet size for an IEEE 
802.15.4 network arranged in star and tree-based topologies. 
 
In deriving the key figures, three different scenarios 
have been investigated, as to the mobility, that has been 
assumed as the reason why the nodes get disconnected.. The 
reference play-ground, that is a 800m×800 m2 square area, 
with 4 SNUs deployed in fixed position, i.e., at the center of 
each of the four sub-squares, and 200 ENUs uniformly 
distributed. The differences consist in the mobility patterns, 
as it assumed for ENUs, respectively: 
• 
No mobility; 
• 
Random Way Point (RWP) mobility model with 
speed uniformly distributed in the interval [1-2] m/s 
(slow mobility); 
• 
RWP mobility model with speed uniformly 
distributed in the interval [3-6] m/s (fast mobility). 
For each scenarios the following figures of merit have 
been evaluated for the setup phase: 
• 
Association efficiency, i.e., the number of ENUs 
that are connected with one SNU with respect to the 
total number of SNs; 
• 
End-to-end (E2E) data delivery latency, i.e., the 
time interval needed to a data message to be 
received by correct ER;  
• 
The length of established e2e paths (between an 
ENU and its SNU). 
The most relevant simulation parameters, characterizing 
the communication links, are summarized in Tab. I.  
TABLE I.  
PARAMETERS VALUES USED IN THE SIMULATIONS 
Parameter 
Value 
Carrier Frequency [GHz] 
2.4 
Transmitted power [dBm] 
0 
Receiver sensitivity [dBm] 
-110 
Coverage radius [m] 
≈ 80 
Transmission Bit-rate [kb/s] 
250 
Packet error-rate [%] 
5 
Simulated time interval [s] 
2000 
Setup period [s] 
3 
Data period [s] 
1 
In Fig. 17, the association efficiency as a function of 
simulated time is depicted for each scenario. The initial 
transient time needed to reach a full network connectivity is 
very short due to the presence, in RPL of an explicit 
solicitation of DODAG information from the neighbors. As 
the network connectivity is achieved, data message can be 
delivered from ENUs to their respective SNUs. To evaluate 
the effectiveness of this phase, the E2E path length 
experimental cumulative distribution function (ECDF) has 
been outlined in Fig. 18. It is evident that RPL protocol is 
able to establish, maintain and exploit stable minimum hop 
paths. The proposed scheme is also able to face low-to-
medium 
speed 
without 
significantly 
performance 
degradation, while for fast mobility pattern it no longer 
holds. Specifically, short E2E paths become more frequent 
while longer ones are more rare; this is due to the fact that a 
longer multi-hop path is not likely to be always guaranteed, 
because each ENU involved in can randomly move toward 
another area. 
In Fig. 19, the E2E delivery time for a data message 
from an ENU to the reference SNU is presented again for 
three different mobility patterns. The robustness of RPL 
approach allows to keep latency below a reasonable value 
for low-to-medium speed range. Nevertheless, if SNs move 
more quickly, network get often disconnected and, as 
pointed out in Fig. 19, only shorter paths are stable during 
all the message delivering; thus, the E2E latency decreases. 
 
 
Figure 17. RPL: Association efficiency as a function of time. 
 
 
Figure 18. RPL: E2E  path length CDF for different mobility pattern. 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
Figure 19. RPL: E2E data delivery latency for different mobility pattern 
with the indication of mean value and confidence interval. 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
An end-to-end distributed monitoring system of 
integrated VOC detectors, capable of performing real-time 
analysis of gas concentration in hazardous sites at an 
unprecedented time/space scale, has been implemented and 
successfully tested in an industrial site. The aim was to 
provide the industrial site with a flexible and cost-effective 
monitoring tool in order to achieve a better management of 
abnormal situations, to identify emission sources in real 
time, and to collect continuous VOC concentration data 
using easily re-deployable and rationally distributed 
monitoring stations. 
The piloting of the system allowed us to pinpoint key 
traits. Collecting data at 1-minute time intervals meets 
several needs: identifying short-term significant events, 
quantifying the emission impacts as a function of weather 
conditions as well as of operational process, in addition to 
identifying potentially VOC sources in the plant area.  
Moreover, the choice of a WSN communication platform 
gave excellent results, above all in allowing for redeploying 
and re-scaling the network‟s configuration according to 
specific needs as they arise, while, at the same time, greatly 
reducing installation costs. Real-time data through a web-
based interface allowed both adequate levels of control and 
quick data interpretation in order to manage specific 
situations. 
Further developments will concern with the development 
of a standard application to allow the deployment of WSN 
in other plant (e.g., refineries), in addition to an assessment 
of potential applications for WSN infrastructure monitoring 
of other environmental indicators. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by eni SpA under contract No. 
3500007596. The authors wish to thank W. O. Ho and A. 
Burnley, at Alphasense Ltd., for their helpful comments and 
clarifications concerning PID operation, as well as E. 
Benvenuti, at Netsens Srl, for his valuable technical 
support. Assistance and support from the management and 
technical staff of Polimeri Europa Mantova is gratefully 
acknowledged.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Tsujita W., Ishida H., and Moriizumi T. (2004), “Dynamic gas 
sensor network for air pollution monitoring and its auto-
calibration,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Sensors, Vol.1, pp. 
56–59, October 2004. 
 
[2] Tsow F., Forzani E., Rai A., Rui W., Tsui R., Mastroianni S., 
Knobbe C., Gandolfi A.J., and Tao N.J. (2009), “A wearable 
and wireless sensor system for real-time monitoring of toxic 
environmental volatile organic compounds,” in Sensors 
Journal, IEEE 9, Vol. 9 Issue 12, pp. 1734–1740, January 
2009.  
 
[3]  G. Manes, R. Fusco, L. Gelpi, A. Manes D. Di Palma and G. 
Collodi, “Real-time monitoring of volatile organic compounds 
in 
hazardous 
sites,” 
in 
Intech 
Book, 
Environmental 
Monitoring, Chapter 14, pp. 219-244.  ISBN 978-953-307-
724-6.  
 
[4] G. Manes, R. Fusco, L. Gelpi, A. Manes D. Di Palma and G. 
Collodi, “A Wireless Sensor Network for Precise Volatile 
Organic Compound Monitoring,” in International Journal of 
Distributed Sensor Networks, Special Issue on Ubiquitous 
Sensor Networks and Its Application. To appear. 
 
[5]  MiniPID User Manual V1.8. (2000). IonScience Ltd. 
 
[6]  G. Manes, R. Fantacci, F. Chiti, M. Ciabatti, G. Collodi, D. Di 
Palma, and A. Manes (2009), “Energy efficient MAC 
protocols for wireless sensor networks endowed with directive 
antennas: A cross-layer solution,” in Proceedings of IEEE 
Radio and Wireless Conference 2009, pp. 239-242, Orlando, 
FL, January 2009. 
 
[7] Price JGW, Fenimore DC, Simmonds PG, and Zlatkis A. 
(1968), “Design and operation of a photoionization detector 
for gas chromatography,” in Analytical Chemistry, Vol. 40, 
No. 3, March 1968, pp. 541-547.  
 
[8] Locke DC. and Meloan CE. (1965), “Study of the 
photoionization detector for gas chromatography,” in 
Analytical Chemistry, Vol. 37, No. 3, March 1965, pp. 389-
395. 
 
[9] Alphasense Ltd. Technical specifications; Doc. Ref.  PID-
AH/MAR11. 
 
[10] 
“IEEE 
Standard 
for 
Information 
Technology 
- 
Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between 
Systems - Local and Metropolitan Area Networks Specific 
Requirements Part 15.4: Wireless Medium Access Control 
(MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications for Low-
Rate Wireless Personal Area Networks (LR-WPANs),” IEEE 
Std 802.15.4-2003, pp. 1–670, 2003. 
 
[11] L. Bartolozzi, F. Chiti, R. Fantacci, T. Pecorella, F. Sgrilli, 
“Supporting Monitoring Applications with Mobile Wireless 
Sensor Networks: the 'eN Route'' Forwarding Approach”, in 
Proc.   IEEE ICC 2012. 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

