Increasing Usage Intention of Mobile Information Services via Mobile Tagging 
 
Susanne J. Niklas 
RheinMain University of Applied Sciences/   
Saarland University 
Wiesbaden/Saarbrücken, Germany 
e-mail: susanne.niklas@hs-rm.de 
Stephan Böhm 
RheinMain University of Applied Sciences, 
Department of Media Management 
Wiesbaden, Germany 
e-mail: stephan.boehm@hs-rm.de
 
 
Abstract—Mobile 
information 
services 
are 
increasingly 
growing in popularity: end-users are getting used to “being 
always 
on”, 
and 
they 
are 
changing 
their 
everyday 
communication behavior. Organizations focus on new ways of 
creating value-adding services for their customers, and 
researchers explore aspects of success and implementation of 
mobile services. In this connection, organizations have a keen 
interest in information about prospective acceptance and use of 
their offerings. However, research on the scope of mobile 
service acceptance often lacks practical relevance, as 
recommendations for enhancing prospective acceptance are 
seldom provided. To contribute to this part, the present study 
investigates user acceptance of mobile services, also showing 
up a concrete possibility of increasing behavioral intention to 
use such services by assisting their accessibility via Mobile 
Tagging. For this, characteristics and functionality of Mobile 
Tagging for access facilitation are presented first. After that, 
an integrated acceptance model is compiled and empirically 
tested. The results found, show that including Mobile Tagging 
into an integrated cross-media communication strategy 
significantly enhances the intention to use mobile services. 
Additionally, the findings indicate that mobile information 
service acceptance is strongly influenced by individual 
personality factors, and offerings should therefore be 
systematically addressed at selective target groups.  
Keywords-Mobile Information Services; Mobile Tagging; 
Technology Acceptance 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The evolvement of mobile technologies has a sustainably 
effect on today’s business. Whereas the mobile market was 
incipiently dominated by phone and network suppliers, the 
extensive diffusion of mobile phones has also opened up the 
market to business offerings of further mobile value-adding 
services by now. Besides the aspect of mobile commerce, 
which describes “any transaction with a monetary value – 
either direct or indirect – that is conducted over a wireless 
telecommunication network” [4], the growing popularity and 
use of the mobile web also allows for new marketing and 
communication opportunities. As mobile devices are highly 
personalized and commonplace in our everyday life, 
organizational communication via the mobile channel offers 
an attractive way for customer relationship management 
providing an utmost interaction intensity as well as time and 
place independency [24]. These mobile inherent features of 
personalization and time and place independency are seen as 
the mobile value added per se, offering differentiated value 
compared to stationary web use. 
Though, besides additional values gained through 
mobiles like mobility, ubiquity and place- and time-
independency [3], mobile devices do also have resource-
based limitations. For example, computing power and 
memory size are much lower than on stationary PCs or 
laptops. Additionally, screens of mobile devices as well as 
keypad or touch-input options are smaller and harder to 
handle and performance is limited to battery power and 
network connection. These restrictions do partly minder the 
overall use and adoption of mobile services. So, whilst it is 
assumed that more than 80 percent of all handsets meanwhile 
include some form of Internet browser [16], actual usage of 
mobile 3G-services in Europe just adds up to one third [13].  
But, what actually influences consumer acceptance of 
and intention to use mobile devices and services? And, what 
can organizations particularly do to enhance user’s 
acceptance and use of the mobile offers? Answering the first 
question a considerable amount of research investigated 
behavioral issues of end-user acceptance of mobile devices, 
applications and services, becoming a major topic in 
nowadays mobile research activities [30]. Here, exploratory 
foci ranged from investigations of perceived usefulness, ease 
of use, enjoyment in use [6, 27, 39], trust [23] or individual 
influences [2, 26, 29]. However, success in offering mobile 
services and implementing mobile communication activities 
into the marketing mix depends on the amount of end-users 
acceptance and use. Thus, besides the overall understanding 
of acceptance determinants the second question of how to 
increase consumer acceptance and usage will be of major 
interest.  
Keeping this question in mind, the application of Mobile 
Tagging was suggested as a solution to overcome device 
limitations as cumbersome keypad input by facilitating 
mobile web access and thus, increasing user-sided mobile 
communication interaction [10]. Though, quite a few studies 
dealing with the application spectrum or cross medial 
embedding of Mobile Tagging are available meanwhile (e.g., 
[10], [15]), there is no research on the specific potential of 
Mobile Tagging for enhancing usage intention at the bottom 
of mobile services by now.  
Following that, the aim of this study is twofold: first, to 
provide an understanding of the acceptance and usage 
intention on the core of mobile services as information 
retrieval on the web through mobile devices, as well as 
secondly, providing some first scientific insights on the 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

potentials of Mobile Tagging as a tool for intervention. In 
this connection both aspects will be investigated, the 
acceptance of Mobile Tagging as a mobile application itself 
as well as its potential for enhancing the acceptance of 
mobile information services providing a convenience value 
and boosting their ease of usage. On this, an introduction into 
Mobile Tagging as well as its application and value 
potentials will be presented in the next Section II before 
reviewing succinctly the relevant literature of mobile 
technology acceptance. In the thereafter following Section 
III, we will compile a context-adjusted acceptance model 
giving 
special 
attention 
to 
mobile-specific 
usage 
determinants. Sections V and IV will constitute the research 
design and results of the empirical analysis, which will be 
finally discussed in the last Section VI. 
II. 
CONCEPTUAL BACKGROUND 
For the current study, an understanding of both Mobile 
Tagging and end-users acceptance behavior is necessary and 
thus, will be provided in the following Sections. 
A. Mobile Tagging 
Mobile Tagging refers to the process of barcode 
decoding with camera-equipped mobile devices. At this, one 
scans a two-dimensional (2D) barcode –the so called Mobile 
Tag– with a camera phone, to decode and process 
information embedded in the Tag. These 2D barcodes do 
have enhanced capabilities compared to traditional one-
dimensional 
(1D) 
barcodes 
known 
from 
common 
consumption goods, providing a much higher data capacity. 
Thus, they can store more as well as also alphanumeric 
information with an improved robustness. Meanwhile, more 
than thirty different 2D barcode types have been developed 
since the late 1980s [21], and some of them are suitable for 
being captured and processed by mobile devices or even 
were developed specifically for this purpose. Examples of 
such Mobile Tags are DataMatrix, Aztec Code, ShotCode, 
BeeTagg and the well-known Quick Response (QR) Code, 
which is also employed in this study. Although all of those 
Mobile Tags differ slightly in standards in terms of their 
technical characteristics and common application areas, they 
are characterized by a similar functional principle and typical 
processing flow as shown in Fig. 1: (1) activation of barcode 
reader software on the mobile device, (2) capturing barcode 
by embedded camera, (3) automatically detecting code area 
and decoding data by reader software, (4) displaying 
decoded information and providing further options for 
utilization [32]. 
 
 
Thereby, decoded information can not only be short texts 
but also telephone numbers, preformatted short messages 
(SMS), email addresses, electronic business card (.vcf) or a 
web address, which is most popular in use. When decoding 
an URL, the reader software directly gives the opportunity to 
open the particular link using the Internet browser of the 
mobile device making mobile web access more convenient. 
That way, referencing to a URL via a Mobile Tag provides 
an opportunity to link the user directly to a targeted topic via 
a “deep link” –a specific page or point on a website, which 
are often characterized by an enlarged number of characters 
compared to website’s homepage and thus, making their 
input over a key- or touchpad even worse.  
Application possibilities of Mobile Tagging are manifold. 
Typically, Mobile Tags are printed on ads, packaging or 
other prints such as newspapers and magazines. Thus, they 
can be used in a variety of applications in mobile commerce 
such as advertizing, marketing, trading, product information 
tracking and checking, security, customer or product 
verification and payment [15]. 
A prerequisite for the use of Mobile Tagging is a barcode 
reader software on the user’s mobile device. Although a 
move toward preinstalled reader software can be observed on 
some mobile devices, the usually required download and 
installation of the reader software is a considerable barrier of 
Mobile Tagging usage [12]. However, it is likely that the 
willingness to install the software increases to the extent to 
which attractive applications for Mobile Tagging are 
available to the user. Thus, due to network externalities the 
dissemination and adoption of a specific barcode standard 
may depend on factors other than technical advantages as 
e.g., time-to-market and reaching a user base sufficient to 
ensure a self-sustaining growth [34]. However, QR codes are 
a widely used pattern for Mobile Tagging and are 
widespread in Asia, and particularly Japan where the QR 
code standard was developed by Denso Wave in 1994 and 
the first mobile with a reader software was already 
introduced in 2002 [10]. Even if not routinely visible yet, QR 
codes are also quite common in Europe and are spreading to 
the US as well by now [12]. Mobile Tags are a simple and 
inexpensive method to present as well as to retrieve 
information, linking the physical to the virtual world. By 
providing access to additional information via mobile 
devices they constitute an attractive enhancement of 
established 
organizational 
consumer 
communication, 
engaging users in interaction with marketers. For users, 
Mobile Tagging can facilitate mobile web access, 
substituting inconvenient typing on small mobile keypads by 
simply scanning the Tag and getting connected to a website. 
Thus, Mobile Tagging not only delivers value via embedded 
information but also by means of a convenience value, which 
has been shown to trigger consumer interaction [10]. 
However, no specific studies on the enhancement of user 
acceptance of mobile services through Mobile Tagging are 
available yet. Thus, the research question for this study is 
whether and to what extend Mobile Tagging influenced users 
intention to use information services via the mobile web.  
For this purpose, we will develop and analyze a context-
adjusted acceptance model, after shortly introducing 
Figure 1. Mobile Tagging processing flow 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

consumer acceptance of technology in principle in the next 
Section B. 
B. Acceptance of Mobile Technologies 
The question of potential information systems (IS) usage 
comes along with the well-established domain of IS 
diffusion, adoption and acceptance research [35]. Hence, the 
current study on mobile service acceptance adds up to this 
research area. However, we will contribute to the already 
existing scope of literature by investigating the hitherto 
unexplored acceptance potentials of Mobile Tagging and 
thus, not only investigating determinants of mobile service 
acceptance but also deriving implications for interventions 
and acceptance enhancement. 
Assessing user acceptance in terms of behavioral (usage) 
intention researchers can choose from quite a wide set of 
theoretical approaches like the Theory of Reasoned Action 
[14] or Planned Behavior [1], the Technology Acceptance 
Model [8], the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use [36], 
or the Task Technology Fit Model [18] (for an overview see 
e.g. [40]). However, opting for one theory should not be 
arbitrary but, considering research area and objective. In this 
connection an appropriate theoretical approach should meet 
three main requirements: first of all, it has to be eligible for 
the domain under consideration. Secondly, it should be well-
established in order to gain valid propositions. Finally, 
especially regarding basic research in so far unexplored areas 
like in the present study, applied theory should be 
parsimoniously giving central insights rather than yielding a 
voluminous set of detailed propositions [35]. Still, the 
exposed requirements do apply to several theories. For the 
study at hand, especially the Task Technology Fit (TTF) 
Model [18] as well as the Technology Acceptance Model 
(TAM) [8] seem to be appropriate for analysis. At first view, 
TTF Model is based on the assumption that an IS is the more 
likely to be used the more the system under consideration 
matches the task a user must perform [18]. Thus, TTF theory 
would be an appropriate approach for investigating usage 
acceptance of Mobile Tagging as such in terms of decoding 
information and finally accessing a website. However, the 
current study wants to investigate the acceptance of mobile 
service usage acceptance and to what extend Mobile Tagging 
can enhance this acceptance. Implying this further goal by 
facilitating mobile information service access and increasing 
overall acceptance and use of such services TTF theory 
hardly would be suitable. In this context of investigation, 
TAM is likely to be a more appropriate approach, giving the 
opportunity to evaluate IS usage intention on two basic 
constructs, perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use 
[8], and thus, providing an appropriate theoretical framework 
for the current investigation of enhanced acceptance through 
access facilitation.  
TAM is a widely applied model for analyzing the 
acceptance and use of innovative technologies, which has its 
roots in social psychology. It postulates that the intention to 
use a novel technology is determined by individual attitudes 
about a system, which are gained through specific beliefs 
about the systems performance (here: using the system). As 
mentioned above, TAM is based on two main constructs: 
perceived usefulness (PU) and perceived ease of use 
(PEOU). Whilst PEOU refers to the belief about the 
necessary effort for using the system, PU describes the extent 
to which an individual perceives that using the system will 
enhance his or her job performance. Thereby, PU is expected 
to be determined by perceived ease of system use, which 
means –other influences being equal– the easier it is to use a 
system, the more useful it would be. The reference to job 
related 
performance 
and 
usefulness 
relates 
to 
the 
development of TAM in an organizational context. In that, 
TAM was compiled to explore employees’ acceptance of 
new software implementation but meanwhile the model was 
adapted to many different contexts. All in all, it can be stated 
that TAM has shown to be a robust and parsimonious model 
for analyzing technology acceptance, explaining about 40 
percent of variance in system usage intention and behavior 
[38], showing to be well-established as claimed above.  
In opposition to its robustness, former studies partly 
criticized TAM for not paying full attention to the wide 
range of relevant influencing factors, missing out important 
acceptance determinants. Thus, by fulfilling the demand of 
being parsimonious on the one hand, it has been shown that 
the two basic constructs in TAM do not fully mirror the 
specification of technological as well as usage context 
determinants that may influence user acceptance on the other 
hand [8]. To cope with these shortcomings lots of researchers 
identified key predictors of PU as well as of PEOU [37]. 
That way, a number of researchers applied TAM to different 
scenarios, adding a range of further determinants, and 
original TAM itself was refined to TAM2 [38] and, recently, 
to TAM3 [37]. While TAM2 considers processes of social 
influences as well as cognitive determinants TAM3 presents 
an extensive model of influencing factors on PU and PEOU 
on individual technology adoption, also introducing intrinsic 
factors like computer playfulness and enjoyment as 
determinants of PEOU. Further research extensions of TAM 
also included factors like enjoyment [9, 19], individual 
personality factors as innovativeness, compatibility and 
affinity [2] or trust [17, 23]. For a comprehensive overview 
on the most prevalent determinants Lee et al. provide a 
summing up as well as a critical review on the application of 
TAM [25]. 
Whilst the extensions of TAM offer a sound contribution, 
the study at hand focuses on a basic understanding of the 
enhancement of mobile information service acceptance 
through Mobile Tagging. Thus, we will focus on a more 
technology- respectively application-orientated acceptance 
approach not taking into account social norms or influences 
as proposed in TAM2 and TAM3. Anyhow, analyzing 
innovative technology –such as mobile information services– 
requires a model adapted to the respective technology system 
as well as its handling [31]. On this we will draw on existing 
literature applying TAM to mobile technology acceptance. 
Here, former studies worked out relevant mobile specific 
factors like technology readiness [29] as well as mobile 
desire as the craving for “being always on” [23, 28] for 
influencing behavioral intention to use the respective 
services. However, beside TAM’s sound contribution for the 
prediction of usage intention and actual behavior based on 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

PU and PEOU, the question of “what actually makes a 
system useful” [5] mostly remains unanswered. Thus, next to 
the essential results on technology acceptance and insights 
into the influences of (mobile) technology acceptance gained 
through TAM-based research studies, a frequently mentioned 
critique on TAM claims its lack in providing practical 
guidance [25]. In this connection, TAM is said to treat 
technology as a “black box”, missing out on focusing system 
design characteristics, which just determines the system’s 
usefulness.  
The aim of this paper lies in analyzing user-sided 
acceptance of available mobile information services and less 
in guiding design and development of technological 
construction and realization. Therefore, this study will not 
focus on specific system design characteristics. Nonetheless, 
we will refer to practical guidance by showing how the 
acceptance of an innovative technology itself as well as its 
PEOU can be enhanced by implementing selective practical 
support. Therefore, we will propose a mobile-adapted TAM, 
as mobile-specific antecedents were highlighted above. 
Further we will incorporate the acceptance of the Mobile 
Tagging application to the acceptance model of mobile 
information services. After proposing the combined model 
and causalities in the following Section III, we will 
afterwards test its significance empirically. 
III. 
RESEARCH MODEL AND HYPOTHESES 
Prior studies on mobile service acceptance applying 
TAM reinforced the relevance or PU and PEOU for 
predicting consumer acceptance and intention to use mobile 
services. For example, Wang et al. [39] found both 
constructs to be significant influences on the intention to use 
mobile services. Likewise, Lu et al. [26] found strong 
support for PU and PEOU in predicting usage intention of 
wireless internet services.  
Whereas PU originally applied to the user’s job 
performance [8], PU in mobile settings rather refers to the 
system’s contributions to (private) personal targets. Based on 
this, the target of both Mobile Tagging (MT) and mobile 
information services (m-Info) does relate to the personal 
demand of information retrieval, although on a different 
level. Therefore, PU is assumed to be a relevant influencing 
factor on individual behavioral usage intention (BI) in both 
aspects. But, due to the fact that Mobile Tags are usually 
found on advertising posters or flyers as well as on products 
suggesting the availability of further concrete information it 
can be assumed that the goal orientation is more precise 
when using Mobile Tagging compared to the general 
information search on the mobile web. Therefore, we expect 
the relationship of PU on usage intention being stronger in 
the context of Mobile Tagging.  
The results on the significance of PEOU as an 
influencing factor on the other hand are not consistent in 
prior studies [6], and, for instance, the study by Lu et al. [27] 
on the intention to use short message services for personal 
communication among young Chinese consumers just 
revealed a significant relationship for PU but not for PEOU. 
According to Venkatesh et al. [36], the significance of the 
direct influence of PEOU on usage intentions just seems to 
be prevalent in early stages of use and diminishes over long 
term as users become experienced [38]. At this, one could 
argue that due to the novelty of mobile services and the 
relative complexity of PEOU of mobile services, like the 
need of special system settings for web access or 
cumbersome navigation aspects, PEOU should appear as a 
weighty factor. Contrary, it can be assumed that due to the 
everyday use and thus, the high familiarity with mobile 
devices, PEOU of mobile handhelds as such will be on a 
very high initial level [31]. Therefore, concerns about high 
efforts should not be prevalent because users generally 
expect to be proficient in handling so that no direct influence 
of PEOU on intention but an indirect effect via PU for the 
application of Mobile Tagging (PEOU_MT) as well as for 
mobile information services (PEOU m-Info) is hypothesized. 
Nonetheless, users meanwhile are accustomed to the limited 
navigation and input opportunities of mobile devices the 
above referenced convenience still remains a valuable 
benefit, which is said to enhance the usage acceptance of 
mobile services [3]. Hence, we additionally hypothesize that 
the intention to use Mobile Tagging in turn positively effects 
PEOU of mobile information services as it facilitates the 
input on mobile devices. Further, we suggest PEOU effects 
individually perceived enjoyment of using a system as we 
assume that perceptions on handling a system also influence 
the anticipated enjoyment. It also can be assumed that if 
users do not get along with a mobile device, service or 
application, they tend not to be amused [31]. 
As mentioned above, the importance of enjoyment has 
been found to be a critical influencing factor in mobile usage 
scenarios. Davis et al. [9] noted that, in the context of 
computer interaction in the workplace intrinsic motivations 
are important determinants of usage intention going beyond 
the relevance of usefulness. Some studies award enjoyment 
to influence usage intention just in case of purely hedonic 
system usage as the end in itself [19], like mobile gaming. 
Whereas this may partly hold true for the current observation 
of Mobile Tagging as an enjoyable hedonic interaction 
technique the underlying intention to gain information 
exceeds the purely hedonic usage for both scenarios. Hence, 
we postulate a direct effect of perceived enjoyment on the 
intention to use both, Mobile Tagging (Enjoy_MT) as well 
as on mobile information services (Enjoy m-Info).  
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

As the last influencing determinant we introduce an 
individual personality construct, mobile desire, which will be 
imposed integratively for both cases and assumed to 
influence comparably PU as well as respective usage 
intention. Mobile desire thereby refers to the personal need 
for “being always on” in terms of being always connected 
and available for being reached out by family and friends 
[11]. This strongly refers to the above described time and 
location independent information access, also including a 
connection value and overall representing the core feature of 
mobile services: mobility [28]. To complete the assumptions 
on Mobile Tagging and mobile information services we 
finally postulate that the intention to use Mobile Tagging has 
an integral influence on the intention to use mobile 
information services. The proposed acceptance model is 
indicated in Fig. 2 and will be empirically tested in the next 
Section 4. 
IV. 
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHOD 
To test the compiled model a paper-based survey was 
conducted among German students who were asked to 
participate voluntarily. Overall, 155 responses were 
obtained, which were all duly completed and thus, all 
accounted for the evaluation. The subjects were at the age 
between 19 and 29 with an average age of 22.50 years 
(standard deviation 2.28). Hereof, 61 percent were male and 
39 percent were female. 
Since Mobile Tagging is not very common in Germany, 
all participants gained a short explanatory description of the 
application indicated by a functional illustration as the one 
depicted above. The final survey to be answered covered the 
nine constructs, each measured by multiple items, which 
were adapted from existing literature [9, 8, 28] but, were 
modified in wording to adapt the measures to the specific 
context. All items were measured on a 5-point Likert scale 
with 1 for total agreement and 5 meaning total disagreement. 
V. 
DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS 
To analyze the overall acceptance model we used 
SmartPLS [33], a Partial Least Squares approach for testing 
structural equation modeling. As all constructs were 
measured by reflective indicators, the reliability of the items 
can be assessed on basis of their loadings [7]. At this, 
loadings should be above 0.6, what means that the variance 
shared with the construct is higher than error variance. 
According to this threshold one item of PEOU of mobile 
information system was removed due to its loading of just 
0.528. All remaining items showed a loading in the range 
between 0.776 and 0.962, also being highly significant with 
t-values all above 10.34 and thus, being higher than the 
respective critical benchmark of 1.96 [20]. Thereby, t-values 
were obtained via PLS-Bootstrapping technique with 
individual sign changes and 1200 resamples.  
Reliability of constructs was assessed by Cronbach’s α 
and composite reliability (CR) as measures for convergent 
validity as well as by average extracted variance (AVE) for 
discriminant validity. At this, values for Cronbach’s α were 
all above 0.868 and above 0.723 for CR and thus exceeding 
the claimed benchmark of 0.7 [20]. The values of AVE 
fulfilled the required objective of 0.5 with values all above 
0.688 as well, indicating that the latent variable explains 
more than 68 percent of the variance of its indicators on 
average. Altogether, the measurement models appear to be 
adequately reliable (α), internally consistent (CR) and 
discriminant valid (AVE) as summarized in Tab 1. 
 
Table 1. 
Reliability values 
Construct 
Cronbach’s α 
CR 
AVE 
BI MT 
0.868 
0.773 
0.688 
BI m-InfoServ 
0.929 
0.848 
0.868 
Enjoyment MT 
0.937 
0.910 
0.788 
Enjoyment m-InfoServ 
0.968 
0.950 
0.909 
PEOU MT 
0.879 
0.793 
0.709 
PEOU m-InfoServ 
0.878 
0.723 
0.783 
PU MT 
0.873 
0.781 
0.697 
PU m-InfoServ 
0.918 
0.867 
0.790 
Mobile Desire 
0.903 
0.840 
0.757 
 
The structural model, in turn, was evaluated by estimates 
of path coefficients, coefficient of determinants (R²), and 
prediction relevance (Q²) as proposed by Henseler et al. [20]. 
The partial model of Mobile Tagging shows a substantial 
explanatory power for the behavioral intention to use with an 
R² of 0.671, and the coefficient of determination for the 
behavioral intention to use mobile information services 
shows a good moderate effect with an estimate of 0.540 as 
well. Construct crossvalidated redundancy (Q²) were derived 
from blindfolding technique, and were positive for all cases 
as required for being considered a predictive relevant [20]. 
All path coefficients showed to exceed the benchmark of 0.2 
Figure 2. Proposed acceptance research model  
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

[7] except the relation of PU of mobile information services 
on respective behavioral intention. At this, significance of 
testing the path coefficients assessed via t-values obtained by 
PLS-Bootsrapping with individual sign changes and 1200 
resampels expectedly reveals the dependency of PU of 
mobile information services on its intention to use being 
non-significant. However, all remaining paths showed high 
significance with t-values all above 2.512, and PU was 
significant for the Mobile Tagging scenario with a path 
coefficient of 0.212. Overall, results show that individual 
mobile desire has the strongest magnitude on the PU 
construct of Mobile Tagging and mobile information 
services with 0.408 and 0.407 as well as on respective 
intention to use with 0.371 and 0.342. In total, effects in the 
partial models differ in strength. Whereas PEOU influences 
perceived enjoyment with 0.328 and PU with just 0.223 
regarding Mobile Tagging, the PEOU for mobile information 
services influence its PU with 0.402 and even 0.520 on 
expected enjoyment. As hypothesized PU was of higher 
relevance for Mobile Tagging, and the intention to use 
Mobile Tagging positively affects PEOU of mobile 
information services (0.359) as well as its totaling intention 
to use (0.335). The overall coefficients are depicted in Fig. 3. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
The study was conducted to get a deeper understanding 
of the acceptance and usage intention of mobile services with 
a specific regard to the application of Mobile Tagging, 
showing up an opportunity to enhance the intention to use 
mobile information services. Conducting the acceptance 
model, mobile specific influences like enjoyment and mobile 
desire were worked out to be important antecedents. The 
results show that individual predispositions like mobile 
desire play a decisive role in the acceptance process having a 
substantial and significant influence on both, PU and overall 
intention to use Mobile Tagging as well as mobile 
information services. Thus, findings indicate that drivers for 
mobile services are strongly influenced by personality 
factors as e.g. suggested by Aldás-Manzano et al. [2]. 
Organizational activities in mobile commerce as well as 
mobile communication therefore should be well considered 
and precisely targeted to an accessible target group. For 
example, mobile activities have high potentials for tech-
savvy consumer interaction as it is prevalently used by e.g.,  
airline companies and the automobile industry [22]. 
Further, analysis revealed that PU indeed effected the 
intention to use Mobile Tagging but, did not play a role in 
the scenario of mobile information services. This effect can 
possibly be attributed to the low availability of mobile 
information services in the respondents’ environment by now 
and thus, their comparatively vague imagination about 
mobile information systems as bringing concrete value-
adding services into mind. The influence of perceived 
enjoyment was higher for Mobile Tagging than for mobile 
information services. It can be assumed that the direct 
apparent interaction of scanning a Mobile Tag from a poster 
or product implies also intrinsic motivation for just having 
fun [9], in trying out a new and innovative mobile feature.  
On the contrary, the influence of PEOU on both, PU and 
enjoyment was higher at the use of mobile information 
services but was positively influenced by the intention to use 
Mobile Tagging as suspected. This can be traced back to the 
fact that the application of Mobile Tagging compensates the 
necessity of keying in essential information like a website 
address via the small input options of mobile devices as this 
is many times seen as uncomfortable [11]. According to that, 
our results support our hypothesis drawn up at the beginning: 
Mobile Tagging enhances PEOU of mobile services.  
Observing the overall behavioral intention to use mobile 
information services one can state that our main hypothesis 
can be supported –the intention to use Mobile Tagging 
positively influenced the intention to use mobile information 
services. This may also indicate the major outcome for 
constructive managerial intervention inasmuch supplying 
additional support can actively enhance user acceptance and 
use 
of 
mobile 
information 
services. 
Thereby, 
the 
implementation of Mobile Tags to print and cross-media 
campaigns can not only provide additional value in form of 
offering extra information via the mobile web but also by 
facilitating mobile web access, constituting an additional 
convenience-value. To concretize best implementation 
opportunities of Mobile Tagging for increasing consumers’ 
value in terms of realization, design and implementation 
further empirical research would be necessary. In so doing, 
system and information related aspects should be considered 
and, to what extent each of them influences different aspects 
of overall acceptance like usefulness, ease of use or 
enjoyment. Additionally, further research should investigate 
Figure 3. Empirical study results 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

whether and how the influence of Mobile Tagging may 
change according to the application context as well as over 
time since we just took a onetime snapshot on mobile 
information services.  
Finally, some limitations have to be noted as data 
collection just took place among students and thus, results 
may lack external validity. Further research may tie up on 
this, also taking into account sociodemographic influences. 
Nonetheless, this study made some fundamental contribution 
to the application and integration of Mobile Tagging, 
providing a basis for further suspenseful investigations. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
I. Ajzen and T. J. Madden, "Prediction of Goal-Directed Behavior: 
Attitudes, Intentions, and Perceived Behavioral Control," Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology, vol. 22, 1986, pp. 453-474. 
[2] 
J. Aldás-Manzano, C. Ruiz-Mafé, and S. Sanz-Blas, "Exploring 
Individual 
Personality 
Factors 
as 
Drivers 
of 
M-shopping 
Acceptance," Industrial Management & Data Systems, vol. 109/6, 
2009, pp. 739-757. 
[3] 
B. Anckar and D. D'Incau, "Value-Added Services in Mobile 
Commerce: An Analytical Framework and Empirical Findings from a 
National Consumer Survey," Proc. IEEE Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS 2002). 
[4] 
S. J. Barnes, "The mobile commerce value chain," International 
Journal of Information Management, vol. 22, 2002, pp. 91-108. 
[5] 
I. Benbasat and H. Barki, "Quo Vadis, TAM?," Journal of the 
Association for Information Systems, vol. 8/4, 2007, pp. 211-218. 
[6] 
G. C. Bruner and A. Kumar, "Explaining consumer acceptance of 
handheld Internet devices," Journal of Business Research, vol. 58/5, 
2005, pp. 554-558. 
[7] 
W. W. Chin, "Issues and Opinions on Structural Equation Modeling," 
MIS Quarterly, vol. 22/1, 1998, pp. 1-11. 
[8] 
F. D. Davis, R. P. Bagozzi, and P. R. Warshaw, "User Acceptance of 
Computer Technology: A Comparison of Two Theoretical Models," 
Management Science, vol. 35/8, 1989, pp. 982-1003. 
[9] 
F. D. Davis, R. P. Bagozzi, and P. R. Warshaw, "Extrinsic and 
Intrinsic Motivation to Use Computers in the Workplace," Journal of 
Applied Social Psychology, vol. 22/14, 1992, pp. 1111-1132. 
[10] X. Dou and H. Li, "Creative Use of QR Codes in Consumer 
Communication," International Journal of Mobile Marketing, vol. 3/2, 
2008, pp. 61-67. 
[11] K. Dushinski, The mobile marketing handbook: A step-by-step guide 
to creating dynamic mobile marketing campaigns, CyberAge 
Books/Information Today: Medford N.J., 2009. 
[12] M. Ebling and C. Ramón, "Bar Codes Everywhere You Look," 
Pervasive computing, vol. 9/2, 2010, pp. 4-5. 
[13] EITO, More than five billion mobile phone users: Berlin,  2010, 
http://www.eito.com/pressinformation_20100811.htm [Accessed: 07 
Sept.  2011]. 
[14] M. Fishbein and I. Ajzen, Belief, attitude, intention and behavior: An 
introduction to theory and research, Addison-Wesley, 1975. 
[15] J. Z. Gao, "Unterstanding 2D-BarCode Technology and Application 
in M-Commerce: Design and Implementation of a 2D Barcode 
Processing Solution," in 31st Annual International Computer 
Software and Application Conference, Beijing, 2007, pp. 49-56. 
[16] Gartner, Gartner Outlines 10 Mobile Technologies to Watch in 2010 
and 2011, Stamford, CT, 2010, http://www.gartner.com/ it/page.jsp? 
id=1328113 [Accessed: 07 Sept.  2011]. 
[17] D. Gefen, E. Karahanna, and D. W. Straub, "Trust and TAM in 
Online Shopping: An Integrated Model," MIS Quarterly, vol. 27/1, 
2003, pp. 51-90. 
[18] D. L. Goodhue, "Understanding User Evaluation of Information 
Systems," Management Science, vol. 41/12, 1995, pp. 1827-1844. 
[19] H. van der Heijden, "User Acceptance of Hedonic Information 
Systems," MIS Quarterly, vol. 28/4, 2004, pp. 695-704. 
[20] J. Henseler, C. M. Ringle, and R. R. Sinkovics, "The Use of Partial 
Least Square Path Modeling in International Marketing," Advances in 
International Marketing, vol. 20, 2009, pp. 277-320. 
[21] H. Kato and T. T. Keng, "Pervasive 2D Barcodes for Camera Phone 
Applications," Pervasive computing, vol. 6/4, 2007, pp. 76-85. 
[22] R. Kats, Mobile driving evolution of airline business, Mobile 
Marketier Online, 16/04/2010, http://www.mobilemarketer.com/cms/ 
news/software-technology/5992.html [Accessed: 07 Sept.  2011]. 
[23] T. Lee, "The Impact of Perceptions of Interactivity on Customer Trust 
and Transaction Intentions in Mobile Commerce," Journal of 
Electronic Commerce Research, vol. 6/3, 2005, pp. 165-180. 
[24] T. Lee and J. Jun, "Contextual perceived value? Investigating the role 
of contextual marketing for customer relationship management in a 
mobile commerce context," Business Process Management, vol. 13/6, 
2007, pp. 798-814. 
[25] Y. Lee, K. A. Kozar, and K. Larsen, "The Technology Acceptance 
Model: Past, Present, and Future," Communications of the 
Association for Information Systems, vol. 12, 2003, pp. 752-780. 
[26] J. Lu, J. E. Yao, and C.-S. Yu, "Personal innovativeness, social 
influences and adoption of wireless Internet services via mobile 
technology," Journal of Strategic Information Systems, vol. 14/3, 
2005, pp. 245-268. 
[27] Y. Lu, Z. Deng, and B. Wang, "Exploring factors affecting Chinese 
consumers' usage of Short Message Service 
for personal 
Communication," Info Systems, vol. 20/2, 2010, pp. 183-208. 
[28] N. Mallat, M. Rossi, V. Tuunaien, and A. Öörni, "The Impact of Use 
Situation and Mobility on the Acceptance of Mobile Ticketing 
Services," Proc. IEEE Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences (HICSS 2006). 
[29] A. P. Massey, V. Khatri, and V. Ramesh, "From the Web to the 
Wireless Web: Technology Readiness and Usability," Proc. IEEE 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS 2005). 
[30] E. W. T. Ngai and A. Gunasekaran, "A Review for Mobile Commerce 
Research and Applications," Decision Support Systems, vol. 42, 
2007, pp. 3-15. 
[31] S. Niklas and S. Strohmeier, "Exploring the Impact of Usefulness and 
Enjoyment on Mobile Service Acceptance," Proc. IEEE Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS 2011). 
[32] E. Ohbuchi, H. Hanaizumi, and L. A. Hock, "Barcode Readers using 
the Camera Device in Mobile Phones," Proc. International 
Conference on Cyberworlds, 2004. 
[33] C. M. Ringle, S. Wende, and A. Will, SmartPLS Software, University 
of Hamburg: Germany, 2nd ed., 2005. 
[34] E. M. Rogers, Diffusion of innovations, Free Press: New York,  2003. 
[35] S. Strohmeier, “Electronic Portfolios in Recruiting? A Conceptual 
Analysis of Usage,” Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, vol. 
11/ 4, 2010, pp. 268-280. 
[36] V. Venkatesh, M. Morris, G. Davis, and F. D. Davis, "User 
Acceptance of Information Technology: Toward a Unified View," 
MIS Quarterly, vol. 27/3, 2003, pp. 425-478. 
[37] V. Venkatesh and H. Bala, "Technology Acceptance Model 3 and a 
Research Agenda on Interventions," Decision Sciences, vol. 39/2, 
2008, pp. 273-315. 
[38] V. Venkatesh and F. D. Davis, "A Theoretical Extension of the 
Technology Acceptance Model: Four Longitudinal Field Studies," 
Management Science, vol. 46/2, 2000, pp. 186-204. 
[39] Y.-S. Wang, H.-H. Lin, and P. Luran, "Predicting consumer intention 
to use mobile service," Information Systems Journal, vol. 16/2, 2006, 
pp. 157-179. 
[40] M. D. Williams, Y. Dwivendi, B. Lal, A. Schwarz, "Contemporary 
trends and issues in IT adoption and diffusion research," Journal of 
Information Technology, vol. 24/1, 2009, pp. 1-10. 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

