m-Physio: Personalized Accelerometer-based Physical Rehabilitation Platform 
Iván Raso, Ramón Hervás, José Bravo 
Technologies and Information Systems Department 
 Castilla - La Mancha University 
13071 Ciudad Real, Spain 
Email: ivanrasodiazguerra@gmail.com; ramon.hlucas@uclm.es; jose.bravo@uclm.es  
 
 
 
Abstract— This paper proposes a rehabilitation system based 
on new technological tendencies in the mobility and ubiquitous 
computing 
areas. 
Specialists 
and 
patients 
related 
to 
rehabilitation area can use this proposed system to improve the 
fulfillment of exercises and the supervision of rehabilitation 
tasks. An important current problem is that sometimes these 
activities cannot be performed efficiently due to the lack of 
time or the large distances between patient homes and 
rehabilitation centers. We have developed our system using a 
mobile device and a bracelet to capture patient’s rehabilitation 
relevant data. As a pre-process procedure, raw data output by 
mobile device accelerometer is filtered, and then we use the 
technique called Dynamic Time Warping to train and 
recognize movements. Based on this recognition, patients can 
perform rehabilitation without the continuous specialist’s 
surveillance and can be sure of its accuracy. Experimental 
results show us that our system is able to adapt itself 
dynamically to the peculiarities of each user and enhance 
healthy rehabilitation in a proactive way. 
Keywords- ubiquitous computing; accelerometry; physical- 
rehabilitation; mobility; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The ubiquity of mobile devices has led to the emergence 
of personalized and adaptive services that are able to respond 
particular needs of each specific user. These services allow 
us to develop a wide range of proactive applications such as 
ambient assisted living services (e.g., assistance to elderly 
people [15] and chronic diseases assistance [22]), 
entertainment (e.g., mobile quiz games [16]), and smart 
homes 
(e.g., 
personalized 
home 
control 
[17] 
and 
visualization services [23]).  
A principal characteristic to take into account in our work 
is the capability of monitoring user movements. Motion 
recognition is a discipline that has been around us for years 
in the scientific community. Some of the related works 
address issues such as handwriting recognition, recognition 
of hand gestures, and monitoring of the user activities. Some 
of these researches have in common with our work the use of 
one 
particular 
technology: 
the 
accelerometry. 
Accelerometers are being used in many sectors and, due to 
the fast development in sensor technology, it is possible the 
integration of these sensors into every day devices [1], for 
example, into mobile devices. 
Focusing on the rehabilitation area, patients usually have 
to move about their rehabilitation center several times, but 
sometimes, factors such as lack of time and large distances 
affect the number of visits to their specialists, and 
consequently affect in the quality of the rehabilitation. 
Moreover, some patients suffer a slight incapacitate and have 
to perform part of their rehabilitation at home and they also 
need medical examination to check their evolution. Also, the 
well-known health care systems overcharge can be lesser by 
means of this kind of m-Health systems. 
The main goal of this paper is the development of a novel 
system that helps the kinds of patient mentioned above 
whenever realize their rehabilitation. Besides, physical 
rehabilitation specialists can improve the monitoring and 
supervision of tasks by using our web-based system in their 
rehabilitation center. Our whole system (web-based and 
mobile applications) lets specialists pay a better attention to 
patients and reduce the problem of performing rehabilitation 
without the attentive specialist’s eye. 
In this paper, we employ the iPhone, one of the first 
mobile devices equipped with an accelerometer. Later, 
several mobile devices such as RIM Blackberry Storm, 
Nokia N95, and Sony Ericsson W910 were equipped with 
this kind of sensor. They basically use accelerometers for 
user interaction with games [3]. Few relevant applications 
employ accelerometry with other purposes. For example, 
Sony Ericsson’s shake control allows the changing of songs 
by shaking the mobile device. However, this paper presents a 
novel application that introduces m-Health area into a new 
challenge that has not been deeply explored, the mobile- 
based rehabilitation. 
This paper is organized in five sections: Section 2 
presents some related works that apply accelerometry to the 
rehabilitation area. Section 3 presents and explains the 
proposed applications. Section 4 presents evaluation results, 
and Section 5 discusses about the future works and the 
conclusions. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Accelerometry has become a powerful choice for 
evaluating variability of person’s movement using these 
kinds of sensor that provide a non-invasive method of 
measurement and have a successful accuracy [4]. 
The entertainment sector is one of the most influenced by 
this technology as we can see in the Nintendo Wii game 
console that uses Wii Remote and Nunchuk to control 
avatars in games by means of natural gestures, and the 
PlayStation3 with its SixAxis and DualShock 3 controllers. 
Other sectors such as motor industry use these sensors to 
control ABS systems, airbags, and for checking the correct 
416
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

working of a machine. Transport industry also uses 
accelerometry to check wherever the merchandises suffer 
misshapes and their condition or their integrity has been 
damage by it [2]. 
Several works [5][6][7][8][10] have shown the accuracy 
of 
the 
accelerometer-based 
physical 
rehabilitation 
monitoring such as limb’s motion, gait analysis before 
strokes, and other illness or accidents that cause malfunction 
in the physical condition of a patient. 
 
Figure 1.  Application parameters (a) and stadistics gathered from the 
rehabilitation process (b). 
Some related works to this paper are Wiihab [20], 
Telefonica’s Rehabitic [9], and the Arteaga et al. proposal 
[19]. These projects use the accelerometers to help in the 
rehabilitation process. The Wiihab is used as an interaction 
object that encourages people to move their limbs. However, 
Rehabitic is made up of several accelerometers and a central 
device that saves the data received from the sensors, all 
complemented by a web page that the specialist uses to 
control the patients. This system gives important information 
relevant to help the patient in the rehabilitation exercises and 
contribute to the specialist’s decisions about the evolution of 
the patient. Arteaga et al. propose a set of monitoring 
devices, each of which comprises of an accelerometer and a 
beeper, LED light and vibrator to provide redundant modes 
of inappropriate posture warnings that would hopefully 
trigger self-correction. 
Other related contributions are the O’Donovan et al. [7] 
and Choquette et al. [18] proposals that allow scientific 
monitoring limb’s motion and measures of heart rate using 
Body Area Network (BAN). Nowadays, the BAN devices 
use wireless technology and have become into Wireless Area 
Network (WAN) [5]. We have found many interesting 
similarities between these systems and our approach. 
However, the invasive characteristic of these systems 
prejudices their common use due to its numbers of devices 
and the tedious task of getting dressed with them. At this 
point, our application contributes to the rehabilitation area 
with a less invasive system than the above-described projects 
do. Moreover, a common problem with these proposals is the 
high effort needed to deploy the systems. Thus, our solutions 
achieve 
the 
objective 
of 
ubiquitous 
rehabilitation 
performance and monitoring that enhance the accuracy, less 
invasively and reducing infrastructural needs.  
III. 
SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
The mobile application (Figure 1) has been developed for 
iPhone 2G devices. This device includes an LIS302DL 
MEMS smart digital accelerometer [21]. It has 3-axis 
(X,Y,Z) and includes dynamically user selectable full scales 
from ± 2g to ± 8g. 
According to some related studies [6][7][5], one of the 
best options to wear the accelerometers to the patient is a 
wearable system. The examples mentioned above were ruled 
out because their tedious wear system. We decided to use a 
bracelet that people use together with the iPhone for jogging 
or fitness. 
Before presenting the principal system’s components, we 
define what kind of rehabilitation exercises are related to this 
paper and their particular characteristics: 
• 
Exercises end in the same point that they start. 
• 
When a patient performs the exercise, it always 
starts at the same point approximately. 
• 
The motion of the exercise will be slow due to the 
fact that the patient is doing rehabilitation. 
Additionally, an exercise can be classified in four types: 
• 
Correct exercise: The patient performs the exercise 
according to the pattern generated in the training 
process and imposed by the specialist. 
• 
Wrong exercise: The patient performs the exercise 
according to the time limits but it was not the 
expected exercise according to the stored pattern. 
• 
Exercise exceeds the maximum time: The patient 
performs an exercise but out of the maximum time 
allowed. 
• 
Exercise does not exceed the minimum time: The 
patient completes an exercise but does not pass the 
minimum time imposed by the specialist. 
A. Filtering 
It is necessary to use a filter because the raw data of the 
accelerometer is noise and redundant. Consequently, we 
have chosen the following smoothing function for each axis 
(Equation 1): 
(1) 
S(At) is the filtered acceleration vector output and At is 
the acceleration raw vector output, which is acquired by the 
interaction device at time t. Besides α is a smoothing factor 
in the range from 0 to 1. The α factor is critical for acquiring 
valid data to be analyzed in the pattern recognition process. 
417
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

We have performed several experiments to select an α 
factor for rehabilitation exercises or other movements with 
similar characteristics; different kinds of movement may 
need additional studies to select a valid α factor. Figure 2 
shows 
different 
graphs 
captured 
by 
the 
iPhones’s 
accelerometer while a patient is performing a rehabilitation 
exercise. Each graph represents the same exercise with 
different α factors. The most representative capture of the 
rehabilitation exercise was the option (a), with α factor 0.1, 
because it filters peaks (remarked with circles) that not 
contribute to define the rehabilitation exercise. In the set of 
exercises performed for this paper we chose the option (a). 
On the other hand, fewer values of the α factor are not 
characteristic to the movement represented by the 
accelerometer axes. 
 
Figure 2.  Test of different smoothing factors. 
B. Pattern Recognition 
The recognition of motion is a kind of pattern 
recognition. This recognition can be performed in several 
ways such as brute force, fuzzy logic, Gabor wavelet 
transform, hidden Markov model, support vector machine, 
and neural networks [3]. 
Instead of these examples, we have decided to base our 
development in the dynamic time warping (DTW) algorithm 
because it requires a simple training and its effective has 
been proved in many researches [11], [8]. Besides, it has 
been used for writing recognition [12] with great results, as 
well as for speech recognition [13]. 
DTW computes the distance between two exercises A 
and B by finding the minimum path that will be represented 
with a numerical value. In our application, the averaged 
Euclidean distance defines the cost between two different 
points Ai and Bj from the rehabilitation exercise. 
C. Segmentation 
The segmentation mechanism is used to determinate the 
beginning and end of an exercise. Some related works use 
the segmentation approach [3][1]. In our case, the 
segmentation is necessary because the patient has to know if 
he/she is beginning the exercises in the correct position as 
well as the device has to know when the exercise begins and 
ends. In order to achieve the segmentation mechanism, 
authors such as Schlömer [14] forces users to touch a button 
for detecting the beginning and end. Other authors [3] use 
mathematical equations such as the equation (2). According 
to the author when this equation is bigger than 0.3 the 
exercise starts and ends when drops to bellow 0.1. 
(2) 
The first method is not directly applicable in our system; 
patients cannot touch the mobile each time they realize a 
rehabilitation exercise because it may distort the pattern 
recognition process. On the other hand, the equation (3) is 
more interesting but neither applicable to our purposes; we 
manage several consecutive exercises and it requires that 
patients cannot stop for a while until the accelerometer drops 
to the value 0.1. 
Our segmentation method is partially based on the push- 
button approach mentioned above and follows these steps: 
• 
Patients have to touch the mobile’s screen when they 
are ready to start the exercise. 
• 
Once the patient touches the screen, the mobile 
device starts a countdown (five seconds) to allow the 
patients gets ready. For example, it could be possible 
that the patients have to make a rehabilitation 
exercise with their legs and then they need time for 
returning to the start position. 
• 
After the mobile device countdown, it starts to 
calculate the exercise beginning and end, taking 
enough samples to represent these facts. The number 
of chosen samples was 30 after a wide testing 
process. In the rehabilitation and training process the 
segmentation is different from the capture steps 
because it is unnecessarily taken this number of 
samples again. 
• 
As soon as patients finish the exercise, the mobile 
device uses the last sample to recognize the end of 
the rehabilitation exercise. 
 
Figure 3.  Flow charts representing the steps to capture and train an 
exercise. 
418
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

This method has not only been designed to control the 
beginning and the end of exercises, but also to validate the 
device’s 
position 
whenever 
patients 
are 
performing 
rehabilitation at home. If the position of the mobile device is 
detected as wrong, the mobile device does not start the 
countdown and notifies the warning to the patient. In this 
case, he/she has to wear the device again. Otherwise it could 
be fatal to the rehabilitation. This step is only performed in 
the rehabilitation and training process. 
 
Figure 4.  Flow chart that represents the steps to perform the rehabilitation 
process. 
D. Rehabilitation Steps 
Three important modules compound our application: 
exercise 
capture, 
exercise 
training 
and 
personal 
rehabilitation. Each module depends on the preceding 
results. The relevant modules’ steps in response to the 
interaction of the patients are explained in the flow charts 
shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4. 
• 
Exercise capture: Before using this module, the 
patient has to wear the mobile device and the 
specialist explains her/him the steps of the 
rehabilitation exercise. The specialist can set the 
movement’s minimum time, the accelerometer’s 
frequency, the movement’s name and the smoothing 
factor α. The smoothing factor recommended after 
our set of test is 0.1 and the frequency is 80Hz. The 
capture of the exercise give to the mobile device the 
main configuration of the movement that is used in 
the following modules. Besides, once the exercise is 
captured, the mobile device completes the necessary 
information to enable the next steps of the system 
and stored the pattern that represents the particular 
rehabilitation exercise. This information includes the 
move’s maximum time and the accelerometer’s data 
corresponded to the exercise. This process is 
described in Figure 3 (left) 
• 
Exercise training: Once the exercise is stored in the 
mobile database, it is necessary to train the exercise 
for being recognized when the patient begins to 
perform the rehabilitation. Whenever patients are 
performing the training, the mobile device acquires 
all the exercises performed by them and applies the 
DTW algorithm to analyze the movements. This part 
has to be performed under the supervision of the 
specialist. Depending on the specialist criteria, the 
training can be adapted to the patient needs. The 
specialist can suggest the patient not be accurate in 
the motion or, on the other hand, the specialist can 
force patients to perform more precise exercises. In 
more detail, if the training was hard because the 
injury was important, the rehabilitation will need an 
accurate exercise, otherwise if the injury was less 
relevant, the training will be leak. As we mentioned 
before, these decision belong to the specialist 
criteria. This process is detailed in Figure 3 (right) 
• 
Personal rehabilitation: The personal rehabilitation 
is the most important step of our system. This 
module captures the exercises that patients perform 
in their rehabilitation process and classify them. This 
process is presented in Figure 4. There are four kinds 
of output to a patient’s exercise and were defined 
previously. Once the rehabilitation ends, the mobile 
phone stores all the outputs and analyzes them to 
allow 
the 
specialist 
controls 
the 
patient’s 
rehabilitation. Additionally, the mobile device 
synchronizes all the information with a centered 
database. This information can be accessed via the 
web application. 
• 
Web application: The incorporation of the web 
application 
to 
the 
system 
complements 
the 
supervising cycle, giving to the specialists an 
efficient method to follow the patient’s evolution. 
 
Figure 5.  Principal steps on mPhysio rehabilitation process. 
We now show the mainly steps for using our application 
to perform the rehabilitation process at home. First, a patient 
have to move about the rehabilitation center and the 
specialist studies the patient’s case to decide the suitableness 
of our system in the specific patient’s rehabilitation. Then, 
419
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

the specialist registers the patient’s personal data into the 
mobile device. Once all the needed information is stored in 
the mobile device, the specialist gaits the patient with the 
capturing and training system’s steps. When the specialist 
decides the training is enough, the patient can comeback to 
his/her home and performs the personal rehabilitation 
process. Whenever the patient ends his/her rehabilitation 
session at home, all the data is stored in the mobile device 
and is sent to the centered database through web services. 
Finally, 
the 
specialist 
can 
supervise 
the 
patient’s 
rehabilitation evolution by means of the developed web 
application. If the specialist thinks the patient is performing 
significant errors, he/she could call or send a message to the 
patient advising him/her, and if required, set up an 
appointment in the rehabilitation center. All these steps are 
summarized in Figure 5. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND EVALUATION 
In order to analyze the patient’s experience with the 
application and its accuracy, we have tested it with five 
patients and two different rehabilitation exercises. The 
population includes one child, two teenagers, and two adults 
(with the ages of 43 and 64). The teenager users were 
familiar with the technology, while the other users were not 
familiar with this kind of system and device. 
TABLE I.  
REHABILITATION AVERAGE BASED ON THE TWO 
EVALUATED EXERCISES AND FIVE PATIENTS 
Day 
Correct 
Wrong 
Min Time 
Max Time 
1 
23.33 % 
33.33 % 
26.67 % 
16.67 % 
2 
30.00 % 
36.67 % 
20.00 % 
13.44 % 
3 
36.67 % 
33.33 % 
20.00 % 
10.00 % 
4 
36.67 % 
33.33 % 
20.00 % 
10.00 % 
5 
33.33 % 
33.33 % 
20.00 % 
13.33 % 
6 
36.67 % 
33.33 % 
16.67 % 
13.33 % 
7 
40.00 % 
30.00 % 
16.67 % 
13.33 % 
8 
46.67 % 
26.67 % 
13.33 % 
13.33 % 
9 
50.00 % 
26.67 % 
13.33 % 
10.00 % 
10 
56.67 % 
26.67 % 
10.00 % 
6.67 % 
11 
60.00 % 
23.33 % 
10.00 % 
6.67 % 
12 
73.33 % 
20.00 % 
0.00 % 
6.67 % 
13 
76.67 % 
20.00 % 
0.00 % 
3.33 % 
14 
83.33 % 
16.67 % 
0.00 % 
0.00 % 
15 
93.33 % 
6.67 % 
0.00 % 
0.00 % 
 
The tested exercise were a shoulder and leg movement 
shown in Figure 6. The exercises were repeated 30 times 
along 15 days, which provided 450 examples for each 
exercises and each patient. The training range was from 10 to 
20 repetitions. The results in Table 1 and Figure 7 present the 
evolution of the patient’s rehabilitation. The first days, only 
one out of every four rehabilitation exercises were performed 
correctly. Without using m-Physio or another monitoring 
system, patients are not aware of the incorrect development 
of the rehabilitation process neither the specialist. This fact 
brings as consequence an inadequate physical recovery and, 
in some cases, it may worsen the injury. Our system guides 
patients since the first day of rehabilitation and enables the 
enhancement of the performed exercises. Moreover, the 
specialist can supervise this process and take part whenever 
necessary. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Shoulder and leg rehabilitation exercises. 
Focusing again on tested exercises, these results show a 
high accuracy rate of 76.67% when users were using the 
application along 13 days and it improves during the next 
days rising up to 93% in the 15th day. 
 
Figure 7.  Daily evolution of the patients’ rehabilitation during the tests. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have presented and evaluated a mobile- 
based rehabilitation system that can be used in rehabilitation 
centers for improving control and supervision. The proposed 
system is completely customizable, so the specialist can 
choose the position of the device, the frequency, minimum 
and maximum time of the rehabilitation exercises and the 
accuracy of the patient when they are performing the 
rehabilitation at home or without the continuous specialist’s 
surveillance at rehabilitation center. Since the applied pattern 
recognition and segmentation techniques have been proposed 
and studied previously, we have analyzed their practical 
application to physical rehabilitation and we have optimized 
these techniques to this kind of movements.  
One of the future works of our system includes the 
improvement of the segmentation process. A new technology 
implanted in the new mobile devices can be particularly 
helpful for the recognition and validation of the exercise’s 
420
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

beginning and end. Moreover this new technology helps 
patients to wear the mobile device at home. This technology 
is the gyroscopes that being used together with the 
accelerometers can enhance the physical rehabilitation. 
In summary, our proposal contributes to the ubiquitous 
health care. Our system improves the physician monitoring, 
guides patients on the rehabilitation process, and can reduce 
the problem of health care systems overcharge. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been financed by PII1I09-0123-27 and 
HITO-09-50 projects from Junta de Comunidades de 
Castilla-La Mancha, and by the TIN2009-14406-C05-03 
project from the Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación (Spain) 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Z. Prekopcsk, “Accelerometer based real-time gesture recognition,” 
Proc. International Student Conference on Electrical Engineering, 
Prague, Czech Republic, May 2008, pp. 1-5. 
[2] 
J. Doscher and C. Kitchin, “Monitoring machine vibration with 
micromachined accelerometers,” Sensors, vol. 14(5), 1997, pp. 33-38. 
[3] 
M. Joselli and E. Clua, “grmobile: A framework for touch and 
accelerometer gesture recognition for mobile games,” Proc. Brazilian 
Symposium on Games and Digital Entertainment, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil, Oct. 2009, pp 141-150, doi:10.1109/SBGAMES.2009.24. 
[4] 
K. M. Culhane, M. OConnor, D. Lyons, and G. M. Lyons, 
“Accelerometers in rehabilitation medicine for older adults,” Age and 
Ageing, vol. 20, Oct. 2005, pp. 556–560, doi:10.1093/ageing/afi192 
[5] 
E. Jovanov, A. Milenkovic, C. Otto, and P. C. de Groen, “A wireless 
body area network of intelligent motion sensors for computer assisted 
physical rehabilitation,” Journal on Neuroengineering Rehabilitation, 
vol. 2(6), Mar. 2005, pp 1-10, doi:10.1186/1743-0003-2-6 
[6] 
E. Mpofu and T. Oakland, Rehabilitation and Health Assessment: 
Applying ICF Guidelines. Springer Publishing Company, 2010, 760 
pp. 
[7] 
T. ODonovan, J. ODonoghue, C. Sreenan, D. Sammon, P. OReilly, 
and K. A. OConnor, “A context aware wireless body area network,” 
Proc. Int. Conf. on Pervasive Computing Technologies for 
Healthcare, 
London, 
UK, 
Apr. 
2009, 
pp. 
1-8, 
doi: 
10.4108/ICST.PERVASIVEHEALTH2009.5987 
[8] 
G. Niezen and G. P. Hancke, “Gesture recognition as ubiquitous input 
for mobile phones,” Proc. Int. workshop on Devices that Alter 
Perception, Sep. 2008, pp. 25-28. 
[9] 
MovilForum, “Aplicaciones ehealth en la feria movilforum 2009,” 
http://pressoffice.telefonica.com/documentos/Dossier (2010, Feb 20th)  
[10] A. S. Alklind Taylor, P. Backlund, H. Engström, M. Johannesson, H. 
Krasniqi, and M. Lebram. “Acceptance of Entertaiment Systems in 
Stroke Rehabilitation,” Porc. IADIS Game and Entertaiment 
Technologies, Algarve, Portugal, Jun. 2009, pp. 75-83. 
[11] T. S. Leong, J. Lai, J. Panza, P. Pong, and J. Hong, “Wii want to 
write: An accelerometer based gesture recognition system,” Porc. Int. 
Conf. on Recent and Emerging Advanced Techologies in 
Engineering, Pan Pacific, Malaysia, Nov. 2009. 
[12]  R. Niels and L. Vuurpijl, “Using dynamic time warping for intuitive 
handwriting recognition,” Proc. Conference of the international 
graphonomics society (IGS2005), Salerno, Italy, Jun. 2005, pp. 217–
221. 
[13] L. A. R. Solano, Verificacion del hablante basado en Dynamic Time 
Warping. Universidad del Norte, 1998. 
[14] T. Schölmer, B. Poppinga, N. Henze, and S. Boll, “Gesture 
recognition with a wii controller,” Proc. 2nd international conference 
on Tangible and embedded interaction, Bonn, Germany, Feb. 2008, 
pp 11-14, doi: 10.1145/1347390.1347395 
[15] D. Lopez-de-Ipiña, X. Laiseca, A. Barbier, U. Aguilera, A. Almeida, 
P. Orduña, and J.I. Vazquez. “Infrastructural support for ambient 
assisted living,” Advances in Soft Computing 51, Springer, 2009, pp 
66-75. 
[16] J. Garduño, L. Pedersen, P. Brodal, T. Sund, G. K. Klungsøyr, T. 
Konstali, and H. Gundersen. “OMA-BCAST Quiz Gaming Prototype 
for Mobile”. Proc. IADIS Game and Entertaiment Technologies, 
Algarve, Portugal, Jun. 2009, 
[17] M. García-Herranz, P.A. Haya, A. Esquivel, G. Montoro, and X. 
Alamán. “Easing the smart home: Semi-automatic adaptation in 
perceptive environments,” Journal of Univeral Computer Science vol. 
14(9), 2008, pp. 1529-1544. 
[18] S. Choquette, M. Hamel, and P Boissy. “Accelerometer-based 
wireless body area network to estimate intensity of therapy in post-
acute rehabilitation,” Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 
vol. 5(20), 2008, doi: 10.1186/1743-0003-5-20 
[19] S. Arteaga, J. Chevalier, A. Coile, A. W. Hill, S. Sali, S. 
Sudhakhrisnan, and S. H. Kurniawan. “Low-cost accelerometry-based 
posture monitoring system for stroke survivors,” Proc. 10th 
international ACM SIGACCESS conference on Computers and 
accessibility. 
Halifax, 
Canada, 
2008, 
pp. 
243-244, 
doi: 
10.1145/1414471.1414519.  
[20] M. W. Hinkel. “WiiHab rehabilitative therapy using the Wii.” 
http://wiihabtherapy.blogspot.com . (2008, May 10th) 
[21] ST Microelectronics. “LIS302DL Datasheets and characteristics,” 
www.st.com/stonline/books/pdf/ docs/12726.pdf  (2010, May 29th ) 
[22] J. Bravo, D. Lopez de Ipiña, C. Fuentes, R. Hervás, R. Peña, M. 
Vergara and G. Casero. “Enabling NFC technology for supporting 
chronic diseases: A proposal for alzheimer caregivers,” LNCS 5355. 
Springer Publishing Company, 2008, pp. 109-125, doi: 10.1007/978-
3-540-89617-3_8 
[23] R. Hervás, S. W. Nava, G. Chavira, V. Villarreal and J. Bravo. 
“PIVITa: Taxonomy for displaying information in pervasive and 
collaborative environments,” Advances in Soft Computing 51, 
Springer Publishing Company, 2009, pp. 293-301, doi: 10.1007/978-
3-540-85867-6_34 
 
 
 
 
421
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

