Identifying Long-Term Risks of the Internet of Things
Erik Buchmann
Hochschule f¨ur Telekommunikation Leipzig,
Gustav-Freytag-Str. 43-45, 04277 Leipzig, Germany
Email: buchmann@hft-leipzig.de
Andreas Hartmann
Hochschule f¨ur Telekommunikation Leipzig,
Gustav-Freytag-Str. 43-45, 04277 Leipzig, Germany
Email: hartmann@hft-leipzig.de
Abstract—The Internet of Things is a result of decades of
research in Ubiquitous Computing and Mobile Computing. It
comes with many advantages for businesses, industry and con-
sumers. Typical examples are a seamless integration of physical
objects into digital workﬂows and improved modes of use for
consumer products. However, if non-smart devices are replaced
by smart ones, the integrated IT components might generate new
risks that stem from different lifecycles of embedded software,
libraries and protocols used, and the IT ecosystem needed.
We strive for an exhaustive catalog of long-term risks for the
operational life-span of smart devices. To this end, we describe
an approach to identify risks which might materialize years after
a smart device has been rolled out and purchased. Furthermore,
we present the risks for a fragment of a smart device’s ecosystem
we have identiﬁed so far.
Index Terms—Internet of Things; Security; Risk Management
I. INTRODUCTION
In the last years, advances in hard- and software in the area
of Ubiquitous Computing and Mobile Computing have led to
numerous industrial components and consumer products that
have been equipped with sensors, computational resources and
communication interfaces, e.g., to cloud services. Together,
such smart devices form the Internet of Things (IoT) [1]. In
many cases, smart devices stem from non-smart predecessors.
For example, a modern smart TV looks and feels mainly like
a classical non-smart one with some extras.
Using smart devices comes with a plethora of beneﬁts.
From a business perspective, IoT technology promises to
reduce process costs, increase process speeds, allow for in-
depth process monitoring or new options to integrate logistics
processes or manufacturing processes with business activities.
For consumers, IoT allows to create smart homes with devices
that can be controlled remotely via smartphone, adapt to
the user’s habits, and provide convenient services locally or
over the Internet. However, public and specialized media
provides anecdotal evidence that smart devices might come
with operational risks that appear after roll-out. With a familiar
non-smart device in mind, the customers might not expect such
risks when deciding for a smart device.
Example 1: Software and hardware lifecycles are different.
The device’s software lifecycle might be much shorter than the
hardware’s operational capability. Consider a smart TV based
on the Android TV operating system. Its software receives
security updates for about three years. Thus, after three years
the smart TV becomes a security issue [2], even if the hardware
is still in good condition and fully operational.
Example 2: Loss of control. Smart devices may depend on a
cloud service. For example, after a third-party service provider
stopped its business, tens of thousands smart Internet radios
became non-functional [3] without warning in advance.
Example 3: Changing compliance or legislation. Changes
in the legislation may restrict the use of smart devices after
years of operation. Consider a smart security camera generates
burglar alerts via cloud service in the UK. Under the ongoing
discussion of the Brexit [4] and the EU General Data Protection
Regulation [5] (GDPR), it remains unclear under which condi-
tions person-related videos can be sent to a cloud in the UK.
In order to make smart devices accessible for risk manage-
ment approaches, a comprehensive catalog of potential risks
is required. However, to the best of our knowledge, existing
approaches don’t focus on long-term operations and have a
narrow topic, e.g., IT security. We are interested in risks that
materialize years after a smart device has been purchased.
Thus, we deﬁne our problem statement as follows:
Which speciﬁc risks for the continued long-term use of smart
devices may materialize after purchase, but cannot be expected
from a smart device’s non-smart predecessor?
We call an appliance a “smart device”, if it contains com-
putational capabilities and data links, which were not needed
for the primary function of its non-smart predecessor. For
example, a classical TV did not need Internet access to display
live TV programmes. With “long-term” we refer to the oper-
ational time that can be expected from the device’s hardware.
Intuitively, this is the expectation of a naive customer who
replaces a broken non-smart device with a new smart one.
In this paper, (1) we propose a research approach to sys-
tematically derive such risks, and (2) we exemplary outline the
risks we have identiﬁed for one fragment of a smart device’s
infrastructure.
Paper outline: In Section II, we brieﬂy discuss related
work. In Section III, we sketch our approach to identify long-
term IoT risks. In Section IV, we describe risks we have
identiﬁed. Section V concludes.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

II. RELATED WORK
a) Risk Analyses for IoT: Advances in technology call
for risk analysis before adoption. However, all risk analysis
approaches we are aware of focus on the current situation and
have a narrow perspective, e.g., on current IT security or return
of investment. For example, [6] provides an exhaustive view
on the vulnerabilities of smart devices in the consumer market.
The risk assessment approach described in [7] considers the
management of risk in the past two years, but does not
feature a projection in the future, e.g., when security breaches
for a discontinued product remain untreated. In consequence,
existing approaches that deal with IoT risks over the product
lifetime [8], [9] don’t consider that vendors may loose interest
in supporting discontinued products, or that it will be hard to
ﬁnd experts to maintain outdated technology.
b) Design
Science
Research:
Design
science
re-
search [10] is a method where an artefact is constructed
from a knowledge base, evaluated and improved in multiple
rounds. Those rounds can be structured in three cycles of
activities. The relevance cycle speciﬁes and reﬁnes the use
cases needed to construct the artefact and to evaluate its
applicability. The rigor cycle builds a knowledge base from
literature and experience that is needed to evaluate the novelty
and research contribution of the artefact. The central design
cycle iterates between building and evaluating the artefact,
based on information from the other cycles.
c) BSI-Standard 200-3: The BSI-Standard 200-3 [11] for
risk analysis based on IT-Grundschutz deﬁnes a process that
allows organizations to assess their information security risks.
For this purpose, the standard deﬁnes the steps necessary for
risk identiﬁcation, risk assessment and risk treatment. In this
paper we focus on risk identiﬁcation. The standard separates
(a) non-speciﬁc, elementary threats, as ﬁre, theft, miscon-
ﬁguration or manipulation, and (b) speciﬁc threats arising
from speciﬁc scenarios. Furthermore, the standard provides
the means for risk classiﬁcation and consolidation.
d) Long-Term Digital Preservation: A problem that has
been extensively discussed in the past years is the preserva-
tion of digital contents over time [12]. The risks for digital
content [13] overlap with the risks of using an out-of-date
smart device in a modern environment. Examples are media
obsolescence and format obsolescence [13], i.e., the digital
object cannot be read with current devices due new media or
new formats. Security properties have been established with
protocols that are insecure now [14]. Digital objects such as
dynamic web pages [15] or computer games [16] require a
complex execution environment.
III. HOW TO IDENTIFY LONG-TERM IOT RISKS
In this section, we describe our research method. To system-
atically identify long-term risks for the use of smart devices,
we have adapted BSI-Standard 200-3 [11] so that it creates the
knowledge base and designs a risk catalog that ﬁts into rele-
vance and design cycle of Design Science Research [10]. We
use research literature to foster the rigor cycle. In particular,
we deﬁne the following steps:
1) Determine a number of relevant use cases. On this basis,
model a generic IT infrastructure that fulﬁls the require-
ments for a smart device and its non-smart counterpart to
operate as intended.
2) Analyse each artefact in the infrastructure for the smart
device in isolation. Determine under which conditions
this artefact operates as intended at time of purchase.
3) Consider this condition a potential risk, if the condition
doesn’t exist at time of purchase and doesn’t materialize
in the non-smart device’s infrastructure.
4) Consolidate risks that are identical for multiple artefacts.
Categorize similar risks and remove elementary ones.
5) Back up each individual risk by literature in order to
evaluate the plausibility of the risks identiﬁed.
6) Repeat these steps with different use cases until no further
risks are identiﬁed.
For illustration, we apply this approach to Example 3 from
the introduction. Step 1: The generic IT infrastructure for the
smart security camera contains, among other things, a data
connection between the smart device and a cloud service
provider in the UK. This is because the security camera
vendor has outsourced the burglar alert into the cloud. The
connection transports personal data, e.g., videos of humans.
Step 2: One required condition is that the data transfer is legal
- depending on the legislation. Step 3: A common non-smart
security camera uses a local storage system, not needing a legal
authorisation for cross-border data transfers. Step 4: “Chang-
ing privacy legislation for data transfers into other countries”
is not an elementary risk. Step 5: A body of literature can
be identiﬁed, discussing the risks of changes in the privacy
regulations for transferring data to a UK cloud, e.g., [4]. Thus,
we have identiﬁed ”changing privacy legislation” as a plausible
risk for any smart device that uses such an IT infrastructure
to transfer personal data.
IV. CATEGORIES OF LONG-TERM RISKS
In this section, we describe the outcomes of our ongoing
research according to the six steps deﬁned in Section III.
a) Use Cases and IT Infrastructure Model: According
to Step 1 of our research method, we started our analysis by
determining a set of relevant use cases. To this end, we have
selected three smart devices that have different purposes:
• A smart TV (Philips Ambilight 32PFS6402),
• a smart security camera (Reolink RLC-410) and
• a smart speaker (Amazon Echo) with voice assistant.
Following our method, we created a generic IT infrastruc-
ture model from those use cases. Our model considers data,
organizations, processes, devices and connections.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

TABLE I. Categories of data.
Id
Name
Description
D1
Sensor Data
Raw sensor information, such as unprocessed
video and audio feeds, GPS and WLAN local-
ization data or keystrokes from a remote control.
D2
Operational
Data
Data needed to execute the device’s function,
e.g., commands to activate the smart speaker or
a live video stream from the camera.
D3
Meta-Data
Time stamps, transmission information, charac-
ter encoding, session keys etc. from the algo-
rithms and protocols used.
D4
Conﬁguration
Data that deﬁnes the behavior of the device,
including updates, private keys and certiﬁcates.
D5
Telemetry
Data used to supervise the behavior and use of
the device.
Table I contains the categories of data of our infrastructure
model. We consider D1 - D5 as personal data according Art.
4 No. 1 GDPR [5]. A time series of D1, D2, D3 or D5
allows to construct a ﬁngerprint of the device and/or of the
user’s activities. D4 contains unique logins for cloud services
and personal settings. Thus, a relation to a single person
can be determined, even there are no personally identiﬁable
information generated, such as user name or image.
TABLE II. Categories of organizations.
Id
Name
Description
O1
User
The user of the smart device.
O2
Vendor
The vendor of the device.
O3
Cloud
The provider and operator of the cloud service.
O4
External
Any third party.
Table II describes the categories of organizations our model
considers. Service operation may vary between O2 (Infras-
tructure as a Service) or O3 (Software as a Service). With O4
we refer to any external party that is invoked from the smart
device. For example, Amazon’s smart speaker can access the
Google calendar or a Philips smart light bulb.
TABLE III. Categories of processes, assigned with data.
Id
Name
Data
Description
P1
Updates
D2, D3, D4,
D5
All functional updates and se-
curity updates.
P2
Local Ops
D1, D2, D3,
D4
Any operation that is pro-
cessed locally on the device.
P3
Cloud Ops
D1, D2, D3,
D4, D5
Any operation that is pro-
cessed remotely in the cloud.
P4
External Ops
D1, D2, D3
Any operation that is pro-
cessed by a third party.
P5
Telemetry
D3, D4, D5
The vendor supervising the be-
havior of the smart device.
The categories of processes are listed in Table III, together
with the categories of data used. A process activity can be
initiated by a local operation (P2), handed over for analysis to
the cloud service (P3) and is executed as an external operation
(P4). For example, an Amazon Echo recognizes the activation
code “Hi Alexa” locally and sends an audio feed containing
the sentence “Turn on all lights.” to the Amazon cloud. The
Amazon cloud service performs natural language processing,
recognizes the commands and sends them to a Philips cloud
service. Then, the Philips service activates the local light bulbs.
TABLE IV. Categories of devices, assigned with organizations.
Id
Name
Organization
Description
G1
Device
O1
The smart device itself.
G2
Cloud
O2, O3
The cloud service.
G3
ext. Device
O1, O3, O4
Any external device.
Table IV contains the categories devices and the organiza-
tions operating them. We have left aside the router needed to
connect the smart device to the Internet. Our risk identiﬁcation
process has shown that any risk involving the router is an
unspeciﬁc elementary risk. With “external Device” we refer
to any situation where a third device is involved. This might
be the user’s smartphone, a virtual gadget in the cloud that is
operated by a third party, or a smart home installation that is
under control of the smart device.
TABLE V. Categories of connections, assigned with data.
Id
Devices
Data
Description
C1
G1 – G2
D1, D2, D3,
D4, D5
Bidirectional
connection:
smart device– cloud.
C2
G2 – G3
D1, D2, D3
Bidirectional
connection:
cloud – external device.
Finally, Table V enumerates the categories of connections
between the devices and the data transferred with each con-
nection. If earphones, external storage, etc. is connected to
the smart device, the associated risks are identical for smart
and non-smart devices. Our use cases don’t allow a direct
connection between the smart device and an external device
beyond that. For the time being, we assume any data transfer
to an external recipient is managed by a cloud service.
b) Long-term risks for C2: Steps 2 to 5 of our research
method let us identify and consolidate the long-term risks for
each component of our infrastructure model. Furthermore, we
have to ﬁlter risks that are speciﬁc for smart devices, and
we need to substantiate them with literature. For the sake
of brevity, we exemplary describe only the risks we have
identiﬁed for the connection between the cloud service and
an external device (Artefact C2). For each risk, we present
only one example from literature to conﬁrm it’s existence.
After having consolidated the risks according to Step 4,
we have learned that C2 has risks in three different areas.
Table VI shows the compliance risks we have identiﬁed,
Table VII contains the economic risks, and Table VIII lists
the operational risks.
TABLE VI. Long-term compliance risks associated with C2.
Risk
Description
Legislation
Changing legislation, new codes of conduct, new trade
restrictions etc. impose limitations on the exchange of
personal data with certain countries or parties [4].
Expiration
Disagreements to common compliance standards, expired
certiﬁcations or approvals, non-renewed audits, etc., ren-
der the connection untrusted [17].
Concealment Characteristics that were hidden at roll-out ban the con-
nection by law, e.g., if it becomes known that personal
information is sent to external parties without the cus-
tomers consent [18].
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

TABLE VII. Long-term economic risks associated with C2.
Risk
Description
Degradation
For economic reasons the service quality of the con-
nection will be reduced, e.g., by applying bandwidth
throttling in favor of other services [19].
Licensing
The revenue model might change. For example, the
external party might switch to a pay-per-use model which
makes external connections expensive [20].
Discontinu-
ation
One of the parties involved discontinues its service or
makes it uneconomic. Patents, licenses etc. disallow to
continue the service with other parties [21].
Liabilities
One of the parties involved discontinues its business, and
its contractual liabilities become void [22].
TABLE VIII. Long-term operational risks associated with C2.
Risk
Description
Inﬂexibility
Without updates for new formats, protocols or interfaces,
it becomes challenging to connect to more recent services
or devices, or to adapt to new modes of service [23].
Unreliability
The service level in terms of reliability, throughput, etc.
of the connection degrades, e.g., due to reduced support
for end-of-lifetime products [24].
Unmaintain-
ability
Due to the use of outdated formats, protocols or interfaces
and closed-source components it becomes difﬁcult to
ﬁnd experts or spare parts needed to that maintain the
connection [25].
Insecurity
Without security updates and by using out-of-date secu-
rity protocols, the connection does not meet the required
level of security any more [24].
Defectiveness Modernizations in the IT ecosystem make technical debts
visible, e.g., if header ﬁelds reserved for future use in
transmission protocols were not handled according to the
standard [26].
Recall that the tables contain the long-term risks for C2.
An example for a risk for other fragments (G1–G3) is the
absence of experts for today’s high-tech components, that are
outdated in the future. Every year, employees with expert
knowledge retire, but new starters do not learn to use out-of-
date technology. Considering the innovation cycles, this will
become an issue when operating smart devices in the future.
As part of our ongoing research, we will follow the steps
listed in Section III. We strive to identify a comprehensive
set of long-term risks for all infrastructure artefacts from all
categories. For this purpose, we will identify and consolidate
such risks for all artefacts of our infrastructure model, and we
will extend the model by further smart devices.
V. CONCLUSION
The Internet of Things is a promising approach from the
area of Ubiquitous Computing and Mobile Computing to inte-
grate physical objects into computing environments. However,
if non-smart devices are replaced by smart IoT devices, the
integrated IT components might generate new risks that stem
from different lifecycles of digital and physical objects, and
the IT ecosystem needed.
In this paper, we have developed an approach to identify
risks which might materialize years after the purchase of a
smart device. Furthermore, we described the risks we have
identiﬁed for a fragment of a smart device’s ecosystem. It is
part of our future work to compile an exhaustive catalog of
long-term risks for the operational life-span of smart devices.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The internet of things: A survey,”
Computer networks, vol. 54, no. 15, pp. 2787–2805, 2010.
[2] B.
Schoon,
“Android
tv
needs
better
standards
for
long-
term
updates
and
support,”
https://9to5google.com/2019/08/29/
android-tv-long-term-updates-support/, 2019, retrieved: 2020-06-09.
[3] Frontier Nuvola Support, “Why did the service change on the
7th may 2019?” https://srsupport.frontier-nuvola.net/portal/kb/articles/
service-change, 2019, retrieved: 2020-06-10.
[4] K. McCullagh, “Brexit: potential trade and data implications for digital
and ﬁntech industries,” International Data Privacy Law, vol. 7, no. 1,
p. 3, 2017.
[5] Council of the European Union, “Regulation (eu) 2016/679 on the
protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal
data and on the free movement of such data,” OJ L 119, 4.5.2016, p.
1–88, 2016.
[6] T. Alladi, V. Chamola, B. Sikdar, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Consumer
iot: Security vulnerability case studies and solutions,” IEEE Consumer
Electronics Magazine, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 17–25, 2020.
[7] M. Aydos, Y. Vural, and A. Tekerek, “Assessing risks and threats
with layered approach to internet of things security,” Measurement and
Control, vol. 52, no. 5-6, pp. 338–353, 2019.
[8] O. Garcia-Morchon et al., “A comprehensive and lightweight security
architecture to secure the iot throughout the lifecycle of a device based
on himmo,” in Symposium on Algorithms and Experiments for Wireless
Sensor Networks, 2015.
[9] J. L. Hern´andez-Ramos, J. B. Bernab´e, and A. Skarmeta, “Army:
architecture for a secure and privacy-aware lifecycle of smart objects
in the internet of my things,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 54,
no. 9, pp. 28–35, 2016.
[10] A. Hevner and S. Chatterjee, “Design science research in information
systems,” in Design research in information systems.
Springer, 2010,
pp. 9–22.
[11] Bundesamt
f¨ur
Sicherheit
in
der
Informationstechnik,
“BSI
Standard
200-3:
Risk
Analysis
based
on
IT
Grundschutz,”
https://www.bsi.bund.de, 2017, retrieved: 2020-08-08.
[12] Digital Preservation Coalition, “Digital preservation handbook,” https:
//www.dpconline.org/handbook, 2015, retrieved: 2020-06-09.
[13] S. Vermaaten, B. Lavoie, and P. Caplan, “Identifying threats to suc-
cessful digital preservation: the spot model for risk assessment,” D-lib
Magazine, vol. 18, no. 9/10, pp. 1–21, 2012.
[14] H. M. Gladney, “Trustworthy 100-year digital objects: Evidence after
every witness is dead,” ACM Transactions on Information Systems
(TOIS), vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 406–436, 2004.
[15] G. TRUMAN, “Web archiving environmental scan: Harvard library
report,” Digital Access to Scholarship at Harvard, 2016.
[16] J. Andersen, “Where games go to sleep: the game preservation
crisis,” https://www.gamasutra.com/view/feature/134653/where games
go to sleep the game .php, 2011, retrieved: 2020-06-09.
[17] Y. T. Mak, S. Carr, and J. Needham, “Differences in strategy, quality
management practices and performance reporting systems between iso
accredited and non-iso accredited companies,” Management Accounting
Research, vol. 8, no. 4, 1996.
[18] J. C. Roberts and W. Al-Hamdani, “Who can you trust in the cloud?
a review of security issues within cloud computing,” in Information
Security Curriculum Development Conference, 2011, pp. 15–19.
[19] D. A. Lyons, “Net neutrality and nondiscrimination norms in telecom-
munications,” Arizona Law Review, vol. 54, p. 1029, 2013.
[20] M. A. Cusumano, “The changing software business: Moving from
products to services,” Computer, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 20–27, 2008.
[21] M. A. Lemley and T. Simcoe, “How essential are standard-essential
patents,” Cornell Law Review, vol. 104, p. 607, 2018.
[22] A. Schwartz, “Products liability, corporate structure, and bankruptcy:
toxic substances and the remote risk relationship,” Journal of Legal
Studies, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 689–736, 1985.
[23] P. Mutchler et al., “Target fragmentation in android apps,” in IEEE
Security and Privacy Workshops.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 204–213.
[24] B. Ford, “Icebergs in the clouds: the other risks of cloud computing,”
in 4th USENIX conference on Hot Topics in Cloud Computing, 2012.
[25] L. M. D. Ferreira, A. Arantes, and C. Silva, “Discontinued products,”
in Conference on Operations Research and Enterprise Systems, 2017.
[26] P. Kruchten, R. L. Nord, and I. Ozkaya, “Technical debt: From metaphor
to theory and practice,” IEEE Software, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 18–21, 2012.
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

