Blockchain and Distributed Ledger Technologies for
Intelligent Transportation Systems: a Survey
Giuseppe Loseto
, Filippo Gramegna
, Saverio Ieva
, Agnese Pinto
, Floriano Scioscia
, Michele Ruta
Department of Electrical and Information Engineering (DEI)
Polytechnic University of Bari – Bari, Italy
name.surname@poliba.it
Abstract—Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSs) aim to
provide novel services to drivers and passengers, increasing
safety, efﬁciency end environmental sustainability. Trustworthi-
ness, reliability and auditability of distributed software and data
are increasingly necessary from both a technical and a regulatory
perspective, particularly as ITSs evolve towards autonomous
driving. Unfortunately, heterogeneity of virtual counterparts of
users and vehicles along with their intrinsic volatility make coor-
dination and trust management difﬁcult for cooperation. To solve
these issues, blockchain and Distributed Ledger Technologies are
increasingly adopted in ITSs. This paper surveys key aspects of
blockchain research and usage in ITS and automotive sectors,
comprising the main technological trends and open issues, the
most signiﬁcant application scenarios and an analysis of relevant
DLT platforms.
Keywords—Intelligent Transportation Systems, Blockchain,
Distributed Ledger Technologies
ACRONYMS
CVIM
Common Vehicle Information Model
DAG
Direct Acyclic Graph
DAO
Decentralized Autonomous Organization
DBMS
Data Base Management System
DLT
Distributed Ledger Technology
DSRC
Dedicated Short-Range Communication
EOV
Execute-Order-Validate
EVM
Ethereum Virtual Machine
IoT
Internet of Things
IoV
Internet of Vehicles
ITS
Intelligent Transportation System
MEC
Mobile Edge Computing
PBFT
Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance
PoET
Proof of Elapsed Time
PoS
Proof of Stake
PoW
Proof of Work
RSU
Road-Side Unit
SC
Smart Contract
SGX
Software Guard eXtensions
SOA
Service-Oriented Architecture
TEE
Trusted Execution Environment
UTXO
Unspent Transaction Outputs
VANET
Vehicular Ad-hoc NETwork
VM
Virtual Machine
V2I
Vehicle-to-Infrastructure
V2V
Vehicle-to-Vehicle
V2X
Vehicle-to-Everything
I. INTRODUCTION
ITSs aim to provide novel and improved services to
drivers, riders and passengers, increasing safety, efﬁciency
end environmental sustainability of transportation [1]. ITS
platforms integrate four main technological layers: (i) sensing
internal and environmental data of vehicles and the road
network; (ii) processing in distributed and multi-core archi-
tectures by means of artiﬁcial intelligence techniques for
decision support and autonomous control; (iii) communica-
tions in Vehicular Ad-hoc NETworks (VANETs) comprising
Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V), Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I), and
Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) links through Dedicated Short-
Range Communication (DSRC) or cellular infrastructures;
(iv) Service-Oriented Architectures (SOA) to discover and
exchange situational awareness information, multimedia re-
sources and application services among vehicles, in addition to
basic emergency data; (v) human-machine interfaces designed
to present information effectively and properly for drivers.
Due to the high-speed mobility of vehicles, VANETs suffer
from high device churn, with consequent unpredictable volatil-
ity of host and resource availability. This makes coordination
and trust management difﬁcult for device cooperation. Any-
way, reliability, trustworthiness and auditability of distributed
software and data are increasingly necessary from both a tech-
nical and a regulatory perspective, particularly as ITSs evolve
towards autonomous driving [2]. Hence, even more research
solutions tend to adopt blockchain technology in ITS pilot
projects [3]. Blockchain denotes a data structure and protocol
for peer-to-peer trustless distributed transactional systems.
In traditional distributed databases, a trusted intermediary
is needed to prevent censorship (i.e., all valid transactions
are committed) and ensure irreversibility (i.e., no committed
transaction can be reverted or altered). Blockchain systems
avoid intermediaries by approving transactions through a dis-
tributed consensus approach, which guarantees no single host
or small group of colluding hosts can force addition, removal
or modiﬁcation of data. Transactions approved in a given time
period are grouped in blocks, which are appended sequentially.
The blockchain works as a distributed ledger of transactions,
and research on Distributed Ledger Technologies (DLT) is
investigating several types of data structures, consensus pro-
tocols and architectural variations for DLT platforms.
The blockchain potential as general-purpose distributed
database was understood soon after the introduction of the
technology with the Bitcoin open source platform for digital
currency. In particular, DLTs enable practical implementations
of the Smart Contract (SC) idea [4], i.e., programs encoding
and enforcing cooperative processes like the terms of a con-
tract among two or more parties. Consensus about SCs on
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-886-0
UBICOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

a blockchain is reached through a parallel execution in the
network, effectively making every SC-enabled DLT a general-
purpose application platform based on a distributed Virtual
Machine (VM).
Due to the above features, ITS applications and projects are
increasingly adopting DLT platforms. This survey provides a
compact but comprehensive overview of the state of the art
about blockchain and DLTs for ITSs.
The remainder of the paper is as follows: Section II brieﬂy
recalls the most important features of blockchain and DLT
technologies, while Section III discusses on relevant applica-
tions of them in the ITS ﬁeld. An analysis of four DLT plat-
forms among the most adopted and technologically signiﬁcant
ones for ITS follows in Section IV, before conclusion.
II. BLOCKCHAIN AND DISTRIBUTED LEDGER
TECHNOLOGIES
Blockchain and DLT systems are increasingly different in
architecture, technologies and applications. Useful surveys
exist, focusing on their integration in the Internet of Things
(IoT) [5]–[7]. DLT types can be classiﬁed with respect to key
design policies [8]:
Network access - Permissionless blockchains allow any host
to join –even anonymously– at any time. Conversely, hosts are
uniquely identiﬁed in permissioned platforms and only autho-
rized ones can connect. This choice affects the blockchain
project: permission-less chains usually have to reward partici-
pants for their computational effort, e.g., Bitcoin allows hosts
to generate (mine) and keep new currency for the validation of
transaction blocks. Permissioned chains are instead adopted in
more controlled collaboration contexts, where access itself is a
reward, as it enables selling and buying services or resources.
Consensus protocol - Permissionless systems require stricter
consensus methods, such as Proof-of-Work (PoW), which guar-
antees data security unless hosts collectively possessing the
majority of computational power in the network are colluding
to subvert the blockchain: Byzantine fault tolerance [9] is,
in fact, typically required. For adding the next block to the
chain, PoW elects a leader among all hosts having candidate
blocks. Election requires solving a cryptographic challenge,
and implies high computational and energy cost with com-
modity hardware, low transaction throughput and the need
for mining (a reward to transaction validators participating in
the consensus by means of small digital currency amounts).
Proof-of-Stake (PoS) consensus, instead, elects the host with
the highest value of coin-age, that is the product of the
amount of owned currency and the time since the host has
been holding it without spending. This mechanism avoids high
computational costs and mining. Permissioned systems –where
each host is accountable– may relax consensus constraints to
crash fault tolerance guarantees [9]. Permissioned blockchains
can follow either the private or the consortium model: in
the former consensus is managed by hosts from a single
organization, giving up some of the beneﬁts of decentralization
in exchange for higher transaction throughput; the latter adopts
a trade off where a subset of all hosts, belonging to multiple
organizations, can participate in the consensus.
Transaction model - Assets can be registered or transferred
by means of transactions on a blockchain. In the unspent
transaction outputs (UTXO) model, an A → B transfer
implies consuming (i.e., deleting) records for A’s spent assets
and producing (i.e., adding) new ones for B’s received assets.
In the account-based model, instead, every host has an account
reporting all its assets, which is updated by transactions. The
former is simpler to manage and ﬁts the digital currency use
cases, but it is not general-purpose; the latter is required to
support SCs [8].
SC language - Blockchains can adopt any formalism for SC
speciﬁcation and execution, such as procedural programming
languages, logic programming or automata [10]. Industry pro-
posals mostly adopt computationally complete programming
languages, either existing (e.g., Java in the Iroha framework)
or created for the purpose (e.g., Ethereum’s Solidity).
Centralized information management models are clearly not
scalable enough for the ever-growing IoT and the Internet
of Vehicles (IoV) [11]. They pose issues with respect to
cost and performance, as well as security and trust. The
viability of blockchain and DLT technologies for the IoT is
analyzed in [7] and strategies are outlined to combine security
and scalability. Running IoV resource/service marketplaces
with minimal or no human intervention [8] requires a cross-
application peer-to-peer middleware layer comprising several
building blocks. Recent proposals include the Inter-Planetary
File System (IPFS) distributed storage protocol [12], intelligent
service discovery [13] and billing services [14].
Research on blockchain scalability is very active, mainly by
optimizing performance of consensus protocols [13], [15] and
by introducting parallelism in a blockchain through sidechains
and/or sharding [16]. Basically, the use of sidechains trans-
forms the chain structure in a Direct Acyclic Graph (DAG).
On the other hand, sharding is a parallelization technique
borrowed from Database Management Systems, consisting
in splitting data elements (e.g., rows in relational databases)
horizontally across host subsets in a cluster. Research results,
however, are not mature enough [17] for building efﬁcient,
robust, large-scale IoT-oriented blockchains.
III. DLT SOLUTIONS FOR INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION
SYSTEMS
Emerging blockchains increasingly refer to novel trans-
parent and trustless models, particularly ﬁtting needs and
requirements of sectors like transportation [18].
A reference ITS-oriented blockchain model has been pro-
posed in [19], with seven conceptual layers characterizing and
standardizing the typical architecture of blockchain systems:
1) physical: concerning devices, vehicles and physical as-
sets;
2) data: core data structures and cryptographic primitives
of the digital ledger;
3) network: peer-to-peer networking primitives;
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-886-0
UBICOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

4) consensus: implementing the supported consensus pro-
tocol(s);
5) incentive: policies for the issuance and allocation of
incentives to miners;
6) contract: SC execution environment and SC instances;
7) application: ITS applications and services implemented
on top of the previous layers.
According to the proposed framework, a real-time decen-
tralized ride-sharing service has been also implemented to
prove its applicability. In [20], the authors have extended
previous modeling approaches to combine IoT and blockchain
technologies for smart logistics and transportation in a general-
purpose and reliable architecture ﬁtting different ITS scenar-
ios. Anyway, the layered architectural model is useful to guide
a systematic analysis of the state of the art.
Physical layer. Collaborative Vehicular Edge Computing
[21] maps the typical VANET architecture to the Edge Com-
puting paradigm: vehicles and other mobile hosts belong to
the infrastructure layer, where local computation and direct
communication among nearby devices occur. Analogously,
Road-Side Units (RSUs) enable the Edge Computing layer,
which interconnects clusters of local devices and supports
both vertical and horizontal collaboration through software-
deﬁned networking for dynamic resource provisioning and
management. In [21] this general model has been specialized
to include the three most popular approaches to Edge Com-
puting: Mobile Edge Computing (MEC), Fog Computing, and
Cloudlets.
Data layer. In VANET-based blockchains, security and
privacy still have several relevant open research questions.
Blockchain networks are not immune to cyberattacks and
frauds. Attackers could exploit vulnerabilities in blockchain
infrastructure to penetrate protected systems, compromise
data, overload networks, and cause potentially severe risks
to users. In [22], a consortium blockchain and SCs improve
security in data exchange and storage within VANETs, while
a reputation model enhances the quality of shared data.
Information interoperability among heterogeneous hosts is a
further largely open problem, and semantic-based structured
representations of blockchain assets exploiting Semantic Web
technologies have been proposed for that [13]. Deﬁning in-
teroperable methods to assess vehicle reputation and level of
trustworthiness, based on both its prior actions and nearby
vehicles information, is one of the main goals.
Network layer. As highlighted in [23], current vehicles
basically integrate wireless communication and sensing de-
vices providing high speed connectivity and a huge amount of
gathered data. Information can be stored and manipulated by
a distributed computing platform to create innovative smart
applications. 5G is seen as a key enabling technology to
overcome bandwidth, reliability and security problems of
DSRC. The combination of both technologies simplify process
automation in several ITS scenarios, including transmission
of tracking information in ﬂeet management applications,
monitoring of resource ﬂows and the administration of lo-
gistics processes. In fact, 5G communication improves the
connectivity of IoT devices by maximizing channel transfer
capacity, reducing network latency and increasing the density
of interconnected devices, whereas blockchain ensures secure,
veriﬁable and auditable storage of transaction data [24].
Consensus layer. From this perspective, scalability is the
main open issue, as PoW and SCs still have a signiﬁcant
impact in terms of transaction throughput [8], [25] and cost
of energy. For this reason the MEC blockchain architecture
proposed in [26] ofﬂoads PoW computation to nearby Edge
Computing hosts. Furthermore, the amount of computing
resources required by a SC cannot be predicted, as it may
recursively invoke further SCs. Approaches to solve this
problem include associating currency costs to computation or
preventing recursive SC calls [13]. Decentralized energy and
charging service marketplaces for electric vehicles and Smart
Grid integration are among the scenarios where the beneﬁts of
blockchain are most evident, as they need supporting secure
and veriﬁable commercial transactions and providing facilities
of service discovery, negotiation, selection and resource alloca-
tion. The Cloud-Edge architecture proposed by Liu et al. [27]
aims to manage interactions concerning vehicular information
and energy ﬂows simultaneously. Following Cloud-Edge and
information-energy interactions, they identify four categories
of context-aware applications and propose a PoS consensus
protocol based on data coins and energy coins.
Incentive layer. Blockchain can facilitate interoperable
vehicle data exchanges among car makers, but the hardest
obstacle to such cooperation is the historically competitive
and secretive nature of the automotive industry. Several ini-
tiatives have been launched to overcome this limitation: most
recently, the AutoMat [28] Horizon 2020 project has deﬁned a
Common Vehicle Information Model (CVIM) to represent and
share hierarchically organized information about vehicles in an
interoperable way, as well as an architecture for a cloud-based
Big Data marketplace. Despite the adoption of blockchain and
SCs is not in the AutoMat proposal, it is easy to see it would
be a natural ﬁt e.g., with the European Blockchain Services
Infrastructure (EBSI) [29], possibly granting stronger security,
traceability, veriﬁability and ﬂexibility to the data marketplace.
Contract layer. The adoption of DLTs and SCs can improve
the automation of complex logistic procedures by introduc-
ing the following beneﬁts [30], [31]: component traceability
with real-time data transmission and identiﬁcation of new
resources; persistent and reliable storage of complex data,
usually pre-processed by means of data mining and machine
learning algorithms; user and data privacy, exploiting different
encryption methods, which is particularly useful in indus-
trial e-procurement scenarios where strict regulations must
be applied; deﬁnition of simple testing procedures required
to optimize business processes and automation procedures.
All the above capabilities are very important for ITS-based
supply chain and logistics applications, where DLTs can be
exploited to reduce wait times and management costs and to
improve (i) timely delivery of goods, (ii) use of connected
devices according to current regulations, (iii) accuracy and
efﬁciency of customer services, and (iv) monitoring of goods
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-886-0
UBICOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

while transiting.
Application layer. In latest years, several automotive com-
panies have been proposing interesting solutions for ITS,
combining novel communication technologies and blockchain.
BMW Group has been particularly active, developing pilot
projects for several real-world ITS scenarios. The VerifyCar
project, based on the VeChainThor [32] blockchain platform,
has introduced a digital car registration document to store
information about mileage, accident history, inspections, main-
tenance procedures and other useful information related to the
lifecycle of a vehicle. Each car results equipped with an up-
to-date and certiﬁed data log which can be properly accessed
by authorized parties at any time and cannot be tampered
with. This constitutes a very important beneﬁt not only for
vehicle servicing, but also for insurance and for the overall
car market. Since 2019 BMW Group has also been working
on a blockchain-based system called PartChain [33], aiming
to improve the supply chain management in the automotive
industry. The project has deﬁned an industrial solution to share
data of production tasks and simplify all the procedures for
tracing the origin of each vehicle component. The company
is planning to use the system also for the management of
raw materials, focusing on the traceability of the most critical
resources involved in vehicle manufacturing. Moreover, BMW
is one of the founding members of MOBI (Mobility Open
Blockchain Initiative) [34], a nonproﬁt consortium includ-
ing over 100 companies in the automotive and information
technology sectors. MOBI aims to deﬁne reference standards
and control models for developing new platforms for ITS.
Dedicated working group have been established for: vehicle
identity, aiming at an extension of VerifyCar towards a vehicle
digital twin; usage-based mobility and insurance; electric
vehicle grid integration; connected mobility data marketplace;
ﬁnance, securitization, and SCs; supply chain. The latter work-
ing group would extend the PartChain project to all companies
interested and involved in the initiative, in order to facilitate
cross-industry data exchange and speed up the integration
of blockchain-based platforms in different automotive and
transportation scenarios.
IV. ANALYSIS OF RELEVANT PLATFORMS
Blockchains and DLTs can be classiﬁed and compared ac-
cording to several criteria, including data structures, consensus
protocols and SCs, allowed data security and privacy [8]. Four
of the most relevant platforms are discussed in what follows,
while Table I summarizes beneﬁts and potential limitations
from an ITS perspective.
Ethereum [37] is a permissionless blockchain; it allows
integrating SCs for developing Decentralized Autonomous
Organizations (DAOs) interacting without the intervention of
a central authority [38]. The platform core is the Ethereum
Virtual Machine (EVM) [39], i.e., a quasi-Turing-complete
execution environment for general-purpose transactions and
SCs, replicated on each participating host for validation. Since
Turing-completeness would open the platform to abuses and
security risks, the EVM associates a cost in gas units to
code execution, which must be paid in Ethereum’s currency,
Ether. When a host invokes a transaction or a SC, it must
pay gas for that in advance; if execution does not com-
plete before running out of the prepaid amount of gas, it
is rolled back completely, otherwise it is committed and the
possibly remaining gas is refunded. Ethereum is currently the
largest SC platform. Several languages can be used: the most
popular and mature one is Solidity [40]. Ethereum adopts a
PoW consensus algorithm called Ethash. It aims to be less
computationally intensive and more memory intensive than
Bitcoin’s PoW, in order to limit the recourse to specialized
mining hardware and to concentrating computational power in
few large mining pools. However, it does not solve the high
energy consumption and limited scalability problems. With
this motivation, the Ethereum Foundation and community are
currently transitioning to Ethereum 2.0, which will adopt a PoS
consensus algorithm to increase transaction throughput, reduce
computational costs and make the platform fairer and more
accessible. Chain sharding will be also employed to partition
the validation load among validators and therefore increase
platform scalability.
IOTA is a DLT designed speciﬁcally for Internet of Things
scenarios. It is based on a Direct Acyclic Graph (DAG) data
structure, the tangle, where each node stores a transaction [41].
Starting from a genesis node n0, in order to accept a new node
nj the issuer must validate 2 or more transactions nik, k ≥ 2
already in the tangle; then nj will be added to the tangle
with edges from each of the nodes nik. This consensus mech-
anism creates tamper-proof records of network participants’
transactions, as older transactions are validated by newer ones
either directly or indirectly (through a DAG path). Further
key tangle properties are: scalability, because the validation
load is spread across all participants; throughput, since a low
number of validations is required to accept a new transaction;
robustness, in case of network partitioning the tangle may
fork temporarily, but it will merge again when connectivity
is restored; no reward mechanism for validators is required,
avoiding the potential distortions of hosts’ behavior related
with mining; a snapshot mechanism allowing the periodic
removal of very old transactions from the DAG safely, so re-
ducing ledger storage requirements for each peer. IOTA claims
the protocol is as secure as PoW, however no formal proof
has been produced yet. Based on the IOTA DLT, the IOTA
Streams protocol (formerly known as Masked Authenticated
Messaging) has been designed for secure and metered access
to IoT data streams. It adopts a publish/subscribe model,
integrating both cryptography for controlled data sharing and
payment in the IOTA cryptocurrency. Its features make IOTA
Streams particularly suitable to vehicular applications [42]. A
IOTA based solution for ITS system has been proposed by the
ORCHESTRA consortium [35].
Hyperledger Sawtooth is an open source project within
the Hyperledger initiative for a business-oriented blockchain
platform with support for SCs. By design, Sawtooth allows
applications to dynamically select transaction rules, authoriza-
tions, and consensus protocol, based on business requirements.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-886-0
UBICOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF BDLT PLATFORMS
BDLT
Beneﬁts
Limitations
ITS Implementations
Ethereum
• SC support
• DAO development
• PoW-related limitations
• Low throughput, high resource
consumption
• Xiong et al. [25]
IOTA
• Fast, inexpensive consensus
• No transaction fee
• Low energy consumption
• High scalability when transactions increase
• DAG snapshot mechanism
• IoT-oriented data stream access services
• Limited SC support
• Unproven consensus security
• ORCHESTRA [35]
Hyperledger
Sawtooth
• SC support in several programming languages
• Permissioned and permissionless blockchain support
• Relatively high transaction throughput
• Low energy consumption of PoET
• Speciﬁc hardware required for
trusted execution environments
• Salesforce blockchain [36]
Hyperledger
Fabric
• Permissioned blockchain support
• High transaction throughput and low latency
• SC support in several programming languages
• Private data areas with privacy-preserving authentication
• Relatively higher architectural
complexity
• PartChain [33]
Its architecture [43] clearly separates the application layer
from the main platform layer, and in particular it isolates
consensus from transaction semantics. The consensus mech-
anism is selected during the network conﬁguration and can
also be modiﬁed later on a running blockchain, by means of
speciﬁc transactions. Sawtooth currently supports four types
of consensus protocols: Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance
(PBFT) [44]; Proof of Elapsed Time (PoET) [45], imple-
menting a fair lottery-based leader election system without
the power consumption disadvantages of PoW; Raft [46], a
consensus strategy optimized for small networks. In partic-
ular, a Byzantine fault tolerant PoET variant is enabled if
a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) is provided by the
hosts’ platform, such as the Software Guard Extensions (SGX)
instructions of Intel CPUs, otherwise a less robust crash fault
tolerant variant is implemented purely in software (essen-
tially used for development purposes but not recommended
in production environments). Similar ﬂexibility is achieved
for SC support, as an interface abstraction mechanism allows
developers to write contract logic in multiple programming
languages, including Python, JavaScript, Go, C++, Java, and
Rust. Finally, Sawtooth includes a scheduler that splits trans-
actions to parallel ﬂows, mutually isolating their execution.
Whenever possible, transactions run in parallel, allowing for a
signiﬁcant increase in performance over sequential execution.
Salesforce introduced a blockchain solution for supply chain
management based on Sawtooth [36].
Hyperledger Fabric [47] adopts an Execute-Order-Validate
(EOV) transaction processing model: peers endorse trans-
actions by checking their correctness, then order them by
consensus and ﬁnally validate them against a particular en-
dorsement policy, before committing them to the ledger.
Conversely, the majority of DLT platforms adopt an Order-
Execute model, where transactions are individually validated,
then ordered and propagated to all peer hosts, which must
execute them sequentially to commit the updated system state
in the ledger. The EOV model grants parallel transaction
execution and pluggable consensus protocols. Further Fabric
peculiarities include: (i) Zero-Knowledge-Proofs for privacy-
preserving authentication, which is particularly valuable in
promiscuous environments like vehicular networks [48]; (ii)
high modularity, since responsibilities within the EOV model
are divided among clients, endorsing peers, orderers and
committing peers, which may run on independent hosts.
V. PERSPECTIVES AND CONCLUSION
This paper has explored most relevant aspects of blockchain
and Distributed Ledger Technologies for Intelligent Trans-
portation Systems. The proposed outline of the main tech-
nological trends, results and open problems has shown the
increasing adoption and importance of DLTs for both the
automotive and transportation industries. While research must
continue on technical issues, it is clear from this survey that,
more and more, challenges for the success of DLTs in ITSs
go beyond purely technological aspects, intertwining with
complex societal, legal and business matters.
Blockchain, DLTs and SCs have been conceived to impact
how people and organizations transact business, coordinate,
and cooperate. Since their inception, they have been con-
tinuously debated with growing interest from technological,
ﬁnancial, regulatory, social and environmental viewpoints.
This is a feature they have in common with transportation
technologies, and in particular with Intelligent Transportation
Systems; perhaps this is at the core of why each one of them
is so relevant for the future of the other.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Zhu, F. R. Yu, Y. Wang, B. Ning, and T. Tang, “Big Data Analytics
in Intelligent Transportation Systems: A Survey,” IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 383–398, 2018.
[2] M. Obaidat, M. Khodjaeva, J. Holst, and M. B. Zid, “Security and
privacy challenges in vehicular ad hoc networks,” in Connected Vehicles
in the Internet of Things.
Springer, 2020, pp. 223–251.
[3] G. Falco and J. E. Siegel, “A Distributed “Black Box” Audit Trail Design
Speciﬁcation for Connected and Automated Vehicle Data and Software
Assurance,” SAE International Journal of Transportation Cybersecurity
and Privacy, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 97–111, 2020.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-886-0
UBICOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

[4] N. Szabo, “Formalizing and securing relationships on public networks,”
First Monday, vol. 2, no. 9, 1997.
[5] A. Reyna, C. Mart´ın, J. Chen, E. Soler, and M. D´ıaz, “On blockchain
and its integration with IoT. Challenges and opportunities,” Future
Generation Computer Systems, vol. 88, pp. 179–190, 2018.
[6] A. Panarello, N. Tapas, G. Merlino, F. Longo, and A. Puliaﬁto,
“Blockchain and IoT Integration: A Systematic Survey,” Sensors, vol. 18,
no. 8, p. 2575, 2018.
[7] I. Makhdoom, M. Abolhasan, H. Abbas, and W. Ni, “Blockchain’s
Adoption in IoT: The Challenges, and a Way Forward,” Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, vol. 125, pp. 251–279, 2019.
[8] K. Christidis and M. Devetsikiotis, “Blockchains and Smart Contracts
for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 2292–2303, 2016.
[9] S. Liu, P. Viotti, C. Cachin, V. Qu´ema, and M. Vukoli´c, “XFT:
Practical fault tolerance beyond crashes,” in 12th USENIX Symposium
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, 2016, pp. 485–500.
[10] F. Idelberger, G. Governatori, R. Riveret, and G. Sartor, “Evaluation
of logic-based smart contracts for blockchain systems,” in International
Symposium on Rules and Rule Markup Languages for the Semantic Web.
Springer, 2016, pp. 167–183.
[11] W. Xu et al., “Internet of Vehicles in Big Data Era,” IEEE/CAA Journal
of Automatica Sinica, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 19–35, 2017.
[12] M. Naz et al., “A Secure Data Sharing Platform Using Blockchain and
InterPlanetary File System,” Sustainability, vol. 11, no. 24, p. 7054,
2019.
[13] M. Ruta, F. Scioscia, S. Ieva, G. Capurso, and E. Di Sciascio, “Semantic
blockchain to improve scalability in the Internet of Things,” Open
Journal of Internet Of Things (OJIOT), vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 46–61, 2017.
[14] R. Yaqub, S. Ahmad, H. Ali, and A. ul Asar, “AI and Blockchain Inte-
grated Billing Architecture for Charging the Roaming Electric Vehicles,”
IoT, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 382–397, 2020.
[15] M. Vukoli´c, “The quest for scalable blockchain fabric: Proof-of-work
vs. BFT replication,” in International Workshop on Open Problems in
Network Security.
Springer, 2015, pp. 112–125.
[16] K. Croman et al., “On scaling decentralized blockchains,” in Inter-
national Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security.
Springer, 2016, pp. 106–125.
[17] H. Wang, K. Chen, and D. Xu, “A maturity model for blockchain
adoption,” Financial Innovation, vol. 2, no. 12, pp. 1–5, 2016.
[18] V. Pureswaran and P. Brody, “Device democracy: Saving the future
of the Internet of Things,” IBM Institute for Business Value, Tech.
Rep., September 2014, available: http://www-935.ibm.com/services/us/
gbs/thoughtleadership/internetofthings, retrieved: August 2021.
[19] Y. Yuan and F.-Y. Wang, “Towards blockchain-based intelligent trans-
portation systems,” in 2016 IEEE 19th International Conference on
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC). IEEE, 2016, pp. 2663–2668.
[20] M. Humayun, N. Jhanjhi, B. Hamid, and G. Ahmed, “Emerging smart
logistics and transportation using IoT and blockchain,” IEEE Internet of
Things Magazine, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 58–62, 2020.
[21] K. Wang, H. Yin, W. Quan, and G. Min, “Enabling Collaborative Edge
Computing for Software Deﬁned Vehicular Networks,” IEEE Network,
vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 112–117, 2018.
[22] J. Kang, R. Yu, X. Huang, M. Wu, S. Maharjan, S. Xie, and Y. Zhang,
“Blockchain for secure and efﬁcient data sharing in vehicular edge
computing and networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 3,
pp. 4660–4670, 2018.
[23] M. Zichichi, S. Ferretti, and G. D’Angelo, “Are Distributed Ledger
Technologies Ready for Intelligent Transportation Systems?” in 3rd
Workshop on Cryptocurrencies and Blockchains for Distributed Systems,
ser. CryBlock ’20.
ACM, 2020, p. 12–17.
[24] I. Jovovi´c, S. Husnjak, I. Forenbacher, and S. Maˇcek, “Innovative
Application of 5G and Blockchain Technology in Industry 4.0,” EAI
Endorsed Transactions on Industrial Networks and Intelligent Systems,
vol. 6, no. 18, pp. 1–6, 2019.
[25] Z. Xiong, Y. Zhang, D. Niyato, P. Wang, and Z. Han, “When Mobile
Blockchain Meets Edge Computing,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 33–39, 2018.
[26] M. Liu, F. R. Yu, Y. Teng, V. C. Leung, and M. Song, “Computation
ofﬂoading and content caching in wireless blockchain networks with
mobile edge computing,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 67, no. 11, pp. 11 008–11 021, 2018.
[27] H. Liu, Y. Zhang, and T. Yang, “Blockchain-Enabled Security in Electric
Vehicles Cloud and Edge Computing,” IEEE Network, vol. 32, no. 3,
pp. 78–83, 2018.
[28] J. Pillmann, C. Wietfeld, A. Zarcula, T. Raugust, and D. C. Alonso,
“Novel common vehicle information model (CVIM) for future automo-
tive vehicle big data marketplaces,” in 2017 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles
Symposium (IV).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1910–1915.
[29] I. Williams, “Cross-chain blockchain networks, compatibility standards,
and interoperability standards: The case of European Blockchain Ser-
vices Infrastructure,” in Cross-Industry Use of Blockchain Technology
and Opportunities for the Future.
IGI global, 2020, pp. 150–165.
[30] K. Valtanen, J. Backman, and S. Yrj¨ol¨a, “Creating value through
blockchain powered resource conﬁgurations: Analysis of 5G network
slice brokering case,” in 2018 IEEE Wireless Communications and
Networking Conference Workshops.
IEEE, 2018, pp. 185–190.
[31] M. B. Mollah et al., “Blockchain for the internet of vehicles towards
intelligent transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 4157–4185, 2021.
[32] VeChain Foundation, “VeChain Whitepaper 2.0 – #Creating valu-
able TXs,” 12 2019, www.vechain.org/qfy-content/uploads/2020/01/
VeChainWhitepaper 2.0 en.pdf, retrieved: August 2021.
[33] D. Miehle, D. Henze, A. Seitz, A. Luckow, and B. Bruegge, “PartChain:
a decentralized traceability application for multi-tier supply chain net-
works in the automotive industry,” in 2019 IEEE International Confer-
ence on Decentralized Applications and Infrastructures (DAPPCON).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 140–145.
[34] L. M. Powell, J. Schwartz, and M. Hendon, “The Mobility Open
Blockchain Initiative: Identity, Members, Technologies, and Future
Trends,” in Revolutionary Applications of Blockchain-Enabled Privacy
and Access Control.
IGI Global, 2021, pp. 99–118.
[35] European Commission, “Coordinating and synchronising multimodal
transport improving road, rail, water and air transport through in-
creased automation and user involvement,” 2021, https://cordis.europa.
eu/project/id/953618, retrieved: August 2021.
[36] D.
Harrison,
R.
Bohm,
T.
Flynn,
and
V.
Nadi,
“Blockchain:
the
building
block
of
trust,”
Salesforce,
Tech.
Rep.,
2018,
https://www.salesforce.com/content/dam/web/en us/www/documents/
white-papers/ﬁnserv-blockchain.pdf, retrieved: August 2021.
[37] V. Buterin, “A next-generation smart contract and decentralized ap-
plication platform,” Ethereum Foundation, Tech. Rep., 2013, https:
//github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/White-Paper, retrieved: August 2021.
[38] K. W¨ust and A. Gervais, “Do you need a blockchain?” in 2018 Crypto
Valley Conference on Blockchain Technology (CVCBT).
IEEE, 2018,
pp. 45–54.
[39] G. Wood, “Ethereum: A Secure Decentralised Generalised Transaction
Ledger,” Ethereum Foundation, Tech. Rep., 2021, https://ethereum.
github.io/yellowpaper/paper.pdf, retrieved: August 2021.
[40] C. Dannen, Introducing Ethereum and Solidity. APress, 2017, vol. 318.
[41] S. Popov, “The Tangle,” IOTA Foundation, Tech. Rep. 1.8.3, 2018,
https://assets.ctfassets.net/r1dr6vzfxhev/2t4uxvsIqk0EUau6g2sw0g/
45eae33637ca92f85dd9f4a3a218e1ec/iota1 4 3.pdf, retrieved: August
2021.
[42] P. C. Bartolomeu, E. Vieira, and J. Ferreira, “IOTA feasibility and per-
spectives for enabling vehicular applications,” in 2018 IEEE Globecom
Workshops.
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–7.
[43] K. Olson et al., “Sawtooth: an introduction,” Hyperledger – The Linux
Foundation, Tech. Rep., 2018, https://www.hyperledger.org/wp-content/
uploads/2018/01/Hyperledger Sawtooth WhitePaper.pdf, retrieved: Au-
gust 2021.
[44] M. Castro, B. Liskov et al., “Practical byzantine fault tolerance,” in
OSDI, vol. 99, no. 1999, 1999, pp. 173–186.
[45] A. Corso, “Performance Analysis of Proof-of-Elapsed-Time (PoET)
Consensus in the Sawtooth Blockchain Framework,” Master’s thesis,
University of Oregon, 2019.
[46] D. Huang, X. Ma, and S. Zhang, “Performance analysis of the Raft
consensus algorithm for private blockchains,” IEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 172–181,
2019.
[47] E. Androulaki et al., “Hyperledger Fabric: a distributed operating system
for permissioned blockchains,” in Thirteenth EuroSys Conference, 2018,
pp. 1–15.
[48] D. Gabay, K. Akkaya, and M. Cebe, “Privacy-preserving authentication
scheme for connected electric vehicles using blockchain and zero
knowledge proofs,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 69,
no. 6, pp. 5760–5772, 2020.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-886-0
UBICOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

