Collaborative Knowledge Construction Using Concept Maps for Cross-cultural 
Communication 
 
Takahito Tomoto, Takako Akakura 
Graduate School of Engineering 
Tokyo University of Science 
Shinjuku, Japan 
{tomoto, akakura}@ms.kagu.tus.ac.jp 
Yuri Nishihori 
Faculty of Music 
Sapporo Otani University 
Sapporo, Japan 
yuri@iic.hokudai.ac.jp 
Satoko Sugie 
Graduate School of International Media 
Hokkaido University 
Sapporo, Japan 
sugie@imc.hokudai.ac.jp 
Keizo Nagaoka 
Faculty of Human Sciences 
Waseda University 
Tokorozawa, Japan 
k.nagaoka@waseda.jp
 
 
Abstract— This paper reports on the results of experiments 
with our concept map tool developed for collaborative 
knowledge construction in cross-cultural communication. The 
purpose of this study is to contribute toward the improvement 
of synchronous-interactive (real time-two way) international 
distance education, which we believe will significantly develop 
within our globalizing educational field. Collaborative 
knowledge construction is the process in which all the 
participants in a learner community can equally integrate and 
share their knowledge. For this purpose, it is essential for them 
to understand the other members’ recognition as well as their 
contributions. Visualization of these reactions is vital for 
successful 
knowledge 
construction. 
In 
cross-cultural 
communication in particular, it is of great importance to be 
able to visualize them since the perception of participants tends 
to be limited. Our concept map tool has been developed in 
order to visualize recognition and contribution for successful 
collaborative knowledge construction. The results of our four 
experiments indicate that our tool is (i) useful for sharing the 
knowledge of each participant, (ii) useful for visualizing the 
knowledge and contribution of each participant within the 
discussion in order to construct collaborative knowledge, and 
(iii) more effective than other traditional tools, such as chat, for 
cross-cultural communication.  
Keywords-CSCL; concept map; collaborative knowledge 
construction; cross-cultural communication 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Current information and communication technologies 
make 
it 
possible 
to 
communicate 
face-to-face 
in 
international settings using high-quality video conferencing 
systems [1][2]. Future development requires tools for 
supporting 
integration 
of 
knowledge 
through 
communication. Support tools for sharing and visualizing 
knowledge of all participants are useful for this purpose. 
Concept maps are tools for visualizing participant 
knowledge [3], and there has been recent research related to 
using 
concept 
maps 
for 
collaborative 
knowledge 
construction [4]. We developed a collaboration tool for 
knowledge integration and sharing in cross-cultural 
communication using a participant-constructed collaborative 
concept map. This paper reports the results of experiments 
with our tool. 
Section II introduces a progress report of this and 
peripheral research. Section III describes our concept map 
tool. Section IV describes four experiments using our tool. 
In that section, Subsection A describes results of 
questionnaires to participants in the first experiment. In 
Subsection B, individual concept maps are constructed 
beforehand, and the maps are compared with concept maps 
created during collaborative knowledge construction. From 
the results, we discuss how preexisting individual 
knowledge was used and how knowledge structures changed 
through collaborative construction. Based on those results, 
we discuss the relationship between individual concept 
maps and collaborative concept maps. In Subsection C, 
participants were required to construct concept maps 
individually after constructing concept maps collaboratively. 
Based on those results, we evaluate whether shared 
collaborative knowledge was retained. The effectiveness of 
this tool is furthermore evaluated by comparison with a 
group that performed a similar activity using a chat system 
and a live whiteboard chat system. We also conducted an 
experiment to evaluate whether Chinese students and a 
cross-cultural group (a mixed group of Japanese and 
Chinese students) used this tool effectively, and Subsection 
D reports the results of that experiment. Section V presents 
our conclusions. 
 
 
 
 
 
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The four above-mentioned experiments confirmed the 
following: 
–Participants felt that our tool was useful for knowledge 
sharing (discussion structuring and visualization).  
–Participants felt the necessity of knowledge and 
contributions from other participants through using the 
visualization function in our tool.  
–Collaborative knowledge construction using a concept 
map requires participants to use their individual 
knowledge and reconstruct their knowledge structure. 
–Our tool is more effective in collaborative knowledge 
construction than other traditional tools, such as chat 
and shared whiteboard chat. 
–Our tool is also useful in cross-cultural communication. 
II. 
PROJECT PROGRESS AND LITERATURE REVIEW 
Our project realized several support tools. The tools 
connected classes in four Asian countries (Japan, Korea, 
China, and Thailand) for cross-cultural communication in a 
Teaching English as a Foreign Language class. An unsolved 
problem in the practice of synchronous (real-time) and 
symmetric (two-way) communication using high-quality 
video conferencing systems [1][2] is that productive growth 
requires that all participants recognize what is actually being 
achieved during their interaction. In this context, a 
visualization tool is useful to recognize and share the 
achievements of each participant. We, therefore, developed 
a visualization tool that incorporates a concept map to share 
collaborative knowledge construction. 
Related literature reports on various tools for knowledge 
construction that have positive effects. Analysis of conflict 
in a jigsaw-type class has been performed in regards to 
collaborative knowledge construction [5]. In this research, 
each participant received different knowledge and then 
constructs collaborate knowledge while they taught their  
knowledge to each other. This study facilitates knowledge 
collaboration using a jigsaw-type method with MS Word as 
a tool for collaboration. Collaborative learning spaces such 
as wikis and their supportive nature in motivating 
participants to construct knowledge have also been 
examined [6]. 
A tool for visualizing and sharing knowledge is useful 
for 
collaborative 
knowledge 
construction. 
Roth 
& 
Roychoudhury proposed that concept maps are useful for 
the activity by the following three factors: tools for social 
thinking, conscription devices, and inscription methods [4].  
Various collaborative concept map creation tools have 
been developed. KMap uses multimedia content for 
collaborative concept mapping [7], sharing concept maps 
via LAN with multimedia content such as text, audio, and 
video. Participants use other concept maps that are not 
edited,, making it an asynchronous tool. In our context, 
synchronous communication is important. CmapTools is a 
tool for collaborative concept mapping for synchronous and 
asynchronous communication [8]. This tool has various 
communication functions and Knowledge Soup for sharing 
propositions, deriving propositions from concept mapping. 
These various functions enable participants to conduct 
various activities. 
In our project, we developed the tool focused on 
visualization of participant contributions to heighten 
knowledge sharing and collaborative knowledge construction 
and evaluated the tool in synchronous cross-cultural 
communication in four experiments. 
III. 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
We developed a tool for collaborative knowledge 
construction using concept maps (Figure 1). Our tool has the 
following 
functions 
for 
collaborative 
knowledge 
construction and visualization of participant contributions 
and discussion structure: 
 
a. Real-time Chat 
b. Adding a Keyword (in a different color for each proposal) 
c. Moving a Keyword 
d. Adding a Link 
e. Adding a Linking Phrase (in a different color for each 
proposal) 
 
Functions (b) through (e) are used for collaboratively 
constructing concept maps. Color-coding the proposals 
allows participants to recognize the contributions of others. 
Individual proposals are clearly indicated by colored 
keywords. 
Participants 
can 
recognize 
their 
own 
contributions and see them as part of the entire class. When 
participants depend solely on others, there is no indicator of 
their contribution in this colored map. Moreover, interaction 
is facilitated because visualization of contributions promotes 
the feeling that participants were part of a face-to-face 
interaction. 
Participants join in a discussion through chat and by 
proposing keywords (a node in the concept map). Keywords 
can be moved anywhere, and linking phrases can link 
between them. If a user adds a keyword, this appears in the 
upper-left corner of the window labeled “Start”. Users can 
move added keywords and add links between them. Linking 
phrases can be added at the top left. 
 
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
Figure 1.  Interface of the collaborative knowledge construction tool 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTS 
A. First experiment 
 
1) Purpose 
 
The first experiment was designed to confirm the 
following: 
 
–Participants feel that our tool is useful for knowledge 
sharing (discussion structuring and visualization).  
–Participants recognize the necessity of knowledge and 
contributions from other participants through using the 
visualization function in our tool. 
 
2) Method 
 
The experiment was performed on July 13, 2009 from 
13:00 to 14:00 at Hokkaido University, Waseda University, 
and Tokyo University of Science in Japan. Three student 
participants, one from each university, joined the 
experiment. The author played the role of mentor in only 
this experiment. The concept map played a supplementary 
function for the main focus, an online discussion on how to 
create a comfortable laboratory. The discussion was 
conducted in Japanese [9]. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
3) Results and Discussion 
 
After the experiment, a questionnaire was distributed to 
the participants. They awarded a numerical score for their 
reaction based on a modified five-point Likert scale: 
 
5 "Chat and concept map" is much better, 
4 "Chat and concept map" is better,  
3 No difference, 
2 "Chat only" is better, and  
1 "Chat only" is much better. 
 
Table 1 shows participant preferences. In particular, items 
(2) and (3) obtained the highest score of 5. Participants 
indicated that the concept map was very useful in the online 
discussion as an aid to seeing the overall structure of the 
discussion and, at the same time, their own and others’ 
contributions. Though these results might be expected since 
use of the tool is optional, participants would prefer “Chat 
only” if they found this function detracting due to the time 
and energy demands of constructing concept maps while 
chatting. The results, however, showed a strong preference 
for “Chat and concept map.” We take this as indicating that 
constructing a collaborative concept map with our tool 
enabled them to better gather, share and integrate their 
knowledge. Thus, both goals were achieved. 
 
 
 
 
chat window 
participants 
function to add a key word 
concept map window 
materials 
evaluation 
evaluation measure 
effectiveness 
reliability validity 
report 
deliberate 
intention 
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

TABLE I.  
RESULTS OF QUESTIONNAIRES 
Questionnaire Item 
Average 
Score 
(1) I recognized my contribution to the 
discussion 
4.7 
(2) I recognized others’ contributions to 
the discussion 
5.0 
(3) I understood the structure of the 
discussion 
5.0 
(4) I felt that others and I had a common 
understanding 
4.3 
(5) I recognized the distance of my 
keyword from the discussion theme  
4.3 
(6) I was able to generally reflect upon the 
discussion 
4.3 
 
B. Second experiment 
 
1) Purpose 
 
The second experiment was designed to confirm the 
following: 
 
–Collaborative knowledge construction using a concept 
map requires participants to use their individual 
knowledge and reconstruct their knowledge structure. 
 
2) Method 
 
The experiment was performed on November 24, 2009 
from 17:00 to 19:00 with the same participants as the first 
experiment. In this experiment, however, the author did not 
participate as a mentor. The online discussion topic was 
ecolonomics. This discussion was also conducted in 
Japanese. 
Participants were first given the theme, and were given 
fifteen minutes to individually construct concept maps 
without discussion. Next, they constructed a concept map as 
in the first experiment through chat discussion and concept 
map creation. Afterwards, we required them to correlate 
nodes and links between the individual concept maps and 
the collaborative concept map shown in Figure 2. We 
allowed them to note correlations even if wordings differed 
between individual and collaborative concept maps when 
they felt the same meaning was indicated. For example, in 
the case of participant B, he used the node “fulfilling 
research” in the pre-constructed concept map and also 
proposed it in collaborative concept map, so he correlated 
them. In the collaborative concept map, the node 
“laboratory’s space” was proposed by participant C but 
participant B had used it also in his pre-constructed map, 
and thus he correlated them. In addition, the node “criticism 
from everyone (around)” was proposed by participant A and 
the node “opinion from everyone (around)” was proposed 
by participant B. Although these words were different, 
participant B felt that they had same meaning and correlated 
them. Because he made a link between the nodes “fulfilling 
laboratory’s life” and “fulfilling research” in both maps, he 
correlated them. Moreover, in the pre-constructed map, he 
made a link between “fulfilling research” and “thinking 
power”. Although the link was not proposed directly in the 
collaborative concept map, he thought that a semantic link 
existed between “thinking power” and “research process”. 
He saw “research process” as intermediate between 
“fulfilling research” and “thinking power” so considered it 
an advanced node, and thus correlated them. 
 
3) Results and Discussion 
 
Table 2 shows the results of the correlations. A high 
proportion of nodes were shared between both individual 
and collaborative concept maps. This result suggests that 
each participant’s knowledge was used in the collaborative 
concept map, and that participant knowledge was integrated 
and expanded. There was, however, a low proportion of 
common links. These results indicate that knowledge 
relations were not maintained and new relations were 
generated 
when 
construct 
concept 
maps 
were 
collaboratively generated. Knowledge structures of each 
participant, therefore, were rebuilt because the relations 
between nodes are the knowledge structure of individual 
participants. This suggests that collaborative concept 
mapping using our tool promotes integration and expansion 
of knowledge, and also generates new knowledge structures. 
 
 
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
Figure 2.  Correlations of nodes and links 
TABLE II.  
THE NUMBERS AND PROPORTIONS FOR PRE-CONCEPT MAP 
AND COLLABORATIVE CONCEPT MAP 
 
Number 
used in 
pre 
map 
Number 
used in 
both 
maps 
Proportion 
Participant 
A 
Node 
25 
11 
44% 
Link 
26 
4 
15% 
Participant 
B 
Node 
42 
31 
74% 
Link 
48 
16 
33% 
Participant 
C 
Node 
14 
11 
76% 
Link 
22 
7 
32% 
Average 
Node 
27 
17.7 
65% 
Link 
32 
9 
27% 
 
C. Third experiment 
 
1) Purpose 
 
The third experiment sought to confirm the following: 
 
–Our tool is more effective in collaborative knowledge 
construction than other tools, such as chat and live 
whiteboard chat. 
 
2) Method 
 
This experiment was performed twice using two 
different themes (Theme 1: “Why one should work in 
society”; Theme 2: “How to turn one million dollars into ten 
million dollars in five years”) on August 20, 2010, from 
13:00 to 15:00, and on August 22, 2010, from 13:00 to 
15:00, by participants from Waseda University and Tokyo 
(a) An individual concept map pre-constructed by a participant 
(b) Collaborative knowledge constructed by all participants through discussion 
Participant B 
opinion from everyone 
fulfilling laboratory life 
fulfilling research 
communication in laboratory 
laboratory space 
drinking session 
thinking power 
problem solving problem finding 
conference 
verbal presentation 
submission of paper 
fulfilling laboratory life 
laboratory space 
life 
environment 
collaborative learning 
human relationship 
thinking power 
problem solving 
problem finding 
fulfilling research 
research process 
master  
thesis 
graduation  
thesis 
thesis 
research product 
society 
conference 
criticism from everyone 
 
communication 
participant C 
participant B 
participant A 
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

University of Science in Japan. Nine students from each 
university joined the experiment. We formed three groups 
consisting of three participants in each of a concept map 
group, a chat group, and a live whiteboard chat (LWC) 
group. The discussion was conducted in Japanese. 
Participants in the concept map group conducted their 
conversation using our tool, and then created individual 
concept maps indicating their post-discussion knowledge 
construction. Participants in the chat group conducted their 
discussion using a chat system, and then described their 
post-discussion knowledge construction as a freeform 
description. Participants in the LWC group conducted their 
discussion using an LWC system with a shared canvas, and 
then described their post-discussion knowledge construction 
as a freeform description. Chat group and LBW group 
participants were allowed to convert their chat logs and 
post-discussion descriptions into concept maps after we 
explained to them what a concept map is. Finally, we asked 
each group to correlate concepts as in the second experiment. 
 
3) Results and Discussion 
 
Table 3 shows the number of nodes and links used by 
individual post-discussion concept maps, the match 
numbers and rates of nodes and links, and the usage rate in 
both post-discussion concept maps and collaborative 
concept maps. Table 3 confirms the following. The concept 
map group’s collaborative concept map was big, and the 
match rate between collaborative concept maps and 
individual post-discussion maps was high. In the chat and 
LWC groups, collaborative concept maps (collaborative 
knowledge) were small, and the match rate between 
collaborative concept maps and individual post-discussion 
individual maps was low. 
TABLE III.  
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN COLLABORATIVE KNOWLEDGE 
AND POST-DISCUSSION INDIVIDUAL KNOWLEDGE. 
Average 
number and 
rate 
Theme 1 
Theme 2 
Number 
used in 
both 
maps 
Proportion 
Number 
used in 
both 
maps 
Proportion  
Concept 
map 
group 
Node 
20.3 
98.4% 
24.3 
95.6% 
Link 
21.7 
81.6% 
25.0 
79.8% 
Chat 
group 
Node 
5.0 
55.2% 
4.7 
59.5% 
Link 
1.7 
20.1% 
2.3 
27.0% 
LWC 
group 
Node 
3.7 
72.2% 
3.3 
28.5% 
Link 
1.3 
41.9% 
1.0 
6.5% 
 
These results suggest that only the group using our tool 
for concept map construction was able to effectively 
construct collaborative knowledge. These results also 
suggest that our tool enabled sharing and retention of 
collaborative knowledge. 
 
D. Fourth experiment 
1) Purpose 
 
The fourth experiment aimed to confirm the following: 
 
–Our tool is useful in cross-cultural communication. 
 
2) Method 
 
This experiment was conducted twice. In the first 
iteration, two groups of four Japanese and four Chinese 
students, respectively, had a chat discussion in their native 
tongues. They next had a discussion using our tool, and then 
answered a questionnaire. Finally, participants were 
reformed into cross-cultural groups of two Japanese and two 
Chinese students each. Those groups held discussions in 
English using chat only and then using our tool, after which 
they answered questionnaires. 
 
3) Results and Discussion 
 
Participants assigned numerical scores to evaluate their 
reaction based on a modified five-point Likert scale: 
 
5 "Chat and concept map" is much better, 
4 "Chat and concept map" is better,  
3 No difference, 
2 "Chat only" is better, and  
1 "Chat only" is much better. 
 
The results shown in Table 4 do not indicate significant 
differences between the three groups, indicating that the tool 
can be used similarly in discussions among both Japanese 
and Chinese students, as well as with cross-cultural groups. 
TABLE IV.  
RESULTS OF QUESTIONNAIRES 
Questionnaire item 
Japanese 
Students 
Chinese 
Students 
Cross-
Cultural 
(1) I recognized my 
contribution to the 
discussion 
3.75 
4.0 
3.5 
(2) I recognized 
other's contributions 
to the discussion 
3.75 
4.0 
3.5 
(3) I understood the 
structure of the 
discussion 
5.0 
5.0 
4.75 
(4) I felt that others 
and I had a common 
understanding 
4.25 
3.25 
3.5 
 
 
 
185
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTHER CONSIDERATIONS 
 
This paper described how a concept map can be used in 
order to show an on-going discussion structuring and 
visualization. The results show that the system can be used 
for the purpose of reflecting upon the collaborative 
knowledge construction through the visualization of 
participant contributions and discussion structure.  
The following were confirmed through the four 
experiments described above: 1) Participants seem to feel 
that our tool is useful for the sharing of knowledge 
(discussion structuring and visualization). 2) Using the 
visualization function in our tool, participants can see the 
contributed knowledge of others and the necessity of 
contribution (contribution visualization). 3) Collaborative 
knowledge construction using a concept map requires that 
participants use individual knowledge and reconstruct their 
own knowledge structures. 4) Our tool is more effective 
than other traditional tools, such as chat, and is also useful 
in cross-cultural communication.  
Since there were some limitations in our experiment, 
however, future work will be focused on finding solutions to 
the following issues: 1) how to increase the number of 
participants so that this system can be incorporated into 
regular distance classes, 2) conducting trials in an 
international multi point situation which will involve 
students from different backgrounds to meet global 
educational situations, and 3) how to integrate this system 
with the synchronous-symmetrical video conferencing 
system of our previous work, which was developed as a 
cross-cultural language class [10]. In terms of functions, we 
plan to further develop a system that can provide more 
nodes and links to give depth to expressions in discussion. 
We plan to further develop a system that allows all 
participants to construct the concept map without any 
assistance from a mentor. 
Our globalizing world needs more borderless, cross-
cultural, collaborative communication in every social field, 
including education. International distance education that is 
synchronous and interactive is not only applicable to 
transmission of information for classroom lectures and 
discussion, but could more broadly help participants 
experience 
concept 
construction 
in 
the 
distance 
communication environment. Technological contributions 
such as the system introduced in this paper will contribute to 
achieving these goals, adding a new dimension to 
collaborative learning. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study is supported by Grant-in-Aid for Scientific 
Research (B) No. 20300274 from the Japan Society for the 
Promotion of Science. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Nishinaga, Y. Nishihori, Y. Collier-Sanuki, K. 
Nagaoka, M. Aoki, Y. Yamamoto, M. Harada, and K. 
Tanaka, “Cross-cultural learning experiments through 
the Internet,” Proc. 6th International Conference of 
Information Technology Based Higher Education and 
Training (ITHET 2005), 2005, pp. 7-9. 
[2] Y. Nishihori, T. Akakura, K. Nagaoka, N. Nishinaga, K. 
Tanaka, Y. Yamamoto, and H. Sato, “A comparative 
analysis of learners' awareness between multi-point 
connections 
in 
a 
videoconferencing 
class,” 
Supplementary Proc. 15th International Conference on 
Computers in Education (ICCE2007), 2007, pp. 45-46. 
[3] J. D. Novak and D. B. Gowin, “Learning How to 
Learn,” Cambridge University Press, 1984. 
[4] W. M. Roth and A. Roychoudhury, “The social 
construction of scientific concepts or the concept map 
as conscription device and tools for social thinking in 
high school science”, Science Education, Vol. 76, No. 5, 
1992, pp. 531-557.  
[5] A. C. C. Lao, S. H. Hsu, J. C. L. Chuang and C. H. 
Hsieh, “Student conflicts in a jigsaw-type technology 
classroom for collaborative knowledge construction”, 
Proc. 16th International Conference on Computers in 
Education (ICCE2008), 2008, pp. 303-307.  
[6] G. K. Chua and G. B. Chua, “Organising collaborative 
learning spaces for knowledge construction: deep 
learning and online behaviour”, Proc. 16th International 
Conference on Computers in Education (ICCE2008), 
2008, pp. 285-289.  
[7] B. R. Gaines and M. L. G. Shaw, “Concept maps as 
hypermedia component,” Instructional Journal of 
Human Computer Studies, Vol. 42, 1995, pp. 323-361.  
[8] A. J. Cañas, K. M. Ford, J. D. Novak, P. Hayes, T. 
Reichherzer and N. Suri, “Online concept maps: 
enhancing collaborative learning by using technology 
with concept maps,” The Science Teacher, Vol. 68, No. 
4, 2001, pp. 49-51.  
[9] T. Tomoto, Y. Nishihori, N. Nishinaga, Y. Yamamoto, 
M. Ueno, T. Akakura and K. Nagaoka, “Collaborative 
knowledge construction in a synchronous-symmetry 
distance learning”, Workshop Proc. 17th International 
Conference on Computers in Education (ICCE2009), 
2009, pp. 137-141. 
[10] Y. Nishihori, “Facilitating collaborative language 
learning in a multicultural distance class over broadband 
networks: 
learner 
awareness 
to 
cross-cultural 
understanding,” 
in 
WorldCALL: 
International 
Perspectives on Computer-assisted Language Learning, 
M. Levy, F. Blin, C. Siskin, and O. Takeuchi, Eds. New 
York: Routledge, 2011, pp. 70-82. 
 
 
 
 
186
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

