Acceptance Models for the Analysis of RFID 
 
Markus Haushahn, Michael Amberg,  
Armin Schwingenschlögel, Florian Bernhardt 
 
Chair of Information Systems III 
University of Erlangen-Nuremberg 
Lange Gasse 20, 90403 Nuremberg, Germany 
markus.haushahn@wiso.uni-erlangen.de 
Krzysztof Malowaniec 
Business Development 
DATEV eG 
Paumgartnerstr. 6-14, 90329 Nuremberg, Germany 
krzysztof.malowaniec@datev.de
 
 
Abstract—Although there is a high dispersion of RFID in many 
areas of the economy, it can be said that up until now this 
technology has been barely implemented and accepted within 
law firms. Considering the severe problems when tracking 
documents and although these systems facilitate specific 
improvement in various sub processes handling legal cases, 
lawyers are still mostly disapproving of the use of RFID. 
Therefore, the motivation as well as the acceptance indicators 
of lawyers, which are responsible for such behavior, need to be 
observed. Within the scope of this article the currently valid 
acceptance 
models 
will 
be 
analyzed 
regarding 
their 
applicability to RFID-Systems and their possible application in 
law firms. Furthermore, both the user’s point of view as well as 
the involved IT technology shall be considered within this 
evaluation. This is the only way to ultimately ensure the 
achievement of pursued objectives such as increasing customer 
and employee satisfaction, optimizing internal processes as well 
as continuously improving business results within law firms. 
The primary result of this analysis shows that the DART 
acceptance model by Amberg and Wehrmann explains best all 
eight of the RFID-relevant acceptance levels such as the 
psychological or the task-related level for instance. 
Keywords: acceptance analysis; RFID; ubiquitous computing  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In recent years RFID-technologies have not only caused 
quite a stir in science but also in many areas of the service 
sector, purchase and outbound logistics, the industry as well 
as in manufacturing companies. Hundreds of companies that 
are actively involved in the development and sale of RFID 
systems indicate that this market is taken very seriously. 
While global sales of RFID systems reached about 1.2 
billion U.S. dollars in 2008, the forecast for 2012 predicts a 
sales growth of 3.5 billion U.S. $ [1]. The market for RFID is 
therefore one of the fastest growing sectors in the industry of 
radio technology. In spite of the obvious progress and the 
expected efficiency and cost potentials, the diffusion rate and 
therefore the implementation in many sectors as well as in 
companies is still to be seen as a niche solution [2].  
Enhancement in productivity and efficiency are not only 
practicable in the field of supply chain management but also 
in many areas of the service sector in terms of a cross-
sectional technology [3]. A particular setting for the 
application of RFID-Systems is the tracking of documents 
and the administration of books within the scope of the 
document management. Especially in the day-to-day 
handling of documents and books, companies gather a 
significant amount of data. These vast amounts of documents 
are often stored in boxes, folders or cabinets and filed in 
special rooms. In order to find and process stored data 
additional costs emerge for the company and cause extra 
time expenses for the employees. Furthermore, this loss of 
efficiency leads to a waste of human resources and employee 
productivity decreases [4]. 
Even today the handling of the so-called “paper files” is 
still required by law, particularly in law firms and tax 
attorney offices. According to §50 of the Federal Code for 
the Legal Profession, it is a lawyer’s responsibility to give an 
orderly insight into his work by creating reference files [5]. 
However, this legally demanded system is being affected 
significantly by the in some extent complex procedure of 
processing a file. If one analyzes the working process of an 
attorney, this problem can clearly be seen. Depending on the 
complexity of a lawsuit there are up to eight people 
sequentially working on one case. Thereby the paper card 
changes the staff member up to 26 times on average.  
If one combines the complexity and diversity of the 
processing steps in a lawsuit with the number of cases a 
lawyer has to work on per day, it is clear that a single paper 
file might get lost easily. However, it is mandatory to have a 
hardcopy of the document while talking to clients in the 
office or being in court in order to ensure the possibility of 
making changes at all times and having a successful legal 
dispute. Therefore, the loss of a file would be linked to far-
reaching consequences for the office and for the client. 
Particularly affected by this problem are law firms with more 
than 20 lawyers, which are distributed on different floors and 
buildings. If at least 5 files a week go missing in a law firm 
with 20 lawyers and a stock of 700 cases, and the average 
search time equals 1.5 hours per file, the consequent time 
spend on searching is at least 7.5 hours a week, which is a 
serious problem for the efficient work cycle in this office.1 
However, with the help of RFID as a cross-sectional 
technology, it is possible to improve the workflow of a 
lawyer and thus the handling of paper files as well as legal 
texts considerably.  
                                                 
1 The numbers result from a process analysis carried out for a law firm in 
Munich.  
301
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

Although many law firms are aware of these problems 
and lawyers know that RFID technology could eliminate 
these deficits, they are still not willing to invest in an 
innovative technology. The goal of this paper is therefore to 
analyze the acceptance models for RFID systems in law 
firms and to identify the factors, which are able to describe 
the acceptance of RFID technology. 
 
Within the scope of the pilot project “RFID in lawyer’s 
offices”, the phenomenon of RFID-technologies in the 
daily use is ought to be analyzed scientifically. Therefore, 
its distribution in both the literature and in practice, 
depending on the costs and benefits, need to be assessed 
in order to assure a holistic implementation with the help 
of practitioners in the next step. The evaluation of the 
acceptance is an essential component next to the creation 
of a business case. This evaluation of the theoretical 
acceptance models illustrates the first step of the analysis 
of RFID in lawyer’s offices. Although acceptance models 
offer diverse possibilities, they only fit partly into the 
scenario RFID in lawyer’s offices, which is the reason 
why this evaluation is being carried out. Therefore, the 
following analysis is ought to indicate to what extent the 
selected models fit the scenario RFID in lawyer’s offices 
and thus which practice seems the most suitable. 
 
At the beginning of this paper it is ought to describe the 
technology of RFID and the main procedure applied in order 
to carry out the analysis. Thereupon, individual dimensions 
and indicators are being described and evaluated by experts. 
In the end, these results are the basis for the decision to use 
the Dart Model according to Wehrmann. 
 
A. Research Design 
The 
scientific 
background 
was 
provided 
by 
a 
comprehensive literature research being the preliminary 
stage of the acceptance research area and RFID. Therefore, 
556 articles of the IEEE and 137 German and English 
books were studied regarding these models. Within the 
scope of this procedure 10 acceptance models were 
identified due to their number of mentions. The main 
objective, however, is the evaluation of the user acceptance 
in law firms, which are supported by RFID. The purpose is 
to create a general understanding for those areas involving 
RFID and research acceptance. Based on this knowledge it is 
ought to identify, outline, and monitor existing acceptance 
models on whether they are suitable for the evaluation of the 
user acceptance of RFID in law firms. Besides, both the 
user’s point of view and the underlying IT technology are to 
be considered within this evaluation and review. Thus, the 
second step of the explorative study involved an 
execution of two workshops. A total of fourteen experts 
participated in these workshops, which were held half-
day in March and April 2010. Four of these participants 
were employees of the law firm and they were working 
with this technology constantly, while there were three 
experts out of science, two experts out of user’s offices, 
and three experts out of the hard- and software industry 
of RFID-systems (see Figure 1). These persons were 
chosen as experts since they had a long-time experience 
and thus a wide knowledge of RFID. Besides, they were 
trained by using this technology directly within lawyer’s 
offices. In order to ensure an equal knowledge of the 
participants and a successful design of the workshops, the 
required documents were sent out about a week prior to 
the meeting. Within the scope of the workshop a set of 
questions was assessed. One of them dealt with the 
expert’s opinion on how well these models covered the 
different factors of the individual levels such as the social 
level, for instance. Therefore, both the interviews as well 
as the related discourses within the project group made it 
possible to carry out an evaluation of the individual 
models. In doing so, individual models were presented, 
discussed several times, and indicators were chosen and 
improved. Afterwards the acceptance models were evaluated 
according to the previously identified indicators. While 
developing the results, there were three questions being 
focused on: 
1. Which acceptance models are available in the 
literature? 
2. Which of these models suits an analysis of 
RFID in law firms the best?  
3. Which indicators need to be considered by the 
acceptance model? 
The objective of this approach is to generate an adapted 
model of acceptance, which possesses those indicators 
adjusted to RFID systems in order to generate an acceptance 
analysis in a pilot office. 
 
Research Design 
Explorative Study 
 
Iteration 
1 
2 
Research Method 
Draft design for 
the selection of an 
adequate 
acceptance model 
2 workshops for 
the selection of an 
adequate 
acceptance model  
Duration 
January- February 
10 
March-April 10 
Number 
556 articles (IEEE) 
& 137 books  
14 experts out of 
science, industry, 
and user’s area 
    Figure1. Procedure while analyzing the acceptance of RFID in law firms 
B. RFID technology 
The abbreviation RFID means Radio Frequency 
Identification, which could be translated via radio waves for 
identification. RFID is also commonly described as an 
automatic identification and data capture system with 
contactless transmission of data between an RFID tag and 
RFID reader based on radio frequency technology. If 
products, pallets, truckloads or documents are being 
equipped with RFID tags, they can give a feedback signal on 
their position, motion or texture automatically [6]. 
RFID has been used for several years and in some areas it 
is already seen as an important part of the process 
management. It has established itself, particularly in the area 
302
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

of production, logistics, theft protection and access security 
[7]. Recently this technology has gained a foothold in other 
areas as well. At the moment there are strong efforts in 
establishing itself in the medical and nutritional area as well 
as in the field of document management. Since the 
advantages and disadvantages of this technology have been 
analyzed more than once in the literature and public, this 
paper will omit to discuss this matter in detail. 
C. Acceptance Models 
In recent years, there has been a development towards a 
new understanding of acceptance research, which is also 
referred to as the “recent acceptance research” by Kollmann. 
The following features can illustrate this new perception. [8] 
p. 149f. 
Timeframe: As mentioned previously, the acceptance 
research is seen traditionally as a study object of various 
areas of science, which observes the “acceptance” isolated 
from the rest. This separation is currently not applicable in 
terms of innovative applications since most technologies 
(including RFID) are able to establish themselves not only in 
organizations but also in private households. An integrative 
perspective counteracts with this isolated observation and 
summarizes all of the critical factors of the various 
disciplines [8] p. 149. 
Decision criterion: The classic dichotomy of acceptance 
decision cannot be transferred on innovative applications in 
general. Especially when it comes to innovative utilization, 
an acceptance continuum has to be acknowledged. 
Therefore, business informatics rather prefer gradations 
between different acceptance levels than a dichotomous 
notion, since it is being focused on the utilization of the 
innovation [9]. 
Utilization motivation: Since products of information 
technology (such as PCs, notebooks, netbooks, or PDA's), 
telecommunications 
(mobile 
phone, 
smartphone) 
and 
multimedia communications can be used both due to 
organizational requirements as well as on a voluntary basis, a 
strict separation of organizational use or voluntary use are 
not longer appropriate. Therefore, acceptance research and 
used models must take into account that innovative products 
have reached both organizations and private households [8] 
p. 149. 
Objective: The traditional point of view considered the 
acceptance only ex-post. Thus, this approach was used 
primarily to generate appropriate marketing strategies for 
already established products and services. As a result no 
action has been taken in order to detect product deficits and 
counteract previously to launching. An ex-ante analysis, 
however, makes it possible to analyze the acceptance at an 
early stage in order to carry out formative and corrective 
actions. Therefore, an acceptance analysis, which carries out 
both, an ex-ante and ex-post analysis, is desirable.  
A great amount of acceptance models were developed 
over the last years in order to analyze the acceptance. Since 
different research areas have arisen, various assumptions are 
being made on the main aspects or influential factors, which 
have a considerable impact on the acceptance [8] p. 150. A 
short overview of the acceptance models dealt with in this 
paper is being given in Figure 2. It shows the development of 
the ten models over time. As a result of the analysis, it could 
be observed that these models have been specified even more 
over the periods of time and thus are able to fulfill the 
demands and application scenarios needed today. 
 
 
 
 
 
            Figure 2. Overview of the relevant acceptance models 
303
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

 
    Figure 3. Influencing factors and dimensions of relevant Acceptance Models 
D. Aggregation of the acceptance models 
While identifying and analyzing all relevant acceptance 
models, the most suitable models were selected and their 
characteristics were observed. Since these differ to some 
extend fundamentally regarding the factors and dimensions, 
Figure 3 aggregates all the relevant acceptance models, 
which affect the attitude and behavior of user acceptance. At 
the same time a corresponding version of each model is 
being outlined briefly. Taking the model of Kollman as an 
example for the other models, it can be shown that indicators 
related to products, consumers, companies, and the 
environment, are being considered in this feedback model 
and therefore facilitate the application for specific scenarios. 
Likewise these indicators were identified in the other models 
as well and thus are being subsumed in Figure 3. This figure 
is therefore the basis for the further progress of this paper. 
Based on these findings the third section indicates appraisals 
of the models concerning their capability of considering the 
adoption of RFID technology in law firms. 
 
II. 
ADEQUACY OF ACCEPTANCE MODELS FOR RFID  
Previous results indicated that the acceptance does not 
only focus on the simple utilization of an application, but 
also refers to many individual, social, organizational, 
technical, economic, task-related, psychological as well as 
cultural indicators. This situation is the same for 
implementing 
and 
using 
RFID 
technologies 
within 
organizations. The introduction of such technologies does 
not only change individual habits but also involves 
organizational adaption. The following section attempts to 
identify such indicators in various steps. Afterwards it will 
be checked which model considers them best and therefore 
seems the most appropriate in order to evaluate the 
acceptance of an RFID-based document management system 
in libraries. 
304
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

 
Figure 4. Assignment of the acceptance indicators according to the levels 
A. Identification of relevant acceptance levels 
First of all representative acceptance levels will be 
detected, which may have an impact on the introduction and 
the utilization of this technology. As a result possible 
acceptance indicators will be classified more precisely. At 
the same time it was attempted to derive behavioral 
psychological and work psychological dimensions. The 
agreement on the acceptance levels is based on discussions 
within two workshops carried out with a project team. After 
having evaluated current acceptance models and other 
researches, eight possible levels have been concluded in 
Figure 3.  
Individual level: All of those factors that may affect the 
acceptance of an application, both positively and negatively, 
at the level of each individual can be found here. Two of the 
key factors within this level are the perceived benefits and 
the perceived usability of an application or a system. 
Task-related level: All of those aspects that could have a 
positive or negative impact on the acceptance of an 
application and are linked to the task, which needs to be 
accomplished, are being subsumed in this section. After 
having analyzed the models cited above, the improvement of 
the work results or the acceleration in accomplishing tasks 
could be mentioned as examples in this context. 
Organizational level: a further level to be considered is 
the organization in which a system is being introduced. The 
establishment of an RFID technology may result in great 
human and structural actions, such as rationalization or 
department mergers. 
Technical level: in order to accept a technology or a 
system, the development of this technology is extremely 
305
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

important. In this context, the acceptance is influenced by the 
awareness and maturity level of the applied technology.  
Social level: every indicator, which explains how the 
acceptance within a collective such as a group of users or a 
organization can be influenced, is being summarized here. In 
this regard, the so-called network effect is a strong 
influencing factor. It may be assumed that the acceptance of 
a system is positively affected if a large number of users has 
already adopted it [10]. The opinion leadership can also have 
a great impact on acceptance. This indicates the extent to 
which an individual is able to influence his social 
environment [11]. The opinion leadership originates from the 
marketing theory and can be associated with the reference 
value model [12]. 
Cultural level: The consideration of cultural aspects in 
matters of the acceptance is also required. The cultural 
sensitivity is of great importance. This means considering 
country-specific characteristics such as adapting oneself to 
the mentality of the country for instance [13]. Therefore, the 
reaction to the introduction of a new system could turn out 
quite differently in Europe and in Asia. 
Economic level: In addition to the dimensions mentioned 
above, economic aspects are also very important, especially 
for the management. The focus in this context is the 
profitability of such actions. Therefore, potential costs such 
as acquisition o maintenance costs need to be contrasted with 
the benefits, which are expected by introducing a new 
technology. A positive result of this analysis could contribute 
to the acceptance within the corporation. 
Psychological level: This level mainly includes factors 
that are usually not directly visible and measurable. They are 
rather results due to the changes within the other dimensions. 
An example could be a department merger, which provokes 
the fear of job loss and therefore affects employees 
psychologically. These indicators can have a positive or 
negative impact on the acceptance. 
B. Model evaluation with the help of acceptance indicators 
In order to determine which model fits best to evaluate 
the acceptance of RFID supported document management 
systems, an evaluation matrix with an adequate rating scale 
was established for every indentified level mentioned above. 
This approach made it possible to establish a ranking of the 
applicable models within the framework of this paper. 
The following scale has been chosen for the 35 
accumulated indicators in order to evaluate the ten examined 
acceptance models: 
 
 
0 = No consideration 
 
 
1 = Poor consideration 
 
 
2 = Consideration 
 
 
3 = Strong consideration 
The mentioned rating scale was chosen for several 
reasons. In order to avoid a tendency towards the centre, a 
four-way specification was chosen on the one hand. On the 
other hand, however, a two-way specification (yes/no) did 
not seem adequate due to the fact that various models offer a 
lot of space for interpretation and adaptation. 
C. Evaluation matrix 
The evaluation of the model was carried out by every 
project member individually within the specified levels with 
the help of matrices. A subsequent group discussion 
compared the results and revealed contradictions. A final 
meeting with all participants completed the assessment. The 
results were satisfactory for all parties. Figure 5 indicates an 
example for the evaluation of the individual level. 
The individual level is included in the DART approach 
according to Wehrmann and even stronger in the acceptance 
model according to Degenhardt. Degenhardt's model is 
focusing very effectively on individual characteristics. The 
DART model allows a flexible design of these features 
within the scope of the sub-dimensions and the process 
model. The poor performance of the customer satisfaction 
model according to Silberer et al. can be traced back to its 
origin. The remaining models cover the identified indicators 
only partially which explains the rather poor results. 
306
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

 
 
Figure 5. Evaluation matrix of the individual level 
 
D. Determination of the overall results 
After having evaluated every model by means of the 
acceptance levels and the included indicators, the obtained 
results will be visualized once again in order to get a better 
comparison of each approach. Besides, the overall results 
will be calculated. One possibility is the evaluation of the 
results using the arithmetic mean [14]. Figure 6 indicates the 
obtained results employing an equal weighting for all levels. 
 
 
Figure 6. Ranking of the acceptance models with the arithmetic mean 
 
Figure 6 clearly indicates the superiority of the DART 
approach according to Wehrmann against the other 
acceptance models. This dominance is also reflected in the 
overall result at each level. The reasons for this advantage 
can be explained with the basic structure of the model. The 
high 
flexibility 
creates 
particularly 
high 
dynamic 
extensibility and thus a great scope for interpretation at all 
levels. The TAM 2 model according to Venkatesh and Davis 
scores surprisingly well in the overall results. In addition to 
the comprehensive consideration of the individual level, 
which has been focused on already in the TAM model by 
Davis, the obtained result is due to a detailed elaboration of 
307
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

external stimuli. This step was positively perceived on the 
task-related as well as the social level. According to the 
project team both approaches, the one according to 
Wehrmann as well as the TAM 2 model, allow the 
integration of cultural aspects sufficiently.  
Having observed the first overall results it became clear 
that the equal weighting of all levels could lead to a 
falsification of the model rankings [15]. According to the 
project team, the reason might be a different degree of 
influence a single acceptance level might have on the 
acceptance of a technology such as RFID [16]. Therefore, a 
weighting of the levels was introduced based on the 
assessments, findings and experience of the project team. 
Those levels, which are highly relevant in this context, are 
assessed with a weighting factor of three. Levels, which 
have a different effect on the acceptance depending on the 
situation, will be assessed with a weighting of two. Lower 
levels, which are expected to have a low impact, will be 
assessed with a weighting of one. 
The individual level has a decisive influence on the 
acceptance of an individual. This fact is also postulated in 
most models as a key factor. Thus, it is necessary to assess 
this level and its involved indicators with a weighting of 
three. The social level also plays an important role within 
the scope of this project. Hence, network effects, synergies 
and opinion leadership could have a great impact on the 
acceptance or use in institutions such as law firms and 
libraries. Therefore it makes sense to assess these levels with 
a weighting factor of three. In this context the 
psychological level should also be assessed with a weighting 
factor of three since it has influence on all levels of 
acceptance. Due to its connection it plays an important role 
in the evaluation. The task-related, technical, organizational 
and economic level can have a completely different effect on 
the acceptance of an individual or a collective, depending on 
the institution, design and other conditions. This can be 
observed in the examined models in which they are not 
treated equally. In order to accentuate this fact, a weighting 
factor of two was assessed. The cultural level, a subordinate 
factor that should not be underestimated, is not being 
considered in any model. However, a weighting factor of 
one was assigned in order include the level in the evaluation 
model. Figure 7 illustrated the changes that have taken place 
in the ranking of the evaluated models. Although each 
acceptance model of Simon, Degenhardt, and Kollmann 
improve their values by more than three percent, the DART 
approach according to Wehrmann is still considered to be the 
best model in the analysis. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Effects on the second evaluation of the model 
 
 
III. 
FINAL EVALUATION 
After a detailed analysis of the mentioned acceptance 
models, an examination has taken place in order to identify 
whether they were suitable for an evaluation of RFID-based 
documant management system. As a result it became clear 
that the approach according to Wehrmann was offering the 
best conditions in almost every research area. This 
dominance is not only due to the overall results. The model 
also achieved optimum values in those levels, which 
according to the project team had a great impact on the 
acceptance, as well. Furthermore an ideal organization based 
on the characteristics for evaluating the acceptance of RFID 
technology in law firms is admitted by the DART approach 
due to its high flexibility and modifiability. Based on these 
findings, the project team has opted for the DART approach 
according to Wehrmann. In the further progress of the 
project it is ought to adjust the basic structure of the model, 
308
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

which was outlined in the literature, to the specific research 
circumstances in order to carry out a promising acceptance 
analysis. Based on this analysis of acceptance models, the 
DART model is being used as the basis for the actual 
analysis of the acceptance of RFID in lawyer's offices. 
Dimensions such as perceived network effects, perceived 
costs, and perceived benefits are being examined according 
to indicators such as investment costs or surface handling. As 
a result of analyzing the 10 acceptance models it can me 
stated that the DART model describes those indicators, 
which are necessary for the scenario of RFID in lawyer's 
offices, best.  
 
In order to achieve generalization, it was ought to include 
structural, local and temporal limitations. Structural 
limitations affect the chosen research design. The analytical 
structure of this paper involves a study of scientific literature 
dealing with acceptance models in general. Additionally, it is 
being specialized by using four workshops until it reaches 
the complex issue of RFID in law firms. However, this 
approach is correct due to the very poor literature provided 
on evaluating the acceptance of RFID in law offices. Based 
on the lack of knowledge, the results may vary when 
applying different research designs.  
Besides, the German legislation as well as the 
composition of the workshops need to be considered as an 
important reason of local limitations. Law firms and 
attorneys operating in different European countries or in 
other parts of the world are facing distinct legal standards 
and working methods. This is why the identified acceptance 
levels and indicators can be transferred only partially. The 
second limitation relates to the time circumstances during the 
investigation. Since there are no scientific studies related to 
RFID in law firms and the use of RFID technology in this 
environment, the declaration given by the experts only 
reflects their current opinion. However, the identified results 
are representative for these issues. It can be assumed that it is 
possible to transfer acceptance indicators on defined 
processes in law firms due to the legal actions in Germany 
and the rigid operations in this profession. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Gartner, “Market Trends: Radio Frequency Identification. 
Worldwide, 2007-2012,” Stamford, 2005. 
[2] S. Weigert, “Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) in der 
Automobilindustrie - Chancen, Risiken, Nutzenpotentiale,” 
Gabler, Wiesbaden, 2007. 
[3] VDEB, “RFID Anwendertag 2009 des Verband IT-
Mittelstand 
– 
Anwender 
treffen 
Experten,“ 
http://www.pressebox.de/pressemeldungen/vdeb-verband-it-
mittelstand-ev/boxid-300867.html, accessed 11 June 2010. 
[4] V. Sohmer, “Management – Denn Sie wissen, was Sie tun,” in 
Handelszeitung no. 21, Zürich, 2008, p. 25. 
[5] German 
Federal 
Ministry 
of 
Justice, 
“Bundesrechtsanwaltsordnung,“ 
http://bundesrecht.juris.de/brao/__50.html, accessed 11 May 
2010. 
[6] J. Gabius, “RFID als erfolgsversprechendes Instrument einer 
Marktforschung,“ diploma thesis, 1 edition, GRIN Verlag, 
Norderstedt, 2007, p. 4. 
[7] G. Schoblick and R. Schoblick, “RFID- Radio Frequenzy 
Identification: 
Grundlagen, 
eingeführte 
Systeme, 
Einsatzbereiche, 
Datenschutz, 
praktische 
Anwendungsbeispiele,” Franzis Verlag, Poing, 2005, p. 153ff. 
[8] J. 
Wehrmann, 
“Situationsabhängige 
mobile 
Dienste: 
Konzepte und Modelle zu ihrer effizienten Entwicklung unter 
besonderer Berücksichtigung der Benutzerakzeptanz,” WiKu 
Verlag, Berlin, 2004. 
[9] T. Kollmann, “Akzeptanz innovativer Nutzungsgüter und -
systeme: 
Konsequenzen 
für 
die 
Einführung 
von 
Telekommunikations- und Multimediasystemen,” Gabler 
Verlag, Wiesbaden, 1998, p. 61. 
[10] G. 
Tamm 
and 
O. 
Günther, 
“Webbasierte 
Dienste: 
Technologien, Märkte und Geschäftsmodelle,” Institut für 
Wirtschaftsinformatik, Universität St. Gallen, Psycho Verlag, 
Heidelberg, 2005, p. 67. 
[11] N. C. Schneider, “Kundenwertbasierte Effizienzmessung – 
Der 
Beitrag 
von 
Marketingmaßnahmen 
zur 
Unternehmenswerterhöhung in der Automobilindustrie, ” 
Deutscher Universitäts - Verlag (DUV) Gabler, 2006, p. 151. 
[12] J. Cornelsen, “Kundenwertanalysen im Beziehungsmarketing 
- 
Theoretische 
Grundlegung 
und 
Ergebnisse 
einer 
empirischen Studie im Automobilbereich,” GIM-Verlag, 
2000, p. 199. 
[13] M. Müller, “Die Identifikation kultureller Erfolgsfaktoren bei 
grenzüberschreitenden Fusionen: Eine Analyse am Beispiel 
der DaimlerChrysler AG,” 1st edition, Deutscher Universitäts 
– Verlag, Wiesbaden, June 2007, p. 151ff. 
 
[14] P. Shannon, “Valuing Business: The Analysis and Appraisal of 
closely Held Companies”, 5th edition, Mac-Graw Hill Books, 2008, p. 
209ff 
 
[15]  P. Niven, „Balanced Scorecard: for Government an non profit 
agencies”, 2nd edition, Wiley Publishing, 2008, p. 95ff 
 
[16]  M. G.Brown, „Beyond the Balanced Scorecard: Improving 
Business Intelligence with Analytics”, 1st edition, 
Productivity Press, 2007, p. 67ff 
 
 
 
309
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

