Robotic and Smart Service for People with Disabilities
Sergey Zavyalov
Petrozavodsk State University
Petrozavodsk, Russia
Email: sza123@list.ru
Anton Kogochev
Petrozavodsk State University
Petrozavodsk, Russia
Email: antkg@yandex.ru
Lyudmila Shchegoleva
Petrozavodsk State University
Petrozavodsk, Russia
Email: schegoleva@petrsu.ru
Abstract—The article presents and discusses the problem of devel-
oping a robotic system for the care and supervision of people with
disabilities. The main functions of the robotic system are telecom-
munications between patients and their guardians, automatic
management of platform movement, manipulator movement and
gripper. An overview of existing solutions (devices) on the robotics
market that implement similar capabilities is presented. Each
device is a complex and expensive system. In order for a robotic
system to be widely accessible to all people, it is necessary
to reduce the cost of its components. Inexpensive mechanical
components have disadvantages in terms of movement accuracy.
We propose a hypothesis about the possibility of using artiﬁcial
intelligence to improve the accuracy of actions performed by a
robotic system. Analysis of the video image of the manipulator
movement can allow to adjust the speed and angle of rotation of
the motors in the joints of the manipulator, thereby making the
movements more accurate.
Keywords–Robotics; Remote control; Manipulator; Alarm sys-
tem; Smart capture.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The value of human health and life is a priority for
everyone individually and for humanity as a whole. The de-
velopment of technologies allows to gradually exclude people
from those processes where they are forced to work physically,
monotonously and with a strain of attention. A special role in
this process belongs to robotics.
Science ﬁction writers have formed the image of a robot
as a thinking human-like mechanism that can interact with
humans and the environment. In reality, robots are complex
software and hardware complexes, mostly located in dark,
unheated workshops, away from humans. The reason for
the discrepancy between reality and ideas is the fact that
human likeness or anthropomorphism is an extremely com-
plex property. It is extremely difﬁcult to create an artiﬁcial
intelligence equal in ﬂexibility and power to the human one.
However, the ideal robot image remains as one of the goals
of technology development, including mechatronics, sensors,
electronics, mathematics, and information technology.
The level of technology development today allows us to
replace a person with software and hardware systems that can
perform part of human duties related to industrial production
and other areas of activity.
Robots from workshops and fenced spaces step into the
space of a human and the human is in the zone of action of
robots. It is clear that such interaction should be effective and
safe. Robots need to be adapted to human environment and to
interact with people just like any of us.
A current trend in robotics is the development of robots
for the social sphere of life of an individual and society as a
whole [1].
If a robot becomes a part of a humans life, if it interacts
with a person and has the intelligence to perform certain
tasks, then it can be considered as part of the Ambient
Intelligence [2].
The purpose of this research is to develop a robotic system
designed for monitoring and telecommunications with people
with disabilities, as well as to help them perform manipulations
with various objects (for example, to pick up a fallen object).
At the same time, the robotic system should not be bulky to
move freely inside a small, limited room, and expensive to be
accessible to patients with a low income level.
Nowadays, a robot for individuals is a complex and very
expensive system. Low-cost components have a number of
shortcomings, the main ones being non stability and non preci-
sion of movements. The main hypothesis is to use capabilities
of artiﬁcial intelligence to compensate shortcomings of low-
cost components and to construct robotics system available for
any person.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes the robotic system proposed, its designated purpose,
main functions and architecture. Section III lists the main
problems that arise when implementing a robotic system and
required solutions using artiﬁcial intelligence. Each of the
listed tasks can be considered as a separate one, without
reference to the robotic system proposed. There are various
approaches to solve these tasks. The most relevant approaches
are presented in Section IV. Some of the approaches have
already been implemented to some extent in existing robots.
Section V describes the existing robotic systems, in which
some tasks are partially solved. We conclude the work in
Section VI.
II.
DESCRIPTION OF THE ROBOTIC SYSTEM
Robotics technology can be deployed in healthcare [3].
Robotics for healthcare presents a major research challenge
due to the strong requirements to deal with humans. The
proposed solution belongs to the assistive robotics subdomain.
This subdomain requires more ﬂexible and compact systems
able to navigate in public areas, to grasp and manipulate soft
and delicate objects as stated in the Multi-Annual Roadmap
For Robotics in Europe [1]. Great importance is attached to
the use of artiﬁcial intelligence in such systems.
The aim of this research is to develop a robotic system de-
signed for the care and supervision of people with disabilities
(patients). There are often cases when the patient lives alone,
or remains alone for a long time. At the same time, the patient
can have certain autonomy, but can not be left unattended. It
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

is also important for the patient to communicate, ﬁrst of all
with their guardian (relatives) and to have the psychological
conﬁdence that they will not be abandoned and can ask for
help at any time. In such a situation, the best decision, of
course, is to have some person that will be constantly near the
patient. A human person can look after a patient, serve him,
help him, and talk to him. But, at the same time, a human
person can get tired and distracted. In addition, the number of
such people should be quite large.
The robotic system being developed is designed to replace
a person in such a situation.
The system functions include remote manual and au-
tonomous movement in an indoor environment (house, apart-
ment, ward), two-way video data exchange in real time be-
tween the patient and their guardian, tracking the patient’s
condition, detecting dangerous conditions of the patient and
transmitting an alarm signal to the guardian or immediately to
the rescue service, remote manual and autonomous control of
the manipulator and the gripper.
To implement these functions, the robotic system must have
a wheeled platform, a manipulator with a gripper, a video
camera, a screen, a set of sensors, a wireless data transmission
system, and a system controller. The robot is controlled in
autonomous mode and in manual or semi-autonomous mode
with the remote device.
This architecture has a number of advantages. Through the
use of the manipulator, there is an opportunity to interact with
objects located near the robot. For example, give the patient
a bottle of water or pick up a fallen item from the ﬂoor. The
video camera and screen provide a two-way exchange of video
data in real time using the Internet, as well as allow the robot
to receive commands from the patient, and allow the operator
to remotely manage the platform and the manipulator. The
system controller provides interaction of all subsystems of the
robot. The set of sensors includes sensors for determining the
distance to objects, for measuring the force effect. Sensors can
also include a video camera and microphone.
Thus, the patient and their guardian can be separated in
space at any distance within a sufﬁciently high-speed Internet,
staying constantly in touch. The guardian is able to remotely
provide assistance within the capabilities of the manipulator.
A prototype of the robotic system will be presented at the
St. Petersburg Technical Fair (PTFair) 2020.
III.
TASKS OF THE ROBOTIC SYSTEM
The robotic system must operate in manual mode and
automatic mode. Its main actions are the movement of the
platform, movement of the manipulator and clamping the
gripper. When performing these actions in manual mode, the
operator (guardian) controls all mechanisms (wheel motors,
manipulator servos and gripper), relying on the video image
transmitted from a video camera installed on the platform,
as well as from video cameras permanently installed in the
room. Even under these conditions, the completeness of the
view may not be achieved, and the accuracy and safety of
the movements may not be sufﬁcient to achieve the goal.
Therefore, in manual control mode, the system needs help
to ensure that these criteria are met. Moreover, these criteria
become more relevant, when robotic system work in automatic
mode.
Let us formulate the important tasks for managing the
robotic platform that require solutions in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial
intelligence:
•
Creation of the route of the platform movement,
avoiding dynamically appearing obstacles, recognizing
their shape and gaining experience in circumventing
them, and possibly moving them to free the passage;
•
Creation of the trajectory of the manipulator with
similar functions, but different degrees of freedom;
•
Selection of the position to capture depending on the
shape of the object to be manipulated;
•
The choice of the grabbing force depends on the
characteristics of the object to be manipulated, so that
on the one hand the object will not be broken, and on
the other hand the object will not fall (is ﬁrmly held);
•
The prediction actions in repetitive situations of work-
ing with objects and obstacles;
•
The detection abnormalities in the patient’s behaviour
and deciding whether to trigger an alarm.
Navigation, perception and cognition technologies provide
a robot with the means to measure and interpret its environ-
ment, to learn of intelligent behaviour. During care processes,
the database of typical motion and interaction patterns can
be accumulated by the robots themselves and transferred to a
shared knowledge base. Then, this knowledge will be used as
needed from this shared repository, thus this will be a novel
network ecosystem for robots.
A network centralized knowledge base and remote data
processing will reduce the energy requirements for individual
computing nodes of robotic systems. These nodes themselves
can be simpler and cheaper. In addition, the released resources
could be spent on improving the ergonomics of the design of
the robotic system.
Thus, it is the task of computer vision with deep processing
of the scene and environment surveillance, the task of the ob-
taining additional information about objects from the Internet
and the task of the gaining experience in manipulating with
various objects. That is the core of the intelligent system.
IV.
OVERVIEW OF SOLUTIONS BEING DEVELOPED
The problem of path planning for an automation moving in
a two-dimensional space has been known for a long time [4].
Navigation in indoor environment can occur in conditions
where the map or plan of the place is known and when such
a map needs to be made ﬁrst. When generating a route, it is
necessary to take into account the dimensions of the robotic
platform, as well as possible angles of its rotation. In the course
of patient activity, the location of objects may change, which
leads to generation of new routes in real time [5]. Now, the
ways to get information about the surrounding space are being
improved, the ability to process large amounts of information
is being accelerated, and path planning algorithms based on
the use of various types of information and deep processing
of information are being developed [6].
The sources of information are lidars that measure dis-
tances to surrounding objects in the range of 360 degrees,
video cameras, stereo-video cameras that receive ﬂat and three-
dimensional images in different electromagnetic wave spectra.
The movement is transferred from a ﬂat surface to a surface
that has a slope, where the power of the motors needs to be
taken into account to overcome the path. The movement is
considered in three-dimensional space and the path is being
created for ﬂying robots that must avoid obstacles from left,
right, above and below.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Truly smart devices must correctly identify obstacles. If
glasses are lying on the ﬂoor, the smart mobile robot must
understand that this is not just an uneven surface, but an extra
object lying on the ﬂoor. Is it possible to drive through it?
Should the robot go around the object? No, the glasses must be
picked up and put in a safe place. These tasks have not yet been
solved. For example, systems like Smart Walkers implement
some of these functions and are designed to help people who
have problems related to balance and gait stability [7].
Determining the trajectory of movement is also necessary
for the manipulator. This task is even more difﬁcult, since
the manipulator has a greater number of degrees of freedom
and operates in more complex conditions of external space. Its
task is not only to achieve the goal, but also not to hook other
objects with the manipulator. In [8], a vision system is used
to recognize both different target objects and their poses that
allow the robot to do pick-and-place operation, that includes
selecting the gripper type or the grip angle.
The theoretical base of the planning and implementation
of fast and absolute path accuracy motions for industrial ma-
nipulators constrained to a given geometric path is developed
in [9][10]. The asymptotic orbital stabilization of motions and
a novel analytical method for analysis and redesign of system’s
dynamics is achieved by use of a feedback control.
The next problem is gentle grabbing. One of the solutions is
based on an electrically controllable adhesion mechanism [11].
In [12], a mobile robot able to autonomously pick-up from
the ﬂoor objects a human is pointing at is presented. The
robot decides by itself if an object is suitable for grasping
by considering measures of size, position and the environment
suitability.
V.
OVERVIEW OF EXISTING DEVICES
Today, robotization takes place most actively in the follow-
ing civil industries:
•
Transport and logistics
•
Agriculture, forestry, water management
•
Medicine
•
Production
•
Civil infrastructure
•
Commerce and service
A. Transport and logistics
In this industry, there are three close areas:
•
Unmanned vehicles (cargo and passenger)
•
Remote inspection systems for complex or dangerous
objects
•
Warehouse automated systems
A lot of publications are devoted to the progress of driver-
less vehicles. This direction is the most promising and closest
to the production of ﬁnal products.
To solve the problem of remote inspection of complex
objects, autonomous systems are used. They operate in au-
tomatic and semi-automatic mode. A special feature of these
systems is the need to operate at a great distance from the
operator, in conditions where direct control is not possible. In
such situations, autonomous systems are forced to solve the
problem of moving along a given trajectory along the object
under study in ofﬂine mode, relying on a system of sensors
and artiﬁcial intelligence. In the case of ﬂying and ﬂoating
systems, it is necessary to take into account and compensate
for the unpredictable effects of wind or water currents.
Flyability Elios (Figure 1) is the world’s ﬁrst ﬂying robot
for technical inspection of industrial facilities and search
and rescue operations. It implements the following functions:
search for injured climbers in the cracks of the glacier; visual
and thermal inspection of steam boilers; inspection of container
ship’s ballast tanks; inspection and monitoring of mining
equipment [13].
Figure 1. Flying robot Flyability Elios [14].
The Naturaldrones StillFly ﬂying robot is designed to
survey high voltage power lines using multispectral and high
resolution cameras [15]. It operates under the operator’s con-
trol in semi-automatic mode. It allows to monitor the condition
of wires and structures of high-voltage supports.
The warehouse robots that transport goods in Amazon
warehouses are 4-5 times more efﬁcient than the company’s
employees who perform similar work [16].
B. Agriculture and forestry management
There is no doubt that there are many heavy, monotonous,
strenuous activities in this industry that humans would be
happy to hand over to robots.
The ecoRobotix weeding robot is equipped with a computer
vision system designed to identify weeds. After detecting a
weed, the robot sprays it with a small dose of herbicide [17].
AGROBOT E-Series (Figure 2) is the ﬁrst robotic harvester
for careful strawberry harvesting [18]. The ﬂexible platform
is equipped with 24 independent manipulators, easily adapts
to any farm conﬁguration, and is able to work at night. The
robot is able to determine the location of the berry and
its level of ripeness in real time. To solve this problem,
graphics processors are used that process information received
from short-range integrated color and infrared depth sensors.
Manipulators are able to grab the stalk of a ripe berry selected
by the AI with high precision, then cut the stalk and move
the fruit into a special transport container without harming the
berry. The developers also took care of the safety of people
interacting with the robot. Special lidars take care of the safety
of the surrounding ﬁeld workers. Crossing the virtual perimeter
stops the work of the robot, so as not to harm the person.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 2. AGROBOT E-Series [18].
TreeRover is a Canadian robot for the planting of trees
when conducting regeneration works [19]. A cassette with
seedlings and a special burrowing device is installed on the
robot’s wheel platform. The robot follows the route based on
GPS data and places seedlings from the cassette at a speciﬁed
distance from each other along the way.
C. Medicine
A prominent representative of clinical systems is the Da
Vinci robot surgeon (Figure 3), designed for performing sur-
gical operations [20]. As an executive device, it allows the
surgeon to see the operation area in a high-precision three-
dimensional format and operate with high-precision manipula-
tors in hard-to-reach places. In the future, robot surgeons will
be able to signiﬁcantly reduce the trauma of operations, mak-
ing them remotely through small incisions. It is also possible
that the movements of the scalpel and other instruments will
be synchronized with the breathing, heartbeat and other micro-
movements of patients, which will also increase the safety of
operations and reduce the number of tissue injuries.
Figure 3. The da Vinci surgical system [21].
Auxiliary medical robots perform the functions of nannies
and nurses. Robear (Figure 4) is the most developed represen-
tative of this group of robots. The robot presented in [22] is the
third experimental example of a robot that can lift a patient out
of bed and put him in a wheelchair. It is equipped with sensors
that allow it to avoid colliding with medical staff, patients,
furniture and ﬁt into doorways. A particularly important quality
of auxiliary medical robots is human safety. A patient can be
moved only in a narrow range of accelerations, be touched only
with carefully dosed effort and in precisely deﬁned places.
Figure 4. Experimental nursing care robot Robear [23].
D. Cobots for production
Apart from specialized robots, it should be consider such
types of robots as cobots (collaborative robots) (for example,
cobots Hanwha2 (Figure 5)). Their purpose is to perform work
in the same workspace with a person, without causing harm to
them [24]. Collaborative robots are used in small companies
where it is necessary to quickly and frequently reconﬁgure
production lines and integrate them into the existing production
process. Cobots successfully cope with complex, monotonous
physical actions, without requiring a salary increase and a
lunch break. But the main advantage of such robots is their
safety for humans when performing joint actions. In addition,
collaborative robots are open systems, which allows us to
program them to perform exactly the actions that are required
at the moment, as well as reprogram them after to perform
other actions.
E. Applicability of the solutions presented
Among the developments listed above, the most suitable for
implemented the functions we are interested in is AGROBOT.
It includes ”Real Time Artiﬁcial Intelligence” for determining
ripe berry of strawberry, but, only strawberry. It provides
human safety, but it moves only in a special organized space. It
provides precise moving to target and gentle grabbing. Table I
presents the main features of the robotic systems listed.
Thus, the market already has solutions that allow to im-
plement almost all the functionality of the proposed robotic
system. At the same time, the cost of such a solution will be
quite high. On the other hand, low-cost components allow to
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 5. Cobot Hanwha HCR-5 [25].
TABLE I. FEATURES OF ROBOTIC SYSTEMS
Robotic systems
Features
Flyability Elios
•
Obstacle avoidance
•
Eliminating potential harm to workers
•
Video translation
Naturaldrones StillFly
•
Obstacle avoidance
•
Video translation
Amazon warehouse robots
•
Route planning
•
Obstacle avoidance
ecoRobotix
•
Computer vision
•
Object recognition
•
The targeting an object
AGROBOT E-Series
•
Computer vision
•
Object recognition
•
The targeting an object
•
Gentle grabbing
•
Human security
TreeRover
•
Route planning
•
Manipulation
Da Vinci
•
Exceptional accuracy
•
Manipulation
•
Video translation
Robear
•
Route planning
•
Obstacle avoidance
•
Manipulation
•
Gentle grabbing
Hanhwa
•
Manipulation
•
Human security
get a similar product, but with rather poor characteristics of
movement accuracy. And here, too, artiﬁcial intelligence can
come to help. The capabilities of artiﬁcial intelligence with
use of feedback control can compensate for the shortcomings
of the mechanical system.
One of the main problems in the development of the system
is mechanical ﬂaws in the design of the manipulator and the
servos used in it, which do not guarantee an accurate rotation
at a given angle. Each movement is performed with a small
error, which accumulates in several joints of the manipulator,
leading to a signiﬁcant error in reaching the target position. It
is of interest to investigate the trajectories of the manipulator
using tracking with a video camera and teach the manipulator
to adjust the speed and angle of rotation of the motors in its
joints by analysing the video image. This approach is based
on methods presented in [10]. Memorizing the movements will
allow to use them in subsequent operations. An important point
here is the establishment of the limits of the motor errors,
within which compensation is still possible, since in other
cases compensation can lead to oscillations around the target
without reaching it.
Artiﬁcial intelligence will be used to analyze video images
and other sensors data and to form a knowledge base for ma-
nipulating manipulator elements in similar external conditions.
The functionality of the system being developed is sup-
posed to be endowed with the system properties listed below.
Conﬁgurability – the ability to easily and quickly re-
conﬁgure software and hardware to maximize the system’s
compliance with a wide range of tasks.
Adaptability – a response to changes in the work environ-
ment, including the ability to self-learn and apply autoconﬁg-
uration strategies.
Interaction – the ability to interact with the operator, pa-
tients, other robots, and other systems in the work environment.
Mobility – the ability to move in relation to the kinematics
and dynamics of manipulators, as well as positioning and
navigation within the working environment.
Manipulation – the ability to handle material objects and
tools, regardless of their shape, density and trajectory of move-
ment, approximately as a person does in natural conditions.
Perception - the ability to choose the measurement method,
to perform an effective analysis of signals and data received
from a complex of heterogeneous sensors, as well as to obtain
the maximum information output from the available data.
Autonomy – the ability to determine of the maximum level
of responsibility in the processes of system management, task
control, taking into account the context when interacting with
the patient, the operator and the work environment.
Cognition – the ability to implement functions that reduce
programming and conﬁguration requirements in deployed sys-
tems.
The implementation of these system features will allow to
create a system that fully corresponds to the task at hand, while
being safe for humans, easy to intuitively manage and quite
ﬂexible in both hardware and software.
VI.
CONCLUSION
This article examines the problem of developing a robotic
system for the elderly and people with disabilities. The main
purpose of the system is related to the implementation of the
telecommunications of the patient with the guardian, of the
remote manual control of platform and manipulator by the
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

guardian, and the autonomous control of the platform and the
manipulator. The implementation of a robotic device requires
solving a number of theoretical and technical problems. For
this purpose, the review of the current state of industrial
robotics and analytical problems of control was performed.
As a result, it was shown that the theoretical problems of
constructing the route of the platform, manipulator and gripper
are partially solved. The considered robotic systems used
in various sectors of the economy have the functions and
characteristics that the developed system should have. At the
same time, there is no device that fully meets the stated
requirements on the market yet. The implementation of some
functions, in particular, the correct capture of objects that
differ in structure and properties, is not represented in existing
robotic devices. In addition, all implemented devices have a
high cost, which makes it difﬁcult to use them widely. In
addition, the problem of population ageing is becoming more
urgent. The article hypothesizes that expensive components
can be replaced with cheaper, but less accurate ones. To
overcome the emerging problem of movement accuracy and
solve the problem of universal capture, it is proposed to use
artiﬁcial intelligence. In the future, it is planned to conduct
experiments to test the hypothesis and determine the limits of
applicability of artiﬁcial intelligence methods for correcting
inaccurate manipulator movements. This will allow to create
robotic systems that are more adapted to the diversity of the
real world and more versatile and ﬂexible.
In general, it is shown that robotic systems are actively
implemented in the professional activity and daily life of a
person. Solving the problem of reducing the cost of robotic
systems will lead to a wider introduction of robotics into
everyday life, which will make human life longer and more
comfortable.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is implemented in Petrozavodsk State Univer-
sity (PetrSU) with ﬁnancial support by the Ministry of Science
and Higher Education of Russia within Agreement no. 075-
11-2019-088 of 20.12.2019 on the topic ”Creating the high-
tech production of mobile microprocessor computing modules
based on SiP and PoP technology for smart data collection,
mining, and interaction with surrounding sources”. The work
is performed within the Government Program of Flagship
University Development for Petrozavodsk State University
(PetrSU) in 2017–2021.
REFERENCES
[1]
”Robotics 2020 Multi-Annual Roadmap For Robotics in Europe,” Hori-
zon 2020 Call ICT-2017 (ICT-25, ICT-27 and ICT-28), 2016.
[2]
D. Korzun, E. Balandina, A. Kashevnik, S.Balandin, and F. Viola,
”Ambient Intelligence Services in IoT Environments: Emerging Re-
search and Opportunities,” IGI Global, 2019, ISBN13: 9781522589730.
http://doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-8973-0
[3]
S.
Kar,
”Robotics
in
HealthCare,”
in
2nd
International
Conference
on
Power
Energy,
Environment
and
Intelligent
Control
(PEEIC),
Greater
Noida,
India,
2019,
pp.
78-83,
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1109/PEEIC47157.2019.8976668.
[4]
S. M. LaValle, ”Planning Algorithms,” Cambridge University Press, May
29, 2006.
[5]
H. J. S. Feder and J-J. E. Slotine, ”Real-time path planning using
harmonic potentials in dynamic environments,” in Proceedings of IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, Albuquerque,
NM, April 1997, pp. 874-881.
[6]
K. A. Muteb, ”Vision-Based Mobile Robot Map Building and Environ-
ment Fuzzy Learning,” 2014 5th International Conference on Intelligent
Systems, Modelling and Simulation, Langkawi, 2014, pp. 43-48, doi:
10.1109/ISMS.2014.155.
[7]
S. D. Sierra, J. F. Molina, D. A. G´omez, M. C. M´unera, and C. A.
Cifuentes, ”Development of an Interface for Human-Robot Interaction
on a Robotic Platform for Gait Assistance: AGoRA Smart Walker,” 2018
IEEE ANDESCON, Santiago de Cali, 2018, pp. 1-7, doi: 10.1109/AN-
DESCON.2018.8564594.
[8]
H. Lin, Y. Chen, and Y. Chen, ”Robot vision to recognize both object
and rotation for robot pick-and-place operation,” 2015 International
Conference on Advanced Robotics and Intelligent Systems (ARIS),
Taipei, 2015, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/ARIS.2015.7158364
[9]
S. S. Pchelkin, A. S. Shiriaev, A. Robertsson, and L. B. Freidovich,
”Integrated time-optimal trajectory planning and control design for
industrial robot manipulator,” 2013 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems, Tokyo, 2013, pp. 2521-2526, doi:
10.1109/IROS.2013.6696711
[10]
S. S. Pchelkin et al., ”On Orbital Stabilization for Industrial Ma-
nipulators: Case Study in Evaluating Performances of Modiﬁed PD+
and Inverse Dynamics Controllers,” in IEEE Transactions on Control
Systems Technology, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 101-117, Jan. 2017, doi:
10.1109/TCST.2016.2554520
[11]
J. Guo, J. Leng, and J. Rossiter, ”Electroadhesion Technologies for
Robotics: A Comprehensive Review,” in IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 313-327, April 2020, doi: 10.1109/TRO.2019.2956869.
[12]
P. De La Puente, D. Fischinger, M. Bajones, D. Wolf, and M. Vincze,
”Grasping Objects From the Floor in Assistive Robotics: Real World
Implications and Lessons Learned,” in IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 123725-
123735, 2019, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2938366.
[13]
”Raw
Video:
Drone
Used
to
Inspect
Huge
Boiler”,
URL:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v= nMdSb0X5bo&feature=youtu.be
[retrieved: July, 2020]
[14]
”FLYABILITY”,
URL:
https://www.ﬂyability.com/elios/
[retrieved:
July, 2020]
[15]
”Drone
(ND
StillFly)
for
Power
Lines
Monitoring”,
URL:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xsMqk2BPheQ
[retrieved:
July,
2020]
[16]
”Roboty-kladovshchiki Amazon rabotayut v 5 raz effektivnee lyudei”,
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nQty01yjV9I [retrieved: July,
2020]
[17]
”ecoRobotix”,
URL:
http://robotrends.ru/robopedia/ecorobotix/
[re-
trieved: July, 2020]
[18]
”AGROBOT”, URL: https://www.agrobot.com/e-series/ [retrieved: July,
2020]
[19]
”TreeRover
–
robot
dlya
vysadki
derev’ev”,
URL:
http://robocraft.ru/blog/news/3419.html [retrieved: July, 2020]
[20]
”Demonstratsiya
raboty
robota-khirurga
davinchi”,
URL:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JT1b3QHi64o
[retrieved:
July,
2020]
[21]
”About da Vinci Systems”, URL: https://www.davincisurgery.com/da-
vinci-systems/about-da-vinci-systems [retrieved: July, 2020]
[22]
”Samyi
milyi
robot
truditsya
v
meditsine”,
URL:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N3kgxardbqA
[retrieved:
July,
2020]
[23]
”The
strong
robot
with
the
gentle
touch”,
URL:
https://www.riken.jp/en/news pubs/research news/pr/2015/20150223 2/
[retrieved: July, 2020]
[24]
”Koboty
Hanwha:
obzor
lineiki
kollaborativnykh
robotov
Hanwha
HCR-3,
HCR-5,
HCR-12”,
URL:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J30bkx5f9aU
[retrieved:
July,
2020]
[25]
”A
variety
of
HCR
robots
to
meet
your
needs”,
URL:
https://www.hanwharobotics.com/ [retrieved: July, 2020]
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

