On the Effectiveness of Blockchain Against Cryptocurrency Attacks
Sarwar Sayeed, Hector Marco-Gisbert
School of Computing, Engineering and Physical Sciences
University of the West of Scotland
High St, Paisley PA1 2BE, UK
Email: {Sarwar.Sayeed,Hector.Marco}@uws.ac.uk
Abstract—Cryptocurrencies are being widely adopted to perform
various online-based transactions; therefore, they are required to
maintain a consensus to ensure a secured transaction. Blockchain
comprises a distributed ledger, which holds digital records of
individual crypto-transactions. Besides recording a particular
activity, blockchain also ensures that the contents of the ledger
are decided based on agreements of distinct participants. Various
consensus mechanisms are followed by blockchain to ensure
blocks are being summed up representing legitimate data on
the network. However, the major consensus protocols comprise
various limitations; and these are prone to different types of
cyber attacks, such as Distributed denial-of-service, 51% attack,
Double-spending, Long-range attack. In this paper, we analyze
several attack vectors that can cause serious security threats
due to the loopholes in the consensus mechanism. Our study
involves examining 3 signiﬁcant consensus mechanisms, which
are followed by major cryptocurrencies. We also discuss the
limitations of individual consensus mechanisms and demonstrate
their robustness towards various attack vectors. We conclude that,
although blockchain comprises proper consensus mechanisms to
enhance secured crypto-transaction, unfortunately, it is not strong
enough to defend against some cryptocurrency attacks which
could discourage some users to adopt this technology.
Keywords–Blockchain; Consensus; Cyber Attack.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The blockchain is a medium of distributing digital infor-
mation to users who are connected to the block. It uses a
distributed system for veriﬁcation and holds a record of every
transaction that ever took place. Blockchain was ﬁrst initi-
ated in 2008 by a pseudonymous named Satoshi Nakamoto;
however, it still remains a mystery about the founder of this
technology. In the blockchain network, each block contains
records of transactions and connected using cryptography. It
is a secure and trustworthy platform, which can be used to
produce applications, such as voting systems, games, online
shops [1].
A cryptocurrency is a revolutionary growing technology
that makes it possible for digital transactions to occur in just a
few minutes. The transaction takes place in, an unidentiﬁed
blockchain network; regardless of the network failure the
transaction will still ﬂow accordingly. In a blockchain network,
every miner can keep their data and ensure that the chain is
not corrupted. If an adversary tries to corrupt the block, then
the whole system veriﬁes every data for authenticity, and any
corrupted ﬁnding gets restricted from the block.
Bitcoin is the ﬁrst digital currency, which evolved in
2009 on blockchain platform. Data with several blocks in the
chain cannot be altered without having every block changed;
hence, making the whole process very secure and reliable.
Beside Bitcoin, various other digital currencies, such as Ether,
Litecoin, are currently being dominated in the crypto platform.
Each cryptocurrency follows a consensus mechanism to make
the transfer process secure and free from the attacks. However,
recent attacks have questioned the reliability of the digital
transactions and showed there is a loophole to bypass the secu-
rity. Bitﬁnex and Dao incident are some of the recent incidents,
which resulted in stealing millions of cryptocurrencies [2] [3].
Hence, it is essential to have a secure consensus mechanism
in place.
Our major contributions in this paper are:
•
We discuss ten cryptocurrency attacks, which not only
can corrupt the cryptocurrencies but also can exploit
the consensus mechanism.
•
We assess three widely used blockchain consensus
protocols, including their limitations.
•
We evaluate the effectiveness of individual consensus
mechanism by classifying towards discrete exploita-
tion type.
This paper is organized as follows: Section II is the back-
ground section, which discusses the major cryptocurrencies.
Section III presents the attack vectors that can be catastrophic
to the blockchain network. In addition to that, phishing and
scams are also discussed. Section IV summarizes the security
enhancements in brief. Section V includes the discussion of 3
consensus mechanisms and limitations associated with each of
the mechanisms. In Section VI, the consensus mechanisms are
analyzed, in the context of attack vectors, and represented in
a table. To conclude the paper, we discuss the ﬁndings from
our analysis and future work to be undertaken.
II.
BACKGROUND
In this section, we discuss ﬁve signiﬁcant cryptocurrencies.
Table I presents some cryptocurrencies that are classiﬁed
according to the consensus mechanism. Figure 1 shows the
recent market capitalization of 10 cryptocurrencies [4] that are
dominating at the moment.
A cryptocurrency is a form of digital cash, which uses
cryptography to process a secure and reliable transactions
over a peer-to-peer (P2P) network. The transaction process
is based on consensus, which means disagreement from any
of the peers on the network will cause an interruption in the
act. About 1662 cryptocurrencies exist at the moment and
Bitcoin is the most widely used cryptocurrencies among all.
The cryptocurrencies have limited supply as cash currencies
do and they can be controlled by an algorithm process.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

TABLE I. CRYPTOCURRENCIES BASED ON CONSENSUS MECHANISM
Consensus Mechanism
Cryptocurrencies
Proof of work
Bitcoin, Ether, Nimiq, Litecoin, Monero
Proof of stake
Linda, Neo, Pivx, Okcash, Stratis
Delegated proof of stake
Lisk, Ark, Rise, Oxycoin, BitShares
A. Bitcoin
Bitcoin was ﬁrst proposed in 2008 and came into effect
since 2009 [5]. It is an electronic based payment system where
the authenticity is based on mathematical proof. The main
concept of this cryptocurrency is to perform digital transac-
tions and exchanges over a secured medium without having
any central supremacy. Bitcoin is operated in a decentralized
system, which can be considered as an alternative version of a
bank. Once a transaction occurs, the sender is required to wait
for the conﬁrmations from the miners. The transactions get
into the pool for authorizations. Mining computers then gather
the unresolved transactions from the pool and switch them
to a mathematical equation. Miners verify the transactions by
solving the equation, and a new Bitcoin block gets added to
the blockchain.
B. Ether
Ether is another popular cryptocurrency, which was
launched in 2015. Ether, a crypto-fuel, is an important attribute
to keep the Ethereum platform running [6]. Ether is used
as an incentive for the application developers who develops
efﬁcient decentralized applications, a unique way of keeping
the network active. Whenever a node validates a block on
the Ethereum blockchain, 5 Ether is generated and rewarded
as an incentive to the node. It normally takes 15-17 seconds
for a new block to be publicized. Users wishing to utilize a
decentralized application on the platform are required to pay
in Ether as a service fee.
C. Ripple
Ripple came into effect in 2012. Ripple is a Real Time
Gross Settlement system, which functions as a cryptocurrency
Figure 1. Market capitalization of cryptocurrencies (in billion) as of March
2018
and digital payment network [7]. Ripple relies on a common
network, which is operated by a network autonomously vali-
dating server that can compare the transactions. The Ripple
platform is decentralized and does not comprise proof of
work (PoW) or proof of stake (PoS); instead, it relies on
a shared public database. Since Ripple structure does not
depend on mining; therefore, the cost of computing power and
network latency is very low. A consensus protocol performs the
validation of balances and transactions. The consensus process
involves distinct nodes that determine the ﬁrst transaction by
going through a poll. The approval time from the poll is very
fast and roughly takes 5 seconds.
D. Monero
Monero is a cryptocurrency, which was launched in 2014.
It is privately based untraceable currency that focuses on de-
centralization [8]. The privacy is ensured by a special method
called “ring signatures”. The method works by having a group
of signatures, which involves a minimum of one genuine
participant. Monero is dynamically scalable and comprises
isolated features comparing to Bitcoin or Ether. For instance,
Monero includes cryptography that protects all the potential
transaction information, such as sender, receiver, transaction
amount, from the outside world and giving the sender the
ability to decide who will be allowed to view a particular
transaction.
E. Litecoin
Litecoin is another cryptocurrency, which was developed
by Charlie Lee and came into effect since 2011 [9]. Litecoin
is one of the oldest cryptocurrencies that came into effect after
Bitcoin. It is able to manage a large volume of transactions than
other cryptocurrencies, such as Bitcoin. Litecoin generates the
blocks more frequently; hence, it supports more transactions
at a faster pace. The transaction fees are relatively low and
determined based on the size of the block. It comprises much
shorter blocks comparing to Bitcoin; therefore, the fee is low.
III.
SECURITY THREATS
In this section, we discuss some of the important attacking
techniques that can be dangerous in corrupting the cryptocur-
rencies as well as exploiting the blockchain.
A.
51% Attack
The 51% attack can be very critical in the blockchain
network if exploited successfully [10]. The vulnerability starts
by creating a corrupt version of the blockchain, which is iso-
lated from the real version. Since blockchain policy complies
with the longest chain to demonstrate the accuracy of the
transaction, if the adversary manages to drive the longest chain,
the corrupt version of blockchain will be predicted as a genuine
chain. Therefore, the transactions that are not listed in the
corrupted chain will be reversed. In the context of Bitcoin,
once a transaction is approved by the sender it gets into the
pool. It is then picked by individual miners to develop a block
of transactions. The miner who gets ﬁrst to solve the problem
produces it to other miners to check the authenticity. In a 51%
attack, a group of adversaries tries to solve the problem and
then generate child of the blockchain so that they can avoid
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

showing the solution to other miners in the network. However,
a large number of miners exist on the blockchain network,
and it is nearly impossible to beat the hashing power of the
network.
B. Sybil Attack
The Sybil attack comprises similar characteristics as 51%
attack. This attacking method was ﬁrst brought into attention
by John Douceur, a researcher based on Microsoft [11]. In a
Sybil attack, the adversary develops a vast amount of nodes
in a sole network to cause disruptions over the network.
This attack also involves corrupting a network to perform
an unprivileged transaction or altering valid transactions. The
network is unable to discover if multiple nodes are being
controlled by a single attacker. In this attacking technique, the
attacker may use several devices, virtual machines or Internet
Protocol (IP) addresses. Normally in a centralized system,
the monitoring process involves verifying if several requests
are being made from the same device, but the blockchain
does not possess such features. In blockchain technology,
adversaries are restricted to the number of blocks they can
produce. However, this attacking technique is very rare as the
digital currency infrastructure was developed considering the
restriction of the Sybil attack.
C. Distributed Denial-of-Service
Distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) is a type of cyber
attack that exists from the past two decades to perform
exploitation over various networks. DDoS is one of the most
common attack vectors in the blockchain network, and the
main objective of the adversary is to ﬂood the network with a
very high amount of trafﬁc [12]. This attack is performed in
the blockchain network so that authentic transactions could be
stopped from being processed and invalid transactions could
be accomplished. However, a DDoS attack over the blockchain
network does not involve stealing the digital currency rather it
just mitigates the network activity.
D. Mining Malware
In this attacking technique, the adversary takes advantage
of cryptojacking malware to perform exploitation. It involves
infecting miners system with malware to have the incentive
directed to the attacker’s wallet [13]. Regardless of the victim’s
location, mining malware can be exploited from any part of
the world. Cryptojacking in mining malware comprises similar
approach as ransomware. However, instead of having a good
chunk of money within a short period, it focuses on achieving
the targeted amount over a period. Cryptojacking works in
stealth mode; hence, it is an attracting exploitation technique
over ransomware. It may not require much effort to infect
a system and can spread via corrupted websites or phishing
campaigns.
E. P + Epsilon Attack
The PoW system is usually vulnerable to this type of
attack [14]. It is a simple statical observation and based on
the uncoordinated choice model. In an uncoordinated choice
model, all the users are not inspired to engage with each other.
Hence, they construct a group, which suddenly turns into big
enough to dominate. Essentially when the network performs
normal, the miners can never construct the miner group large
enough to manipulate the network. It correctly assumes that
the average miners will look after their interest.
F. Long-Range Attack
A long-range attack can occur due to the weak subjectivity
model [15]. In the PoS chain, only a limited number of users
participate at the beginning, and as the user increases, they
form the chain as a pool of miners. Hence, users who staked
at the chain, grow more prominent. Those limited number of
users, from the beginning, can join together to maintain the
previous chain back in action. In the following stages, they
will be the one to dominate in mining blocks. PoS does not
set a limit on the growth of the chain; hence, the chain can
grow very long.
G. Eclipse Attack
In this attacking technique, an adversary manipulates the
P2P network to control over the information that a node com-
prises. The exploitation may start when a peer communicates
with other peers using gossip protocol [16]. An adversary can
separate the target from the network chain so that the target
could be diverted to misuse the computation power on invalid
segment of the blockchain. In an eclipse attack, the adversary
resides in between the nodes and the rest of the network by
regulating the capacity of the node. It gives an attacker to
perform a 51% attack with lot less mining power [17]. The
attacker aims to manipulate the nodes to the attackers IP so that
connections are made to their chosen destination. The attacking
process goes through three phases. However, conducting this
attack can be very expensive since the attacker is required to
control the whole network system.
H. Border Gateway Protocol Hijacking
Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) hijacking is also known as
routing attack. In this attacking technique, the Internet Service
Provider makes false announcements over the routing system
so that trafﬁc could be diverted [18]. An investigation shows
that the BGP attacks are increasing time to time over the Bit-
coin network and a minimum of 100 BGP attacks are occurring
on a monthly basis. The investigation also demonstrates that
447 nodes were hijacked in 2015. This attack vector can be
performed to beneﬁt from 2 attacking stages. Firstly, divide
the network and secondly, obstruct the blocks by 20 minutes.
Though the blockchain system is a decentralized network;
however, when considering it from the routing perspective then
it can be regarded as centralized as about 100 IP preﬁxes are
managing about 20% of the Bitcoin hosts. Hence, this attacking
technique can be proven fatal due to its centralization.
I.
The Balance Attack
The Balance attack aims to focus on the nodes, which
comprise balanced mining power. It mainly enforces double-
spending on PoW consensus mechanism [19]. In this attacking
technique, the adversary puts a delay between the legit sub-
groups of nodes. The next step involves the adversary mining
as many blocks as possible in another subgroup conﬁrming that
other sub-tree puts importance on the transaction subgroups.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The adversary aims to exploit the ghost protocol by separating
the blockchain branch from the other nodes in the network. At
a later time, the separated branch will be furnished to other
nodes to put an impact on the branch selection process.
J. Phishing and Scams
The number of scams occurs in the crypto-space is just
remarkable, but not in a good sense. The main idea of the
phishing and scams is to trick users to steal money from
their wallet [20]. Phishing can spread from device to device,
and technology-oriented people can easily fall for it without
even noticing the inﬂuence. Scams can occur in many ways,
for instance, an important email from the wallet asking to
sync the account with a network which has just been hard-
forked. Scams can also occur through social media by asking
potential information from the user making it look like a legit
request. Slack and forums attack can also occur by providing a
corrupted link and asking the miners to log in through that link.
Phishy wallets, fake ads are also some of the scam techniques
being used to steal cryptocurrencies.
IV.
SECURITY TECHNIQUES
In this section, we summarize some of the security en-
hancements, which can be implemented to ensure a secured
blockchain network.
A. SmartPool
SmartPool is a decentralized mining pool, which is based
on Ethereum smart contracts [21]. SmartPool comprises vari-
ous innovative data structures and design options, which have
resulted in to be secure, efﬁcient and reliable. SmartPool
enhances probabilistic veriﬁcation that helps to decrease the
number of messages and cut down the expense for the miners.
SmartPool provides a solution by ensuring a decentralized
pool, mitigating transaction censorship threat, guaranteeing
low variance.
B. Oyente
Oyente is a symbolic execution tool, which is used to
ﬁnd security bugs in smart contracts [22]. Oyente examines
Ethereum smart contracts to ﬁgure out security loophole,
which can cause potential threats. Oyente does not only detect
unsafe bugs but also investigates every practical execution
path. An experiment carried out by Oyente on 19,366 smart
contracts, and it resulted in 8,833 of them are vulnerable.
C. Hawk
Hawk is a framework to develop privacy-preserving smart
contracts [23]. Hawk does not require cryptography implemen-
tation, so it gives an opportunity to the non-programmers to
write Hawk program. A Hawk compiler is in place to compile
the Hawk program. One-chain privacy and contractual security
are two security approaches guaranteed by Hawk to enhance
security.
V.
BLOCKCHAIN DISTRIBUTED CONSENSUS
MECHANISMS
In this section, we analyze three blockchain consensus
mechanisms, which are being utilized by the major cryptocur-
rencies such as Bitcoin, Litecoin, Ether and so on. We also
put our focus on the limitations of each mechanism. Table II
summarizes some of the main features of each consensus.
The key point of the consensus mechanism is to ensure that
the entire network agrees upon the contents of the ledger by
following a set of rules. It also inﬂuences the security and
economic guidelines of the blockchain network.
A. Proof of Work
Proof of work (PoW) is a consensus mechanism, which
is based on solving a mathematical equation. PoW was ﬁrst
introduced by Bitcoin and currently implemented in many
other cryptocurrencies [24]. The action involves mining where
each node on the network is referred to as a miner. The
process of rewarding miners ensures that it is running while
establishing blocks. Miners are the foundation of PoW; hence,
they are responsible for authorizing new transactions and
recording them to the ledger. It usually takes 10 minutes to
mine a Bitcoin block by solving strong mathematical equation
based on a cryptographic hash algorithm. A successfully solved
equation results in PoW; therefore, the transaction is consid-
ered as valid. Miners receive rewards for solving mathematical
equation and transaction fees.
One of the major drawbacks of PoW is the cost of energy.
The amount of energy the Bitcoin mining consumes per
year is more than 159 countries individually. Research shows
that Bitcoin to consume all the electricity of the world by
February 2020 [25]. PoW for Bitcoin mining requires extensive
hardware to make the mining process smooth and fast, which
results in huge expenditures. Moreover, the effort in generating
the blocks are useless as it can not be applied anywhere but
takes a lot of time and energy to form the blocks.
B. Proof of Stake
Proof of stake (PoS) is another consensus mechanism,
which has gained popularity in recent time. Peercoin was
the ﬁrst cryptocurrency to use this mechanism in 2012. In
this consensus mechanism, a randomized system is applied to
determine the creator of the following block [26]. The process
involves giving information about the amount of cryptocur-
rency and the duration that cryptocurrency has been held for
by a particular user. It does not need to meet any rigid hardware
requirements and also abandons the high computation require-
ment. The possibility of obtaining the reward by developing a
block entirely depends on the number of tokens possessed by
potential users in the network. In PoS, each node is connected
to an address and participants with a large number of coins
likely to achieve the address, as well as involve in mining the
TABLE II. MAIN FEATURES OF CONSENSUS MECHANISMS
Consensus
Energy Cost
Decentralization
Processing Speed
PoW
High
High
Low
PoS
Low
High
High
DPoS
Low
Low
High
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

next blocks. The advantage of PoS is that comparing to PoW;
it is not energy intensive.
PoS suffers from weak subjectivity, and the implementation
process is very complex and challenging. Another limitation of
PoS system is that a large number of stakeholders have control
over the network based on technical and economical aspects;
therefore, making it a monopolized system.
C. Delegated Proof of Stake
Delegated proof of stake (DPoS) is another consensus
mechanism that allows the shareholders to vote for wit-
nesses [27]. One vote per share policy is performed giving
the stakeholders the opportunity to have more votes if they
own most coins. The witnesses get paid for building individual
blocks, and failure to do so may result in being unpaid and
voted out. They must obtain the largest number of votes
from random stakeholders to perform the instructed task. The
stakeholders also vote for the delegates to reform and make
changes in the network which can be reviewed for an utmost
decision. However, the rewards depend on the accomplishment
of the DPoS mechanism. The voting power is endorsed by
analyzing the number of tokens an account is holding. In a
particular DPoS version, to prove dedication, the delegates may
require to deposit funds in the time-locked security account and
any corrupted behavior will result in money being seized. The
version is called as deposit-based proof of stake [28].
Though DPoS enhances efﬁciency in the transactions;
however, it comprises various limitations. The signiﬁcant lim-
itation of DPoS is that adequate decentralization cannot be
obtained. An excessive amount of validators slow down the
network. Moreover, delegates get penalized for not abiding
with particular rules.
VI.
ANALYSIS
In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of individual
consensus mechanism. Our analysis does not involve dis-
cussing only the effectiveness rather it also classiﬁes each
mechanism towards distinct exploitation type and presents in
a table. We assess three primary consensus mechanisms, and
Table III shows that consensus mechanisms are vulnerable to
various attack vectors.
The act of PoW method is too slow. Expensive hardware
requirement and energy cost make it very costly. Some min-
ing ﬁrms are dominating with enough mining power; hence,
attacks to the mining ﬁrms can cause disruptions and also put
massive impact over the cryptocurrency. PoW is vulnerable
to the 51% attack, and a P + epsilon attack can also be
carried out at no cost by having the required budget. Hence,
the crypto-security level of the PoW based system towards P
+ epsilon attack can be considered as zero [29]. Our analysis
indicates that the Sybil attack can exploit PoW as an adversary
can interrupt the ﬂow of the network by developing several
malicious nodes. PoW is also vulnerable to the Balance attack.
The Ethereum protocol and private blockchain are mainly
vulnerable to this attacking technique. However, the adversary
with much hashing power more likely to corrupt the Bitcoin
blockchain network. In addition to that, our analysis also shows
that the DDoS attack and BGP hijacking can corrupt the
regular ﬂow of this consensus mechanism.
Comparing to PoW, the signiﬁcant advantage of PoS is
the energy savings. However, in the context of security, it is
not a fully secured mechanism. PoS is vulnerable to the 51%
attack. To conduct a 51% attack, the adversary will have to
achieve 51% of the cryptocurrency. Since it is quite tough
to achieve 51% cryptocurrency; therefore, the threat of that
attack can be very rare. However, PoS can be exploited by the
long-range attack. PoS is not vulnerable to the P + epsilon
attack since the adversary requires to produce a huge amount
of budget to contribute as a security deposit for the participants
when voting for the minority [29]. The Sybil attack can exploit
PoS. A DDoS attack can also be carried out to disrupt the
consensus mechanism. PoS can be an expensive option for
novice attackers. It requires users to stake their own money
ﬁrst to validate transactions and produce blocks. Any corrupted
activity in the network will conﬁscate the staked amount.
Hence, the adversary will also lose their right to participate
in future activities. This particular approach will demotivate
potential attackers to carry out speciﬁc attack vectors; thus, it
will enhance extra security.
Our analysis shows that comparing to PoS and PoW, DPoS
comprises an entirely different consensus approach. Though
the distinct approach holds advantages concerning energy cost,
speed and processing time; however, in the context of security,
DPoS is also not very secure. The adversary can convince the
stakeholders to obtain 51% voting power and carry out a 51%
attack [30]. It is also vulnerable to the other primary attack
vectors, such as long-range attack, DDoS attack, P + epsilon
attack, Sybil attack and the Balance attack. DPoS is not fully
decentralized; therefore, it can always be the focal point of
random attackers.
In the distributed network, a source entity can produce mul-
tiple entities from which some may not be reliable to perform
particular tasks. Hence, a consensus algorithm is in place to
ensure the reliability of the speciﬁc network. Cryptocurrencies
in the blockchain network take advantage of the consensus
algorithm to provide a secured transaction. Truechain is a
blockchain platform, which comprises a hybrid consensus
mechanism [31]. Proof of activity (PoA) is another hybrid
consensus algorithm, which combines PoW with PoS [32].
Even though hybrid consensus ensures high security but PoA
has been criticized due to the resources required for mining.
TABLE III. CONSENSUS MECHANISMS THAT ARE VULNERABLE TO VARIOUS ATTACKS
Consensus Mechanism
Long-Range Attack
51% Attack
DDoS
P + Epsilon Attack
Sybil Attack
The Balance Attack
BGP Hijacking
PoW







PoS







DPoS







13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

VII.
CONCLUSION
The blockchain is a remarkable evaluation, and decen-
tralization has made it a very reliable and secure medium
for digital transactions. In this paper, we studied ten major
attacking techniques. Our analysis indicated that some of the
techniques could corrupt the consensus mechanism and also
carry out crypto thefts. Major cryptocurrencies were discussed
and presented in a table based on their consensus classiﬁcation.
We evaluated the effectiveness of 3 signiﬁcant consensus
mechanisms and pointed out that alongside various limitations,
they are also vulnerable to different types of attack vectors.
Though blockchain consensus mechanism is a robust
method conversely, it is visible that they are still vulnerable
and can remarkably have an effect on particular cryptocurrency
if successfully exploited. The vulnerability in the consensus
mechanisms might discourage the miners to get involved in
the mining process. Thus, we encourage the re-implementation
of the mechanisms with robust security to mitigate the risks.
For our future work, we aim to analyze several other
consensus mechanisms and develop a standard method, which
can be used to relate various attack vectors and limitations to
the consensus mechanisms. Our method will be used to deter-
mine particular exploitation class and constraints of individual
consensus mechanism.
REFERENCES
[1]
“What is Blockchain,” 2018, URL: https://lisk.io/academy/blockchain-
basics/what-is-blockchain [retrieved: July, 2018].
[2]
S. FalKon, The Story of the DAOŁŁIts History and Consequences, 2017
(accessed April, 2018), https://medium.com/swlh/the-story-of-the-dao-
its-history-and-consequences-71e6a8a551ee.
[3]
C. Baldwin, “Bitcoin worth 72 million stolen from Bitﬁnex exchange
in
Hong
Kong,”
2016,
URL:
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-
bitﬁnex-hacked-hongkong/bitcoin-worth-72-million-stolen-from-
bitﬁnex-exchange-in-hong-kong-idUSKCN10E0KP
[retrieved:
July,
2018].
[4]
M.
Frankel,
“15
largest
Cryptocurrencies
by
Market
Cap,”
2018,
URL:
https://www.fool.com/investing/2018/03/16/how-many-
cryptocurrencies-are-there.aspx [retrieved: July, 2018].
[5]
“What is Bitcoin,” 2018, URL: https://www.coindesk.com/information/what-
is-bitcoin/ [retrieved: July, 2018].
[6]
“What is Ether,” URL: https://bitcoinmagazine.com/guides/what-ether/
[retrieved: July, 2018].
[7]
J.
Martindale,
“What
is
Ripple,”
2018,
URL:
https://www.digitaltrends.com/computing/what-is-ripple/
[retrieved:
June, 2018].
[8]
P. Bajpai, “The 6 Most Important Cryptocurrencies Other Than Bit-
coin,” 2018, URL: https://www.investopedia.com/tech/most-important-
cryptocurrencies-other-than-bitcoin/ [retrieved: July, 2018].
[9]
J.
Bushmaker,
“What
is
Litecoin,”
2018,
URL:
https://www.investinblockchain.com/what-is-litecoin/ [retrieved: July,
2018].
[10]
J. S., “Blockchain: how a 51% attack works double spend at-
tack,” 2018, URL: https://medium.com/coinmonks/what-is-a-51-attack-
or-double-spend-attack-aa108db63474 [retrieved: May, 2018].
[11]
J. Risberg, “Yes, the Blockchain Can Be Hacked,” 2018, URL:
https://coincentral.com/blockchain-hacks/ [retrieved: June, 2018].
[12]
S.
Morgan,
“Blockchain
startup:
300,000
DDoS
attacks
will
cause
150B
in
damages
this
year,”
2017,
URL:
https://www.csoonline.com/article/3234775/security/blockchain-
startup-300000-ddos-attacks-will-cause-150b-in-damages-this-
year.html [retrieved: July, 2018].
[13]
D.
Palmer,
“Cryptocurrency-mining
malware:
Why
it
is
such
a
menace
and
where
it’s
going
next,”
2018,
URL:
https://www.zdnet.com/article/cryptocurrency-mining-malware-why-it-
is-such-a-menace-and-where-its-going-next/ [retrieved: June, 2018].
[14]
V.
Buterin,
“The
P
+
epsilon
Attack,”
2015,
URL:
https://blog.ethereum.org/2015/01/28/p-epsilon-attack/
[retrieved:
June, 2018].
[15]
A.
Sharma,
“Understanding
Proof
of
Stake
through
its
Flaws.
Part
3
Long
Range
Attacks,”
2018,
URL:
https://medium.com/@abhisharm/understanding-proof-of-stake-
through-its-ﬂaws-part-3-long-range-attacks-672a3d413501
[retrieved:
June, 2018].
[16]
F. Wang, “Eclipse Attacks on Bitcoins Peer-to-Peer Network,” 2015,
URL:
https://medium.com/mit-security-seminar/eclipse-attacks-on-
bitcoin-s-peer-to-peer-network-e0da797302c2 [retrieved: May, 2018].
[17]
E. Heilman, A. Kendler, A. Zohar, and S. Goldberg, “Eclipse attacks
on bitcoin’s peer-to-peer network,” in Proceedings of the 24th USENIX
Conference on Security Symposium, ser. SEC’15.
Berkeley, CA,
USA: USENIX Association, 2015, pp. 129–144. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2831143.2831152
[18]
P.-A. Vervier, “Why BGP Hijacking Remains a Security Scourge,”
2018, URL: https://www.symantec.com/blogs/feature-stories/why-bgp-
hijacking-remains-security-scourge [retrieved: July, 2018].
[19]
C. Natoli and V. Gramoli, “The balance attack against proof-of-
work blockchains: The R3 testbed as an example,” CoRR, vol.
abs/1612.09426, 2016.
[20]
“Phishing in Cryptocurrency: How to Avoid Scams and Save Your
Money,”
2018,
URL:
https://medium.com/@Changelly/phishing-
in-cryptocurrency-how-to-avoid-scams-and-save-your-money-
d3d1b442a16a [retrieved: June, 2018].
[21]
L.
Luu,
Y.
Velner,
J.
Teutsch,
and
P.
Saxena,
“Smartpool:
Practical
decentralized
pooled
mining,”
in
26th
USENIX
Security
Symposium
(USENIX
Security
17).
Vancouver,
BC:
USENIX
Association,
2017,
pp.
1409–1426.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity17/technical-
sessions/presentation/luu
[22]
L. Luu, D.-H. Chu, H. Olickel, P. Saxena, and A. Hobor, “Making
smart contracts smarter,” in Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Security, ser. CCS ’16.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2016, pp. 254–269. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2976749.2978309
[23]
A.
Kosba,
A.
Miller,
E.
Shi,
Z.
Wen,
and
C.
Papamanthou,
“Hawk: The blockchain model of cryptography and privacy-preserving
smart contracts,” Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2015/675, 2015,
https://eprint.iacr.org/2015/675.
[24]
A.
Tar,
“Proof-of-Work,
Explained,”
2018,
URL:
https://cointelegraph.com/explained/proof-of-work-explained [retrieved:
June, 2018].
[25]
“Bitcoin Mining,” 2017, URL: https://powercompare.co.uk/bitcoin/ [re-
trieved: May, 2018].
[26]
“Proof Of Stake,” 2018, URL: https://lisk.io/academy/blockchain-
basics/how-does-blockchain-work/proof-of-stake [retrieved: July, 2018].
[27]
B. Asolo, “Delegated Proof of Stake (DPOS) Explained,” 2018, URL:
https://www.mycryptopedia.com/delegated-proof-stake-dpos-explained/
[retrieved: July, 2018].
[28]
“Delegated
Proof
of
Stake,”
2018,
URL:
https://lisk.io/academy/blockchain-basics/how-does-blockchain-
work/delegated-proof-of-stake [retrieved: June, 2018].
[29]
K. Wang, “Cryptoeconomics: Paving the Future of Blockchain Technol-
ogy,” 2017, URL: https://hackernoon.com/cryptoeconomics-paving-the-
future-of-blockchain-technology-13b04dab971 [retrieved: June, 2018].
[30]
“Solving the Byzantine Generals Problem with Delegated Proof of Stake
(DPoS),” 2018, URL: https://www.radixdlt.com/post/what-is-delegated-
proof-of-stake-dpos [retrieved: August, 2018].
[31]
“TRUE,” 2018, URL: https://www.truechain.pro/ [retrieved: August,
2018].
[32]
“Proof of Activity Explained: A hybrid Consensus Algorithm,”
2018, URL: https://www.coinbureau.com/blockchain/proof-of-activity-
explained-hybrid-consensus-algorithm/ [retrieved: August, 2018].
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

