 
Context-aware Multimedia Distribution to User 
Groups 
Filipe Cabral Pinto1,2, António Videira1, Nuno Carapeto1 
 
1Portugal Telecom Inovação S.A., R. José F. P. Basto, Aveiro, Portugal 
2Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Road, London E1 4NS, UK 
{filipe-c-pinto,antonio-p-videira, nuno-f-carapeto}@ptinovacao.pt 
 
Abstract — Increasingly, multimedia services require efficient 
delivery systems to support content distribution. If a service 
targets groups of users then a point-to-multipoint distribution 
technology is naturally more optimized. 3GPP has specified 
MBMS (Multimedia Broadcast Multicast Service) and E-MBMS 
(Evolved MBMS) systems to broadcast and multicast rich media 
contents to mobile communities in an efficient way. But these 
systems can be enhanced with a permanent access to users’ 
context information for dynamic group management leading to 
effective content distribution. This paper proposes an algorithm 
that employs the ubiquitous awareness of the user situation to 
optimize the multimedia content distribution to user groups, 
saving the resources of the mobile operators’ networks. 
Keywords: 
Context-awareness, 
Ubiquitous 
Information 
Appliance, E-MBMS, MBMS, Efficiency, User Groups. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The new multimedia trends are forcing mobile operators to 
improve their content distribution processes in order to avoid 
network collapses. Mobile TV services and the social network 
fashion are just two examples that require efficient networks 
to enable the rich media content distribution to mobile 
communities. 
Multimedia services are by nature major resources 
consumers; therefore 3GPP has launched MBMS (Multimedia 
Broadcast Multicast Service) and E-MBMS (Evolved MBMS) 
to enable the point-to-multipoint transmissions over UMTS 
(Universal Mobile Telecommunication System) and EPS 
(Evolved Packet System) networks in an efficient way [1]. 
This allows saving network resources because users share the 
channels used on the multimedia distribution. 
The MBMS and the E-MBMS systems can be evolved by 
considering users’ context information on the bearers’ 
management, which leads to an improved data distribution. 
The ubiquitous knowledge of users’ instant situation allows 
the systems to perform their tasks more accurately. This can 
be achieved by splitting groups of users intending to receive 
the multimedia content into several subgroups encompassing 
the users under the same situation. For the same content 
distribution, each subgroup will include all the users receiving 
the content with the same format consuming the same network 
resources. An example of splitting a group into two subgroups 
can be seen in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1 - User Groups Splitting 
This paper proposes an algorithm that enables a context-
aware MBMS and E-MBMS (CE-MBMS) system to 
dynamically create several subgroups based on a ubiquitous 
knowledge of the users’ situation leading to an effective 
multimedia content distribution. A CE-MBMS system is for 
sure a stepping stone in the direction of an efficient multimedia 
delivery over mobile networks to user groups. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section II it 
is described the main motivation for the work carried out; 
Section III describes several related publications; the proposed 
algorithm to improve the network efficiency is detailed in 
Section IV; Section V presents the main results of the work 
performed; finally, Section VI summarizes the main 
conclusions. 
II. 
MOTIVATION 
The increase video trend with powerful formats, such as 
3D, and the unlimited social networks tendency make us 
believe that in a near future there will be a lot of services 
targeting groups of users. These services will generate a huge 
amount of traffic that requires systems skilled to efficiently 
deliver the multimedia contents. When the distribution is to be 
made to groups of users, a point-to-multipoint technology is 
much more effective. MBMS and E-MBMS are the 
technologies that can support an efficient multimedia content 
Users Receiving the 
Multimedia Content
Group 1
Group 2
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

distribution to mobile communities. Still, they can be evolved 
with context information to enable a personalized delivery. 
Therefore, the main motivation of this paper is to enhance the 
process of content distribution using the user situation 
knowledge on the CE-MBMS channel management. A service 
scenario is proposed in order to facilitate the demonstration of 
the algorithm efficiency. 
A. Context-aware User Groups 
The solution to offer personalized services over optimized 
networks to groups of mobile users is sustained by the 
mechanisms to manage the groups’ splitting process. For the 
MBMS and the E-MBMS cases the final groups maps on 
specific content formats that are to be used on the multimedia 
distribution to mobile communities by means of shared 
channels. Therefore, each subgroup having several end-users 
will be matched with a specific format arrangement. The group 
creation shall take into account all ubiquitous context 
information, 
which 
may 
encompass 
environmental 
information, network status, user profile, operator policies or 
terminal capabilities, as shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2 - Context Impacting the Group Selection Process 
Consequently, this paper presents an algorithm that is 
devised to allow a CE-MBMS system to optimally deliver its 
multimedia contents to user groups. Significant efficiency 
gains can be achieved by personalizing the contents through 
the group splitting process by making use of a ubiquitous 
context information access. 
B. Service Scenario 
Maria really loves football. She is always following her 
team matches. For that, she has subscribed the mobile service 
“I am a fan”, which replays the goals and the main plays 
almost on real-time. Depending on Maria’s environment, the 
service will adapt the content to be transmitted. The service 
also considers the Maria’s profile for the content adaptation. 
Whenever there is a new goal or highlight to be transmitted 
related with the match still running the system shall check if 
Maria is on a noisy environment and if she is on the move; plus 
it shall also take into account which team has scored. With all 
this information, the service will tailor the content in the format 
that best fits the Maria’s situation, improving the system 
effectiveness while ensuring a high level of user satisfaction. 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
The association between context information with mobile 
networks is now a hot topic in the scientific community. It 
allows the introduction of personalized services running on top 
of improved networks. 
The work presented in [2] devises a context-aware 
framework for content delivery in pervasive computing 
environments. It is here proposed the adaptation of multimedia 
content to the specific user situation. The framework supports 
media coding and transmission adaptation taking into account 
temporal, spatial, and communicational circumstances of the 
user. 
The work carried out in [3] has tackled the impact of 
context, 
sensors 
and 
wireless 
networks 
in 
the 
telecommunications field. It has proposed several scenarios 
stressing the potential synergies between the defined areas. 
In [4] was demonstrated that mainly in an MBMS 
environment, “there is an advantage for using more efficient 
codecs, by sub-grouping multicast groups based on supported 
codec, as they become widely available in the network”. A 
hierarchal group management framework was proposed 
allowing the control of transcoding based groups. 
The work carried out in [5] introduces a framework that 
allows the network to control its devices connectivity based 
virtually on any criteria. The paper proposes an algorithm to 
intelligently manage the device mobility, which can take into 
account any type of information, such as context, user 
preferences or user profiling. 
The work presented in [6] defends the service enrichment 
by means of context usage. It presents an innovative service 
based on different enablers, over an IMS (IP Multimedia 
Subsystem) environment, responsible for managing triggers 
defined by the users. 
The main concern of the work presented in [7] was to 
research the prerequisites and enablers for context-aware 
services. Furthermore, it has highlighted the challenges and the 
priorities for future investigations in the context-awareness 
area. 
The applicability of context-based multicast content 
distribution was investigated in [8] on the example of a Swiss 
shopping centre where push and video-based mobile 
advertising services were selected as a use case scenario. 
In [9] is devised an architecture “where context information 
is taken into account to improve MBMS and E-MBMS 
services”. The proposed architecture makes possible an 
efficient multimedia content distribution to mobile users’ 
communities. 
 
Network
Terminal
Content
Environment
User
Group Selection
Algorithm
Group 
Selected
Content Format
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The research presented in [10] considers the use of context 
information to achieve a personalized multiparty multimedia 
content delivery to groups of users. It describes an architecture 
that encompasses mechanisms for context management, 
content processing and distribution to mobile communities. 
IV. 
PROPOSED MECHANISM 
The following sections describe and present the devised 
mechanism for user group selection.  
A.  Ubiquitous Content Delivey 
Here, it is devised a mechanism that considers a set of 
stages where the user situation is evaluated. Each piece of 
ubiquitous context information is assessed and, depending on 
the results achieved, a classification is provided to each 
possible group. At the end, the group selected is the one with 
the highest classification, which enables an effective 
multimedia content distribution. 
As an example, consider the Figure 3 illustration where two 
different groups are taken into account: G1 encompassing all 
clients using a high definition codec and G2 for users having 
only access to a low definition codec. Users on the move have 
no advantage of being associated with G1 since they won’t be 
under an appropriate environment where they can enjoy the full 
multimedia quality provided by a high definition codec. 
Therefore, its employment is not recommended for moving 
users. However G2 could be a good option for clients on the 
move, since they can enjoy the service with about the same 
experience as using G1, but saving network resources. 
Consequently, the G2 classification can be marked as Good. 
Similar logic can be applied when users are stopped, but, in this 
case, leading to opposite classifications: users clogged can 
make use of a higher definition codec; therefore G1 shall be 
better scored than G2. 
 
 
Figure 3 - Group Selection for a Moving User Scenario 
The choice of the group may also be dependent on the type 
of environment that surrounds the client. A user placed in a 
quiet environment can, undisturbed, enjoy the multimedia data 
using a high definition content format. Therefore, G1 is a very 
good option for this client while G2 could be a less than 
remarkable option since it will decrease the user experience. In 
the opposite case, a client in a noisy environment, the group 
classification shall be the contrary: G1 is a bad choice since the 
noise would disturb the user experience while G2 could be a 
good option. This can be seen in Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4 - Group Selection for a Quiet Environment Scenario 
Since there is an endless set of context information related 
with users’ situation, mobile operators shall narrow down the 
context data by selecting only the ones useful for improving the 
service and the multimedia distribution. 
B. Proposed Mechanism 
The mechanism here proposed for group selection manages 
a set of stages where the occurrence of a specific context event 
is evaluated, which leads to a specific group classification. 
Furthermore, it makes possible the easily addition and 
subtraction of context information in the chain. After running 
all the steps, the user is finally considered as belonging to a 
specific group. All the process can be seen in Figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 5 - Context-aware Group Selection 
Consider G(i,j) as the total classification allocated in stage i 
to the Group number j, where: 








j
i
N
j
M
i
,
,1
,1
 
  
Moving? 
Yes
G1 = Bad
G2 = Good
No
G1 = Good
G2 = Bad
  
Quiet 
Environment?
Yes
G1 = Good
G2 = Bad
No
G1 = Bad
G2 = Good
 
Condition 1?
Yes
G(1,1) = w(1)*a1
G(1,2) = w(1)*b1
...
G(1,N) = w(1)*n1
No
G(1,1) = w(1)*a1'
G(1,2) = w(1)*b1'
...
G(1,N) = w(1)*n1'
Condition M?
Yes
G(M,1) = G((M-1),1) + w(M)*aM
G(M,2) = G((M-1),2) + w(M)*bM
...
G(M,N)= G((M-1),N) + w(M)*nM
No
G(M,1) = G((M-1),1) + w(M)*aM’
G(M,2) = G((M-1),2) + w(M)*bM’
...
G(M,N)= G((M-1),N) + w(M)*nM’
Stage 1
Condition 2? 
Yes
G(2,1) = G(1,1) + w(2)*a2
G(2,2) = G(1,2) + w(2)*b2
...
G(2,N) = G(1,N) + w(2)*n2
No
G(2,1) = G(1,1) + w(2)*a2’
G(2,2) = G(1,2) + w(2)*b2’
...
G(2,N) = G(1,N) + w(2)*n2’
Stage 2
...
Stage M
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Note that M is the number of stages, or conditions, while N 
represents the number of possible groups. 
Consider also that w(i) represents the weight of the ith 
condition on the group selection process, where: 

1,0
)
( 
w i
 
Additionally, c(i,j) can be defined as the jth group 
classification at stage i, where: 

,1100
( , )
c i j 
 
There are some conditions that are mandatory to happen in 
order to allow the mapping of a specific user in a specific 
group. For instance, it is mandatory the support of the content 
format by, at least, the terminal, the network and the source. 
Furthermore, the user profile shall allow the client the codec 
usage. Consequently, the following multiplicand shall be also 
taken into account: 

m
S m j
, )
(
  
Where S(m,j) is mth mandatory condition required to allow 
the user mapping in the jth Group. It takes the value 0 if the 
mapping is not possible and the value 1 if it is supported.  
{ 1,0 }
( , )
S m j 
 
Consider T defined as a vector representing the total 
classification of each of the Nth possible groups for the CE-
MBMS service. Furthermore, j can be defined as the index of 
the jth group classification belonging to the T vector. 
Consequently, T(j) can be defined as: 
 
 





N
j
c i j
w i
S m j
j
T
i
m
,1
,
,
( , )
=
 



 
This is equivalent to the following equality: 
 

j
G M
S m j
j
T
m
,
( , )
=


 
The result will be a list of the group relative importance for 
a user in a specific service, where the highest value means the 
“best” one. As can be seen by the expression above, the 
unavailability of the content format in the terminal, network, or 
source prevents its choice in the group selection procedure 
since it assigns a zero value. The selected group is obtained by 
finding the index of the T element having the highest value. 
Using the “Matlab” notation, the GroupSelected can be 
obtained in the following way: 
[value,index] = max (T)  
GroupSelected = index  
In a match case, when two different groups end with the 
same classification, the network can be configured to randomly 
allocate a user to one of the defined groups or it can apply 
specific rules refining the group selection. 
This approach enables operators to allocate users in specific 
groups based on context information leading to useful services 
delivered over optimized networks. 
V. 
EVALUATION 
The scenario environment and its evaluation are presented 
in the following sections. 
A. Scenario Environment 
The scenario depicted for the proof of concept considers 
sets of users in different environmental conditions accessing 
their multimedia services. To demonstrate the benefits of the 
group selection procedure it was developed a simulation 
environment where 450 users were randomly spread in the 
network encompassing 15 antennas having each of them 3 
sectors. It was considered two users’ groups where the first 
group uses a higher definition codec that consumes twice the 
data rate of the second one. The users were accessing their 
services utilizing either a 256 kbps (Group 1) or a 128 kbps 
(Group 2) content format. Besides the comparison between the 
mean data rate of the service accesses using the CE-MBMS 
system running or not the proposed group selection algorithm it 
was also considered using unicast technology with and without 
the group selection procedure active. It is assumed that when 
the group selection procedure is switched off the system 
chooses whenever possible the 256 kbps content format to 
distribute the multimedia content to the end-users. The group 
selection was done based on the users’ movement, on the 
existing noise in the users’ surroundings, and on the user 
profile. Table 1 presents the group classification according to 
the user context. 
Table 1 – Group Classification  
User Context 
Group Classification 
Yes 
No 
G1 
G2 
G1 
G2 
Content match the user profile 
90 
10 
10 
90 
User in a quiet environment 
90 
10 
10 
90 
User on the move 
10 
90 
90 
10 
 
It was considered that each condition has the same weight 
in the group selection process. Moreover, it is assumed that 
90% of the terminals are capable of using the high definition 
codec. Additionally, for the analysis of performance it was 
considered different percentages of fans depending on where 
the game took place. Finally, it was crossed over with specific 
team statistics taken from [11], which leads to different team 
scores’ probabilities. Multiple runs of the scenario were 
executed. 
B. Scenario Evaluation 
1) Group Selection Results 
Two environments are here considered to demonstrate the 
group selection results: a vehicular scenario where users have a 
higher probability of being on move and facing a noisy 
environment; and a city centre situation having users mostly 
stationary in a much quieter atmosphere. 
Best Team Playing at Home 
These simulations assume that the best team plays at home. 
This has two implications: most of the users in the area are 
supporters of the best team and the best team has even a higher 
probability of scoring. Consequently, most of the contents 
made available by the service match the user profiles. 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 6 presents the relative data rate transmission per 
antenna in a vehicular environment. As can be there observed 
the group selection procedure operation provided efficiency to 
the system even when using point-to-point connections, where 
mobile operators can save almost 34% of data rate transmission 
in comparison with the raw unicast. The utilization of the 
group selection on the CE-MBMS leads to almost 5% of gains 
regarding the standard E-MBMS. This is due to the fact that in 
some situation where users face a noisy environment while on 
the move the selected group is the one with the lowest data rate 
since the decrease of the quality does not affect the user 
experience. Considering now the two extremes’ cases, the CE-
MBMS operation can decrease the total data rate up to 85% 
when comparing it with the unicast transmission without the 
group selection procedure active. 
 
Figure 6 - Best Team Playing at Home in a Vehicular Environment 
It was taken for granted that in a city centre environment 
most of the users are still and consequently they can face a 
calmer ambience than the one existing in vehicular situations. 
Figure 7 shows the relative data rate transmission per antenna 
in a city centre location. As can be seen, the group selection 
procedure leads to an improvement of almost 13% of the total 
data rate in the unicast transmissions. The savings go up to 4% 
when assessing the group selection utilization in the CE-
MBMS systems.  
 
Figure 7 - Best Team Playing at Home in a City Centre Environment 
It can be noted an efficiency decrease when going from a 
vehicular to a city centre scenario. This happens due to the 
assumption that users located in the city centre can easily sit in 
a quiet place to access their multimedia services. Thus, the 
system tends to put most of the users in a same group all 
enjoying higher data rates content formats, in the end 
increasing the system total data rate consumption. 
Weakest Team Playing at Home 
The following simulations assume that the weakest team 
plays at home. Therefore, most of the supports are fans of the 
worst team, which has a lesser probability of scoring. 
As can be observed in Figure 8, the relative data rate 
transmission per antenna in a vehicular environment decreases 
with the introduction of the group selection algorithm. The data 
rate savings for the service can reach up to 37% when 
comparing the unicast transmissions running the procedure 
with the raw unicast multimedia delivery. Furthermore, when 
comparing to the standard E-MBMS, the use of the group 
selection algorithm on the CE-MBMS makes possible to save 
up to 5% of the utilized resources. These gains can reach up to 
72% when comparing with basic unicast transmissions. 
  
Figure 8 - Weakest Team Playing at Home in a Vehicular Environment 
The results presented in Figure 9 are related to a city centre 
environment where the weakest team is the home team. As 
expected the unicast transmission using the group selection 
algorithm consumes fewer resources than the ones transmitting 
with the standard unicast, being the data rate savings about 16 
% of the total data rate needed when transmitting with the raw 
unicast. Furthermore, the use of CE-MBMS allows up to 85 % 
of data rate transmission reduction when having as a reference 
the unicast transmission without group selection, which is a 
very significant gain. 
 
Figure 9 - Weakest Team Playing at Home in a City Centre Environment 
 
 
 
CE-MBMS With Group Selection CE-MBMS Without Group Selection
Unicast With Group Selection
Unicast Without Group Selection
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Best Team Playing at Home - Vehicular Environment
Relative Data Rate Transmission per Antenna
 
CE-MBMS With Group Selection CE-MBMS Without Group Selection 
Unicast With Group Selection 
Unicast Without Group Selection 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Best Team Playing at Home - City Centre Environment
Relative Data Rate Transmission per Antenna
 
CE-MBMS With Group Selection CE-MBMS Without Group Selection 
Unicast With Group Selection 
Unicast Without Group Selection 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Weakest Team Playing at Home - Vehicular Environment
Relative Data Rate Transmission per Antenna
 
 
 
CE-MBMS With Group Selection CE-MBMS Without Group Selection 
Unicast With Group Selection 
Unicast Without Group Selection 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Weakest Team Playing at Home - City Centre Environment
Relative Data Rate Transmission per Antenna
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

2) Number of Users per Group 
Figure 10 presents the relative users’ groups distribution in 
different environments. Users in Group 1 consume 256 kbps 
multimedia content while users in Group 2 access their services 
requiring a 128 kbps connection. Considering the weakest team 
as the reference, the following assumptions shall be taken into 
account: 
 
CH: the weakest team is playing at Home in a City 
centre environment 
 
CV: the weakest team is the Visitor in a City 
centre environment 
 
VH: the weakest team is playing at Home in a 
Vehicular environment  
 
VV: the weakest team is the Visitor in a Vehicular 
environment 
 
Figure 10 - Users’ Distribution per Group 
The users’ groups’ distribution are deeply affected by the 
type of environment. It can be seen that users in the city centre 
are typically allocated to Group 1 while users placed in a 
vehicular environment are included in Group 2. This happens 
mainly because the users’ classification considers that clients 
on the move or on noisy environments cannot enjoy higher 
definition formats, pushing them to the lowers data rate 
transmissions, making it possible to save network resources. 
It can also be noted that it is not indifferent to play the 
game as a visitor or at home. Home teams have a larger 
supporter base, therefore, when their team scores there are 
much more fans pulled to the higher quality videos. 
Consequently, it can be seen that for the same environment, 
city centre or vehicular, the number of users allocated to Group 
1 increases whenever the weakest team plays in the adversary 
field. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The dynamic group selection procedure is a powerful tool 
that mobile operators can use to offer personalized services 
over improved networks to groups of users. The users’ group 
selection is made based on a ubiquitous access to their clients’ 
situation data. Mobile operators shall make the appropriate 
tuning taking into account selected environment information in 
order to optimize its operation. The results here presented have 
demonstrated its usefulness where significant gains were 
shown with the CE-MBMS usage. The selected proof of 
concept scenarios gave almost 5% of gains when comparing 
with the standard E-MBMS and they can reach up to 85% of 
data rate reduction when comparing with the raw unicast 
transmission. 
As future work it is envisage the study of the user 
satisfaction taking into account the involved dynamics of a 
context-aware bearer modification. For that, a testbed will be 
setup where users can access the multimedia contents under 
different situations and where they can provide their experience 
feedback according to their situations.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 3GPP TS 23.246 V9.5.0, Multimedia Broadcast/Multicast Service 
(MBMS), Architecture and functional description, Release 9, June 2010 
[2] W. Zhang, H. Guan, M. Li, M. Wu, C. Zhang, and F. Tang,  "Context-
Aware Adaptation for Media Delivery in Pervasive Computing 
Environment", Advances in Grid and Pervasive Computing (GPC 2006), 
Taichung, Taiwan, May 2006 
[3] R. Aguiar and D. Gomes, “Quasi-omniscient Networks - Scenarios on 
Context Capturing and New Services through Wireless Sensor 
Networks”, Wireless Personal Communications, Springer Volume 45, 
Pages 497-509, June 2008 
[4] M. Zafar, M. Fuchs, and N. Baker, "Supporting Transcoding-based 
Multicast 
Groups", 
15th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Telecommunications, St Petersburg, Russia, June 2008 
[5] V. Jesus, S. Sargento, and R. Aguiar, “Any-Constraint Personalized 
Network Selection”, 19th IEEE International Symposium on Personal, 
Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), Cannes, France, 
September 2008 
[6] J. Simoes, J. Goncalves, T. Mota, and T. Magedanz, “CATS: Context-
Aware Triggering System for Next Generation Networks”, 2nd Joint 
IFIP Wireless and Mobile Networking Conference, Gdansk, Poland, 
September 2009 
[7] R. Tönges et al, "Context-awareness and User-profiling for User-centric 
Services", eMobility Technology Platform, October 2009 
[8] T. Wozniak, K. Stanoevska, D. Gomes, and H. Schotten, "The 
Applicability of Context-based Multicast - A Shopping Centre 
Scenario", 3rd Workshop on Economic Traffic Management (ETM), 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, September 2010 
[9] F. Cabral Pinto, A. Videira, A. Ma, and L. Cuthbert, "Efficient Big 
Brother Networks", International Conference on Computers as a Tool 
(Eurocon2011), Lisbon, Portugal, April 2011 
[10] N. Carapeto, F. Cabral Pinto, D. Figueira, N. Coutinho, S. Sargento, and 
P. Roux, “Pervasive Multiparty Delivery Framework for Ubiquitous 
Multimedia 
Services”, 
IEEE 
Symposium 
on 
Computers 
and 
Communications (ISCC’11), Kerkyra, Greece, July 2011 
[11] http://www.lpfp.pt/Pages/Inicio.aspx 
[Accessed 
19 
June 
2011]   
 
CH
CV
VH
VV
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Groups of Users' Environment
Relative User Allocation per Group per Antenna
 
 
Group 1
Group 2
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

