Mobility in a Personalized and Flexible  
Video-based Transmedia Environment 
 
Alcina Prata 
Lasige, Faculty of Sciences 
University of Lisbon 
Lisbon, Portugal 
alcina.prata@esce.ips.pt 
Teresa Chambel 
Lasige, Faculty of Sciences 
University of Lisbon 
Lisbon, Portugal 
tc@di.fc.ul.pt
 
 
Abstract - This paper addresses the effective design of 
Transmedia environments to generate personalized additional 
video information from iTV, PC and mobile devices with a 
special focus on mobile devices. It presents the opportunities 
and challenges of the inclusion of mobile devices on this 
ubiquitous environment, turning it into a true “ecosystem of 
devices”, designed and evaluated based on cognitive and 
affective aspects that influence the user experience. The system 
generates a Transmedia personalized web-based content, 
which provides extra information about users’ selected topics 
of interest while watching a specific video. The web content 
may be generated and accessed through iTV, PC and mobile 
devices. Depending on the users needs, that web content may 
be viewed immediately or stored for latter view, individually or 
simultaneously, from these devices. An evaluation was carried 
out with a special focus on mobile devices, complementing 
previous evaluations with iTV and PC environments. The 
achieved results were very good considering that they helped 
rethink our mobile related assumptions and they showed that 
the integration of mobile devices on the environment was a 
success.     
  
Keywords - HCI; mobility; video; transmedia; iTV.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The proliferation of new devices able to support human 
activities across a range of contextual settings [1] is one of 
the main motivations for media integration in what is 
designated as Crossmedia or Transmedia environments [2]. 
These environments, based in the integration and co-
existence of various media technologies with an integrated 
and specific purpose are becoming increasingly popular due 
to their flexibility and mobility. They create new 
opportunities for the generalization of communicational 
practices, as those associated with formal and informal 
learning and information access, which are becoming more 
relevant considering the importance of lifelong learning [3] 
and the pervasive nature of media technologies and devices.   
Video is a very rich medium to support learning, and TV, 
PC and, more recently, mobile devices are privileged ways 
to access it. Through structure and interaction, these devices 
can open the door to flexible environments that can access 
video and integrate it with different media, accessible from 
different devices, adequate to support different cognitive 
modes and learning processes in several contexts. In spite of 
their valuable potential to create rich and flexible 
environments, the design of these Transmedia systems faces 
some challenges that may affect their effective use. Some of 
the proposed systems failed because too much effort was put 
into technical details, leaving behind Transmedia conceptual 
aspects such as interaction and service design based on: 
cognitive 
processes, 
usability, 
user 
experience, 
contextualization, continuity, media affordances, and device 
characteristics.  
Our main concern is to focus also and mainly on these 
aspects, while studying and understanding this emerging 
paradigm, where research has not been complete [1][4]. Our 
eiTV application has been designed and developed to 
illustrate our research. It was recently redesigned to support 
the use of videos other than TV shows on iTV, and the 
functionalities increased to match this more flexible 
perspective. Now we are redesigning it to fully support 
mobile devices and contexts of use. Running from iTV, PC 
and mobile devices, it provides users with the possibility to 
choose, from a video, usually watched in a more 
experiential cognitive mode (which allows us to perceive 
and react to events naturally), which topics they would want 
to know more about. They may also choose with which 
level of detail, and later decide when and where they would 
want to access those extra related contents, in a more 
reflective mode (the mode of thought), and with whom they 
would want to share them with, having the adequate support 
from the application in the different access contexts. The 
architecture and the main features available in iTV and PC 
contexts were already explored and described in previous 
publications [5][6][7], this paper will focus on the 
introduction 
of 
mobile 
devices 
and 
their 
specific 
functionalities and design in this Transmedia video-based 
context. 
After this introduction, Section II includes a review of 
related work and concepts, Section III describes the design 
challenges of Transmedia applications and mobile devices 
in that context, Section IV presents the design decisions on 
the Transmedia eiTV mobile device module, evaluated in 
Section V. Finally, Section VI presents the conclusions and 
perspectives for future research and developments. 
314
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

II. 
RELATED WORK 
This section addresses some of the more relevant related 
research studies in Transmedia environments that include 
mobile devices.  
The TAMALLE project [8] developed a „dual device 
system‟ for informal English language learning, based on 
watching iTV and selecting what to access later on mobile 
phones. This was an interesting system capable to 
accommodate different cognitive modes and different 
contexts of use, especially, if considering the mobile phone 
possibilities. Obrist et al. [9] developed a “6 key navigation 
model” and its interface for an electronic program guide 
running on the TV, PC and mobile phone. The different 
devices were not used in a complementary way since the 
intention was to test a similar interface, on three different 
devices. They have perceived that viewers prefer a reduced 
number of navigation keys and a unified UI with the same 
functionalities across devices. This confirmed our prototypes 
UI design last decisions. Newstream [10] provides extra 
information about what is being watched and related 
websites, using TV, PC and mobiles. Depending on the 
viewers‟ needs, that extra information may be viewed 
immediately, stored for later view or pushed to other device. 
Each device maintains awareness of each other and are able 
to: move interaction to the device that makes the most sense 
in a specific context, use several devices simultaneously, and 
use the mobile device as a remote to the TV and PC. 
Limitations include: the system relies almost exclusively on 
social networks to receive and share content, for interaction 
and dialogues; and the limited viewer direct influence on the 
new contents presented as extra information. Our work is 
more flexible in these concerns. 2BEON [11] is an iTV 
application which supports the communication between 
viewers, textually and in real time, while watching a specific 
program. It also allows viewers to see which of their contacts 
are online, which programs they are watching, and instant 
messaging on the iTV, demonstrated to be important to give 
viewers a sense of presence. Currently called WeOnTV, it is 
being implemented with smart-phones as “secondary input 
devices”, soon to be distributed by one of the most popular 
Portuguese TV cable companies. This work demonstrates the 
importance of sharing information with viewers‟ contacts 
about what they are watching on TV, which supports our 
own decision of including a sharing functionality in eiTV.  
III. 
DESIGN CHALLENGES 
This section describes the central aspects, cognitive and 
affective, that need to be considered to effectively design 
Transmedia services and interfaces, with a special focus on 
the design challenges associated with video and mobile 
devices.  
A. Transmedia Design Challenges 
Media and Cognition: Norman‟s view [12] defines two 
fundamental cognitive modes. The experiential mode allows 
us to perceive and react to events naturally and without 
much effort, while the reflective mode is the one “of thought 
and decision making”. Both are important in human 
cognition, but require different technological support, and 
the medium affects the way we interpret and use the 
message and its impact on us. For example, TV and video 
are typically watched in an experiential mode, but learning 
strongly relies on reflection. A successful integration of 
media should have into account what each medium and 
device is most suited for in each context of use, augmenting 
and complementing their capabilities in a flexible 
combination.  
Transmedia Interaction, Conceptual Model and User 
Experience: the main challenges of Transmedia interaction 
design 
described 
by 
[13] 
include: 
consistency, 
interoperability, and technological literacy needed for the 
different devices. The conceptual model, how the software 
will look like and act, is also a very important aspect, since 
several interaction scenarios and contexts are involved [14]. 
The quality of the interaction cannot be measured only by 
the quality of its parts, but as a whole. In this context, the 
user experience (UX) may be evaluated through how well it 
supports the synergic use of each medium and the different 
kinds of affordances involved, also understanding what 
makes the user pass the current medium boundaries to use 
other media as well. According to [15], the UX may involve 
the isolated perception of the medium (distributed), one of 
the biggest barriers to its efficient use and adoption, or the 
perception of the system as a whole unity (coherent). 
According to [16], the UX evaluation methods and measures 
relevant, when ubiquitous TV is involved, are: physiological 
data; data mining, log files, observation, case studies, lab 
experiments, experience sampling method, probes, diaries, 
interviews, surveys and focus groups. The combination of 
methods to use depends on each specific case.     
Supporting Transmedia HCI: In this context, the 
migration of tasks is supported via Transmedia usability and 
continuity, influencing on how well and smoothly users‟ 
skills and experiences are transferred across the different 
devices [17]. The consistent look and feel across media is an 
important requirement, even if it should not limit the goal of 
having each medium doing what it is most suited for and 
extending its characteristics (synergic use) [18].  
Designing for Different Devices and Contexts of Use: 
Transmedia design involves designing interfaces for 
different devices. To understand the devices, and have each 
device doing what it is most suited for, the best approach is 
usually to study each particular situation, including device 
characteristics 
and 
cognitive 
and 
affective 
aspects 
associated to its use: why people use them, in which mode, 
compare them, etc., and the design guidelines for each 
device [6] followed by an adequate combination.  
B. Mobile Devices Design Challenges 
Interactive systems design has always been a hard task 
considering the diversity of factors that were involved and 
thus requiring the designer‟s attention, ranging from the 
final users needs to the context in which the solution is 
going to be used. More recently, the appearance of mobile 
315
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

and ubiquitous computing supported through different and 
new devices, and as in our particular case as part of a 
Transmedia application, contributed to a substantial increase 
of opportunities and challenges associated with the design 
process for these new devices. 
Due to the specific characteristics of mobile devices, 
namely, their ubiquitous and permanent nature, small 
dimensions, several interaction modalities, the multiplicity 
of possible contexts of use, these devices interfaces are 
becoming extremely hard to design, but nevertheless very 
desirable in many contexts, and in particular in our 
application, due to their flexibility, mobility and location 
awareness.  
As to the main challenges of mobile devices design, they 
are spread through the design process phases [19]:  
1) Analysis and requirements recoil: on mobile scenarios 
where the use of the mobile device or application is 
constantly based on mutational contexts, where users may 
be walking and passing through different places and 
environments, the recoil of requirements is a difficult task 
and needs a specific approach;  
2) Prototyping: prototyping techniques that support the 
construction and evaluation of prototypes in realistic 
scenarios is needed. In general terms, all components 
(device prototype and UI prototype) must be as faithful to 
the original as possible;  
3) Evaluation: Recent research experiences suggest that 
given their intensive and pervasive use, mobile devices and 
correspondent applications should be evaluated on multiple 
and realistic settings [20]. In low-fidelity prototypes, the 
presence of the designer is usually required to act as the 
system, besides gathering usage information or detecting 
usability issues. Although far from a perfect solution, this 
evaluation approach (called wizard-of-oz), has been used 
successfully in several studies.  
There are also design guidelines for mobile devices that 
we took into account. For example, Brewster‟s [21] set of 
guidelines to overcome the limited screen space, Kar et al. 
[22] guidelines about the system‟s usability, Sánchez et al 
[23] navigational hints to the construction of mobile web 
pages, and Apple [24] guidelines for SmartPhones.  
IV. 
MOBILE DEVICES DESIGN IN EITV  
This Section presents main functionalities and design 
options concerning mobile devices in the eiTV Transmedia 
system, in response to the challenges identified in Section 
III.        
A. Mobile Devices Design Process 
As 
stated 
by 
several 
authors, 
when 
designing 
applications and interfaces to mobile devices, the design and 
development process should be transported out of the 
laboratory [19], which was exactly what we did, along with 
taking into account the design challenges and guidelines 
addressed in Section III, in addition to traditional design 
guidelines in User-Centered Design methodologies. The 
specific mobile device challenges identified in Section III 
were addressed as follows:  
In the Analysis and requirements recoil phase: It was 
decided to pay attention to the user behaviour changes 
according to the surrounding environment, the variables that 
trigger the changes and how they affect usability. For this, 
we used [19]: contextual scenarios, scenario transitions, and 
scenario variables (location and settings; movement and 
posture; workloads distractions and activities; devices and 
usages; users and personas). In Prototyping: we separated 
the physical prototype (the device) and the GUI prototype 
while building a realistic graphical UI in the low-fidelity (or 
mixed-fidelity, due to increased realism) prototypes. A real 
Smatphone was used and the GUI was designed on power 
point and printed in a colour laser printer, with the real 
screen size. All functionalities were designed in breadth and 
depth, and the designed interaction is very close to the final 
product. The evaluation is described in Section V. 
B. Mobile Devices Functionalities 
In the mobile devices, the central functionalities of the 
eiTV system are present: Create, Search, Share and Profile. 
These functionalities are available: at the „departure point‟, 
which occurs while watching the video and generating the 
web 
content, 
and 
at 
the 
„arrival 
point‟, 
when 
accessing/editing/etc. the generated web content. Although 
these functionalities allow the same actions as on iTV and 
PCs, they were not provided exactly in the same way, 
considering the different devices characteristics. To briefly 
remind these central functionalities: Create allows users to 
watch videos and select topics of interest to create further 
information; the Search functionality searches videos based 
on different criteria and allows to watch them, and edit the 
associated generated web content if there is one; the Share 
functionality allows sharing the generated web content, or 
retrieved video, with user‟s contacts; and the User Profile 
contains personal data in order to personalize the generated 
web contents.  
In order to have each device doing what it is most suited 
for, contexts of use, device characteristics and cognitive and 
affective aspects associated to its use were studied. In what 
concerns to specific mobile devices functionalities, after this 
study, the following were made available:  
1) Great flexibility and mobility (use it everywhere, anytime, 
anyway): when using the TV, the scroll is not an option, but 
that does not happen when using the other devices; contrary 
to TV and PC, mobile devices may be used everywhere, 
even when users are standing up, mining that any extra time 
may be used (if waiting for a medical appointment, in a bus 
queue, while in the train, etc);  
2) Location-based search using the GPS functionality: the 
search functionality allows users to search videos related to 
their current location. As an example, when near the liberty 
statue the user may use this functionality to search, from its 
own system and the internet, videos related to that specific 
spot  (this type of video files need to be inserted when using 
iTV or PC);  
316
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

3) Add immediately, or latter, shot pictures or videos, that 
may be related, to the video being watched, as additional 
information to the web content or, instead, really integrated 
as part of the web content.  
C. Mobile Devices Design Options  
As part of a larger Transmedia system, the design 
challenges identified in Section III were considered in the 
mobile devices design module. As to the cognition modes, 
all functionalities (central or specific to mobile contexts) 
were designed to accommodate users‟ changes in cognition 
modes, attention levels, and different levels of technological 
literacy or preferences. Namely: they may be more or less 
intrusive of the video watching experience, designed with 3 
different information levels (ranging from less to more 
intrusive and informational), prepared to be viewed 
immediately or latter, overlaid or embedded onscreen, etc; if 
viewers turn off the device when in the middle of generating 
a web content, all the selected topics, will be stored and the 
web content will be generated; the user has a simplified 
navigation layout that takes advantage of the typical 
smartphones navigation characteristics as the scroll bar, 
tactile screen, etc. Thus, a simplified interface, when 
compared to the other devices (PC and iTV), was possible. 
Nevertheless different levels of intrusion were made 
available; on the search functionality, a specific location may 
be inserted through text or through the GPS of the mobile 
device; shot pictures or videos (stored or capture at that time) 
may be inserted as additional information to a web content at 
any moment.        
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  eiTV Mobile Interface Create functionality (a);  topics selection interface with the information level 2 activated (b); aditional information 
immediately presented when a topic is selected by the user and the information level 2 is activated (c); interface to the addition of files captured on the 
moment to the web content being created (d); interface of the generated web content, based on the users selected topics (b-e) 
Consistency in UX and the perception of the system as a 
whole coherent unity independently of the device being used 
was also a priority. In spite of having considered the mobile 
device characteristics and contexts of use in the design, 
towards a more simplified design, we decided to keep a 
coherent layout in terms of colours, symbols and other 
graphic elements, as navigational buttons, in order to better 
contextualize users, give them a sense of unity in their UX 
and to allow a smooth transition among media and devices. 
This way, it was possible to provide users with a sense of 
317
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

sequence and continuity, respect the context of use and be 
consistent in terms of look and feel and navigational options 
in all the devices, and to help the perception of the 
application as a unity. Users are aware that they may access 
their eiTV application through different devices whenever 
they create web contents, helping to conceptually understand 
the system as an „ecosystem of devices‟. An example of the 
resulting mobile module design interface is presented in 
Figure 1. Considering that it is the main focus of this paper, 
the presented interactions (Figure 1) are exclusively from 
mobile devices. However, these interaction proposal was 
already developed and tested on the other eiTV devices (iTV 
and PC), obviously taking into account these devices specific 
characteristics.   
V. 
EVALUATION  
The UX evaluation methods and measures considered 
relevant for this specific case as a preliminary evaluation 
were: observation, case studies, lab experiments, experience 
sampling method, interviews, surveys and focus groups.  
The evaluation process started with a demonstration of 
the last tested high fidelity prototype on a PC, in order to 
remind users and to create a sense of unity of the whole 
application. Then, users were asked to perform tasks that 
allowed using all the eiTV functionalities (central and also 
mobile specific ones, already described in Section III), 
designed for mobile devices, through the prototype in three 
different contextual scenarios with transitions between 
them. Users started using the prototype standing up at the 
end of the bar queue (similar to other public queues), after 
that, they went to the library that, although surrounded by 
people, is a quiet place (context similar to a medical clinic 
waiting room) and they finally ended the prototype use in 
the school backyard seated in a relaxing place. Note that, in 
this last context, the luminosity conditions changed when 
going from the building interior to the exterior. The 
interaction with the GUI low(mixed)-fidelity prototype 
occurred via the wizard-of-oz technique to provide us with 
feedback at an early stage of development of the mobile 
prototypes without too much initial investment. It is 
important to mention that the evaluation process took place 
in real contexts of use, one of the most important factors to 
consider when testing mobile devices applications.   
Finally, they were asked to fill a questionnaire and were 
interviewed. The questionnaire was based on the USE 
questionnaire (usefulness, satisfaction and ease of use) [26]; 
the NASA TLX questionnaire (cognitive overload) [27]; and 
usability heuristics. There were 15 participants, ranging 
from 20 to 45 years old, which were grouped into 3 
evaluation groups: 5 students with high technological 
literacy; 5 students with medium technological literacy and 
5 
persons 
with 
poor 
technological 
literacy. 
Their 
technological literacy categorization was possible via the 
use of a questionnaire with question as: do you use Internet? 
e-mail? facebook? How many hours a day do you use the 
Internet? From which devices? Do you have a smartphone? 
Which functionalities do you use on your smartphone? 
Amongst many other specific questions. The participants 
were the same that had participated in the last prototypes 
evaluation, to maintain a conceptual idea of the whole 
application, and allowing to ask for comparisons, without 
making the tests with the other devices again. Results are 
presented next.  
   At both the „departure interface‟ (generate the web content 
through mobile device), and „arrival interface‟ (access that 
web content) as presented in tables I and II: The mobile 
interface was considered easier to learn than the TV 
interface, but the TV interface was considered more pleasant 
visually and better designed. In terms of information level, 
more users preferred level 1 information (the less intrusive 
and less informational) than on TV. This result stresses an 
increase in users preference to select additional info to 
access later on when they are watching video on the move 
with a mobile, when compared with TV, where users 
already prefer this option not to interrupt the more 
experiental mode of watching videos especially on TV.  
TABLE I.  
EVALUATION OF EITV OVERALL DEPARTURE AND 
ARRIVAL INTERFACES  
eiTV Transmedia 
System 
Easy 
to learn 
Visually 
pleasant 
Well 
designed 
Could be 
better 
Departure 
Interface: 
TV 
73% 
87% 
73% 
87% 
Mobile 
93% 
73% 
60% 
87% 
Arrival 
Interface: 
PC 
87% 
87% 
80% 
67% 
Mobile 
93% 
80% 
73% 
87% 
TABLE II.  
EVALUATION OF EITV OVERALL DEPARTURE AND 
ARRIVAL INTERFACES (INFORMATION LEVELS) 
eiTV Transmedia 
System 
Most used information level 
1 
2 
3 
Departure 
Interface: 
TV 
47% 
40% 
13% 
Mobile 
60% 
27% 
13% 
Arrival 
Interface: 
PC 
Not tested 
Not tested 
Not tested 
Mobile 
Not tested  
 
Not tested 
Not tested 
 
   The central functionalities: Create, Search, Share and 
Profile (see tables III and IV) were considered more useful 
than in the previous tests (from iTV to PC). As to the most 
important ones in the context of the application (Create and 
Search) they were also considered more interesting. As to 
specific actions inherent to the use of mobile devices: all 
users appreciated the idea of mobility (93%), the possibility 
to use GPS in location-based searches (67%), and the 
possibility to add pictures and videos to the web content, at 
that particular moment or later, both related and unrelated to 
the video being watched (87%). Most functionalities were 
considered more difficult to use, if considering the smaller 
screen size and font (67%) and mixed fidelity prototypes, 
but easier (80%) if considering the interaction mode (tactile 
screen versus mouse and remote). These aspects, along with 
having the access to the web content in the same device that 
created it, also influenced (decreased) the perceived need for 
contextualization at arrival. For more accurate results on 
these aspects, a prototype with video actually playing is 
important. 
318
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

TABLE III.  
EVALUATION OF THE CREATE AND SEARCH 
FUNCTIONALITIES FROM TV AND MOBILE DEPARTURE INTERFACES  
Characteristics: 
Create 
Search 
TV 
Mobile 
TV 
Mobile 
Interesting 
80% 
93% 
73% 
100% 
Ease to use 
80% 
47% 
77% 
40% 
Useful 
87% 
100% 
87% 
93% 
TABLE IV.  
EVALUATION OF THE SHARE AND PROFILE 
FUNCTIONALITIES FROM TV AND MOBILE DEPARTURE INTERFACES  
Characteristics: 
Share 
Profile 
TV 
Mobile 
TV 
Mobile 
Interesting 
73% 
73% 
60% 
60% 
Ease to use 
73% 
60% 
47% 
80% 
Useful 
80% 
87% 
53% 
67% 
 
   It is important to mention that in spite the use of a mixed 
fidelity prototype the intention of transmitting a sense of 
unity was achieved: 87% of the users referred that they 
immediately felt “inside” the same application, in spite of 
using a different device (table V).  
TABLE V.  
EVALUATION OF CONTEXTUALIZATION FROM DEPARTURE 
TO ARRIVAL INTERFACES  
 
Sense unity 
Context with 
video or image 
need 
Context with 
video playing 
need 
PC 
80% 
93% 
73% 
Mobile 
87% 
87% 
60% 
 
As a whole (table VI), the transmedia application with 
the mobile devices was considered: more useful, easier to 
use, easier to learn, and more users would like to have it and 
would recommend it to a friend, when compared to having 
only iTV and PCs, with high percentages (87% and 93%).  
TABLE VI.  
OVERALL EVALUATION OF THE WHOLE EITV 
TRANSMEDIA APPLICATION  
Whole 
Application 
Useful 
Easy to 
use 
Easy to 
learn 
Like to 
have 
Recommend 
TV & PC 
87% 
73% 
67% 
87% 
80% 
TV&PC&Mobile 
93% 
87% 
87% 
93% 
93% 
 
In general, there was no substantial difference of opinion 
amongst the 3 groups. Nevertheless, it was possible to 
observe that the group with poor technological literacy, in 
general, took more time to accomplish the proposed tasks 
and asked more questions. However, like the other 2 groups, 
they all made it and the enthusiasm was the same. Interesting 
to note, no considerable differences were detected between 
the group with high technological literacy and the group with 
medium technological literacy. This may be explained by the 
fact that they add already participated on previous 
evaluations of the eiTV so they are probably becoming more 
familiar with it. Thus, and in order to overcame this 
situation, after concluding the high fidelity prototypes, these 
groups and completely new ones will be used for evaluation 
purposes.       
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The evaluation results were encouraging. In many aspects, 
the increased functionalities and flexibility inherent to the 
mobile context were perceived as useful and an added value 
in this Transmedia context (e.g., location-based search). 
Some design options allowed to accommodate the users 
cognitive mode changes (e.g., information levels), and the 
prototypes where designed and tested in realistic mobile 
scenarios and contexts of use. In general the results showed 
that the integration of the mobile devices in the eiTV 
environment was a success. The use of a mixed fidelity 
prototype was a good option in a preliminary phase, 
considering that it helped detecting most significant usability 
problems, test ideas and it provided us with good clues for 
future developments, with a reasonably low investment. 
Based on the obtained feedback, some aspects need to be 
revised in terms of the size restrictions in the interface, and 
next evaluations should take place with high-fidelity 
prototypes to increase the realism in media access, in 
addition to the already realistic mobile contexts. Considering 
the design framework followed, the trends in the use of 
multiple devices, and the results of this and previous studies, 
we have reasons to believe that our goal for this Transmedia 
context is worth pursuing and that we can achieve quite good 
results with all the devices in different scenarios.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work is partially supported by FCT through LASIGE 
Multiannual Funding and the ImTV research project (UTA-
Est/MAI/0010/2009). To Diogo Silva, for his collaboration 
in the development of the eiTV prototypes.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] K. Segerståhl, “Utilization of Pervasive 
IT Compromised? 
Understanding the Adoption and Use of a Cross Media System”, 
Proc. of 7TH International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous 
Multimedia (MUM‟2008) in cooperation with ACM SIGMOBILE, 
Umea, Sweden, December 2008, pp. 168-175. 
[2] H. Jenkins, “Transmedia missionaries: Henry Jenkins” video, 
retrieved: 
September, 
2011, 
from 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bhGBfuyN5gg. 
[3] P. Bates, “T-Learning - Final Report”. Report prepared for the 
European Community IST Programme, pjb Associates, 2003, 
retrieved: 
October, 
2011 
from 
http://www.pjb.co.uk/t-
learning/contents.htm 
[4] J. Taplin, “Long Time Coming: has Interactive TV Finally Arrived?”, 
Opening Keynote, Proc. of 9th European Conference on Interactive 
TV and Video: Ubiquitous TV (EuroiTV‟2011), in coop with ACM, 
Lisbon, Portugal, 30th June 2011, pp. 9. 
[5] A. Prata, N. Guimarães, and T. Chambel, “Crossmedia Personalized 
Learning Contexts”, Proc. of 21st ACM Conference on Hypertext and 
Hypermedia (HT‟10), Toronto, Canada, June 2010, pp. 305-306.   
[6] A. Prata, T. Chambel, and N. Guimarães, “Personalized Content 
Access in Interactive TV Based Crossmedia Environments”. In: TV 
Content Analysis: Techniques and Applications, to be published on 
October 30th by CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, (2011), 
ISBN:  978-1-43985-560-7  
[7] A. Prata and T. Chambel, “Going Beyond iTV: Designing Flexible 
Video-Based Crossmedia Interactive Services as Informal Learning 
Contexts”, Proc. of 9th European Conference on Interactive TV and 
319
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Video: Ubiquitous TV (EuroiTV 2011, in coop with ACM, Lisbon, 
Portugal, 1ST  July 2011, pp. 65-74.   
[8] L. Pemberton and S. Fallahkhair, “Design Issues for Dual Device 
Learning: interactive television and mobile phone”, Proc. of 4th World 
Conference on mLearning  - Mobile Technology: the future of Learn 
in your hands (mLearn‟2005), Cape Town, South Africa, October 
2005, 
retrieved: 
October, 
2011, 
from: 
http://www.mlearn.org.za/CD/papers/Pemberton&Fallahkhair.pdf 
[9] M. Obrist, C. Moser, M. Tscheligi, and D. Alliez, “Field evaluation of 
a Cross Platform 6 Key Navigation Model and a Unified User 
Interface Design”,  Proc. of 8th European Interactive TV Conference 
(EuroiTV 2010), in coop with ACM, Tampere, Finland, June 2010, 
pp. 141-144. 
[10] R. Martin and H., Holtzman, “Newstream. A Multi-Device, Cross-
Medium, and Socially Aware Approach to News Content”, Proc. of 
8th European Interactive TV Conference (EuroiTV 2010), in coop 
with ACM, Tampere, Finland, June 2010, pp. 83-90. 
[11] J. Abreu, “Design de Serviços e Interfaces num Contexto de 
Televisão Interactiva”, Doctoral Thesis, Aveiro University, Aveiro - 
Portugal, 2007. 
[12] D. Norman, “Things that Make us Smart”, Addison Wesley 
Publishing Company, 1993. 
[13] K. Segerståhl, “Utilization of Pervasive 
IT Compromised? 
Understanding the Adoption and Use of a Cross Media System”,  
Proc. of 7TH International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous 
Multimedia (MUM‟2008) in cooperation with ACM SIGMOBILE, 
Umea, Sweden, December 2008, pp. 168-175. 
[14] D. Norman, “The Design of Everyday Things”, New York: Basic 
Books, 2002. 
[15] K. Segerståhl and H. Oinas-Kukkonen, “Distributed User Experience 
in Persuasive Technology Environments”, in: Y. de Kort et al. (Eds.), 
Lecture notes in Computer Science 4744, Persuasive 2007, Springer-
Verlag, 2007. 
[16] M. Obrist and H. Knoch, “How to Investigate the Quality of User 
Experience for Ubiquitous TV?”, Tutorial, Proc. of EuroiTV‟2011, 
9th European Conference on Interactive TV and Video: Ubiquitous 
TV, Lisbon, Portugal, 29th June 2011. 
[17] M. Florins and J. Vanderdonckt, “Graceful Degradation of User 
Interfaces as a Design Method for Multiplatform Systems”, Proc. of  
the ACM International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces 
(IUI‟04), Funchal, Madeira, January 2004, 140-147. 
[18] J. Nielsen, “Coordinating User Interfaces for Consistency”, 
Neuauflage 2002 ed., the Morgan Kaufmann Series in Interactive 
Technologies, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1989. 
[19] M. de Sá, “Tools and Techniques for Mobile Interaction Design”, 
Doctoral Thesis, Lisbon University, Lisbon - Portugal, 2009. 
[20] C. Nielsen, M. Overgaard, M. Pedersen, J. Stage, and S. Stenild, “It‟s 
worth the hassle! The added value of evaluating the usability of 
mobile systems in the field”, proc. of 4TH Nordic Conference on 
Human-Computer Interaction (NordiCHI 2006), Oslo, Norway, 
October 2006, pp. 272-280.  
[21] S. Brewster, “Overcoming the lack of screen space on mobile 
computers”, Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 6, 2002, pp. 188-
205. 
[22] E. Kar, C. Maitland, U. Montalvo, and H. Bouwman, “Design 
guidelines for  mobile information and entertainment services – based 
on the radio538 ringtunes i-mode service case study”, proc. of 5th 
International Conference on Electronic Commerce (ICEC 2003), 
Pennsylvania, USA, September/October 2003, ACM Press, pp. 413-
421. 
[23] J. Sánchez, O. Starostenko, E. Castillo, and M. González, 
“Generation of usable interfaces for mobile devices”, proc. of 
CLICH‟05, 2005, pp. 348.   
[24] APPLE, “iOS Human Interface Guidelines”, Apple 2011, retrieved: 
October, 
2011, 
fom 
http://developer.apple.com/library/ios/documentation/userexperience/
conceptual/mobilehig/MobileHIG.pdf 
[25] A. Lund, “Measuring Usability with the USE Questionnaire”, 
retrieved: 
October, 
2011, 
from 
http://www.stcsig.org/usability/newsletter/0110_measuring_with_use.
html 
[26] NASA, “NASA TLX – Paper/Pencil Versin”, retrieved: October, 
2011,from: 
http://humansystems.arc.nasa.gov/groups/TLX/paperpencil.html 
    
 
 
 
 
 
320
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

