Topological Cluster-based Geographic Routing in
Multihop Ad Hoc Networks
Emi Mathews
Heinz Nixdorf Institute
University of Paderborn, Germany
Email: emi@hni.upb.de
Hannes Frey
University of Paderborn, Germany
Email: hannes.frey@uni-paderborn.de
Abstract—Existing geographic routing algorithms face seri-
ous challenges due to location errors, nonplanarity issues and
overhead of location service. To solve these issues, we propose
Topological Cluster Based Geographic Routing that combines
topology-based routing and geographic routing. It is a localized
routing scheme where the geographic routing is performed on
an overlay network of topological clusters. Preliminary results
from simulations show that the overlay graph created by topo-
logical clustering has the potential to create planar graphs even
with realistic wireless models. Hence, the typical Greedy-FACE-
Greedy protocol used in geographic routing works in these
overlay graphs and makes the geographic routing applicable in
realistic wireless networks. Moreover, due to the topology-based
multi-hop clustering which we apply in this work, the proposed
routing has the potential to subside node localization errors and
reduce the overhead of the location service.
Keywords—geographic routing; multi-hop clustering; overlay
graph; graph planarization; location fault tolerance.
I. INTRODUCTION
Efﬁcient routing in mobile ad-hoc networks is a challenging
task due to their highly dynamic network topology, bandwidth
constrained links and resource constrained nodes. Routing
protocols developed during the earlier stages were based on
the topology information, which used the knowledge about
the links between the nodes to establish and maintain end-to-
end paths for routing. Topology-based routing has signiﬁcant
overhead in maintaining up-to-date paths between source and
destination, if the topology changes frequently. Moreover, it
has scalability issues, as the overhead increases according to
the number of nodes in the network.
With the availability of small, inexpensive, and low-power
Global Positioning System [1] receivers or other localization
systems, routing based on the geographic information gained
signiﬁcant attention. In geographic routing, a node uses the
position information of the sender S, its neighboring nodes,
and the destination node D, to move the packet further toward
the destination at each hop.
The simplest form of geographic routing is to greedily
forward the message to the node which minimizes a local
forwarding metric. A simple example of such a metric is
the distance to the destination. In this case, the message is
forwarded to the neighbor node which minimizes the distance
to the destination.
In all greedy routing variants the message may arrive at a
node, which compared to its neighbors is the best with respect
to the routing metric applied. In this case, greedy routing has
to stop and an alternative routing mode called void handling
has to be used to circumvent the void regions.
Void handling based on routing in planar geometric graphs
attracted a major amount of research effort due to its stateless
property and guaranteed delivery in planar graph models [2],
[3]. The planar graph algorithms uses graph traversal rules
(right hand rule and face changes rules) to ﬁnd a path from the
source to the destination on planar graphs along the boundaries
of the void regions.
Existing geographic greedy routing and void handling meth-
ods do not require the establishment and maintenance of end-
to-end paths. Thus, compared to topological routing, changes
in topology have less impact. However, the following short-
comings of geographic routing algorithms are known:
Localization errors: Location measurement is often noisy
and incurs errors. Even small errors can lead to incorrect, non-
recoverable geographic routing with noticeable performance
degradation. Kim et al. [4] shows that location inaccuracy (
≤ 20% of radio range) caused forwarding loops, and packet
drops reaching up to 54 percent.
Void handling issues: The planar graph-based void handling
guarantees message delivery only if the graph is planar. Hence
a planarization step, prior to routing is required. However,
localized planarization processes that work in realistic wireless
models do not exist. Moreover, localization errors as discussed
above, causes incorrect edge removal and may disconnect the
planar subgraph [4]. Hence an efﬁcient localized planarization
algorithm that works in realistic wireless models with location
fault tolerance is needed.
Location service: Geographic information of the destination
node is required to send packets to the destination. Typically
a location service maintains the up-to-date positions of the
nodes in the network and the source directly asks the location
service for destination position information. The overhead in
maintaining a location service with up-to-date positions of all
nodes in the network is very high; especially at high node
mobility [5].
To address the above mentioned problems, we propose
Topological Cluster Based Geographic Routing (Topogeo),
which is a combination of small scale topology-based and
342
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

large scale geographic-based routing. The principal idea be-
hind the Topogeo routing is presented in Section II. Prelim-
inary results of the Topogeo performance analysis on graph
planarization are discussed in Section III. Finally, Section IV
summarizes the ﬁndings of this work and provides an outlook
on possible future research.
II. TOPOLOGICAL CLUSTER BASED GEOGRAPHIC
ROUTING
Topogeo combines topology-based routing and geographic
routing. Here, the geographic routing is performed on an
overlay network of topological multi-hop clusters. The cluster
heads constitute the vertices of the overlay graph. The cluster
heads collect information about their neighboring clusters and
establish links towards the neighboring cluster heads. These
links constitute the edges of the overlay graphs. Since the
cluster hop counts are limited and the cluster head keeps
information only about the neighboring clusters, Topogeo
remains a localized routing algorithm.
Using topology-based multi-hop clustering to create a ro-
bust overlay graph for geometric routing, is a novel idea.
Geographic routing performed on an overlay graph of cluster
heads (CH) was already reported; for instance in [4], [6]–
[8]. Contrary to these works that create geographic clusters or
geographic cells, our work is based on the idea of topological
clustering. Terminode Routing [9] combines hierarchical and
geographic routing. The hierarchy created in Terminodes is
by using anchor nodes, where, as in Topogeo the hierarchy
is created by topological clustering. Moreover, Topogeo is a
localized geographic routing, where as Terminodes needs a
global map of the anchor nodes or path discovery protocols
to obtain the anchored path.
Topological Cluster Based Geographic Routing has three
different processes, namely 1) Multi-hop clustering and cluster
head selection 2) Overlay network formation and 3) Topogeo
routing. Topogeo uses any multi-hop clustering algorithm, e.g,
k-hop connectivity ID algorithm [3], for clustering and cluster
head selection. After the clustering process, virtual nodes are
created at the center of gravity of the clusters. These nodes
are chosen as the vertices of the overlay graph, as they are
more location fault tolerant than the real cluster heads. In
principle, a node close to the location of virtual cluster head
(VCH) or the real cluster head itself serves the functions of
the VCH. Now, virtual links are created between neighboring
VCHs. After the overlay graph formation, the Topogeo routing
process is executed.
Topogeo routing uses topological information of the cluster
member nodes for routing within the clusters. During the
clustering process, each cluster head collects topology infor-
mation about its member nodes. The cluster member nodes
keep information about the path to reach their cluster head.
This information is used for the topology-based intra-cluster
routing. For routing beyond the source node’s cluster, Topogeo
uses geographic routing. In geographic routing, the typical
Greedy-Face-Greedy type protocol [2] is used to route packet
along the edges of the overlay graph. In the greedy-forwarding
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
Fig. 1: Overlay graph created with 2-hop clustering for illustration
mode of the protocol, each cluster head forwards the packets to
its neighboring cluster head based on any forwarding criterion
that guarantees loop-free paths; e.g., the most-advance based
forwarding [10] criterion. When the packets get stuck at voids
during greedy-forwarding, they use the planar graph traversal
based on Face routing [3] for void handling. This helps the
packets to circumvent the void region. Once they circumvent
the void region, the routing is switched back to the greedy
forwarding mode. When the packets reach the cluster head of
destination node, the local topology routing protocol is used
to forward the packets to the recipient node.
Planar-graph-based void handling guarantees message deliv-
ery only if the graph is planar. Hence a planarization step that
works in realistic wireless models is needed. Topogeo creates
an overlay graph that is almost 100% planar, even with realistic
wireless models such as Log normal Shadowing model [11]
as observed in our experiments. The planarity of the overlay
graph is achieved with the multi-hop clustering step.
Figure 1 shows a small network created with 50 nodes
and average node degree 9.4 (3π) for illustration. The edges
of the original network are not shown in the ﬁgure for
better visualization of the overlay graph. On performing 2-hop
clustering, three clusters are formed with the cluster member
nodes displayed in three different colors, along with their
node ids. The silver colored area shown in the background of
clusters, is the convex hull region of their member nodes. The
vertices of the overlay graph are shown in brick-red colored
circles and the edges in brick-red colored line segments.
Topogeo addresses the shortcomings of localized geographic
routing discussed in Section I as follows. It is location fault
tolerant, as Geographic routing is performed at the cluster head
level rather than at the node level. Hence the location and link
errors of individual nodes do not directly reﬂect on the routing
decisions in the overlay graphs; especially in dense networks
having several gateway nodes between each clusters or cells.
Moreover, the virtual cluster head creation and large cluster
formation, subside the discrepancy in the location of nodes
which will be validated in our future experiments.
343
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

In Topogeo, the location service keeps and maintains the
position information only for virtual cluster heads. For each
individual node in the network, now only the node’s cluster
head id is stored in the location service. Hence the location
service need not update information of each node in the
network while it has a position change. Location information
about a node only needs to be updated when it changes its
cluster. Moreover, individual node movements do not change
the position of virtual cluster heads signiﬁcantly and hence the
virtual cluster head position update is less frequent.
The overlay graph created by Topogeo has almost no
intersections even with realistic wireless models. Hence the
non-planarity issues of planar-graph-based void handling in
realistic wireless models is solved and FACE routing works
with guaranteed delivery in such overlay graphs.
III. EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS AND PRELIMINARY
RESULTS
We have implemented the multi-hop clustering algorithms
such as k-CONID (k-hop connectivity ID) algorithm [3] and
Max-Min D-Cluster algorithm [12] for clustering and cluster
head selection process. After this process, the virtual nodes
and virtual links of the overlay graph are created. The third
process, the Topogeo routing, works on any existing topology-
based and geometric routing algorithms for intra-cluster and
inter-cluster routing respectively. The evaluation of Topogeo
performance on its ability to solve the shortcomings of local-
ized geographic routing discussed in Section I is independent
of the implementation of Topogeo routing process.
To make statistical estimations on the planarity of the
overlay graphs, we conduct various experiments on different
test networks. We use the ShoX network simulator [13] for
network creation and overlay graph formation. Networks with
ﬁeld sizes 500×500 containing 100 to 500 nodes, and another
one with 2500 × 2500 containing 2500 to 12500 nodes, are
used in these experiments. For each ﬁeld size, 100 different
network conﬁgurations are created for a speciﬁc average node
degree value. We use more than 1000 different networks in
total for the evaluation.
We use the Log normal shadowing (LNS) model [11] for
our experiments. The path loss at a distance d expressed in
decibel by the LNS model is given as:
PL(d)[dB] = PL(d0)[dB]+10γ log10
d0
d +Xσ[dB], where
(1)
γ is the path loss exponent, Xσ is a zero-mean Gaussian
random variable with variance σ2, and PL(d0) is the reference
path loss at a reference distance d0. We choose realistic values
γ = 3.25 and σ = 2.5 for our experiments. We assume Ptx =
15 dBm and the reference path loss PL(d0) = 40 dBm for
the reference distance d0 = 1 m. We set the receiver sensitivity
at 80 dBm.
The preliminary results obtained on the planarity of the
overlay graphs show that overlay graphs created from multi-
hop clustering are almost 100% planar especially at higher
hop counts. We are working on the strategies to create overlay
graphs that are planar even at lower hop counts.
To compare the performance of the Topogeo planarization,
a Gabriel Graph (GG) [2] based planarization algorithm is also
implemented. GG creates a planar graph locally from the full
graph. It provably yields a connected planar graph on Unit
Disk Graphs. When the GG based planarization algorithm is
performed on the LNS model, more than 80% of the test cases
produced are nonplanar graphs, where as almost 100% graphs
are planar with Topogeo.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We proposed Topological Cluster-based Geographic Rout-
ing, a new routing scheme which combines topology-based
routing and geographic routing. The geographic routing is
performed on an overlay network created from multi-hop
clustering. For routing within the clusters, Topogeo uses
topology information and for inter-cluster routing, it uses the
typical Greedy-FACE-Greedy routing scheme. The Greedy-
FACE-Greedy routing guarantees message delivery only if the
network graph is planar. Nevertheless, localized planarization
processes that work in realistic wireless models have not yet
been found. The preliminary results obtained from simulations
show that the overlay graphs created by the multi-hop cluster-
ing are almost 100% planar even with realistic wireless models
like Log Normal Shadowing model. Hence the Greedy-FACE-
Greedy routing works in these overlay graphs and makes the
geographic routing applicable in realistic wireless networks.
More investigation on multi-hop clustering algorithms that
create overlay planar graphs using local information need to
be done. This work shows that the geometric properties of the
overlay graph produced from topological clustering, is an area
worth exploring more.
Due to the multi-hop clustering, it is evident that individ-
ual node localization errors do not affect the performance
of Topogeo routing and the overhead of a location service
is reduced signiﬁcantly. We are currently working in this
direction to provide more quantitative results in future. We are
also working towards the implementation of Topogeo routing
process.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Emi Mathews acknowledges with appreciation, the research
fellowship from the International Graduate School, Dynamic
Intelligent Systems, University of Paderborn, Germany.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Hofmann-Wellenhof, H. Lichtenegger, and J. Collins, Global Posi-
tioning System: Theory and Practice.
Springer-Verlag, 1997.
[2] B. Karp and H. T. Kung, “GPSR: Greedy perimeter stateless routing
for wireless networks,” in MobiCom ’00: Proceedings of the 6th annual
international conference on Mobile computing and networking.
New
York, USA: ACM, 2000, pp. 243–254.
[3] G.
Chen,
F.
G.
Nocetti,
J.
S.
Gonzalez,
and
I.
Stojmenovic,
“Connectivity-based k-hop clustering in wireless networks,” in HICSS
’02: Proceedings of the 35th Annual Hawaii International Conference
on System Sciences, vol. 7.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer
Society, 2002, p. 188.3.
344
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

[4] Y. Kim, J.-J. Lee, and A. Helmy, “Modeling and analyzing the impact
of location inconsistencies on geographic routing in wireless networks,”
SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing and Communications Review, vol. 8,
no. 1, pp. 48–60, 2004.
[5] D. Chen and P. K. Varshney, “Geographic routing in wireless ad hoc
networks,” in Guide to Wireless Ad Hoc Networks.
Springer London,
2009, pp. 1–38.
[6] H. Frey and D. G¨orgen, “Planar graph routing on geographical clusters,”
Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 560–574, 2005.
[7] J. Lin and G.-S. Kuo, “A novel location-fault-tolerant geographic routing
scheme for wireless ad hoc networks,” in IEEE International Conference
on Vehicular Technology Conference, vol. 3.
Melbourne, Australia:
IEEE Computer Society, 2006, pp. 1092 – 1096.
[8] J. Cao, L. Zhang, G. Wang, and H. Cheng, “SSR: Segment-by-segment
routing in large-scale mobile ad hoc networks,” in IEEE International
Conference on Mobile Adhoc and Sensor Systems Conference, vol. 0.
Los Alamitos, CA, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2006, pp. 216–225.
[9] L. Blaˇzevi´c, S. Giordano, and J.-Y. Le Boudec, “Self organized termin-
ode routing,” Cluster Computing, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 205–218, 2002.
[10] T. Melodia, D. Pompili, and I. Akyildiz, “Optimal local topology
knowledge for energy efﬁcient geographical routing in sensor networks,”
in INFOCOM 2004: Twenty-third AnnualJoint Conference of the IEEE
Computer and Communications Societies, vol. 3, Hong Kong S.A.R.,
People’s Republic of China, 2004, pp. 1705 –1716.
[11] H. Karl and A. Willig, Protocols and Architectures for Wireless Sensor
Networks.
John Wiley & Sons, 2005.
[12] A. Amis, R. Prakash, T. Vuong, and D. Huynh, “Max-min d-cluster
formation in wireless ad hoc networks,” in INFOCOM 2000: Nineteenth
Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications
Societies, vol. 1, 2000, pp. 32 –41.
[13] “Shox – a scalable ad hoc network simulator,” accessed on May 1,
2010. [Online]. Available: http://shox.sourceforge.net
345
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

