Understanding Individual’s Behaviors in Urban Environments
Claudia Liliana Z´u˜niga-Ca˜n´on1,2 and Juan Carlos Burguillo1
1 Information Technologies Group GTI, Department of Telematics Engineering
University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain.
2 Research Group COMBA R & D, Department of Engineering
University of Santiago de Cali, Cali, Colombia.
Email:clzuniga@ieee.org,(clzuniga, J.C.Burguillo)@uvigo.es
Abstract—UrbanContext is an urban computing context abstrac-
tion model that follows an individual centered approach and
validates the use of the Theory of Roles to understand the
behavior of the individual within a social environment. The roles
deﬁned in UrbanContext allow the interpretation of the states of
the individual, facilitating its interaction with the environment
and offering services without damaging its privacy. In this paper,
we mainly describe a real evaluation scenario for UrbanContext
at the UBI platform in Oulu (Finland).
Keywords–Urban Computing; Urban Context; Models; Theory
of Roles; Smart Cities.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Several projects have focused their works on improving
cities, with the objective of making them more intelligent and
ubiquitous. The ubiquitous city [1][2] is deﬁned as a city with
high technological interaction that has as goal to offer services
and information at any place and time to its inhabitants.
These urban environments become spaces where persons,
places and technologies converge. These three aspects form
the so called triad [3] in urban computing. People become
dynamic individuals and the main subject of study, if we want
to offer people-centric services within an urban environment.
To model the context in the urban environment we face a
big complexity due to the great number of variables involved
in such spaces. This complexity demands techniques that
allow the modeling and the representation of the individuals’
behaviors in the cities.
Our contribution to face this problem is UrbanContext,
a model for urban computing systems that uses the Theory
of Roles [4] to manage context. UrbanContext facilitates the
interpretation of the states of the individual, the development
of adapted services and the generation of positive relationships.
We propose a validation scenario in an adapted real environ-
ment, and evaluate our roles model approach.
The paper is organized as follows: The ﬁrst section is
an introduction about the context and the theory of roles
in urban computing. The second section presents the roles
model used in UrbanContext and describes the dynamic of the
component. The third section presents an evaluation scenario
for UrbanContext at Oulu (Finland), and ﬁnally, we conclude
and present some future work.
II.
THE CONTEXT AND THE THEORY OF ROLES
To model the urban environments it is necessary to con-
sider the context. Schilit and Theimer [5] introduced the
term ”context aware”, and they consider the ”context” as
the location, identities of nearby people or objects, and the
changes happening to these objects. Later, this deﬁnition was
complemented in [6], where it was stated that the important
aspects of context were: where you are, who you are, and what
resources are near you.
One of the broader deﬁnitions was made by Dey [7], who
deﬁned ”context” as any information that can be used to
characterize the situation of an entity. These deﬁnitions were
widely discussed and subsequently improved by Dourish [8],
who indicated that to understand and model the context it was
also necessary to involve social issues. Based on the latter idea,
in UrbanContext we need a user-oriented approach that allows
the identiﬁcation of the individual’s behavior and interaction
within the urban environment.
The Academic Community has done big efforts to under-
stand the different points of view present in urban environ-
ments. A representative example from the beginnings could
be the project “Familiar Strangers” presented by Paulos in
Intel Research [9], while recently we could mention the project
“Urban Computing Middleware” funded by the South Korean
Government [10], that tries to identify people, present in an
environment, sharing the same likes in order to provide them
with common services.
One of the challenges found in urban environments is the
need to generate interacting spaces that allow to establish
strong relationships among individuals. To achieve that it is
necessary to understand the roles that people play in an urban
environment in order to satisfy their real needs [11].
To face all these challenges, we use the Theory of Roles
proposed by Erving Goffman [4]. This theory considers an
individual who determines its behavior according to the role
he/she plays in a certain situation. The individual’s behaviors
are inﬂuenced by the interactions he/she experiences, and
is constantly changing the roles played within the social
environment.
Therefore, the objectives of the UrbanContext, are to im-
prove the interaction of the individual within the urban context,
to identify its needs in every interaction and to provide services
for it.
III.
ROLES MODEL IN AN URBAN ENVIRONMENT
Understanding human behavior generates technical chal-
lenges for managing and classifying data with the required
quality [12]. These challenges are related also with the issues
to understand how the individual socially interacts, and how
this interaction can be powered.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The individual interacts in physical and social environ-
ments that inﬂuence directly its behaviors, so we need to
understand what he/she is doing, and what he/she really wants
to do in speciﬁc physical places to estimate past behaviors
in order to predict future ones. The roles model used in
UrbanContext focuses on those challenges, and characterizes
several individual states, deﬁning if the user wants to be
disconnected from the system or if it wants to play a certain
role in a particular spatial or temporal scenario within the urban
environment.
A. The Management of the Context in the UrbanContext Model
As we said before, we have created UrbanContext [13],
which is a general-purpose model with a set of components,
used for the design of urban computing platforms that applies
the Theory of Roles to manage the individual’s context in
urban environments.
UrbanContext was designed from the result of previous
projects and experiments developed in controlled and open
environments of urban interaction. Our previous experiences
have been performed gradually and were restricted to three
major projects [14][15][16] (See Figure 1).
Figure 1. Previous Projects Developed in Urban Computing.
Openzoo [14] was the ﬁrst project, and it was developed
in an urban tourist controlled environment. Here, we worked
along with anthropologists and sociologists analyzing a group
of 400 individuals. After that, we had seven work sessions
with focus groups of 45 users of different categories in a zoo.
This allowed an ethnographic analysis of the individuals, the
identiﬁcation of their perception about the urban environment
and the availability of technological resources.
Based on this ﬁrst experience, we developed Urb@naLab
[15], an urban computing platform that mixes the living lab
concept in its design to allow the creation of collaborative
spaces where the individual could participate actively in the
co-creation of services. This originated a third project called
Guacar´ı LivingLab [16], an Urb@naLab adaptation on an open
real environment. LivingLab was considered as an ideal space
to experiment, where we carried out three sessions with control
groups of 45 people to observe and measure the interaction
among individuals.
These previous experiments allowed us to identify the
constant needs when designing urban computing platforms
and led us to propose Goffman’s Theory of Roles [4] to
model the context of the individual. In order to describe it, we
outlined our proposal with ﬁve components that we consider
relevant to develop urban platforms (See Figure 2): interface,
roles, semantic, cloud and services. The components of the
UrbanContext model can be described as:
Interface Component, is the main external interaction
point, uses several devices and technologies present in urban
environments like mobile devices, augmented reality, etc.
Roles Component, is in charge of understanding human
behaviors for modelling human states. This component allows
the system to manage context information, to identify user
interactions and to provide personalized services.
Semantic Component, is in charge of classifying all the
information obtained, in order to be processed afterwards by
algorithms to introduce a semantic level for reasoning.
Cloud Component stores all the data obtained from the
individual and the urban atmosphere.
Service Component provides a set of adapted services to
the individual needs.
In UrbanContext, the management of the context and the
roles assumed by the individual are modeled through the
Roles Component. The Roles Component is composed of four
sub-components: urban agent, urban atmosphere, context and
context management. Next, we describe the main aim of all
those sub-components:
Urban Agent SubComponent, which is focused on the
characterization of the user. It should collect all the information
of the user directly from its interaction, as well as from
different social sources he/she is related to.
Urban Atmosphere SubComponent, that allows ﬁltering
through all the data about the place, the environment, as well
as the persons attending the space.
Context SubComponent, which is associated with the
identiﬁcation of the contexts in which the individual par-
ticipates within the urban atmosphere. It considers that the
individual can be in three different contexts: personal, social
and global. This sub-component collects and identiﬁes the
roles of the individuals within every selected context.
Context Management SubComponent, that focuses on
the semantic processing of all the data collected by the other
components. It also achieves discovering services, establishes
the logic of the individual’s behaviors in the atmosphere and
builds effective relationships.
B. Roles Component Flow
In UrbanContext we use a multi-tier approach to manage
the context, which is divided in three main parts: global, social
and personal. Thus, the Roles Component provides:
The global context is ﬁxed to an individual in an open
space of the urban atmosphere. This context manages what
people share through a set of services around a public place: a
concert, the meeting in a square or a spontaneous congregation.
The social context corresponds to what is obtained from
socializing with other individuals; for example, friends, ac-
quaintances and people the individual gets in contact with.
The personal context is based on the individual’s own
world, the one that is only available to it. In this space, the
user is represented as a big bubble with some needs, fears,
concerns, ideas and tastes.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 2. UrbanContext Model.
At this level of abstraction, we use a second ranking that
allows to offer customization. For this approach, we used the
Theory of Roles, which considers individuals always playing
roles according to their situation. By applying this concept in
UrbanContext, we establish that for every context an individual
can play different roles that we can structure hierarchically as:
Role Groups: Personal, Family, Professional or Academic,
Social and Rest of the World Roles.
Role Categories: Within each Role Group we have cre-
ated several categories that identify the role the individual is
playing, i.e., father, uncle, teacher, friend, or just himself.
Individuals can release public information and needs ac-
cording to the role and the context they are at a certain
moment. This information is fed into a knowledge base that
identiﬁes the role of individuals in an urban environment to
be able to provide the right services adapted to their needs.
IV.
EVALUATION PROCESS OF URBANCONTEXT
The evaluation process of the UrbanContext model con-
siders three main steps. The ﬁrst one identiﬁes who is the
individual, the second one identiﬁes what role is playing
the individual and the third one predicts which services are
relevant for the individual.
The evaluation of the UrbanContext takes place at Oulu
(Finland), where citizens have available a smart city platform,
Open UBI(quitous) Oulu [17], which is accessible through
displays scattered over the city. The UBI platform offers
services like games, transport information, event information,
maps, etc. (See Figure 3).
As the interaction with the UBI platform is done through
smart displays and not with mobile devices, and taking into
account that to identify the individual’s roles it is necessary that
participants are available online, we have designed a mobile
application in Android to support all these issues.
Figure 3. UBI Platform Interface.
The development of this application has taken into account
technical and sociological factors. The application shall be able
to consider different scenarios. For example, in many cases we
need different services for a person when he/she is 20 years
old, than when he/she is 35 years old.
The Android application can be freely downloaded by the
participants in the evaluation. The application identiﬁes the
individuals and their devices. The application also stores a set
of individuals’ interaction records during a certain amount of
time. Finally, the mobile application also includes an algorithm
to manage the knowledge needed for the predicting future
services (See Figure 4).
Concerning the three evaluation steps described above, they
are performed as described next:
Individual and urban atmosphere information: the infor-
mation is obtained through UrbanContext Application, upload-
ing the Urban Agent SubComponent (name, age, sex, etc), and
the Urban Atmosphere SubComponent (location in real time,
place, etc).
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 4. UrbanContext Android Application.
In Oulu, there exists demographic repositories with data
coming from the users of the UBI platform. These data
are combined with the data coming from the UrbanContext
Application to obtain context enriched individual information.
Individuals’ Roles: the individuals’ roles are also captured
through UrbanContext Application. The application was de-
signed to start using a predetermined roles repository, which
were obtained according by a previous study introduced in
[18]. Using this predeﬁned set of roles, an individual can
choose at any time the role he/she plays from the default list
or add new roles to the knowledge base.
Regarding the use of the mobile application, the user
provides information about the actual context and the role it
is playing when logging in for the ﬁrst time. After that, the
application enters a hibernation mode, appearing as an active
icon on the screen of the mobile device. In hibernation mode,
the user may at any time change its role by a simple touch.
The application will use data mining algorithms to predict
individual services based on the roles played by the individual.
Services prediction: the database obtained by the roles
model, and the user interaction with the mobile device, allows
to predict different services for resting or working time. For
instance, if the user is resting at home at 6pm, the application
can suggest a social network, but if the user is working at 9am,
other work related services can be suggested instead.
While the knowledge roles’ database is initially tuned by
the user, the next times it adapts progressively to each user, and
by means of data mining techniques (supervised classiﬁcation
techniques through decision trees), it is able to suggest the
recommended services.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we present UrbanContext, a model for urban
platforms that follows an individual centered approach. We
consider the Theory of Roles to understand the individual’s
behavior within a social environment. We also deﬁne an eval-
uation environment in a real scenario to validate UrbanContext.
We can conclude that UrbanContext, and its roles model
proposal, aim to understand the interpretation of the states of
the individual, as well as its interaction with the environment.
We consider that the urban atmosphere and the individuals’
context directly inﬂuence the individuals’ needs.
We have also realized, through the characterization of the
individual and the urban atmosphere, that the roles model
provides a knowledge base that facilitates the interaction and
promotes positive relationships.
As future work, we plan to evaluate the UrbanContext
model, at the UBI platform in Oulu (Finland), by means
of our new Android mobile application. We also plan to
collect enough data to measure the level of interaction of the
individuals, in order to provide the adequate services according
to the roles that individuals are playing at a certain time.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Hwang, “u-city: The next paradigm of urban development,” Handbook
of Research on Urban Informatics: The Practice and Promise of the
Real-Time City, 2009, pp. 367–378.
[2]
M. Foth, “From social butterﬂy to engaged citizen,” Urban Informat-
ics, Social Media, Ubiquitous Computing, and Mobile Technology to
Support Citizen Engagement, 2011, p. Chapter 17.
[3]
M. Foth, J. H.-j. Choi, and C. Satchell, “Urban informatics,” in
Proceedings of the ACM 2011 Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work, ser. CSCW ’11.
NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 1–8.
[4]
E. Goffman, The presentation of self in everyday life, ser. Doubleday
anchor books.
Doubleday, 1959.
[5]
B. Schilit and M. Theimer, “Disseminating active map information to
mobile hosts,” Network, IEEE, vol. 8, no. 5, Sept 1994, pp. 22–32.
[6]
B. Schilit, N. Adams, and R. Want, “Context-aware computing applica-
tions,” in Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, 1994. WMCSA
1994. First Workshop on, Dec 1994, pp. 85–90.
[7]
A. K. Dey, “Understanding and using context,” Personal Ubiquitous
Comput., vol. 5, no. 1, Jan. 2001, pp. 4–7.
[8]
P. Dourish, “What we talk about when we talk about context,” Personal
Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 8, no. 1, Feb. 2004, pp. 19–30.
[9]
E. Paulos and E. Goodman, “The familiar stranger: Anxiety, comfort,
and play in public places,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’04.
NY, USA:
ACM, 2004, pp. 223–230.
[10]
J. Lertlakkhanakul, S. Hwang, and J. Choi, “Developing spatial infor-
mation framework for urban computing environment: A socio-spatial
computing framework for smart urban environment,” in Management
and Service Science, 2009. MASS ’09, Sept 2009, pp. 1–5.
[11]
T. Kindberg, M. Chalmers, and E. Paulos, “Guest editors’ introduction:
Urban computing,” Pervasive Computing, IEEE, vol. 6, no. 3, July 2007,
pp. 18–20.
[12]
N. Oliver, “Urban computing and smart cities: Opportunities and chal-
lenges in modelling large-scale aggregated human behavior,” in Human
Behavior Understanding, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
A. Salah and B. Lepri, Eds.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, vol.
7065, pp. 16–17.
[13]
C. L. Zuniga-Canon and J. Burguillo, “Urbancontext: A management
model for pervasive environments in user-oriented urban computing,”
Computer Science, vol. 15, no. 1, 2014, pp. 75–88.
[14]
C. L. Zu˜niga and et al., “Design of service-oriented pervasive system for
urban computing in cali zoo (openzoo),” World Academy of Science,
Engineering and Technology, vol. 4, no. 3, 2010, pp. 990 – 995.
[15]
C. Zuniga and et al., “Software platform for services in colombian
cities using the living labs approach,” in GLOBECOM Workshops (GC
Wkshps), 2011 IEEE, Dec 2011, pp. 1258–1262.
[16]
“CO-T1199:
Wireless
Networks
and
Digital
Inclusion
Services
in
the
Municipality
of
Guacar´ı,
Sponsored
by
the
IDB
(In-
teramerican Development Bank) and the Italian Trust Fund of
Information
and
Communication
Technology
for
Development,”
2011,
URL:
http://www.iadb.org/en/projects/project-description-title,
1303.html?id=CO-T1199 [accessed: June, 2015].
[17]
“UBI, Open Ubiquitous Oulu-Finland,” URL: http://www.ubioulu.ﬁ/en/
[accessed: June, 2015].
[18]
C. Z´u˜niga-Ca˜n´on and J. Burguillo, “Applying data mining in urban
environments using the roles model approach,” in Advances in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence – IBERAMIA 2014, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, A. L. Bazzan and K. Pichara, Eds.
Springer International
Publishing, 2014, vol. 8864, pp. 698–709.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

