Interoperability in IoT: A Vital Key Factor to Create the “Social Network” of 
Things. 
Antonios Pliatsios, Christos Goumopoulos 
Information and Communication Systems Engineering 
Dept., University of the Aegean  
Samos, Greece 
e-mail: icsdd18007@icsd.aegean.gr, goumop@aegean.gr  
 Konstantinos Kotis 
Dept. of Cultural Technology and Communication  
University of the Aegean  
Mytilene, Greece 
e-mail: kotis@aegean.gr  
 
Abstract— The Internet of Things (ΙοΤ) is a concept that 
describes the connection of various devices with built-in sensors 
and communication equipment to achieve the collection and 
transmission of data in a network. IoT devices are increasing 
with geometric progress, and ensuring interoperability and 
handling of the enormous heterogeneous data generated is of 
major importance for the creation of intelligent applications and 
services. This paper presents the state of art and current 
solutions on the issues of interoperability in the IoT domain, as 
well as the challenges and open issues. Finally, a discussion is 
provided on what future research should focus on and solutions 
are outlined to achieve interoperability in IoT systems that can 
lead to a “Social Network” of Things.  
Keywords- Internet of Things; Interoperability; Semantic Web 
Technologies; IoT platforms; ontologies; Social Network of 
Things; middleware; Open Linked Data, ontology alignment; 
reasoning mechanisms. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The Internet of Things (IoT) is the next big step in the 
field of technology. New technologies are being developed to 
meet the ever-increasing demands of a new digital world 
where heterogeneous devices will be connected, forming a 
part of an IoT ecosystem [1]. IoT has the potential to bring 
out many possibilities of natural objects, which until recently 
were considered impossible. This has a significant impact on 
society, economic growth and in the informatics sector. 
The IoT devices collect a huge amount of data using 
microcontrollers and sensors embedded in them connecting 
home users, businesses, public facilities, and business 
systems. These data are multimodal including video streams, 
images, and text data. The density of systems and 
technologies is becoming increasingly high and ensuring 
interoperability 
and 
handling 
of 
such 
large 
scale 
heterogeneous data will be a key factor in the development of 
smart applications in several areas, such as Smart Cities, 
Smart Homes, Smart Health, Smart Agriculture, etc. [2].  
According to Noura et al. [3], the interoperability on the 
Internet of Things relates to the layers below: 1) Device, 2) 
Syntactic, 3) Networks, 4) Semantic and 5) Platform 
architecture. The difficulty in the communication between 
the various devices is not only related to the diversity of 
devices but also is about the way data is labelled, how devices 
are represented and modelled, as well as, it is about the 
architecture type of the different systems. 
There are several definitions in the literature for 
interoperability. From all these definitions, we will focus on 
the one that is most important about our context. The IEEE 
defines interoperability as "the ability of two or more systems 
or components to exchange information and use the 
information exchanged" [4]. Moreover, we can define 
interoperability as a measure of the degree to which diverse 
systems, organizations, and/or individuals are able to work 
together to achieve a common goal [5].  
The "Internet of Things" concept implies that all Things 
are harmoniously connected so they can communicate and 
they are also easily accessible from the Internet to deliver 
services to end-users [6]. But, to create a new “Social 
Network” of Things, a truly connected world,   that 
harmoniously connects applications to Smart Homes, Smart 
Cities, Smart Agriculture, Smart Health, etc., it will require a 
real horizontal integration of devices, applications, systems 
and platforms.  
Firstly, in this work, we attempt to define the problem of 
interoperability in IoT systems and then we report the current 
developments on this issue (Section II). Following the 
challenges and open issues (Section III) and existing 
solutions (Section IV) are discussed. As a contribuiton, 
solutions are proposed to enhance interoperability in the IoT 
field and ideas are presented on what future research should 
focus on (Section V) before our conclusion (Section VI). 
II. 
INTEROPERABILITY LEVELS IN IOT 
IoT interoperability is a multifaceted issue and the 
solutions to be addressed must be in line with many factors 
that are also referred to the literature as interoperability 
levels.  A taxonomy of interoperability for IoT is based on 
four 
levels: 
technical, 
syntactical, 
semantic 
and 
organizational interoperability [3][7]. Below we will analyze 
each level individually. 
A. Technical Interoperability 
Technical Interoperability includes the first three levels of 
classification, as proposed by Noura et al. and it includes the 
interoperability of devices, the interoperability of networks 
and the interoperability of platforms. 
a) Device Interoperability 
Devices that are integrated into the world of IoT are 
becoming more and more ubiquitous. These Smart Devices / 
Things are either devices with a lot of computing power like 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-736-8
UBICOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

smartphones and Raspberry Pi, or devices with built-in 
microswitches and low-power actuators, such as Arduino, 
Wispmote, Libelium, and others [7]. The problem of 
interoperability at this level is due to the inability of all these 
devices with different architectures and power levels to 
interact properly. 
b) Network Interoperability 
Moreover, due to the variety and heterogeneity of IoT 
devices, many communication protocols have been 
developed to cover all requirements in the IoT market.  Home 
appliances, such as smart air conditioners, refrigerators, 
televisions, etc., use Wifi and 2G / 3G / 4G cellular 
communications. Other mobile devices use more low-power 
and short-range wireless technologies, such as Bluetooth, 
ZigBee, Beacons, RFID belonging to the WBAN IEEE 
802.15.6 family. While a new category created for sensor 
applications is that of long-range and Low-Power Wide-Area 
Networks (LPWAN). Some of them are the wireless 
technologies LoRaWan, SigFox, NB-IoT [8]. This level of 
interoperability refers to the difficulty of communication of 
the IoT devices using different communication protocols. 
c) Platform Interoperability 
The IoT platform is a comprehensive suite of services that 
facilitates services, such as development, maintenance, 
analysis, visualization and intelligent decision-making 
capabilities in an IoT application. Interoperability issues of 
IoT platforms are because many of these systems are tailored 
for specific IoT applications. Some of the most popular 
platforms are Google Cloud Platform, IBM Watson IoT, 
ThingWorx, oneM2M, Microsoft Azure Cloud, ThingSpeak 
[9]. Each of the above follows its data sharing policy, it has 
its operating system, and this has the effect of creating 
heterogeneous IoT systems and increasing the problem of 
interoperability. 
B. Syntactic Interoperability 
Syntactic interoperability refers to the interoperability of 
data formats and encodings used in any exchange of 
information or services between heterogeneous systems and 
IoT entities. Such forms of standardization are, for example, 
XML, JSON and RDF. The encoding and decoding of 
messages are done using editorial rules, defined by a 
grammar. The problem of syntactic interoperability arises 
due to the great variety of grammars that each architecture 
employs and consequently, the IοT devices could not 
communicate properly. 
C. Semantic Interoperability 
Semantic interoperability is characterized as the ability to 
transmit information, data and knowledge among agents, 
services and applications in a meaningful way, inside and 
outside the Semantic Web [10][11]. It is the description of 
smart devices according to their data, services, and 
capabilities in mechanically comprehensible form using a 
common vocabulary. Semantic interoperability is achieved 
when the exchange of data is made harmoniously 
independent of the structure of the original data giving a 
common meaning [12]. This can be done either by existing 
standards or agreements on the form and importance of data 
or can be done using a common vocabulary either in a schema 
and/or in an ontological approach [13]. 
The use of an ontology is the most common way of adding 
semantics to the IoT data. It is a way of modelling 
information that extends the concept of the Semantic Web 
into the Internet of Things. The most important Semantic 
Web technologies have been standardized by the World Wide 
Web Consortium and are Resource Description Format 
(RDF), a lightweight data metadata model for describing 
ontology properties, SPARQL, and the RDF Query Language 
[14]. 
Existing solutions [11][14] suggest the use of unified 
ontologies to address semantic interoperability issues and 
automation related to the heterogeneity of data. However, the 
multiple possible consolidations developed by field experts 
[2] pose many challenges as each consolidated ontology 
proposes its autonomous classification. It is therefore 
imperative to improve ontology matching and ontology 
alignment [15][16] to discover the most appropriate 
strategies that can overcome the heterogeneity problem in the 
Internet of Things and bridge the semantic gap between IoT 
entities at the level of Information / Applications. 
D. Organizational Interoperability 
Organizational interoperability refers to the successful 
organization of a system to communicate effectively and to 
transmit the information in a harmonious manner [10]. To do 
this, the other three levels of interoperability: technical, 
syntactic and semantic interoperability, must be ensured. 
High organizational interoperability means that information 
has 
been 
properly 
transmitted 
irrespective 
of 
the 
heterogeneity of devices, networks, types of compilation and 
modelling of information [17]. 
III. 
CHALLENGES 
With the rapid expansion of various heterogeneous devices 
and systems, addressing the interoperability challenges is a 
major issue. The IoT devices must be compatible with their 
devices communicate with this and this is only possible if 
they follow common protocols and communication 
standards. 
Below 
we 
present 
the 
most 
important 
interoperability challenges in IoT. 
A. Heterogeneous Connected Devices/Things  
One of the most important challenges in IoT systems is 
the interoperability of connected devices. Some of the most 
important issues are: 
• Heterogeneous equipment from different manufacturers: 
Devices not manufactured by the same manufacturer 
cannot communicate correctly [18]. 
• Incompatibility between different platforms. Some of 
them are Evrythng (www.evrythng.com), ThingWorx 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-736-8
UBICOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

(www.thingworx.com), 
Xively 
(www.xively.com), 
Google Cloud IoT, Yaler (yaler.net), Microsoft Azure IoT 
[9]. 
• Incompatibility of different versions: Newer devices do 
not take backward compatibility issues. 
• Different communication protocols / formats (IEEE 
802.11, IEEE 802.15, LoRaWan, SigFox). 
B. Multimodal, High Heteogeinety Data 
IoT Systems collect data from different distributed 
sensors. These data are multimodal, including heterogeneous 
data, such as video streams, images, audio, and simple text 
[2]. How to integrate these distributed data from multisource 
is a key challenge for IoT development and for 
implementation of new innovative smart applications.  
Moreover, 
communication 
between 
heterogeneous 
devices generates a large volume of real-time, high-speed, 
and uninterrupted data streams. These data streams include 
structured, semi-structured and unstructured data. When 
heterogeneous and various sensor data are acquired, 
multisource data should be merged to create a comprehensive 
and meaningful view for further utility [19]. 
C. Syntactic interoperability between Things 
As discussed previously, syntactic interoperability 
involves packet and data networking mechanisms. Thus, 
when the above challenges are overcome, there is still a need 
to ensure that the data flow is interoperable between different 
networks and between a combination of devices. Translation 
functions to networks or on some devices, gateways or in the 
form of intermediate software sitting on the edge of one 
network are most likely to be necessary [20].  
Moreover, IoT frameworks prefer to use popular and 
tried-and-tested 
solutions 
to 
increase 
syntactic 
interoperability. These solutions include the messaging 
protocols CoAP, XMPP, AMQP, MQTT, DDS and Hy-LP, 
as well as the DPWS, UPnP, and OSGi [21]. However, these 
solutions only offer cross-domain compatibility and usually 
operate as closed silos with a close application focus, 
enforcing specific data formats and interfaces. 
D. Semantically Incompatible Information Models  
As mentioned in the previous section, ensuring semantic 
interoperability is very important to address the inability to 
exchange and reuse data. Unfortunately, even today, IoT 
systems consist of semantically incompatible information 
models, such as incompatible general ontologies that offer 
different descriptions or even understandings of resources 
and processes, and thus are a barrier to the development and 
adoption of the IoT.  
Most of the existing semantic tools and techniques, such 
as Linked Data, ontology alignment and ontology matching 
[14][15] have been created primarily for Internet resources. 
Existing models provide the basic description frameworks, 
but alignment between different models and frameworks are 
required. In addition, the capacity of the natural environment 
and the resource constraints on IoT systems have not been 
taken into account [16]. Future work in this area should 
provide capability, security and scalability and provide 
solutions that are easily adapted to limited and distributed 
resource environments. 
IV. 
EXISTING SOLUTIONS 
A significant research effort has been devoted to providing 
solutions in the direction of increasing interoperability at all 
four levels presented in Section III. In this section, we 
examine solutions provided by six related projects (AGILE, 
BiG-IoT, VICINITY, Open-IoT, INTER-IoT, and Machine-
to-Machine Measurement (M3) Framework). These six 
projects are developing interoperability solutions at different 
interoperability levels and for this purpose were chosen to be 
analyzed in this particular work.  
A. BIG-IoT 
BiG-IoT [22][23] focus on addressing the semantic and 
organizational levels of IoT interoperability issues by 
creating the BiG-IoT API. It is about a generic web platform 
that unifies multiple platforms and different middlewares.  
The Web API and semantic information representation 
models are defined in cooperation with the Web of Things 
Interest Group at W3C, expanding the standards of this 
community. The project has chosen schema.org as a basic 
vocabulary of concepts.  
Through the API, which has a defined architecture, it is 
easier to create applications and services for heterogeneous 
platforms. To increase the level of interoperability at 
semantic, but especially at the organizational level the IoT 
API is framed by the following functions [19][24]: 
 Identity management for registering resources. 
 Discover resources according to user-defined search 
criteria. 
 Access metadata, and data (download data as well as 
publish / record feeds). 
 Work with forwarding commands in Things. 
 Vocabulary management for semantic descriptions of 
concepts. 
 Security, including identity management, authorization 
and key management. 
 Billing that allows you to make money through payment 
and billing mechanisms. 
B. INTER-IoT 
The INTER-IoT project aims to comprehensively address 
the lack of interoperability in the IoT realm by proposing a 
full-fledged approach facilitating "voluntary interoperability" 
at any level of IoT platforms and across any IoT application 
domain, thus guaranteeing a seamless integration of 
heterogeneous IoT technology [23][25].  
INTER-IoT is based on the above main functionalities to 
address technical and syntactic interoperability:  
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-736-8
UBICOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 Techniques and tools for providing interoperability 
among and across each layer of IoT platforms. 
 A global framework called INTER-FW for programming 
and managing interoperable IoT platforms, including 
INTER-API and several interoperability tools for every 
layer. 
 Engineering Methodology based on the CASE tool for 
IoT platforms integration/interconnection. 
Regarding the main types of interoperability (technical, 
syntactic, semantic), INTER-IoT enables all of them [18]. 
Universal syntactic and semantic interoperability among any 
platform with different data formats and ontologies is 
possible through the INTER-IoT DS2DS solution. Moreover, 
other INTER-IoT layers (D2D and N2N) can provide 
organizational interoperability among smart elements, 
enabling connectivity to the network. 
C. VICINITY 
The VICINITY project aims at interfacing cloud-based 
platforms from various application domains by providing 
"interoperability as a service" for the Internet of Things [26]. 
The proposed interoperable platform is presented as a virtual 
neighborhood, a “social network” where users can share 
access to their smart objects without losing control. The 
project team has thoroughly reviewed all existing standards 
and platforms, selecting those needed to build a service or 
increase interoperability. 
The project is not so concerned with technical 
interoperability. For communication between devices, 
wireless networks like Wi-Fi and ZigBee are mainly used. 
VICINITY's 
main 
goal 
is 
to 
increase 
semantic 
interoperability. Using the standard W3C Web Language 
Ontology, specific ontologies are developed in a variety of 
areas, such as ontologies for energy and building, etc., 
extending 
the 
SAREF 
reference 
ontology 
[27] 
interoperability.  
VICINITY ontology network is composed of cross-
domain ontologies, addressing the modelling of general 
concepts like time, space, web Things. It will represent the 
information for exchanging IoT descriptor data between 
peers. Domain-oriented ontologies aim to cover vertical 
Domains, such as Health, Transport, Buildings, etc. 
D. AGILE 
The AGILE project builds a modular open-source 
interoperable Gateway solution (hardware and software 
gateway) for the IoT focusing on the physical layer, network 
communication layer, processing, storage, and application 
layers [22]. The AGILE software modules are addressing 
functions, such as device management, communication 
networks like area and sensor networks and solution for 
distributed storage. Moreover, AGILE approaches include 
security features that allow users to share data in a trusted 
way. 
The AGILE project focuses on technical interoperability 
both at hardware and software level [23][25]. Within the 
project, various popular and low-cost technologies, such as 
Raspberry Pi are being developed and expanded. This creates 
the "Gateway Maker", a proposal to create interoperable 
gateways that will be used for multi-purpose and 
heterogeneous purposes. At the same time, the project 
provides open-source code and a web-based environment 
(Node-Red) for developers to develop new, innovative 
applications. The project does not address any approach to 
the semantic and organizational level of interoperability. 
E. Open-IoT 
Open-IoT focuses on increasing semantic interoperability 
[28]. In the framework of the project, a middleware platform 
was created that allows semantic integration of applications 
on the cloud. For information modelling, the ontology of 
W3C (SSN) sensor networks are used as a common standard 
for the semantic integration of various IoT systems. 
Appropriate 
infrastructures 
collect 
and 
semantically 
comment on the data of the different sensors. Also, another 
semantic technique called Linked Data is used to enrich the 
data and interface it.   
Open-IoT innovates with other programs as it implements 
a platform with modules for collecting data and applications 
in cloud computing infrastructures, modules for creating 
semantically interoperable applications, and applications for 
mobile sensors. The implementation of semantic techniques 
in the cloud is something that adds value to the project and 
makes it stand out from other similar solution. These 
functionalities provide a basis for the development of novel 
applications in the areas of smart cities and mobile 
crowdsensing, while also enabling large scale IoT 
experimentation and increase the level of organizational 
interoperability. The project does not address any approach 
to the technical and syntactic level of interoperability. 
F. Machine-to-Machine Measurement (M3) Framework 
The M3 Framework project focuses on addressing the 
lack of semantic interoperability in IoT. The framework of 
the project assists the developers in semantically annotating 
M2M data and in building innovate applications by reasoning 
on M2M data originating from heterogeneous IoT systems 
and domains. To increase the level of interoperability at 
syntactic, but especially at the semantic level the M3 
Framework is framed by the following layers [30]:  
 Perception layer, which consists of physical IoT devices, 
such as sensors, actuators and RFID tags. 
 Data acquisition layer, which focus on collecting raw data 
from IoT devices/sensors and converting them in a 
unified way, such as RDF/XML compliant with the M3 
ontology. These formats are compliant with the M3 
ontology, an extension of the W3C SSN Observation 
Value concept to provide a basis for reasoning. 
 Persistence layer, which takes over to store M3 in a 
database to store semantic sensor data which called triple 
store. 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-736-8
UBICOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 Knowledge management layer, which is responsible for 
finding, indexing, designing, reusing and combining 
domain-specific knowledge, such as ontologies and 
datasets to update M3 domain ontologies, datasets and 
rules.  
 Reasoning layer, which infers new knowledge using 
reasoning engines and M3 rules extracted from Sensor-
based Linked Open Rules (S-LOR) [31].  
 Knowledge query layer executes SPARQL (a SQLlike 
language) queries on inferred sensor data. 
 Application layer, which employs an application (running 
on smart devices) to parse and display the results to end-
users.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
To conclude the degree of interoperability maturity, we 
summarize in Table I the tools of state-of-art platforms that 
were analyzed in section IV, which attempt to solve 
interoperability issues at the layers discussed in Section II. 
At technical and syntactic level AGILE, VICINITY and 
INTER-IoT attempt to provide solutions by creating Generic 
Gateways and device to device modules that integrate several 
wireless and wired technologies. All of these need to be 
incorporated into supported technologies like families of 
Low Power and Wide Area wireless networks (LoRaWan, 
SigFox, etc.), as well as other short-range wireless indoor 
technologies, such as Beacons. 
A recurring aspect is that most efforts are focused on 
addressing 
the 
semantic 
interoperability 
challenge. 
VICINITY platform uses the standard W3C Web Language 
Ontology and implements cross-domain ontologies, whereas 
Open-IoT extends SSN ontology, and uses semantic tools 
such as Linked Data. BiG-IoT expands the standards of WoT 
and uses vocabulary management for handling semantics 
tools. 
Moreover, 
INTER-IoT 
increases 
semantic 
interoperability compared to the rest of the platforms by 
introducing different data formats and ontologies through the 
INTER-IoT DS2DS solution. In addition, M3 Framework 
Project 
addressing 
the 
semantic 
interoperability 
by 
innovative semantic tools, such as M3 ontology tools, 
reasoning engines and M3 rules extracted from S-LOR. 
The solutions developed in this direction are promising, 
but they are still at an early stage. The proposed frameworks 
do not take into account the limitations of IoT systems, i.e., 
low device resources, energy consumption, mobility, etc. 
Moreover, the ontologies that are created are complicated and 
not interoperable with each other and focus mainly on the 
interoperability of specific fields rather than on a general 
solution. Besides that, the tools for ontology alignment and 
ontology merging, solutions that can radically improve 
interoperability 
levels, 
have 
not 
been 
particularly 
emphasized. Certain future research should focus on this 
direction so that future ontology engineers are given powerful 
“light” tools, such as ontology alignment tools for low-power 
devices or tools to implement “light” ontologies for cross-
domains. 
 In addition, as already mentioned, organizational 
interoperability will be realized provided that all other 
interoperability levels are properly addressed. In this context, 
BiG-IoT creates a common and generic Application 
Programming Interface (API) between the different IoT 
middleware platforms. Open-IoT implements a cloud-based 
middleware 
platform 
with 
innovative 
tools 
and 
functionalities. Also, VICINITY project creates a framework 
that follows the philosophy interoperability as a service for 
“Internet of Things Neighborhood” with many modules and 
tools. Moreover, the INTER-IoT platform increases the 
levels of organization interoperability with INTER-API, 
which includes several interoperability tools for every layer.    
Finally, M3 Framework project with innovative semantic 
engines and solutions at the Application layer, which parses 
and displays the results to end-users, increases the 
organizational interoperability level. 
 
TABLE I.  INTEROERABILITY LEVELS COVERAGE BY THE 
EXAMINED RESEARCH PLATFORMS. 
Interopera-
bility level / 
Project 
Technical 
level 
 
Syntactic 
level 
 
Semantic 
level 
 
Organiza-
tional level 
 
AGILE 
Yes 
(Maker’s 
Gateway) 
Yes 
(Maker’s 
Gateway) 
No 
No 
Open-IoT 
No 
No 
Yes 
(extend 
SSN 
ontology, 
Linked 
Data) 
Yes 
(extend SSN 
ontology, 
Linked Data) 
 
VICINITY 
Yes 
(Generic 
Gateway 
supports 
common 
networks 
(Wifi, 
ZigBee,)) 
Yes 
 
(OWL 
Lang.) 
 
Yes 
(VICINI-
TY Onto-
logies) 
Yes 
(interopera-
bility as a 
service) 
BiG-IoT 
No 
No 
Yes 
(expand the 
standards 
of WoT, 
vocabulary 
manage-
ment for 
handling 
semantics) 
 
Yes 
(BiG-IoT 
API) 
 
INTER-
IoT 
Yes 
(DS2DS) 
Yes 
(DS2DS) 
Yes 
(DS2DS) 
Yes 
(INTER-
API) 
Machine to 
Machine 
(M3)  
Frame-
work 
No 
Yes 
(Data 
acquisi-
tion 
layer) 
Yes 
(Knowle-
dge mana-
gement 
layer, 
Reasoning 
layer) 
Yes 
 
(Application 
layer) 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-736-8
UBICOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
To address the problem of interoperability, equal 
emphasis should be placed on all levels of interoperability as 
they have been presented in this work. It is necessary to create 
tools and software modules that will seamlessly solve the 
problem of interoperability at all levels in parallel, and also 
provide solutions that are available for devices with minimal 
resources. In this way, an indispensable, interoperable, global 
IoT ecosystem will be created in the form of a new “Social 
Network” of Things. 
Taking under consideration, the open issues and 
shortcomings of the state-of-art frameworks, as presented in 
this 
survey, 
we 
aim 
to 
design/implement 
a 
framework/architecture called “Social Network” of Things 
framework that consists of modules, tools and functionalities 
that will increase interoperability at all levels. 
Firstly, at the level of technical interoperability, it is 
proposed to extend the AGILE and VICINITY solutions as 
well as other solutions from similar platforms and to create 
an architecture that includes even more interoperable devices. 
Expansion of tools, such as Maker’s Gateway by supporting 
technologies and new widespread technologies, such as 
Arduino, Wispmote, Beacons, Libelium products, etc., are 
promising to make device compatibility much easier. New 
data collection and raw data filtering tools should be added to 
the entire system, so data going to the cloud can be edited 
with edge computing techniques. Additionally, these new 
technologies should be also compatible with the new wireless 
technologies of the LPWAN family (LoRaWan, SigFox, NB-
IoT). 
Also, 
at 
the 
level 
of 
syntactic 
and 
semantic 
interoperability, the new architecture should include new 
tools creating interoperable ontologies that will extend the 
existing solutions that have been analyzed in this paper. 
Initially, it is necessary to create an interoperable middleware 
framework with new innovative semantic modules, through 
which heterogeneous devices will be interconnected. 
Moreover, 
with 
the 
successful 
implementation 
and 
development of the proposed framework and the creation of 
a “Social Network” of Things where all devices and systems 
can communicate seamlessly, many innovative applications 
could be spawned in various fields leveraging on the raw data 
collected. Consequently, the level of organizational 
interoperability will increase rapidly.  
The new architecture, as shown in Figure 1, consists of 
Perception, Transmission, Middleware and Application 
layers. The Perception layer contains all the IoT 
heterogeneous physical devices, such as Beacon sensors, 
ZigBee sensors, LoraWan sensors, actuators, etc. from which 
all heterogeneous data are derived. The Transmission layer, 
comprises the following modules:    
 
Data collection module, to get data from different types 
of sensor devices   
 
Data 
integration 
module 
which 
converts 
the 
heterogeneous data in a unified way, such as RDF, XML 
and JSON. 
 
 
Figure 1. Overview of “Social Network” of Things Architecture. 
 
The 
Middleware 
layer 
contains 
components 
and 
functionalities that can be divided into several functional 
modules as follows: 
 
Data Storage module, which contains tools to store 
semantic IoT Data to a cloud database.  
 
“Lite” Ontology Creator module, which includes tools 
for creating interoperable “light” ontologies and 
semantic structures, and methods to enrich with metadata 
and create reusable data, to enable semantic interaction 
and interoperability between the various heterogeneous 
“Things”, offering a significant advantage compared to 
existing syntactic interactions. 
 
Connector module, to provide Open Linked Data 
interfaces e.g. SPARQL (SPARQL Protocol and RDF 
Query Language) over ontologies for internet-connected 
objects within the physical world abstracted by the 
middleware to interact with the “Social Network” of 
Things. 
 
Reasoner module, which includes tools and components 
for the automated data configuration filtering, fusion and 
reasoning mechanisms, according to the problems/tasks 
at hand. 
 
Ontology alignment module for resource-constrained 
devices, which includes tools for ontology merging, 
matching, and alignment related to the dynamics and 
complexity of the IoT systems. 
The top layer is the Application layer. It implements and 
presents the results of the other three layers to accomplish 
disparate applications of IoT devices. The Application layer 
is a user-centric layer which executes various tasks for the 
users. It contains the innovative smart application of various 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-736-8
UBICOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

fields, such as Smart homes, Smart cities, Smart healthcare, 
Smart agriculture, Smart buildings, etc.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Addressing interoperability in IoT systems is a crucial key 
factor for IoT development.  There is an urgent need to 
address the problem at all levels of IoT interoperability and 
to take into account the limitations of IoT systems. 
In this context, we report the current developments on this 
issue, comparing the solutions of six major research 
platforms, and we discuss the main open issues and 
challenges. Finally, we propose to design and implement a 
framework/architecture that utilizes tools and methods that 
increase interoperability at all levels simultaneously and 
address the issue with low-cost devices and minimal 
computing resources, such as common IoT devices.  
REFERENCES 
[1] F. Shi, Q. Li, T. Zhu, and H. Ning, “A survey of data semantization in 
internet of things,” Sensors, vol. 18, no 1, pp. 313, 2018. 
[2] K. N. Kumar, V. R. Kumar and K. Raghuveer, "A Survey on Semantic 
Web Technologies for the Internet of Things," 2017 International 
Conference on Current Trends in Computer, Electrical, Electronics and 
Communication (CTCEEC), Mysore, pp. 316-322, 2017. 
[3] M. Noura, M. Atiquzzaman, and M. Gaedke, "Interoperability in 
internet of things: Taxonomies and open challenges," Mobile Networks 
and Applications, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 796-809, 2019. 
[4] J. Radatz, A. Geraci, and F. Katki, “IEEE standard glossary of software 
engineering terminology,” IEEE Std, vol. 610121990, no. 121990, pp. 
3, 1990. 
[5] A. Tolk, and J. A. Muguira, “The levels of conceptual interoperability 
model,” In Proceedings of the 2003 fall simulation interoperability 
workshop, Citeseer, vol. 7, pp. 1-11, 2003.  
[6] A. Gyrard and M. Serrano, "A Unified Semantic Engine for Internet of 
Things and Smart Cities: From Sensor Data to End-Users 
Applications," 2015 IEEE International Conference on Data Science 
and Data Intensive Systems, Sydney, NSW, pp. 718-725, 2015.  
[7] A. Glória, F. Cercas and N. Souto, "Comparison of communication 
protocols for low cost Internet of Things devices," 2017 South Eastern 
European Design Automation, Computer Engineering, Computer 
Networks and Social Media Conference (SEEDA-CECNSM), 
Kastoria, pp. 1-6, 2017.  
[8]  R. S. Sinha, Y. Wei, and S. H Hwang, “A survey on LPWA 
technology: LoRa and NB-IoT” Ict Express, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 14-21, 
2017.  
[9] A. Bröring et al., "Enabling IoT Ecosystems through Platform 
Interoperability," in IEEE Software, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 54-61, 2017.  
[10] L. Seremeti, C. Goumopoulos, and A. Kameas, “Ontology-based 
modeling of dynamic ubiquitous computing applications as evolving 
activity spheres,” Pervasive and Mobile Computing, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 
574-591, 2009. 
[11] M. Noura, A. Gyrard, S. Heil and M. Gaedke, "Automatic Knowledge 
Extraction to build Semantic Web of Things Applications," in IEEE 
Internet of Things Journal, 2019. 
[12] P. Murdock et al., “Semantic interoperability for the Web of Things,” 
2016.  
[13] H. Veer, and A. Wiles, "Achieving Technical Interoperability-the ETSI 
approach, European Telecommunications Standards Institute," 
Accessed: Sep, 2008, 20, 2017. 
[14] P. Barnaghi, W. Wang, C. Henson, and K. Taylor, “Semantics for the 
Internet of Things: early progress and back to the future,” International 
Journal on Semantic Web and Information Systems (IJSWIS), vol. 8, 
no. 1 pp. 1-21, 2012.  
[15] K. Kotis, A. Katasonov, and J. Leino, “Aligning smart and control 
entities in the IoT,” In Internet of Things, Smart Spaces, and Next 
Generation Networking, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 39-50, 2012.  
[16] M. Ma, P. Wang and C. Chu, "Ontology-Based Semantic Modeling and 
Evaluation for Internet of Things Applications," 2014 IEEE 
International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings), and IEEE 
Green Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, 
Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom), Taipei, pp. 24-30, 2014. 
[17] I. P. Zarko et al., "Towards an IoT framework for semantic and 
organizational interoperability," 2017 Global Internet of Things 
Summit (GIoTS), Geneva, pp. 1-6, 2017.  
[18] K. Rose, S. D. Eldridge, and L. Chapin, “The Internet of  Things : An 
Overview Understanding the Issues and Challenges of a More 
Connected World,” 2015. 
[19] H. Cai, B. Xu, L. Jiang and A. V. Vasilakos, "IoT-Based Big Data 
Storage Systems in Cloud Computing: Perspectives and Challenges," 
in IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 75-87, 2017.  
[20] M. Elkhodr, S. A. Shahrestani, and H. Cheung, “The Internet of 
Things: New Interoperability, Management and Security Challenges,” 
2016.  
[21] G. Hatzivasilis, K. Fysarakis, O. Soultatos, I. Askoxylakis, I. 
Papaefstathiou, and G. Demetriou, “The industrial internet of things as 
an enabler for a circular economy Hy-LP: a Novel IIoT protocol, 
evaluated on a wind park’s SDN/NFV-enabled 5G industrial network,” 
Computer Communications, vol. 119, pp. 127-137, 2018.  
[22] T. Jell, A. Bröring and J. Mitic, "BIG IoT – interconnecting IoT 
platforms from different domains," 2017 International Conference on 
Engineering, Technology and Innovation (ICE/ITMC), Funchal, pp. 
86-88, 2017. 
[23] G. Hatzivasilis et al., "The Interoperability of Things: Interoperable 
solutions as an enabler for IoT and Web 3.0," 2018 IEEE 23rd 
International Workshop on Computer Aided Modeling and Design of 
Communication Links and Networks (CAMAD), pp. 1-7, Barcelona, 
2018. 
[24] S. Žitnik, M. Janković, K. Petrovčič and M. Bajec, "Architecture of 
standard-based, interoperable and extensible IoT platform," 2016 24th 
Telecommunications Forum (TELFOR), Belgrade, pp. 1-4, 2016.  
[25] G. Fortino et al., “Towards multi-layer interoperability of 
heterogeneous IoT platforms: The INTER-IoT approach,” In: 
Integration, interconnection, and interoperability of IoT systems. 
Springer, p. 199-232, Cham, 2018. 
[26] Y. Guan et al., "An open virtual neighbourhood network to connect IoT 
infrastructures and smart objects — Vicinity: IoT enables 
interoperability as a service," 2017 Global Internet of Things Summit 
(GIoTS), Geneva, pp. 1-6, 2017. 
[27] L. Daniele, F. den Hartog, and J. Roes, “Created in close interaction 
with the industry: the smart appliances reference (SAREF) ontology,” 
In International Workshop Formal Ontologies Meet Industries, 
Springer, Cham, 2015. 
[28] J. Soldatos et al., “Openiot: Open source internet-of-things in the 
cloud,” In Interoperability and open-source solutions for the internet of 
things, Springer, Cham, pp. 13-25, 2015.  
[29] OpenIoT 
Consortium. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.openiot.eu/ 2019.07.25. 
[30] A. Gyrard, S. K. Datta, C. Bonnet and K. Boudaoud, "Standardizing 
generic cross-domain applications in Internet of Things," 2014 IEEE 
Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), Austin, TX, pp. 589-594, 2014.  
[31] A. Gyrard, M. Serrano, J. B. Jares, S. K. Datta, and M. I. Ali, “Sensor-
based linked open rules (S-LOR): An automated rule discovery 
approach for IoT applications and its use in smart cities,” In 
Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web 
Companion, pp. 1153-1159, 2017. 
 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-736-8
UBICOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

