MMSP: Designing a Novel Micro Mobility Sensor Protocol for Ubiquitous 
Communication 
Dhananjay Singh and Daeyeoul Kim 
Division of Fusion and Convergence of Mathematical Sciences 
National Institute for Mathematical Sciences, 
Daejeon, Korea 
singh@nims.re.kr ; daeyeoul@nims.re.kr 
  
Abstract—Designing low power and less delay for mobile nodes 
is one of the most important issues for the ubiquitous sensor 
networks (USN). The paper presents a novel Micro Mobility 
Sensor Protocol (MMSP), as an enhanced form of the AODV 
(Ad hoc on-demand Distance Vector) protocol, in order to 
improve the quality of mobile IP (IPv6)-USN nodes. An IP-USN 
node can include various sensors for application monitoring. In 
this MMSP technique, IP-USN nodes can easily move to monitor 
their applications within the range of a PAN coordinator, 
connected to internet based networks. By using this technique, 
the user can globally receive sensor data on any internet based 
equipment such as a PDA, notebook, cell phone, etc. The IETF 
working group has defined, in RFC 4919 and RFC 4944, 
standards for IPv6 over Lowpan (IP-USN). We carry out a 
performance analysis in an NS-2 simulator for, e.g., a small 
number of IP-USN nodes randomly deployed to monitor a 
number of targets. Each target (IP-USN) may be redundantly 
covered by multiple sensors. To conserve routing performance 
of IP-USN networks, we have organized sensors in sets activated 
successively. This novel protocol can use monitoring and 
detection with respect of various applications.   
  
Keywords—Mobility; IP-USN; AODV; Routing; Global 
communication.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, technological development has changed our 
lives in many ways by providing increased comfort and 
safety, and has affected almost every field of work and 
education. One of these fields is that of communication; here 
it has enriched our lives by enabling us to communicate more 
easily and, to some extent, more cheaply, with people living 
in different places on the earth. Information technology is 
still developing easier, faster, and more accurate technologies 
to improve the quality of our life. The technologies that 
enable this connection are called ubiquitous computing 
technologies. The pervasive nature of IP-based networks 
allows the use of the existing infrastructure. IP based mobile 
(cell phone) technologies already exist, and can be connected 
readily to internet based networks, without the need of 
intermediate entities like translation  base station or proxies. 
Such a method is specified in open and freely available 
specifications, which is a situation favorable to, or at least 
better able to be understood by, a wired audience than would 
be proprietary solutions. Tools for the diagnostics, 
management, and commissioning of IP-networks, already 
exist. Due to the rapid development of new paradigm 
applications, wireless networks are morphing into IEEE 
802.15.4–the standard for Lowpan (Low power wireless 
personal area networks), which are playing an essential role 
in the realization of the envisioned ubiquitous world. IEEE 
802.15.4 (Lowpan) needs to be connected with other 
Lowpans as well as with other wired networks in order to 
maximize the utilization of information and other resources. 
However, the maximum frame size of IEEE 802.15.4 is 127 
octets while UDP and IPv6 have big packet size and no space 
for applications data. The PANs consist of various IP-USN 
(IPv6 over ubiquitous sensor networks) nodes. As well, one 
has to overcome problems such as network overhead, node 
discovery, and security. When that technology is integrated 
with IPv6, we have a vast amount of possibilities for 
implementing applications because IP has been used for a 
long time and technologies related to it already exist, as IP-
connectivity is spreading its influence to all kinds of 
applications [1] [2]. 
IP-USN has currently become a hot subject for researcher 
with the advancement in WSN (wireless sensor networks). 
This is evolving together with global connectivity between 
IP-sensor devices and IP-network services. The IETF 
(Internet Engineering Task Force) working group has been 
standardizing a new development called 6lowpan (IPv6 over 
low power wireless personal area networks), which refers to 
an IPv6 integrated with a Lowpan device [2]. 
This paper proposes a novel mobility approach and 
analyses the simulation results of IP-USN networks. We have 
created an NS-2 simulation-based 6lowpan stack. It, in this 
stack, presents compression techniques, protocol designs, a 
mobility 
approach, 
data 
binding 
techniques, 
and 
communication between neighboring nodes in the same 
environment by diffusing  throughout a specific field with  
inter-PAN networks. The aim of this paper is to develop 
global  communications between IP-USN nodes and service 
208
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

providers. The service provider (user) connects directly and 
checks the current status of the IP-USN based sensor node 
(for application- data) with the help of an existing wireless 
internet-based technologies such as cellular, GPS [16], Wifi  
[17] services used by PDA, notebook, and cell phone [16].   
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
So far, many mobility protocols have been proposed 
based on IPv6 for tunneling mobile nodes, such as HMIPv6 
and MIPv6.  These have managed to reduce packet losses 
while the mobile nodes are moving. HAWAII and Cellular IP 
networks require mobile nodes to manage mobility through 
path setup messages. The mobility related packets are used in 
the IP layer at IP traffic. Researchers have followed different 
approaches to give connectivity to a mobile user when the 
user is moving. Integrating mobility with an IP-USN node is 
very useful for applications. IP-USN node has considered 
IEEE 802.15.4 networks with internet for global monitoring 
applications. There are a lot of packet losses due to mobility. 
Few of the following mobility protocols have been proposed 
for IP-USN networks [3–5]. 
NEMO (Network Mobility) is a routing based mobility 
protocol, which requires a mobile router to support the 
mobility of a WPAN [5]. NEMO provides connectivity to all 
mobile nodes. Basic Support ensures session continuity for 
all the nodes. Mobile Node does this by adding routing 
capability between its point of attachment (Care-of Address) 
and a subnet that moves with the Mobile Router. It is non-
supportive of multi-homing for Mobile Routers [6]. 
LoWMob & DLoWMob (Intra-PAN Mobility Support 
Schemes for 6LoWPAN) use static nodes for multi-hop 
communication between PAN coordinators and mobile nodes 
in Intra-PAN networks. LoWMob is a network based 
mobility approach for mobile 6lowpan nodes in which the 
mobility of the 6lowpan nodes is handled at networks-side. It 
ensures 
multiple-hop 
communication 
between 
PAN 
coordinators and mobile nodes with the help of static node 
within a 6lowpan. The distributed version of DLoWMob, 
which employs mobility, supports the distribution of the 
traffic connection at the PAN coordinators and optimizes a 
multi-hop path between sources and destinations [7]. 
PMIPv6 (Proxy Mobile IPv6) is a network based 
localized mobility scheme. In this system, MNs’ movements 
and setup require routing states. PMIPv6 uses host based 
mobility protocols, thus it is good for 6LoWPAN mobility 
management. PMIPv6 is also compatible with any global 
mobility management protocols such as Host Identity 
Protocol 
(HIP), 
IKEv2 
Mobility, 
and 
Multi-homing 
(MOBIKE) [8]. 
MUNNA (Mobile Ubiquitous Nodes, Negotiation Agent) 
are techniques where the devices move within a mobile 
network. It shares the responsibility by revolving the load of 
smaller devices to bigger network elements such as a PAN 
coordinator and a mobile router. It hosts a mobile router and 
a 6lowpan PAN coordinator. Its main function is to maintain 
a delegation table which is specially designed to support the 
mobility of sensor nodes or low capacity devices. MUNNA 
techniques have objectively analyzed the scalability of the 
system using the throughput and delay measures for 
benchmarking their performance under the influence of 
mobility. The IP-USN nodes must be addressable by any 
corresponding node, independent of its current whereabouts 
[9].  
III. 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
During the earlier development phase, wireless sensor 
applications focused mainly on environment and industrial 
monitoring applications, but now different applications are 
emerging from all fields. The ubiquitous communication  has 
also witnessed a few new applications for wireless sensor 
networks, but they are a bit different as far as the issues that 
need to be addressed. Earlier applications focused mainly on 
the ways to optimize the power consumption in the network, 
and gave less priority to the reliability of packet transmission. 
However, in the global scenario the main purpose shifts from 
power to reliability. So the design of wireless applications 
should focus more on the reliability of packet transmission, 
although this does not mean that power consumption should 
be ignored. 
Fig. 1 describes the ubiquitous communication sensor 
networks for global  connectivity between IP-USN node and 
service provider. In this system IP-USN nodes are able to 
move easily within the range of PAN coordinator which is 
integrated with IPv6-based wired networks. Thus, the service 
provider can easily get to know the current position and its  
application data on internet  provider equipments. This 
integration will help realize ubiquity by allowing  global to 
access application data across IP-USN system and wired IP-
based networks [10] [11]. 
 
Figure 1.  Mobility in ubiquitous communication sensor networks. 
In relation to the maximum utilization of resources, they 
are mainly associated with internet-based networks. These 
networks are characterized by short range, low bit rate, low 
power, and low cost. Many devices used are also limited in 
computational power, memory and energy. The novel MMSP 
protocol is highly reliant on the availability of other 
information, such as physical location, global ID, data 
209
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

gathering, transmitting to the PAN coordinator, etc. The 
global ID is desirable in sensor networks. Thus, the sensors 
can be distinguished from other networks. The sensor node 
has address space for the global ID, which will cause it to 
establish communication with IPv6 networks. For the 
operation of some routing protocols, we do need to 
distinguish sensor nodes to some extent, but a locally unique 
ID will suffice [12] [13]. 
IV. 
MMSP: MICRO MOBILITY SENSOR PROTOCOL 
MMSP works as the back bone of the mobile IP. The idea 
behind the design is to modify the cellular IP in such a way 
as to get location information at a particular instant in time 
and to find the estimated velocity during handoff. To find the 
location of the IP-USN node at a particular instant in time, 
directional antennae located on the PAN coordinator are 
used, directed towards the highest roaming probability inside 
the PAN or smart networks. In this technique, the PAN 
coordinator (GW) stores the location information of all IP-
USN nodes shown in Table 1. The MMSP knows its radius 
and maintains a routing table for the each of the IP-USN 
nodes. The intermediate IP-USN node also maintains a route 
cache as a PAN coordinator. The PAN coordinators 
broadcast periodic route query messages to detect available 
IP-USN nodes in its wireless coverage or PAN. Responding 
to query messages, all IP-USN nodes in the coverage field 
send route update messages. After the time elapsed during 
the exchange of both control packets, the MMSP calculates 
the distance of the IP-USN from the PAN coordinator or of 
the PAN coordinator from other nodes. The PAN coordinator 
keeps the location information of all IP-USN nodes. Table 1 
shows the present IP-USN radial component in R1 [14] [15].  
TABLE 1. PRESENT IP-USN RADIAL COMPONENT IN R1 
 
 
The angle of the antenna lobe at which it receives 
maximum strength from a particular IP-USN, is taken as 
approximately equal to the azimuthal angle between the two, 
α. The values of the angles are tabulated as the current 
positions shown in Table 2. After the completion of 
consecutive control message exchanges, the MMSP again 
records the R2 and β for the IP-USN node. 
The PAN coordinator maintains a routing table for the IP-
USN as shown in Table 2 with its position information. All 
position entries are taken in circular coordinates. Table 2 is 
updated with R2, β, using these two position values as well as 
the time delay between the two entities, the approximate 
velocity of the IP-USN node is calculated and further 
updated in Table 3. 
 
Figure 2. IP-USN mobility in a specific field.  
Whenever the MMSP receives a route update packet from 
the IP-USN, the MMSP updates its route cache. If it receives 
a route update packet for the first time when a new IP-USN 
enters its area of coverage, a new entry is made for the IP-
USN and the route validation time is set. If the PAN 
coordinator receives a route update message from an old IP-
USN, it refreshes the old route; besides the route update 
packets, the IP-USN sends a periodic page update packet to 
the nearest IP-USN. 
TABLE 2. MMSP MAINTAINS A ROUTING TABLE IN PAN 
 
 
The MMSP makes more for complications in structure 
due to the greater number of directive antennas instead of 
one omni-directional antenna. Extra computation will be 
needed on the part of the PAN coordinator. 
TABLE 3. MMSP MAINTAINS A ROUTE TABLE FOR THE OTHER PAN 
 
In Fig. 3 is presented the communication scheme where 
the PAN coordinator broadcast a query packet to the IP-USN 
networks (including approximate receiving signal strength for 
1st level) at once and then waits for a reply until the timer 
expires. The timer is set on the IP-USN according to the 
velocity, signal strength and distance between IP-USN 
networks and PAN coordinator. Each level has to define the 
hop distance between the IP-USN node and the PAN 
coordinator. The PAN coordinator broadcasts a query packet 
into the mesh topology. The IP-USN node receives a packet 
within an area that compares to the signal strength, according 
to an RSS value which the node joins or establishes a 
connection to the PAN coordinator. Then, the IP-USN node 
sends a Query_response (IPaddr) packet to the PAN 
210
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

coordinator that the IP-USN nodes are joining with the 
coordinator. 
Then, 
the 
IP-USN 
nodes 
adjust 
their 
transmission power to the PAN coordinator for further 
communication processes. 
ALGORITHEM 
// MMSP Coordinator Functions 
while (receivingPacket) { 
  //calculate distance 
lastLocation = getLastLocation (packet.nodeId); 
currentLocation = getLocation (packet); 
distance = getDistance (currentLocation, 
lastLocation); 
  //calculate interval 
lastTime = getLastTime (packet.nodeId); 
currentTime = getCurrentTime (packet);  
timeInterval = getInterval (lastTime, currentTime); 
  //update route information 
velocity = distance/timeInterval; 
updateRouteCache(packet.nodeId,location,currentTi
me, velocity); 
} 
// IP-USN Functions 
while (periodicTimer) { 
           broadcast (updatePacket); 
} 
// Get Distance 
getDistance (currentLocation, lastLocation) { 
 distance = lastLocation.R*cos(lastLocation.alpha) 
 - currentTime.R * cos (currentTime.alpha); 
 return distance; 
} 
Figure 3. Pseudo-code for Micro Mobily Sensor Protocol . 
V. 
PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
The random waypoint mobility techniques are used 
during movement of IP-USN nodes. Each node moves 
randomly within define topology field at a random speed. 
The speeds are uniformly defined between 1 to some 
maximum speed. Each node start movement by stationary 
pause time in value of seconds and after reaching the 
destination it should stop in pause time seconds as its defined 
instruction. The mobility will be repeated during simulation 
process. The mobility process will be set before simulation 
started there thus we can set the distance of nodes. We have 
evaluated the proposed MMSP (Micro Mobility Sensor 
Protocol) by developing a complete simulation in NS 2.33 
and through numerical analysis. The terrain area is 500 × 500 
m2. A total of 25 number of IP-USN nodes are deployed in a 
4 ×4 logical grid. The main reason of dividing the whole area 
into a grid is to examine the IP-USN node behavior at each 
step. We have used the random way point mobility model 
and the fluid flow mobility model. The minimum speed of an 
IP-USN node is 1 m/s, and the maximum speed varies 
between 20 m/s, 25 m/s, 30 m/s, and 35 m/s. The IP-USN 
node pause time is 30 sec. The MMSP is used as mobility 
enabled routing protocol. The simulation is run for 500 
seconds and there are 20 simulations run.  The performance 
metrics of interest are the end-to-end delay, packet delivery 
ratio, and handoff. The packet delivery ratio is the ratio of 
the number of packets successfully received by the PAN 
coordinator, out of the ones that are transmitted by an IP-
USN node; and for the communication between multiple IP-
USN node packets, the success rate is the number of packets 
that are successfully received by a IP-USN node out of the 
ones that are transmitted by another IP-USN node and hand 
off overhead. Figures 4 and 5 have described the end-to-end 
delay and the packet delivery ratio of the packets between an 
IP-USN node and the PAN coordinator. The speed of the IP-
USN node and the number of hops between them varies. 
After a certain number of hops, the end-to-end delay 
increases linearly with the increasing number of hops 
between the IP-USN node and the PAN coordinator. Also, 
the end-to-end delay increases when the speed of the IP-USN 
node increases. This is because as the speed of the IP-USN 
node increases, the association of the IP-USN node and 
sensor node breaks, triggering the handoff process. Thus 
when the IP-USN node moves with high speed, most of the 
time is spent to complete the handoff process by the newer 
and the older IP-USN node. MMSP broadcasts packets by 
bringing traffic into the network that not only causes 
collisions but also introduces the hidden node problem. The 
packet delivery ratio, when the IP-USN node is far away 
from the PAN coordinator, i.e., 5 hops, is just about 0.4 for 
an IP-USN node moving with the speed of 20 m/s. As the 
number of hops between the PAN coordinator and the IP-
USN node decreases, the packet delivery ratio increases. And 
when, the IP-USN node comes closer to the PAN 
coordinator, the success ratio approaches 1, and the end-to-
end delay approaches 0.01 seconds. Moreover, it can be seen 
from Fig. 4 that, when the speed of the IP-USN node is 20 
m/s, the packet delivery ratio is better than when the speed is 
25 m/s. This is because as the speed increases, the number of 
handoffs increases, which can lead to a significant packet 
loss. Also, when the speed increases exponentially, there is a 
possibility that the IP-USN node will be lost in the PAN. 
This is because, as the new IP-USN node wakes up for the 
handoff process, the IP-USN node may have already crossed 
the new IP-USN node. As shown in Fig. 5, when the IP-USN 
node is 5 hops away from the PAN coordinator, the packet 
211
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

delivery ratio at the speed of 30 m/s is almost double than 
that of speed of 25 m/s.  
 
Figure 4 End-to-End delay during IP-USN mobility. 
 
Figure 5. End-to End PDR during IP-USN mobility.  
The performance of this novel MMSP in terms of packet 
delivery ratio and end-to-end delay is good when the IP-USN 
node is closer to the PAN coordinator. But usually this is not 
the case, because the IP-USN node can move anywhere 
within the network. Moreover, as the network size increases, 
the performance of the novel MMSP algorithm decreases 
dramatically. Also, as the speed increases, the number of 
handoffs increases, thus degrading the network lifetime. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION  
In this paper, we have proposed a Micro Mobility Sensor 
Protocol (MMSP) for IP-USN nodes. The node can easily 
move into the specified field and globally communicate with 
service providers by PAN coordinator. MMSP is a modified 
form of the AODV protocol. It comes with a relatively new 
idea for tackling the increasing performance of various 
applications such as healthcare monitoring, structural 
monitoring, location monitoring etc. The application based 
data packet try to utilize such increasing speed, because 
currently the increasing speed permits such a kind of system. 
By using this technique, the service provider globally 
receives sensor data on internet based equipments such as 
PDA, notebook, cell phone, etc. This paper is a step towards 
bringing 
wireless 
networking 
closer 
to 
the 
global 
communication techniques. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
This work was supported by NAP of Korea Research 
Council of Fundamental Science & Technology. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
N. Kushalnagar, G. Montenegro, and C. Schumacher, "IPv6 over 
Low-Power Wireless Personal Area Networks (6LoWPANs): 
Overview, Assumptions, Problem Statement, and Goals", RFC 4919, 
August 2007. 
[2] 
G. Montenegro, N. Kushalnagar, J. Hui, and D. Culler, 
"Transmission of IPv6 Packets over IEEE 802.15.4 Networks", RFC 
4944, September 2007. 
[3] 
H. Soliman, C. Castelluccia, K. El. Malki, and L. Bellier, “RFC-
4140: Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 Mobility Management (HMIPv6)”, 
August 2005. 
[4] 
D. Johnson, C. Perkins, and J. Arkko, “Mobility Support in IPv6”, 
RFC-3775, June 2004. 
[5] 
E. Nurvitadhi, B. Lee, C. Yu, and M. Kim, “Adaptive semi-soft 
handoff for Cellular IP networks”, International Journal of Wireless 
and Mobile Computing archive,  Vol. 2, July 2007, pp.109-119.    
[6] 
V. Devarapalli, R. Wakikawa, A. Petrescu, and P. Thubert, 
“RFC3963 - Network Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support Protocol”, 
Network Working Group, January 2005. 
[7] 
G. Bag, M. T. Raza, K. H. Kim, and S.W. Yoo, “Inter-PAN Mobility 
Support for 6LoWPAN”, Sensors 2009, vol. 9, 2009.  pp.5844-5877. 
[8] 
S. Gundavelli, K. Leung,V. Devarapalli, K. Chowdhury, and B. Patil, 
“ RFC-Proxy Mobile IPv6”  IETF draft., August 2008. 
[9] 
M. Hasan, A. H. Akbar, H. Mukhtar, K. H. Kim, and D. W. Kim, “A 
scheme to support mobility for IP based sensor networks”, 
Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on Scalable 
information systems, vol. 5, 2008, pp.28-38. 
[10]  Dhananjay Singh, “IP-Based Wireless Sensor Networks for Global 
Healthcare Monitoring Applications, (Ph.D. thesis) Dongseo 
University, Busan, Korea, (published) Feb. 2010, pages 217.  
[11] E. Kim, D. Kaspar, C. Gomez, and C. Bormann, “Problem Statement 
and Requirements for 6LoWPAN Routing” draft-ietf-6lowpan-
routing-requirements-06 (work in progress) March, 2010. 
[12] R. C. Wang, R. S. Chang, and H. C. Chao, "Internetworking Between 
ZigBee/802.15.4 and IPv6/802.3 Network", Proceedings of ACM 
SIGCOMM 2007 Workshops, pp. 362-367, Japan, August 27-31, 
2007. 
[13] T. Winter and P. Thubert, “RPL: IPv6 Routing Protocol for Low 
power and Lossy Networks”, Internet Draft, June 2010, pages 103, 
(draft-ietf-roll-rpl-09). 
[14] D. Singh and H. J. Lee, “Design and Performance Evaluation of a 
Proactive Micro Mobility Protocol for Mobile Networks”, chapter in 
the Book: Handheld Computing for Mobile Commerce: Applications, 
Concepts and Technologies, IGI Global publisher, USA, Feb. 2010, 
p.p.328-342. 
[15] D. Gao, C. H. Foh, H. Zhang, and L. Liang, “MSRP: A Light Weight 
Cross-Layer Routing Protocol for IPv6 Wirelss Sensor Networks”, 
Sensors Journal, 2010,  doi : 10.3390/ (In press). 
[16] http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2316534,00.asp (July, 2010). 
[17] http://www.webopedia.com/TERM/W/Wi_Fi.html  (July,  2010). 
212
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

