A Mobile Internet Service Consistency Framework 
Yangyi Wen, Chunhong Zhang 
Key Laboratory of Universal Wireless Communications, 
Ministry of Education, 
Mobile Life and New Media Laboratory, 
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,  
Beijing,China 
wenyangyi74@gmail.com, zhangch@bupt.edu.cn 
Yabo Du, Yang Ji 
Key Laboratory of Universal Wireless Communications, 
Ministry of Education, 
Mobile Life and New Media Laboratory, 
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,  
Beijing,China 
blessdyb@gmail.com, jiyang@bupt.edu.cn
 
 
Abstract—As more and more Internet services migrate to 
mobile terminal, it is very necessary to carry out the 
service consistency between traditional Internet and 
mobile 
internet 
when 
service 
convergence. 
Unfortunately, current frameworks can not satisfy the 
requirements of consistency of service, for the difficulties 
in realize the coherence and continuity of user 
experience. In this paper, we bring forward a service 
consistency framework to achieve the inter-service 
consistency by the introduction of service consistency 
platform and widget manager. This service consistency 
framework mainly adopts W/S framework on mobile 
terminal, while maintains B/S framework on traditional 
terminal to retain the existing advantage.  This paper is 
concerned to utilize the framework to make user 
experience the “anytime, anywhere, anyway” Internet 
service. 
Keywords-Internet 
service 
consistency; 
service 
consistency framework; inter-terminal 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recently, the traditional Internet corporations speed up 
the process of service migration to mobile field. As the same 
time, terminal equipment manufacturers and operators also 
join the mobile Internet industry [1]. These participants 
gradually become the core forces in this huge Internet 
industry. 
These leaders capture the market rapidly by putting 
forward various mobile terminal solutions, integrating the 
resource of data, optimizing the user experience and 
developing mobile Internet service actively, adding to the 
advantages of brand, technique and capital [2].  
However, all the enterprise will face an extremely 
difficult problem: how to migrate existing services to the 
mobile terminal or how to extend the mobile Internet service 
inheriting the advantages of traditional Internet. Some 
provided WAP or WEB sites that can be visited with mobile 
browser to end-user. Some launched online store to sell 
applications. And some are still in exploration. 
Every attempt converges on the realization of inter-
terminal Internet service. A method or platform may make 
Internet service and mobile technology better fusion, 
optimize cooperation mechanism and realize the effective 
utilization of resources. 
Current frameworks are unable to meet the requirement 
of coherence and continuity of experience because of the 
limit of platform or technique or others. We put forward our 
framework, not only settling down the difficulty but also 
maintaining existing advantage. 
This paper is structured as follows, besides this 
introduction and the future work: Section 2 briefly discusses 
related work, which mainly proposes the concept of Internet 
service consistency and compares the realization used by 
three usual frameworks. Section 3 introduces the service 
consistency framework, including the design, the structure 
and the work flow. Section 4 presents a practical case based 
on the proposed framework. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
A. Internet service consistency 
Internet service should have three important elements, 
service data, service process and service display. Service 
data is the most interested thing to users. Service process is 
the work flow of service. Service display is the interface of 
service. All these are perceived by user as user experience. 
It is inevitable to realize Internet services across 
different terminal. The display of traditional Internet service 
recurs to the computer terminal, called desktop Internet. The 
development of Internet is not limited to one terminal only. 
In fact, terminals that support access to Internet are rapidly 
increasing, including mobile terminals [3].  
In this instance, inter-terminal Internet services that 
refer to one Internet service realized and appeared in 
different terminal.  
It is necessary to realize service consistency of inter-
terminal Internet services. End-users expect service can be 
consistent using different terminals. It means users can 
complete some parts of service in one terminal, and then 
continue completing rest parts in another. And at the same, 
there should be nearly no difference between terminals in 
the display of service [4].  
Internet service consistency can be defined as inter-
terminal Internet service maintaining the identity and 
69
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

continuity of user experience. So we can conclude the 
characteristics of Internet service consistency: 
• 
The terminal adaptation of service. The same service 
should be displayed and used cross different 
terminals. It 
is the fundamental of service 
consistency. 
• 
The identity of service. It is composed of two 
elements, identity of service data, service process 
and service display. The identity of service data 
ensures that the inter-service is the same. The 
identity of service process ensures the flow of 
service is the same. And the identity of service 
display ensures the interface of service is the same. 
• 
The continuity of service. It focuses on the 
continuity of service data, service process. The 
continuity of service data means that the data end-
users is using or submitting on one terminal can 
migrate smoothly to another terminal. For example, 
we have seen a film for three minutes in computer, 
and then we can continue seeing the rest part of film 
in mobile phone automatically. The continuity of 
service process means that the process end-users are 
going alone can complete inter-terminal. Taking 
shopping for example, it is allowed users order a 
commodity in mobile phone, and then pay in 
computer. 
Unfortunately, the increasingly emerging inter-terminal 
Internet service usually can not achieve the service 
consistency. 
B. Current frameworks for traditional mobile Internet 
service 
During the migration of Internet service from desktop 
to mobile terminal, the problem of service consistency also 
exits. According to the great advantage of traditional 
desktop Internet, we are inclined to discuss and modify the 
accessing framework in mobile terminal. Mobile Internet 
services should adapt all mobile terminals and maintain the 
identity and continuity of user experience with traditional 
service. Three frameworks are usually chosen to realize 
Internet service. 
B/S (Browse/Server) framework refers to use browse to 
experience Internet service deployed in the remote server 
[5]. It is a classical framework accessing Internet service. 
Most mobile Internet service also prefers B/S framework no 
matter realizing with WAP or WEB technique. 
C/S (Client/Server) framework is an accessing Internet 
service way using particular client [6]. Having a long 
magnificent history, C/S framework is also been applied 
widely on mobile terminal. 
W/S (Widget/Server) is not a new framework that 
visits remote server using widget applications [7]. As a 
matter of fact, Widget applications appeared in computer 
desktop originally.The widget has been widely applied in 
mobile because of its small sizes. 
However, as TABLE 1 showed, these frameworks can 
not achieve service consistency, especially in the continuity 
of user experience. 
In terminal adaptation of service, B/S framework is 
very outstanding in respect that almost every mobile 
terminal has browser to visit Internet service. But C/S 
framework and W/S framework have to face this difficult 
problem. Services adopted C/S framework need to develop 
many clients to adapt different terminal, while services 
using W/S framework demand a widget engine installed in 
terminals [8]. 
In identity of service, services of B/S framework can 
be considered as a simpler version of traditional desktop 
Internet service. C/S framework usually made some 
modification of service process in view of the small screen 
and difficulty operation of mobile terminal. But the interface 
is friendlier because client technique has considered the 
display capacity of terminal. W/S framework is mostly for 
small services which are always parts of traditional services. 
Yet the interface of widget applications is closer to 
traditional one because widget technique is similar to web 
[9]. 
In continuity of service, no framework succeeds to 
realize because no method has been introduced to achieve 
communication  between relatively independent terminals.  
TABLE I.  
FRAMEWORK COMPARISON 
Service 
consistency 
 
B/S 
framework 
C/S 
framework 
W/S 
framework 
Adaptation 
 
very satisfied 
Barely 
satisfied 
Satisfied 
Identity 
Data 
satisfied 
satisfied 
satisfied 
Process 
More direct 
Made some 
modification 
Part of whole 
process 
Display 
simpler 
More friendly 
closer to 
traditional 
service 
Continuity 
Data 
Not satisfied 
Not satisfied 
Not satisfied 
Process 
Not satisfied 
Not satisfied 
Not satisfied 
From the above analysis, it is just the time to put forward 
a new framework to realize Internet service integration on 
mobile terminal. 
III. 
SERVICE CONSISTENCY FRAMEWORK 
Service consistency framework should resolve the 
problems caused by inter-terminal and maintain the same 
user experience. At the same time, Service consistency 
framework should not change the existing traditional 
Internet service. 
A. The design of service consistency 
Service consistency framework adopts B/S framework 
to keep the advantage in traditional terminal, and choose 
widget to realize the service in mobile terminal. In order to 
achieve Service consistency, some modifications are 
inevitable. A service consistency platform in charge of 
saving user service data and pushing the service to terminal 
and widget manager with responsibility for communication 
with platform and management of widget are introduced.  
70
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

The service will break up to lots of parts. A 
corresponding widget is responsible for each part in term of 
contract. To provide inter-terminal service, a mapping table 
between service process and widget application should be 
offered to register in service consistency platform by service 
provider. A database or XML file (format mentioned as Part 
B) can be used to describe the mapping table. 
Consistency framework consists of five parts: Internet 
service platform, service consistency platform, desktop 
Internet service display, mobile Internet service display, and 
access network. The components of framework are showed 
as Figure 1: 
 
Figure 1.  The components of service consistency framework 
1) Internet service platform 
Internet service platform can be divided into three 
modules: service model module, service logic control 
module and service view module. 
Service model module is primarily to complete the 
encapsulation of service data.  
Including inter-service logic control module (ISLC 
module) disposing inter-service, service logic control 
module based on service process deals with service data. 
After running successfully, widget application will access 
service logic control module directly to receive service data 
so that the identity of service data is realized.  
Service view module takes charge of desktop Internet 
service display, while widget will display the mobile 
Internet service  
2) Service consistency platform 
Service consistency platform includes user service 
model module and service consistency logic control module. 
User service model module packs user service data. 
User service data involved user information and service 
information what user just done and will do. Once having 
user service data, to realize the continuity of service is easier. 
Service consistency logic control module comprises six 
sub-modules. 
Service registration module handles the registration of 
inter-service. Only after registration, widget is available to 
download. 
Service logic control of service customization module 
(SLCC module) realizes customization of service. User 
service data is gathered by this module. 
Service logic control of user service data module 
(SLCD module) takes charge to save, and read, and modify, 
and delete user service data. 
Service logic control of service pushes module (SLCP 
module) will push the related information to mobile 
terminal at appointed time. By this module, user service data 
reaches mobile terminal successfully. 
Above modules accomplish the migration of user 
service data from desktop Internet service to mobile service. 
So the realization of continuity of service data achieves.  
Widget engine download module (WED module) 
provides online download of engine. The widget engine is 
developed as software which can be downloaded. The 
problem of terminal adaptation of service is settled down. 
Widget manager download module (WMD module) 
offers download of manager. Widget download module 
supply download of widget application. Widget manager 
can mange widget applications to complete the whole 
service process so as to the achievement of identity of 
service process. And widget manager makes the continuity 
of service process feasible. 
3) Desktop Internet service display 
Inter-service display module is added to achieve the 
display of service customization, while other modules of 
this part conform to existing framework. 
4) Mobile Internet service display 
Widget manager was introduced to communicate with 
service 
consistency 
platform 
and 
manager 
widget 
application.  
Service is showed by widget application in mobile 
terminal. This ensures the identity of service display. 
It is worth noting that widget manager starts widget 
application and transfer user service data to application. 
After that, application can directly communicate with 
Internet service platform. 
5) Access network 
Access network sees to data transmission between 
platform and terminal. 
In conclusion, service consistency framework has the 
capacity of realizing Internet service consistency. 
B. The work flow of integration framework 
In Figure 1, the label 1 means that end-user firstly 
browses Internet service in traditional terminal. The 
communication in label 2 happens when user decides to 
customize service. Then, service consistency platform will 
interact with mobile terminal, just as label 3 noted. Finally, 
71
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

mobile widget accesses Internet service platform to gain 
service data, showed as label 4. 
We can notice that the data transmission of label 1 and 
4 are just the same as B/S framework and W/S framework. 
So the most important flow is how terminals communicate 
with service consistency platform. And this flow can be 
divided into three parts and described as follow:  
 
Figure 2.  The work flow of integration framework 
 
Firstly, it is very important to make sure whether 
widget manager has set up in the terminal. Service 
consistency platform pushes SMS to mobile terminal and 
waits confirmation message. Widget manager will send 
successful 
message 
to 
platform 
immediately 
after 
intercepting SMS if manger has been running in the terminal. 
Else user can download widget manager according to the 
URL providing by SMS. When set up successfully, widget 
manager shall send confirmation message to the platform 
then. The format of SMS should be:  
http://<serviceurl>/Download/<widget manager> 
Secondly, updating mapping table is completely 
necessary. Mapping table is one-to-one mapping of widget 
application information and service information. Only 
known the latest mapping table, widget manager can 
accurately arrange widget application to show service. 
Service consistency platform will push SMS with user 
service data and application identifier to mobile terminal 
when receiving confirmation message. Widget manager will 
obtain this SMS, and then request to update the mapping 
table. A sample XML can be used to update the map with 
the following table format  
<widget application information:  
WidgetId(Unique),  
address of download,  
app description;  
service information:  
ServiceId(Unique),  
service description; index1, index2…> 
The format of SMS should be: 
http://<serviceurl>/WidgetID/index1&index2&... 
At last, widget manager dispatches widget application 
to display service. Manager finds the right application 
identifier from the mapping table in terms of application 
identifier pushed and tries to start it. We deem that the failed 
message means the application has not been set up. Manager 
will refer to the mapping table and download the application. 
Then installation and startup will accomplish automatically 
with the help of widget manager. The platform will receive 
the application running successfully message from manager. 
From the above work flow, inter-terminal Internet 
service based on service consistency framework does not 
bring more burdens to end-user. The complete automatic of 
process makes the service realize seamless inter-terminals. 
End-user can feel nothing different especially after widget 
manager and application have been installed. 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION BASED ON SERVICE CONSISTENCY 
FRAMEWORK 
 
Figure 3.  Implementation of 360buy based on service consistency 
framework 
360buy widget application just realizes a service based 
on service consistency framework. User browses service on 
the website of 360buy, when he is willing to buy some new 
discount commodity. However, we have to wait an hour to 
buy for justice, while we will be offline that time. Then we 
can customize the service. After all user and service 
72
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

information is submit, service consistency platform will 
push the user service data to mobile terminal at the due time. 
With the help of widget manager, widget application of 
360buy successfully runs in user terminal. User can also 
follow the flow of community distribution. From now on, 
any user favorite things can be bought by this mobile widget 
application from 360buy. 
To test the service consistency of 360buy widget 
application, we install it in some mobile terminals with 
different platforms, such as S60, Windows Mobile and 
OMS. All these terminals have a pre-install BAE runtime 
environment (a kind of widget engine). 
The running success ratio of the application is more 
than 95%. The terminal adaptation of service is upstanding. 
The identity of service is close to 90% thank to the similar 
technique between web and widget. After the introduction 
of service consistency framework which resolves the 
consistency 
problem 
fundamentally, 
the 
service 
of 
continuity is nearly 100%. 
TABLE II.  
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON 
Service 
consistency 
 
360buy widget 
application 
Others 
(http://m.360buy.com) 
Adaptation 
 
>=95% 
≈100% 
Identity 
Data 
100% 
100% 
Process 
>=90% 
≈60% 
Display 
>=80% 
<=70% 
Continuity 
Data 
≈100% 
0 
Process 
≈100% 
0 
V. 
FUTURE WORK 
Under the background of network and service 
convergence, Internet plays a more and more important role. 
In this case, it is of great importance to realize the Internet 
service consistency when traditional Internet service is 
migrated to other terminal [10].  
Whether widget is supported by terminals is the key of 
popularize of Integration framework put forward. However, 
it is hard to realize that widget can be run int all terminals 
with different system structure, although more and more 
terminals are concerned about widget and have done some 
research or development, such as PDA, TV, sensor, and 
mobile phone of course and so on. A universal widget 
engine should be developed to run inter-terminal widget 
application.  
Another problem is to determine the service granularity. 
It is difficult to decide how many parts service should be 
divided. And then we have no way to know that the widget 
should realize which services.  
In current service consistency framework, widget 
manager is only considered as background software.  In fact, 
widget manager is not a widget but a software. So we have 
to face the adaptation problem.  
In future work, the service consistency platform should 
have the ability of distinguishing different terminals and   
communicating with each one. Apart from that, service 
consistency platform can also be regard as a SaaS platform 
providing widget applications. A widget manager with 
interface could provide more assistance, like widget 
searching, application association, service classification. All 
these are of great value to mobile user behavior analysis. 
The purpose of service consistency framework is to 
make end-user apperceive “anytime, anywhere, anyway” 
service, with the consistency and continuity of experience. 
 
References 
[1] 
IResearch service. http://news.iresearch.cn/Zt/107684.shtml, 7-2010 
[2] 
Chiu KKS, Lin RJ, Hsu MK, and Huang LH. “POWER OF 
BRANDING ON INTERNET SERVICE PROVIDERS”. The Journal 
of Computer Information Systems. Thursday, April 1 2010 
[3] 
Wang Jing-lin. Design of Internet TV Based on Intel CE3100 and 
Yahoo! Widget Channel. VIDEO ENGINEERING. 2009 33(12) 
[4] 
Miaoqing Tan, Arjona Andres, and Ylä-Jääski Antti. “Real-time 
service migration for voice over IP services”. 2008 The Second 
International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, 
Services and Technologies. September 29-October 04. 
[5] 
Liang Weihong. “Integrative Structure Mode Based on C/S and B/S”. 
Computer Study, 06-2003 
[6] 
Wikipedia. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Client%E2%80%93server_m
odel, July 16 2010. 
[7] 
Anind K. Dey, Daniel Salber, Gregory D. Abowd, and Masayasu 
Futakawa. 
“An 
Architecture 
To 
Support 
Context-Aware 
Applications”. Georgia Institute of Technology. 1999 
[8] 
Ryu Eun-Seok, Hwang Jeong-Seop, and Yoo Chuck. “Widget 
integration framework for context-aware middleware”. Lecture Notes 
in Computer Science. Volume 3744/2005 
[9] 
Srbljic S, Skvorc D, and Skrobo D. “Widget-Oriented Consumer 
Programming”. Journal for Control, Measurement, Electronics, 
Computing and Communications, Vol.50 No.3-4 December 2009. 
[10] Sultan Florin, Bohra Aniruddha,Iftode, and Liviu. “Service 
continuations: An operating system mechanism for dynamic 
migration of 
Internet 
service 
sessions”. 22nd International 
Symposium 
on 
Reliable 
Distributed 
Systems 
(SRDS'03)
 
73
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

