U-Lab Cloud: A Ubiquitous Virtual Laboratory Based on Cloud Computing 
 
Rafaela Ribeiro Jardim, Eduardo Lemos, Fabricio 
Herpich, Ricardo Bianchim, Roseclea Medina 
PPGI - Post graduation Program in Informatics 
Federal University of Santa Maria (UFSM) 
Santa Maria, Brazil 
(rafa.rjardim, elemos04, fabricio.herpich, ricardo, 
roseclea.medina) @gmail.com 
Felipe Becker Nunes 
Computer Education Post Graduate Program (PPGIE)  
Federal University of Porto Alegre (UFRGS) 
Porto Alegre, Brazil 
nunesfb@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract— This paper describes a proposal of U-Lab Cloud, a 
ubiquitous virtual laboratory based on Cloud Computing. This 
environment will provide hardware and software resources 
dynamically, making it possible to increase the resources as 
needed. The environment will be adapted to the user's context 
and will consider the individual characteristics of each student, 
such as connection speed, device type and cognitive style of the 
student. 
Keywords- u-learning; laboratory virtual; cloud computing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The use of virtual laboratories is essential for acquiring 
practical skills [1]. These laboratories allow students to 
perform simulations and practice theories without the need of 
a physical laboratory, because the construction of such 
laboratory requires high investment costs and adequate 
infrastructure. Moreover, others difficulties found are: the 
need of exclusive use of these resources and its quick 
obsolesce. [2]. In this scenario, it is necessary to provide an 
accessible 
environment 
that 
meets 
the 
individual 
characteristics of each student. According to Piovesan [3], U-
learning environments provide access to educational 
resources with full mobility and an adaptation system to the 
computational context of students. Facing the need of 
providing a personalized educational environment to the 
context of the students, this work aims to provide the U-Lab 
Cloud, a ubiquitous virtual laboratory. Its objective is to 
identify variables of the user context, such as the student’s 
cognitive 
profile 
and 
connection 
speed. 
With 
the 
identification of these characteristics, the U-Lab Cloud will 
indicate what type of content presentation is the most 
appropriate for that student, then U-Lab Cloud will 
dynamically provide the software and hardware resources 
available from a Cloud Computing environment. 
Some analysts predict that by 2020, most of the world's 
digital data will be handled, monitored and/or stored in clouds 
- if not throughout their whole life cycle, at least in part of it 
[4]. Thus, Cloud Computing emerges as a technology model 
that allows access to the network in demand, in favor of 
configurable shared computing resources (e.g., networks, 
servers, storage, applications and services) [5]. Most existing 
solutions for U-learning, based on Cloud Computing, 
implement some models of cloud services without integration 
with a learning service [2][6][7].  
Therefore, this work aims to integrate the latest 
technology trends, ubiquitous computing and 
Cloud 
Computing, in order to present the same potential in 
educational settings, given the diversity of available 
platforms, operating systems and patterns. 
II. 
 CLOUD COMPUTING 
Cloud Computing is based on surveys of virtualization, 
shared computing, "grid computing" and more recently, 
networks, the web and software services [7]. Cloud 
Computing is defined as "a computer model with the ability 
to allow, in a ubiquitous and convenient way, the access to 
shared and configurable computing resources" [8]. One of the 
advantages of using cloud services is the reduced concern of 
the loss of data or the intrusion of a virus [9]. The use of 
virtualization and cloud technologies provide versatile 
management of computing systems, because it can be easily 
deployed, scaled, replicated and updated in any of the levels 
of the Cloud Computing [1]. 
Cloud Computing is an emerging computing model in 
which users can have ubiquitous access to their applications 
[10]. According to Dey [11], it promotes the idea of 
ubiquitous exchange of information anytime and anywhere by 
the use of transparent, intelligent and integrated computer 
technologies. This way, Cloud Computing can be used to 
support 
ubiquitous 
environments. 
However, 
the 
implementation of a ubiquitous, scalable and reusable 
educational Cloud Computing architecture still faces big 
challenges in the areas of technology advancement and better 
practices [9]. Although several studies address Cloud 
Computing in Education [1][12], the lack of a systematic 
description during the development of the Cloud Computing 
platform is noted, because most papers discuss only 
techniques, types of services and others. 
Among many characteristics of Cloud Computing, 
according to [1] using this technology allows the management 
of versatile computing systems, because it can be deployed, 
scaled, replicated and updated easily in any of the levels of 
the computing cloud. To Liang and Yang [9], one of the 
biggest advantages of using cloud services is the reduced 
concern about data loss or the intrusion of viruses. Cloud 
computing is an emerging computing model that the users can 
have ubiquitous access to their applications from any 
connected device [10]. When analyzing the computational 
cloud model, one realizes that one of its biggest benefits is the 
259
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

flexibility that it provides to the user. Therefore, the user 
needs to have in his computer device only a browser installed 
to access the desired application, without the need for 
installing software or even performing updates.  
Another potential of Cloud Computing is the possibility 
of sharing data and conducting collaborative work practices 
that facilitate working in educational settings. For example, to 
centrally store all data in one place with the same format, it 
excludes the need for conversions and adaptations.  
In addition, large financial investment to use Cloud 
Computing in institutions is not necessary, since this 
infrastructure requires little computational resources, i.e., it 
can be used by computers with simple hardware (personal 
computers). Spending on software license is not necessary 
because by joining this alternative you have the possibility of 
using open source operating systems, which can be installed 
for free with no restrictions on the number of machines. 
So, it was estimated that the use of this new paradigm of 
computing can bring many operational and financial benefits. 
However, there are some significant obstacles when using 
Cloud Computing. A major disadvantage of using this model 
points to data security and asks whether it is possible to 
maintain total security in data traffic. The unavailability of 
service can be another obstacle to the success of this 
computational model, since it is necessary to connect to the 
Internet to access certain data. 
 
III. 
U-LEARNING  
 
The term Ubiquitous Computing has emerged in the 90s, 
initially proposed by Mark Weiser. This concept promotes the 
idea of the exchange of information anytime and anywhere 
through the use of a transparent, intelligent and integrated 
way of computer technology [13]. Yahya et al. [14] describes 
the technological developments, especially the expansion of 
computing and communication abilities of small electronic 
devices as responsible for the progress of electronic-learning 
(e-learning) to mobile learning (m-Learning) and m-learning 
to the ubiquitous learning (u-Learning). So, the u-learning 
automatically adapts resources and content according to the 
preferences and needs of students at any time and place, 
observing the characteristics, context and available resources 
[3][15]. 
In [7], Ubiquitous computing environments are defined as 
"an area that incorporates a set of embedded systems 
(computers, 
sensors, 
user 
interfaces, 
and 
service 
infrastructure) that is reinforced by technological computation 
and 
communication." 
The 
ubiquitous 
computing 
environments allow learning the right thing, at the right place 
and time, and in the right path [3]. Piovesan [3] complements 
that the u-learning environment allows "access to educational 
resources with full mobility and adapting the system to the 
computational context of the students". 
A feature of Ubiquitous Computing is the sensitivity to 
the context. In [11], a definition of context is any information 
that can be used to characterize the situation of entities that 
are considered relevant to the interaction between a user and 
an application. 
To Pernas et al. [15], sensitivity to context refers to 
everything that occurs around the user, and that influences 
how it interacts with the environment and with other people. 
According to Dey [11], context-sensitive computing should 
be aware of the state of the user and its surroundings, and 
must modify their behavior based on this information.  
 
IV. 
RELATED WORKS 
 
Cloud Computing proposes the integration of various 
technological models for the provision of hardware 
infrastructure, platforms of development and applications as a 
service [6]. The virtualization is one of the prerequisites for 
the realization of Cloud Computing [5]. Therefore, it allows 
the execution of multiple virtual machines (VMs) on a single 
physical machine. Among the many advantages of Cloud 
Computing applications with focus on teaching, one can 
mention 
scalability, 
centralized 
storage, 
flexibility, 
accessibility and low costs [16]. Cloud Computing is an 
infrastructure that has been explored in educational 
environments [1][5][15][16][18][19]. It is important to 
highlight that for the proper choice of the Cloud Computing 
platform, some aspects need to be considered: the Information 
Technology infrastructure and the most appropriate service 
model type to be implemented in the educational institution. 
An application can use one or more types of service, 
including: Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a 
Service (PaaS) and Software as a Service (SaaS) [17]. 
For example, Wenhong et al. [16] proposes a framework 
for managing PaaS in a virtual laboratory based on Cloud 
Computing that implements user management, resources and 
accesses, but it approaches the subject in general and does not 
focus on the needs of an educational system. 
In [18], an infrastructure solution is presented in a private 
cloud that addressed a combination of three service models 
(IaaS, SaaS, PaaS); it was developed in the University of 
Hochschule Furtwangen (HFU). This solution allows the 
creation of Virtual Machines from choosing an image and 
software packages by the user. Similarly, Vouk et al. [19] 
describes a Virtual Laboratory with a Cloud Computing 
solution; it was developed by the North Carolina State 
University (USA). It enables students to reserve VMs 
according to their needs, choosing from basic images or 
images with specific applications. This platform is being used 
by a large number of users and currently uses a service (SaaS) 
model, providing a variety of specific applications for 
different areas of study. 
In [1], a system based on Cloud Computing and 
virtualization directed to the engineering education was 
presented. This virtual laboratory provides hardware and 
software resources, where practical work from VMs can be 
developed. 
The problems mentioned during the implementation were 
related to network communication and the creation of VMs 
on OpenNebula. Similarly, Wang et al. [12] provides a 
laboratory for network administration, implemented with the 
integration of VMware and Lab Manager, having as main 
characteristic the flexibility of resources. 
260
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Comparing with the mentioned works, the U-Lab Cloud 
differs from them because it will provide an environment 
adapted to the peculiarities of the students, for example, 
cognitive profile, the device they will be using and their 
connection speed. Another difference is that the U-Lab Cloud 
will provide students a ubiquitous environment and may be 
accessed from any device with an Internet connection, but 
without the need to make downloads or install applications. 
 
V. 
PROPOSAL  
 
The proposal of this paper is to supply from a platform of 
Cloud Computing the U-Lab Cloud, a ubiquitous virtual 
laboratory. 
Among several factors that motivated this work, one of 
them is the problems faced by students when they fail to 
download certain materials, because they are using a low 
speed connection. This barrier discourages students, making 
them give up from seeking access to the materials. So, the 
proposed environment aims to get information from the user’s 
context, such as: the connection speed to the cognitive style 
can create a user’s profile. Then, it will provide the 
presentation of the content, adapted to each user’s 
particularity. 
Another particularity of this environment is that it will 
supply dynamic hardware and software resources, making it 
possible to increase or decrease these resources as it is needed 
for use. 
The Cloud Computing is divided in three layers: IaaS, 
PaaS and SaaS [17]. So the proposed architecture for the U-
Lab Cloud will approach the model in layers of services, as it 
can be visualized in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Architecture of U-Lab Cloud. 
 
The SaaS layer is the most superficial one of this 
environment; it will provide the interface for the student. It 
will be available over Internet and it will be able to be 
accessed from any device with a Web browser. In this layer, 
students will have access to the provided applications, the 
adapted content and the proposed activities. 
For the intermediate PaaS layer, it is suggested an 
Adaptive Module that will do the treatment of the student’s 
information context. This is how it is going to work: first, it 
will be collected preferences from the student through the 
answering of a survey. Then the connection speed of the 
device that the student is using will be collected. After that, 
the Adaptive Module will determine the context style of the 
user, based on the connection speed and the materials that 
were chosen. 
Finally, the Adaptive Module will communicate with the 
Database (DB) stored on the IaaS layer, and it will adapt the 
presentation of the content in the U-Lab Cloud, according to 
each student’s context. 
U-Lab Cloud will allow students to use the most recent 
software versions, independently from the hardware they 
have, because it will provide these resources in a dynamic 
way. So, if the number of users get higher, it will be possible 
to increase these resources as needed, without the concern of 
the physical infrastructure. To provide this environment, after 
performing a performance analysis which will be done with 
very similar hardware machines, a Cloud Computing 
platform will be selected. 
Students will be able to access the U-Lab Cloud by any 
technology device that has an Internet connection that has a 
very minimal requisite: only a Web browser. It will be used in 
the desired time, from anywhere, from any device, making 
this approach ubiquitous. 
 
VI. METHODOLOGY 
 
To develop he U-Lab Cloud, five distinct steps were 
scheduled. The first is characterized by the construction of the 
theoretical framework, where we will seek to study the main 
concepts that will be used in its development. The second step 
also involves the implementation of a private cloud on a 
platform of Cloud Computing; the Eucalyptus version 3.4.2 
with CentOS was used. Eucalyptus was chosen for providing 
open source versions and presenting the initial requirements 
for the context of this work.  
The installation of this platform will be held on the 
network server located in the Network Group and Applied in 
the IT Laboratory that is located at the Federal University of 
Santa Maria in the city of Santa Maria, Brazil. This server has 
an Intel Core2 Quad Q9300 2.66 GHz processor with 4 
physical cores of 8 GB of RAM and one hard drive with the 
capacity of storing 750GB with CentOS operating system. 
For the third stage of this work, it is planned to build the U-
Lab Cloud, as well as the insertion of objects and Computer 
Networks related to teaching activities. The development of 
this stage involves the installation of Moodle [20], OpenSim 
[21], Sloodle [22] and WampServer [23] platforms. 
Moodle was chosen because it is open source and is the 
virtual environment used at this university. OpenSim is the 
tool that makes the creation of the graphical interface of the 
virtual laboratory and it was chosen because it is open source, 
stable and allows the integration with the Moodle version. 
Sloodle will be used to integrate Moodle with OpenSim, and 
it allows the inclusion of activities on the topic of Computer 
Networks which is available to students through the U-Lab 
Cloud. Finally, the WampServer was used to create a local 
server. 
In the fourth stage of this work, U-Lab Cloud will be 
validated in the discipline of Computer Networking, with 
students from the Computer Science Course of this 
institution. The fifth stage includes a statistical analysis that 
will be performed with data collected during the validation 
process. 
261
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
VII.     CONCLUSION 
 
The lack of physical laboratories at the institutions made 
the virtual laboratories arise as a complementary alternative to 
practice theories. Several works using virtual laboratories and 
Cloud Computing were evidenced but most of them had static 
characteristics. 
The difference of this proposal is that it will be considered 
the variables from the student’s context, because these 
particularities influence directly in the teaching and learning 
process. 
With this work, it is intended to provide a ubiquitous 
environment, based on the principles of Cloud Computing 
and virtualization. These technologies will be selected after 
the realization of performance tests using almost homogenous 
machines. This work has presented the proposed architecture 
for the development of U-Lab Cloud, describing the service 
layers that it will approach. 
With the fulfillment of U-Lab Cloud, it is intended to 
supply scalability, availability and ubiquity to students and 
teachers. With the completion of this study, it is intended to 
demonstrate 
the 
viability of the Cloud 
Computing 
infrastructure platform in the educational environment, as 
well as the advantages in using it. 
REFERENCES 
 A. C. Caminero, R. Hernandez, S. Ros, L. Tobarra, A. 
Robles-Gomez, E. San Cristobal, M. Tawfik and M. Castro, 
“Obtaining university practical competences in engineering 
by means of virtualization and Cloud Computing 
technologies,” in Teaching Assessment and Learning for 
Engineering (TALE), IEEE International Conference, pp. 
301-306, August 2013. 
 T. R. S. Rauen, “An alternative approach to teaching 
computer networks”. Master’s Dissertation 
- Federal 
University of Santa Catarina, pp.85, 2003.  
 S. Piovesan, “U-SEA: A Ubiquitous Learning Environment 
Using Cloud Computing”. Master’s Dissertation, Federal 
University of Santa Maria, pp.84, 2011. 
 H. Costa, “Large Masses of Data in the Cloud: Challenges 
and Techniques for Innovation,” in XXX Brazilian 
Symposium on Computer Networks and Distributed Systems, 
2012. 
 Nist. The Nist Definition of Cloud Computing., [Online]. 
Available from: http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-
145/SP800-145.pdf /. 2014.05.25. 
 T. Sá, J. Smith, and D. Gomes “Cloudreports: A graphical 
tool for simulation of Cloud Computing environments based 
on cloudsim framework,” in IX Workshop on Clouds and 
Applications – WCGA, 2011. 
 M. D. Zrakić, K. Simić, A. Labus, A. Milić and B. Jovanić, 
“Scaffolding Environment for Adaptive E-learning through 
Cloud Computing,” in Educational Technology & Society, pp. 
301–314, October 2012. 
 P. Mell and T. Grance, “The Nist Definition of Cloud 
Computing,” in National Institute of Standards and 
Technology, pp.7, 2011. 
 P. Liang and J. Yang, “Virtual Personalized Learning 
Environment (VPLE) on the cloud” in Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, v. 6988, pp.403-411, 2011. 
 I.B.M Corporation. Seeding the Clouds: Key Infrastructure 
Elements for Cloud Computing. [Online].Available from: 
http://www.software.ibm.com/common/ssi/sa/wh/n/oiw03022
usen/OIW03022USEN.pdf/ 2014.05.22.  
 A. Dey, “Understanding and using context”, in Personal and 
Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 5, pp. 4–7, Feb. 2001.  
 X. Wang, C. Hembroff and R. Yedica, “Using the VMware 
vCenter Lab Manager in undergraduate courses in system 
administration and network security,” in Proc. da 10ª 
Conference on Information technology education (SIGITE), 
pp. 43-52, 2010. 
 M. Weiser, “The Computer for the 21st Century” in Scientific 
American, [S.l.], v.265, pp. 94–104, 1991. 
 S. Yahya, A. Ahmad and A. Jalil, “The definition and 
characteristics of ubiquitous learning: a discussion” in 
International Journal of Education and Development using 
ICT, [S.l.], v.6, n.1, p.117–127, February 2010.  
 A. Pernas, I. Gasparini, J. Oliveira and M. Pimenta “An 
Adaptive ODL Environment Considering User Context,” 
Federal University of Pelotas, p.6, 2009. 
 T. Wenhong, S. Sheng and L. Guoming, “A framework for 
implementing and managing platform as a service in a virtual 
Cloud Computing lab,” in The Second International 
Workshop on Education Technology and Computer Science, 
pp. 273-276, March 2010. 
 Webgranth. A Complete Reference to Cloud Computing. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://www.webgranth.com/a-
complete-reference-to-cloud-computing/ 2014.05.22. 
 F. Doelitzscher, A. Sulistio, C. Reich, H. Kuijs and D. Wolf, 
“Private cloud for collaboration and e-Learning services: 
From IaaS to SaaS,” in Journal Computing, v.91, pp. 23-42, 
January 2011. 
 M. Vouk, S. Averitt, M. Bugaev, A. Kurth, A. Peeler, H. 
Shaffer, E. Sills, S. Stein and J. Thompson “Powered by VCL 
-Using Virtual Computing Laboratory (VCL) Technology to 
Power Cloud Computing,” in International Conference on 
Virtual Computing, pp. 1-10, May 2008. 
 Moodle. [Online]. Available from: http://docs.moodle.org/. 
2014.05.19. 
 OpenSim. [Online]. Available from: http://opensimulator.org/. 
2014.05.22. 
 Sloodle. [Online]. Available from: https://www.sloodle.org/. 
2014.05.21. 
 WampServer. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.wampserver.com/en/.2014.05.18.
262
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

