Machine Learning Technologies in Smart Spaces 
 
 
Somia Belaidouni                                                       
MMS Laboratory, Quebec University,                       
École de technologie supérieure                         
Montréal, Canada               
 
email :belaidounisoumia@yahoo.fr 
Moeiz Miraoui                                                    
High institute of applied sciences and technology      
University of Gafsa, Tunisia                                 
email: moeizmiraoui@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract— Context-awareness is a key element for building a 
smart environment that responds to users needs.  The goal of 
such environment is to provide proactively services according 
to the demand of users by considering the user’s context 
information. Machine learning techniques can provide several 
benefits. They can be applied in many context-aware systems 
to help provide services. They have the possibility to make 
better prediction and adaptation than other techniques. In this 
paper, we present the main goals of machine learning and 
some learning algorithms applied in smart space.  
Keywords-context-awareness; 
smart 
environment; 
machine 
learning; prediction; adaptation; performance. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
A smart environment can be defined as an environment 
that is able to acquire and apply knowledge about the 
environment and its inhabitants in order to improve their 
experience in that environment [1]. In effect, such 
environment can perceive the state of the space using 
sensors, analyzes the state using learning and reasoning 
techniques and adapt behaviors according to users in order to 
provide easy daily life by increasing their comfort. 
Dynamism and complexity are very important characteristics 
in smart spaces [2]. Indeed, there are different devices 
networked via an infrastructure of heterogeneous access 
technologies. Also, the user behaviour or preferences may 
change at any time.  
 In addition, the awareness of context is a key feature to 
develop an adaptable smart system which has the ability to 
sense and to react according to context modifications. Also, 
smart space should be able to control and to adapt services 
automatically with minimum user intervention. Machine 
learning techniques have been widely used for this objective. 
Machine learning as a domain capable of supporting the 
solution of complex problems is able to provide significant 
help [3]. These algorithms can be applied in a predictive 
sense or to investigate internal relationships of a dataset [4]. 
They can be divided into four main groups: supervised 
learning, unsupervised learning, semi-supervised learning 
and reinforcing. Each of these groups has their advantages 
and drawbacks and utilizes different approaches to target 
different goals.  
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes 
important goals of machine learning in smart environments. 
Section 3 shows the principal necessary phases in the 
learning process. Section 4 discusses the different types of 
machine learning and some techniques applied in smart 
spaces. Section 5 concludes the paper. 
II. 
MACHINE LEARNING GOALS 
One important feature of smart environments is that they 
possess a high degree of autonomy, adapt themselves to 
changing environments, and communicate with humans in an 
easy way. Application of machine learning in context aware 
systems can be employed to achieve specific goals. 
Generally, these goals belong to 4 main classes. 
A. Recognition 
Several approaches already exist devoted to recognition 
problem to identify events or activities of users in smart 
environments. The activity recognition is usually done 
through two steps: activity pattern clustering and activity 
type decision [5]. In most cases, recognition problems are 
processed by supervised learning algorithms which assumes 
that a training set is consisting of a set of instances that have 
been properly labeled by hand with the correct output. 
B. Prediction 
The aim of prediction is to predict what is going to 
happen in the future. In a smart environment, prediction 
allows providing information useful for future locations and 
activities.  It helps to predict the most probable event or 
subsequent activity. This type of problem can be solved by 
online training approach which can learn from input data 
over time, to predict the output data [4].  
C. Adaptation 
Adapting user services according to the current context 
aims to provide the proper services by considering the user 
and the environmental information. Machine learning 
algorithms provide several benefits for context-aware 
systems. Indeed, it can be applied to support reasoning, 
inferences and also to deal with complex or fuzzy 
information [6]. 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

D. Optimization 
Optimization is a very important feature in smart 
environments. It aims to increase their performance and 
effectiveness.  It can be solved by using reinforcement 
algorithms that can explore idealized learning situations and 
evaluate the effectiveness of various learning methods [7].  
III. 
LEARNING PROCESS IN SMART ENVIRONMENTS 
Machine learning techniques used in smart environments 
offer major opportunities to provide context-aware services.  
Context-awareness is about capturing a broad range of 
contextual attributes (such as the user’s current positions, 
activities, and surrounding environment) to better understand 
what the user is trying to accomplish, and what services the 
user might need [8].  In consequence, learning becomes 
important and indispensable for reasoning and for making 
the best decision. It is considered necessary for knowledge 
creation [9]. In addition, artificial intelligence includes 
several 
subcategories 
such 
as 
detection, 
knowledge 
representation and machine learning, machine perception, 
among others [10]. In this paper, we focus mainly on four 
processes namely detection, interpretation, learning and 
reasoning as illustrated in Fig 1. First, the detection phase is 
accomplished using different sensors installed in the 
environment in order to capture current context. After that, 
interpretation is done in order to interpret raw data to get a 
useful and significant context. After acquiring the sensed 
context, learning mechanisms take the useful context and try 
to classify and to organize the observations according to a 
specific algorithm. Finally, the reasoning phase allows using 
the context information knowledge acquired through 
learning to achieve its objectives. 
 
IV. 
MACHINE LEARNING APPLICATION IN SMART 
ENVIRONMENTS 
Diverse 
machine 
learning 
algorithms 
have been 
developed to cover a variety of data and problem types in 
smart environment.  Machine learning has branched into 
several subfields dealing with different types of learning 
tasks. We give a rough taxonomy of learning paradigm. 
Mainly, there are four categories: Supervised learning, 
unsupervised 
learning, 
semi-supervised 
learning 
and 
reinforcing algorithms. The next section presents some 
learning strategies applied for different objectives in smart 
environment. 
A. Supervised learning 
Supervised machine learning is the search for algorithms 
that perform reasoning on externally supplied instances to 
produce general hypotheses, which then make predictions 
about future instances [11]. Mainly, supervision is provided 
in the form of a set of labeled training data, each data point 
having a class label selected from a fixed set of classes [12]. 
The use of the supervised activity classification approaches 
has shown promising results [13]. 
Supervised learning methods are widely used in smart 
environments to solve several problems. The ACHE system 
used neural networks and reinforcement learning to control 
devices [14]. Bourobou et al. [15] proposed a hybrid 
approach consisting of the neural network algorithm based 
on temporal relations and K-pattern clustering to recognize 
and predict user activities in IoT (internet of things) based 
smart environments. Neural network was used for inferring 
the users viewing preferences to develop a personalized 
contextual TV recommendation system [16]. Fleury et al. 
[17] used SVM (support vector machine) algorithm to 
classify the activities of daily living in a Health Smart Home. 
In [18], authors used Decision tree based on context history 
to infer the preferences of the user in order to provide 
personalized services using context-aware computing. A 
naïve Bayes Classifier was used to learn user activity and 
availability directly from sensor data according to given user 
feedback [19]. 
B. Unsupervised learning 
In unsupervised learning no information about the input 
is given and thus the system cannot know anything about the 
correctness of the outcome [2]. It tries to directly construct 
models from unlabeled data either by estimating the 
properties of their underlying probability density (called 
density estimation) or by discovering groups of similar 
examples (called clustering) [20]. The use of an 
unsupervised approach was applied for different activities 
recognition in smart spaces when it is difficult to have labels 
for the data [21]. Authors used a statistical approach based 
on hidden Markov models in a regression context for the 
joint segmentation of multivariate time series of human 
activities. Hidden Markov models (HMM) were also used in 
[22] for both segmentation and recognition of 3-D Human 
action to enable real-time assessment and feedback for 
physical rehabilitation. 
C. Reinforcement learning 
Reinforcement learning is a learning paradigm concerned 
with learning to control a system so as to maximize a 
numerical performance measure that expresses a long-term 
objective [23]. Q-learning [24] is a model-free reinforcement 
learning method based on learning the expected utility given 
a state decision. Li and Jayaweera [25] proposed a Q-
learning algorithm to provide a more efficient way for on-
line decision making, with more flexibility and adaptiveness 
with relatively good performance. This algorithm was also 
implemented in simulation to demonstrate how the 
performance of the new Markov Decision Process (MDP) 
representation is comparable to that of a Linear Time-
Detection 
 
   
Knowledge 
 
Learning 
Reasoning 
Context 
Service 
Figure 1.  The main steps for learning process in a context-aware 
system. 
Figure 2.   
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Invariant (LTI) one on a reference-tracking scenario [26]. 
Reinforcement algorithms are used in Mavhome project [27] 
to acquire an optimal decision policy to automate basic 
functions in order to maximize the inhabitants’ comfort and 
minimize the operating cost of the home.  
D. Semi-supervised learning 
Semi-supervised learning is a learning paradigm 
concerned with the study of how computers and natural 
systems such as humans learn in the presence of both labeled 
and unlabeled data [28]. The goal of semi-supervised 
learning is to combine a large amount of unlabeled data, 
together with the labeled data, to build better classifiers [29]. 
This category requires less human effort as well as building 
costs.  
There are some popular semi-supervised learning models, 
including self-training, mixture models, co-training and 
multi-view learning, graph-based methods and semi-
supervised support vector machines. Authors in [30] 
combined between supervised and semi-supervised learning 
to recognizing ADL (assisted daily life) activities and to 
provide context-aware services, such as health monitoring 
and intervention in different smart space.  
V. 
PERFRMANCE COMPARISON OF MACHINE LEARNING 
ALGORITHMS 
Machine learning algorithms that have been used for 
solving different problems in context-aware smart spaces 
generally fall into the categories of being supervised, 
unsupervised, semi-supervised or with reinforcement. 
Nevertheless, the advantages or disadvantages of each one 
depend on what learning algorithm wants to solve. 
Neural 
networks 
are 
the 
most 
widely 
used  
supervised learning. Indeed, they offer a number of 
advantages including requiring less formal statistical 
training, ability to implicitly detect complex nonlinear 
relationships between dependent and independent variables, 
ability to detect all possible interactions between predictor 
variables and the availability of multiple training algorithms 
[31]. On the other hand, disadvantages include its “black 
box” nature, greater computational burden and proneness to 
over fitting. Decision trees algorithm are non-parametric 
algorithm and easy to interpret and explain. Their main 
disadvantage is that they easily over fit. SVMs could work 
well with an appropriate kernel even when data isn't linearly 
separable, they have a high accuracy and nice theoretical 
guarantees regarding over fitting. Whoever, they are hard to 
interpret. 
In unsupervised learning, there is no outcome measure; 
we observe only the features and the goal is to describe the 
associations and patterns among a set of input measures [32]. 
Its major disadvantage is the lack of direction for the 
learning algorithm and that the absence of any interesting 
knowledge discovered in the set of features selected for the 
training.  Clustering is a form of unsupervised learning that 
consists of finding patterns in the data by putting each data 
element into one of K-clusters, where each cluster contains 
data elements most similar to each other [33]. 
Semi-supervised learning is an interesting field. It is a 
hybrid 
between 
clustering 
and 
supervised 
learning, 
potentially useful on scenarios where labeling effort is not 
ready available or expensive. These algorithms try to solve a 
supervised learning approach using labeled data, augmented 
by unlabeled data. So, by adding cheap and abundant 
unlabeled data, one is hoping to build a better model than 
using supervised learning alone. 
 
Reinforcing learning algorithms learn more control 
policies, especially in the absence of a priori knowledge and 
a sufficiently large amount of training data. However, they 
suffer from a major drawback: high calculation cost because 
an optimal solution requires that all states be visited to 
choose the optimal one. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
      In this paper, we have discussed the importance of the 
use of machine learning techniques in context-aware 
systems.  We have presented the major goals of learning 
methods. We have also shown the main steps to achieve the 
learning process in context-aware smart spaces. This 
process must acquire the context of the environment to be 
able to adapt services to users according to the current 
context. A discussion of the most important and commonly 
used learning algorithms was provided to solve different 
problems in smart environments. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. K. Das, D. J. Cook, "Designing and modeling smart 
environments," Proceedings of the 2006 International 
Symposium on on World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia 
Networks. IEEE Computer Society, pp. 490-494, 2006.  
[2] S. Stenudd, "Using machine learning in the adaptive control 
of a smart environment," Utigivare, Vuorimiehentie, 2010. 
[3] A. Smola and SVN. Vishwanathan, "Introduction to machine 
learning, " Cambridge University, UK, vol. 32, pp.34, 2008. 
[4]  A. J. Stimpson, "A machine learning approach to modeling 
and predicting training effectiveness, ". Thèse de doctorat. 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2015. 
[5] S. T. M. Bourobou and Y. Yoo, "User activity recognition in 
smart homes using pattern clustering applied to temporal ann 
algorithm, " Sensors, vol. 15, no 5, pp. 11953-11971, 2015. 
[6]  V. G. Motti, N. Mezhoudi and J. Vanderdonckt, "Machine 
Learning in the Support of Context-Aware Adaptation, ". In 
: CASFE. 2012. 
[7] R. S. Sutton,  A. G. Barto and G. Andrew, "Reinforcement 
learning: An introductio, " Cambridge : MIT press, 1998. 
[8]  WP. Lee, "Deploying personalized mobile services in an 
agent-based 
environment, 
" Expert 
Systems 
with 
Applications, vol. 32, no 4, pp. 1194-1207, 2007. 
[9] G. D. Bhatt and J. Zaveri,  "The enabling role of decision 
support systems in organizational learning, ". Decision 
Support Systems, vol. 32, no 3, pp. 297-309, 2002. 
[10]  M. Bkassiny, M. Li and S. Jayaweera,  "A survey on 
machine-learning techniques in cognitive radios," IEEE 
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 15, no 3, pp. 
1136-1159, 2013. 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

[11] S. B. Kotsiantis, I. Zaharakisand P. Pintelas, "Supervised 
machine learning: A review of classification techniques," 
2007. 
[12]  T. Mitchell, "The role of unlabeled data in supervised 
learning, " In :Proceedings of the sixth international 
colloquium on cognitive science.  pp. 2-11, 1999. 
[13] K. Altun, B. Barshan and O. Tuncel, "Comparative study on 
classifying human activities with miniature inertial and 
magnetic sensors," Pattern Recognition, vol. 43, no 10, pp. 
3605-3620, 2010. 
[14] M. C. Mozer,  "The neural network house: An environment 
hat adapts to its inhabitants," In : Proc. AAAI Spring Symp. 
Intelligent Environments, 1998. 
[15]  S. T. M. Bourobou and Y. Yoo, "User activity recognition in 
smart homes using pattern clustering applied to temporal ann 
algorithm, " Sensors, vol. 15, no 5, pp. 11953-11971, 2015. 
[16] S. H. Hsu, M. H. Wen and M. H. Lee, "A personalized TV 
recommendation system, " In : European Conference on 
Interactive Television. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 166-
174, 2007. 
[17]  A. Fleury, 
M. Vacher and N. Noury, "SVM-based 
multimodal classification of activities of daily living in health 
smart homes: sensors, algorithms, and first experimental 
results, " IEEE transactions on information technology in 
biomedicine, vol. 14, no 2, pp. 274-283, 2008. 
[18]  J. S. E. Hong and J. Kim, "Context-aware system for 
proactive personalized service based on context history, " 
Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 36, no 4, p. 7448-7457, 
2009. 
[19]  M. Muhlenbrock, O. Brdiczka and D. Snowdon, "Learning to 
Detect User Activity and Availability from a Variety of 
Sensor Data, " In : PerCom. pp. 13-22, 2004. 
[20] G. T. Chen, S. haxun, X. Tao,  "An unsupervised approach to 
activity recognition and segmentation based on object-use 
fingerprints, " Data & Knowledge Engineering, vol. 69, no 6, 
pp. 533-544, 2010. 
[21] D. 
Trabelsi, 
S. 
Mohammed, 
F. 
Chamroukhi, 
"An 
unsupervised approach for automatic activity recognition 
based on hidden Markov model regression, " IEEE 
Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, , vol. 
10, no 3, pp. 829-835, 2013. 
[22]  F. LV and R. Nevatia, "Recognition and segmentation of 3-d 
human action using hmm and multi-class adaboost, ". In 
: European conference on computer vision. Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, pp. 359-372, 2006. 
[23]  C. Szepesvari, "Algorithms for Reinforcement Learning 
(Synthesis Lectures on Artificial Intelligence and Machine 
Learning, " Morgan and Claypool, 2010. 
[24] C. Watkins and P. Dayan, "Q-learning. Machine learning, " 
vol. 8, no 3-4, pp. 279-292, 1992. 
[25]  D. Li and S. K. Jayaweera, "Reinforcement learning aided 
smart-home decision-making in an interactive smart grid, " In 
: Green Energy and Systems Conference (IGESC), pp. 1-6, 
2014. 
[26] E. C. Kara and M. Berges and B. Krogh, "Using smart 
devices for system-level management and control in the smart 
grid: A reinforcement learning framework, " In : Smart Grid 
Communications 
(SmartGridComm), 
IEEE 
Third 
International Conference on. pp. 85-90, 2012. 
[27]  D. J. Cook, G. M. Youngblood and E. O. Heierman, 
"MavHome: An Agent-Based Smart Home, " In : PerCom. pp 
521-524, 2003. 
[28] X. Zhu, A. Goldberg, "Introduction to semi-supervised 
learning. Synthesis lectures on artificial intelligence and 
machine learning, vol. 3, no 1, pp. 1-130, 2009. 
[29] X. Zhu, "Semi-supervised learning literature survey, ". 2005. 
[30] D. j. Cook, "Learning setting-generalized activity models for 
smart spaces, " IEEE intelligent systems, vol. 2010, no 99, pp. 
1, 2010. 
[31]  J. V. Tu, "Advantages and disadvantages of using artificial 
neural networks versus logistic regression for predicting 
medical outcomes, " Journal of clinical epidemiology, vol. 49, 
no 11, pp. 1225-1231, 1996. 
[32] M. Ramon, F. M. Pastor and O. L. G. A. Felipe, "Taking 
advantage of the use of supervised learning methods for 
characterization of sperm population structure related with 
freezability in the Iberian red deer, ". Theriogenology, vol. 77, 
no 8, pp. 1661-1672, 2012. 
[33] B. Wooley, "Scaling Clustering for the Data Mining Step in 
Knowledge Discovery, ". 1999. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

