The Importance of Context Towards Mobile Services Adoption 
  Shang Gao, John Krogstie  
Department of Computer Science and Information Science 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology 
NO 7491 Trondheim, Norway 
shanggao@idi.ntnu.no, krogstie@idi.ntnu.no 
 
Abstract—Along with the popularity of mobile devices and 
advances in wireless technology, mobile services have 
become more and more prevalent. Although many analysts 
have predicted that mobile systems will become mainstream, 
the adoption of mobile services has been slower than 
expected. The main objective of this research is to study the 
influence of context on mobile services adoption. The 
importance of context towards mobile services adoption was 
explored by looking at two newly developed mobile services. 
The findings from the exploratory study demonstrate that 
context is a significant factor to affect people’s adoption of 
mobile services.  
Keywords-Context; Mobile Services Adoption 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Along with the popularity of mobile devices and 
advances in wireless technology, mobile services have 
become more and more prevalent. Although many 
analysts have predicted that mobile systems will become 
mainstream [1], the adoption of mobile services has been 
slower than expected. Despite all the technological 
possibilities, the number of successful context-aware 
mobile services in the commercial market is still limited 
[2]. Building successful strategies for promoting mobile 
services stems from understanding the context in which 
potential users prefer to use mobile services. Key factors 
for the success of mobile services are to identify the 
actual and potential customers, to investigate how they 
are influenced and how they behave (i.e., people’s 
behavior) and to uncover what they really expect (i.e., 
needs, and preference) [3]. Therefore, it is important to 
study how users’ perception on mobile services is affected 
by context.    
The main objective of this research is to study the 
influence of context on mobile services adoption. 
Extensive research on the Technology Acceptance Model 
(TAM) [4][5] has explained why people accept or reject 
information systems. However, TAM has limitations 
when investigating users’ adoption of mobile services, 
which is also confirmed by prior research work [6]. An 
important goal throughout this work is to investigate the 
importance of context in the adoption of mobile services. 
By exploring the role of context towards mobile service 
adoption in two case studies, the findings of this research 
will not only help mobile services developer to better 
understand users’ expectations on mobile services, but 
also provide insights into how to promote new mobile 
services to potential users.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In 
Section 2, we review prior literature on mobile commerce, 
mobile services, and context. Section 3 discusses some 
related work. In Section 4, we illustrate the role of context 
in mobile services and propose some contextual factors. 
Section 5 explores the importance of context towards 
mobile service adoption by looking at two newly 
developed mobile services. Section 6 concludes this 
research work and points out directions for future 
research. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
A. Mobile Commerce and Mobile Services 
Mobile Commerce [7] refers to e-commerce services, 
conducted through mobile devices using wireless 
telecommunications networks and other wired e-
commerce technologies. Due to its inherent characteristics 
such as ubiquity, personalization, flexibility, and 
dissemination, mobile commerce promises business 
unprecedented market potential, enhanced productivity, 
and high profitability. Hence, network designers, service 
providers, vendors and application developers must 
cautiously take the needs and considerations of various 
users into account to provide better services and attract 
them to mobile commerce  [8]. 
Mobile commerce involves mobile services, mobile 
technologies, and business models. Mobility implies 
portability. In other words, users can conduct business on 
real time bases in mobile commerce environment. 
Customers as well as vendors can be reached at any time 
via a mobile device. Ubiquity, convenience, localization, 
and 
personalization 
are 
characteristics 
of 
mobile 
commerce  [9]. 
With the evolution of mobile technologies and the 
appearance of new innovative business models, we are 
seeing the growth of mobile services. Over the past 10 
years mobile devices have changed the way that we work 
and live. Many people consider mobile devices as 
extensions and attachments of themselves [10]. As 
technology advances, mobile devices are able to be used 
to do things and fulfill needs in a more efficient and 
effective manner. 
Mobile services provide an entirely new way for 
services providers to better serve their users through a 
variety of mobile devices over a wireless network in a 
wireless environment. Mobile services will enable users 
to make purchases, request services, as well as access 
news and information using mobile devices. Some key 
422
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

features of mobile services are: mobility, reachability, 
localization, personalization  [11].   
B. Context 
Webster’s Dictionary defines context as “whole 
situation, background or environment relevant to some 
happening or personality.” The definition of context in the 
Free Online Dictionary of computing is “that which 
surrounds, and gives meaning to something else.” 
Building on those definition from dictionary, Dey et al, 
[12] crafted a definition that operationlized the concept in 
terms of the actors and information sources involved in 
creating context: “Any information that can be used to 
characterize the situation of entities (i.e., whether a 
person, place, or object) that are considered relevant to 
the interaction between a user and an application, 
including the user and the application themselves.” 
Context is typically the location, identity, and state of 
people, groups, and computational and physical objects.  
Context is a key issue in the interaction between users 
and mobile devices, describing the surrounding facts that 
add meanings. Location can be regarded as one part of the   
context. In [13], the authors create a working model for 
context. At the top level of this model, they propose two 
contexts related to human factors in widest sense and 
physical environment respectively. Human factors related 
context is structured into three categories: information on 
the user (i.e., knowledge of habits), the user’s social 
environment 
(i.e., 
co-location 
of 
others, 
social 
interaction), and the user’s tasks (i.e., spontaneous 
activity). 
Likewise, 
context 
related 
to 
physical 
environment is structured into three categories: location 
(i.e., absolute position, relative position), infrastructure 
(i.e., surrounding resources for computation), and 
physical conditions (i.e., noise, light). Furthermore, how 
context relates to requirements specification and analysis 
and design of mobile information system was discussed in 
[14][15]. 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
Mobile services adoption is a relatively new field of 
research. When introducing new information technology, 
it is critical to study factors that influence user intention to 
adopt the new services. Developers and vendors can apply 
this knowledge throughout the design and implementation 
process to create a better service. Various technology 
acceptance models and theories, for example, the 
Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) [4][5], Theory of 
Planned Behavior (TPB) [16], Innovation Diffusion 
Theory (IDT) [17], Unified Theory of Acceptance and 
Use of Technology (UTAUT) [18],  have been suggested 
to assist developers in the evaluation of new software 
applications. Further, the authors proposed a mobile 
services acceptance model [19] by extending traditional 
technology acceptance and diffusion theories above to 
assess users’ adoption to mobile services.  
While acceptance and adoption of IT services has 
been one of the most prevailing IS research topics (e.g., 
[5], [20], [21]), the pervasiveness of mobile systems 
raises new questions in exploring the adoption of mobiles 
services, such as what are the key factors determining the 
adoption of mobile services, and how contextual factors 
affect users’ adoption of mobile services.  
Because of these, some context related theories and 
frameworks were proposed to address the issue of mobile 
service adoption. Figge [22] introduced situation 
dependency as a new concept to adapt mobile services 
according to spatial, personal, and temporal context in 
which the user accesses a service. Situation dependency 
may be conceived as a three dimensional space, with user 
identity (personal profile, background, preferences, etc.), 
access position, and access time.  In [23], they proposed 
contextual perceived usefulness as a new construct to 
enhance the understanding of an individual’s mobile 
commence acceptance behavior.  
However, the number of studies using individual 
consumer samples to investigate and observe the 
importance of contextual factors towards the adoption of 
newly developed technologies and services specifically 
provided on mobile devices and ubiquitous systems is 
small. Most previous studies on the significance of 
contextual factors towards mobile services adoption focus 
on general mobile services like voice, data services and 
messaging. Therefore, we believe that the contextual 
determinants for mobile services adoption with some 
newly developed mobile services is still worthy of 
examination. In this research work, we examine some 
contextual factors for mobile services adoption on two 
mobile services. 
Concerning the two mobile services used in our 
exploratory studies, it might be equal to some existing 
mobile services on the commercial market. Moreover, the 
functions in these two mobile services are quite advanced 
and are able to offer some interesting applications to 
university students. Considering the fact that university 
students will become major customers on mobile business 
market soon, the role of context in these two mobile 
services is worthy to explore.  
IV. 
THE ROLE OF CONTEXT IN MOBILE SERVICES 
The term context has been extensively used in the 
research of mobile related technologies. A unique feature 
of mobile services is that it can be applied in different 
contexts. A context often describes the surrounding 
circumstances of mobile services, which receives 
increasing attention in mobile computing.  
Context provides an understanding of the way and 
circumstances for performing an activity [24]. Mobile 
services are often developed to provide an alternative 
channel for accessing services, not to replace the existing 
channels completely. The use of mobile services is able to 
provide time and place independent service access. When 
a service needs to be accessed immediately regardless of 
time and place, the usefulness of the mobile service is 
perceived as the highest, so that it would implicitly 
influence user's intention to use the service. Because a 
user’s concerns and needs vary with the context in which 
he/she uses a service, the services that can meet the user’s 
423
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

needs in a specific context will provide the best value to 
the user [22]. Therefore, we believe that context plays an 
important role in the adoption of mobile services. Some 
contextual factors would influence the usage of mobile 
services. 
Based on the context, a user can decide whether the 
mobile services are useful or not. For example, if people 
have no access to a desktop computer, they will perceive 
accessing information systems via mobile devices as 
useful. Prior research [25] found that there were 
significant differences between experienced users and 
inexperienced users in the influence of intention to use. In 
[26], the authors also indicated that, for experienced 
users, there was a stronger intention to use the 
technology/service. It is also believed that users’ 
perception of the ease of use and usefulness of mobile 
services may vary in different contexts.   
The growing interest on the part of practitioners and 
academics alike in developing context-aware mobile 
services underlines the importance of context [27]. It is 
believed that the added value of mobile services depends 
on the context in which users are using. This inspired us 
to study the potential contextual factors which may 
impact mobile services adoption. 
Furthermore, the authors in [28] classify the frequent 
changes in the context with regards to the usage of mobile 
information systems into six categories. We list three of 
them which are of relevance to the design of mobile 
services. Firstly, the environmental (physical) context, 
which captures the entities that surround the user, for 
example, the absolute or relative location of the user, 
plays an important role. Secondly, the task context 
describes what the user is doing. The task context may 
refer to the tasks people are interested. This view is also 
empirically confirmed by [29]. Thirdly, the social context 
describes the social aspects of the user context. It may, for 
instance, contain information about friends, neighbors, 
co-workers, and relatives. The role that the user plays is 
an important aspect of social context.  
People’s profile/lifestyle plays an important role in 
mobile services adoption. The extent to which users are 
inclined to mobile services adoption in a given situation 
may vary depending on people’s profile/lifestyle. For 
example, party people may be much more interested to 
use mobile services in social situations, while as 
professional individuals may prefer to use mobile services 
which are able to help them with their daily tasks.   
Task oriented context is also important for all groups 
of mobile users. For instance, students may like to use 
mobile social services to keep in touch with their friends 
and use mobile student information systems to keep 
updates 
about 
class 
related 
information, 
while 
professional individual may aim to use mobile services to 
ease their daily tasks whenever they are on the move.   
Based on the definitions of context provided in 
Section 2 and context related concepts in this section, we 
decompose context into two dimensional constructs: 
people-centered context and place-centered context. Each 
dimension can then further divide into four categories (see 
Table 1). People-centered context mainly refers to 
personal profile (e.g., gender, personal preference, 
cultural background), past experiences people have (past 
impression or perception with similar systems), social 
status and roles, and personal tasks or goals. Place-
centered context refers to a specific location, what kinds 
of resources the place has, what kind of environment 
people are in (e.g., weather, sound-level), and network 
condition (e.g., network connectivity). 
TABLE I.  
CONTEXTUAL FACTORS 
Context 
People-Centered Context 
Place-Centered Context 
Personal Profile/Lifestyle 
Location 
Past Experience  
Physical Condition 
Social Status 
Available Resources 
Personal Tasks or Goals 
Network Condition 
V. 
EXPLORATORY STUDIES 
We have carried out two exploratory studies to study 
users’ impressions and perceptions on mobile services in 
different contexts. The aim of these two exploratory 
studies is to study the importance of context towards 
mobile services adoption and test some of the contextual 
factors proposed in the last section. Two mobile services 
were presented to the participants in two daily life 
scenarios at a Norwegian university campus.  
A. Study 1- Mobile Students Information Systems(MSIS) 
The main purpose of the Mobile Students Information 
Systems (MSIS) is to offer a number of mobile services 
that can assist students in their daily activities in a 
university campus environment. The system makes use of 
contextual information such as location, time, and 
personal preferences to provide the user with relevant and 
timely information. MSIS consists of three parts: a 
lightweight client application for deployment on mobile 
devices, a Web-based portal for system configuration, and 
a backend server which provides database storage, 
business logic, and a number of public web services.  
Three basic functions are offered by the system: 
1). Location Finder: Allow users to search for 
different type of locations on campus, e.g. lecture rooms, 
computer labs, dining halls, etc. It provides a short 
description of the location with an option to show the 
position of the location on a map.   
2). Lecture Planner: Allow users to view current 
lectures for a given day. 
3). Announcement: News, notifications, and other 
information relevant to the user are published on an 
announcements board. The list supports sorting according 
to different “flags”, such as importance or category.  
Figure 1 shows screenshots of the MSIS main menu 
and the location finder service as they appear on a 
Windows Mobile 6 Professional emulator. This is quite 
similar to how it appeared on the actual test devices. 
In order to assess the importance of contextual factors 
on the MSIS system, a survey was conducted to all the 
424
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

  
 
                                                 (a) The main menu                                                         (b) The location finder 
Figure 1.  The screenshots of the MSIS
invited participants after using the MSIS in two specific 
realistic scenarios in the university campus environment 
for around 45 minutes. The first scenario utilizes the 
location finder and map services within campus, whereas 
the second scenario utilizes the course schedule service. 
Respondents were also informed that the data being 
collected was part of a research study.   
25 university students participated in this study. The 
students were from various study programs, including 
students 
with 
both 
technical 
and 
non-technical 
background. Fifteen of the participants were students 
majoring in computer science, whereas the other 10 
participants were students with non-computer science 
background. Most of the survey participants had at least 
one mobile device and had some previous experience with 
mobile services. 
It is believed that the adoption of mobile services is 
likely to be more affected by context than traditional 
desktop applications. As expected, our findings show that 
students are more likely to use the system if they are in a 
situation where they do not have access to a desktop 
computer or a laptop.  According to the survey results, all 
the participants would use the system if they were out of 
their office or home. Both of the situations above can be 
considered as place-centered context. The first situation is 
related to the available resources in place-centered 
context, while the second situation is related to the 
location in place-centered context.  
Another interesting observation was made from 
another contextual related measurement item, which 
concerned the users’ previous experience with mobile 
services. 36% of the respondents did not regard this to be 
a critical factor. 12% were neutral to this matter, while 
52% agreed that they would more likely use the system if 
they previously had had a nice experience with mobile 
services. This demonstrates the importance of people-
centered context (i.e., past experience) on mobile services 
adoption.  
Further, most respondent (24 out of 25 participants) 
indicated that they would also more likely use the service 
if it would be meaningful in the current situation and help 
increase task efficiency. This finding proves the 
significance of fulfilling personal goals, which is a 
people-centered contextual factor, on the adoption of 
mobile services.   
36% of the participants agreed that they would use the 
MSIS system if most people around them are using the 
system. 32% were neutral to this determinant, while 
another 32% disagreed with this. According to our survey 
result, this people-centered contextual factor is the least 
important contextual determinant for mobile service 
adoption. This shows that, given the fact that the service 
has a value for them, the users are generally not affected 
by others’ decisions to use a mobile service or not. 
B.  Study 2- FindmyFriends 
FindMyFriends was a project developed by Accenture 
for UKA-07 (a student festival in Trondheim, Norway) 
that allowed students to locate each other at Samfundet, 
the building where the student society is located. 
Samfundet was constructed in 1929, has three and a half 
floors, and contains 10 main rooms. The most prominent 
arrangement at Samfundet is the biennial student festival 
UKA. 
It is a known problem among students in Trondheim 
that it is difficult to find each other inside Samfundet. The 
system was particularly aimed towards the more than 
2000 voluntarily workers of UKA-07, to make it easier 
for the workers to keep track of each other. 
In brief, the FindMyFriends system offered the 
possibility of keeping track of your friends in the main 
venue of the festival. Just before UKA-07 started, the 
users received their tag used for positioning. In order to 
connect to other users, the user needed to link the tag with 
his/her profile, and registers the tag at the FindMyFriends 
system. Then, users could start connecting to each other, 
425
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

much like Facebook or any other social network service. 
When a user moved around Samfundet wearing the tag, 
the user’s friends could log on the FindMyFriends or one 
of the terminals to check out the user’s position. A user 
can only locate the users that have accepted to be friends 
with him/her. In addition to the FindMyFriends system, 
there are some terminals placed at Samfundet, which 
allowed the users to log into the system and keep track of 
their friends. Moreover, the system could generate 
statistics based on the user profiles, which allowed the 
users to see which rooms that had most girls, the average 
age of the users in a room, where you should be if you 
want to meet most single boys and similar statistics. 
The technology used for positioning of tags inside 
Samfundet is ultrasound indoor positioning system (IPS). 
Ultrasound makes it possible to locate users precisely by 
room using wireless detectors. Each tag has its own 
unique identification sound, which is transmitted 
periodically or by moving. This sound is detected by one 
of the 63 detectors (“microphones”) spread around in the 
rooms of Samfundet. 
As reported in [30], we did a study to investigate the 
usability of this system. A questionnaire was distributed 
to the registered users at the FindMyFriends system after 
the student festival and face-to-face interviews with some 
respondents were carried out as well. Here we only 
present the observations and results that are of relevance 
to this paper. More specifically, we did some follow-up 
studies in connection to one of the research questions in 
the questionnaire: RQ1. Are people willing to use a 
system with functionality for locating and interacting with 
their friends and family using a mobile device connected 
to a wireless network in a city environment?  
There 
were 
2769 
users 
registered 
in 
the 
FindMyFriends system, but only 1661 registered tags. 207 
users answered the questionnaire. Over one third had 
between 10 and 29 friends, and approximately 60 % had 
10 or more friends. This number corresponds well with 
the overall distribution of friends for all users. 55% of the 
participants indicated they would use this kind of system 
if it was available in the city environment.  
The results show that the more a user visited 
Samfundet, the more friends the user has. This can 
indicate that the users who did not use the system so 
much, actually never got the chance to use it, because 
they visited Samfundet none or only a few times during 
UKA. This situation is related to the location and 
available resources aspects of place-centered context. 
This finding indicate that the users are inclined to keep 
using the system once they get chance to know and use 
the system.   
Some users expressed great enthusiasm about using 
the system, and many of them would probably use the 
system without thinking too much about privacy 
mechanisms. Most users, who indicated the statement 
above, thought that it would be useful tool for finding 
their friends, especially when they were out partying. And 
six respondents explicitly mentioned that they only would 
use the system when they were out partying, which is also 
confirmed by the interviewees of this study. It is believed 
that this is of relevance to the place-centered context in 
terms of partying.  
Some respondents mentioned that they had no joy 
from using FindMyFriends and they did not think that this 
service would give them any value individually. 
However, one of the interviewee indicated that he may 
attempt to use the application if some of their closest 
friends or family is starting to use it. We believe that this 
impression is of relevance to people-centered context (i.e., 
personal profile, personal task). 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This study presents the results from an exploratory 
study of the importance of contextual factors on mobile 
services adoptions in two newly developed mobile 
services. The theoretical background for the proposed 
contextual factors was adopted from the existing theories 
on context. 
The findings of our study provide some contributions 
to mobile services adoption research. First, the study 
proposed some contextual factors which might influence 
people’s adoption of mobile services based on existing 
research work on context. Second, the observations 
obtained from two studies provide support for the fact that 
context is a significant factor to affect people’s 
impression and perception on mobile services. People 
tend to use mobile services in the situations, such as, 
when the services need to be accessed immediately and 
when other more advanced and convenient alternatives 
are not available. In these situations the usefulness of 
mobile services and benefits of mobility are the highest. 
Third, the results also imply that the general research 
model on mobile services adoption and diffusion needs to 
be augmented with contextual related factors which affect 
the use of mobile services. In the MSIS study, most 
respondents perceived the MSIS service as useful when it 
allows them to access lecture information and location of 
the classroom in a timely manner on the move, 
particularly in the case that mobile devices as the only 
possible means to access information. Last but not least, it 
is believed that the proposed contextual factors in Section 
4 would be useful as a foundation to create contextual 
related instrument items to assess people’s adoption of 
mobile services. It can also offer some insights to 
compose contextual related questions to test the usability 
of mobile services.   
While our study provided some interesting findings on 
the importance of context towards mobile services 
adoption, we are also aware of some limitations of this 
research work. The respondents in two explorative studies 
were students at a university. This means that the results 
do not represent views from other users. Therefore, the 
generalizability of the results to other potential users 
remains to be determined.  Further, the current study only 
examined two mobile services in university based 
environment. More research is needed to test the 
importance of context in some other commercial mobile 
services.   
426
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

There exist some opportunities for future research. 
First, generalization can be increased by expanding the 
study to include individuals representing different 
countries and cultures. Second, we have improved the 
instrument developed in [31] by taking these contextual 
factors into consideration. Then, we will try to use the 
enhanced instrument to measure the importance of the 
contextual factors towards mobile services adoption in 
some other context-aware mobile services. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Balasubraman, et al., "Exploring the Implications of 
M-Commerce for Markets and Marketing," Journal of 
the Academy of Marketing Science, vol. 30, pp. 348-
361, 2002. 
[2] 
C. Carlsson, "ECRA - Special issue on mobile 
technology and services," Electronic Commerce 
Research and Applications, vol. 5, pp. 189-191, 2006. 
[3] 
S. J. Barnes, "The mobile commerce value chain: 
analysis and future developments," International 
Journal of Information Management, vol. 22, pp. 91-
108, 2002. 
[4] 
F. D. Davis, "Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of 
use and user acceptance of information technology," 
MIS Quarterly, vol. 13, pp. 319-340, 1989. 
[5] 
F. D. Davis, et al., "User acceptance of computer 
technology: a comparison of two theoretical models," 
Manage. Sci., vol. 35, pp. 982-1003, 1989. 
[6] 
J.-H. Wu and S.-C. Wang, "What drives mobile 
commerce? An empirical evaluation of the revised 
technology acceptance model," Inf. Manage., vol. 42, 
pp. 719-729, 2005. 
[7] 
K. Siau, et al., "Mobile Commerce – Promises, 
Challenges, and. Research Agenda," Journal of 
Database Management, vol. 12, pp. 4-13, 2001. 
[8] 
P. Pedersen and L. Methlie, "Understanding Mobile 
Commerce End-User Adoption: A Triangulation 
Perspective and Suggestion for an Exploratory Service 
Evaluation Framework," in Proceedings of the 
HICSS'02, Hawaii, USA, 2002. 
[9] 
G. S. Mort and J. Drennan, "Marketing m-services: 
Establishing a usage benefit typology related to 
mobile user characteristics," The Journal of Database 
Marketing & Customer Strategy Management, vol. 12, 
pp. 327-341, 2005. 
[10] 
K. Wehmeyer, "Assessing Users' Attachment to Their 
Mobile Devices," in Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Mobile Business (ICMB 2007), 2007. 
[11] 
K. Siau and Z. Shen, "Mobile communications and 
mobile services," Int. J. Mob. Commun., vol. 1, pp. 3-
14, 2003. 
[12] 
A. K. Dey, "Understanding and Using Context," 
Personal Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 5, pp. 4-7, 2001. 
[13] 
A. Schmidt, et al., "There is more to context than 
location," Computers and Graphics, vol. 23, pp. 893-
901, 1999. 
[14] 
J. Krogstie, "Requirements Engineering for Mobile 
Information Systems," in the Seventh International 
Workshop on Requirements Engineering: Foundations 
for 
Software 
Quality 
(REFSQ'01), 
Interlaken, 
Switzerland, 2001. 
[15] 
J. Krogstie, et al., "Mobile Information Systems - 
Research Challenges on the Conceptual and Logical 
Level," in Proceedings of the MobiMod'02, Tampere, 
Finland, 2002. 
[16] 
I. Ajzen, "The theory of planned behavior," 
Organizational 
Behavior 
and 
Human 
Decision 
Processes, vol. 50, pp. 179-211, 1991. 
[17] 
E. M. Rogers, The diffusion of innovations. New York: 
Free Press, 1995. 
[18] 
V. Venkatesh, et al., "User Acceptance of Information 
Technology:  Toward a Unified View," MIS 
Quarterly, vol. 27, pp. 425-478, 2003. 
[19] 
S. Gao, et al., "Mobile Services Acceptance Model," 
in Proceedings of the 2008 International Conference 
on Convergence and Hybrid Information Technology, 
2008. 
[20] 
S. Taylor and P. A. Todd, "Understanding Information 
Technology Usage: A Test of Competing Models," 
Information Systems Research, vol. 6, pp. 144-176, 
1995. 
[21] 
K. Ven and J. Verelst, "The Impact of Ideology on the 
Organizational Adoption of Open Source Software," 
Journal of Database Management, vol. 19, pp. 58-72, 
2008. 
[22] 
S. Figge, "Situation-dependent services--a challenge 
for mobile network operators," Journal of Business 
Research, vol. 57, pp. 1416-1422, 2004. 
[23] 
T. Lee and J. Jun, "Contextual Perceived Usefulness? 
Toward an Understanding of Mobile Commerce 
Acceptance," in Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Mobile Business, 2005. 
[24] 
R. C. Basole, "The value and impact of mobile 
information and communication technologies," in 
IFAC Symposium on Analysis, Modelling &amp; 
Evaluation of Human-Machine Systems, Atlanta GA, 
USA, 2004. 
[25] 
I. Ajzen and M. Fishbein, Understanding Attitudes 
and Predicting Social Behavior. Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1980. 
[26] 
S. Taylor and P. Todd, "Assessing IT usage: the role 
of prior experience," MIS Q., vol. 19, pp. 561-570, 
1995. 
[27] 
M. de Reuver and T. Haaker, "Designing viable 
business models for context-aware mobile services," 
Telematics and Informatics, vol. 26, pp. 240-248, 
2009. 
[28] 
J. Krogstie, et al., "Research areas and challenges for 
mobile information systems," Int. J. Mob. Commun., 
vol. 2, pp. 220-234, 2004. 
[29] 
H. Bouwman and L. van de Wijngaert, "Coppers 
context, and conjoints: a reassessment of TAM," 
Journal of Information Technology, vol. 24, pp. 186-
201, 2009. 
[30] 
A. Kofod-Petersen, et al., "An empirical investigation 
of attitude towards location-aware social network 
service," Int. J. Mob. Commun., vol. 8, pp. 53-70, 
2010. 
[31] 
S. Gao and J. Krogstie, "Development of an 
Instrument to Measure the Adoption of Mobile 
Services," in 8th Global Mobility Roundtable 
conference (GMR 2009) Cairo, Egypt, 2009. 
 
427
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

