Performance Assessment of Time-Threshold Based Scheme over Soft Frequency Reuse 
(SFR)  Scheme  
 
Idil Candan 
Computer Engineering Department, Middle East Technical University, Northern Cyprus Campus 
Guzelyurt, Mersin 10 Turkey 
email: cidil@metu.edu.tr 
 
 
Abstract- The Soft Frequency Reuse (SFR) scheme is used to 
make the cell-edge users get better performance and utilize the 
resource effectively. Applying Quality of Service (QoS) for cell-
edge users in SFR scheme is a challenging issue. Time-Threshold 
based Scheme (TTS) is a call admission policy that is based on 
monitoring the elapsed time of the handoff calls and, according 
to a time threshold parameter, handoff calls are either prioritized 
or not. In this paper, the performance of SFR scheme in presence 
of TTS scheme (TTS-SFR) is investigated under different 
network conditions. The proposed scheme outperforms our 
previously proposed scheme in terms of handoff dropping (Pd), 
new call blocking (Pb) probabilities and utilization.   
Keywords - Call Admission Control; Soft Frequency Reuse; 
Handoff. 
I. INTRODUCTION  
The tremendous growth of wireless communication and 
mobile computing needs an ever increasing wireless spectrum. 
In order to support a number of simultaneous calls at the same 
time, radio resources have to be reused. Soft Frequency Reuse 
(SFR) scheme is one of the most promising Inter-Cell 
Interference Coordination (ICIC) schemes that has been 
introduced in Long Term Evolution (LTE) -Advanced 
networks [1]. The SFR scheme divides the available resource 
blocks (RBs) into two parts: cell-edge RBs and cell-core RBs. 
Cell-edge users are confined to cell-edge RBs, while cell-core 
users can access cell-center RBs and cell-edge RBs but with 
less priority than cell-edge users. This means that cell-center 
users can use cell-edge RBs only when there are remaining 
available cell-edge RBs available [1]. In literature, several 
approaches, such as [2] - [7], have been proposed for the 
performance analysis of different call admission control (CAC) 
schemes with SFR. In [2], the impact of new call bounding 
scheme with SFR using queuing analysis was discussed. In [3], 
the performance of SFR in presence of Uniform Fractional 
Guard Channel Scheme (UFGCS) was investigated. A 
fractional amount of bandwidth unit is allocated for handoff 
calls. In [4], an adaptive SFR algorithm was developed that 
dynamically optimizes subcarrier and power allocations for 
multicell wireless networks to improve system capacity. In [5], 
a new resource configuration strategy for SFR and an 
admission control algorithm that takes full account of the 
frequency planning of SFR was proposed. In [6], the effect of 
cutoff priority scheme in SFR was investigated using queuing 
analysis.  
Several approaches for CAC schemes, such as [7] -[11], 
have been discussed to provide priorities to handoff requests 
and, since it is practically impossible to completely eliminate 
handoff drops, these schemes have advocated providing 
probabilistic QoS guarantees by keeping the handoff dropping 
probability below a certain level. The Guard Channel Scheme 
(GCS) in [12] gives priority to handoff calls by exclusively 
reserving channels for handoff calls. Although GCS decreases 
handoff dropping probability (Pd), it increases new call 
blocking probability (Pb) and may not utilize the system 
efficiently. On the other hand, according to the fully shared 
scheme (FSS), discussed in [12], all available channels in the 
cell are shared by handoff and new calls. Thus, the FSS scheme 
minimizes the new call blocking probability and maximizes 
system utilization. However, it is difficult to guarantee the 
required dropping probability of handoff calls. Usually, the 
GCS scheme is preferred by users since it decreases Pd, and 
the FSS scheme is preferred by service providers, since it 
maximizes system utilization. As mentioned before, handoff 
calls are prioritized in many schemes at the expense of 
blocking newly originating calls. Their claim is “forced 
termination of ongoing calls is more annoying than blocking of 
newly originating calls”. We believe that this is true to some 
extent, as the annoyance is a fuzzy term which depends on the 
elapsed time of the ongoing call [13] - [15]. For example, 
dropping an ongoing voice call is very annoying if it does not 
last for a moderate duration, whereas it is not that much 
annoying if the call is coming  to its end. Motivated by these 
arguments, the current work evaluates the performance of time-
threshold based scheme over SFR scheme in terms of Pd , Pb 
and utilization. The performance of the system is evaluated via 
extensive simulation. The TTS scheme proposed in [15] is 
evaluated over SFR scheme. The rest of the paper is organized 
as follows: Section 2 summarizes the TTS scheme over SFR 
scheme. In Section 3, simulation parameters are presented. 
Section 4 presents the performance results. Finally, Section 5 
summarizes some key achievements and conclusion.  
II. TIME-THRESHOLD BASED SCHEME OVER SOFT FREQUENCY 
REUSE (SFR)  SCHEME (TTS-SFR SCHEME) 
In our scheme, we focus on a homogeneous multi-cellular 
system that has the same arrival times. This allows considering 
only one cell for performance study. Other cells interact 
through handoff call arrival process. The cell is divided into 
edge and core according to the soft frequency scheme. 
Figure 1 below shows the flowchart of processing a voice 
call in TSS scheme over SFR scheme. According to the TTS-
SFR scheme, after calculating the number of resource blocks 
required, the call type is determined. If there is any free RB 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

available, then the new call is allocated. For handoff calls that 
have elapsed real time greater than or equal to time threshold 
te, if the sum of cell-edge RB and cell interior RB is less than 
total capacity, then the call is accepted. Otherwise, it is 
dropped. For handoff calls that have elapsed real time less 
than time threshold te, if the sum of cell-edge RB and cell 
interior RB is less than the total capacity, then the call is 
accepted. Otherwise, the required resource block is borrowed 
from a neighbouring new call and the call is accepted. If there 
are no cells left to borrow from, then the call is dropped. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. A Call Processing Flowchart 
III. SIMULATION PARAMETERS AND PERFORMANCE 
METRICS 
The simulation has been performed using the Java 
simulation tool [16]. During simulation, more than 30 runs are 
taken for each point in order to reach 95% confidence level. 
The inter-arrival times of new voice and handoff voice calls 
are assumed to follow Poisson processes with means 1/λn ,1/λh   
respectively.  
The call holding times follow exponential distribution with 
means 1/µn for new calls, and 1/µh for handoff calls. 
The normalized offered load of the system (in Erlang) is 
defined as [12] 
        




B
h
n 

                           (1) 
 
The mobility ( ) of calls is a measure of terminal mobility 
and is defined as the ratio of handoff call arrival rate to new 
call arrival rate, and can be written as [12] 
n
h


 
                            (2) 
 
 
The simulation input parameters used are given in Table 1. 
 
TABLE I 
SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
 
Mobility( ) 
0.5, 1, 1.5 
Load (  ) 
2 Erlangs 
Time threshold 
values (tev, ted) 
15, 30, 60, 
90, 120, 150, 
and 165 sec. 
Total 
bandwidth (B) 
10 
MHz(50 
RBs,180 
kHz 
per RB) 
New 
call 
average 
service 
time 
(1/µn) 
180 
sec. 
(Exp. Dist.) 
Handoff 
call 
average 
service 
time 
(1/µh) 
180 
sec. 
(Exp. Dist.) 
Average 
elapsed time of 
a handoff call 
      90 
sec. 
(Unif. Dist.) 
 
 
 
 
 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Block 
the call 
Yes 
Yes 
New Call 
Handoff Call 
Call Admission Request 
Calculate the number of 
possible resource 
blocks (PRBs) 
Call 
type? 
Accept  call 
Any free 
RB? 
Block call 
Elapsed 
time>=te
? 
Accept  call 
 
Cell-edge 
RB+Cell 
interior 
RB<total 
capacity? 
No 
Cell-edge 
RB+Cell 
interior 
RB<total 
capacity? 
Borrow resource from a new 
call and accommodate the 
handoff call  
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

IV. PERFORMANCE RESULTS 
The proposed scheme is evaluated for different time 
threshold (te) values. The performance measures obtained 
through the simulation are the blocking probability of new 
voice calls, the dropping probability of handoff voice calls 
(Pd) and utilization (U) of the system. 
Figure 2 shows the voice handoff call dropping probability 
(Pd) versus elapsed time threshold (te) for mobility=3. It is 
seen that handoff dropping probability (Pd) decreases as 
elapsed time threshold (te) increases. The reason is that, as te  
increases, resource blocks are borrowed from new calls and 
handoff calls are accomodated.  
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Dropping probability of voice handoff calls (Pd) versus time 
threshold (te) of the TTS-SFR scheme for load=2 and mobility=3 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Dropping and blocking probabilities of calls (Pd,Pb) versus mobility 
of the TTS-SFR scheme for load=2 and te=90 sec 
 
      Figure 3 above shows the handoff call dropping 
probability (Pd) and new call blocking probability versus 
mobility for elapsed time threshold (te) = 90 sec. It is seen that 
both probabilities increase as mobility increases. This is 
because, as mobility increases, the number of handoff calls 
increases and more RBs are borrowed from the new calls. 
Figure 4 below shows the blocking, dropping probabilities 
versus mobility for TTS and TTS-SFR schemes for te=90 sec.   
It is clear that the proposed scheme is superior to the 
previously proposed TTS scheme in terms of new call 
blocking and handoff dropping probabilities. In TTS-SFR 
scheme, if the sum of cell-edge RB and cell interior RB is less 
than the total capacity, a channel is borrowed from a new call 
to accommodate handoff call. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Dropping and blocking probabilities of TTS-SFR and TTS schemes 
versus mobility 
 
 
Figure 5. Utilization versus mobility for TTS and TTS-SFR schemes 
 
Figure 5 above shows the utilization versus mobility for 
TTS and TTS-SFR schemes for te=90 sec. TTS-SFR 
performance is better than TTS in terms of utilization. This 
means channels are used more efficiently in the TTS-SFR 
scheme. 
V. CONCLUSION 
      In this paper, a scheme called TTS-SFR is proposed and 
analyzed under different network conditions. According to the 
simulation results, the proposed scheme is superior to the 
previously proposed TTS scheme in terms of new call 
blocking probability, handoff dropping probability and 
utilization. There are a number of issues that will be addressed 
in our future research. We will be including multimedia data 
and queuing to the proposed model. 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

REFERENCES 
[1]  L. Shu, X. Wen, Z. Lin, W. Zheng, Y. Sun, “Queue Analysis of Soft 
Frequency Reuse Scheme in LTE-Advanced” 2nd International 
Conference on Computer Modeling and Simulation, pp.248-252, 2010. 
[2] M. Safwat, A. Yehya, H. El-motaafy, “Performance Analysis for  New 
Call Bounding Scheme with SFR in LTE-Advanced Networks”, IEEE 
International Conference on High Performance Computing and 
Communications, pp.443-451, 2014. 
[3] M. Safwat, H. M. El-Badawy, A. Yehya, H. El-Motaafy, “Performance 
Assessment for LTE-Advanced Networks with Uniform Fractional 
Guard Channel over Soft Frequency Reuse Scheme”, Wireless 
Engineering and Technology, 2013, pp.161-170. 
[4] M. Quin, W. Hardjawana, Y. Li, B. Vucetic, X. Yang, J. Shi, ”Adaptive 
Soft Frequency Reuse Scheme for Wireless Cellular Networks”, IEEE 
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol.64, no.1, pp.118-125, Jan 
2015. 
[5] Z. Lu, H. Tian, Q. Sun, B. Huang, S. Zheng, ”An Admission Control 
Strategy for Soft Frequency Reuse Deployment of  LTE Systems”, 7th 
IEEE Consumer Communications and Networking Conference, pp.62-
66, CCNC 2010. 
[6] M. Safwat, H. M. El-Badawy, A. Yehya, H. El-mootaafy, ”Analysis of 
Cutoff Priority SchemeImpact of Soft Frequency Reuse in LTE-
Advanced  Networks”, Int.Journal of Scientific & Engineering Research, 
vol.4, Issue.10, October 2013. 
[7] G. S. Kuo, P. C. Ko, M. L. Kuo, "A probabilistic resource estimation 
and semi-reservation scheme for flow-oriented multimedia wireless 
networks",  IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 39, pp. 135-141, 
February 2001. 
[8] C. Oliveria, J. B. Kim, T. Suda, "An adaptive bandwidth reservation 
scheme for high-speed multimedia wireless networks",  IEEE J Select. 
Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 858-874, August 1998. 
[9] J. Y. Lee, J. G. Choi, K. Park, S. Bahk, "Realistic cell-oriented adaptive 
admission 
control 
for 
QoS 
support 
in 
wireless 
multimedia 
networks",  IEEE Trans. on Vehicular Tech., vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 512-524, 
May 2003. 
[10] I.. Y. Kim, D. Lee, B. Lee, "Dynamic channel reservation based on 
mobility in wireless ATM networks",  IEEE Communications Magazine, 
vol. 37, no. 11, pp. 47-51, November 1999.  
[11]  Z. Xu, Z. Ye, S. V. Krishnamurthy, S. K. Tripathi, M. Molle, "A new 
adaptive channel reservation scheme for handoff calls in wireless 
cellular networks",  Proc. of NETWORKING 2002 Technical Committee 
“Communications Systems” of International Federation for Information 
Processing (IFIP-TC6), pp. 672-684, May 2002. 
[12]  I. Katzela and M. Naghshineh, "Channel assignment schemes for 
cellular 
mobile 
telecommunication 
systems: 
A 
comprehensive 
survey",  IEEE Personal Communications, pp. 10-31, June 1996. 
[13] I. Candan, ”Mobility and Queue Based Guard Channel Scheme for 
Cellular Networks”, Proc. of 4th International Conference on Wireless 
Communications,  Vehicular Technology,Information Theory and 
Aerospace/ElectronicSystems, Aalborg,Denmark, pp. 1-4, May 2014. 
[14] I. Candan, “A Preemptive Time-Threshold Based Multi-Guard 
Bandwidth Allocation Scheme for Cellular Networks ”, Proc. of the  
Sixth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications,AICT 
2010, Barcelona,Spain,May 2010. 
[15] I. Candan and M. Salamah, “Analytical Modeling of a Time Threshold 
Based Bandwidth Allocation Scheme for Cellular Networks”, Computer 
Communications, vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 1036 1043, 2007. 
[16] http://www.um.es./fem/EjsWiki [accessed September 2016] 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

