EARTH COURSE Pilot: NEWTON Project Support for STEM Education  
 
 
Cristina Hava Muntean  
National College of Ireland, School of Computing 
Dublin, Ireland 
cristina.muntean@ncirl.ie 
 
Diana Bogusevschi  
Dublin City University, School of Electronic Engineering 
Dublin, Ireland 
diana.bogusevschi@dcu.ie
 
Abstract— This paper presents NEWTON Earth Course large 
scale pilot developed and deployed as part of the NEWTON 
Project. The pilot consists of a number of innovative 
applications that teach STEM topics part of the primary school 
curriculum. A demo of the Earth Course Pilot will be provided 
during the presentation session. 
Keywords: STEM Education; technology enhanced learning; 
augmented reality; game based learning. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Technology-Enhanced Learning (TEL) methods are 
currently one of the proposed teaching solutions for the 
increasing 
lack 
of 
interest 
in 
science, 
technology, 
engineering and mathematic (STEM) subjects. These 
subjects are perceived as boring and difficult to be studied. 
Therefore, many students seem to become disengaged in 
such topics, especially if they are struggling to understand 
certain complex concepts leading to diminishing grades. TEL 
solutions offer various teaching approaches that help 
students to understand better STEM topics, thus increasing 
their interest and engagement. It has been observed in 
primary schools the majority of students are interested in 
STEM topics and it is important to continue fostering 
students’ interest in these throughout their education, from 
primary to secondary and third-level institutions. 
The NEWTON project [1] is an EU Horizon 2020-
funded project involving 14 partners from seven countries. 
The main objectives of the project include building a 
networked 
platform 
to 
facilitate 
integration 
and 
dissemination of many technology-enhanced learning (TEL) 
materials and innovative learning approaches. NEWTON 
also investigates the impact of using various forms TEL 
materials, such as serious games, virtual labs, fabrication 
labs, augmented reality, virtual reality, and innovative 
learning approaches, such as problem-based learning, on 
students’ learning outcome and affective states. Various 
courses covering STEM subjects were developed and 
deployed in European educational institutions [2]-[4]. 
II. 
EARTH COURSE PILOT 
Earth Course is one of the NEWTON Project’s large-
scale pilots that focuses on primary school education and it 
was carried out across Europe in Ireland, Slovakia and 
Romania, 172 students have participated in the study. The 
Earth Course pilot includes a set of educational applications 
developed in an effort to attract children to STEM subject. 
The educational applications cover a set of topics part of four 
main areas: Atmosphere, Geosphere, Biosphere and 
Astronomy. The applications use various technologies and 
innovative pedagogical methods (e.g., Augmented and 
Virtual Reality, gamification, game-based learning and 
problem-based learning) to achieve the learning objectives 
specific to the primary school curriculum specific to the 5th 
grade and 6th grade and to improve learning satisfaction. The 
applications are also suitable for children with special 
educational needs, specifically hearing impairments.  
The main applications (see Fig.1) employed in this pilot 
are:  
 
Water Cycle in Nature, focusing on precipitation 
formation and related topics, such as vaporisation, 
evaporation and condensation;  
 
Wildlife, focusing on a set of terrestrial animals, such 
as deer, brown bear, lynx, wolf, wild boar, fox, hare 
and moose;  
 
Sea-Life, focusing on the aquatic world and 
presenting educational material on sea creatures such 
as sharks, stingrays, dolphins, puffer fish, jellyfish, 
octopus, orc, turtle, clownfish, seahorse;  
 
Final Frontier game, presenting the rocky planets, 
the giant gas planets and an astronomical bodies 
such as the Moon part of the Solar System; 
 
Geography application, focusing on educational 
content about Ireland and United Kingdom, 
including its monuments and archaeological sites.  
The deployment of the Earth Course pilot was done using 
the online NEWTON project platform called NEWTELP 
(NEWTON Technology Enhanced Learning Platform) and it 
involved all applications, knowledge tests and questionnaires 
for assessing learner experience, usability of the platform and 
applications as well as knowledge gain evaluation. The pilot 
was deployed in three European schools and results 
presented in various papers [4]-[7]. Eight separate learning 
sessions were carried out employing digital educational 
content developed as part of the NEWTON project.  
Focus groups and interviews were carried out with 
learners and teachers, in order to assess the effect and 
benefits of the pilot. Noteworthy is that the children 
participating in this course enjoyed each session, and got 
excited every time when the NEWTON team was setting up 
the classroom for another Earth Course session. Some 
children already came up with ideas on other applications 
and what other interesting subjects they might like to learn. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-736-8
UBICOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The overall feedback from teachers that applied the Earth 
Course pilot in their class was positive. They all noted the 
enjoyment students exhibited during these sessions as well as 
their engagement in each topic. Teachers are very open to 
using novel technologies seeing the benefits of the 
NEWTON-based lessons. However, schools’ infrastructure 
were sometimes lacking the necessary equipment. Teachers 
also noted that it is imperative to have a more established 
communication between TEL designers and teachers, 
emphasizing the need to improve teachers’ familiarity and 
involvement with TEL approaches. 
In terms of learner satisfaction, the majority of the 
students who exhibited positive learning satisfaction 
following NEWTON-based lessons were students who 
already have positive attitudes to school and they were used 
to employing technology as well as those students who do 
not have issues with STEM subjects. It is notable the fact 
that students who do not like school reported significant 
improvements in knowledge assessment tests, specifically 
preferring to use NEWTON apps when learning STEM 
topics and an increased enjoyment level during NEWTON-
based lessons compared to their usual STEM classes. 
III. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Summarizing, learner’s experience and knowledge 
results analysis show that the NEWTON approach lessons 
applied in primary schools increased children’s interest in 
Technology Enhanced Learning, which also improved their 
engagement in STEM subjects. NEWTON approach also 
provided a beneficial support in terms of knowledge 
acquisition and can be employed by teachers as an aiding 
tool to better illustrate to children various STEM concepts. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by the NEWTON project [1] 
funded under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research 
and Innovation programme, Grant Agreement no. 688503. 
REFERENCES 
[1] NEWTON 
Project, 
http://newtonproject.eu 
Retreived: 
September 12, 2019 
[2] A. Chis, A.N. Moldovan, L. Murphy, P. Pathak, and C.H.  
Muntean, “Investigating Flipped Classroom and Problem-
based Learning in a Programming Module for Computing 
Conversion Course” Journal of Educational Technology & 
Society, 21(4), pp. 232-247, 2018 
[3] D. Bogusevschi, C.H. Muntean and G.M. Muntean, 
“Teaching and Learning Physics using 3D Virtual Learning 
Environment: A Case Study of Combined Virtual Reality and 
Virtual Laboratory in Secondary School”, in Society for 
Information Technology & Teacher Education International 
Conference. Las Vegas, NV, USA, pp. 721-728, 2019 
[4] D. Bogusevschi, C.H. Muntean and. G.M. Muntean, “Earth 
Course: Knowledge Acquisition in Technology Enhanced 
Learning STEM Education in Primary School”, in EdMedia + 
Innovate Learning Conference, Amsterdam, Netherlands,  pp. 
1261-1270, 2019 
[5] D. Bogusevschi,  C.H. Muntean,   N.E. Gorji and G.M. 
Muntean,   “Earth Course: A Primary School Large-Scale 
Pilot on STEM Education”, in 10th EDULEARN Conference, 
Palma de Mallorca, Spain,  pp. 3769-3777, 2018 
[6] C.H. Muntean, J. Andrews and G.M. Muntean, “Final 
Frontier: An Educational Game on Solar System Concepts 
Acquisition for Primary Schools”, in 17th IEEE ICALT 
Conference, Timisoara, Romania, pp. 335-337, 2017 
[7] N. El Mawas, I. Tal, A. N. Moldovan, D. Bogusevschi, J. 
Andrews, G.-M. Muntean and C.H. Muntean, “Final Frontier 
Game: A Case Study on Learner Experience”, in 10th 
International Conference on Computer Supported Education 
(CSEDU), Madeira, Portugal, pp. 122-129, 2018 
 
 
Water Cycle in Nature application (Nature 
Environment 
 
 
Water Cycle in Nature application (Virtual 
Lab - Boiling Experiment) 
 
 
Sea-life Application – Nature Environment 
 
 
Sea-life application – Virtual Lab 
 
 
 
Final Frontier Game - Venus 
 
 
Final Frontier game – Virtual Library 
 
Figure 1. Water Cycle, Final Frontier and Sea-life applications part of the NEWTON Earth Course Pilot  
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-736-8
UBICOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

