An Application and Hardware for Repetition Images in Special Effects Shooting 
 
 
Myoungbeom Chung 
Division of Computer Engineering 
Sungkyul University 
Anyang City, South Korea 
e-mail: nzin@sungkyul.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we propose an application that can be 
used to take repetition images for special effects shooting in 
movies or television using the Bluetooth technology of smart 
devices. After the application saves the control data for a 
specific period (based on the user’s selection), the proposed 
application can move the motors of the hardware mounted on 
the camera to perform the same motion several times via 
Bluetooth communication. We do not permit users to control 
the camera motors for the repeated movements, so we can keep 
the same start and end positions after saving the moving data. 
The camera motors are only moved remotely by the 
application’s saved data. We developed the proposed 
application and hardware, which work with camera motors for 
performance evaluation. Then, we confirmed that the proposed 
application repeated exactly the same motion with the camera 
motors several times, according to the saved data. Therefore, 
because the proposed application can take same images by 
remotely controlled camera motors, it will be a useful 
technology for special effects shooting of movies or television. 
Keywords-special effects shooting; repeated images; smart 
devices; application; same-movement. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With the rapid development of smart devices and 
wireless communication, many technologies, such as data 
sharing, near wireless transmission, and hardware control 
methods are using the communication function of smart 
devices. The communication technologies included in smart 
devices are Bluetooth, socket transmission using Wi-Fi, and 
Wi-Fi Direct; these are developed from control research 
involving robots, smart devices, Remote Control (RC) cars, 
etc. [1-4]. 
From the growth of these control technologies, 
equipment for broadcast shootings has been applied to 
remote control technologies. ARRI Co. has sold equipment 
and software to control the Motion Control Camera (MCC) 
called Scorpio Mini Head SB92 [5], and CamRanger co. has 
released an MP-360 tripod head that can be controlled by a 
smart device or computer [6]. These control technologies are 
set up and used in dangerous recording positions, such as 
high places or quickly moving vehicles, and especially in 
difficult-access areas. Because the MCC has a built-in 
memory card for special effects shooting, it can record 
moving shots during a two minute period and it can shoot the 
same motion consistently. Thus, the MCC can record the 
same scene with the same camera moving a dozen times. 
When wired controls are used for the MCC, the scene being 
shot through the monitor can be seen immediately, and 
electric power can be directly supplied to the MCC. 
However, when we use wireless controls for the MCC, a 
wireless control desk is need, and the MCC can only save 
four movements according to the number of built-in memory 
cards. Because most MCC equipment is very expensive, we 
cannot use it frequently. On the other hand, the MP-360 is 
cheaper than MCC equipment and it can be controlled 
wirelessly. Since the MP-360 uses a tripod, we can adjust it 
to making a movie or video. However, the MP-360 can make 
panning and tilting motions, but not rolling motions. 
In this paper, we propose an application based on smart 
devices and hardware that can repeat the same movement 
consistently for special effects shooting. The proposed 
application and hardware have the advantages of both the 
MCC and the MP-360. The proposed application sends the 
movement data to the hardware via Bluetooth, and the 
hardware mounted on the video camera can repeat the same 
movement numerous times. The hardware is composed of 
four motors (one motor for the panning motion, one motor 
for the tilting motion, and two motors for the rolling motion), 
a Micro Controller Unit (MCU) board for data transmission 
and control, and a Bluetooth module. 
To evaluate the performance of the proposed application 
and hardware, we developed an application based on smart 
devices and hardware, and we conducted a control 
experiment with the same movements repeated during two, 
three, and four minute periods. The results showed that the 
proposed application and hardware moved to the same 
position without error during the two and three minute 
periods. Moreover, during the four-minute phase, the error 
rate was only 0.18% for the rolling motion. Thus, because 
the proposed application and hardware can work as well as 
the MCC and because they do not require an extra control 
desk, the proposed application and hardware can replace the 
MCC. Since the proposed equipment can be used in 
dangerous regions or places people difficult for people to 
access, it will be useful for special effects shooting. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 explains 
some of the equipment used for special effects shooting and 
how to make a special effect using the MCC. In Section 3, 
we describe the proposed application based on smart devices 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

and hardware mounted on video cameras. In Section 4, we 
describe the application and hardware that we developed, 
and we discuss the results of the control experiment in terms 
of the performance of the proposed technologies. Finally, in 
Section 5, we present the conclusions and our further 
research. 
II. 
RETATED WORK 
In this section, we explain some of the equipment 
required for special effects shooting. Many kinds of 
broadcast shooting equipment exist for special effects 
shooting and Computer Graphics (CG), such as the MCC, 
Body-Cam (body camera), Steadicam, or wireless controllers 
for lens focusing. The body-cam is a video camera attached 
to the body of an actor using hardware, and it can capture 
scenes for the first person narrative, following up the actions 
of the actor and creating a sense of immediacy [7]. 
Steadicams capture a steady scene even if the actor of the 
scene runs or walks [8]. While running or walking with a 
Steadicam, the camera operator cannot focus the lens. 
Therefore, when the distance between the actor and the 
movie camera is changed, a wireless controller is often used 
to focus the Steadicam lens. 
For special effects shooting, the MCC is used to repeat 
the same camera movement though actors move differently 
during each take. For example, we can shoot the same 
motion with the same camera using the MCC, as shown in 
Fig. 1 [9]. 
 
Fig. 1 (a) is a tree plate scene: the base scene for special 
effects shooting. Fig. 1 (b) is a tracking plate, which includes 
a guideline for CG special effects. Fig. 1 (c) is a reference 
plate, where a silver pipe stands in for a stream of water that 
will be added later by CG effects. Fig. 1 (d) is a main plate 
that will compose the background of a scene with applied 
CG effects. After we combine each scene with CG effects, 
we can make a special effects scene, as shown below in Fig. 
2 [9]. 
In Fig. 2, the stream of water that was based on the 
reference plate is now visible in the main plate, which did 
not show any water originally.  
Recently, broadcast equipment for special effects 
shooting has mostly been comprised of the Remote Head 
series of ARRI co.; of this series, the Classic Head HD and 
Mini Head HD are capable of tri-axis movements [10]. 
However, the Remote Head series of ARRI co. requires a 
hand-wheel to control the head manually and a wireless 
control desk to control the head wirelessly. Thus, we cannot 
use Remote Head equipment often, and movie companies or 
advertisement companies use it most, because renting the 
hardware is expensive. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
(d) 
Figure 1. Each plate is an example of how to create CG and special effects for a movie scene: (a) tree plate, (b) tracking plate, (c) reference plate, 
 (d) main plate 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III. 
AN APPLICATION AND HARDWARE FOR SAME-
MOVEMENT SHOOTING 
In this section, we describe an application based on smart 
devices that can control hardware via Bluetooth, and we 
describe the hardware mounted on the video camera that can 
do the same movement multiple times. Wireless transmission 
control between the application and the hardware connects 
with Bluetooth pairing, and the work flow is shown in Fig. 3. 
 
 
Figure 3. The work flow of the proposed application and hardware attached 
to the camera 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As shown in Fig. 3, the hardware is not moved from 
shooting start to shooting end without the proposed 
application. When the proposed application moves the 
hardware after “Recording start” is selected, the application 
saves the movement data to built-in memory, according to 
the user’s control. If the user finishes shooting a scene, he or 
she can stop the application from recording via the 
“Recording stop” button, and the application finishes by 
saving control data. At the same time, the hardware stops 
each camera motor. When the proposed application executes 
the “Reset” function, the hardware moves to the first position 
recorded by the application’s movement data. Next, if we 
execute the “Reading start” button, the application sends 
movement data to the hardware, which then moves according 
to the movement data provided. If the application’s saved 
movement data ends, the application stops reading 
movement data and the hardware stops each motor. Then, the 
“Reset, Reading start, Reading stop” operating process 
repeats until enough scenes are obtained for CG special 
effects. A screen shot of the proposed application based on 
smart devices is portrayed in Fig. 4, and the menu of the 
application is categorized into three headings: Recording, 
Reading, and Setting. 
Fig. 4 shows the control functions of the “Recording” 
menu, which allows the user to move the hardware via many 
directional buttons, such as Panning (Left, Right), Tilting 
(Up, Down), and Rolling (Left, Right). These buttons can 
move the hardware even if the “Recording Start” button is 
not executed. When the user wants to save a hardware 
movement, the user touches the “Recording Start” button. 
Then, the “Recording time” increases, and the application 
saves the camera movement data. Simultaneously, the 
application moves the hardware via Bluetooth, and the user 
can take a shot needed for special effects shooting via the 
Panning (Left, Right), Tilting (Up, Down), and Rolling (Left, 
Figure 2. Final shot using special effects implementation and CG 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Right) buttons. When the shooting is ended, the user touches 
the “Recording Stop” button, and the application stops to 
save the camera movement data. The camera movement data 
is saved in the built-in memory of the smart device, and we 
can see the saved data from the application’s “Reading 
menu” (shown below in Fig. 5). 
 
 
Figure 4. Main screen of the proposed application for control MCC 
 
 
Figure 5. Main screen for repeat movement of camera 
 
In Fig. 5, the hardware’s position should be moved to the 
first position, because the position of hardware is the ending 
position after shooting is finished. Thus, the hardware goes 
to the first position as the user touches the “Reset” button in 
the “Reading” menu. If the user does not touch this button 
but touches the “Read Start” button, the application shows an 
alert message and the hardware does not move. When the 
user touches the “Read Start” button after touching the 
“Reset” button, the application sends movement data to the 
hardware in consecutive order, and the video camera 
attached to the hardware takes another shot of the same scene. 
The color of the control message line changes to red when a 
control message exists, and it changes to green when no 
control message exists. Next, the “Setting” menu has three 
slide bars to regulate the control speed, as shown in Fig. 6. 
As shown in Fig. 6, each slide bar ranges from 1 to 10; the 
chosen value can increase or decrease the motor speed of the 
hardware. If the value is low, the motor speed is slow and the 
hardware will move slowly. Conversely, if the value is high, 
the motor speed is fast and the hardware will move quickly. 
The “Remaining Time” switch sets how the “Read time” of 
the Reading menu will be displayed. If the switch is off, the 
“Read time” shows a time counter. If the switch is on, the 
“Read time” shows the remaining time. 
 
 
Figure 6. Setting screen for speed control of camera movements 
 
Finally, the composition of the hardware mounted on the 
video camera is shown in Fig. 7.  
 
 
Figure 7. The composition of the proposed hardware to be attached to the 
camera 
 
In Fig. 7, each motor is composed of a reducer, a motor, 
and an encoder. For rolling movements, we used two motors 
that are composed of an IG 32 reducer, a BL2644 motor, and 
a dual channel 26-pulse encoder. We used a 5GT type pulley 
and pulley belt to connect these two motors. For panning and 
tilting movements, we used one motor for each. This motor 
is composed of an IG42 reducer, a GM01-Type DC motor, 
and a dual channel 26-pulse encoder. Next, MCU and 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

communication modules for controlling each motor are 
shown below in Table 1. 
 
TABLE I.  
THE CONTROLLER COMPOSITION OF THE PROPOSED 
HARDWARE 
Equipment 
Model name 
MCU 
Arduino mega 2560 
Communication 
BLE Shield SLD09041M 
BLDC driver 
NT-BL3V 
DC driver 
NT-VNH20SV1 
Power 
5V for Board, 24V for BLDC 
 
MCU not only controls all motors from control data via 
Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) but also supplies information 
about current motor status and position to a computer for 
experiment and analysis. The BLE shield is a module for 
communication between the smart device and the hardware, 
while the Brushless DC (BLDC) driver controls the BL2644 
motor and retrieves its position information. The DC driver 
is meant to control the GM01-Type motor and to get its 
position information, and power equipment is to supply 
additional electric power to MCU and each motor. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTS AND EVALUATION 
This section explains the experiments and evaluation of 
the proposed application and hardware. The aim of the 
experiments was to verify how well the wireless application 
and hardware worked and how exact (i.e., without error) the 
position of the hardware was throughout its repeated 
movements. Fig. 8 shows how the user can control the 
proposed application and hardware according to the user’s 
purpose. 
Fig. 8 illustrates the user touching the “Left” button of 
the proposed application for left-panning. The hardware was 
turning from right to left in the following order: (a), (b), (c), 
(d), (e), and (f). We tested not only panning movements but 
also tilting and rolling movements, and the proposed 
application and hardware worked as well for all movements 
as movement of left-panning. 
Next, we did an experiment about whether the hardware 
maintained the same position after being moved several 
times to shoot the same scene. We could check the position 
value of each motor from a PC via USB serial 
communication, because we used Arduino mega 2560 as 
MCU and motor driver to get the position value of each 
motor. We saved movement control data in the “Recording” 
menu, and we checked the start position and end position 
values of each motor at the “Reading” menu at 5, 10, and 20 
repetitions. At these times, the setting speed of the panning, 
tilting, and rolling movements was three and the control 
duration of the hardware was two minutes, which was the 
maximum saving time of MCC of ARRI co., three minutes, 
and four minutes. The results of this experiment are 
presented in Table 2. 
The value of each cell is the error rate of the hardware’s 
end position value via the proposed application. In Table 2, 
the error rates for panning and tilting movements were 0% at 
two, three, and four minutes, though the hardware was 
moved several times. In contrast, the error rate for the rolling 
movement was 0.18% at four minutes, even though the error 
rates were 0% at two and three minutes. A possible 
explanation is that we used a 5GT type pulley and pulley belt 
to connect the two motors for the rolling movement.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Images of the stages of left-panning via the proposed application, controlled by the hardware 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

TABLE II.  
THE ERROR RATES OF END POSITION VALUE OF THE 
HARDWARE VIA THE PROPOSED APPLICATION 
 
Motor direction 
2 min 
3 min 
4 min 
5 times 
Panning 
0 % 
0 % 
0 % 
Tilting 
0 % 
0 % 
0 % 
Rolling 
0 % 
0 % 
0.17 % 
10 
times 
Panning 
0 % 
0 % 
0 % 
Tilting 
0 % 
0 % 
0 % 
Rolling 
0 % 
0 % 
0.18 % 
20 
times 
Panning 
0 % 
0 % 
0 % 
Tilting 
0 % 
0 % 
0 % 
Rolling 
0 % 
0 % 
0.18 % 
 
We expect that the rolling movement error occurred 
when the motor stopped, because the 5GT type pulley belt 
has a 3 mm furrow. If we had used a pulley belt that was 
smaller than the furrow of the 5GT pulley belt, we think we 
could have decreased the error rate for rolling movements. 
From the results of the experiment, it is clear that the 
proposed 
application 
and 
hardware 
worked 
exactly 
according to the user’s purpose. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have proposed an application based on 
smart devices that can control hardware movements and save 
the movement data; we have also proposed hardware that can 
conduct the same movement repeatedly for special effects 
shooting for movies or dramas. From the experiment results, 
we showed that the application and hardware were working 
well during two, three, and four minute periods without any 
error for panning and tilting movements. A marginal error of 
the application and hardware occurred only during the four 
minute period for the rolling movement. Thus, the proposed 
application and hardware could not only work like the MCCs 
of ARRI co., but they also do not require any wireless 
control desk or extra controller. Therefore, the proposed 
application and hardware would be a useful technology for 
special effects shooting at dangerous locations and difficult-
access areas. 
In future research, we will look into other options to 
replace the 5GT type pulley and pulley belt, and we will do 
more experiments using these options. Furthermore, we will 
test whether the accumulated shots of the same hardware 
movement overlap exactly when we use the proposed 
application the hardware. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research project was supported in part by the 
Ministry of Education under Basic Science Research 
Program 
(NRF-2013R1A1A2061478) 
and 
(NRF-
2016R1C1B2007930), respectively. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] C. J. Ryu, "The design of remote control car using 
smartphone for intrusion detection," In Computer Science and 
its Applications, pp. 525-533, 2012. 
[2] C. Y. Wang and A. F. Lai, "Development of a mobile rhythm 
learning system based on digital game-based learning 
companion," Proceedings of 6th International Conference on 
E-learning and Games, Edutainment 2011, pp. 92-100, 2011. 
[3] Chopper 
2, 
http://majicjungle.com/chopper2_iphone.html, 
retrieved Sept. 2016.  
[4] PadRacer, http://padracer.com/, retrieved Sept. 2016. 
[5] Scorpio 
mini 
head 
SB 
92, 
http://www.cinecrane.com/en/ScorpioSB92.html, 
retrieved 
Sept. 2016. 
[6] CamRanger PT Hub, http://camranger.com/camranger-pan-
tilt/, retrieved Sept. 2016. 
[7] Facecam, 
http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/Facecam, 
retrieved Sept. 2016. 
[8] R. Ofria Jr, "Steady camera mount system." U.S. Patent No. 
6,027,258. 22 Feb. 2000. 
[9] Visual distractions Ltd., “Fuji Finepix 3d – City Trip”, 
http://vd-fx.com/project/fuji3d, retrieved Sept. 2016. 
[10] ARRI Remote Heads, http://www.arrirental.de/grip/remote-
heads/remote-heads/, retrieved Sept. 2016. 
 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

