Evaluating Student Attitudes on Ubiquitous e-Learning  
Timothy Arndt  
 Dept. of Computer and Information Science 
Cleveland State University 
Cleveland, OH, USA 
arndt@cis.csuohio.edu 
   
 
 
 
Angela Guercio 
Dept. of Computer Science 
Kent State University – Stark 
North Canton, OH, USA  
aguercio@kent.edu 
 
 
Abstract—This paper describes our preliminary work 
in progress on ubiquitous e-learning.  Ubiquitous e-
learning is learning which can take place anywhere, 
anytime. Following this paradigm, ubiquitous e-
learners use mobile devices such as smart phones, 
tablets, and laptops to learn wherever they are. 
Furthermore, ubiquitous e-learning implies context-
sensitivity so that the style of learning as well as the 
material is adapted to the e-learner’s immediate 
surroundings. 
Ubiquitous 
e-learning 
has 
been 
identified by researchers as an increasingly important 
paradigm for the future, for both non-traditional 
learners as well as for today’s generation of students 
who are increasingly comfortable with mobile devices 
as their primary computing platforms. In spite of this, 
evidence about students’ attitudes towards ubiquitous 
e-learning is scarce. In order to guide and inform our 
future research in ubiquitous e-learning research, we 
have performed a survey of our computer science 
students. In this paper we present the results of this 
survey, our evaluation of the results, and our 
reflection on how these results will inform our future 
research. 
Keywords - e-learning; ubiquitous learning; mobile 
learning; instuctional technology. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Several emerging trends point towards the growing 
importance of ubiquitous learning – learning which takes 
place at any time and at any place. Among these trends is 
a growing population of non-traditional learners. Many of 
these learners have full or part time jobs which require 
them to fit the learning into a crowded schedule. 
Learning must take place wherever and whenever 
possible and it is not possible to fit this learning into a 
fixed, rigid schedule. Older non-traditional learners often 
have family obligations which render them non-mobile as 
well – the learning must come to them rather than the 
other way around. Younger, more traditional, learners 
also bring new demands to the learning environment. 
This generation is used to being entertained when and 
where they want, and may find traditional learning 
methods to be too constraining. In order to meet the 
needs of this generation, a more flexible, adaptive 
approach to learning is required.  
In the following section, we briefly describe 
experimental prototypes which we have previously 
developed 
which 
illustrate 
different 
aspects 
of 
adaptability for ubiquitous e-learning. Section 3 surveys 
research in ubiquitous e-learning. Section 4 presents the 
results of a survey on the attitudes of students towards 
ubiquitous e-Learning. These results are meant to guide 
the development of our research. Section 5 presents our 
analysis of the student survey. Section 6 gives 
conclusions and discusses future research. 
II. 
 ADAPTABILITY FOR UBIQUITOUS E-LEARNING 
This section briefly reviews our previous research in 
adaptability for ubiquitous e-learning.  
In [8], we described our research in multimedia 
software engineering applied to distance learning – in 
particular the Growing Book project, a multinational 
research effort supporting multi-lingual, multi-modal and 
multi-level learning. The metadata for courseware was 
described using an XML (extensible markup language) 
language called TAOML (teleaction object markup 
language) whose definition was given. We also described 
a dataflow transformer, based on XSLT (extensible style 
sheets language for transformations), for transforming the 
courseware from one desired output format to another. A 
prototype data transformer was developed in Java and 
demonstrated. 
In 
[9], 
we 
further 
developed 
this 
approach, 
concentrating on ubiquitous e-learning and showing how 
the dataflow transformation approach could be used to 
support e-learning on different types of devices as well as 
diverse learning styles, described by user profiles. We 
moved 
towards 
standards-compliant 
metadata 
for 
learning objects and we developed a prototype system 
capable of generating learning scenarios for several 
different types of devices. 
In the future, we wish to explore ubiquitous e-learning 
by incorporating context awareness, social networking 
and support for new mobile devices and networks into 
our previous research. The exact direction we take will be 
guided by the survey whose results are reported in this 
paper. 
III. 
 OVERVIEW OF RESEARCH IN UBIQUITOUS E-
LEARNING 
Ubiquitous e-learning builds on the increasing 
popularity of smart phones and tablets and the 
widespread availability of wireless networks in order to 
adaptively recommend learning resources which are 
appropriate for a user’s given context, and to supply them 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

in a timely manner. In this section, we review previous 
research in ubiquitous e-learning. 
Wang and Wu [1] developed a prototype system for 
ubiquitous e-learning for lifelong learners. Their system 
takes into account the learner’s characteristics, behaviors 
and preferences to make appropriate courseware 
recommendations. 
Context-aware 
functionality 
was 
enabled through the use of RFID technology. 
Chen, Chan and Wang [2] developed a website for 
ubiquitous e-learning with various devices (laptop, smart 
phone, etc.). A log of learning behaviors was kept at the 
website. SMS (short message system) messages were 
used to push information (e.g., reminders of homework 
and tests) to users. Information correlating device types 
to tasks performed was collected. The push and pull of 
course information to and from learners’ phones seemed 
to increase student awareness. 
Baird and Fisher [11] note the reliance on and expertise 
in social software of the rising generation of students and 
proposes the use of social networking media to foster the 
building of learning communities as well as to facilitate 
self-paced and customized learning experiences in 
synchronous and asynchronous learning environments. 
This work reviews the literature in Social Learning 
Theory and lists various social networking media with 
hints of how they may be exploited in e-learning. 
Chen and Huang [3] designed a context-aware 
ubiquitous learning system based on radio frequency 
identification (RFID) in order to enable students to learn 
in an environment containing both traditional learning 
resources and resources from the real world. An 
experimental result is given showing the effectiveness of 
the approach. 
Tzouveli, Mlyonas, and Kollias [4] aim at providing 
adaptability for web-based learning systems based on 
user profiling (similar to our approach in [9]). Electronic 
questionnaires were used to develop the user profiles and 
automatic assessment of the questionnaires is used to 
assign a particular profile to each user. The profile serves 
the proper learning material user to the learner. An 
experiment in five European countries shows the 
approach is promising. 
Muntean and Muntean [5] combined the adaptability of 
[4] with a ubiquitous learning approach. They produced a 
system which provides support for the selection of 
learning materials, in the ubiquitous context, from one of 
a number of open corpus resources. Their system serves 
rich media content to the users which will best meet their 
needs while keeping in mind the limitations of the 
devices and networks currently being used. 
Hwang and Tsai [6] give a survey of research in mobile 
and ubiquitous learning published in selected journals 
between 2001 and 2010. They find that the amount of 
research in this area has increased greatly over this time 
frame and that researchers have stressed the importance 
of situating students to learn from a real world 
environment as well as emphasizing the mobile and 
communication technologies which are key to supporting 
effective learning in the real world. 
Agarwal and Nath [7] present a systematic study of 
various issues and challenges in ubiquitous e-learning. 
They identify the characteristics of ubiquitous learning 
as: Permanency; Accessibility; Immediacy; Interactivity; 
Situating of instructional activities; and Adaptability. 
Further, they identify six parameters which may be used 
to 
explore 
ubiquitous 
e-learning: 
Connectivity; 
Flexibility; 
Interactivity; 
Collaboration; 
Extended 
opportunities; and Motivation. 
Liu and Hwang [8] explore the paradigm shifts in e-
learning leading to the development of context-aware 
ubiquitous learning, proposing a set of significant values 
based on the relevant literature to guide the development 
of context-aware ubiquitous e-learning applications. They 
also present a context-aware ubiquitous e-learning case 
study. In addition to the RFID technology as identified in 
[3], they also mention Global Positioning System (GPS) 
as another technology which is expected to impact this 
area. 
IV. 
 SURVEY OF STUDENT OPINIONS ON UBIQUITOUS E-
LEARNING 
In order to guide our future research in ubiquitous e-
learning, we performed a survey of our students. The 
students surveyed are all computer science majors. They 
are both undergraduate (bachelors degree) and graduate 
(masters degree) students, both domestic (U.S.A.) and 
international students. The survey (see Table I.) is 
composed of three parts: the first part (questions 1 – 3) 
concerns the use of mobile devices for study; the second 
part (questions 4 – 8) concerns the students’ study 
environment; the third part (questions 9 – 12) concerns 
the type of ubiquitous interested in using. The survey 
employs a standard five-point Likert scale. 
 
 
 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

TABLE I.  
RESULTS OF STUDENT SURVEY 
 
 
Items addressed 
Strongly 
agree 
Agree 
Neither 
agree nor 
disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Score 
1. 
I use a laptop computer for 
coursework (studying online 
slides, videotaped lectures, doing 
assignments, etc.). 
34 
3 
1 
0 
0 
4.87 
2. 
I use a tablet device for 
coursework (studying online 
slides, videotaped lectures, doing 
assignments, etc.). 
6 
10 
10 
6 
5 
3.16 
3. 
I use a smartphone for 
coursework (studying online 
slides, videotaped lectures, doing 
assignments, etc.). 
6 
10 
5 
9 
8 
2.92 
4. 
I do coursework while 
commuting (listening to taped 
lectures in a car, studying on 
public transportation, etc.). 
4 
6 
4 
15 
9 
2.50 
5. 
I do coursework in "slack times" 
(waiting for appointments, 
between classes, etc.). 
9 
18 
2 
7 
2 
3.66 
6. 
I do coursework out of doors. 
5 
10 
8 
11 
4 
3.03 
7. 
I do coursework while travelling 
(weekend outings, vacations, 
business trips, etc.). 
5 
8 
7 
15 
2 
2.97 
8. 
I do coursework for one class 
while in another class. 
0 
7 
5 
7 
19 
2.00 
9. 
I would be interested in viewing 
videotaped lectures with 
seamless scaling and 
remembered last locations across 
all of my mobile devices. 
12 
16 
6 
3 
1 
3.92 
10. 
I would be interested in a mobile 
app which would automatically 
highlight relevant material from 
related courses when I am 
following a lecture in a different 
course. 
16 
14 
2 
4 
2 
4.00 
11. 
I would be interested in a mobile 
app which would alert me when 
classmates are in close proximity 
so that we could have 
impromptu study sessions or 
collaboration. 
6 
12 
7 
10 
3 
3.21 
12. 
I would be interested in a social 
networking-type app which 
would let me know when my 
instructor and/or classmates are 
online for chat/help. 
19 
13 
5 
1 
0 
4.32 
 
V. 
 ANALYSIS OF STUDENT SURVEY 
In order to guide our research in ubiquitous e-learning, 
we have analyzed the results of the student survey. We 
briefly summarize our analysis here. 
The first part of the survey attempts to determine the 
extent to which the students are using mobile devices for 
coursework. It is clear that the use of mobile devices – 
laptops, tablets, and smart phones – is almost universal 
among students, but the question we ask is more specific 
– how much are these devices used for coursework? 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

What we see from the survey is (as would be expected) 
that the use of laptops for coursework is almost universal. 
We also see that tablets score fairly highly, and smart 
phones just a bit less, with more than 40% of respondents 
agreeing (or agreeing strongly) that they use these 
devices for coursework. We take this number as a base 
level from which to start – if we can develop more useful 
apps for ubiquitous e-learning for tablet and smart phone 
devices, we would expect the number of users to 
increase. Overall, the results of this section are very 
favorable for the potential of research in ubiquitous e-
learning. 
The second part of the survey examines how much 
students currently work in situations which might be 
considered to part of the “ubiquitous” environment (out 
of doors, while between appointments, while commuting, 
etc.). While the responses show that many students do 
coursework while between classes or appointments (we 
conjecture that many of them are working on laptops 
between classes), the other possible learning situations 
have lower responses. This indicates a potential 
opportunity for more learning if we can enable this via 
appropriate applications. 
The third and final part of the survey attempts to 
determine which type of mobile apps would be most 
appreciated by the students surveyed. The results of this 
section are very positive, with several of the proposed 
apps having very high scores. This indicates a 
willingness of the students to use such apps if they are 
available. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
This work presents our initial research in ubiquitous e-
learning. The results of our survey indicate both an 
opportunity for new applications (students have mobile 
devices and a significant number use them for 
coursework), an opportunity for significance (there are 
slack times, which are not currently regularly exploited 
for coursework), and a willingness to use the results of 
research in this area (indicated by the positive responses 
in the third part of the survey). We intend to use the 
results of this survey to direct our research direction in 
this area. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  S. L. Wang and C. Y. Wu, “Application of Context-Aware and 
Personalized 
Recommendation 
to 
Implement 
an 
Adaptive 
Ubiquitous Learning System”, Expert Systems with Applications, 
vol. 38, 2011, pp. 10831-10838. 
[2] G. D. Chen, C. K. Chang, and C. Y. Wang, “Ubiquitous Learning 
Website: Scaffold Learners by Mobile Devices with Information-
Aware Techniques”, Computers & Education, vol. 50, 2008, pp. 
77-90. 
[3]  C. C. Chen and T. C. Huang, “Learning in a u-Museum: 
Developing a Context-Aware Ubiquitous Learning Environment”, 
Computers & Education, vol. 59, 2012, pp. 873-883. 
[4] P. Tzouveli, P. Mylonas, and S. Kollias, “An Intelligent e-Learning 
System Based on Learner Profiling and Learning Resource 
Adaptation”, Computers & Education, vol. 51, 2008, pp. 224-238. 
[5] C.H. Muvean and G.M. Muntean, “Open Corpus Architecture for 
Personalized Ubiquitous e-Learning”, Pers. and Ubiquitous 
Comput., vol. 13, 2009, pp. 197-205. 
[6] G. J. Hwang and C. C. Tsai, “Research Trends in Mobile and 
Ubiquitous Learning: a Review of Publications in Selected Journals 
from 2001 to 2010”, British Journal of Educational Technology, 
vol. 42, no. 4, 2011, pp. E65-E70. 
[7] S. Agarwal and A. Nath, “Some Challenges in Designing and 
Implementing  Learning Material for Ubiquitous e-Learning 
Environment”, Journal of Global Research in Computer Science, 
vol. 2, no. 2, 2011, pp. 29-32. 
[8] T. Arndt, S.K. Chang, A. Guercio, and P. Maresca, “An XML-
Based Approach to Multimedia Software Engineering for Distance 
Learning”, in Future Directions in Distance Learning and 
Communication Technologies, T. Shih and J. Hung, Eds. London: 
Information Science Publishing, 2007, pp. 106-134. 
[9] T. Arndt and A. Guercio, “Course Personalization for Ubiquitous e-
Learning”, ISAST Journal of Computers and Intelligent Systems, 
vol. 2, no. 2, 2010, pp. 1-11.  
[10] G. Z. Liu and G. J. Hwang, “A Key Step to Understanding 
Paradigm 
Shifts 
in 
e-Learning: 
Towards 
Context-Aware 
Ubiquitous Learning”, British Journal of Educational Technology, 
vol. 41, no. 10, 2010, pp. E1-E9. 
[11] D. E. Baird and M. Fisher, “Neomillennial User Experience Design 
Strategies: Utilizing Social Networking Media To Support “Always 
On” Learning Styles”, Journal of Educational Technology Systems, 
vol. 34, 2005-2006, pp. 5-32. 
 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

