An Experimental Study of Personalized Mobile Assistance Service
in Healthcare Emergency Situations
Alexander Borodin∗, Nikolay Lebedev∗, Andrew Vasilyev∗†, Yulia Zavyalova∗, Dmitry Korzun∗
∗ Petrozavodsk State University (PetrSU), Petrozavodsk, Russia
† P.G. Demidov Yaroslavl State University (YarSU), Yaroslavl, Russia
Email: aborod@cs.petrsu.ru, lebedev@cs.petrsu.ru, andrey.vasilyev@fruct.org, yzavyalo@cs.petrsu.ru, dkorzun@cs.karelia.ru
Abstract—Chronic diseases currently account for most deaths in
the world. Despite the fact that these illnesses are generally incur-
able, they are often preventable and manageable, and concomitant
risks are reducible. In particular, acute out-of-hospital complica-
tions of the chronic conditions can pose a threat to health and life.
Nevertheless, in the case of early detection and timely treatment
the remote patient has a good chance to survive. The success of
the early management and resuscitation is directly related to the
arrival time of the emergency medical services. In our approach,
a mobile health (m-Health) service is introduced to healthcare.
The service supports involvement of trained volunteers to ﬁrst aid
and resuscitation, dispatching them depending on the proximity
to the patient, and provide a guidance. Our design concept of this
service is heavily relies upon the smart spaces paradigm, namely,
the personalized assistance in medical emergencies is delivered
to mobile participants operated in networked environment as a
result of knowledge reasoning over the shared information. In this
paper, we study the architecture and key features of the service
and its smart m-Health space. We experimentally evaluate the
Smart-M3 based implementation to analyze the feasibility and
applicability of such mobile information services for the case of
medical emergencies.
Keywords–healthcare; medical emergency; m-Health; personal-
ized assistance service; smart spaces; Internet of Things; Smart-M3;
performance evaluation
I.
INTRODUCTION
Over the last few decades, mortality of chronic diseases
has decidedly risen and now they are the leading cause of
death and disability worldwide, surpassing the infectious and
acute ilnesses [1][2]. Almost half of the total chronic disease
deaths are attributable to cardiovascular diseases (CVD), which
is umbrella term for all diseases related to heart and circulation,
including, but not limited to, coronary heart disease, heart
failure, stroke and atrial ﬁbrillation [3].
Due to the long-term and, mostly, outpatient treatment,
complications of these diseases can be developed between
visits to the doctor and resulted in acute worsening of chronic
conditions. According to statistics, most heart disease deaths
occur suddenly outside the hospital [4]. Most sudden deaths
from CVDs are caused by a heart attack or acute myocardial
infarction (AMI) with the survival rate 60–70% [5], and out-
of-hospital cariac arrest (OHCA) with the survival rate 7–
11% [6][7].
It is proven that the survival from OHCA is utterly time-
sensitive and in case of immediate treatment the chance of
survival is roughly 67% [8]. However, it rapidly decreases
and after 12 minutes the patient dies almost inevitably [8].
Due to the hospital locations, trafﬁc conditions and lack of
free ambulance staff, the ambulance response time may vary
over a wide range. Moreover, for better survival rate the so-
called “chain of survival”, namely, a particular sequence of
actions should be carried out. Among the links of this chain,
the cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) should be fulﬁlled,
and being provided by bystanders, it extremely increases the
survival chances [9][10].
Decreasing the emergency response time can be based on
an integrated approach to healthcare. The approach aims at
achieving the following properties.
1)
Remote tracking out-of-hospital CVD events and
outpatient care by means of continuous monitoring
of the vital signs with personal wearable sensors and
reliable identiﬁcation of health state worsening.
2)
Involving the bystanders and trained volunteers to the
process of early management in healthcare emergency
situations.
3)
Supervising patients and caregivers with recommen-
dations provided by personal digital assistants—
information services—running on mobile devices.
The above properties characterize the growing class of
mobile health (m-Health) systems, where the classic style of
patient’s health monitoring by visiting a hospital is substituted
with more effective and intelligent solutions [11]. They are
essentially enabled by the progress in technologies of the
Internet of Things (IoT) and smart spaces. An mHealth system
is responsible to support and provision of healthcare services
using mobile communication devices, such as mobile phones
and tablet computers. Mobile devices are primarily responsible
for collecting medical data, delivery of healthcare information
to participants, real-time monitoring of patient vital signs, and
direct provision of care (via mobile telemedicine).
In addition to the patient mobility requirement, mHealth
services are essentially data-driven. They should produce
“smart assistance” decisions on the basis of individual health
data and a context information gathered from a variety of
sources [12][13]. In this paper, we study the problem of
reducing IT set-up costs and improve the quality of such
mHealth services. Speciﬁcally, our approach is directed to
the minimization of risk of CVD complications due to im-
provement of prevention, early diagnostics, forecasting of
development of the disease. The service implementation is
based on Smart-M3 platform [14]. The platform provides a
promising open source solution for smart spaces based systems
in IoT environments [15][16].
We consider a smart spaces based system for assistance
in healthcare emergency situations. The use cases and system
design were proposed in our previous work [13][17][18]. The
focus of this paper is on experimental study of the architecture,
the key features of the service and the created smart m-
Health space for the patient. We experimentally evaluate our
Smart-M3 based implementation to analyze the feasibility and
applicability of the approach to mHealth development in the
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

particular healthcare case of emergency assistance.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
introduces enabler solutions that are used in the service de-
velopment. Section III describes our pilot implementation of
the mHealth assistance service for emergency situations. Sec-
tion IV provides the key results of the experimental evaluation.
Finally, Section V concludes the study.
II.
ENABLER SOLUTIONS AND RELATED WORK
Let us consider solutions from IoT and smart spaces
that enable development of the considered class of mHealth
services. Most of the discussed solutions have been elaborated
in our previous work.
The possibility to provide mobile healthcare service, out-
side of hospital, is a clear result of the emerging IoT technol-
ogy, including the use of wireless sensors and personal mobile
devices. As a reference health parameter the service can use the
electrocardiogram (ECG) recordings obtained from personal
cardiomonitor. An example mobile application of this health
parameter monitoring is CardiaCare [19]. The application runs
on a smartphone communicating with a heart activity monitor
used by the patient. This variant of assistant service with heart
rhythm analysis is pure local: arrhythmias detection for the
heart function is performed directly on the smartphone.
The data heterogeneity problem for personal and body-
area medical and well-being devices is discussed in [20][21].
One solution [20] is the enterprise service that guarantees
interoperability and integration. For this purpose the inter-
mediate semantic middleware is provided. Our solution [21]
involves the architecture of the background service running
on the smartphone. The architecture supports mashup health
parameters gathered from a variety wirelessly connected sen-
sors. Furthermore, a relational data model is proposed in [22],
which is agnostic to the stored health parameters and supports
introducing new vital signs with no need to redesign the
backend database schema.
In [23], mobile and web applications are proposed to
improve the efﬁciency of emergency services. Current location
of the patient and his/her name and age are sent to the emer-
gency command center for the purpose of better dispatching of
emergency units. A particular design and its implementation
are described in [14][24], where the service acts as a digital
assistant aimed to dispatch closely located volunteers to the
patients in healthcare emergency situations.
A smart spaces based platform is introduced by Vergary
et al. [25]. The platform aims at the information interoperabil-
ity between existing smart spaces based solutions in healthcare.
The concept is illustrated with a simple demo application for
the Smart-M3 platform. In particular, they focused on solutions
to ensure an autonomous life to patients who would normally
be placed in hospital. These solutions are based on ambient
intelligence techniques and try to adapt the technology to
peoples needs by building on three basic concepts: ubiquitous
computing, ubiquitous communication, and intelligent user
interfaces.
Reference scenarios for constructing emergency and other
mHealth services are considered in [13][17][18]. The con-
struction is essentially based on the mechanisms of semantic
information sharing in smart spaces. The role of service
intelligence and semantic relation of all available information
when constructing assistance mHealth services is discussed
in [11]. When a lot of data appears, then, knowledge reasoning
over these data collections becomes inevitable part of the
service. Based on deduced knowledge, recommendations to
assist a patient can be constructed. A special form is prediction,
which is important for early detection of patient state changes.
III.
PERSONALIZED MOBILE ASSISTANCE SERVICE IN
HEALTHCARE EMERGENCY SITUATIONS
The analyzed mHealth service aims at providing personal-
ized information assistance in healthcare emergency situations.
The assistance is in the form of recommendations, both to
the patient and involved medical professionals. According
to the smart spaces approach proposed by Korzun et al.
[13], the system is deployed at a set of networked devices,
including, but not limited to, standalone or cloud-based server
equipment, desktops, laptops and personal mobile devices,
such as smartphones and tablets. The multi-agent Smart-M3-
based architecture is shown in Fig. 1.
The basic software unit is an agent acting as a Knowledge
Processor (KP). Such KPs run on the digital devices as a part
of the application or background service. The KPs interact
with users, sensor equipment, external information sources and
other KPs. The data, gathered and processed by one KP, can
be shared with other KPs by means of so-called Semantic
Information Broker (SIB). SIB provides the functionality of
ontology-driven common storage for the information shared
by KPs and presented in machine-readable form of RDF-
triples, the Resource Description Framework. Also, it support-
sSPARQL queries for accessing the RDF-data.
As a result of this cooperative information sharing, a se-
mantic network is formed in the smart space. The network inte-
grates various heterogeneous data sources and their consumers.
SIB
Patient
KP
HIS KP
Hospital
information
system
Authentication
service
Authentication
KP
Sensor devices
Dispatcher
KP
Map and
geolocation
services
Volunteer
KP
Ambulance
KP
Pharmacy
KP
Pharmacy
information
system
Doctor
KP
Recommen-
dations KP
Figure 1. Multi-agent system architecture for personalized information
assistance in healthcare emergency situations
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

In addition, this semantic information sharing provides high
scalability in the condition of current trends in development
of IoT technologies and the explosive growth of the market of
m-Health equipment and applications.
The patient is equipped with a set of personal sensor
devices that are able to continuously register the vital signs and
send the recordings wirelessly to the personal mobile device.
The mobile device has positioning capabilities, therefore, the
location of the patient is also known. Besides, the health state
is regularly assessed based on the questionnaire-based survey.
The digital recordings of health parameters and the survey data
are preprocessed on the local hardware and risk factors are
identiﬁed. The Patient KP operates as a part of the mobile
application, collects and shares the location and the risk factors
in the smart space. The patient is also able to use the “panic
button” to send an emergency alarm. The purpose is to address
to the doctor timely and obtain further guidelines (e.g., call
the ambulance or to take medications independently). Along
with the alarm, the patient is able to send the complaints,
selecting them from the predeﬁned list, if in consciousness.
The patient receives the machine-generated guidelines from
the Recommentations KP.
The health data, provided by the patient is linked with
the information from patient’s electronic health record (EHR)
elicited from the hospital information system (HIS) and pub-
lished to the SIB by the HIS KP and is available to the
physician via Doctor KP.
Alarms, locations and concomitant health data are available
to EMS and, in certain limits, to volunteers. Bystanders, able
to provide a ﬁrst aid are guided by ﬁrst aid assistant. Trained
volunteers, able to assess the heaviness of the health state and
provide resuscitation procedures, are informed on the impor-
tant peculiarity of the patient, e.g., individual contraindications.
Volunteer KPs also publish the locations to the SIB, as a
result, volunteers receive alarms based on their proximity to
the patient expressed in time to arrive the patient, elicited
from the external map service. Both location of the patient,
and locations of the appointed volunteers are accessible by
ambulance squad through the Ambulance KP.
So far, the mobile applications for patients, volunteers,
ambulances and physicians have been developed along with
the authentication and dispatcher services. Current version of
HIS KP interacts with the HIS mockup due to the lack of API
of available HISes. For the same reason, the development of
the Pharmacy KP is postponed. Scenarios of personal recom-
mendations for the hypertension management and decreasing
the risk of complications in hypertensive patients are currently
discussing with the cardiologists from the Institute of Medicine
of Petrozavodsk State University, preliminary discussion can
be found in [26].
IV.
EXPERIMENTAL STUDY
A. Experiment Setup
The experiments with the implemented pilot mHealth ser-
vice services in medical emergencies aim to analyze the ap-
plicability of smart spaces based approach to mHealth service
implementation, as it was described in Section III.
Since the personal mobile device (e.g., smartphone) of a
patient is continuously used for collecting and preprocessing
of the vital signs from a number of health sensors, a problem
of fast battery drain can arise due to the computational load.
During our experiments electrocardiogram recordings were
being continuously and wirelessly obtained from the portable
ECG monitor to the smartphone. These recordings were being
preprocessed to extract the R-R intervals for the purposes
of further HRV analysis. Calculated HRV-metrics were then
publishing to the SIB.
For the extraction of R peaks from the ECG recording, the
one-pass algorithm based on the Teager energy operator de-
veloped in our previous work was used [27]. The performance
of the algorithm was evaluated on the well-known MIT-BIH
Arrhythmia Database containing 48 half-hour annotated two-
channel ambulatory ECG recordings freely available online.
According to the tests, the average sensitivity on these record-
ings is 98.94 (min = 92.03) and the average positive precision
is 99.47 (min = 97.13). These results are comparable to the
well-known algorithms of R peaks extraction.
In the tests, we have used the wearable 1-lead ECG
recorder with Bluetooth LE connectivity. The discharge rate
of the smartphone battery was being measured during the tests
using standard tools provided by Android OS. There were
10 four-hour tests with lengths of R-R intervals extracting
alternated with 10 four-hour tests with no preprocessing.
Before the tests were started, the negligible difference in the
battery discharge rate had been forecasted due to the features
of used R peak detection algorithm.
The information shared by KPs is presented in the SIB
in the form of RDF triples. Real world entities may need
hundreds of triples to be represented in the semantic and
machine-processible form. Therefore, the problem of evalu-
ation of SIB performance regarding domain-speciﬁc informa-
tion entities. In the proposed service, semantic descriptions
of the questionnaires for the regular health state audit and
alarm accompanying complaints, are those complex informa-
tion structures. In the second experiment, the questions of the
health state questionnaire were publishing to the SIB and then
they were consumed by other KP. The time of readiness of
the questionnaire to other KPs and the time of extracting the
questionnare-related triples from the SIB were being measured
in each test. The tests differed in the number of requested
questions.
Since the purpose of these tests is to evaluate the perfor-
mance of the SIB, they were fulﬁlled in artiﬁcial conditions,
namely, the inﬂuence of the network load has been eliminated,
the KP and the SIB were run on the same desktop computer.
For the experiments 10 tests were constructed with 10, 20
and up to 100 questions. There were 100 runs for each
questionnaire. Before the tests were started, we had predicted
SIB to be able to deal with the semantic description of the
questionnaire of any reasonable size.
Participants of the smart space operate in distributed net-
worked environment and gain an access to the external ser-
vices, and so, the third experiment is devoted to the evaluation
of the functionality of remote access to the EHR that is stored
in an external HIS. The EHR consists of the set of documents
and for the purposes of reasoning a subset of these documents
may be published to the SIB. During the tests, measurements
of arterial blood pressure (ABP) were extracted from the HIS
mockup and published to the SIB. For the purposes of the
further data processing, patients were divided into the several
groups depending on the number of ABP measurements in
their EHRs, as it is shown in Fig. 2. The query processing time
for all measurements of one patient was evaluated against the
number of simultaneous queries for each group of the patients.
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

0
250
500
750
1000
1250
5-14
15-24
25-34
35-44
45-54
55-64
65-74
75-84
85-94
95-104
105-114
115-124
Group of patients by the number of documents
Number of patients
Figure 2. A histogram of the number of documents in patient accounts
The main service scenario is to appoint the volunteers to
the emergency patients depending on locations in order to
reduce the response time. Therefore, the process of volunteer
dispatching was profoundly studied. In this experiment, the
randomly distributed to the ﬁctional map volunteers were being
appointed to the patients. The patients were simulated with
different rates of alarm arrivals. The waiting times of patients
in the queue were being measured in each test. The tests
differed in the number of available volunteers.
B. Functional Testing
The results of the battery discharge rate evaluation exper-
iment are summarized in Table I. We observe the difference
within the small bounds. It leads to conclusion that the ECG
preprocessing on the smartphone has no signiﬁcant affect on
the battery drain. Therefore, the computational resources of
the smartphone can be used in smart services for sensor data
processing taking into account battery usage.
The box plot for the experiment with the questionnaire
publication is shown in Fig. 3. It shows a linear dependence
TABLE I. BATTERY DISCHARGE RATE EVALUATION
Test run
Battery discharge, %
1
9
2
10
3
10
4
8
5
9
6
11
7
9
8
10
9
9
10
9
(a) Battery discharge with R
peaks detection
Test run
Battery discharge, %
1
9
2
11
3
10
4
9
5
9
6
10
7
9
8
10
9
10
10
9
(b) Battery discharge with no
ECG preprocessing
5000
10000
15000
20000
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100



requests result in readiness of the documents within the bounds
of one second. It allows to conclude that developed HIS KP
can be used in the assistance in medical emergency.
In the experiment with the dispatching volunteers to the
patients, the exponential dependence between alarm waiting
times before the volunteer is chosen versus the number of
patients was estimated. At the same time, according to the
statistics, Petrozavodsk EMS receive a call every 5–15 minutes
on average. At this rate of alarm arrival, the dispatcher allows
to appoint the volunteers to the patients in a few seconds, and
thus, is quite fast to be used in reference scenario.
Hereinabove, the results of four experiments are presented
and brieﬂy discussed. In the example of emergency assistance
service, we showed that such a mHealth service can be
constructed using smart spaces and, in particular, based on
the Smart-M3 platform.
C. Emergency Response Time
The proposed system is aimed to the increasing of the
efﬁciency of the ﬁrst aid providing due to the mobilization of
the trained volunteers. The volunteers that are located nearby to
the scene of an accident receive an alarm along with the details
and have the chance to arrive in a timely manner, and, in turn,
to promote the increasing the survival rate in life-threatening
conditions. Therefore, one of the goals of the experimental
study is the evaluation of decreasing of emergency response
times when using of the proposed system.
Simulation analysis was chosen as the method for assessing
the merits of the approach. The process of receiving alarms and
dispatching them to the volunteers was considered on the ex-
ample of one of the urban residential districts of Petrozavodsk
with the population of at least 50 thousand.
Since departure points of the emergency vehicles are
known, the assessment of the emergency response time without
the support of the volunteers can be obtained from the external
map services taking into account the trafﬁc conditions. We
obtained the assessment of the arrival time of emergency
vehicle to the scene in 9–17 minutes depending on the location
of the patient on condition of lack of transport trafﬁc jams.
We have found out that this assessment is in accord with the
statistics of the local Ministry of Healthcare claiming that the
average response time in Petrozavodsk is approximately 14
minutes.
We had predicted the signiﬁcant decreasing of the response
times before simulations runs were started, as it is shown
in Fig. 5. Using the map services we also obtained the
assessments of the arrival times for all pairs of addresses of
the selected residential district.
The simulation model is based on the assumptions that
the patients and volunteers are distributed along the district
according to the residential density and all the volunteers are
available for alarm dispatching. In each series of simulation
runs 20, 30, and so on, up to 100 volunteers were distributed
over all the district map. During the simulation it is revealed
that on condition of presence of the trained local volunteers the
emergency response time decreases to 3–9 minutes depending
on the density of volunteers.
V.
CONCLUSION
This paper presented the experimental evaluation of per-
sonalized mobile assistance service healthcare emergency sit-
uations. For the service development, we reviewed the mHealth
use cases, IoT-enabled solutions, and information-drive multi-
agent system models. The evaluated implementation is Smart-
M3 based pilot that aims at demonstrating the feasibility and
applicability of the smart spaces approach to mHealth service
development for deploying in emerging IoT environments.
The presented experiment results indicate the possibility for
creating a personalzied mHealth smart space around its mobile
patients. We conﬁrmed that the efﬁciency of the Smart-M3
platform is enough to implement and deploy such services
even in complicated settings of IoT environments.
For the analysis of advantages of the approach, the de-
veloped personalized mobile assistance service is planned to
be approved among the patients of Petrozavodsk Hospital of
Emergency Care.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is ﬁnancially supported by the Ministry of
Education and Science of the Russian Federation: project
# 14.574.21.0060 (RFMEFI57414X0060) of Federal Target
Program “Research and development on priority directions of
scientiﬁc-technological complex of Russia for 2014–2020”
REFERENCES
[1]
Centers
for
Disease
Control
and
Prevention,
“Chronic
disease
overview,”
Feb.
2016.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.cdc.gov/
chronicdisease/overview/index.htm [retrieved: Aug. 2016]
[2]
World Health Organization, “Preventing chronic diseases: a vital invest-
ment: WHO global report,” 2005. [Online]. Available: http://www.who.
int/chp/chronic disease report/full report.pdf [retrieved: Aug. 2016]
[3]
R. Busse, M. Bluemel, D. Sheller-Kreinsen, and A. Zentner, “Tackling
chronic disease in europe,” 2010. [Online]. Available: http://www.euro.
who.int/
data/assets/pdf ﬁle/0008/96632/E93736.pdf [retrieved: Aug.
2016]
[4]
J. P. Ornato and M. A. Peberdy, “Cardiopulmonary resuscitation,” 2005.
[5]
K. Smolina, F. L. Wright, M. Rayner, and M. J. Goldacre, “Determinants
of the decline in mortality from acute myocardial infarction in england
between 2002 and 2010: linked national database study,” BMJ, vol. 344,
2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.bmj.com/content/344/bmj.d8059
[retrieved: Aug. 2016]
[6]
D. Mozaffarian et al., “Executive summary: Heart disease and
stroke statistics–2015 update a report from the american heart as-
sociation,” Circulation, pp. 434–441, Jan. 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/circulationaha/131/4/434.full.pdf [re-
trieved: Aug. 2016]
Figure 5. A district map: alarm and volunteer locations and response time
assessments
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

[7]
European Society of Cardiology, “Out-of-hospital cardiac arrest survival
just 7 percent,” 2013. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedaily.
com/releases/2013/09/130901154147.htm [retrieved: Aug. 2016]
[8]
B. Sund, “Effect of response times on survival from out-of-hospital
cardiac arrest: using geographic information systems,” Department of
Economics, Karlstad University, Karlstad University Working Papers in
Economics 4, May 2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.diva-portal.
org/smash/get/diva2:372865/FULLTEXT01.pdf [retrieved: Aug. 2016]
[9]
R. O. Cummins, J. P. Ornato, W. H. Thies, and P. E. Pepe, “Improving
survival from sudden cardiac arrest: the ”chain of survival” concept.
a statement for health professionals from the advanced cardiac life
support subcommittee and the emergency cardiac care committee,
american heart association.” Circulation, vol. 83, no. 5, pp. 1832–1847,
1991. [Online]. Available: http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/83/5/1832
[retrieved: Aug. 2016]
[10]
L. W. Boyce et al., “High survival rate of 43% in out-of-hospital cardiac
arrest patients in an optimised chain of survival,” Netherlands Heart
Journal, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 20–25, 2015. [Online]. Available: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1007/s12471-014-0617-x [retrieved: Aug. 2016]
[11]
D. Korzun, A. Borodin, I. Paramonov, A. Vasiliev, and S. Balandin,
“Smart spaces enabled mobile healthcare services in internet of things
environments,” International Journal of Embedded and Real-Time Com-
munication Systems (IJERTCS), vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–27, 2015.
[12]
H. Demirkan, “A smart healthcare systems framework,” IT Professional,
vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 38–45, Sep. 2013. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/MITP.2013.35 [retrieved: Aug. 2016]
[13]
D. Korzun, A. Borodin, I. Timofeev, I. Paramonov, and S. Balandin,
“Digital assistance services for emergency situations in personalized
mobile healthcare: Smart space based approach,” in Proc. 2015 Int’l
Conf. on Biomedical Engineering and Computational Technologies
(SIBIRCON/SibMedInfo).
IEEE, pp. 62–67, Oct. 2015.
[14]
N. Lebedev, I. Timofeev, and I. Zavialova, “Design and implementation
of the ﬁrst aid assistance service based on smart-m3 platform,” in Proc.
18th Conf. Open Innovations Framework Program FRUCT.
ITMO
University, pp. 174–180, Apr. 2016.
[15]
J. Honkola, H. Laine, R. Brown, and O. Tyrkk¨o, “Smart-M3 information
sharing platform,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Computers and Communica-
tions (ISCC’10).
IEEE Computer Society, pp. 1041–1046, Jun. 2010.
[16]
D. Korzun, A. Kashevnik, S. Balandin, and A. Smirnov, “The Smart-
M3 platform: Experience of smart space application development for
Internet of Things,” in Internet of Things, Smart Spaces, and Next Gen-
eration Networks and Systems. Proc. 15th Int’l Conf. Next Generation
Wired/Wireless Networking and 8th Conf. on Internet of Things and
Smart Spaces (NEW2AN/ruSMART 2015), LNCS 9247, S. Balandin,
S. Andreev, and Y. Koucheryavy, Eds. Springer, pp. 56–67, Aug. 2015.
[17]
E. Balandina, S. Balandin, Y. Koucheryavy, and D. Mouromtsev, “IoT
use cases in healthcare and tourism,” in Proc. IEEE 17th Conf. on
Business Informatics (CBI), vol. 2, pp. 37–44, Jul. 2015.
[18]
I. Paramonov, A. Vasilyev, and I. Timofeev, “Communication between
emergency medical system equipped with panic buttons and hospital
information systems: Use case and interfaces,” in Proc. the AINL-
ISMW FRUCT 2015.
ITMO Univeristy, pp. 36–43, Nov. 2015.
[19]
A. Borodin, A. Pogorelov, and Y. Zavyalova, “The Cross-platform
Application for Arrhythmia Detection,” in Proc. 12th Conf. of Open
Innovations Association FRUCT and Seminar on e-Tourism, S. Balandin
and A. Ovchinnikov, Eds.
SUAI, pp. 26–30, Nov. 2012.
[20]
P. Castillejo, J.-F. Martnez, L. Lpez, and G. Rubio, “An internet of things
approach for managing smart services provided by wearable devices,”
International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, vol. 2013, p. 9,
2013.
[21]
A. Borodin, Y. Zavyalova, A. Zaharov, and I. Yamushev, “Architectural
approach to the multisource health monitoring application design,” in
Proc. 17th Conf. of Open Innovations Association FRUCT.
ITMO
Univeristy, pp. 36–43, Apr. 2015.
[22]
A. Borodin and Y. Zavyalova, “On an EAV based approach to designing
of medical data model for mobile healthcare service,” in Proc. 9th
Int’l Conf. on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and
Technologies (UBICOMM 2015).
IARIA XPS Press, pp. 20–23, Jul.
2015.
[23]
J. B. de Guzman, R. C. C. de Guzman, and E. R. G. Ado, “Mobile emer-
gency response application using geolocation for command centers,”
International Journal of Computer and Communication Engineering,
vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 235–238, Jul. 2014.
[24]
I. Zavialova, N. Lebedev, and A. Borodin, “First aid assistance service,”
in Proc. 18th Conf. Open Innovations Framework Program FRUCT.
ITMO Univeristy, pp. 638–638, Apr. 2016.
[25]
F. Vergari et al., “An integrated framework to achieve interoperabil-
ity in person-centric health management,” International Journal of
Telemedicine and Applications, vol. 2011, pp. 5:1–5:10, Jan. 2011.
[26]
E. Andreeva, A. Borodin, and T. Kuznetsova, “Mobile system for
the management of hypertension in remote patients and evaluation
of the risk markers for hypertension-related complications,” in Proc.
18th Conf. Open Innovations Framework Program FRUCT.
ITMO
Univeristy, pp. 419–420, Apr. 2016.
[27]
A. Borodin and A. Rudenya, “A study of teager-kaiser energy operator
pertinence for r peak detection in ecg recordings,” in Proc. AINL-
ISMW FRUCT, S. Balandin, T. Tyutina, and U. Trifonova, Eds. ITMO
University, pp. 144–146, Nov. 2015.
[28]
D. G. Korzun, I. V. Galov, and A. A. Lomov, “CuteSIB: a func-
tional platform that provides a cross domain search extent for triple
based informationy,” https://sourceforge.net/projects/smart-m3/, 2009–
2016, [retrieved: Aug. 2016].
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

