Intelligent Manufacturing based on Self-Monitoring Cyber-Physical Systems
Simon Bergweiler
German Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DFKI)
Kaiserslautern, Germany
Email: simon.bergweiler@dfki.de
Abstract—This paper describes the approach and implementation
of a system that combines real industrial environments with a
virtual copy of these components. The coupling elements for
communication and data management are cyber-physical systems
and active digital object memories. The idea of this approach is
to create an assistance system that relies on these virtual digital
object memories to ensure quality characteristics and to describe
any information in a uniﬁed structured format. Up to a certain
level of complexity, state changes and feature checks are done
decentralized by each object memory, in the way of autonomous
control.
Keywords–active digital object memory; cyber-physical systems;
cyber-physical production system.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The current order of the market is shifting more and more
towards the idea of an individual production, different product
variants need to be made in almost no time. However, this
ﬂexible approach also requires that future factories must be
easily adapted and converted to the order situation, but this
is time-consuming and costly. To make such a complex task
more manageable, parts of the plant, e.g., sensors, machinery
and products need to be developed that will make a ﬂexible
and modular engineering possible. Nowadays, as a general
trend, the focus shifts from pure engineering, which is based
on mechanical processes, to software-controlled processes [1].
Future-oriented technologies will increase efﬁciency in produc-
tion, for instance through the application of self-monitoring for
manufactured products and ﬁeld devices [2].
The evolution of the Internet to the Internet of Things (IoT)
corresponds to the fusion of the real and the virtual world.
When considering this trend, Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS)
play a main role by coupling the different scientiﬁc worlds -
mechanical engineering, electrical engineering and computer
science. This trend reveals the German industry that it stands on
the threshold of the fourth industrial revolution (Industrie 4.0)
[2]. Future production processes are characterized by speciﬁc
requirements to the individual manufacturing of products. This
opens up new requirements for highly ﬂexible production
systems, and increasing efﬁciency in industrial production
processes will become a signiﬁcant competitive factor. CPS
form a solid basis for Industrie 4.0 [3], and this approach
shows the integration of these systems in a real production
environment.
The development of component-based machine-to-machine
(M2M) communication technologies enable ﬁeld devices to
exchange information with each other in an autonomous way
without human intervention. The concept of IoT extends
this M2M concept by the possibility to communicate and
interact with physical objects, which are represented by CPS.
These CPS provide the necessary computing power, storage,
sensors and ubiquitous access to the functionality of the
instrumented machines and ﬁeld devices. In this approach,
all major ﬁeld devices are equipped with CPS and installed
in spatially separated production lines. The idea goes here
towards the concept of “retroﬁtting”. Retroﬁtting means the
advanced equipment of existing facilities through additional
hardware: function-enhancing modules for communication and
distributed processing. With this instrumentation, it is possible
that individual ﬁeld devices and the manufactured products
communicate with each other, until the industrial plant meets
the standards and directives of future factories and principles
of Industrie 4.0.
In Section II, this paper gives an overview of used
technologies and introduces the terms ﬁeld devices, IoT, CPS,
active digital object memories, smart factories and smart
products. The Section III describes the concept of distributed
decentralized CPS and corresponding locally and globally
stored data structures. Section IV describes the scenario and
application domain and shows how the approach and the
developed framework can be used in this industrial environment.
In the following Section V the technical creation of an
infrastructure for distributed CPS-based product memories is
shown in detail, and Section VI gives a conclusion and an
outlook on future work.
II.
BACKGROUND
A. Field Devices
Field devices are electronic devices that are located at the
ﬁeld level, the lowest level in the hierarchical level model for
automation. They are associated with sensors that, on one hand,
detect the data of the measuring points and on the other pass
the control data to the actuators. At certain time intervals, ﬁeld
devices continuously supply measured data for process control
and receive control data for the actuators.
B. Internet of Things
The inexorable growth and innovation diversity of informa-
tion and communication technologies leads to a fundamental
change in daily life. Computers are becoming smaller and
can be used almost anywhere. They are built almost inside
of all of our technical equipment, e.g., smart watches that
track bio-physical data. These devices provide a wide range of
technical capabilities that can be used quite comfortable and
allow individual components to communicate and cooperate
by constantly exchanging sensor information. Following this
future trend it can be expected that all utensils of our daily life
are turning into smart nodes within a global communication
network: this is called the IoT [4], a trend that will also ﬁnd
its way into domains such as consumer electronics and also
industrial production.
The term Internet of Things was coined and popularized by
the work of the Auto-ID Center at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology (MIT), which in 1999 started to design and
propagate a cross-company RFID infrastructure. In 2002, its
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

co-founder and former head Kevin Ashton was quoted in
Forbes Magazine as saying, “We need an internet for things, a
standardized way for computers to understand the real world”
[5]. This article was entitled “The internet of things”, and was
the ﬁrst documented use of the term in a literal sense [6].
C. Cyber-Physical Systems
In the ﬁelds of agriculture, health, transport, energy supply
and industry, we are facing a revolution, hat will open up
new ways and possibilities in the upcoming years. Modern
information technologies connect data out of different areas
and bring them together. This works, if there is a virtual
counterpart for every physical product, that can reproduce,
by means of sensors and cameras, the environment and the
context to combine simulation models and predictive models.
Therefore, the paradigm of the IoT describes distributed
networks, which in turn are composed of networks of smart
objects. As a technical term for such smart objects, the term
Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) was coined [7]. The main
feature of a CPS is that the information and communication
technologies were developed and ﬁnely tuned to create virtual
counterparts to physical components. CPS link data of the
real world and this increases the effectiveness and does not
encapsulate computing power in an embedded system. Over
the communication channel available distributed computing
power can be used to solve problems within a network. The
IoT and CPS are not fundamentally new concepts. Indeed,
Simon [8] already identiﬁed the importance and beneﬁts of
combining both, physical and virtual domains. His approach was
presented many years ago, when not all embedded platforms
and manufacturing techniques were developed as today. In
fact, the possibility to develop and use a mature platform
and techniques are nowadays widely accepted by the industry.
Production processes in the context of the initiative “Industrie
4.0” of the federal German government can be ﬁne-grained
equipped with sensors and deliver real-time internal and external
production parameters in an very high level of detail [2][9].
These following four features typically characterize CPS [10]:
•
A physical part, e.g., sensors and actuators capture
physical data directly. This allows a direct inﬂuence
on physical processes.
•
A communication part, e.g., connected to digital
networks: wireless, bound, local, global. This allows
the use of globally available data and services.
•
A computation part, e.g., save and evaluate data and
interact on this basis, active or reactive with physical
and digital worlds.
•
An interaction-layer for HMI, e.g., feature a range of
interfaces for multi-modal human-machine interaction.
This provides dedicated facilities for communication
and control, like control by speech and gestures.
In this approach, CPS are embedded micro-controllers
installed either inside or outside of physical objects, responsible
for the connection and communication over a network, e.g.,
the Internet. The technical aspect of classical embedded
systems is extended by the idea of Real World Awareness
and tight integration in digital networks. In the context of this
implementation, CPS act as digital counterpart and couples
the real and the virtual worlds [3][11]. Furthermore, the “Real
World Awareness” and dynamic integration of CPS is based on
three basic principles: self identiﬁcation (Who am I?), service
exploration (What do I offer?) and active networking (Where
are my buddies?).
D. Cyber-Physical Production Systems
The application of CPS in production systems leads to the
Cyber Physical Production Systems (CPPS), in which products,
machines and other resources are represented by CPS sharing
information and services across the entire manufacturing and
value network. Future factories use CPPS, semantic machine
to machine communication (M2M) and semantic product
memories to create smart products [12]. These smart products
are the basis for smart services that use them as a physical
platform.
Overall, a CPPS, which is based on decentralized production
logic and networked principles, offers advantages in terms
of transparency, adaptivity, resource efﬁciency and versatility
over traditional production systems. In the context of CPPS,
CPS are fundamental units that have almost instant access
to relevant information and parametrization of machines,
production processes and the product itself. On the automation
level of a CPPS all these information out of the CPS-network
is needed to run the manufacturing process successfully and to
make strategic decisions. For decision making and control of the
manufacturing processes, consistent and coherent information
of the “real” world is needed.
E. Active Digital Object Memories
The development of the IoT makes it possible to assign a
digital identity to physical objects [13][14]. Paradigms, such
as human-machine interaction and machine-to-machine com-
munications are implemented by the use of clearly identiﬁable
markers, so-called smart labels. However, the identiﬁcation is
not only bound to those labels, it can be also achieved by
integrated sensors or by providing identiﬁcation methods.
These developments pave the way for the concept of Active
Digital Object Memories (ADOMe), which extend the usage of
smart labels by additional memory and processing capabilities
[15]. By the use of the product memory concept all data in the
life cycle of a product (manufacturer information, suppliers,
dealers and users) can be added, and furthermore, the data
exchange can be made over this speciﬁc memory model. Also,
memory-related operations can be performed by small scripts
in a local runtime environment directly on the ADOMe [16].
According to the functionality of these scripts it is possible to
closely monitor decentralized production processes and resource
consumption, to impove the quality of the products [17].
These innovative technologies and techniques are crucial
parts and the further development is highly supported in national
research initiatives, such as Smart Manufacturing Leadership
Coalition in the US [18] and Industrie 4.0 in Germany [2].
The next step in the development and to establish new
technologies is to evaluate, process and merge data from
existing enterprise resource planning systems (ERP) [19] and
data from different ADOMes. Both sources, considered as a
single unit, offer comprehensive access to domain knowledge
and contextual information. A more concrete description of the
industrial environment and the running manufacturing processes
enables a better user assistance to automatically recognize
intentions and activities of the worker. Recommendations for
improvements of the current activity of the worker can be
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

presented proactively by the system. The approach of Haupert
et al. [20] refers to a system for intention recognition and
recommendation that shows an example scenario also based
on ADOMes.
Furthermore, the concept of digital product memories still
has an active part. This activity is realized in the form of
small embedded scripts that can be run in a separate runtime
environment on the speciﬁc CPS. Thus, according to the
computing power and storage capacity autonomously simple
tasks can be executed independently in a decentralized way.
In a certain interval or linked to events, deployed scripts are
executed and perform small tasks such as storage cleaning,
threshold value monitoring or target/actual-value comparisons.
The present work uses the idea of the Object Memory
Modeling (OMM) [21] and implemented an own Application
Programming Interface (API) on this basis. OMM is an XML-
based object memory format, which can be used for modelling
events and it also deﬁnes patterns, so called block structures, to
store information about individual physical objects. Moreover,
this format is designed to support the storage of additional
information of physical artifacts or objects. The present work
uses the idea of the Object Memory Modeling (OMM) [21] and
implemented an own Application Programming Interface (API)
on this basis. OMM is an XML-based object memory format,
which can be used for modelling events and it also deﬁnes
patterns, so called block structures, to store information about
individual physical objects. Moreover, this format is designed
to support the storage of additional information of physical
artifacts or objects.
F. Fields of Application - Smart Factories and Smart Products
Powerful computers are becoming smaller, inexpensive and
energy efﬁcient and suitable for the integration in devices, the
instrumentation of everyday objects and integration in clothes -
smart products. Tiny CPS-adapted sensors and actuators are
able to perceive and respond to their environment and interact
with connected services in the network. These sensor networks
are an essential piece of the foundation for future factories -
smart factories. Software-deﬁned platforms, like CPPS, make
sensor data available and processable, enriched with intelligence
by integrated analysis methods for monitoring and controlling.
CPS-enabled factory modules or factory parts and the produced
smart products communicate and interact with each other. In
this context, ADOMes provide a way to collect and analyze
structured data and gives an answer to the question in which
format the obtained data sets of all connected CPS could be
stored. A smart service uses a smart product of the smart factory,
to use smart data as an asset, linked via semantic technologies,
see Figure 1 [22].
Figure 1: Customization based on semantic technologies [22].
Smart factories and smart products characterize a generation
change to new, highly ﬂexible and adaptive manufacturing
technologies for the production.
•
More computing power in many small devices - extend
functionality of existing industrial plants with several
CPS.
•
Better networked via Cloud-services.
•
Gathering and fusion of information - local and global
data processing (sensors, actuators).
•
Create object memories, and store product/object-
speciﬁc data.
III.
CONCEPT OF DISTRIBUTED MANUFACTURING DATA
In our approach, we consider a production line of a
smart factory as a sum of several autonomous CPS. In
addition to these aforementioned smart products, there are also
intelligent CPS-enabled ADOMes that structure the accruing
data of ﬁeld devices and produced objects and make them
accessible. Accordingly, each of these systems is able to
act self-regulating and self-monitoring as autonomous factory
component, consequently they are able to communicate with
each other.
The idea of this approach is to distinguish between locally
and globally accessible data structures, respectively represented
by an ADOMe. Large amounts of data or storage-intensive
data types (e.g., CAD drawings, manufacturer documentation
and other internal company documents, videos and examples,
electrical wiring diagrams, data history) must be stored in the
global version of the ADOMe, because the storage capacity
of embedded systems is usually tight. Taking into account
these memory restrictions, the local version is an adaptation
or ﬁltered version of the global ADOMe, only the necessary
information, required for operation and production are stored
here. But to accomplish this and to create a special limited
local version of an ADOMe, there exist synchronization
points and communication structures to ensure the correct
synchronization when modifying local or global variables or
parameters. Nevertheless, the speciﬁc parametrization of ﬁeld
devices should be done ﬁrst on the unit’s local ADOMe and
shall be directly accessible. For the ﬁne tuning of dedicated ﬁeld
devices, it is to complex and not practicable to access the central
CPPS or global ADOMe. This decentralized parametrization
can also be advantageous by setting up a new plant whose
infrastructure is also still under construction, or when plant
parts are reconstructed and quick compatibility checks must
be performed using local data access. Moreover, by the idea
that the data is available on the produced object, the ability is
given to access these information, just in other factory halls
or other companies without access to the central network. Due
to the possibility, to keep only certain production data locally
in the product’s object memory, no sensible production data
leaves the factory.
IV.
SCENARIO
In our scenario, depicted in detail in Figure 2, we take the
speciﬁc case of the production of a gearbox that should be
improved or modiﬁed during the manufacturing stage. The focus
is on the milling of the base plate and the subsequent process
of assembling the individual parts. First, the bottom plate is
milled and veriﬁed by camera, before in a second production
step, the product is assembled. These processes take place in
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

different production lines, which are coupled via a workpiece
carrier (WPC). The WPC accompanies the product through
the milling, assembling and processing cycle and carries the
product physically. The WPC is also equipped with a CPS-
enabled ADOMe, that couples the physical product part with
its virtual counterpart, which represents all product-speciﬁc
data. Within this interconnected infrastructure, the WPC has
access to all information of the product, to provide relevant
and necessary data at the respective part of the industrial plant.
The WPC communicates with the ADOMe of the respective
object, to provide information for the next production step.
Thus, produced objects can be registered early in the process
ﬂow.
Figure 2: Production scenario.
Beside the idea to structure information in a uniﬁed struc-
tured format, another goal of this approach is the decentralized
autonomous processing of information and immediate derivation
of a solution on a CPS-enabled ADOMe. After milling a small
script, that has already be embedded to the local ADOMe of the
product, checks in a comparison task, whether the actual values
match to the speciﬁed target values, which are also stored
in the same ADOMe. This review will determine, whether
the product is ﬁne and meets the quality requirements for the
production order, if rework is necessary or it is a faulty product.
If reworking is required for that workpiece, a note is stored
in the product’s memory and the product can be supplied to
the production cycle again, when a correctable deviation can
be solved directly in the production line. The delayed delivery
of produced products, because of reworking, can bring the
production process to a standstill. Such bottlenecks can be
identiﬁed and communicated early enough, so that the overall
system is able to reschedule the production workﬂow.
The smart product knows the sequence and which operations
a machine did during the production cycle. Each action is stored
by timestamp in an ADOMe. In this assembling scenario of
a gearbox, many parts exist that look very similar and have
to be prepared and assembled in a certain order. In many
cases, it is difﬁcult or not possible to distinguish the material
characteristics and the suitability of the gear parts with the
naked eye. In this special case, every produced part has its
own ADOMe that allows access to the data, which are needed
for the next processing or assembling step and for reasons of
quality assurance. Furthermore, every single processing step is
registered and must be compared with the desired processing
steps, deﬁned in the detailed construction phase of the product.
In order to deploy and synchronize a global ADOMe, an
own server platform was created, the Object Memory Server
(OMS), which provides service functionality in the cloud or
the local network. This component is described in detail in
Section V-B, cloud-based manufacturing.
V.
TECHNICAL COMPONENTS OF THE FRAMEWORK
The approach can be subdivided into three processing areas
that need to interact with each other. Figure 3 shows the
actual products and ﬁeld device level, represented by each
CPS and the associated ADOMe, furthermore, the supply level,
where services, snippets and ADOMes are hosted as cloud-
based networked solutions, and the assistance level for decision
support and knowledge acquisition of the CPPS. Decision
making is based on the dedicated processing steps and the
context-adaptive provision of information of ﬁeld devices and
manufactured products stored in their ADOMes. Each product
or ﬁeld device has both a local and a global ADOMe. The local
ADOMe is stored directly on the CPS with limited memory,
and the global ADOMe, for storage-intensive data types, is
stored by a central server, the OMS.
Figure 3: Interaction of the individual components of the
framework.
A. Production Assistance System
In an CPPS with many decentralized CPS-enabled modules,
condition reports to the overall system are very important. The
adopted assistance system for CPPS acts as logical parent
unit and is based on managed information out of individual
product ADOMes. As presented on Figure 4, the contextual
evaluation and context-speciﬁc management of processes and
procedures is based on facts about the manufactured products
(ADOMe), the factory parts (factory model) and the current
situation, inﬂuenced by the manufacturing process and the
skills and role of the user (user model, situational model).
The assistance system monitors and supervises the course
of production based on process data of the production cycle,
and it also monitors and supports the decisions taken by the
decentralized scripts. If an intervention in the workﬂow of
the current manufacturing process is needed, based on all
converging information here, it generates precise instructions for
handling and rescheduling of the production order, or triggers
actions, such as maintenance, alteration, or replacement of
system components. These reactions of the system are deﬁned
in context-dependent rules based on described models, which
represents the domain knowledge and the special vocabulary
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

and terminology. The system decides, whether the manufactured
parts are ready for further processing, if they must be revised
or if it is rejected goods. These actions are transferred to
and processed by the module for output presentation and
communicated to the registered clients and subsequent actors.
However, the focus of this approach is not on the con-
sideration and evaluation of complex relationships, for which
this assistance system has been designed, but ﬁrst on simple
evaluation purposes, such as self-monitoring and the self-check
of quality parameters of a manufactured object or a single ﬁeld
device within its ADOMe and its aligned embedded system.
Each distributed ADOMe performs its individual quality checks
and returns the data to the assistance system. For example,
when a ﬁeld device is re-parametrized, recommendations are
formulated that rely upon the data stored in the history of the
memories of this device. Within the system infrastructure, the
Figure 4: Contextual management based on a situational model.
tiny scripts, we named them snippets, will be hosted in a central
cloud-based Snippet Store, see Figure 3. Furthermore, based
on the task description of the assistance system, e.g., “quality
control by target value comparison”, concrete recommendations
for scripts are given which adequately provide the required
skills. An appropriate matching script is installed in the local
ADOMe, when it is compatible with the existing combination
of hardware and software of the CPS. The assistance system
administrates the runtime of the local ADOMe and sets the
execution interval of the script. This scheduling job of the script
runs the small tasks, like memory operations or maintenance
procedures, based on necessary boundary parameters made
dynamically available on the product memory. Moreover, the
assistance system must react according to the notiﬁcation or
event mechanism and create a listener functionality for this
device conﬁguration. This means that the overall CPPS must
check within a time interval, whether the message or event
status of an ADOMe has changed. In accordance to these
message or event types a recommendation is triggered of the
CPPS, which may affect the current production process.
B. Cloud-based Manufacturing
This approach makes use of the potential of a cloud-
based networked solution to improve the production process,
information sharing, and quality management. Within the cloud,
resources, such as processing power, memory or software, in the
form of little scripts, are provided dynamically and appropriately
over a network. The Object Memory Server (OMS) is the main
infrastructure component that stores ADOMes, according to
the model of an application server to serve a large number of
users. Via a RESTful Web service interface the OMS permits
access to process data of each manufacturer and provides
the functions to create, store, replace, and modify the data
structures in a uniform and consistent manner. Figure 5 shows
the interaction of the CPS’ client layer with the OMS. The
Figure 5: OMS creates ADOMe in production.
OMS uses an own implementation (API) of the Object Memory
Model (OMM) to structure and represent the delivered data in
an appropriate format. This entails the creation of OMS-records,
all communicated data are checked and traceably documented
at the time the information was accepted and inserted in
the CPS’ ADOMe. But upon closer examination of the data
structures from different manufacturers, it becomes evident that
no approach is suitable for all requirements, hence the OMS
will always be characterized by a certain heterogeneity.
C. Interaction and Output Presentation
A smart factory can never operate without human employees,
so one key issue is the human to machine interaction. In a
production process, a lot of information passes from monitoring
and control, but the problem usually lies in the overview and
the appropriate visualization. When people work together with
self-learning and self-adapting systems like CPS-based systems,
they need to understand each other and which processes are
internally occurring. Therefore, the user interface for technical
experts or operators is dynamically adapted by a personal
assistance system and its module for situational management.
This system creates speciﬁc UI-layouts or templates for the
presentation of contents for diverse mobile devices of the
workers (notebooks, smartphones, tablets, smart watches).
Currently available monitoring data are presented in adaptable
views in form of a curve visualization as depicted in Figure 6.
This overview allows the trained experts to draw conclusions
about the manufacturing process and possible bottlenecks. First,
the situational management component selects the appropriate
visualization for a registered device. This selection is based on
the situational model, that provides all gathered information
about the present situational factors (e.g., user model, parametric
inﬂuences of the location, factory and production process).
According to speciﬁc predeﬁned inference rules, which are
applied to this model, a visualization pattern is determined
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 6: Worker performing a maintenance task with a mobile
device.
and prepared for different devices. In this consideration, the
special privileges and responsibilities play a major role for an
adaptive intelligent visualization, because a technician requires
a different view in error or maintenance purposes, as a machine
operator who inspects the up and running plant.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
This article described the conceptualization and implemen-
tation of a cyber-physical industrial environment and the use of
virtual counterparts of real physical objects, whose data is stored
in active digital object memories, hosted on a dedicated Object
Memory Server. The described cyber-physical systems enable
these memories to communicate over the network and to fulﬁll
small tasks in a decentralized autonomous way, which contribute
to the production cycle, like storage cleaning, threshold value
monitoring or target/actual-value comparisons. This could even
reach a stage, referred to the case of maintenance, in which
production systems autonomously order spare parts long before
a component fails. With these interconnected cyber-physical
systems, it will be possible to implement further product
requirements, such as the efﬁcient use of energy and raw
materials in production. Furthermore, it will be possible to
personalize products and adapt product features in regards to
local needs and their individual manufacturing process.
A smart factory can never operate without human employees,
so one key issue is the visualization of the stored contents of a
dedicated ADOMe. Future work will cover this topic and will
further develop strategies that will help to identify and visualize
important key values and how these should be presented to the
worker (e.g., via tablets or smart watches).
VII.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was funded in part by the German Federal
Ministry of Education and Research under grant number
02PJ2477 (project CyProS), 01IA11001 (project RES-COM),
and the EIT project CPS for Smart Factories. The responsibility
for this publication lies with the authors.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Loskyll, I. Heck, J. Schlick, and M. Schwarz, “Context-based
orchestration for control of resource-efﬁcient manufacturing processes,”
Future Internet, vol. 4, no. 3, 2012, pp. 737–761.
[2]
H. Kagermann, W. Wahlster, and J. Helbig, Eds., Securing the
future of German manufacturing industry - Recommendations for
implementing the strategic initiative INDUSTRIE 4.0, Final report of
the Industrie 4.0 Working Group.
Berlin: acatech National Academy
of Science and Engineering, 2013, [retrieved: June 2015]. [Online].
Available: http://www.acatech.de/ﬁleadmin/user upload/Baumstruktur
nach Website/Acatech/root/de/Material fuer Sonderseiten/Industrie 4.
0/Final report
Industrie 4.0 accessible.pdf
[3]
J. Schlick, P. Stephan, M. Loskyll, and D. Lappe, “Industrie 4.0 in
der praktischen Anwendung [Industrie 4.0 implemented in practical
applications],” in Industrie 4.0 in Produktion, Automatisierung und
Logistik, T. Bauernhansl, M. ten Hompel, and B. Vogel-Heuser, Eds.
Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden, 2014, pp. 57–84.
[4]
J. H¨oller, V. Tsiatsis, C. Mulligan, S. Karnouskos, S. Avesand, and
D. Boyle, From Machine-to-Machine to the Internet of Things: Intro-
duction to a New Age of Intelligence.
Elsevier, 2014.
[5]
C. R. Schoenberger, “The internet of things,” 2002, [retrieved: June 2015].
[Online]. Available: http://www.forbes.com/global/2002/0318/092.html
[6]
F. Mattern and C. Floerkemeier, “From the internet of computers to the
internet of things,” in From Active Data Management to Event-Based
Systems and More, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, K. Sachs,
I. Petrov, and P. Guerrero, Eds.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, vol.
6462, pp. 242–259.
[7]
E. Lee, “Cyber physical systems: Design challenges,” in Object
Oriented Real-Time Distributed Computing (ISORC), 2008 11th IEEE
International Symposium on, 2008, pp. 363–369.
[8]
H. A. Simon, The Sciences of the Artiﬁcial (3rd Ed.).
Cambridge,
MA, USA: MIT Press, 1996.
[9]
M. Broy, Cyber-Physical Systems: Innovation durch softwareintensive
eingebettete Systeme [Innovation through software-intensive embedded
systems], ser. acatech Diskutiert.
Springer, 2010.
[10]
B. Vogel-Heuser, “Automation als enabler f¨ur industrie 4.0 in der
produktion auf basis von cyber physical systems [automation as an
enabler for industrie 4.0 in production on the basis of cyber physical
systems],” Engineering von der Anforderung bis zum Betrieb, vol. 3,
2013, p. 1.
[11]
F. Hu, Cyber-Physical Systems: Integrated Computing and Engineering
Design.
Taylor & Francis, 2013.
[12]
W. Wahlster, Ed., SemProM: Foundations of Semantic Product Memories
for the Internet of Things.
Heidelberg: Springer, 2013.
[13]
L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The Internet of Things: A survey,”
Computer Networks, vol. 54, no. 15, 2010, pp. 2787–2805.
[14]
H. Chaouchi, Ed., The Internet of Things: Connecting Objects. Hoboken,
NJ, London: Wiley-ISTE, 2010.
[15]
J. Haupert, “DOMeMan: A framework for representation, management,
and utilization of digital object memories,” in 9th International Confer-
ence on Intelligent Environments (IE) 2013, J. C. Augusto et al., Eds.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 84–91.
[16]
A. Kr¨oner, J. Haupert, C. Hauck, M. Deru, and S. Bergweiler, “Fostering
access to data collections in the internet of things,” in UBICOMM 2013,
The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing,
Systems, Services and Technologies, W. Narzt and A. Gordon-Ross,
Eds.
IARIA, 2013, pp. 65–68, best Paper Award.
[17]
L. Abele, L. Ollinger, I. Dahmann, and M. Kleinsteuber, “A decentralized
resource monitoring system using structural, context and process informa-
tion,” in Trends in Intelligent Robotics, Automation and Manufacturing.
Intelligent Robotics, Automation and Manufacturing (IRAM-2012), vol.
330.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 371–378.
[18]
“SMLC Forum: Priorities, Infrastructure, and Collaboration for
Implementation
of
Smart
Manufacturing:
Workshop
Summary
Report,” Workshop Summary Report, 2015, [retrieved: June 2015].
[Online]. Available: https://smartmanufacturingcoalition.org/sites/default/
ﬁles/smlc forum report vf 0.pdf
[19]
L. Wylie, “A Vision of Next Generation MRP II,” Gartner Group, 1990,
pp. 300–339.
[20]
J. Haupert, S. Bergweiler, P. Poller, and C. Hauck, “Irar: Smart intention
recognition and action recommendation for cyber-physical industry
environments,” in Intelligent Environments (IE), 2014 International
Conference, 2014, pp. 124–131.
[21]
A. Kr¨oner et al., “Object Memory Modeling,” Worldwide Web
Consortium, Tech. Rep., 2011, [retrieved: June 2015]. [Online].
Available: http://www.w3.org/2005/Incubator/omm/XGR-omm/
[22]
W. Wahlster, “Semantic Technologies for Mass Customization,” in
Towards the Internet of Services: The THESEUS Research Program,
ser. Cognitive Technologies, W. Wahlster, H.-J. Grallert, S. Wess,
H. Friedrich, and T. Widenka, Eds.
Springer International Publishing,
2014, pp. 3–13.
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

