On Providing Healthy Routes: A Case for Fine-Grained Pollution Measurements 
Using Mobile Sensing
Srinivas Devarakonda, Ruilin Liu, Badri Nath 
Department of Computer Science 
Rutgers University, USA 
e-mail: {skd70, rl475, badri}@cs.rutgers.edu 
 
Abstract— Extended periods of exposure to air pollution is a 
health hazard. For commuters, avoiding polluted areas to the 
extent possible can minimize long-term pollution exposure. 
Hence, it would be desirable to have an option in navigation 
systems to choose a route based on the pollution index of the 
route. However, sufficient data is not available to make an 
informed choice of routes based on pollution index.  This 
choice is predicated upon availability of ubiquitous pollution 
measurements along the route segments. In this paper, we 
present a healthy route recommendation schema that uses 
spatially and temporally dense pollution measurements to 
recommend route options that avoid polluted road segments. 
These healthy routes were evaluated on a neighborhood scale 
using measurements from vehicular-based mobile sensors. 
Experiments using data generated by these mobile sensors 
demonstrate that significant reduction in pollution exposure 
can be achieved by taking a healthy route instead of the 
shortest route or the quickest route. 
Keywords- Air Quality; Mobile Sensing; Healthy Routes; 
Participatory Sensing; Navigation System. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
According to the factsheet published by the World Health 
Organization [1], outdoor air pollution in cities and rural 
areas was estimated to have caused 3.7 million premature 
deaths worldwide in 2012. Major health effects associated 
with outdoor air pollution are respiratory and cardiovascular 
disease, lung cancer, asthma exacerbation and chronic 
bronchitis. Predominant outdoor airborne pollutants that 
contribute to these health effects are particulate matter (PM), 
ozone (O3), nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide and carbon 
monoxide (CO). The effects of pollution depend on many 
factors – the concentration of the pollutant, the state of health 
of the person, the activity of the person and the duration of 
exposure. 
During the 1996 Olympic games in Atlanta, efforts were 
made to reduce downtown traffic congestion. These efforts 
resulted in a prolonged reduction in O3 pollution and 
significantly lower rates of childhood asthma events [7]. The 
results show that reduction in traffic volume reduces air 
pollution measurably and improves the health. Another study 
reveals that utilizing a route away from motorized traffic 
could reduce bicycle commuter’s exposure to particle 
number concentrations [5]. It was also seen that the inhaled 
dosage of pollution not only depends upon the pollution 
levels but also on the activity of the individual [8]. 
These studies show that, to reduce the effects of pollution 
one must either reduce the pollution or make an informed 
decision to avoid polluted areas. The latter serves as the 
motivation for our work in building a navigation system that 
uses spatially and temporally dense (fine-grained) pollution 
measurements in suggesting a healthy route choice instead of 
the shortest or the quickest route choices. 
The healthy route choice is predicated upon the 
availability of accurate pollution measurements along the 
route segments. The difficulty in providing a healthy route 
choice is the lack of accurate ground-truth pollution 
measurements.  The existing air pollution measurements are 
available for a non-representative sample of urban areas. 
Pollution is measured using expensive equipment located at 
a few select locations. Measurements from these stations are 
extrapolated over a large area using dispersion models. This 
data may not truly reflect the ground-truth measurements of 
pollutants. Localized variations in pollutant concentrations 
may not be truly represented by the published measurements 
based on modeled data. Consequently, individual exposure to 
pollutants on this basis is not fully known.  Particularly in 
urban and metropolitan areas, an individual's daily pollution 
exposure levels are not truly quantified. 
The availability of inexpensive sensors and the ubiquity 
of reliable cellular bandwidth have provided an impetus 
towards building and using mobile sensor systems to 
measure fine-grained pollution concentrations. The increase 
in the availability and usage of smartphones has seen an 
increase in the availability of personal pollution sensing 
devices. This gave rise to a new sensing paradigm – 
participatory sensing. The mobile sensing systems and 
personal sensors together are now providing a fine-grained 
pollution sensing opportunity. 
In this paper, we present a navigation schema that 
generates a healthy route choice using fine-grained pollution 
measurements. We evaluated this schema on a neighborhood 
scale. Specifically, we evaluated the following: 
 
 
Is there a measurable reduction in pollution exposure on 
a healthy route as compared to the pollution exposure 
on the shortest route or the quickest route? 
 
What is the cost in terms of time and distance if a 
commuter chooses a healthy route recommendation? 
 
Is there a temporal variability to a healthy route or does 
it stay the same every day in a neighborhood? 
 
How does the choice of the pollutant affect the healthy 
route recommendation? 
 
Does the route recommendation differ depending on the 
mode of transport? 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

In Section II, we present related work. The details of the 
sensor systems deployed on public transportation, as well as 
the sensors used as participatory mobile sensing devices 
contributing to the fine-grained pollution measurements used 
in our study are presented in Section III. Details of route 
generation and the experiments are discussed in Sections IV 
and V, respectively. Results are presented in Section VI. 
During this study, there were several ideas that we identified 
were relevant to the generation of healthy routes but could 
not be investigated as part of the current work. These are 
discussed as future work items in Section VII. We provide 
our conclusions in Section VIII of the paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In an earlier work, Ribeiro et al. developed a healthy 
route planning system for pedestrians and cyclists to promote 
less polluting, economical and more equitable modes of 
transportation [11]. In this work, the healthy routes were 
calculated based on data collected and estimated through the 
simulation of noise levels and pollution indices derived from 
sparse measurement stations using dispersion models. In 
another study, Beheshtitabar et al. built a system that uses an 
alternate cost function to predict the bicycle route choice of a 
commuter based on cost function attributes chosen by the 
commuter [4].  The authors considered two types of cost 
function attributes – link-level factors, such as riding surface, 
riding incline, etc., and route level factors, such as travel 
time, presence of stop signs, etc. Both groups provided an 
alternate routing strategy specifically targeting pedestrians 
and cyclists. In our approach, we developed a system that 
generates fine-grained pollution measurements and used 
them to evaluate healthy navigational route choices for 
cyclists and drivers. We also evaluated the impact of 
choosing a healthy route in terms of increased time or 
distance. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time a 
healthy route navigation system is developed based on 
multiple pollutants using fine-grained measurements and 
evaluated the trade-off between a healthy route choice and 
the quickest or shortest route choices. 
III. 
HEALTHY ROUTING SYSTEM 
In this paper, we evaluate healthy route choices for 
cyclists and drivers with the aim of minimizing a 
commuter’s long-term pollution exposure. The factors that 
influence 
this 
decision 
are: 
the 
on-road 
pollution 
concentrations and the mode of transport. Pollutants that are 
found in higher concentrations near roads include PM, CO, 
oxides 
of 
nitrogen 
(NOx), 
and 
O3. 
Fine-grained 
measurements of these pollutants are required to provide a 
healthy route choice. The pollution considerations are 
different for cyclists and drivers. A cyclist is concerned with 
the ambient air pollution whereas a driver is concerned with 
the pollution inside the vehicle during their respective 
commutes. Irrespective of the modes of transport, a user may 
prefer to minimize exposure to a specific pollutant – for 
example one may choose to minimize PM exposure or to 
minimize O3 exposure. So, the considerations in providing a 
healthy route to a commuter are: on-road pollution 
measurements, inside the vehicle pollution measurements, 
pollution inventory as an input in route calculations and 
route generation. 
A. Pollution Measurements 
Two pollution-sensing models were used to collect the 
measurements in this study: public transportation sensors 
that are designed for use on public transportation vehicles to 
measure ambient pollution and personal mobile sensors that 
are used as participatory sensing devices to measure 
pollution inside vehicles. The sensor deployment schema is 
shown in Fig. 1. 
 
1) 
Public Transportation Sensors  
Public transportation sensor units are custom designed 
and built for use on public transportation infrastructure. We 
assembled sensor units for use on Rutgers University campus 
buses. One of the units was mounted on a car for 
experiments in areas not covered by the campus buses (Fig. 
2). 
These units are equipped with sensors to measure PM, 
CO, O3, nitrogen dioxide (NO2), temperature, humidity and 
pressure (see Table 1 for sensor specifications). The unit is 
powered by the vehicle battery and starts measuring 
pollution when the vehicle is powered up and put into 
service. Global Positioning System (GPS) location data, 
speed, date and time are attached to each pollution data 
point. Accumulated data points are uploaded every minute to 
a server deployed in the cloud. The data upload is done using 
the data channel of the cellular modem in the unit. These 
units provide the ambient pollutant measurements relevant 
for computing the healthy routes applicable to cyclists. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.    Sensor deployment schema. 
 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

TABLE I.  
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SENSOR SPECIFICATION 
Sensor 
Measures 
Range 
Figaro TGS5042 
CO 
0-10000 PPM 
MICS 5525 
CO 
0-1000 PPM 
MICS 2710 
NO2 
0.05 – 5 PPM 
MICS 2610 
O3 
10-1000 PPB 
Shinyei PMS1 
PM 
0.3 μm and larger 
Shinyei PPD42NS 
PM 
1 μm and larger 
Sharp GP2Y1010AU0F 
PM 
0.3 μm – 10 μm 
 
2) 
Personal Mobile Sensors 
As part of the participatory sensing model, we use NODE 
sensors from Variable Technologies for data collection [2]. 
These sensors connect to the user’s IOS or Android 
smartphone over Bluetooth. We developed applications for 
IOS and Android platforms to communicate with and 
manage the NODE devices. GPS location data, speed, date 
and time are added to the pollution measurements collected 
by the smartphone application and are uploaded to the cloud 
server every minute over the phone’s data channel. The user 
may choose to upload this data over Wi-Fi if data bandwidth 
is a constraint. 
For our experiments, we use the NODE device to 
measure CO, temperature, pressure and humidity (see Table 
2 for sensor specifications). The personal mobile sensor, 
when conveniently mounted inside a vehicle in front of the 
vent during the user’s commute, can measure CO levels in 
the user’s personal space (Fig. 3). In an earlier work, we 
have shown that the measurements inside the vehicle 
correlate well with outdoor values [6].  The personal mobile 
sensors provide the measurements relevant for computing the 
healthy routes applicable to drivers. 
 
 
TABLE II.  
PERSONAL MOBILE SENSOR SPECIFICATION 
Sensor 
Measures 
Range 
NODE 
CO 
0-400 PPM 
 
The public transportation sensors and the personal mobile 
sensors send pollution data to a cloud server. We use 
Amazon Web Services (AWS) platform [12] to host our 
server in the cloud. The pollution measurements are stored in 
a PostgreSQL database [13]. The database has PostGIS [14] 
extension installed to add support for geographic objects and 
to allow location queries to be run. Data is post-processed to 
remove outliers and to apply calibration curves. The 
resulting dataset consists of pollution measurements, time, 
GPS location, and speed at the time of the measurement. 
Information whether the measurement is from inside a car or 
outside is also stored so that relevant measurement can be 
used in route calculations for cyclists and drivers. The cloud 
server provides these pollution measurements to users 
through a Web portal, as well as through the Android and 
IOS applications. 
IV. 
ROUTE GENERATION BASED ON POLLUTION 
MEASUREMENTS 
A neighborhood scale road segment graph was created 
for the Rutgers University College Avenue campus in New 
Brunswick, New Jersey. This is a directed graph with road 
intersections as graph nodes and roads as graph edges. Each 
road segment has a cost associated with it which includes the 
distance of the segment used for the shortest path calculation, 
the segment travel time used for the quickest path calculation 
and the average pollution index used for the healthiest path 
calculation. In our schema, we used PM and CO 
measurements for the pollution exposure values so that the 
healthy route can be calculated based on average PM or CO 
concentrations per road segment. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.   Personal mobile sensor mounted in a car near the vent. 
 
 
Figure 2.   Public transportation sensor mounted on a car for 
experimentation. 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

For each road segment, we stored the segment length, 
travel time, average PM and average CO concentrations per 
unit time. These values are obtained directly from the 
pollution inventory generated by the public transportation 
sensors and the personal mobile sensors. Segment lengths 
and segment travel times are used to calculate the shortest 
paths and the quickest paths, respectively. To calculate the 
healthiest path, the pollution load on each segment is 
required. A segment’s pollution load at any given time is 
calculated based on the average pollution on the segment per 
unit time and the travel time on the segment. 
We implemented Dijkstra lowest cost path algorithm 
with segment distance, segment travel time and segment 
pollution index as the costs to compute the shortest, quickest 
and healthiest paths, respectively. 
V. 
EXPERIMENTS 
Experiments were conducted in Rutgers University 
College Avenue campus in New Brunswick, New Jersey. 
Besides Rutgers University campus, the area has a transit 
train station, downtown businesses and a residential area. 
The neighborhood has a mix of pedestrians, cyclists and 
vehicular traffic. Because of this variability in the traffic mix, 
we chose this neighborhood for our experiments. 
We measured CO concentrations inside the car using the 
personal mobile sensors placed near the car vent. The vent 
was set to a constant speed throughout the experiments. All 
the car windows were closed during data collection. PM, 
CO, NO2 and O3 outside the car were measured using a 
public transportation sensor mounted on the car. Inside-car 
measurements were used for route calculations for drivers 
and outside PM and CO measurements were used for route 
calculation for cyclists. Vehicular travel time on each 
segment was obtained from the measurements. Due to lack 
of transit data for cyclists in the test area, we assumed a 
constant speed of 10 mph in our route calculations for 
cyclists. Data was collected over a period of three days. 
VI. 
RESULTS 
During the tests, we observed significant temporal and 
spatial variations in the pollution measurements.  Hence, a 
choice exists in selecting routes that avoid polluted road 
segments. The CO measurement data from two test runs on 
two different days shows the spatial and temporal variations 
in measurements (Fig. 4). On the map in Fig. 4, we display 
the CO data in three ranges instead of showing the discrete 
measurements so that spatial variations in pollution can be 
clearly differentiated. The graph in the inset shows CO 
measurements in parts per million (PPM) over time. Periodic 
data identifiers from the x-axis of the plot in the inset are 
marked on the map to show the corresponding location of the 
measurements.  
The PM measurements were relatively steady due to a 
series of snowstorms in the area (Fig. 5). We believe that the 
few high readings observed were due to the re-entrained 
deicing treatment on the roads. Even though these readings 
had very little variation, we observed that average segment 
level PM concentrations showed variability so we went 
ahead and used these measurements in our healthy route 
evaluation. On the map in Fig. 5, we display the PM data in 
three ranges instead of showing the discrete measurements 
so that spatial variations in pollution can be clearly 
differentiated. The graph in the inset shows PM 
measurements in milligrams per cubic meter (mg/cum) over 
time. Periodic data identifiers from the x-axis of the plot in 
the inset are marked on the map to show the corresponding 
location of the measurements.  
 
A. Route choice and Pollution 
Using the inside-car CO measurements, we computed the 
shortest, quickest and healthiest paths between an arbitrary 
                             
 
Figure 4.    CO measurements in College Avenue campus during two test runs on two different days. Inset in each of the maps shows the time series plot of 
CO measurements. Periodic X-axis values are marked on map to correlate measurements shown in inset to corresponding location. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

set of origin and destination (O/D) pairs. The exposure cost 
for the three route choices for 30 O/D pairs was calculated 
and plotted as scatter plot (Fig. 6). The CO exposure in the 
case of the shortest path and the quickest path has always 
been more than the exposure on a healthy route. The 
exposure is higher on the shortest path as compared to the 
exposure on the quickest path. It can be seen from Fig. 6 
that, the healthy route’s CO exposure of 10.19 PPM is much 
less than the corresponding exposure values of 30.2 PPM for 
the shortest path (data point marked as 1) and 17.0 PPM for 
the quickest path (data point marked as 2). 
We quantified the percentage increase in the cumulative 
CO exposure on the shortest path and the quickest path as 
compared to the healthiest path for the 30 O/D pairs we 
evaluated (Fig. 7). It is seen that, on average there is an 
increase of 160% in CO exposure if a shortest path is chosen. 
There was one instance where a 400% increase in CO 
exposure was recorded. In the case of the quickest route, the 
increase in CO exposure is not as predominant as in the case 
of the shortest path. On average, there is an increase of 45% 
in CO exposure when the quickest route is chosen. There 
were several instances of the quickest route where only a 
marginal increase in CO exposure was observed over the 
corresponding CO exposures on the healthiest route. 
 
B. Cost of Healthy Route 
In this section, we discuss the cost of the healthy route 
choice in terms of increase in time and distance of travel. We 
will use the same data set from the 30 O/D pairs we used 
before. 
It is observed that in all the 30 O/D pairs we evaluated, 
there has been an increase in the distance and time of travel 
(Fig. 8). On average, there is an increase of about 8-9% in 
the distance travelled and about 30% in the time of travel. 
The maximum increase in the distance is about 50% and in 
time it is about 85%. 
There is an additional cost to a healthy route choice due 
to the increased time and distance of travel. However, it is 
the choice of an individual – whether the benefits of a 
healthy route outweigh the additional costs of increased 
travel time and distance. There could be another choice 
provided to the user by the routing implementation to accept 
a threshold for the increased travel time and/or distance, 
beyond which the healthy route recommendation is not 
provided.  
 
C. Healthy Route – Temporal Dependency 
Pollution index for a route varies over time. To establish 
this temporal dependency, we calculated the healthy routes 
for the same O/D pairs (Fig. 9) using the CO measurements 
inside the car taken over two days. 
It is seen that the healthy routes are different on the two 
days. Hence, static profiles of routes are not sufficient. Tests 
with different O/D pairs yielded similar results. The quickest 
routes were also different but we have not shown them in 
Fig. 9 for clarity. 
 
 
Figure 5.    PM measurements in College Avenue Campus. Inset 
shows the time series plot of PM measurements. Periodic X-axis 
values are marked on map to correlate measurements shown in inset 
to corresponding location. 
 
 
Figure 6.   CO exposure on healthy route vs. CO exposure on shortest 
and quickest route. X-axis values for points 1 and 2 show the CO 
exposure values for shortest and quickest paths for a healthy route’s 
CO exposure of 10.19 PPM.  
 
Figure 7.   Increase in cumulative CO exposure in shortest and 
quickest paths over healthiest path in 30 origin-destination pairs. 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

D. Healthy Route – Dependency on Pollutant 
A user may prefer to base their healthy route choice on a 
specific pollutant. We evaluated this scenario using pollution 
measurements outside the car using PM and CO 
measurements for a cyclist. Currently, we only have CO 
measurements inside the car, so we used outside PM and CO 
measurements to evaluate this scenario. 
Fig. 10 shows the route recommendation for a cyclist 
based on CO and PM measurements.  We show the results 
for one O/D pair only, even though we observed similar 
results for other O/D pairs. A similar recommendation could 
not be evaluated for drivers due to lack of fine-grained 
measurements for pollutants other than CO.  
E. Healthy Route – Mode of Transport 
The healthy route recommendations for cyclists and 
drivers did not show any variation in the routes. The 
pollution exposure depends on the amount of time spent on a 
road segment. So, we think that the use of a constant speed 
of 10 mph in our calculations may be affecting the route 
calculations. Additional evaluation needs to be done when 
transit data becomes available for cyclists. Alternatively, we 
need to choose a test location where transit data for cyclists 
is available. 
F. Trade Off – Healthy Route and its Cost 
The left part of Fig. 11 shows the comparison between 
the increase in travel time on a healthy route and the increase 
in pollution on the quickest route. There is no clear 
distinction to choose one option over the other. A threshold 
function can help wherein an increase in travel time above a 
threshold on a healthy route - chooses the healthy route over 
the quickest route. 
Fig. 11 shows the tradeoff between pollution exposure, 
distance and time. The right side of Fig. 11 shows the 
increase in pollution exposure along the shortest path plotted 
along with the increase in distance on the healthiest path. 
The proportional increase in pollution exposure far out-
weighs the increase in travel distance on a healthy route. 
VII. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we presented fine-grained pollution data as 
a choice in route selection.  However, we have not discussed 
validation methods for our healthy route approach. 
Validation needed a large team divided into producers of fine 
grained pollution measurements and consumers of healthy 
route recommendations with a view to validate the 
correctness of the route recommendations. We did not have a 
large team at our disposal during these tests to conduct 
validation of our approach during our experimentation. 
However, during our tests we observed that the segment 
level pollution load and segment travel time remained 
relatively constant for a period of about 15-20 minutes. So, 
we use this to observe that our route recommendations are at 
least valid for this duration. A rigorous validation of our 
route recommendation will be taken up as part of a future 
work using data from sensors mounted on campus buses and 
participatory sensing using student groups.  
 
 
Figure 8.   Percentage increase in distance and time on a healthy 
route corresponding to the shortest and quickest routes. 
 
 
Figure 9.   Healthiest route recommendations on two different 
days. Shortest route is also shown. Quickest route is omitted for 
clarity. 
 
 
Figure 10.   Distinct healthy route recommendation for cyclists 
based on based on different pollutants. 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The healthy route recommendation depends on the 
availability of fine-grained pollution measurements. For 
areas with no pollution data, the available measurements in 
the near vicinity can be used to extrapolate on a micro scale 
based on the approach discussed by Ulyanik et al., [10]. 
Participatory sensing may not be contributing to fine-
grained measurements in all areas. Using the model 
developed by Hudda et al., [9] outside the car pollution 
measurements can be used to derive the pollution exposure 
inside the vehicle.  The inside-car measurements depend 
upon the comfort settings in the vehicle (ventilation settings, 
opening of windows, etc.) and the age of the vehicle. The 
model caters to all these variables. Similarly, it must be 
possible to derive outside car measurements based on 
measurements from inside the car. However, this needs 
further work in the future. 
A healthy route recommendation need not be a static 
route generated at the start of the trip. Current navigation 
systems are capable of dynamic route updates based on road 
and traffic conditions. With the availability of fine-grained 
pollution measurements, it is trivial to reuse the existing 
dynamic route update capability to healthy routes as well. 
Our study has been confined to a neighborhood scale due 
to lack of fine-grained pollution data. Even though our work 
is based on neighborhood scale data, we feel it can be easily 
extended as fine-grained measurements become available 
over a larger area. Consequently, the demand on existing 
navigation systems is additional storage to store per segment 
pollution attributes and the additional computation to 
generate healthy routes. 
The sensitivity of healthy routes to seasonal variations 
needs additional study. The dependency on local weather 
conditions and its influence on the healthy route choice will 
require additional work in the future. 
We did not include pedestrians in the current study. A 
pedestrian’s pollution exposure depends on the mobility 
patterns and wait patterns in an urban setting. A separate 
study is required to provide similar insight into a pedestrian’s 
pollution exposure during a day. 
Once a healthy route recommendation is made, it will be 
interesting to study how users behave. For example, given a 
healthy route choice, how many cyclists and drivers adopt it 
at the cost of increased distance or time? 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
This paper presents a navigation system to provide 
healthy route recommendations using fine-grained pollution 
measurements contributed by participatory mobile sensors 
and public transportation sensors. We evaluated this model 
on a neighborhood scale and showed that the healthy route 
provides significant improvement in the pollution load on an 
individual when compared to the pollution loads on the 
shortest route or the quickest route. In addition, we also show 
that fine-grained measurements are essential for providing 
the healthy route recommendations daily. The healthy route 
recommendation need not be based on a single pollutant but 
can be a choice of pollutants. We evaluated this model for 
two modes of transportation, namely bicycles and 
automobiles. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported in part by National Science 
Foundation (NSF) Grant CNS-1111811.  
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] WHO factsheet http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs313/en/ 
[retrieved: September, 2017]  
[2] NODE sensors http://www.variableinc.com/gas-sensing [retrieved: 
September, 2017]  
[3] D. Allemann and M. Raubal, "Towards health-optimal routing in 
urban areas," In Proc. Second ACM SIGSPATIAL International 
Workshop on the Use of GIS in Public Health, pp. 56-59, 2013. 
[4] E. Beheshtitabar, S. Aguilar Ríos, D. König-Hollerwöger, Z. Svatý 
and C. Rydergren, "Route choice modeling for bicycle trips," 
International Journal for Traffic and Transport Engineering 4, pp. 
194-209, 2014. 
[5] T. Cole-Hunter et al., "Utility of an alternative bicycle commute route 
of lower proximity to motorised traffic in decreasing exposure to 
ultra-fine particles, respiratory symptoms and airway inflammation–a 
structured exposure experiment," Environmental health 12, no. 1, 
2013. 
 
Figure 11.   (Left) Percent increase in travel time for healthy route vs. percent increase in pollution for quickest route. (Right) Percent increase in 
distance for healthy route vs. percent increase in pollution for shortest route. 
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

[6] S. Devarakonda et al., “Real-time air quality monitoring through 
mobile sensing in metropolitan areas,” In Proc. Second ACM 
SIGKDD International Workshop on Urban Computing, 2013. 
[7] M. Friedman, K. E. Powell, L. Hutwagner, L. M. Graham, and W. 
Gerald Teague, "Impact of changes in transportation and commuting 
behaviors during the 1996 Summer Olympic Games in Atlanta on air 
quality and childhood asthma," Jama 285, no. 7, pp. 897-905, 2001. 
[8] K. Hu, T. Davison, A. Rahman, and V. Sivaraman, "Air Pollution 
Exposure Estimation and Finding Association with Human Activity 
using Wearable Sensor Network," In Proc. MLSDA 2014 2nd 
Workshop on Machine Learning for Sensory Data Analysis, 2014.  
[9] N. Hudda and S. A. Fruin, "Models for predicting the ratio of 
particulate pollutant concentrations inside vehicles to roadways," 
Environmental science & technology 47.19, pp. 11048-11055, 2013. 
[10] I. Uyanik, A. Khatri, P. Tsiamyrtzis and I. Pavlidis, “Design and 
Usage of an Ozone Mapping App,” In Proc. Wireless Health 2014 on 
National Institutes of Health (WH '14). ACM, New York, NY, USA,  
DOI=10.1145/2668883.2668885 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145 
/2668883.2668885 
[11] P. Ribeiro and J. F. G. Mendes, "Route planning for soft modes of 
transport–Healthy routes," In 17th International Conference on Urban 
Transport and the Environment, pp. 677-688, 2011. 
[12] Amazon Web Services details https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/details/ 
[retrieved: October, 2017]  
[13] PostgreSQL database details https://www.postgresql.org [retrieved: 
October, 2017] 
[14] PostGIS spatial and geographic objects for PostgreSQL database 
http://postgis.net [retrieved: October, 2017]  
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

