Combining Edge Computing and Blockchains for Flexibility and Performance in 
Industrial Automation 
Mauro Isaja  
Research & Development  
Engineering Ingegneria Informatica SpA 
(ENG) 
Rome, Italy 
e-mail: mauro.isaja@eng.it 
John Soldatos  
IoT Group  
Athens Information Technology  
(AIT) 
Maroussi, Greece 
e-mail: jsol@ait.gr 
Volkan Gezer  
Innovative Factory Systems (IFS) 
German Research Center for Artificial 
Intelligence (DFKI)  
Kaiserslautern, Germany 
e-mail: Volkan.Gezer@dfki.de
  
 
Abstract — The advent of Industry 4.0 has given rise to the 
introduction of new industrial automation architectures that 
emphasize the use of digital technologies. In this paper, we 
introduce a novel reference architecture (RA) for industrial 
automation, which leverages the benefits of edge computing, 
while using blockchain technologies for flexible, scalable and 
reliable configuration and orchestration of automation 
workflows and distributed data analytics. The presented RA is 
unique in blending the merits of blockchains and edge 
computing, while being compliant with emerging standards for 
industrial automation, such as RAMI4.0 and the RA of the 
Industrial Internet-Consortium. 
Keywords-Factory automation; edge computing; blockchain; 
RAMI4.0; IIRA; Industry4.0. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The vision of future manufacturing foresees flexible and 
hyper-efficient plants that will enable manufacturers to 
support the transition from conventional “made-to-stock” 
production models, to the emerging customized ones such as 
“made-to-order”, “configure-to-order” and “engineering-to-
order”. Flexibility in automation is a key prerequisite to 
supporting the latter production models, as it facilitates 
manufacturers to change automation configurations and 
rapidly adopt new automation technologies, as a means of 
supporting variation in production without any essential 
increase in production costs.  
In order to support flexibility in automation, the industrial 
automation community has been exploring options for the 
virtualization of the automation pyramid, as part of the 
transformation of mainstream centralized automation models 
(like ISA-95) to more distributed ones. Several research and 
development initiatives have introduced decentralized 
factory automation solutions based on technologies like 
intelligent agents [1] [2] and Service Oriented Architectures 
(SOA) [3] [4]. These initiatives produced proof-of-concept 
implementations 
that 
highlighted 
the 
benefits 
of 
decentralized automation in terms of flexibility. However, 
they are still not being widely deployed in manufacturing 
plants, mainly due to that the cost-benefit ratio of such 
solutions is perceived as unfavourable. Nevertheless, the 
vision of decentralizing the factory automation pyramid is 
still alive, as this virtualization can potentially make 
production systems more flexible and agile, increase product 
quality and reduce cost.  
With the advent of the fourth industrial revolution 
(Industry 4.0) and the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), 
decentralization is being revisited in the light of the 
integration of Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) with cloud 
computing infrastructures. Therefore, several cloud-based 
applications are deployed and used in factories, which 
leverage the capacity and scalability of the cloud while 
fostering 
supply 
chain 
collaboration 
and 
virtual 
manufacturing chains. Early implementations have also 
revealed the limitations of the cloud in terms of efficient 
bandwidth usage and its ability to support real-time 
operations, including operations close to the field.  
More recently, the edge computing paradigm has been 
explored in order to alleviate the limitations of cloud-centric 
architectures. Edge computing architectures move some part 
of the system’s overall computing power from the cloud to 
its edge nodes, i.e., on the field or in close proximity to it –as 
a means of [5], [6]: 
 
Saving bandwidth and storage, as edge nodes can filter 
data streams from the field in order to get rid of 
information without value for industrial automation. 
 
Enabling low-latency and proximity processing, since 
information can be processed close to the field.  
 
Providing enhanced scalability, through supporting 
decentralized storage and processing that scales better 
than cloud processing.  
 
Supporting shopfloor isolation and privacy-friendliness, 
since edge nodes at the shopfloor are isolated from the 
rest of the network.  
These benefits make edge computing suitable for specific 
classes of use cases in factories, including: 
 
Large 
scale 
distributed 
applications, 
typically 
applications that involve multiple plants or factories, 
which process streams from numerous devices at scale. 
 
Near-real-time applications, which analyse data close to 
the field or even control Cyber-Physical Systems such as 
smart machines and industrial robots.   
As a result, the application of edge computing to factory 
automation is extremely promising, since it empowers 
decentralization in a way that still supports real-time 
interactions and scalable analytics. It’s therefore no accident 
that there are ongoing efforts to provide edge computing 
implementations for industrial automation in general and 
factory automation in particular. Furthermore, reference 
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

architectures for IIoT and industrial automation exist, which 
highlight the importance of edge computing for compliant 
implementations. In this article, we present a reference 
architecture (RA) for factory automation based on edge 
computing, which has been specified as part of the H2020 
FAR-EDGE project [11]. The FAR-EDGE RA and 
associated compliant implementations comprise some unique 
features and capabilities, which differentiate them from other 
on-going implementations of edge computing for factory 
automation. Most of these unique features concern the 
exploitation of Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT, today 
commonly referred to as “blockchain”) as a means of 
representing automation and data analytics processes based 
on Smart Contracts. These can be dynamically configured, 
stored securely and executed in a distributed way, enabling 
flexibility and scalability in factory automation processes. 
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2, following 
this introduction, presents state-of-the-art specifications and 
implementations of the edge computing paradigm for factory 
automation. It also positions FAR-EDGE against them. 
Section 3 introduces the FAR-EDGE RA, from a functional 
and structural perspective. Section 4 illustrates a number of 
automation use cases and the way in which they can be 
supported by FAR-EDGE compliant systems. Finally, 
Section 5 concludes the paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Acknowledging the benefits of edge computing for 
industrial automation, standards development organizations 
(SDOs) have specified relevant reference architectures, while 
industrial organizations are already working towards 
providing tangible edge computing implementations.  
SDOs such as the OpenFog Consortium and the 
Industrial Internet Consortium (IIC) have produced 
Reference Architectures. The RA of the OpenFog 
Consortium prescribes a high-level architecture for internet 
of things systems, which covers industrial IoT use cases. On 
the other hand, the RA of the IIC [7] outlines the structuring 
principles of systems for industrial applications. The IIC RA 
is not limited to edge computing, but rather based on edge 
computing principles in terms of its implementation. It 
addresses a wide range of industrial use cases in multiple 
sectors, including factory automation. These RAs have been 
recently released and their reference implementations are 
still in their early stages. 
A reference implementation of the IIC RA’s edge 
computing functionalities for factory automation is provided 
as part of IIC’s edge intelligence testbed [8]. This testbed 
provides a proof-of-concept implementation of edge 
computing functionalities on the shopfloor. The focus of the 
testbed is on configurable edge computing environments, 
which enable the development and testing of leading edge 
systems and algorithms for edge analytics. Moreover, Dell-
EMC has recently announced the EdgeX Foundry 
framework [9], which is a vendor-neutral open source project 
hosted by the Linux Foundation that builds a common open 
framework for IIoT edge computing. The framework is 
influenced by the above-listed reference architectures and is 
expected to be released in 2017. Other vendors are also 
incorporating support for edge devices and edge gateways in 
their cloud platforms.  
FAR-EDGE is uniquely positioned in the landscape of 
edge computing solutions for factory automation. In 
particular, the FAR-EDGE architecture is aligned to the IIC 
RA, while exploiting concepts from other RAs and standards 
such as the OpenFog RA and RAMI 4.0 (Reference 
Architecture Model Industry 4.0) [10]. However, FAR-
EDGE explores pathways and offers functionalities that are 
not addressed by other specification and reference 
implementations. In particular, it researches the applicability 
of disruptive key enabling technologies like DLT and Smart 
Contracts in factory automation. DLT, while being well 
understood and thoroughly tested in mission-critical areas 
like digital currencies (e.g., Bitcoin), have never been 
applied before to industrial systems. FAR-EDGE aims at 
demonstrating how a pool of specific Ledger Services built 
on a generic DLT platform can enable decentralized factory 
automation in an effective, reliable, scalable and secure way. 
Ledger Services will be responsible for sharing process state 
and enforcing business rules across the computing nodes of a 
distributed system, thus permitting virtual automation and 
analytics processes that span multiple nodes – or, from a 
bottom-up perspective, autonomous nodes that cooperate to a 
common goal. This is the project’s unique contribution, 
which sets it apart from similar efforts worldwide.  
III. 
FAR-EDGE RA OVEVIEW 
The FAR-EDGE RA is the conceptual framework that 
drives the design and the implementation of the project’s 
automation platform based on edge computing and DLT 
technologies. As an RA, its first goal is communication, i.e. 
providing a terse representation of concepts, roles, structure 
and behaviour of the system under analysis for the sake of 
dissemination and ecosystem-building. Its second goal 
concerns reuse: exploiting best practices and lessons learned 
in similar contexts by the global community of system 
architects. 
 
Figure 1.  Overview of the FAR-EDGE RA 
The FAR-EDGE RA is aligned to IIC’s RA concepts 
and described from two architectural viewpoints: the 
functional viewpoint and the structural viewpoint, as 
outlined in following paragraphs.  
An overall architecture representation that includes all 
elements is provided in Figure 1. 
 
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

A. Functional Viewpoint 
According to the FAR-EDGE RA, the functionality of a 
factory automation platform can be decomposed into three 
high-level Functional Domains - Automation, Analytics and 
Simulation – and four Crosscutting (XC) Functions – 
Management, Security, Digital Models and Field Abstraction 
& Data Routing. To better clarify the scope of such topics, 
we have tried to map them to similar IIRA concepts. 
Functional Domains and XC Functions are orthogonal to 
structural Tiers: the implementation of a given functionality 
may – but is not required to – span multiple Tiers, so that in 
the overall architecture representation Functional Domains 
appear as vertical lanes drawn across horizontal layers. In 
Figure 2, the relationship between Functional Domains, their 
users and the factory environment is highlighted by arrows 
showing the flow of data and of control. 
Automation Domain: The FAR-EDGE Automation 
domain includes functionalities supporting automated control 
and automated configuration of physical production 
processes. While the meaning of “control” in this context is 
straightforward, “configuration” is worth a few additional 
words. Automated configuration is the enabler of plug-and-
play factory equipment (better known as plug-and-produce), 
which in turn is a key technology for mass-customization, as 
it allows a faster and less expensive adjustments of the 
production process. The Automation domain requires a 
bidirectional monitoring/control communication channel 
with the Field, typically with low bandwidth but very strict 
timing requirements (tight control loop). In some advanced 
scenarios, Automation is controlled – to some extent – by the 
results of Analytics and/or Simulation. The Automation 
domain partially maps to the Control domain of the IIRA.  
 
 
Figure 2.  FAR-EDGE RA Functional Domains 
Analytics Domain:  The FAR-EDGE Analytics domain 
includes functionalities for gathering and processing Field 
data for a better understanding of production processes, i.e. a 
factory-focused business intelligence. This typically requires 
a high-bandwidth Field communication channel, as the 
volume of information that needs to be transferred in a given 
time unit may be substantial. On the other hand, channel 
latency tends to be less critical than in the Automation 
scenario. The Analytics domain provides intelligence to its 
users, but these are not necessarily limited to humans or 
vertical applications (e.g., a predictive maintenance 
solution): the Automation and Simulation domains, if 
properly configured, can both make direct use of the 
outcome of data analysis algorithms. In the case of 
Automation, the behaviour of a workflow might change in 
response to changes detected in the controlled process – e.g., 
a process drift caused by the progressive wear of machinery 
or by the quality of assembly components being lower than 
usual. In the case of Simulation, data analysis can be used to 
update the parameters of a digital model (as illustrated in the 
following section). The Analytics domain matches perfectly 
the Information domain of the IIRA, except that the latter is 
receiving data from the Field through the mediation of 
Control functionalities. 
 
 Simulation Domain: The FAR-EDGE Simulation 
domain includes functionalities for simulating the behaviour 
of physical production processes for the purpose of 
optimization or of testing what/if scenarios at minimal cost 
and risk and without any impact of regular shop activities. 
Simulation requires digital models of plants and processes to 
be in-sync with the real world objects they represent. As the 
real world is subject to change, models should reflect those 
changes. For instance, the model of a machine assumes a 
given value of electric power / energy consumption, but the 
actual values will diverge as the real machine wears down. 
To detect this gap and correct the model accordingly, raw 
data from the Field (direct) or complex analysis algorithms 
(from Analytics) can be used.  
Crosscutting Functions: Crosscutting Functions address 
common specific concerns. Their implementation affects 
several Functional Domains and Tiers. They include. 
 
Management: Low-level functions for monitoring and 
commissioning/decommissioning of individual system 
modules.. 
 
Security: Functions securing the system against the 
unruly behaviour of its user and of connected systems. 
These include digital identity management and 
authentication, access control policy management and 
enforcement, communication and data encryption.  
 
Digital Models: Functions for the management of 
digital models and their synchronization with the real-
world entities they represent. Digital modes are a shared 
asset, as they may be used as the basis for automated 
configuration, simulation and field abstraction – e.g., 
semantic 
interoperability 
of 
heterogeneous 
field 
systems.  
 
Field Abstraction & Data Routing: Functions that 
ensure the connectivity of business logic (FAR-EDGE 
RA Functional Domains) to the Field, abstracting away 
the technical details – like device discovery and 
communication protocols. Data routing refers to the 
capability of establishing direct producer-consumer 
channels on demand, optimized for unidirectional 
massive data streaming – e.g., for feeding Analytics.  
 
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

B. Structural Viewpoint 
The FAR-EDGE RA uses two classes of concepts for 
describing the structure of a system: Scopes and Tiers. 
Scopes are very simple and straightforward: they define a 
coarse mapping of system elements to either the factory - 
Plant Scope - or the broader world of corporate IT - 
Enterprise Ecosystem Scope. Examples of elements in Plant 
Scope are machinery, Field devices, workstations, SCADA 
and MES systems, and any software running in the factory 
data centre. The Enterprise Ecosystem Scope comprises ERP 
and PLM systems and any application or service shared 
across multiple factories or even companies – e.g., supply 
chain members.  
Tiers are a more detailed and technical-oriented 
classification of deployment concerns. They can be easily 
mapped to scopes, but they provide more insight into the 
relationship between system components. This kind of 
classification is quite similar to OpenFog RA deployment 
viewpoint, except for the fact that FAR-EDGE Tiers are 
industry-oriented while OpenFog ones are not. FAR-EDGE 
Tiers are one of the most innovative traits of its RA, and are 
described in following paragraphs. 
The Field Tier is the bottom layer of the FAR-EDGE 
RA and is populated by Edge Nodes (EN), i.e. any kind of 
device that is connected to the digital world on one side and 
to the real world to the other. ENs can have embedded 
intelligence (e.g., a smart machine) or not (e.g., a sensor or 
actuator). The FAR-EDGE RA honours this difference: 
Smart Objects are ENs with on board computing capabilities, 
Connected Devices are those without. The Smart Object is 
where local control logic runs: it’s a semi-autonomous entity 
that does not need to interact frequently with the upper layers 
of the system.  As shown in Figure 3. ENs is actually located 
over field devices.  
The Field is also populated by entities of the real world, 
i.e., those physical elements of production processes that are 
not directly connected to the network, and as such are not 
considered as ENs: Things, People and Environments. These 
are represented in the digital world by some kind of EN 
wrapper. For instance, room temperature (Environment) is 
measured by an IoT sensor (Connected Device), the 
proximity of a worker (People) to a physical checkpoint 
location is published by an RFID wearable and detected by 
an RFID Gate (Connected Device), while a conveyor belt 
(Thing) is operated by a PLC (Smart Object). 
The Field Tier is in Plant Scope. Individual ENs are 
connected to the digital world in the upper Tiers either 
directly by means of the shopfloor’s LAN, or indirectly 
through some special-purpose local network (e.g., WSN) that 
is bridged to the former. From the RAMI 4.0 perspective, the 
FAR-EDGE Field Tier corresponds to the Field Device and 
Control Device levels on the Hierarchy axis (IEC-
62264/IEC-61512), while the entities there contained are 
positioned across the Asset and Integration Layers. 
The Edge Tier is the core of the FAR-EDGE RA. It 
hosts those parts of Functional Domains and XC Functions 
that can leverage the edge computing model, i.e., software 
designed to run on multiple, distributed computing nodes 
placed close to the field, which may include resource 
constrained nodes. The Edge Tier is populated by Edge 
Gateways (EG): computing devices that act as a digital world 
gateway to the real world of the Field. These machines are 
typically more powerful than the average intelligent EN 
(e.g., blade servers) and are connected to a fast LAN. 
Strategically positioned close to physical systems, the EG 
can execute Edge Processes: time- and bandwidth-critical 
functionality having local scope. For instance, the 
orchestration of a complex physical process that is monitored 
and operated by a number of sensors, actuators (Connected 
Devices) and embedded controllers (Smart Objects); or the 
real-time analysis of a huge volume of live data that is 
streamed from a nearby Field source. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Edge Tier in the FAR-EDGE RA 
Deploying computing power and data storage in close 
proximity to where it is actually used is a standard best 
practice in the industry. However, this technique basically 
requires that the scope of individual subsystems is narrow 
(e.g., a single work station). If instead the critical 
functionality applies to a wider scenario (e.g., an entire plant 
or enterprise), it must be either deployed at a higher level 
(e.g., the Cloud) – thus losing all benefits of proximity – or 
run as multiple parallel instances, each focused on its own 
narrow scope. In the latter case, new problems may arise: 
keeping global variables in-sync across all local instances of 
a given process, reaching a consensus among local instances 
on a global truth, collecting aggregated results from 
independent copies of a data analytics algorithm, etc. The 
need for peer nodes of a distributed system to mutually 
exchange information is recognized by the OpenFog RA. 
The innovative approach in FAR-EDGE is to define a 
specific system layer – the Ledger Tier – that is responsible 
for the implementation of such mechanisms and to guarantee 
an appropriate Quality of Service level. 
The Edge Tier is in Plant Scope, located above the Field 
Tier and below the Cloud Tier. Individual EGs are connected 
with each other and with the north side of the system, i.e., the 
globally-scoped digital world in the Cloud Tier – by means 
of the factory LAN, and to the south side through the 
shopfloor LAN. From the RAMI 4.0 perspective, the FAR-
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

EDGE Edge Tier corresponds to the Station and Work 
Centre levels on the Hierarchy axis (IEC-62264/IEC-61512), 
while the EGs there contained are positioned across the 
Asset, Integration and Communication Layers. Edge 
Processes running on EGs, however, map to the Information 
and Functional Layers. 
The Ledger Tier is a complete abstraction: it does not 
correspond to any physical deployment environment, and 
even the entities that it “contains” are abstract. Such entities 
are Ledger Services, which implement decentralized 
business logic as smart contracts on top of a distributed 
ledger. Ledger Services are transaction-oriented: each 
service call that needs to modify the shared state of a system 
must be evaluated and approved by Peer Nodes before taking 
effect. Similarly to “regular” services, Ledger Services are 
implemented as executable code; however, they are not 
actually executed on any specific computing node: each 
service call is executed in parallel by all Peer Nodes that 
happen to be online at the moment, which then need to reach 
a consensus on its validity. Most importantly, even the 
executable code of Ledger Services can be deployed and 
updated online by means of a distributed ledger transaction.  
Ledger Services implement the part of Functional 
Domains and/or XC Functions that enable the edge 
computing model, through providing support for their Edge 
Service counterpart. For example, the Analytics Functional 
Domain may define a local analytics function (Edge Service) 
that must be executed in parallel on several EGs, and also a 
corresponding service call (Ledger Service) that will be 
invoked from the former each time new or updated local 
results become available, so that all results can converge into 
an aggregated data set. In this case, aggregation logic is 
included in the Ledger Service. Another use case may come 
from the Automation Functional Domain, demonstrating 
how the Ledger Tier can also be leveraged from the Field: a 
smart 
machine 
with 
embedded 
plug-and-produce 
functionality can ask permission to join the system by 
making a service call and then, having received green light, 
can dynamically deploy its own specific Ledger Service for 
publishing its state and external high-level commands. 
The Ledger Tier lays across the Plant and the Enterprise 
Ecosystem Scopes, as it can provide support to any Tier. The 
physical location of Peer Nodes, which implement smart 
contracts and the distributed ledger, is not defined by the 
FAR-EDGE RA as it depends on implementation choices.   
From the RAMI 4.0 perspective, the FAR-EDGE Ledger 
Tier corresponds to the Work Centre, Enterprise and 
Connected World levels on the Hierarchy axis (IEC-
62264/IEC-61512), while the Ledger Services are positioned 
across the Information and Functional Layers. 
The Cloud Tier is the top layer of the FAR-EDGE RA, 
and also the simplest and more “traditional” one. It is 
populated by Cloud Servers (CS): powerful computing 
machines, sometimes configured as clusters, which are 
connected to a fast LAN internally to their hosting data 
centre, and made accessible from the outside world by means 
of a corporate LAN or the Internet. On CSs runs that part of 
the business logic of Functional Domains and XC Functions 
that benefits from having the widest of scopes over 
production processes, and can deal with the downside of 
being physically deployed far away from them. This includes 
the planning, monitoring and management of entire factories, 
enterprises and supply chains (e.g., ERP and SCM systems). 
The Cloud Tier is populated by Cloud Services and 
Applications. 
Cloud 
Services 
implement 
specialized 
functions that are provided as individual API calls to 
Applications, which instead “package” a wider set of related 
operations that are relevant to some higher-level goal and 
often expose an interactive human interface. 
The Cloud Tier is in Enterprise Ecosystem scope. The 
“Cloud” term in this context implies that Cloud Services and 
Applications are visible from all Tiers, wherever located. It 
does not imply that CSs should be actually hosted on some 
commercial cloud. In large enterprises, the Cloud Tier 
corresponds to one or more corporate data centres (private 
cloud), ensuring that the entire system is fully under the 
control of its owner.   
In terms of RAMI 4.0, the FAR-EDGE Cloud Tier 
corresponds to the Work Centre, Enterprise and Connected 
World levels on the Hierarchy axis (IEC-62264/IEC-61512), 
while the Cloud Services and Applications are positioned 
across the Information, Functional and Business Layers. 
 
IV. 
REFERENCE USE CASES 
In following paragraphs we present some indicative use 
cases that will be supported by FAR-EDGE. 
A. Wheel Alignment Smart Station  
This scenario is centred around the concept of an 
autonomous cyber-physical system (CPS): a self-contained 
plant module (workstation) comprising smart machines/tools 
and locally-scoped monitoring/control logic. Such module 
operates as a block-box: internally, it implements automated 
machine/tool configuration and workflows; externally, it 
integrates with the factory’s IT backbone (e.g., MES/ERP) 
by means of a “public” interface that provides the required 
functionality while hiding the module’s internals. 
The concrete use case that the FAR-EDGE project is 
developing in this scenario targets a wheel alignment 
workstation for the manufacturing of industrial vehicles. The 
use case is complex, as it builds on a production process that 
is currently in place: its full description would go beyond the 
scope of this paper. To summarise, the added value of 
introducing the FAR-EDGE platform is this context is 
twofold. Firstly, it enables smart tools, i.e., an IoT-ready nut 
driver – to be dynamically deployed on any physical 
workstation and to be timely reconfigured (torque 
adjustment) to match fast-changing requirements, as a wide 
array of truck models is processed along the same production 
line. Secondly, it allows the entire workstation to be easily 
relocated to other plants that share the same IT backbone. As 
a positive side effect, the workstation, being mostly 
autonomous, is also able to operate with little or no 
disruption when temporarily disconnected from the network. 
According to the FAR-EDGE RA, locally-scoped 
automation and analytics are Edge Processes belonging to 
the Edge Tier. From the implementation perspective, Edge 
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Processes are hosted by an Edge Gateway, which is an 
integral part of the wheel alignment workstation. In 
particular, smart tool deployment is in charge of the Edge 
Automation 
Services 
(EAS) 
component, 
which 
communicates with local field devices through the Field 
Abstraction layer. EAS also interacts with a digital model of 
the plant in order to retrieve and update information. 
 
B. Plug-and-Produce Conveyor Belt  
As in the previous example, the foundation of the FAR-
EDGE use case is an existing logistic process in a real-world 
factory. The scenario is that of a large production plant 
where finished products, stacked on pallets, are moved by a 
single conveyor belt to a warehouse. Pallets only contain 
product items of the same type, but each pallet can be 
different as the conveyor is the outlet of multiple assembly 
lines working in parallel; the exact product type sequence on 
the conveyor at any given time is not predictable. When the 
pallets reach the warehouse, they are dispatched to a number 
of “exit bays” for immediate shipping, temporary storage or 
other destinations (e.g., defective products). The dispatching 
logic should take into account product type on the one hand, 
bay configuration, capacity and status on the other. In its 
current implementation, a PLC-based dispatching system 
does its best to match the input stream (product type ID 
scanned on pallets) with the output channels (static 
configuration of exit bays), taking into account the daily 
production schedule. However, this approach does not allow 
for 
any 
significant 
schedule 
change 
and/or 
“hot” 
reconfiguration of the exit bays.  
The FAR-EDGE platform is redesigning the above 
described “primitive” CPS with the introduction of Smart 
Objects (exit bays with embedded computing power and 
network connectivity) and of a Ledger Tier (a Distributed 
Ledger exposing Ledger Services) where decentralized 
configuration and orchestration logic resides. The basic use 
case is Plug-and-Produce: new bays can be added to the 
working system, and existing bays can be put offline, at any 
time: the Ledger Tier is responsible for granting permission 
and for keeping the digital model of the plant in-sync with 
the real world. Once online, new bays are immediately able 
to negotiate with the plant controller their services – e.g., ask 
for more products of a given type when actual processing 
capacity exceeds the incoming flow. The innovative 
approach in FAR-EDGE, where blockchain is used to 
implement Ledger Services, avoids potential single-point-of-
failure problems and scalability bottlenecks. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The edge computing paradigm provides many compelling 
advantages for the implementation of digital automation 
platforms, including the ability to analyze information close 
to the field, as well as the ability to flexible (re)configure 
real-time automation workflows. This is the reason why 
several edge computing platforms for industrial automation 
are already under implementation. FAR-EDGE takes these 
implementations to the next level, through enhancing edge 
computing implementations with the merits of blockchain 
technologies, notably in terms of representing and 
implementing automation and analytics operations as 
scalable 
and 
flexibly 
configurable 
smart 
contracts. 
Blockchain concepts have already been introduced in the 
FAR-EDGE RA, which serves as a basis for implementing 
automation, analytics and digital simulation use cases. In 
addition to providing open source implementation of FAR-
EDGE systems, our project will provide tangible research 
findings regarding the applicability of blockchain for factory 
automation.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been carried out in the scope of the FAR-
EDGE project (H2020-703094). The authors acknowledge 
help and contributions from all partners of the project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Leitão, “Agent-based distributed manufacturing control: A 
state-of-the-art 
survey”, 
Engineering 
Applications 
of 
Artificial Intelligence, vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 979-991, Oct. 2009. 
[2] P. Vrba,., Review of Industrial Applications of Multi-agent 
Technologies," Service Orientation in Holonic and Multi 
Agent Manufacturing and Robotics, Studies in Computational 
Intelligence Vol. 472, Springer, pp 327-338, 2013 
[3] F. Jammes and H. Smit, “Service-Oriented Paradigms in 
Industrial 
Automation 
Industrial 
Informatics,” 
IEEE 
Transactions on., pp. 62 – 70, vol. 1, issue 1, Feb, 2005. 
[4] T. Cucinotta and Coll, “A Real-Time Service-Oriented 
Architecture 
for 
Industrial 
Automation,” 
Industrial 
Informatics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 5, issue 3, pp. 267 – 
277, Aug. 2009. 
[5] W. Shi, J. Cao, Q. Zhang, Y. Li and L. Xu, "Edge Computing: 
Vision and Challenges," in IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 
vol. 
3, 
no. 
5, 
pp. 
637-646, 
Oct. 
2016. 
doi: 
10.1109/JIOT.2016.2579198 
[6] F. Bonomi, R. Milito,  J. Zhu,  S. Addepalli, «Fog computing 
and its role in the internet of things», Proceedings of the first 
edition of the MCC workshop on Mobile cloud computing, 
MCC '12, pp 13-16. 
[7] Industrial Internet Consortium. 2017. The Industrial Internet 
of Things Volume G1: Reference Architecture, version 1.8. 
(2017). 
[Online], 
Available 
from:  
http://www.iiconsortium.org/IIRA.htm 
[8] Industrial Internet Consortium. IIC Edge Intelligence Testbed. 
2017. 
[Online], 
Available 
from: 
http://www.iiconsortium.org/edge-intelligence.htm 
[9] 
EdgeX Foundry Framewok 2017. [Online], Available from:  
https://www.edgexfoundry.org/ 
[10] K. Schweichhart. “Reference Architectural Model Industrie 
4.0 - An Introduction”, April 2016, [Online], Available from: 
https://ec.europa.eu/futurium/en/system/files/ged/a2-
schweichhart-
reference_architectural_model_industrie_4.0_rami_4.0.pdf 
[11] H2020-703094 FAR-EDGE Project 2017. [Onine], Available 
from: http://www.far-edge.eu  
 
 
 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

