Improving TelEduc Environment with GPL Software   
The visualization content case for computers and mobile devices 
 
André Constantino da Silva 
 Institute of Computing (PG)         
 
UNICAMP  
IFSP 
 
Campinas, Brazil  
Hortolândia, Brazil 
acsilva@ic.unicamp.br 
Heloísa Vieira da Rocha 
Institute of Computing, NIED 
UNICAMP 
Campinas, Brazil 
heloisa@ic.unicamp.br
 
 
Abstract—e-Learning environments are proposed to support 
teaching and learning activities using the Web infrastructure. 
One example is TelEduc, a GPL e-Learning environment 
which its developers are mostly students involved in academic 
projects, making it difficult to have a long-period team with 
expertise to maintain the code and evolve the software with 
new requirements and to new and desirable contexts, like 
mobile access. One solution is use third-party software to 
improve the software and minimize the code maintain efforts, 
solution applied in the TelEduc environment to visualize 
attached documents on computers and smart phones without 
installed appropriated software, an open problem in the 
environment before this work. The main result is a TelEduc 
version with visualization file for desktops and smart phones. 
Another result is identification of issues dealt when integrates 
with third party software like impact on usability, accessibility 
and performance, license compatibility and easily to integrate, 
update and change. 
Keywords-e-Learning environment; Mobile user interfaces; 
Mobile learning; software integration. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Devices like smart phones are been increasingly popular; 
most of them have touch screen displays and access to the 
Internet. Therefore, Web sites and applications, initially 
developed to be used with keyboard, mouse and a medium 
size display, are been accessed by small touch screen 
devices. Tablets are been popularized too, and some models 
allow interaction with the Web applications using fingers and 
others models using special pens. 
One kind of Web application is e-Learning environments, 
as Moodle [1], SAKAI [2] and TelEduc [3]. They are 
computational applications with tools to support teaching 
and learning activities though the Web. These tools allow 
users to create content, communicate with other users and 
manage the virtual space. 
The actual version of these environments take advantages 
of the available Web resources and offers textual content 
with images, audios and videos in a hypertext document to 
transmit the content. Tools like chat, forums, portfolios, 
repositories are widely used. And tools that explore the audio 
and video resource to user communication, like instant 
messenger and video-conferences, are become common too. 
Due to the quickly Internet growth (number and types of 
devices accessing it) and evolution (number of technologies 
that can be used to develop applications to use it), it is hard 
to a small development team updates and evolves complex 
systems with their own solutions. A lot of new requirements 
are requested by users, bugs and errors are found every day, 
and a lot of technologies are available, requiring expert 
developers. 
One strategy is found a development community with 
different knowledgeable and skill members that together 
maintain and evolve the system, like communities organized 
to evolve Moodle and SAKAI environments. TelEduc 
project is organizing its community [4], but some solutions 
need to be used to evolve the code until the community 
growth enough. Another strategy is get third-party software 
available that meets the requirements and integrate them. 
We applied this strategy to attend a user-reported 
problem: visualization of attached items in the environment. 
This is an old problem in the TelEduc and other e-Learning 
environments (e.g., Moodle and SAKAI): the user needs to 
download the file, write permission to save the file and have 
the appropriated software to view it. To solve this, we 
integrated TelEduc with FlexPaper to easily the document 
view.  
This integration generated some questions about the use 
of third-party software in the environment and a list of issues 
to be analyzed, like the distributed license. Other relevant 
issue is about data responsibility, like where the data will be 
persist, who will ensure the data availability, backup and 
restore mechanisms. 
Section II presents the TelEduc Project with a brief 
historical view and the needs for use third-party software. 
Section III describes the TelEduc e-Learning environment its 
tools, features and problems. Section IV describes how to 
avoid the elicited problems in Section II and III through 
integration with existing free software, and Section V 
summarizes the dealt problems in this research. Section VI 
presents a conclusion and future works. 
 
II. 
TELEDUC PROJECT 
The TelEduc environment was conceited in the end of 
90, born with the Cerceau´s Master dissertation (1998), with 
professor Heloísa Vieira da Rocha as advisor, using 
constructivism as base [5,6] for teacher´s continuance 
formation with situated learning bases [7]  or contextualized 
learning [8] bases. In 2001 February, the first free version 
was released over GNU General Public License (GPL), an 
unprecedented fact in the Brazilian Educational Software 
222
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

scenario. Many public and private institutions adopted the 
TelEduc as platform, maximizing the TelEduc user’s 
community, and consequently, the development demand. 
This fact culminated in the release of TelEduc version 3.0 in 
March 2002. The version 3.0 was completely redesigned and 
optimized, reason for TelEduc project was awarded by 
ABED (Brazilian Association for Distance Education) in the 
“Research and Development about Distance Learning” 
category. In August 2011, TelEduc version 4.3 was released, 
with its user interface redesigned to improve user tasks and 
be more similar than the most visited Web sites. 
The TelEduc development is mainly performed by a team 
situated at NIED/UNICAMP, composed of undergraduates, 
plus research graduate students of IC/UNICAMP. This is a 
small team, considering the complexity of the environment, 
responsible for developing new features, code maintenance 
and management of existing servers. The next Section shows 
some TelEduc features and problems. 
III. 
TELEDUC E-LEARNING ENVIRONMENT 
The TelEduc environment [3] is a teaching and learning 
environment developed by Nucleus of Applied Informatics 
in Education (NIED) of State University of Campinas 
(UNICAMP), adopted by many public and private 
institutions, like UNICAMP through Ensino Aberto project.  
TelEduc is a system that aggregate administration, 
management and communication tools designed to support 
teaching and learning activities. Some tools allow content 
creation, other ones allow synchronous or asynchronous 
communication among users, participant and course 
management and administrative features. The TelEduc 
course page is structured in two parts: the left one (Figure 
1a) has a list of all tools available and in the right one 
(Figure 1b) the content of the selected tool. 
Figure 1a shows TelEduc instance for a course where the 
teacher dispose the Couse Dynamic, Agenda, Readings, 
Support Material, Activities, Chat, Mail, Discussion Forum, 
Frequently Asked Questions, Portfolio, Groups and other 
tools available. Figure 1b shows the user interface to 
visualize a Support Material item, where the teacher can 
change the title, content, attach or remove files or links and 
see and write comments, and the student can see the item, 
download the attached files and visit the posted links. 
To provide content, TelEduc uses the Web infrastructure, 
more specifically, hypertext with images, links, audios and 
videos. All these media can be published as content in tools 
like Agenda, Support Material and Readings.  
Agenda is the ongoing course home page and shows the 
course´s program for a given period (daily, weekly, etc.). 
Agenda is an important tool because organize the activities 
that must be done in a specific period, similar teachers do in 
the beginning of a presence class. The Support Material is a 
tool that provides an area for the file storage and sharing 
among course participants, named Support Material Area. To 
store an item in this area, the user needs to be a coordinator 
or an instructor. When the user stores an item in support 
material area, she can specify the type of access (for 
example, i) not shared, ii) shared only with users who have 
instructor role or iii) shared with all participants). Users with 
student role can access the stored items published with all 
participant sharing type, read their content, visit their links 
and download their attached files. 
The 
Readings, 
Activities 
and 
Frequently 
Asked 
Questions tools have features and user interface similar with 
Support Material tool, but different purposes. Readings tool 
is used to publish relevant documents, like books, 
magazines, news and articles. The Activities tool is an area 
to publish activities to the accomplished during the course, 
like home work descriptions. And the Frequently Asked 
Questions tool contains a list of the most frequently 
questions done by the participants during the course and their 
respective answers. 
Tools like Discussion Forums and Mail are used to 
participant communication, supporting text message change 
in asynchronous mode. To synchronous communication, 
there is Chat tool, with some features similar with Web chat 
sites. 
The Portfolio is a communication tool that aims to 
promote the collaboration among participants through the 
sharing of “items” (documents, presentations, programs, 
links, etc.). So the Portfolio tool provides an area to item 
storage and sharing for each participant (user or group of 
users) within a course. 
The Bulletin Board tool is a dedicated space where all the 
participants can post information considered relevant to the 
course content. 
The Agenda, Activities, Support Material, Readings, 
Bulletin Board, Discussion Forums, Mail and Portfolio allow 
users to create text content using a text editor. Details about 
it are in Section IV. 
The Agenda, Activities, Support Materials, Readings, 
Mail and Portfolio tools allow attaching files into them items 
in similar way, following these steps: the user goes to Files 
area, click in the link “Attach File”, click in the “Select 
file...” button, browse into the computer directories, choose 
one file, click on “Open” button and waiting for the 
uploading process. The environment response for the correct 
uploading process is writing the feedback message “File 
attached successfully”. 
         (a) 
(b) 
Figure 1 – Course page at TelEduc environment (a) tools available; (b) 
content of selected tool. 
223
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

To download the file, the users need to go to the Files 
area, click in the file name (Figure 2a), wait for the 
browser´s “Open” dialog, choose “Open” or “Save” (Figure 
2b). If the user chooses “Open”, the used computer needs to 
have the correct software to visualize and edit the file. If the 
user chooses “Save” option, the browser will download the 
file and save it into the download folder. The user will need 
open the download folder to open the file or change the file 
to another folder. In TelEduc version 4.3, there is no feature 
to preview the content file, as Moodle version 2.3 and Sakai 
2.8. Moodle allows the instructor creates some spaces to 
visualize a content (e.g., a .PDF file), but it is necessary have 
the appropriate program installed to view. For attached files 
there is no preview feature. 
In mobile devices, to view attached file it is necessary to 
have installed the appropriate software, an application to 
visualize the file. But, for some files formats there are no 
free applications or the device have a limited number of 
installed application. 
Motivated by the lack of a solution for the described 
problem and focused to minimize the user efforts to view the 
content, we developed this work. Maybe the steps to 
visualize and edit a downloaded file are easy for Web 
experts, but it is not so simple to new users.  
Since the e-Learning environments need to be easily to 
use for users with different levels of Web experience, the 
usability is an important nonfunctional requirement. TelEduc 
was designed to have good usability in an iterative design-
evaluation process, and the main focus is the user interface 
does not impair teaching and learning activities. The 
accessibility is another nonfunctional requirement desired for 
TelEduc, to allow impaired people to use the environment 
without meet barriers or obstacles. 
Since the e-Learning environments are available on the 
Internet, this software can be accessed by mobile devices 
nowadays and the developers need to study how to allow all 
features into these devices. Access the environment in 
anywhere and anytime is one of the biggest attractions, but 
research is necessary to design good user interfaces that take 
into account the restrictions imposed by the devices. 
The e-Learning environments are proposed to be generic 
so that they can be support any kind of educational content in 
any learning context. The solution adopted by the developers 
to reach out the generic state is dispose features that allow 
the users upload any kind of file; so, sometimes, the 
environment is used like a repository server and a lot of 
interactions problems appear. Users spend your time 
uploading and downloading files and need specific software 
installed into their machines to visualize the file. Sometimes, 
it is not possible to have this software installed, or the users 
just want to visualize quickly the content without save the 
file. So a solution is allow users preview the file in the 
browser, but it is not trivial to implement. 
To guide what file extension to focus, we analyzed the 
files attached in the TelEduc at NIED servers. At NIED 
servers there are a total of 50 finished courses and 50 
incoming courses running over TelEduc 4.x, and a total of 
443 finished courses and 77 ingoing courses running over the 
TelEduc version 3.x.  The users usually attach files with 
DOC or PDF extension for text content, PDF or PPT 
extension for presentations, MP3 or WAV for audio, and 
AVI or WMV for video. Figure 3 shows the quantity of each 
type file in the courses at NIED/UNICAMP servers since 
2009 until 2012. Analyzing the extension of 9,019 attached 
files, 39.7% of all files are text documents at DOC, DOCX, 
ODT, RTF or TXT format. PDF documents are 23.5%, and 
52
3583
426
2120
420
2418
Amount of Attached Files per 
Extension in NIED Servers since 2009 
until 2012
AVI, FLV, SWF, WMV
DOC, DOCX, ODT, RTF,
TXT
MP3, M4A, WAV, WMA,
WMF
PDF
PPS, PPSX, PPT, PPTX
Other extensions
 
Figure 3. Amount of attached file per extension at NIED/UNICAMP 
TelEduc 4.x server since 2009 until 2012. 
 (a) 
                     
 
(b)                         
Figure 2. Step to view an attached file in TelEduc: (a) item 
visualization; (b) open or save dialog.. 
 
224
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

4.6% are presentations archive in PPT, PPTX, PPS and 
PPSX format. Audio files are 4.7% and the formats are MP3, 
M4A, WAV, WMA and WMF. Video files are 0.5% in AVI, 
FLV, SWF and WMV formats. It is important to consider 
that in this analysis, we did not consider audio and videos of 
other sites, like YouTube, that usually are posted like links 
instead of attached files. 
Considering the small development team and the need to 
allow visualization of attached documents, as well as allow 
access from mobile devices, we used third-party platforms to 
integrate with TelEduc environment. These platforms are 
described in the next section. 
IV. 
WEB PLATFORMS FOR SHARING CONTENT 
Using third-party software integrated to TelEduc is not a 
new task. To allow users write rich text instead of simple 
plain text, the CKEditor was integrated with TelEduc (Figure 
4) since version 3.0. So, the TelEduc team did not develop 
the text editor, minimizing coding efforts. 
CKEditor [9] is a WYSIWYG text editor to be used 
inside web pages, bringing to the web application common 
editing features found on desktop editing text applications. 
Some of them are basic and advanced styling, block-quoting, 
colors, copy and paste features, build advanced links, insert 
images and Flash content. Its main purpose is, instead of 
having plain text fields to write content, having a richer 
content and a richer user experience. In the version 3.0 of 
CKEditor are possible insert videos from YouTube, so the 
user only needs get the video´s URL. In this case, there are 
some problems like data responsibility that will be discussed 
on Session V. 
In version 3.0, the developers improved the accessibility, 
turned it compatible with screen readers, a better navigation 
with the keyboard and high contrast support. It is also 
compatible with Internet Explorer 6+, Firefox, Safari, 
Google Chrome and Opera. 
The flexibility and performance are two important 
features of CKEditor. It is possible to customize the editor 
interface and behavior, choosing tool bar elements, interface 
colors or adding features. The editor loads fast and its 
features run. 
CKEditor is distributed under the GPL, LGPL and MPL 
Open Source licenses, so the use of these tree licenses turn 
this software more flexible to be adopt in another Open 
Source software, as the developers intend:  
“Because CKEditor is licensed under flexible Open 
Source and commercial licenses, you'll be able to 
integrate and use it inside any kind of application. 
This is the ideal editor for developers, created to 
provide easy and powerful solutions to their 
users.” 
There are some solutions available into Web with 
different licenses and different mode of use, too. We 
analyzed free solutions, like Flexpaper [10]. Flexpaper is an 
open source web based document viewer allowing 
publishing documents to multiple platforms, making it 
possible to display and interact with PDF files in web pages. 
So, it is possible to distribute the CKEditor with the 
application code in one package. These easier the software 
download and configuration. 
To show visualize documents into browsers without the 
need of downloading. Some of these solutions is proprietary, 
but are solutions developed with free of use license and open 
PDF files into Web browsers and without Adobe Reader 
installed on the device, Flexpaper needs to convert the PDF 
file to a  SWF file. So, to see the document into Web 
browser is necessary to have Flash Player installed. To 
covert PDF to SWF, the Flexpaper uses SwfTools [11], an 
open source tool that can be automated if needed, and it is 
built in PHP language. The SWFTools have features to 
convert JPEG, PDF, PNG, GIF and WAV files to SWF files. 
But some files upload is in another format, like DOC file 
format, as Figure 3 shows. In this case, it is necessary to use 
another software to convert DOC files to PDF files, like the 
CUPS-PDF [12] or WVPDF [13]. So, integrating CUPS-
PDF and PDF2SWF it is possible to have a more powerful 
document viewer. 
Flexpaper allows distributing the code with the Web 
application, but some sites expose the HTML code of a given 
resource to be copied and pasted in the Web application. For 
example, YouTube, a video sharing platform, the Issuu [14], 
a 
publishing 
platform 
for 
reading 
documents, 
the 
Soundcloud [15], a sharing sound platform, and the 
Slideshare [16], a platform to sharing presentations, videos, 
documents and webinars. All these platforms are Flash or 
HTML5 based technologies, so mobile phones with support 
for these technologies can access the content provided by 
these platforms. 
The Issuu and Soundcloud platform have applications for 
mobile phone available at iPhone´s and Android´s market, 
allowing the user access the content in the device. Flexpaper 
does not provide an app for devices, instead of it uses Adobe 
Flash and needs to be installed on the server. A php script 
was created to, when user request file visualization (Figure 
5a), the respective file is copied to a temporary folder and a 
convert command is executed to create the respective SWF 
file. After the conversion, the server response the user 
request sending a HTML code to visualize the created SWF 
file (Figure 5b). So the user can see the document in the Web 
Figure 4. CKEditor in TelEduc environment. 
225
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

browser. The access can be done into an Android-based 
phone (Figure 6a and 6b) with similar steps. 
Flexpaper integration is simpler, since the Flexpaper 
code can be distributed with Web application code, so both 
can run in the same server. Issuu, Youtube, Soundcloud and 
Slideshare have different approaches to integrate, but similar 
steps for the user, turn more easier to see the document 
content. 
V. 
ISSUES ABOUT WEB SOFTWARE INTEGRATION 
The first one issue analyzed was meeting requirements. 
So, we selected some Web platforms focused on content 
visualization and studied them, how to integrate them and the 
licenses compatibility. 
 
The TelEduc environment was designed to have good 
usability, performance, and have accessibility studies to 
improve its access by impaired people. So, when the code is 
modified, e.g., during the integration between TelEduc and 
Flexpaper, it is necessary to verify the impact on usability, 
accessibility and performance from TelEduc. Is not desirable 
increase the usability, accessibility or performance problems, 
so 
it 
is 
necessary 
investigate 
these 
nonfunctional 
requirements on platform and after integration. 
The TelEduc was implemented to be compatible with the 
most used browsers, so it is desired to, after the integration, 
does not minimize the compatible browsers number. 
The flexibility to adapt the platform was considered 
another important issue, since this impact on usability and 
gives for users a unity sense. 
More than be easily to integrate, it needs to analyze the 
platform updating and changing. Since Web applications are 
evolving quickly, it is important to update the version used in 
the integration. Since, sometimes, the platform can be 
discontinued, so it is necessary replace with another one. 
TelEduc has three languages, Portuguese (Brazilian and 
Portugal), Spanish and English. So, one issue is considering 
if the platform offers user interfaces on these languages. 
                              
 
 
(a)  
(b) 
Figure 5. Integration between Flexpaper and TelEduc accessed on desktop: (a) an item with attached files; (b) file preview using Flexpaper. 
 
(a)  
(b) 
Figure 6. Integration between Flexpaper and TelEduc accessed on Android-based phone: (a) an item with attached files; (b) file preview using Flexpaper. 
226
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Changing the language it is important too, e.g., if the 
TelEduc interface is in English, the platform must be in 
English too. 
Before integration, it is necessary to analyze the platform 
license to verify law violation and to choose the better 
integration form. If the platform cannot be delivery with the 
environment code, it is possible create a plugin and give 
instructions about how to configure the integration. 
Platforms like YouTube, Issuu and Slideshare, need to 
have the file into their servers. So, these platforms are data 
servers, too. It is important to analyze data ownership issues 
and if this data violate some law. It is not a trivial task, since 
the content generated sometimes cannot be available to all 
Internet users due to intellectual property or special owner 
restrictions. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Developing e-Learning environment is not a trivial task: 
the software has a variety of users and roles, many features 
and must be technologically updated and get advantages 
from Web to facilitate the teaching and learning activities. 
The Web evolves quickly, a lot of technologies are proposed, 
requiring for projects have high expertise members. One 
example is the Web applications, either e-Learning 
environments, are been accessed by mobile phones. But how 
teams without expertise in these technologies can improve 
them software? One approach is integrating the application 
with third-party platforms available in Web. 
To explore this solution, we chose the content 
visualization problem in the e-Learning environment for 
desktop and mobile devices. Files in the environment need to 
be downloaded to be viewed, and the device needs to have 
installed appropriated software to show the content. TelEduc 
version 4.3, Moodle version 2.3 and Sakai version 2.8 have 
this problem. 
There is a lot of third-party software to content 
visualization, like Flexpaper, YouTube, Issuu, Soundcloud 
and Slideshare. An environment integrated with these 
platforms can 
allow 
documents, audio, 
video 
and 
presentations visualization more easily to the users and better 
usability. This motivated this work. 
Analyzing the number of documents uploaded in 
TelEduc at NIED servers from 2009 until 2012, the DOC, 
DOCX, ODT, RTF, TXT and PDF files correspond to 
63.24% of all uploaded documents. So in this work we 
decided to integrate Flexpaper to allow visualizing these type 
of files. Integration with YouTube, Issuu, Soundcloud and 
Slideshare will allow users visualize almost all uploaded files 
using desktop and mobile phones. 
In this work, we challenged some problems and 
questions, and we generated a list of issues to think about 
when integrate two Web applications: features; usability; 
accessibility; performance; license compatibility; browsers 
compatibilities; flexibility to adapt; easily to integrate, 
update and change; user interface languages; data location 
and data ownership. 
Using platforms as Flexpaper, Issuu, Soundcloud and 
Slideshare is possible to increase the e-Learning environment 
with features hard to implement and maintain. Doing an 
appropriate relationship, it can be beneficial for both 
software, one use the platform and increase the number of 
users, turning the platform more popular and receive code 
contribution, and the another, who increase its features and 
turn easier the users tasks. 
The integration among TelEduc and content platforms is 
not the only one necessity to turn this environment accessible 
on mobile phones. For example, it is necessary study the 
influence of changing the mouse by touch screens (and some 
coding solutions like use of JavaScript’s onMouseOver 
events) and medium size display to a small one. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank the CAPES and CNPq for financial 
support and for FAPESP through TIDIA-Ae Project (n. 
05/60572-1), which provided the equipment. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Moodle Trust. Moodle.org: open-source community-based tools for 
learning. Available at <http://moodle.org>. Accessed in July 2012. 
[2] SAKAI Environment. Sakai Project | collaboration and learning - for 
educators by educators. Available at <http://sakaiproject.org>. 
Accessed in July 2012. 
[3] TelEduc Environment. TelEduc Ensino à Distância. Available at 
<http://www.teleduc.org.br>. Accessed in July 2012. 
[4] F. L. Arantes, A. C. da Silva, L. L. de Oliveira, and F. M. P. Freire, 
“(Re)Projetar para Crescer – Reestruturação do Site do TelEduc 
Centrado na Comunidade”, Proceeding of International Free Software 
Workshop, July 2012, in press. 
[5] S. Papert, “Constructionism: a new opportunity for elementary 
science education”. Proposal to The National Science Foundation. 
Massachusetts: Cambridge, 1986. 
[6] J. A. Valente, “Computadores e conhecimento: repensando a 
educação”. Campinas, Brazil: Gráfica da UNICAMP., 1993. 
[7] J. Lave and E. Wenger, “Situated Learning – Legitimate peripheral 
participation”. Cambrigde: Cambrigde University Press, 1991. 
[8] J. A. Valente, “Formação de Professores: Diferentes Abordagens 
Pedagógicas”. In O Computador na Sociedade do Conhecimento, J. 
A. Valente, Ed. Campinas, Brazil: UNICAMP/NIED, 1999,  pp. 131-
156. 
[9] CKSource - Frederico Knabben. CKEditor - WYSIWYG Text and 
HTML Editor for the Web. Available at <http://www.ckeditor.com>. 
Accessed in July 2012. 
[10] Devaldi Ltd. FlexPaper - The web based pdf viewer solution. 
Available at <http://flexpaper.devaldi.com/>. Accessed in July 2012. 
[11] SWFTools. Available at <http://wiki.swftools.org>. Accessed in July 
2012. 
[12] CUPS-PDF. Available at < http://www.cups-pdf.de/ >. Accessed in 
July 2012. 
[13] D. Lachowicz, C. McNamara. wvWare, library for converting Word 
documents. Available at <http://wvware.sourceforge.net>. Accessed 
in July 2012.  
[14] Issuu. Issuu - You Publish. Available at <http://www.issuu.com/>. 
Accessed in July 2012.  
[15] Soundcloud Ltd. Dashboard on SoundCloud - Create, record and 
share 
your 
sounds 
for 
free. 
Available 
at 
<http://www.soundcloud.com>. Accessed in July 2012.  
[16] SlideShare Inc. Upload & Share PowerPoint presentations and 
documents. Available at <http://www.slideshare.com>. Accessed in 
July 2012. 
 
227
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

