Performance Evaluation of ZigBee Transmissions on the Grass Environment
Teles Bezerra, Saulo Silva,
Erika Silva and Marcelo Sousa
Laboratory for Cognitive Systems
and Personal Networks (LABee)
Federal Institute of Para´ıba (IFPB)
Campina Grande, Brasil
Email: {teles, saulo.eleuterio,
erika.delmiro, marcelo.portela}@ieee.org
Matheus Cavalcante
Department of Electrical Engineering
Institute for Advanced Studies in Communications (Iecom)
Federal University of Campina Grande (UFCG)
Campina Grande, Brasil
Email: matheus.cavalcante@ee.ufcg.edu.br
Abstract—This article proposes a prototype to measure the
Received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) value in devices of
ZigBee-based networks. The developed device was employed in
two outdoor experiments, to verify how far transmitter and
receiver can be separated to still maintain a connection. The
proposed system utilizes a XBee module Series 1, an Arduino
Uno R3 microcontroller board, a XBee Arduino Shield and a
LCD. The measurements were accomplished on and over a grass
environment. The RSSI meter demonstrated efﬁciency for good
quality connections, but at certain environmental conditions, the
connection was lost at a short distance of 9 m.
Keywords–Arduino; RSSI; Prototype; ZigBee.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) became a trend in the
last years due to advances in wireless communications, such
as new information technologies and electronic attributes de-
veloped for these technologies [1]. WSNs are one of the most
promising technologies from this generation, as they have great
usability due to their implementation on industrial control
systems. Moreover, the low cost multi-functional sensors that
accomplish surveillance control reinforce the strong impor-
tance of these networks.
With a great versatility for being used in several application
ﬁelds, WSNs have joined an increasingly interest in the last
years [2]. Particularly, extensive researches have induced to
the deﬁnition of a new wireless systems generation, capable of
extending even more the WSN application ﬁelds. It is relevant
to characterize how the radio signal range varies over indoor
and outdoor environments, because some ambient conditions
can cause impairments to any transmissions [3].
The ZigBee technology promotes communication between
devices and manages big WSN size. This standard provides a
license-free and low-power, two-way wireless communications
with high reliability and more extensive reliable range at an
affordable cost. It is deployed in wireless control and monitor-
ing applications with low data rate, low power consumption,
allows longer life with smaller batteries [4].
In wireless networks, an important project aspect is to con-
sider the fading effect, as shown in several articles, such as [5]–
[7]. There are various electromagnetic wave’s fading processes,
for example fading caused by signal reﬂections on objects,
and they all quite affect the transmission between nodes.
The waves travel through different ways, that not necessarily
have the same length, and interactions between them and the
objects and barriers during their travel are responsible for great
part of the fading phenomenon on transmission and reception
processes. Fading during electromagnetic waves propagation
is also caused by reﬂection, diffraction and scattering [7].
RSSI is a measurement of the power in a received radio
signal. Several works have been proposed to investigate radio
signals’ propagation effects at ZigBee devices. Ben Hamida
and Chelius [8] have studied the effects of human movement
on the RSSI, in an indoor environment. The sensors were
deployed in different ﬂoors of a building, and the researchers
analyzed their data by observing the impact from human
presence, and showed that it causes a degrading effect on
the system’s performance. In [9], the impacts from antenna
orientation in WSNs were empirically determined, by tilting
TelosB modules in several directions. When these modules
are in contrary orientations, there are great variations on the
RSSI. Ben Graham et al. [10], they monitor the effects by
installing the sensors on the ceiling, where the antenna stays
inverted and pointing to the ground. All these works focused
in different factors that have inﬂuence on the RSSI, such as
antenna orientation and human presence.
In this paper, we propose the development of a RSSI meter,
which was utilized to collect data on sport ﬁelds, on the grass
environment. The data collected during tests were used as
a case study, and the relevant factors on several RSSI mea-
surements were identiﬁed. Environment effects related to the
considered physical scenario were taken into account, as such
as wind, temperature and humidity, which were determining
factors on the RSSI variation.
The remaining of the paper is organized as follows: in
Section II, the ZigBee technology and the XBee modules
characteristics are presented. Section III describes the hardware
used during the RSSI meter assembly, and the concepts about
the RSSI meter prototype. Section IV brings the methodology
used for the experiments and Section V presents the measure-
ment results. At last, the conclusions are devoted to Section
VI.
287
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

II.
ZIGBEE TECHNOLOGY
ZigBee technology is an option to ﬁll a gap in WSN’s
network architecture, being an appropriate communication
protocol for this application. The differential of this technology
is its advantage in face of other communications protocols,
such as Wi-Fi [11] and Bluetooth [12]. ZigBee technology
has a protocol that supports mesh, star and tree networks,
creating more than one path possible between a transmitter
and a receiver.
This technology has been gaining great notoriety due to
simpliﬁed code and protocol, and also its reduced develop-
ment cost. The modularization allowed by ZigBee during
development also attracts attention to this technology. The
IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers) has
regularized its functioning in the IEEE 802.15.4 protocol [13].
However, Zigbee is not part of IEEE 802.15.4 standard, being
Zigbee and IEEE 802.15.4 related but different things. IEEE
802.15.4 is a IEEE communication standard that speciﬁes the
medium access control (MAC) sublayer and physical (PHY)
layer for low rate and low power wireless communication
devices.
XBee is the brand name from Digi International for a fam-
ily of ZigBee-compatible radio modules, that take part during
hardware implementation necessary on a ZigBee network’s
assembly. The device controls radio wave’s propagation by the
transmission/reception antenna. This antenna, usually, works at
a maximum power of 60 mW, and its frequencies are usually
between 2.40 GHz and 2.48 GHz.
III.
HARDWARE DESCRIPTION
A. Arduino
Arduino is a small microcontroller board, connected to
a PC through an USB connection, allowing so a connection
between the board and the PC. Moreover, an Arduino board
contains several other terminals that allow connection with
external devices such as motors, relays, light sensors, LEDs,
speakers and so on. This board’s project is open-source,
that means that any user could construct Arduino-compatible
boards. A board’s cost reduction was accomplished by the
opening of the Arduino’s source code.
The Arduino’s development platform was the base-device
during the assembly of the prototypes. The model used was
an Arduino Uno R3, chosen due to its great application ﬁeld
and its easy integration with the XBee module’s platform, and
shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Arduino Uno R3 microcontroller board
B. XBee Shield for Arduino and XBee Module
The basic Arduino boards can be complemented some
boards, called shields, that can be coupled over the basic
Arduino board. These shields are circuit boards containing
other devices (GPS receivers, LCD displays, Ethernet modules,
etc.) that are connected to the Arduino in order to obtain
additional functionalities. Thus, a shield is a Printed Circuit
Board (PCB) coupled over an Arduino board allowing com-
munication between these boards, through an connection fed
by connector-pins.
In order to correctly couple the XBee modules to the
Arduino board, it was also used a shield whose function is to
convert the socket’s format from the Arduino board to the one
from the XBee S1 MaxStream module. This shield is shown in
Figure 2.
Figure 2. XBee MaxStream Module
All this connection procedure is made aiming the surveil-
lance at the received signal’s state during transmissions be-
tween the two modules. Their communication is very simply
conﬁgured, as the signal forwarded to the transmitter device
is directly sent to the receiver device. Such a conﬁguration is
possible because the XBee modules can directly communicate,
without any need for addressing, while at AT (transparent)
mode.
C. RSSI
RSSI is a measure from the received radio signal’s power.
Such a metric used to estimate the transmission quality be-
tween two nodes as the distance between them is varied. It
works by using the distance between transmitter and receiver to
designate the quality from the received signal, even considering
variations on signal strength by comparing the received signal
level with probability distributions and localization measures
based on statistic analysis [14].
IV.
METHODOLOGY
The methodology adopted during the assembly of the
prototype and subsequent measurements with it were made
under the following schedule.
1st:
The used device allowed the RSSI measurement
on a speciﬁc pin. On this pin, there was a
PWM (Pulse Width Modulation) modulated sig-
nal, where the RSSI value is codiﬁed in how long
the pin’s output stands on a certain digital level.
This output was treated as analogic, but actually is
a digital output that generates an alternating signal
(low and high digital levels).
2nd:
Compatibility tests were made between the used
Arduino Uno R3 platform and the XBee modules,
for the purpose of test basic trigger circuits with
the modules, and verify whether there was com-
munication establishment between the devices.
On this stage, the prototypes were assembled
in assembly boards. Other electronic components
288
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

were also added to project, such as a 16×2 LCD
display for showing RSSI values, and components
responsible for maintain and feed this display.
3rd:
The programming language used to create the
source code executed by the prototype is called
Wiring, that stands as the standard development
language for Arduino projects. The RSSI value
was obtained from the A1 pin, through pulseIn
() function. This function measures the length of
the PWM pulse. The code executed by the mi-
crocontroller responsible for the reading function
follows.
int dur = pulseIn(A1,LOW,200);
int rssi=(dur+50)*(-1);
4th:
The measurements were made on an outdoor
sports ﬁeld. The transmitter was ﬁxed and the
receiver was taken to increasingly distances to the
transmitter. Two tests were made: on the ﬁrst, both
devices were on ground level. A photo was taken
showing how the receiving device was put during
this test, and this photo is shown in Figure 3. At
ﬁrst, distancing them by one meter, the RSSI was
measured by the receiving device. The distance
was increased up to one in which there weren’t
connection. This test was made on a sunny day,
in the afternoon, low wind, temperatures between
28 ◦C and 31 ◦C, and air humidity at 65%. The
second test was made similarly to the ﬁrst, but
the devices were 45 cm over the ground.
Figure 3. Prototype standing on the ground, during ﬁrst measurement.
5th:
On the tests, every measure took 45 RSSI samples.
As the tests ended, the samples were processed.
For every measure point in every test, it was
calculated the average, the standard deviation of
the mean (through formula shown in (1)), and
the highest and lowest received signal strength.
Equation (1) shows how the standard deviation of
the mean was calculated.
σmean =
v
u
u
t
1
N · (N − 1)
N
X
i=1
(xi − x)2,
(1)
in which N is the number of samples, xi is the
value of the i-th sample, and x is the arithmetical
mean.
V.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
Figure 4 shows the measurement’s data for the experiment
in which the devices were on ground level.
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
RSSI (dBm)
Distance (meters)
Average signal strength
Maximum signal strength
Minimum signal strength
Figure 4. Received signal’s power versus distance between transmitter and
receiver at ﬁrst measurement.
As shown in Figure 4, as the receiver device was taken
farther, lower RSSI values were measured, reaching minimum
levels of -85 dBm. When the receiver was at a distance of 9 m
far, there was not anymore connection between the devices.
Before that, the last average signal strength (measured at
8.5 m) was -75.95 dBm. The RSSI values did not ﬂuctuated
too much around the mean, as shown by the small standard
deviations.
A similar measurement was made, but this time the devices
were 45 cm over the ground. The results can be seen in Figure
5.
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
RSSI (dBm)
Distance (meters)
Average signal strength
Maximum signal strength
Minimum signal strength
Figure 5. Received signal’s strength versus distance between transmitter and
receiver at second measurement.
As the environmental parameters on both measurements
were almost the same, the difference between how far the
transmission went can be explained by the device’s height.
In the second experiment, the connection was broken when
the devices were distanced by 26 m. Overall, the RSSI during
the second experiment was higher than the one of the ﬁrst, in
which the lowest strength was about −76 dBm. On the second
experiment, just before connection loss, the last average signal
strength was −73.00 dBm.
Apparently, in such environmental conditions there is no
useful connection between the devices if the RSSI is under
−70 dBm. Based on this statement, it was analyzed how long
289
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

the signal strength stood under this level, from now on called
of percentage of idle time. It is shown in Figure 6 the analysis’
result for the ﬁrst experiment. From 8 m and beyond it’s
difﬁcult to hold an connection between the two devices, as
the signal has a very low RSSI on such a distance.
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
Percentage of idle time
Distance (m)
Figure 6. Percentage of idle time versus distance in the ﬁrst measurement.
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
Percentage of idle time
Distance (m)
Figure 7. Percentage of idle time versus distance in the second measurement.
The results for the second measurement can be found in
Figure 7. Despite the fact the connections is maintained up to
a distance between transmitter and receiver of 26 m, distances
greater than 15 m would have a bad quality of service, as the
connection would have to be constantly reestablished.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We successfully built a functional prototype and analyzed
some data extracted from the experiments. Reading the RSSI
value seems to be a positive indicator for good quality con-
nections, but at certain environmental conditions (devices at
ground level) the connection was lost at a small distance of
9 m.
One important result achieved through this article was the
determination of how far can two sensors be and still maintain
connection. At ground level, this distance is about 7 m, and to
a 45 cm height, this distance goes up to 15 m, showing how
great is the inﬂuence of the environmental conditions.
We aim at improving the measurements quality, by chang-
ing other environmental parameters. Experiments in cloudy
or rainy days, with or without human presence, with more
samples, and at different times shall be done in order to allow
a more complete efﬁciency analysis of the experiments data.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Federal Institute of
Para´ıba (IFPB), Laboratory for Cognitive Systems and Per-
sonal Networks (LABee), Federal University of Campina
Grande (UFCG), Institute for Advanced Studies in Communi-
cations (IECOM) and IFPB’s IEEE Student Branch, they all in
Campina Grande, and also the National Council for Scientiﬁc
and Technological Development (CNPq).
REFERENCES
[1]
F. Yahaya, Y. Yussoff, R. Rahman, and N. Abidin, “Performance
analysis of wireless sensor network,” in 5th International Colloquium
on Signal Processing Its Applications., March 2009, pp. 400–405.
[2]
I. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, “A survey
on sensor networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 40, no. 8,
Aug 2002, pp. 102–114.
[3]
R. Pellegrini, S. Persia, D. Volponi, and G. Marcone, “RF propagation
analysis for ZigBee sensor network using RSSI measurements,” in
2nd International Conference on Wireless Communication, Vehicular
Technology, Information Theory and Aerospace Electronic Systems
Technology (Wireless VITAE), Feb 2011, pp. 1–5.
[4]
J. de S. B. Ramos, Instrumentac¸˜ao eletrˆonica sem ﬁo: transmitindo
dados com m´odulos ZigBee e PIC16F877A, 2012.
[5]
N. Lo, D. Falconer, and A. U. H. Sheikh, “Adaptive equalization for
a multipath fading environment with interference and noise,” in IEEE
44th Vehicular Technology Conference, Jun 1994, pp. 252–256.
[6]
J.-L. Chu and J.-F. Kiang, “Multipath effects on beacon performances,”
in IEEE International Conference on Networking, Sensing and Control,
vol. 1, March 2004, pp. 635–638.
[7]
R.-H. Wu, Y.-H. Lee, H.-W. Tseng, Y.-G. Jan, and M.-H. Chuang,
“Study of characteristics of RSSI signal,” in IEEE International Con-
ference on Industrial Technology, April 2008, pp. 1–3.
[8]
E. Ben Hamida and G. Chelius, “Investigating the impact of human
activity on the performance of wireless networks 2014; an experimental
approach,” in IEEE International Symposium on a World of Wireless
Mobile and Multimedia Networks (WoWMoM), June 2010, pp. 1–8.
[9]
M. Wadhwa, M. Song, V. Rali, and S. Shetty, “The impact of antenna
orientation on wireless sensor network performance,” in IEEE 2nd Inter-
national Conference on Computer Science and Information Technology
(ICCSIT), Aug 2009, pp. 143–147.
[10]
B. Graham et al., “Analysis of the effect of human presence on a wire-
less sensor network,” in International Journal of Ambient Computing
and Intelligence (IJACI), vol. 3, 2011, pp. 1–13.
[11]
“Unapproved draft standard for information technology– telecom-
munications and information exchange between systems– local and
metropolitan area networks– speciﬁc requirements part 15.1reva: Wire-
less medium access control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) speciﬁca-
tions for wireless personal area networks (WPANs) (revision of IEEE
802.15-2002),” IEEE Std P802.15.1REVa/D5, 2004.
[12]
“IEEE standard for information technology - telecommunications and
information exchange between systems - local and metropolitan area
networks speciﬁc requirements part 15.4: Wireless medium access
control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) speciﬁcations for low-rate
wireless personal area networks (LR-WPANs),” IEEE Std 802.15.4-
2003, 2003, pp. 0 1–670.
[13]
M. Saleiro and E. Ey, Zigbee: Uma Abordagem Pr´atica, 2009. [Online].
Available: http://lusorobotica.com/ﬁcheiros/Introducao\ ao\ Zigbee\
-\ por\ msaleiro.pdf
[14]
C. Park, D. Park, J. Park, Y. Lee, and Y. An, “Localization algorithm
design and implementation to utilization RSSI and AOA of Zigbee,”
in 5th International Conference on Future Information Technology
(FutureTech), May 2010, pp. 1–4.
290
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

