Architectural Blueprint Solution for Migrating Towards FAR-EDGE 
  
Ambra Calà  
Siemens AG, Corporate Technology,  
Günther-Scharowsky-Str. 1, 91058, Erlangen, Germany  
e-mail: ambra.cala@siemens.com  
Filippo Boschi, Paola Fantini, Giacomo Tavola, 
Marco Taisch 
Politecnico di Milano 
Via R. Lambruschini 4/b, 20156, Milano, Italy 
email: {filippo.boschi, paola.fantini,giacomo.tavola, 
marco.taisch}@polimi.it 
      
Abstract— Over the last years, several technologies and control 
systems have been developed for enabling the decentralization 
of automation control architectures for cyber-physical 
production systems. However, none of these technologies are in 
use yet. To overcome manufacturers’ conservatism, migration 
strategies and decision-making approaches are required to 
support the adoption of the next generation of smart production 
systems. This paper presents a migration approach tailored to 
the migration of legacy automation systems towards the 
Industry 4.0 paradigm. Considering that the implementation of 
a new, or even just modified production control will have a 
direct impact on the existing production systems, the aim of the 
proposed approach is to evaluate opportunities of improvement 
and mitigate the risks of migration from technical, operational, 
human and business perspectives. The methodology follows an 
iterative and incremental approach starting from the definition 
of the current situation of the factory and identification of 
business goals to the evaluation of possible migration paths and 
the selection of the optimal one according to a cost-benefit 
analysis. The paper presents the methodology and one of the 
architectural blueprints derived during the EU-project FAR-
EDGE to migrate towards a cloud- and edge-based automation 
control architecture. 
Keywords: Industry 4.0; Decentralized automation control; 
Migration strategy; cyber-physical production systems. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The combination of Edge-Computing (EC) with Cyber-
Physical Systems (CPS) and Internet of Things (IoT) 
standards will virtualize the conventional automation 
pyramid, enhancing flexibility and scalability in integrating 
modern IT technologies and, consequently, increasing the 
efficiency and the performance of production processes [1]. 
Edge-computing provides a distributed architecture option, 
which considers a new functional layer in the Industrial 
Automation pyramid that places data processing and control 
functions at the very edge of the network and facilitates 
distributed real-time control and scalable data processing. 
However, today manufacturers are still reluctant to adopt 
decentralized manufacturing technologies. They typically 
aim at obtaining the return on the relevant investment 
sustained for their production facilities and envision only 
sporadic and limited changes. Nevertheless, in order to reap 
the opportunities offered by the new technologies, changes 
during the whole life cycle of the devices and services should 
be performed.  To this end, industries need to be supported 
with migration strategies to implement new technologies and 
decentralize the automation pyramid. Within the context of 
complex automation systems, a complete change from the 
legacy production systems to the emerging I4.0 compliant 
ones in one step, following the Big Bang approach, will have 
a negative impact in terms of high upfront investments, 
development time, and risk of production losses. On the 
contrary, a smooth migration strategy, that applies future 
technologies in existing infrastructures with legacy systems 
through incremental migration steps, could lower risks and 
deliver immediate benefits [2]. The challenge is to identify 
the architectural blueprints of the migration considering not 
only the technology dimension but also the operational and 
human ones from a business process point of view. 
Migration strategies are expected to play an essential role 
to the success of the envisioned infrastructure. Therefore, 
FAR-EDGE will study smooth migration path options from 
legacy centralized architectures to emerging FAR-EDGE 
based one. 
The paper is structured as follows: after this brief 
introduction, Section II outlines the FAR-EDGE project’s 
goals and Section III presents the methodology defined and 
adopted within the project, while Section IV briefly describes 
the migration strategy and how it supports the identification 
of the architectural blueprints and migration paths towards 
the FAR-EDGE architecture by using the migration matrix. 
Section V presents one migration solution blueprint and its 
implementation roadmap based on the FAR-EDGE industrial 
use cases. Section VI concludes the paper with a summary 
and outlook. 
II. FAR-EDGE PROJECT 
FAR-EDGE (Factory Automation Edge Computing 
Operating System Reference Implementation) intends to 
exploit the combination among EC, CPS and IoT 
Technologies for virtualizing conventional automation 
pyramid, and enhancing production system reconfigurability 
[3]. 
To this aim, FAR-EDGE project proposes a new 
Reference Architecture (RA) (Figure 1) composed by: 
1. Four horizontal Layers: Field, Edge, Ledger and 
Cloud.  
2. Three functional viewpoints: Automation, Analytics 
and Simulation  
 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-736-8
UBICOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

FAR-EDGE identifies in the Field tier, which 
corresponds to the Level 1 in the ISA-95 pyramid, particular 
device called Edge Node, equipped with on board computing 
capabilities,  
The Edge Layer includes SCADA (Level 2) and MES 
(Level 3) functionalities by following the Automation 
Pyramid terminology. In FAR-EDGE, it consists of Edge 
Gateways that execute all those production processes having 
a local scope due to time and bandwidth constraints. Finally, 
the Cloud layer could also include MES functionality and 
provides interfaces (Cloud Services) to the ERP (Level 4) of 
the ISA-95 automation pyramid. Compared to the Edge 
Layer, it includes production and business processes that do 
not have strict time requirements and do not bound to the 
factory. 
 The connection to the shopfloor is performed by the Field 
Abstraction Component that has specific requirements from 
the shopfloor automations and equipment. Thus, in addition 
to the 3 vertical functional viewpoints (Automation, 
Analytics and Simulation enabled by RA), a Field dimension 
is required, as it is a FAR-EDGE enabler. Therefore, if in 
some use cases specific requirements are not met in the field, 
the FAR-EDGE platform is not applicable.  
 
Figure 1. FAR-EDGE Platform 
III. METHODOLOGY FOR MIGRATION 
This section illustrates a methodological approach aiming 
at supporting decision makers in addressing the migration, 
i.e., transformation, towards FAR-EDGE. The approach 
encompasses the initial assessment of the current level of 
manufacturing digital maturity, the analysis of priorities 
based on the business strategy, and the development of a 
migration strategy. Specifically, an innovative holistic 
approach to develop a migration strategy towards the digital 
automation paradigm with the support of a set of best 
practices and tools is presented. The application of the 
approach is illustrated through the description of the blueprint 
solution in Section IV. 
The overall approach is implemented according to the 5 
steps described in Figure 2. 
The identification of the factory analysis domains in Step 
1 allowed a better understanding of the current situation of 
the production environment under technical, operational and 
human aspects. This task is supported by an assessment 
questionnaire according to the scope of the developed FAR-
EDGE architecture. The second step of the FAR-EDGE 
Migration approach aims at the realization of the Migration 
Matrix and the selection of the appropriate digital maturity 
levels scale characterized for the three different dimensions 
of the factory, constituting a reference model that can be used 
to evaluate the AS-IS and TO-BE situations of a factory and 
analyse their gap. The Migration Matrix with the redefined 
digital maturity levels scale are described in [4]. 
 
Figure 2. FAR-EDGE Migration Approach 
The next step based on the mapping of the conventional 
automation architecture within the Migration Matrix, needed 
to analyse the possible different starting points of migration 
and to define accordingly a kind of library of reusable 
blueprints architectures towards FAR-EDGE. 
The gap analysis between the TO-BE situation, namely 
the edge based distributed architecture envisioned by FAR-
EDGE, and the AS-IS situation of the factory, considers the 
methodology described in [5] to point out the business goals 
and KPIs, in order to define the optimal migration strategy 
for the specific use cases.  
Finally, the approach ends by providing a set of blueprint 
solution that can ensure a smooth and low risk digital 
transformation of traditional production systems to digital 
automation solutions, notably the automation, simulation and 
analytics solutions that are aligned to the FAR-EDGE 
reference architecture. 
In this way, the approach provides a clear map of the 
current (AS-IS) and desired (TO-BE) conditions of a factory, 
revealing different alternatives to achieve a specific goal, by 
means of a digital automation system and towards the vision 
of digital factory. 
Moreover, this approach enables the evaluation of the 
potential alternatives according to the business strategy, 
considering also strengths and weaknesses points. Based on 
this evaluation, the migration approach ends-up specifying 
adequate architectural blueprints that match the needs of the 
organization and the estimation of the overall benefit of the 
digital automation solution for the analysed production 
system. 
IV. MIGRATION PROCESS 
The first part of the migration approach previously 
mentioned is based on an assessment questionnaire. It has 
been developed in order to assess the current status of a 
factory at technical, operational and human dimensions. The 
assessment aims at evaluating the digital maturity level of a 
factory in comparison with the digitalization envisioned by 
FAR-EDGE. For this reason, the questionnaire is structured 
according to the main functional domains of the FAR-EDGE 
Reference 
Architecture: 
automation, 
analytics, 
and 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-736-8
UBICOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

simulation. The “Automation” mainly concerns the 
capability to utilize instructions to create a repeated process 
that replaces an IT professional’s manual work in data centres 
and cloud deployments. In this context, the automation 
accomplishes a task repeatedly without human intervention. 
The “Analytics” involves those activities related to 
multivariate analysis of a process aiming at developing a 
statistically based understanding, leading to process 
improvement and/or optimization. The “Simulation” is 
closely related to the digital factory concept, which offers an 
integrated approach to enhance the product and production 
engineering processes and simulation is a key technology 
within this concept.  
In order to create a more coherent questionnaire, the 
interrelationship between functional domain (Automation, 
Analytics and Simulation) with the three dimensions applied:  
(Technical, Operational and Human) has been needed. 
The “Automation – Technical dimension” section aims at 
collecting information related to the current automation 
system in production, i.e. the structure of the automation 
architecture and the legacy software and hardware. Particular 
relevance is also given to the type of the connectivity among 
these systems, and the existing security and access control 
mechanisms. Related topics include the monitoring support 
in production for errors and performance [6].  
The “Automation – Operational dimension” section is 
related to the so-called “Orchestration” concept. This is a 
broader concept wherein the user coordinates automated 
tasks into a cohesive process or workflow for IT and the 
business process. In this context, automation is seen as the 
capability to manage and to integrate different information in 
an automatic way [6]. 
The “Analytics – Technical dimension” section is related 
to the possibility to utilize data and information needed to 
carry out the analysis to provide the value added to 
management approach [6]. 
The “Analytics – Operational dimension” section takes 
into account the company inclination to manage a basic 
manufacturing process controlling the input factors 
(especially chosen by decision makers) and the fixed inputs 
(defined by the current context) and monitoring the 
uncontrollable or nuisance variables aiming at evaluating and 
optimizing the output responses [6]. 
The “Simulation – Technical dimension” section sees the 
simulation as a technology that provides design engineers 
with the right tools, the right hardware—at the right time—to 
make better decisions. It requires Integration of CAD designs 
and CAE information, connecting multiple simulation 
models, and data synchronization of the engineering 
processes requiring access to all necessary product and 
process information [6]. 
The “Simulation – Operational dimension” section 
concerns the enabled dynamic analysis and optimization of 
material flow, resource utilization and logistics for all levels 
of plant planning from global production networks, through 
local plants down to specific lines. In these terms, the relevant 
goal of simulation is to provide all users to quickly assess the 
impact of their decisions on product, process, plant and 
resource requirements [6]. 
The “Human dimension” section concerns the social 
readiness to cope with the functional domains and the related 
technical and operational facets, namely it is related to the 
level of awareness and know how that are characterizing the 
company organization. It takes into account also the 
capability of the human resources to extract the valuable data 
and to carry out a disciplined engineering and scientific 
methods to identify and control the factors that impact the 
business value of the company [6]. 
Based on the answers of this questionnaire, different 
migration scenarios according to the possible technology 
options are investigated in order to identify the migration 
alternatives to go from the identified AS-IS situation to the 
TO-BE one [1] . To this end, a tool called Migration Matrix 
has been developed within the FAR-EDGE project to identify 
all the necessary improvements in the direction of the 
Industry 4.0 vision of smart factory, splitting the digital 
transformation in different scale-levels. Thus, the matrix 
represents a multiple impact dimensions, aiming at providing 
a snapshot of current situation of companies and suggesting 
which steps should be achieved in order to reach the FAR-
EDGE objective in a smooth and stepwise migration process. 
The migration matrix is structured in rows and columns. 
The rows represent the relevant application fields selected 
during the preparation phase with high potential of 
improvement by FAR-EDGE concepts implementation on 
the architecture. Meanwhile the columns the development 
steps for each application field towards a higher level of 
production flexibility, intelligent manufacturing and business 
process 
in 
the 
direction 
of 
a 
digital 
automation 
implementation [1]. The development steps are divided in 
five columns representing five levels of production system’s 
digital maturity, based on the integrating principles of both 
the Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) 
framework [7][8][9], and DREAMY model (Digital 
REadiness Assessment MaturitY) [10] . 
V. MIGRATION SOLUTION BLUEPRINTS 
A traditional manufacturer aims at decentralizing the 
current factory automation architecture and introduce cyber-
physical system concepts in order to flexibly deploy new 
technologies and maximize the correlation across its 
technical abilities to support mass-customization. Target of 
the implementation of the FAR-EDGE platform is the 
reduction of time and effort required for deploying new 
applications by the automatic reconfiguration of physical 
equipment on different stations, according to the current 
operation, and its automatic synchronization among different 
information systems (PLM, ERP, and MES [11],[12]). 
A factory that currently presents an automation 
architecture compliant to ISA-95 standards with three layers 
(ERP, MES, and SCADA with Field devices) could have 
potential issues during the integration of new applications at 
the MES level to obtain new functions at the shop-floor. In 
fact, it could be very expensive because of highly dependent 
on the centralized control structure of the architecture. 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-736-8
UBICOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Moreover, it requires a long verification time and, 
consequently, a long delivery time to customers. 
From this context, one of the project’s goals was to 
provide a set of architectural blueprints based on the use cases 
that have been developed within the project. The main 
objective is to show the benefits of the FAR-EDGE 
architecture and few possible application scenarios with 
reference to one or more functional domains of the platform. 
This section presents one of these architectural blueprints, i.e. 
the migration towards production optimization by means of 
the simulation functional domain of the FAR-EDGE 
architecture. 
A. 
Simulation functional domain 
FAR-EDGE Simulation provides functionalities for 
simulating the behaviour of physical production processes for 
the purpose of optimization or of testing What-If scenarios at 
minimal cost and risk and without any impact of regular shop 
activities. Simulation requires digital model of plants and 
processes to be in-sync with the real-world objects they 
represent. As the real-world is subject to change, models 
should reflect those changes. For instance, the model of a 
machine assumes a given value of electric power / energy 
consumption, but the actual values will diverge as the real 
machine wears down. To detect this gap and correct the 
model accordingly, raw data from the Field (direct) or 
complex analysis algorithms (from Analytics) can be used. 
To explain how a typical migration roadmap to the FAR-
EDGE Simulation functionality can bring industrial benefits, 
the What-If scenario use case based is here described. 
A traditional factory will benefit from the adoption of 
simulation and what-if analysis especially about the 
evaluation of the impacts of variations in the production 
conditions, including changes in the capacity, changes in the 
production plan, changes in the production mix, as well as the 
changes in physical configurations.  
 From a technical point of view a capacity to create a 
digital model to reproduce the actors and the activities carried 
out within the shop floor is required. Furthermore, 
decentralized architecture that enhances the automatic 
integration of data, information and results coming from the 
overall context of the company such as the market, the 
customer requirement or the internal processes, is needed. 
Finally, the real time and remote communication will need to 
be carried out for initiating and updating parameters 
exchange for example at the beginning of the production. 
This requires standard communication protocols.  
Moreover, the role of employees can be affected by the 
new technological and operational changes.  A typical design 
engineer should improve his/her skills and his/her know how 
on utilizing new technologies based on design and simulation 
activities and typically integrated with ICT aspects. 
For 
example, 
the 
added 
implementation 
of 
communication tools in simulation process means that 
feedback loops are growing ever too common to the modern 
engineer. Feedback loops are great when it comes to affecting 
the design positively, but they often mean a nightmare to the 
untrained engineer. With the growing capability of cloud-
based programs, engineer’s work is now often monitored or 
analysed in real time. This opens up the door for collaboration 
and greater innovation, but it means that as engineers, we 
need to be able to communicate. 
B. 
Deployment of FAR-EDGE Simulation – Roadmap 
Implementation 
The virtual representation of the physical objects in cyber 
space can be used for optimization of the production 
processes. For example, the cyber modules have the ability to 
avoid getting stuck in local optimization extremes and are 
able to find the global maximum and minimum which results 
in high performance. Therefore, the integration of digital 
models should be considered as a first step.  
In addition, the existing CAD systems will be interfaced 
to each other, and secondly, they will be fully integrated to 
enable the optimization of equipment reconfiguration 
through intelligent simulation tools. In the same way, the 
production will be optimized based on the integrated 
information derived from the CAD designs and then it will be 
automatically implemented through the intelligent tools. To 
this end, the production process models and their different 
layout versions will be first integrated with business 
functions, in order to align the process parameters with cost 
deployment and profitability measures. 
 From 
an 
organizational 
perspective, 
the 
main 
implications affect the roles of product designers and 
production engineers: they need to increase their level of 
cooperation to model all the relevant aspects of the 
manufacturing processes into the CAD. Furthermore, the 
production engineers have to see that the models of the CAD 
are connected to the models of the actual production 
facilities, so that the production can be simulated, planned 
and monitored. Therefore, the competences of the above-
mentioned roles require to be enhanced with new skills 
concerning 
digitalization, 
modelling 
and 
simulation. 
Furthermore, the tasks and responsibilities of these roles have 
to be updated, accordingly. 
The FAR-EDGE architectural blueprint for simulation 
and what-if analysis comprehends the following components: 
- 
CPS Model Synchronization 
o 
Synchronization Services 
o 
Open API for Virtualization 
- 
Edge Infrastructure 
o 
Data Routing & Pre-processing 
o 
Field Abstraction 
- 
Ledger Infrastructure 
o 
Distributed Ledger 
The 
Field 
Abstraction 
Component 
provides 
the 
mechanisms for configuring and controlling shop floor 
equipment and to receive asynchronous events and alarms 
from it. It is composed of informatics istance that, exploiting 
a bi-directional, low bandwidth communication, can 
exchange high frequent message. In this way, it is possible to 
obtain the abstraction of the low-level technical details of 
field components interactions. 
The Data Routing & Pre-processing Component provides 
the mechanisms to move massive streams of data from the 
Field Tier to the upper Tiers of the Platform. In this case, the 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-736-8
UBICOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

communication is unidirectional (upstream). Using this 
module, the acquisition and the pre-process of large amounts 
of data from heterogeneous sources can be pointed out, 
merging them into a common schema.  
From the implementation of these two components of the 
edge infrastructure, it is possible to instantiate a digital model 
of the shop floor and to populate it with set of heterogeneous 
data. The digital model facilitates an intermediate step where 
the integration of CAD systems with other design tools can 
be obtained.  In this way, it is possible to leave the approach 
in which each simulation system was fed by manually 
entering data from other systems (e.g. scheduling systems, 
production data management). In fact, through the integration 
of multiple software it will be possible to analyse in a single 
simulation environment more aspects (from those technical, 
operational to economic ones) facilitating the integration and 
orchestration ability that will be obtained through the ledger 
implementation. 
Once the connectivity has been ensured, the next step 
consists in the implementation of the Ledger Infrastructure, 
namely Synchronization services and Distributed Ledger to 
enable the collection and integration of information through 
the Cloud and to support simulation activity and what- if 
analysis. 
The Distributed Ledger Enabler is responsible of the 
decentralization of the factory automation pyramid. It 
maintains shared process state and shared business logic on 
Peer Nodes that may belong to any physical Tier of the 
Platform (Field, Edge, Cloud), and includes all the 
functionality for the enablement of Ledger Services. In this 
case, the Synchronization Services Component is considered 
as an aggregation / post-processing layer that includes all 
smart contacts used to support the Digital Models. These 
smart contracts are responsible to lead the relationship 
between the digital model and the changes or the event that 
happen in the real world, namely in the shop floor. 
After Ledger implementation, the smart contract 
instantiation and after the connection of Field abstraction 
with upper tier, it is possible to obtain a fully integrated CAD 
systems with intelligent tools for interactive design process 
and consequently an automatic optimization of shop floor 
details based on simulation services. The last component to 
be implemented is the Cloud infrastructure with its Open API 
for Virtualization that implement the cloud service endpoints. 
At this point a definition of maintenance plan for cloud 
system and a training for its utilization and management is 
required. 
Figure 3 represents the roadmap at technical (in blue), 
operational (in orange) and human (in green) dimensions 
towards simulation and what-if analysis by means of FAR-
EDGE Simulation. 
The Migration Matrix in Figure 4 represents the results, 
in terms of digital maturity improvement, of one of the 
possible migration paths towards FAR-EDGE Simulation. 
The technical, operational and human entities most impacted 
by the migration towards the scenario “Simulation and What 
if analysis” described above are the following: 
 
Simulation and visualization tools that, by the 
implementation of the Ledger infrastructure, are able 
to integrate in a digital world the results of different 
systems, enabling the representation of virtual aspect 
of overall company; 
 
Cyber-Physical System characteristics 
of the 
process, since the processes are integrated with 
digital-twin capabilities to interact each other; 
 
Autonomous Optimization process, since each shop 
floor component can be abstracted, visualized and 
can communicate each time has impacted by 
condition change; 
 
Production IT department, since new digital systems 
are introduced by external experts that will also 
provide continuous support; 
 
Simulation and design employees’ skills, with the 
first trainings focused on the use of the new 
technologies implemented. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
The FAR-EDGE migration approach shows how migration 
matrices can support manufacturers by providing them with 
a holistic view of the required steps for migration towards the 
Industry 4.0 vision at different dimensions of the factory, i.e. 
technical, operational, and human. Based on this information 
Figure 3. FAR-EDGE Simulation Roadmap for Simulation and What-If analysis scenario 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-736-8
UBICOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

and according to the business goals, the manufacturer can 
select the optimal scenario as first step of migration towards 
the long-term goal of complete digitalization of the factory. 
The solution identified within the selected scenario is then 
further 
detailed 
into 
an 
implementation 
roadmap, 
highlighting the necessary steps at technical, operational and 
human levels, in order to ensure a successful migration 
towards the FAR-EDGE vision. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s 
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under 
grant agreement No 723094. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Calà, F. Boschi, P. Fantini, A.Lüder and M. 
Taisch, “‘Migration Strategies towards the Digital 
Manufacturing 
Automation,’” 
in 
The Digital 
Shopfloor: Industrial Automation in the Industry 4.0 
Era . (Soldatos, J; Lazaro, O; Cavadini, F. Eds.): 
River Publisher, 2019.”  
[2] 
A. Calà, A. Lüder, A. Cachada, F. Pires, J. Barbosa, 
P. Leitao and M. Gepp “Migration from traditional 
towards cyber-physical production systems,” in 
Proceedings - 2017 IEEE 15th International 
Conference on Industrial Informatics, INDIN 2017, 
2017, pp. 1147–1152.  
[3] 
“FAR-EDGE 
– 
Factory 
Automation 
Edge 
Computing 
Operating 
System 
Reference 
Implementation.” 2017. 
[4] 
A. Calà, F. Boschi, A. Lüder, G. Tavola, and M. 
Taisch, “Migration towards digital manufacturing 
automation - An assessment approach,” Proc. - 2018 
IEEE Ind. Cyber-Physical Syst. ICPS 2018,  
[5] 
Marco Taisch, Roberto Rocca, Filippo Boschi, 
Ambra Calà and Paola Fantini, “A migration 
methodology for factories digital transformation,” in 
Sixth 
European 
Lean 
Educator 
Conference 
(ELEC2019), 2019. 
[6] 
A. Calà, F. Boschi, P. M. Fantini, A. Pagani, and F. 
Schildauer, “D 3.10 Blueprint Solutions and 
Strategies for Migrating to Decentralized Factory 
Automation Architectures – M20 Release,” 2018. 
[7] 
M. Macchi and L. Fumagalli, “A maintenance 
maturity assessment method for the manufacturing 
industry,” J. Qual. Maint. Eng., 2013. 
[8] 
M.Macchi M., Fumagalli L., Pizzolante S., Crespo A. 
and Fernandez G., “Towards Maintenance_maturity 
assessment of maintenance services for new ICT 
introduction,” in APMS-International Conference 
Advances in Production Management Systems, 2010. 
[9] 
J. Zeb, T. Froese, and D. Vanier, “Infrastructure 
Management Process Maturity Model: Development 
and Testing,” J. Sustain. Dev., vol. 6, no. 11, 2013. 
[10] 
A. De Carolis, M. Macchi, E. Negri, and S. Terzi, “A 
Maturity Model for Assessing the Digital Readiness 
of Manufacturing Companies,” in IFIP International 
Federation for Information Processing 2017, 2017, 
pp. 13–20. 
[11] 
M. Garetti, P. Rosa, and S. Terzi, “Life Cycle 
Simulation for the design of Product-Service 
Systems,” Comput. Ind., vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 361–369, 
2012. 
[12] 
M. Garetti and S. Terzi, “Product Lifecycle 
Management: 
Definizione 
, 
Caratteristiche 
e 
Questioni Aperte,” 2003, no. January 2003, p. 16.
 
 
Figure 4. Migration Path (MP2) for the implementation of simulation and what-if analysis 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-736-8
UBICOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

