 
 
Propensity to Use Smartphone Applications 
 
Hannu Verkasalo 
Zokem Oy 
Helsinki, Finland 
hannu.verkasalo@zokem.com 
 
 
 
Abstract—This article studies the impact of contextual 
variables on smartphone usage with a dataset collected from 
256 people with mobile audience measurements. Real-life 
smartphone usage was tracked over a period of 1-2 months, 
and contextual information of the usage was collected to 
complement behavioral data. This article seeks for statistical 
understanding regarding how context affects usage patterns 
and likelihood to use smartphone features and applications. 
Results of the analyses suggest that, odds of using voice and 
mobile browsing are approximately 100% and 240% higher 
in home country than abroad, respectively. On the other 
hand, messaging is found to be used more while out of home 
country. Voice service is preferred when handset battery 
status is low, than any other service. Odds of using calendar 
on weekdays are 42% higher and for maps 20% lower, than 
on weekdays. Music service is found to be used more during 
night hours (00:00-07:59) and higher battery status (2.6% 
higher odds with every single unit increase on a seven-bar 
battery scale). 
 
Keywords—handset-based usage tracking; user experience 
research; context analysis; mobile audience measurements 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Smartphones, advanced devices running operating 
systems to which applications can be installed, are driving 
the growth of the mobile industry in developed markets. 
In these markets most of the new innovations are based on 
new applications and services, and carriers together with 
device vendors are seeking new growth from these areas. 
Due to the increasing number of mobile applications and 
device features, also the heterogeneity in the ways people 
use them is increasing. Some applications are geared for 
office use (like email and document viewers), some 
applications are clearly more hedonic by nature (for 
example music playback or gaming). Therefore a need 
exists to analyze how people use new smartphone 
applications and features in practice, and in particular 
how context affects usage [1]. For example, there is a 
valid hypothesis that international roaming tariffs have a 
significant negative effect on usage, or that low battery 
status discourages people to use multimedia applications. 
The difficulties to conduct such analysis earlier have 
mainly resulted from the lack of hard data on usage and 
contextual variables. 
 
Usage of mobile services is typically studied through 
surveys and interviews. A research method that is based 
on in-device meters has been defined and used during the 
past few years at Helsinki University of Technology. The 
method involves setting up a panel population consisting 
of smartphone users, who install a research application to 
their mobile phones. The application collects information 
on device usage and contextual factors, and sends the 
information to centralized servers for analysis. Thus, 
usage data is complemented with web-based surveys that 
are conducted during the study. The advantages of the 
method include the objectivity and accurate nature of the 
data, and possibilities to arrange research projects on 
specific topics not easy to study with other methods (for 
example adoption research). The shortcomings include 
the cost of arranging the studies, early-adopter bias 
involved, and the generic lack of interactivity in the 
research process. [2] [3] [4] 
 
The goal of this article is to use data obtained through 
in-device measurements in a Finnish panel study or 
smartphone users in analyzing the impact of context on 
usage. In this research, context is defined to mean mainly 
the day of the week, hour of the day, battery status and 
location of subscribers (home vs. abroad). The research 
problem of the paper is: 
 
“How does context affect smartphone usage?” 
 
This article uses a handset-based research method in 
collecting data from a sample of smartphone users (see 
[2] and [4]). The method provides statistics on the actual 
use of mobile services. End-users participating in the 
study install a research client on their smartphone devices. 
This client runs on the background of the device, invisible 
to end-users, observing user actions and storing collected 
data points into device memory. The collected data points 
give an accurate and objective view on smartphone usage. 
This research data is transmitted daily to centralized 
servers for the purposes of analysis. The method is 
deployed 
in 
controlled 
panel 
studies, 
to 
which 
approximately 500–700 Finnish smartphone users are 
recruited annually, sampled randomly from the databases 
of all Finnish operators. The annual Finnish smartphone 
study has been repeated four times (2005–2008). The 
panelists (end-users participating in the study) are 
provided with €20 vouchers as compensation for the 
potential data transfer costs they have to bear due to the 
research setting (automatic transmission of data to 
servers), and everybody are required to agree on the terms 
of the study (opt-in). 
 
The combination of subjective survey and objective 
usage-level data obtained in a natural environment of end-
223
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
users is the main advantage of the used research method, 
in comparison to surveys, laboratory tests, network-based 
measurements and interviews (see [3] and [4]). The main 
shortcoming of the method is the adverse selection of 
panelists. Typically, only certain kinds of people 
participate in the research panels (tech-savvy, open-
minded, explorative). In addition, the smartphone device 
penetration is still well below 20% in the Finnish market 
[5], and most panelists are still early-adopter users, 
instead of mass-market consumers. 
 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
In order to create our research model, we first define 
context and its determinants in our scope. Context is a 
crucial concept, especially in the case of mobile services 
because of their ubiquitous nature, and is defined in the 
literature 
from 
different 
perspectives. 
Information 
defining context is very vast and in theory it is limitless 
[6]. Therefore it is imperative to define context in the 
study scope, prior exploring it. 
 
Amongst many proposed elucidation of context, Shilit 
gave a categorical definition of context by dividing 
context into three categories [7]: computing context (e.g., 
network bandwidth, nearby resources), user context (e.g., 
user profile, location), and physical context (e.g., 
temperature, light). Chen and Kotz afterwards [8], 
extended it by adding a time context (e.g., time of a day, 
week). Dey intended a generalized and embracing 
definition of context as [9], “Context is any information 
that can be used to characterize the situation of an entity. 
An entity is a person, place, or object that is considered 
relevant to the interaction between a user and an 
application, 
including 
the 
user 
and 
applications 
themselves”. Dey et al. also proposed a classification of 
context based on entities into people, places and things 
[10]. They also characterize contextual information as 
identity, location, status (or activity), and time. Whereas 
Lee et al. categorized context, in their mobile contexts 
framework, into personal and environmental context as 
depicted in Figure 1 [11]. 
 
 
Figure 1. Framework of mobile contexts (adapted from 
[11]) 
  
The effect of context on specific mobile service usage 
has been studied by different researchers, through 
different research instruments (usually surveys). The 
studies typically define contextual variables, representing 
context, in different ways in order to study contextual 
determinants of the service(s) usage.  
 
One classic study to explore effect of context 
(specifically time and location context) on the use of 
mobile internet was done by Sidel and Mayhew [12]. The 
location context was determined as home, work/school, 
commute and leisure, each of which was further detailed 
into micro-contexts (e.g., bedroom, kitchen, bathroom, 
etc. in home context). The study suggests that effect of 
time and location context on service usage is low. 
 
Lee et al. study intended to identify contexts [11], 
where mobile internet services are likely to be used more 
frequently, through a longitudinal study. The study 
defined a framework (depicted in Figure 1) of mobile 
context centering the concept of Use Context which is 
defined as, “the full set of personal and environmental 
factors that may influence a person when he or she is 
using a mobile Internet service”. Both environment and 
personal context were observed to affect internet usage 
and the service usage was clustered around few contexts. 
 
Esbjörnsson 
and 
Weilenmann 
studied 
voice 
conversation over mobile phone in different contexts [13]. 
Contexts here were different environments (classroom, 
car and change room). The study finds that users find 
certain contexts felt inappropriate for such use (cloth 
change room and classrooms), while some context were 
preferred (driving a car). The study concludes that context 
has a significant impact in the mobile usage behavior and 
implies the need of context-aware applications. 
 
Mallat et al. studied the effect of context on mobile 
service adoption taking mobile ticketing service for the 
analysis [14]. Her study was based on TAM and diffusion 
of innovations theory. It added a construct of use-context 
as a mediating construct for Perceived Usefulness (PU) 
and mobility, in effecting intentions of service usage. The 
context construct here was defined as, ‘the conditions that 
users meet when they use mobile services in different 
places and times’. The study finds that the effect of PU 
and mobility was fully mediated by use-context and 
indeed PU had no significant direct effect on intentions. 
 
Verkasalo defines a context identification algorithm 
(specifically location context) based on the handset-based 
measurement method and studied differences in service 
usage across observed contexts [1]. Location context was 
defined in terms of home, office and on-the-move context, 
and the study observed the difference in usage patterns of 
multimedia services across these contexts. 
 
Recently, Xu and Yuan highlighted the impact of 
context and incentives on the behavioral intentions to use 
mobile service (particularly m-commerce) [15]. Context 
in the study was defined in categories of personal and 
environmental 
context 
and 
the 
context 
variables 
concerned the observed service of GPS-based taxi 
dispatching system. The variables defining environmental 
context included location (rural or urban), weather (bad or 
normal), time (rush hour or normal hour) and personal 
context included mobility (user can easily move around or 
224
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
not) and urgency (taxi needed urgently or not). The study 
finds significant impact of context on the service usage. 
 
Most of the studies in the literature review were found 
to be focused on a specific service, which limits the 
external validity of the analysis, especially when 
perceiving context as variable shaping behavior of mobile 
user in a holistic way. Therefore, this study intends to 
highlight the effect of contextual factors on the 
smartphone usage, not through a particular service but by 
analyzing complete handset usage. Also, existing studies 
typically observe the effect of context on behavioral 
intention to use a service, which can be different from the 
contextual factors which trigger the actual usage.  
 
The context is also observed to be defined in different 
ways by researchers. Variables defining the contexts 
(even if it was labeled the same e.g., location) were 
diverse too. One possible reason could be the indefinite 
number of prospective contextual variables. We also 
choose different variables for defining context, which 
were observed accurately through the handset-based 
measurement method of the mobile user behavior. This 
provides a novel insight on the usage of smartphones, 
observed through a different set of contextual parameters. 
 
III. 
RESEARCH MODEL AND HYPOTHESES 
 
The literature about context gives an overview that 
context is a broader concept and can be elucidated from 
different perspectives. There can be numerous contextual 
parameters that effect handset usage (of different 
services), in different ways. Being able to capture all 
contextual information, of mobile service usage, is 
difficult. However, with our handset-based measurement 
methodology we are able to get part of it accurately. The 
contextual information we model here includes day of the 
week, time of the day, location (international roaming) 
and battery status of the device. From the categorical 
context description view, we have objective behavioral 
information pertaining to time context, computing context 
and user context, as depicted in Figure 2. However, it 
should be noted that this model represents partial context 
as per the availability of objective mobile usage-
information. But, the model presented is extensible and 
cater for further contextual information if available. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Research model 
 
In order to form hypotheses, we take prior research 
work concerning these contextual factors as our starting 
point. For battery status, we use results from Rahmati and 
Zhong [19] study about human-battery interaction in 
user-centric perspective. The survey-based study provides 
insight about how people perceive battery indicators, their 
charging patterns, and their knowledge about power 
consumption 
from 
different 
services. 
Hypothesis 
regarding roaming is grounded on Europe wide study 
“Eurobarometer”, 
commissioned 
by 
European 
Commission’s Directorate-General Information Society 
and Media [20]. The study suggests that there is a clear 
difference observed in handset usage when roaming 
abroad and highlights the influencing factors. Hypotheses 
referring day of the week usage are based on the research 
on mobile internet usage by Sidel [12]. The study 
investigates whether context in which mobile internet is 
used, and specifically time and location context, 
differentiates mobile internet usage behavior.  Day of the 
week hypothesis takes root in two separate studies (see 
[17]; [18]) which analyze mobile traffic at the web portal. 
Both the studies provide different insights about the 
weekend usage. Previously, the effect of context on all 
mobile services (and thus smartphone as a whole) has not 
been studied in detail except for voice and internet 
services. 
Therefore, 
in 
order 
to 
have 
a 
better 
understanding about the influence of context on the usage 
we do alongside exploratory research as well. 
 
H1: Lower battery status increases likelihood of 
using basic voice service over other services 
 
“Only 31% of the mobile users in our user survey 
correctly pointed out voice communication as a large 
power consumer. From the remaining 69%, 39% chose 
text messaging as a large power consumer while text 
messaging is usually much more energy-efficient than a 
voice call to convey the same message, as our 
measurement indicated.” [19] 
 
People consider smartphone as a communication device 
and voice as the most crucial mobile communication 
application. Moreover, they consider voice to be less 
power 
consuming 
application 
for 
communication, 
relatively, as shown in the study by Rahmati et al. [19]. 
 
H2: While roaming internationally, likelihood of 
using 
price-sensitive 
applications 
(e.g., 
voice, 
messaging and browsing) decrease significantly 
 
“A clear majority of users limit their mobile 
communications when travelling abroad” AND “The 
survey 
demonstrates 
clearly 
that 
excessive 
communication costs are by far (81%) the main reason 
why Europeans use their phone less often when travelling 
abroad” [20] 
 
The hypothesis is derived from Eurobarometer; the 
survey-based study is done in 25 member states of the 
EU, during that time, on 24,565 people (see [20]). 
 
H3: Evening time (16:00-23:59) increases the 
likelihood of using mobile browsing 
 
“Over half of respondents (54.8 percent), however, 
report that no day-part exceeds evening (18:00-24:00) in 
MobileNet usage.” [12] 
 
 “Investigating whether heavy users have a particularly 
high proportion of their usage in any particular day-part, 
we find the strongest correlation between minutes per day 
and percentage of usage in the late night/early morning 
(0:00-6:00”) [12] 
225
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
Hypothesis 3 is based on survey study by Sidel and 
Mayhew on the use of mobile internet by Japanese 
consumers [12]. It should be noted when interpreting 
results, that this study uses eight-hour time slot and 
divides day into three intervals referred as Morning, 
Evening and Night. Whereas, in Sidel study it is divided 
into four intervals of six-hour each. Also, Sidel study 
considers all services accessed on mobile internet, 
encompassing several services (e.g., browsing, email 
clients, instant messaging services, etc.) 
 
H4: Weekend affects the use of browsing application 
on smart phones compared to weekdays.  
 
“…Second, if you view the percentage of traffic over a 
weekly period, day by day, the weekdays are fairly 
regular and the peaks are found on the weekend days” 
[18] 
 
“The relative importance of different categories did not 
change between weekdays and weekends (except stock 
quotes and sports). However, the amount of data accessed 
over the weekend drops by 45%.” [17] 
 
The hypothesis 4 is derived from a study on mobile 
internet by analysing traffic on mobile portal [18] and a 
study on wireless browsing patterns on popular web portal 
specifically designed for cell-phone and PDA users [17]. 
Halvey et al. study suggests a possibility of higher use on 
weekends, but Adya et al. study finds no significant 
difference in the weekend and weekday browsing use 
except for some application categories. However, both the 
studies are done during different time periods and it 
should be noted that increase in traffic could be a 
consequence of more intense data sessions and/or 
frequent application usage. Therefore, an open hypothesis 
is given regarding the browsing usage by day of the week 
context. 
 
IV. 
ANALYSIS 
 
A. Dataset 
 
This article uses a dataset collected in fall 2007 of 579 
users. Out of those, 255 active panelists (whose data has 
been consistently recorded) are included in the dataset. 
All of them had S60 3rd edition devices. Of the panelists, 
31% have a GPS-enabled phone, and 52% have a WLAN-
enabled phone; 81% are male, and 19% female. In 
addition, 77% of the panelists are less than 40 years old. 
This gender and age balance indicates that panelists are 
mostly early-adopters (typically tech-savvy younger 
men). Many (68%) of the panelists are in full-time work, 
and 20% are students. The panelists are recruited from the 
customer databases of all the major Finnish operators 
(TeliaSonera, Elisa and DNA), targeting only consumers. 
SMS invitations are sent to 27 000 consumers who own a 
smartphone, and do not resist operators’ research oriented 
SMS messages. The panel study was arranged to collect 
data for better understanding market conditions and user 
behavior. All panelists were compensated with lump sum 
voucher of 20€ in the end of the study. Most people paid 
their bills themselves. The panel lasted for 1–2 months 
(depending on the time people signed up) between 
November 2007 and January 2008. 
 
The following data points are used in the actual 
analysis: 
• 
Application data 
• 
Messaging data 
• 
Location data (cellular tower ID codes) 
• 
Time and date stamps of transactions 
• 
Battery status data 
 
B. Descriptive study 
 
Descriptive statistics, in Figure 3, provides us with a 
summarized understanding about the behavioral dataset 
being analyzed. The statistical analysis further exhibits 
hard facts about the overall use of frequently-activated 
mobile services across different contexts.  
 
In Figure 3, y-axis represents the average service-usage 
in terms of service launches normalized over Active 
hours. Active hours represent hours of the day where the 
device has been observed to be used at least once. Active 
hours along with different service launches are aggregated 
by different contexts, to present normalized launches per 
active hours. 
 
It can be observed from the descriptive statistics that 
time of the day and location context seem to impact all 
observed services. But day of the week usage segregation, 
by weekend and weekday, does not indicate any notable 
change in the voice, messaging and browsing service 
usage. Battery level descriptive, in the Figure 3, do show 
some variation in the different services usage but it is 
difficult to deduce any conclusive usage trends. 
 
The descriptive analysis gives an overview of overall 
effect of context on the service usage pattern. But the 
results of the analysis are not interpreted in terms of 
trends about the user behavior in smartphone usage, 
because of the aggregate nature of the descriptive 
analysis.  
  
 
  
 
Figure 3. Contextual impact on smartphone usage 
226
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
B.1.Statistical analysis 
 
A logistic regression model is next deployed in 
analyzing smartphone user behavior. In exploring the 
likelihood of using the mobile service, the outcome is a 
dichotomous variable (service either used or not-used, for 
example) therefore logistic regression is a relevant 
method for the analysis. Use of this technique in related 
studies is studied in [22], [23] and [24]. 
 
The analysis is structured by the frequently used 
services on smartphones by the users. These services 
cumulatively account for more than 70% of the total 
handset usage, observed in the sample population. 
Observed smartphone services include: voice, messaging, 
browsing, camera, music, calendar and maps services. 
Regression analysis is run for each of the service using 
SPSS Statistics (v.16) software package. Typical output 
of logistic regression is odds ratio, but for easier 
interpretation output is presented in terms of percent-
change in odds, of using a service. Having fitted the 
model, it is also required to assess the adequacy and 
significance of the model. Without assessing the fit of 
logistic model, consequences could be adverse [21]. 
Goodness-of-fit of all models is reported with both, the 
Hosmer–Lemeshow (H-L) and Omnibus tests of model 
coefficients. Coefficient of determination (R2) is also 
checked in analysis. 
 
An omnibus test of model coefficients test has positive 
response for all the models. Chi-squares listed under this 
column represents drop in deviance (-2Log likelihood) in 
model with variables included, compared to intercept-
only model (model without variables). The chi-squares 
observed for all the models are statistically significant as 
well. 
Suggesting 
that 
model 
with 
predictors 
is 
significantly different from zero variable models. 
 
H-L goodness-of-fit test divides the cases into deciles 
(referred as “deciles of risk”) and computes a contingency 
table for H-L test, with predicted probabilities. It then 
uses observed and expected frequency to compute chi-
square. p value then is calculated from the chi-square 
distribution with 8-degrees of freedom [25] and if it is 
greater than 0.05, research is unable reject the null 
hypothesis that there is no difference between model-
predicted and observed values. Thus indicating that model 
fits the data at an acceptable level. The statistical analysis 
releveals that H-L test is statistically significant for all 
models except for Music service model. This suggests 
that (based on the difference between observed and 
predicted values) most of the models tend to favor 
alternate hypothesis, which means model prediction 
capability is not statistically sound (except Music service 
model). 
 
Coefficients of determination (R2) values, which 
indicate the proportion of variance explained by the 
predictive models, are also checked. For logistic 
regression R2 is computed observing the difference 
between null and fitted model and are often referred as 
Pseudo R2. We study two R2 values, namely Cox and 
Snell and Nagelkerke, they both are computed using the 
concept of log likelihood differences between null-model 
and fitted-model. R2 value ranges from 0 to 1, with 1 
representing saturated model (model explaining full 
variance in the dataset). It can be seen that R2 values are 
lower in the models, but as stated by Hosmer and 
Lemeshow [25] that R2 are typically low even in well-
fitted logistic regression models. Hence one should avoid 
its comparisons with other regression models. 
 
B.1.1. Voice 
 
Voice service includes both outgoing and incoming 
voice calls on the smartphone and accounts for 17.7 
percent of total handset usage. Regression analysis reveals 
that time context has a substantial impact on the voice 
service usage followed by user and computing context. 
During Morning (08:00 – 15:59) and Evening (16:00-
23:59) odds of using voice service increase by around 138 
percent and 80 percent, respectively. Also, compared to 
travelling abroad when at home odds of using Voice are 
99 percent higher approximately.  
 
Battery status, denoting here computing context, brings 
out worth-noting paradigm of handset usage. It reads, 
with every unit increase in battery status odds of using 
Voice service decrease by roughly 3 percent. Thus, it can 
be argued that usage of voice increases when battery runs 
low. Therefore, hypothesis 1: ‘Lower battery status 
increases likelihood of using basic voice service over 
other services’ is favored. Likelihood decrease in voice 
usage, also aligns with hypothesis 2. 
 
B.1.2. Messaging 
 
Messaging service here includes SMS, MMS, IM and 
other applications used through messaging application on 
Symbian S60 handsets. This service represents 43 percent 
of total handset usage. 
 
Location seems to have deeper impact on the use of 
messaging service. It is likely to be used more when 
roaming 
abroad. 
Hypothesis 
2: 
“While 
roaming 
internationally, 
likelihood 
of 
using 
price-sensitive 
applications 
(e.g., voice 
and 
browsing) decrease 
significantly” is not supported here. Messaging is more 
likely to be used during the usage of handset at nights. 
Also, greater battery status can enhance its usage. 
 
B.1.3. Browsing 
 
Browsing service refers to use of web browser from the 
handset and it corresponds to 4.1 percent of the 
cumulative mobile usage.  
 
The study finds that location of the user has the most 
profound effect on its usage. Odds of using browsing 
service are around 242 percent higher when at home, 
compared to roaming internationally, thus supporting 
hypothesis 2. There is no significant difference between 
browsing use on weekend and weekday (in terms of 
service launches) therefore Hypothesis 4: “Weekend 
affects the use of browsing application on smart phones 
compared to weekdays” is rejected here.  
 
Morning time is likely to lessen mobile web browsing 
usage, while the usage also decreases with increasing 
battery status. But no significant difference is found in 
227
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
usage difference during evening time and night time. This 
rejects hypothesis 3: “Evening time (16:00-23:59) 
increases the likelihood of using mobile browsing”. 
 
B.1.4. Camera 
 
Camera represents one percent of net smartphone 
usage. Although there is no hypothesis concerning camera 
usage, but it is essential to explore effect of context on 
this important service to model smartphone usage.  
 
It can be observed that camera is more likely to be used 
on weekends. Besides, location-context has a high effect 
on its usage, with 55 percent (approximately) less odds of 
being used at home compared to abroad. Also its usage is 
likely to be more when battery level is high and during 
the evening time. 
 
B.1.5. Music 
 
Music applications on Symbian phones account for 1.5 
percent of total handset usage. 
 
Location context here appears to have no effect on 
music service usage. But time of the day and battery 
status has an impact. It is likely to be used more during 
the night hours and with battery levels on the upper side. 
 
B.1.6. Calendar 
 
Calendar is the mostly used application after 
Messaging, Voice and Browsing. It stands for 2.2 percent 
of the entire usage.  
 
Calendar is more likely to be used on weekdays (around 
42 percent higher odds than weekdays) and during the 
morning time (34 percent higher odds). Context of 
location has a significant impact, with approximately 130 
percent more likely to be used at home (compared to 
abroad). Battery-life also has a deeper impact on Calendar 
usage compared to other services observed. 
 
B.1.7. Maps 
 
It represents use of different applications which activate 
GPS use on the device. Its use in the dataset is observed 
to be 0.9 percent of the total usage, with logistic 
regression analysis. 
 
It is observed that Maps service is less likely to be used 
on weekdays but is more likely to be used during Morning 
time of the day. Also, usage is likely to increases with the 
increasing battery status. 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
 
The context, defined here by the variables: day of the 
week, time of the day, location (international roaming) 
and battery status of the device, is found to have an 
considerable impact on smartphone usage. It is observed 
that chances of using voice service are higher than other 
service in low battery status. This adds to the findings by 
Rahmati et al. [19], where people were observed to have 
an opinion that voice service consumes less power 
relatively, by confirming preference for voice service in 
case of low battery status. But this does not necessarily 
establish a potent causal relationship between low battery 
status and voice service usage, because of other factors 
(e.g., psychographic or motivational) which possibly can 
impact the usage as well, but are left outside the scope of 
this study. Other than browsing service which follows the 
same trend as voice, rest of the services are more likely to 
be used with higher battery power still in the handset.  
 
Time of the day context, is observed to impact all the 
observed services and potentially music and maps service. 
Some services are more likely to be used during specific 
time periods. For example, voice, calendar and maps are 
preferred more during the morning (8:00-15:59) and 
camera in the evening (16:00-23:59) time. The study also 
finds no significant increase in mobile browsing likely-
usage during evening time, thus finding an exception for 
mobile browsing use to Sidel [16] study’s mobile internet 
findings. 
 
Location context, defined here in terms of international 
roaming status, had a considerable impact on all service 
except music and maps. For voice and browsing the 
likelihood of using the services abroad is found to be 
reduced drastically, but for messaging the chances of 
using it abroad are found to be higher. This complements 
the findings by Eurobarometer study [20], but with an 
exception of messaging service. This has implications for 
price regulatory bodies in deciding fair charges for 
roaming consumers, backed by their usage behavior. 
 
Day of the week context segregation by weekends 
versus weekdays is found to have less effect on 
smartphone usage, comparatively. More frequently used 
services including messaging, voice and browsing were 
found to be used evenly across defined day of the week 
context, while camera and maps are likely to be used 
more on weekends. Such a behavior can be fueled by 
several factors, analyzing those factors might help 
categorizing services from a different perspective (e.g., 
everyday services, weekend services, holiday services). 
 
All the contextual variables analyzed were observed to 
influence smartphone usage, though to a varying degree. 
This is in-line with the reviewed existing literature in this 
research area. But some of the results provide different 
insights than the previous studies, as observed from the 
objective behavioral-data analysis. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
 
This research analyzed effect of context on smartphone 
usage, by first defining context in terms of variables 
(time, week, battery status and location). The novel 
method of analyzing context through handset-based 
measurement method is found to be empowering for 
analyzing use-context of smartphones.  
 
The regression analysis revealed that time context, user 
context and computing context measured by time-of-the-
day / day-of-the-week, user location and battery status of 
smartphone, significantly vary usage of most mobile 
services. It is also observed that, day-of-the-week time 
228
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
context does not seem to have much impact on most 
frequently used services (messaging, voice and browsing). 
 
This analysis may have implications for designing of 
context-aware applications for smartphones. For example, 
making more likely-to-be-used services in a certain 
context quickly accessible to the users by dynamically 
adjusting user interfaces. Also, identifying usage context 
and analyzing contextual user behavior can open up new 
themes of mobile advertisement based revenue models for 
involved businesses. In particular, targeted advertising 
based on context is likely to be one of the future things 
that will transform the advertising business One a broader 
scale, the research about observing contextual information 
through smartphones, can also reveal valuable social and 
ethnographic information about people, and through 
“reality mining” new models explaining the behavior of 
people can be observed  [16]. 
 
The study has certain limitations which should be 
considered when interpreting or using the direct findings: 
 
• 
A 
small 
number 
of 
people 
from 
whom 
comprehensive datasets were collected 
• 
Sample bias (e.g., male biased dataset) and 
problems with representativity (early-adopter 
smartphone users) 
• 
Low level of variance explained by the dataset 
analyzed. One possible reason could be fewer 
contextual variables available in the dataset. 
• 
Not enough data yet to confirm findings in a 
confirmatory study setting. 
• 
Services which are used less frequently, each of 
which account for less than 0.9% of the total 
handset usage, are scoped out for simplicity 
reasons.  
 
Future research should try to capture as many 
contextual variables as possible to have a more 
comprehensive analysis of context impact, on the 
smartphone use. Given the platform, future work should 
also focus on mobile services in the long tail of 
smartphone service usage. It should also analyze 
determinants of smartphone usage other than contextual 
factors simultaneously. This could help quantify impact of 
context in comparison to other factors, influencing mobile 
user behavior. This also highlights mediating effect of 
contextual factors. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Verkasalo, H. (2008). Contextual Patterns in Mobile Service 
Usage’. Journal of Personal and Ubiquitous Computing; February 
2008 (Online First collection). 
[2] 
Verkasalo, H. and Hämmäinen, H. (2007) A Handset-Based 
Platform for Measuring Mobile Service Usage”, INFO: The 
Journal of Policy, Regulation and Strategy, vol. 9, no. 1 , pp. 80-
96. 
[3] 
Verkasalo, H. (2005). Handset-Based Monitoring of Mobile 
Customer Behaviour. Master’s Thesis Series, Networking 
Laboratory, Department of Electrical and Telecommunications 
Engineering, Helsinki University of Technology, Espoo, Finland. 
[4] 
Verkasalo, H. (2009). Handset-Based Analysis of Mobile Service 
Usage. Doctoral Dissertation. Helsinki University of Technology. 
[5] 
Kivi, A. (2007). Measuring mobile user behaviour and service 
usage. Presented at Los Angeles Roundtable, 1-2 June 2007, LA, 
USA. 
[6] 
Chavez, E., Ide, R., and Kirste, T. (1999). Interactive applications 
of personal situation-aware assistants. Computers and Graphics, 
23, pp. 903–915. 
[7] 
Schilit W. N. (1995). System architecture for context aware mobile 
computing, Ph.D. Thesis, Columbia University, May 1995. 
[8] 
Chen G. and Kotz D. (2000). A survey of context-aware mobile 
computing research, Technical Report, Dartmouth Computer 
Science TR2000-381, 2000. 
[9] 
Dey, A.K. (2001). Understanding and using context. Journal of 
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing; Vol. 5, No. 1, February 2001 
[10] Dey A. K., Abowd G.D and Salber D. (2001). A conceptual 
framework and a toolkit for supporting the rapid prototyping of 
context-aware applications. Human Computer Interaction 16 2–4, 
pp. 97–166. 
[11] Lee, I., Kim, J. and Kim, J. (2005). Use Contexts for the Mobile 
Internet: A longitudinal Study Monitoring Actual Use of Mobile 
Internet Services. International Journal of Human-Computer 
interaction 18(3), pp. 269-292, 2005. 
[12] Sidel, P. H. and Mayhew, G. E. (20013). ‘The Emergence of 
Context: A Survey of MobileNet User Behavior’. International 
University of Japan, Niigata Japan 
[13] Esbjörnsson, M and Weilenmann, A. (2005). Mobile Phone Talk in 
Context. In Proceedings of Context’2005 – The 5th International 
and Interdisciplinary Conference Modeling and Using Context. 
Springer Verlag, 11: pp. 140-154. 
[14] Mallat, N., Rossi, M., Tuunainen, V. K. and Öörni, A. (2006). The 
Impact of Use Situation and Mobility on the Acceptance of Mobile 
Ticketing Services. In Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, Hawaii. Computer 
Society Press. 
[15] Xu Z. and Yuan Y. (2009). The impact of context and incentives 
on mobile service adoption..Int. J. Mobile Communications, Vol. 
7, No. 3, pp.363–381. 
[16] Eagle, N. (2005). Machine Perception and Learning of Complex 
Social Systems. Doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. 
[17] Adya, A., Bahl, P. and Qui, L. (2001). Analyzing the browse 
patterns of mobile clients. In Proceedings of SIGCOMM  2001 
(Nov. 2001). 
[18] Halvey M., Keane M. and Smyth B. (2006). Time Based Patterns 
in Mobile-Internet Surfing. Proceedings of CHI 2006 (April 22-27, 
2006), Montréal, Québec, Canada. 
[19] Rahmati, A., Qian, A. and Zhong, L. (2007). Understanding 
human-battery interaction on mobile phones. International 
Conference on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices 
and Services (MobileHCI), ACM. 
[20] Eurobarometer. (2006). Special Eurobarometer. 269/Wave 66.1–
TNS Opinion and Social. 
[21] Hosmer, DW., Taber, S. and Lemeshow, S. (1991). The 
importance of assessing the fit of logistic regression models: a case 
study. American journal of public health 81(12), pp. 1630-1635. 
[22] Katz J.E. and R.E. Rice. (2003). Comparing internet and mobile 
phone usage: digital divides of usage, adoption, and dropouts. 
Telecommunications Policy 27(8-9): pp.  597-623. 
[23] Carlsson, C., Hyvönen, K., Repo, P. and Walden, P. (2005). 
Asynchronous Adoption Patterns of Mobile Services. Proceedings 
of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 
(HICSS-38), Island of Hawaii, USA, January 3 - 6, 2005. 
[24] Carlsson, C., Carlsson, J., Hyvönen, K., Puhakainen, J. and 
Walden, P. (2006). Adoption of Mobile Devices/Services - 
Searching for Answers with the UTAUT. Proceedings of the 39th 
Hawaii International Conference on System Science, 2006. 
 [25] Hosmer, D.W. and Lemeshow, S. (2004). Applied logistic 
regression, Wiley-Interscience. 
 
229
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

