Performance Evaluation of Wireless IP Telephony (W-IPT) over Wi-Fi Networks 
Maan A. Kousa 
Electrical Engineering Department, 
King Fahd University of Petroleum & Minerals 
Dhahran 31261, Saudi Arabia 
kousa@kfupm.edu.sa 
 
 
Abstract -- As one of the fastest growing voice service 
technologies, IP Telephony is currently the greatest 
benefactor of IP Convergence. Apart from the cost and 
management benefits of a converged network, the 
exciting array of productivity enabling applications 
such as unified messaging, collaboration, and presence 
services within an IP Telephony infrastructure are 
driving this rapid growth. Wi-Fi, on the other hand, is 
the widest deployed technology for indoor Internet 
access. It is therefore the default candidate for enabling 
wireless IP Telephony (W-IPT). The study aims at 
assessing the performance of W-IPT over Wi-Fi 
networks. In particular, the paper describes an 
experiment that was carried out on a running network 
at a university campus. The results shed some light on 
the readiness of Wi-Fi networks to embrace this fast 
emerging technology. 
 
Keywords- IP telephony;, VoIP; Wi-Fi. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The evolution of Internet Protocol Telephony products 
has drastically increased in scale and popularity. Vugrinec  
and Tomazic [1] discussed several issues of IP telephony 
deployment, 
what 
can 
be 
expected 
from 
such 
communication methods, what kind of benefits does IP 
telephony bring, and what drawbacks should users expect 
in comparison to the Plain Old Telephone System (POTS).  
Yet, IP Telephony faces at least two significant 
challenges. The first challenge is to ensure virtual 
connection across this connectionless packet IP network 
using new protocol standards, such as H.323, MGCP, 
MEGACO/H.248, or SIP. The second is to transport 
packets over the IP network in a timely manner with high 
integrity, thereby ensuring acceptable voice quality. 
The successful deployment of IP telephony depends on 
the performance of the underlying data network. 
Consequently, assessing a network to determine whether it 
can accommodate the stringent Quality of Service (QoS) 
requirements of IP telephony is critical.  
This work aims at assessing the performance of IPT 
over the widely-spread Wi-Fi network at King Fahd 
University of Petroleum and Minerals (KFUPM). Various 
experiments were run on different parts of the network 
covering good, average and poor links. Key performance 
indicators, namely latency, packet loss, jitter and Mean 
Opinion Score (MOS) were measured and analyzed. The 
results provided guidelines for the level of voice traffic 
that can be carried out over Wi-Fi links while maintaining 
good or acceptable call quality. Furthermore, the paper put 
forward some recommendations for network upgrade for 
better call quality or more voice traffic. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section II surveys 
the most relevant work to the problem under investigation. 
Section III introduces the key performance indicators 
adopted for the evaluation of IPT. Section IV describes the 
experiment set up and assessment tool, followed by 
Section V where results and findings are discussed. The 
paper concludes by stating some useful lessons learned 
from this experiment. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The area has attracted many researchers very early. 
Hsiaosu, Martin, Denise, and Darren [2], and El-Sherbini, 
El-Sherif,  Kamel, and Fayez [3] have conducted 
theoretical evaluations as well as computer simulations for 
IP Telephony assessment. Bearden, Denby, Karacali, 
Meloche, and Stott [4] have described a technique for 
evaluating a network for IP telephony readiness. Their 
technique relies on the data collection and analysis support 
of 
their 
prototype 
tool, 
ExamiNet/spl 
trade/. 
It 
automatically discovers the topology of a given network 
and collects and integrates network device performance 
and voice quality metrics. They report the results of 
assessing the IP telephony readiness of a real network of 
31 network devices (routers/switches) and 23 hosts via 
ExamiNet/spl trade/. Their evaluation identified links in 
the network that were over utilized to the point to which 
they could not handle IP telephony. 
Stefic and Prib [5] presented the results of the 
subjective testing of user perception of the quality with 
which IP telephony service is delivered. Both listening and 
conversational tests were considered. The results were 
187
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

further used to test the existing commercial QoS 
mechanisms and their suitability for the immediate service 
offering. The analysis of tests enables a provider offering 
IP telephony to not only  understand technical features of 
the service, but also to recognize the users’ needs, 
behavior and their acceptance of the service and its 
quality. Furthermore, test results may be used as a basis 
when designing a network supporting the IP telephony 
service while using existing QoS mechanisms. 
Karacali, Denby, and Meloche [6] have described a 
technique for efficiently assessing network readiness for 
IPT. Their technique relies on understanding link  QoS 
behavior in a network from an IPT perspective. They used 
network topology and end-to-end measurements collected 
from the network in locating the sources of performance 
problems that may prevent a successful IP telephony 
deployment. They present an empirical study conducted 
on a real network spanning three geographically separated 
sites of an enterprise network.  
This paper summarizes the results of an experiment 
conducted to assess the performance of IPT over Wi-Fi 
networks. This work differs from other works cited above 
in applying it to a vey large scale network running in real 
time.  
III.  KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 
The quality of IPT is inferred from a set of indicators. 
The first indicator is the Delay. Delay (or Latency) is the 
time it takes a packet to make its way through a network 
end-to-end. It is the sum of packetization delay, 
propagation delay, transport delay and jitter buffer delay. 
Generally, it is accepted that the end-to-end delay should 
be less than 150 ms for toll quality voice calls. 
The second indicator is Packet Loss.  During network 
congestion, the queue buffers of some routers and switches 
can overflow. Packet loss for non-real-time applications, 
such as Web browsers and file transfers, is undesirable but 
not critical. The protocols used by non-real-time 
applications, usually TCP, are tolerant to some amount of 
packet loss because of their retransmission capabilities. 
However, real-time applications based on UDP are 
significantly less tolerant to packet loss. In an RTP 
session, by the time a media gateway could receive a 
retransmission, it would no longer be relative to the 
reconstructed voice waveform; that part of the waveform 
in the retransmitted packet would arrive too late.  
The third indicator is Jitter. Jitter is the measure of the 
variation of packet arrival time. Jitter can be positive, 
where some packets arrive late, or negative where some 
packets arrive early. Keeping jitter under control is of 
particular interest to IPT networks in order to prevent calls 
from developing glitches or sounding "choppy". 
The fourth indicator is the Mean Opinion Score 
(MOS). Described in ITU-T P.800, MOS is the most well-
known measure of voice quality. It is a subjective method 
of quality assessment based on users opinion of the 
perceived quality of a voice transmission. A MOS of 5 is 
excellent; a MOS of 1 is unacceptably poor. The E-Model, 
ITU Standard G.107 quantifies MOS by determining 
which impairment factors produced the strongest user 
perceptions of lower quality. The E-Model thus includes 
factors for equipment and impairments and takes into 
account typical users' perceptions of voice transmissions 
affected by jitter, lost data, and delay.  
IV. EXPERIMENT SETUP  
Several tools for assessment were examined, namely 
ResponseWatch, Vista Insight, Expernet and Vivinet. 
Vivinet Assessor [7] was found to be a very flexible and 
feature-rich software, and therefore was selected for our 
experimental assessment.  
The test was run over KFUPM wireless LAN. KFUPM 
has a well developed wireless LAN based on IEEE 
802.11g standard which supports up to 54 Mbps. The 
wireless access points are back connected to the layer-2 
switches within a building, while layer-2 switches are 
connected to the only layer-3 switch of the building, which 
then forwards the data over the fiber-optic link to the 
university core network.  
For assessment tests on WLAN environment, six 
locations were selected, which are distributed on three 
floors in Building 59 (the largest academic building) based 
on different criteria as given below: 
Room 0032 (Ground Floor, very good signal coverage) 
Room 0072 – PC1 (Ground Floor, good signal coverage) 
Room 0072 – PC2 (linked with same access point of PC1) 
Room 0081 (Ground Floor, far from the Access Point thus 
poor signal coverage) 
Room 1079 (First Floor, far from the Access Point thus 
poor signal coverage) 
Room 2078 (Second Floor, excellent signal coverage) 
One IPT probe was installed in each of these locations 
and simulated IP calls were made between these rooms in 
a full mesh connection, i.e. every location calling every 
other location. We have considered three levels of traffic 
intensity: low, where one call is initiated between every 
pair of nodes, medium where 2 simultaneous calls are 
initiated between every pair, and high where 4 
simultaneous calls are initiated between every pair. The 
logical network diagram is shown in Figure 1. 
 
R-2078
R-0071-PC1
R-0081
R-0071-PC2
R-0032
R-1079
 
Figure 1. Logical connectivity of the assessment network 
188
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

All calls are 3-minute long separated by a 5-minute 
silence. Each configuration (traffic intensity) was run for 
24 hours. G711 Codec was used throughout the test. The 
specifications of G711 are shown in Table 1.  
 
TABLE 1. G711 CODEC SPECIFICATIONS 
bit rate  
64 kbps 
IP frame size  
280 bytes 
packetization 
time  
30 ms 
bandwidth at 
IP level   
74.7 kbps 
packet rate 
33.3 /sec 
bandwidth at 
ethernet level 
84.7 kbps 
   
The routers of KFUPM network were not configured 
for QoS, therefore all test were run with the absence of 
QoS protocols.  
 
V. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
In the study, several configurations were run to cover 
all scenarios of interest. Due to paper size constraints, only 
three sample runs are presented. The results of the other 
runs are supportive of the cases presented here.  
Run -1: one call/pair 
For a mesh network of 6 nodes, 1 call/pair translates to 
5 calls/link The performance was pretty good for more 
than 99% of the calls.  The average delay was always 
below 45 ms, which is quite acceptable.  The lost data was 
negligible (less than 0.03%). Moreover, all links 
performed equally well.  The variation in their 
performance was negligible.  
 
Run-2: 2 calls/Pair 
The impact of this increase in traffic on call quality 
was harsh: 33% of the calls were poor (Figure 2). In 
general, there are three main factors that affect the call 
quality, namely: delay, jitter, and lost data. The percentage 
effect of each of these factors for this run is shown in 
Figure 3.  The source of poor quality is mainly delay 
(51%) and lost data (41%).  The average delay  varied 
between 300 ms and 310 ms, and the average packet loss 
varied between 6.6% and 7.7%; both are on the high side.  
 
Figure 2. Call quality summary for 2 call/pair traffic. 
 
Figure 3. Factors affecting quality, for 2 call/pair traffic 
Unlike the 1-call case where all links were 
comparatively good, there is a high variation in call 
quality between different pairs of nodes. Figures 4 and 5 
show the call quality on the top 5 and bottom 5 links, 
respectively (referred to as Call “Group” in the figures).  
The top 5 are always good (MOS = 4.38), while the 
bottom 5 are always poor (MOS <  1.35).  By examining 
the WLAN links, it can be seen that the link between 
Room 0081 and its AP is the source of trouble.  All 
communications between Room 0081 and other nodes are 
poor, and they are the only poor links.  The delay on these 
links exceeds 800 m sec, while the delay on other links 
was in the range of 45 m sec.  On those same poor groups 
the lost data exceeds 20%. 
 
Figure 4. Call quality of the best 5 links for 2 call/pair. 
 
Figure 5. Call quality of the worst 5 links for 2 call/pair 
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

It is to be noted that a poor link is consistently poor at 
all times.  Figure 6 shows the quality on one such poor 
link (Room 0081- Room 2078), by hour.  The MOS is in 
the range of 1.3-1.4.  
 
Figure 6. Call quality by the Hour for the worst link for 2 
call/pair. 
 
Run-3:  4 calls/Pair 
Figure 7 shows the overall statistics of call quality for 
this level of traffic. The Figure shows that 75% of the calls 
are poor, 14% are acceptable and only 10% are good. 
 
Figure 7. Call quality summary for 4 call/pair. 
The percentage effect of the three performance factors is 
shown in Figure 8. We can clearly see that the source of 
poor quality is lost data (52 %) and delay (44%).  The 
effect of jitter is marginal (4%). 
 
Figure 8. Factors affecting call quality for 4 call/pair. 
Figure 9 shows the call quality evaluation by hour.  
The figure highlights the effect of the data traffic on the 
quality of IPT traffic (MOS ~ 2.7 in light traffic hours 11 
pm – 7 am, MOS ~ 2.1 in Busy Hour (BH) 8am – 9 pm). 
Measurement showed that the delay has been always 
excessive (average delay over 600 ms, approaching 740 
ms in BH), and the average percentage of lost data has 
been always above 16%, exceeding 28% during BH. 
 
Figure 9. Average call quality by the hour for 4 call/pair. 
Similar to the 2-call/pair case, not all calls on WLAN 
links had the same quality. Figures 10 and 11 show the 
MOS for the best 5 links and the bottom 5 links, 
respectively.  The Figures show wide variation of call 
quality between links (from MOS = 4 to 1). 
 
Figure 10. Call quality of the best 5 links for 4 call/pair. 
 
Figure 11. Call quality of the worst 5 links for 4 call/pair. 
We examined the performance of the link with highest 
MOS and that of the lowest MOS. The best link 
maintained a high MOS in the acceptable and good range 
(3.7 ~ 4.1).  The delay by the hour, Figure 12 fluctuated 
between 100 – 200 ms, which is within the acceptable / 
good ranges. However the lost data, Figure 13, is on the 
high side (4-10%). 
190
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
Figure 12. Delay by the hour over the best link for 4 
call/pair. 
 
The fact that the delay is in the acceptable range while 
the lost data is on the high side suggests that the link 
suffers from intermittent interruptions/disconnections at 
such high IPT traffic levels. While data traffic may not 
feel such disconnections, they are noticeable for voice 
traffic. They are the main reason behind the drop in MOS 
from the best range of 4.5 to around 4.0. 
 
Figure 13. Lost data by the hour over the best link for 4 
call/pair. 
Figures 14 and 15 show the delay & lost data of the 
worst link. With delay reaching 1500 ms and packet loss 
of about 50%, the link is useless and cannot support IPT 
traffic by any means.  
 
Figure 14. Delay by the hour over the worst link for 4 
call/pair. 
 
Figure 15. Lost data by the hour over the worst link for 4 
call/pair. 
 
V.  CONCLUSION 
In conventional telephony, the number of simultaneous 
calls affects the blockage probability but not the quality of 
the call. This is not the case in IPT. The assessment results 
of IPT over Wi-Fi network show how the IPT traffic load 
affects the quality of calls. For the case of one call 
between any pair of nodes (5 concurrent IPT calls on each 
link), the performance seems to be pretty good for more 
than 99% of the calls  The average delay was always 
below 45 ms and the lost data was negligible. Moreover, 
all links performed equally well.  
When the traffic is doubled 33% of the calls became 
poor. And, unlike the 1-call case where all links were 
comparatively good, there was a high variation in call 
quality between different pairs of nodes, some being 
consistently “good” and others being consistently “poor”. 
By examining the poor links, we found one node common 
to all, where the channel between that node and the nearest 
Access Point is poor. 
When the quality is doubled to 4 calls per pair, call 
quality became poor for 75% of the calls. For this test we 
started to notice the effect of Busy Hours of data traffic on 
IPT quality. Being within an academic building, the 
WLAN network is usually utilized within the hours of 8 
am – 9 pm and is hardly utilized after that. The MOS of 
calls between 9 pm-8 am were found to be 30% above that 
for calls between 8 am – 9 pm. 
The implication of this work is that Wi-Fi networks 
designed for data traffic can be suitable for reasonable IPT 
traffic and acceptable performance without modification. 
However, for heavy traffic or better performance, the 
routers may have to be configured for QoS enhancement 
as in IEEE 802.11e. Relying on 802.11e–enabled access 
points should help diminish the effect of non-IPT traffic 
and ensure better equity between concurrent IPT calls. For 
heavier traffic, there may be a need for more AP 
installations.  
In this work we assumed the best quality G711 Codec. 
The system could be as well configured to G723 (5.3 
kbps) which consumes less bandwidth but at the cost of 
quality (MOS theoretical maximum is 3.69).    
 
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author expresses his sincere thanks to Ahmar Shafi 
and Ajmal Khan for their help in acquiring the tools, 
preparing the set up and running the experiment. The 
author would also like to thank the Deanship of Scientific 
Research at KFUPM for its support. This project was 
carried out under Fund Programs FT070003 and 
SB100008.  
 
REFERENCES  
[1] A. Vugrinec and S. Tomazic, “IP telephony from a user 
perspective”, 
10th 
Mediterranean 
Electrotechnical 
Conference (MELECON) 2000, vol. 1, pp. 344-347.  
[2] H. Hsiaosu, F. Martin, M. Denise, and C. Darren, “An 
Approach to IP Telephony Performance Measurement and 
Modeling in Government Environments”, INET'99 Book, 
June 1999. 
[3] A. El-Sherbini, M. El-Sherif, T. Kamel, and A. Fayez, "A 
Performance Evaluation of the Integration of Voice and 
Data in a TCP/IP Local Environment," 36th IEEE Midwest 
Symposium on Circuits and Systems, Detroit, 1993, 
pp. 1332-1335.  
[4] A. Bearden, L. Denby, B. Karacali, J. Meloche, and D. Stott,  
“Experiences with evaluating network QoS for IP 
telephony”, 10th IEEE International Workshop on Quality of 
Service, 2002, pp. 259- 268.  
[5] R. Stefic and N. Prib, “Measurement and analysis of users' 
perception of QoS for IP telephony service”, 7th  
International Conference on Telecommunications (ConTEL) 
2003, 11-13 June 2003, vol. 2, pp. 505- 512. 
[6] B. Karacali, L. Denby, and J. Meloche, “Scalable network 
assessment for IP telephony communications”, IEEE 
International Conference on Communications, vol. 3  20-24 
June 2004, pp. 1505- 1511. 
[7]  Performing a VoIP Assessment with Vivinet Assessor, 
white paper, June 2007. 
http://download.netiq.com/CMS/WHITEPAPER/NetIQDoi
ngVoIPAssessmentWithVivinetAssessor-June2007.pdf  
<retrieved: Oct, 2011>.  
 
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

