The Effect of Feedback on Chord Typing
Adrian Tarniceriu, Pierre Dillenbourg, Bixio Rimoldi
School of Computer and Communication Sciences
Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale de Lausanne
Lausanne, Switzerland
adrian.tarniceriu@epﬂ.ch, pierre.dillenbourg@epﬂ.ch, bixio.rimoldi@epﬂ.ch
Abstract—The amount of visual feedback when using a
mobile device in a busy context is often limited. For example,
while texting and walking in a crowded place, we need to focus
on the environment and not on the phone. A way to type fast,
accurately and with limited visual feedback is represented by
chording keyboards. We present a study on such a chording
keyboard prototype and analyze the inﬂuence of having visual,
audio or no feedback at all on the typing process. The typing
rates are the same under all three conditions, with an average
of 20 words per minute, after approximately 350 minutes of
practice. The average error rates are the lowest in the absence
of feedback (2.41%) and the highest when the users can see
what has been typed (4.03%). Considering these results, the
proposed text input method is a viable option in situations
where visual attention is already committed to other tasks.
Keywords-chording keyboard; text entry; blind typing; feed-
back
I. INTRODUCTION
As mobile computing devices become increasingly pop-
ular, people want to be able to access them at all times.
However, in a mobile environment, the amount of visual
attention that can be devoted to a smartphone is often
limited. This happens because the vision is already focused
on the environment, and cannot be committed at the same
time to the device or to the display. Many people initiate
phone-calls while walking, but other functions such as text
messaging or e-mail writing are less accessible. Even so,
more than 40% of people write text messages while walking
in public places [1]. This is potentially dangerous, as the
visual attention is committed to typing and not to the
surrounding environment. Therefore, to increase security and
reduce the risk of accidents, it is important to ﬁnd a method
for entering text with limited visual feedback and without
the need to look at the keys.
Using a chording keyboard [2] for text input will reduce
the visual constraints. These keyboards enable users to gen-
erate a character by simultaneously pressing a combination
of keys, similarly to playing a note on a musical instrument.
With ﬁve keys, there are 31 combinations in which at least
one key is pressed, enough for the 26 letters of the English
alphabet plus ﬁve other characters. If the keys are placed
in a position that is naturally under the ﬁngertips, one can
type with only one hand and without looking at them. The
vision (or auditive feedback) is still needed occasionally
to verify the output and to correct errors, but this requires
considerably less commitment than continuously looking at
the input device.
The likely reason chording devices are not very popular
is that users require some training before being able to
type, to learn the correspondence between key combinations
and characters. A previous study [3] shows that people can
learn to type with a ﬁve-key chording keyboard in less than
45 minutes if the key-to-character mapping is conveniently
chosen.
We will analyze how different types of feedback affect
the ability to type with a chording keyboard. To obtain the
experimental data, users were asked to type under three
different conditions: (1) with visual feedback, when they can
see what has been typed; (2) with audio feedback, when they
cannot see, but they hear the character that has been typed;
(3) with neither visual nor audio feedback. We analyze the
typing rates, the accuracy and the distribution of errors. We
also evaluate the effect of the input device form factor on
the typing process.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we
overview existing typing studies that evaluate different types
of feedback. In Section III, we describe the experimental
setup used in the study and in Section IV, we present the
results. In Section V, we conclude the paper and discuss
future directions.
II. RELATED WORK
The condition when users type without looking at the
text-input device and/or the display mostly occurs in mobile
environments and is usually denoted as “blind” or “eyes-
free” typing [4]. This explains why most blind-typing studies
are performed using mobile keyboards such as 4×3 multi-tap
keypads, mini-QWERTY, touchscreen keyboards, Twiddler
[5], or other chording keyboards.
Silfverberg examined the effect of both tactile and visual
feedback when using mobile phone keypads [4] and found
that reduced tactile feedback increases the typing error rate.
In addition, low visual feedback also leads to more errors,
decreasing accuracy. A similar study made by Clawson et
al. [6], concerning typing with mini-QWERTY keyboards,
demonstrates the importance of seeing the keys while typing,
but does not show any signiﬁcant differences in typing
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 1.
Examples of letter mappings for “i”, “m”, “n”, “w” and “o”.
speeds and error rates when users can or cannot see the
typed text.
The above studies stress the importance of seeing the
input device in the case of 4 × 3 multi-tap keypads and
mini-QWERTY keyboards. However, this should not be an
issue for most chording keyboards, which are speciﬁcally
designed to be operated without looking at the keys. Typing
experiments with limited visual feedback for the Twiddler
chording keyboard were performed by Lyons et al. [7], and
show that, surprisingly, typing and error rates actually im-
prove with reduced visual feedback. Mascetti et al. propose
and evaluate a Braille typing system for smartphones [8].
As it is intended for visually impaired persons, there is no
visual, but only audio feedback.
Other studies, where participants do not look at the typing
device or are involved in dynamic activities that require
vision commitment, include the chording glove [9], a two-
handed chorded software keyboard for PDA’s [10], half-
QWERTY touch typing [11], or the keyboard proposed by
Gopher and Raij [12].
The chording keyboard used in this study has ﬁve
keys, placed directly under the natural position of the
ﬁngertips. As users do not have to move their ﬁn-
gers
from
one
key
to
another,
it
should
make
no
difference if they are able to see the keys or not.
In a previous study [3], we proposed and evaluated a key-
to-character mapping for a ﬁve-key chording keyboard. It is
designed to minimize the learning time by assigning intuitive
mnemonics to each character. Five examples of mnemonics
are shown in Figure 1: “i” is given by the initial of the ﬁnger
pressing the key (index); “m” and“n” are given by the shape
of the ﬁngers pressing the keys; “w” is given by the shape
of the ﬁngers not pressing the keys; for “o”, we imagine ﬁve
dots spread around a circle, and we obtain it by pressing all
the keys. The complete mapping is given in the Appendix.
The ﬁrst part of the study evaluated the learnability of the
mapping. We found that it can be completely learned in less
than 45 minutes.
In the second part of the study, we analyzed the achievable
text-entry rates and accuracy. We also assessed the difﬁculty
of different key combinations by measuring the associated
composition times. After 250 minutes of typing, the mean
typing rate was 15.2 words per minute (wpm), with a
maximum of 19.2 wpm. As a reference, after the same
training time, the typing rates for multi-tap mobile phones
are 12.4 wpm [13], for Twiddler 20.6 wpm [5], and for
half-QWERTY approximately 24 wpm [4]. Rates of 20.3
wpm were reached by expert T9 users [14]. Note that the
experimental conditions were not the same for all devices,
and the given values are only indicative. The mean error
rate during the experiment, accounting for both corrected
and uncorrected errors, was 7.42%.
The chording keyboard was simulated on a regular desk-
top QWERTY keyboard. It only allowed for the use of ﬁve
keys, each representing a key of the chording keyboard.
III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
The input method that we present is designed to be used
in situations where the visual attention is partially or totally
unavailable for the typing process. In these conditions, audio
feedback is often suggested as an alternative. This is indeed
useful in some environments, but could be difﬁcult to use in
noisy areas. Considering this, we designed a 3 × 10 within-
subjects experiment, where we analyzed three different typ-
ing conditions. Under the ﬁrst condition, subjects are able to
see the outcome of what they have typed, under the second
condition they receive voice output for each typed letter
(without visual feedback), and under the third condition they
receive no feedback at all about the typing. From here on,
we will refer to these conditions as visual, auditive, and no-
feedback, respectively.
We asked ten PhD students from our university (eight
male and two female, between 24 and 31 years old) to type
using a chording keyboard. All of them had participated in
the learnability part of the previous study, so they already
knew the mapping and had had 45 minutes of training. They
used a ﬁve-key chording keyboard prototype with the keys
placed around a computer mouse, presented in Figure 2. We
chose this design for the prototype because we wanted the
subjects to see a practical application of a chording device
that allows for typing and screen navigation at the same
time. The keyboard is designed using an Arduino Pro Mini
microcontroller board and communicates with the computer
by Bluetooth. The buttons are placed in a position that is
naturally under the ﬁngertips when a user holds the palm
on the mouse.
The participants were asked to type for 10 sessions of
30 minutes. Each session consisted of three rounds of 10
minutes separated by breaks of 2 minutes, and each round
corresponded to a different typing condition. The order of
the typing conditions was random for each session, but the
same for all subjects. For each user, the typing sessions took
place on consecutive days, with the exception of weekends.
The ﬁrst session enabled the subjects to remember the
mapping between keys and characters, and a help image
showing the key combination for the letter to be typed was
displayed. Starting with the second session, this image was
no longer displayed. In the beginning of each round, the
participants warmed up by typing each letter of the alphabet.
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 2.
Chording keyboard prototype
Figure 3.
Typing application screenshot for the visual feedback condition
Afterwards, they typed phrases from a set considered repre-
sentative of the English language [15]. These phrases were
pre-prepared before the experiment to contain only small
letters and no punctuation signs.
A Java application was designed to display the text to be
typed, to monitor the pressed keys and, in case of errors,
to check what character was typed in lieu of the correct
one. A screenshot of the application for the visual feedback
condition is shown in Figure 3. The top-left window contains
the text to be typed, and the bottom-left window represents
the typing area. The help image is displayed on the right.
The subjects were instructed to type as quickly and
accurately as possible. They were told to not correct even-
tual mistakes and keep typing, but this was not enforced
and they could delete typed text. As a reward for the
time commitment during the experiment, they received a
ﬁxed monetary compensation for the ﬁrst nine sessions.
For additional motivation, for the last session, the reward
was proportional to the number of typed words and to the
accuracy.
The total amount of data gathered during the experiment
consists of 40 345 words, out of which 4052 (10.17%)
contain errors. The total number of characters is 219 308,
from which 5889 (2.69%) are errors.
IV. RESULTS
The main purpose of the experiment is to analyze how
different typing conditions affect a person’s typing rate and
accuracy. Even if the mapping is the same, the input devices
are different between this study and our previous work. This
enables us to also verify the inﬂuence of the form factor of
the device on the text entry process.
A. Typing Speed
We use the words-per-minute measure to describe the text
entry speed. This is deﬁned as
wpm = 60L
t
1
5
(1)
where L is the total number of typed characters and t is
the typing time in seconds. The scaling factor of 1/5 is
based on the fact that the average English word length is
approximately 5 characters. Because the average word length
for the typed text differs from one session to another, the
use of the above formula provides a more reliable estimate
than actually counting the words.
In Figure 4, we show the average typing rates for each
session and for each condition. For the ﬁrst three sessions,
the rates are higher for the no-feedback condition, and the
analysis of variance tests showed that the differences are
statistically signiﬁcant (F = 10.85, p < 0.001). From the
fourth session onward, there are no more visible differences
between the typing rates. Moreover, the effect of the feed-
back type is no longer signiﬁcant (F = 0.28, p = 0.75). This
probably happens because in the beginning subjects pause
typing to check the provided feedback, visual or audio. As
they gain experience, they become more conﬁdent and do
not analyze the feedback so often, therefore reducing the
differences between conditions.
In Figure 5, we show the typing rates for each user and
for each session, during the no-feedback condition. As it can
be noticed, the fastest subject can type three times faster
than the slowest subject, the differences being statistically
signiﬁcant (F = 53.8, p < 0.001).
The average typing rates at the end of the experiment
are 19.77, 20.16 and 20.00 wpm for the visual, audio and
no-feedback conditions, with maximums of 31.24, 30.48
and 31.78 wpm, respectively. Considering the participants’
experience from the previous experiment, these values cor-
respond to approximately 350 minutes of practice. Because
the text entry rates will probably still improve, we use
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
Typing session
Typing rate (wpm)
 
 
Visual
Auditive
No feedback
Figure 4.
Average typing rates for each condition and for each typing
session
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Typing session
Typing rate (wpm)
 
 
Average
Subjects
Figure 5. Average typing rates for each subject and for each typing session,
for the no-feedback condition
exponential regressions to estimate how fast people will
be able to type after longer training periods. Based on
these calculations, after 20 sessions (300 more minutes of
practice), the average could be 26 wpm, and the fastest typist
could reach 42 wpm.
B. Error Rates
The error rates are computed as the number of errors
divided by the number of typed characters. Errors include
substitutions (when one character is typed for another),
insertions (when an extra character is typed) and deletions
(when a character is missing). Each substitution, insertion
and deletion counts as one error.
In Figure 6, we display the average error rates for each
session, accounting for both uncorrected and corrected er-
rors, and the corresponding exponential regressions. All of
the error rates are below 5%, except one. The averages for
all sessions and for all users under the visual/auditive/no-
feedback conditions are 4.03%, 3.30% and 2.41%, respec-
tively. Analysis of variance tests show that feedback plays
a relevant role in the error rates (F = 25.57, p < 0.001).
Initially, it might seem surprising that the error rates are
the lowest for the no-feedback condition and the highest for
the visual condition. However, this is explained by the fact
that increased cognitive loads generally lead to more errors
[16]. For our study, the cognitive load is the highest in the
visual condition: users can check the whole typed phrase;
it is reduced by the audio condition when users only hear
the last typed character, and minimum in the absence of
feedback. Noticing an error could cause someone to become
less focused, thus favoring new mistakes.
In Figure 6, we notice the high error rate for the second
typing session, visual condition. The reason for this could be
the fact that in the ﬁrst session the help image was always
displayed, whereas in the second session it was hidden.
Moreover, the ﬁrst typing condition in session 2 was the
visual one, giving subjects more practice time for the audio
and no-feedback conditions, which do not have much of an
increase in the error rates.
The error rates decrease during the ﬁrst four sessions
(with the exception mentioned in the previous paragraph),
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Typing session
Error rate %
 
 
Visual
Auditive
No feedback
Figure 6.
Average error rates for each condition and for each typing
session
but afterwards they remain stationary or even increase.
Similar effects, when after a certain point the error rates do
not decrease anymore as users gain experience, were also
noticed by Matias et al. [11] and Lyons et al. [5].
Error Patterns: In Figure 7, we present the error rates for
each character and for each typing condition. We notice that
the character errors respect the pattern of the overall error
rates: the highest for the visual condition and the lowest for
the no-feedback condition, this being the case for 20 of the
27 analyzed characters.
For all three conditions, the error rates are higher for
characters that are less frequent in the English language,
such as “q” and “j”. The character error rates are similar
between the three conditions, up to a scaling factor: if a
character has an error rate lower than other characters for
a speciﬁc condition, it usually also has a lower error rate
relative to the same other characters for the other conditions.
This is conﬁrmed by the correlation coefﬁcients between the
error vectors, all above 0.9.
To analyze in more detail the error patterns, we determine
the confusion matrices for each typing condition. They
are square matrices with rows and columns labeled with
all possible characters. The value at position ij shows the
frequency of character j being typed when i was intended.
The values are given as percentages of the total number
of occurrences for character i. The three matrices are sim-
ilar, with correlation coefﬁcients higher than 0.99. If we
consider only the erroneously typed characters (by setting
the diagonal values to zero), the correlation coefﬁcients are
above 0.9, still showing a strong similarity: if one character
is frequently typed instead of another under one condition,
the same will happen under the other two conditions; if the
probability for one character to be typed instead of another
is low under one condition, it is also low under the other
two conditions.
C. Typing-Device Form Factor
When designing a keyboard, an important aspect is the
form factor: where the keys are placed, how hard they have
to be pressed, and what the provided tactile feedback is.
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
j
k
l
m
n
o
p
q
r
s
t
u
v
w
x
y
z
sp
0
2
4
5
6
letter
 
 
Error rate %
Visual
Auditive
No feedback
Figure 7.
Error rates for each character for each typing condition
Modifying these characteristics will most likely inﬂuence the
typing process, because a keyboard can be perceived based
on them as difﬁcult or comfortable to use. In the absence
of visual/auditive feedback, tactile feedback is important
because it could be the only way to let the user know that a
character has been typed. This is why we used buttons that
provide a strong passive feedback, and not touch or pressure
sensors.
We evaluate the inﬂuence of the typing device form
factor on the typing process by comparing the typing rates
and the error rates under the visual condition with those
from our previous work. Even if the experiments took
place at different times, this is motivated by the fact that
the main difference is the input device, whereas the other
experimental conditions are similar. This time, the subjects
used a real prototype, not a chording keyboard simulated on
a regular QWERTY desktop keyboard; the keys are not the
same and also placed in a different position. For both studies,
the participants had the same education level (all master’s
or PhD students at our university), the gender distribution
was similar (two females out of ten vs. one female out of
six), the typed phrases were from the same set, the Java
application used to see the text to be typed was the same, and
the participants received similar ﬁnancial compensations.
As can be observed in Table I, after the same amounts of
training time, the typing rates are higher than those in the
previous work (15.73 wpm, compared to 12.16 wpm). The
time values start from 1.5 hours and not from 30 minutes (the
duration of one session), thus including the previous typing
experience of the subjects. The differences in the typing
speed are statistically signiﬁcant (F = 12.16, p < 0.001),
thus conﬁrming the importance of the input-device form
factor.
TABLE I.
AVERAGE TYPING RATES FOR THE VISUAL CONDITION
AND FOR THE PREVIOUS EXPERIMENT
Training time (hours)
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Visual condition (wpm)
7.23 7.82 11.83 14.01 14.97 15.73
Previous study (wpm)
6.79 7.83
8.87
9.40
10.37 12.16
The average error rate at the end of the previous study was
6.43%. After the same typing time, the average error rate for
the visual condition was 3.91%. The difference could also
be explained by different input devices and is statistically
signiﬁcant (F = 55.2, p < 0.001). Even if the average error
rates are not the same, the error patterns are similar for the
two studies, therefore we can conclude that they depend on
the mapping more than on the typing condition or on the
form factor.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have presented a study evaluating the
effect of different types of feedback for a chording keyboard.
The subjects were asked to type under three conditions:
with visual feedback, with auditive feedback and with no
feedback at all. Because of the keyboard design, whether the
user can see the keys or not should not make any difference
on the typing process — at the end of the experiment,
participants conﬁrmed that they did not look at the keys.
Similarly, someone playing a saxophone does not look at
the keys to be pressed.
After approximately 350 minutes of typing (taking into
consideration the previous typing experience of the subjects),
the average entry rates are approximately 20 wpm under all
three conditions, with the maximums above 30 wpm. We
conclude, therefore, that having visual, audio or no feedback
has no inﬂuence on the typing speed.
The average error rates are 2.41% under the no-feedback,
3.30% under the auditive and 4.03% under the visual condi-
tions. This is explained by the fact that the cognitive loads
are different under the three typing conditions: the highest
under the visual and the lowest under the no-feedback condi-
tion. Hence, not seeing the typed text actually represents an
advantage. The error patterns are similar between conditions,
the characters with the highest error rates and the most
common substitutions being the same.
This study shows that the lack of visual or audio feedback
does not impede the typing process, therefore the chording
keyboard can be used reliably in situations where a person
is not able to continuously check the output. Besides this,
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

the keyboard can be used with only one hand. The small
number of keys also represents an advantage from the size
and design ﬂexibility point of view. As the study took place
in an ofﬁce, to go one step further, we should set up the
experiment in a dynamic environment (for example, have
the participants walking or jogging).
In addition to the effect of different typing conditions, the
experiment enables us to evaluate the importance of different
form factors for the input device: using the keyboard proto-
type and not a simulated keyboard as in our previous work
leads to higher typing rates and lower error rates. However,
no attempt was made to optimize the form factor, and other
designs might further improve these measures.
So far, we have envisaged the chording keyboard as a
means of typing in dynamic or busy environments. Due to its
advantages, it can also be successfully used in other areas:
For example, it can facilitate text input for disabled users
who can only use one hand, or for persons who are visually
impaired.
APPENDIX
In Table II, we present the key combinations correspond-
ing to the characters used in our study.
TABLE II.
FIVE-BIT CODES FOR THE USED CHARACTERS
Character
5-bit code
Character
5-bit code
a
00110
q
01101
b
10111
r
00010
c
10100
s
10101
d
11101
t
10000
e
11000
u
01001
f
01010
v
10011
g
11100
w
10001
h
11001
x
11011
i
01000
y
10110
j
01011
z
10010
k
11010
space
11110
l
00111
backspace
01111
m
01110
enter
00011
n
01100
period
00100
o
11111
comma
00101
p
00001
Each key combination can be represented by a ﬁve-bit
codeword in which the ﬁrst digit represents the key under
the thumb, the second digit the key under the index, etc. The
value of a position is 1 if the corresponding key is pressed.
So, for instance, 10111 (the codeword for “b”) means that
all ﬁngers except the index press the keys.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Isaac, R.C. Nickerson and P. Tarasewich, “Cell phone
use in social settings : Preliminary results from a study in
the United States and France,” in Decision Sciences Institute
Conference, November 2004.
[2] J. Noyes, “Chord keyboards,” Applied Ergonomics, vol. 14,
no. 1, 1983, pp. 55 – 59.
[3] A. Tarniceriu, P. Dillenbourg, and B. Rimoldi, “Single-
handed typing with minimal eye commitment: A text-entry
study,” in The Sixth International Conference on Mobile
Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies,
September 2012, pp. 117 – 122.
[4] M. Silfverberg, “Using mobile keypads with limited visual
feedback: Implications to handheld and wearable devices,”
in Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and
Services (L. Chittaro, ed.), vol. 2795 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2003, pp. 76–
90.
[5] K. Lyons, et al., “Twiddler typing: one-handed chording text
entry for mobile phones,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human factors in computing systems, CHI
’04, (Vienna, Austria), ACM, 2004, pp. 671–678.
[6] J. Clawson, K. Lyons, T. Starner, and E. Clarkson, “The
impacts of limited visual feedback on mobile text entry
for the twiddler and mini-qwerty keyboards,” in Wearable
Computers, 2005. Proceedings. Ninth IEEE International
Symposium on, Oct. 2005, pp. 170 – 177.
[7] K. Lyons, D. Plaisted, and T. Starner, “Expert chording text
entry on the twiddler one-handed keyboard,” in Proceedings
of the Eighth International Symposium on Wearable Comput-
ers, ISWC ’04, (Washington, DC, USA), 2004, pp. 94–101.
[8] S. Mascetti, C. Bernareggi, and M. Belotti, “Typeinbraille:
Quick eyes-free typing on smartphones,” in Computers Help-
ing People with Special Needs (K. Miesenberger, A. Karsh-
mer, P. Penaz, and W. Zagler, eds.), vol. 7383 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2012, pp. 615–622.
[9] R. Rosenberg and M. Slater, “The chording glove: a glove-
based text input device,” Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part
C: Applications and Reviews, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 29,
no. 2, 1999, pp. 186 –191.
[10] K. Yatani and K. N. Truong, “An evaluation of stylus-based
text entry methods on handheld devices studied in different
user mobility states,”
Pervasive and Mobile Computing,
vol. 5, no. 5, 2009, pp. 496 – 508.
[11] E. Matias, I. S. MacKenzie, and W. Buxton, “One-handed
touch typing on a qwerty keyboard,” Hum.-Comput. Interact.,
vol. 11, Mar. 1996, pp. 1–27.
[12] D. Gopher and D. Raij, “Typing with a two-hand chord
keyboard: will the qwerty become obsolete?,” Systems, Man
and Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 18, July-Aug.
1988, pp. 601 –609.
[13] I. S. MacKenzie, H. Kober, D. Smith, T. Jones, and E. Skep-
ner, “Letterwise: preﬁx-based disambiguation for mobile text
input,” in Proceedings of the 14th annual ACM symposium
on User interface software and technology, UIST ’01, (Or-
lando, Florida, United States), 2001, pp. 111–120.
[14] C. L. James and K. M. Reischel, “Text input for mobile
devices: comparing model prediction to actual performance,”
in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors
in computing systems, CHI ’01, (Seattle, Washington, United
States), ACM, 2001, pp. 365–371.
[15] I. S. Mackenzie and R. W. Soukoreff, “Phrase sets for eval-
uating text entry techniques,” in Extended Abstracts of the
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
CHI ’03, (Fort Lauderdale, Florida, United States), ACM,
2003, pp. 766–767.
[16] A. Baddeley, Working Memory. Oxford Psychology Series,
No 11, Clarendon Press, 1986.
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

