Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks: A Focused Survey
Advances and Current Issues
Priscila Copeland Palmeira, Marcos Pereira dos Santos
Computer Science Department, Tiradentes University
Sergipe, Brazil
Emails: {priscilacopeland, marcospereira.ufs}@gmail.com
Abstract – Vehicular networks are a kind of technology that
requires continuous researcher. In this article, we give an
overview of the ITS (Intelligent Transportation System),
showing current known problems in the VANETs (Vehicular
Ad
Hoc
Networks)
and
proposed
solutions
in
existing
literature,
with
emphasis
on
the
following
topics:
geo-
localization, QoS (Quality of Service), and traffic safety.
Keywords – VANET; issues; geo-localization; QoS; traffic
safety.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Due to population growth and industrial development
around the world, vehicle traffic load is getting heavier every
day, increasing the likelihood of accidents. This prompts
automobile industries to manufacture their vehicles with ITS,
in order to ensure a more secure and comfortable vehicle
traffic.
To support ITS, the IEEE 802.11 group has produced the
IEEE 802.11p protocol [1], which developed applications
that include the exchange of data among vehicles using the
road infrastructure, thus bringing the Internet to the car
framework. Using dedicated wireless DSRC (Device Short-
Range Communication), cars are able to communicate with
each other through VANETs, i.e., vehicles have intelligent
sensors able to detect the road conditions.
VANETs correspond to a field of vehicular networks
which is widely recognized as an essential element for ITS.
VANETs have the potential to support a wide range of
applications and services [2]. So far, the focus has been
mainly on security applications, such as road awareness,
accident warning, traffic surveillance, which have a huge
impact on avoiding traffic accidents and increase the safety
of road transport [3][4].
One of the known definitions of VANETs is a type of
wireless network where each node is a moving vehicle on the
road; the vehicles communicate with each other in order to
make the traffic safer and generally better. This type of node
acts as a router transmitting a message to another node. This
network has two types of communication, V2V (vehicle-to-
vehicle),
and
V2I
(vehicle-to-infrastructure).
Its
main
function is to provide secure applications in real-time to
users, thus delivering the data at the right time, reducing
accidents and delays [18].
However, there are security-related issues, and problems
with the management of the media. Wireless network, like
VANETs, have a number of communication requirements to
work well. The communication requirements have a large
number of adverse effects on the characteristics of VANETs,
e.g., multi-path disappearance and shading the wireless
channel, fluctuating density nodes in different scenarios, and
quick changes on the network topology.
Another problem is the creation of flexible services, able
to adapt easily to their environment, so that one can connect
to any device, while ensuring the safety and performance of
the communication.
VANETs
support
from
the
simple
exchange
of
information
to
the
integration
of
highly
complex
infrastructure. The general application framework takes into
account the dissemination of warning messages from those
vehicles that could find accidents or dangerous situations, in
order to provide useful information for drivers, wherever
they might be, in restaurants, hotels and service stations, as
well as entertainment: Internet, download multimedia, or
chat among vehicles [5].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the related work; Section III describes the current
problems and the proposed solutions; and Section IV shows
the conclusion and future works.
II.
RELATED WORK
Many researchers have been interested in solving issues
related to VANETs and improving their advances. Some of
these researches focus on an overview related to the general
information pertaining to VANETs and others tackles a more
specific topic. In this article, our approach is to tackle both of
these scenarios, taking a better look at specifics problems
and advances related to VANETs.
Gupta et al. [19] present general idea about VANETs,
showing an overview that include basic information. The
authors provide focus on the various aspects of VANETs,
such as architecture, characteristics, challenges, glimpse of
routing protocols, and simulation models used for VANETs.
They clarify the advantages and disadvantages associated
with sending information protocol among the nodes of
VANETs; showing the difference to sending information on
the highway and in the cities. Delay and interference are
associated with each case. Their results show that the speed
and
distance
influence
the
efficiency
of
information
exchange, as there is a maximum time for sending such
information. In an attempt to improve algorithms for sending
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

and receiving data, they suggest that the network nodes
should work as routers using routing tables.
Eze et al. [20] provide an overview of the current
research state, challenges, potentials of VANETs as well as
the ways forward to achieving the long awaited ITS. The
authors
present: a
comparison
of high-speed
wireless
communication
technologies
for
vehicular
networks,
spectrum
allocation
issues
in
VANETs,
message
broadcasting,
routing
protocols,
congestion
control
techniques in inter-vehicle communication, security, privacy,
anonymity and liability, reliability and cross-layer approach
between the transport layer and the network layer. With their
analysis, they have determined the minimal prerequisites to
QoS applications in VANETs. Then, the high reliability and
the low latency are not guaranteed by any of the revised
algorithms in their paper. The paper suggests that the
challenge
to
develop
a
security
solution
capable
of
supporting the exchange of authentication, accountability
and privacy, according to each vehicle’s information should
be disclosed to appropriate government agencies (transport
authority) over the network. It is one of the biggest problems
of security and privacy in VANETs.
Sanguesa et al. [21] show a clear guideline of the benefits
and drawbacks associated with different schemes. The
authors did an analysis of the most relevant broadcast
dissemination
available
in a
fair
comparative
scheme
analysis
by
evaluating
them
according
to
the
same
environmental conditions, focusing on the same metrics, and
using the same simulation platform, specially designed for
VANETs, highlighting their features, and studying their
performance under the same simulation conditions. The
paper describes one of the biggest problems that the
researchers have found when comparing their results with
the existing state-of-art. Most researches have taken different
approaches and they try to prove which approach has the
best performance.
They have proven those approaches in
different environments with unrealistic parameters leaving
inaccurate and unrepresentative conclusions. For this reason,
their work has reproduced simulations using the same
metrics for different tools, comparing the methods to the
same simulation conditions in order to determine which
method is the best for each situation.
Other researches, in these cases with specifics subjects,
such as [5], designed a collaborative virtual environment that
unifies the knowledge and is integrated with vehicles to
endow the final user with the necessary information. The
authors developed a model-driven approach that generates a
groupware application to improve the collaborative work and
access to services. The implemented tool facilitates the
development
and
implementation
of
collaborative
frameworks in VANETs. In this kind of collaborative
system, it is not essential for all data to be received in a
single node, which reduce duplication of information and
increases the data flow exchange. However, this system does
not consider the vehicle speed, or the environmental changes
or handoff that could happen, showing that this solution
requires other features in order to function in any VANETs
structure.
Tabassum et al [7] developed an interference-aware high-
throughput channel allocation mechanism, called HT-CAM
that addresses the unique challenges of CRVANETs. They
created conflict graphs of link-band pairs to extract non-
interfering
OBU
(On
Board
Unit)
pairs
that
can
communicate simultaneously on a given channel, increasing
the spatial reuse of the available channels. In addition, their
work
formulates
a
high-throughput
channel
allocation
problem as a MILP (Mixed-integer Linear Programming)
problem, showing that the proposed HT-CAM provides a
better network performances compared to state-of-the-art
protocols. The comparative graphs show that the HT-CAM
technique can improve decision-allocation in the most
efficient channel for communication in VANETs. To test the
new technique efficiency they compared the TE-CAM [33]
and CC-VANET [34] methods. As its results, Tabassum et
al. [7] proved that their technique outperforms the other two
methods in terms of network throughput, channel use, and
the late delivery of end-to-end packages.
Gonzalez et al. [12] present an analysis of several
protocols proposed in literature for message dissemination in
VANETs. The authors proposed a protocol that sets and wait
a time to relay candidates. They have demonstrated that it is
possible to reduce the delay needed to cover a given area.
For that, when they stop the beacon transmissions a warning
message is detected and it does not provide a significant
performance improvement. Nonetheless, by allowing a
continuous channel access, it proves that the performance of
any protocol might be greatly increased.
The state-of-art in VANETs is constantly developing,
though
much
more
research
is
required,
as
many
fundamental issues remains. This paper differs from others
because of the approach, bringing information and solutions
by different authors in the same paper.
III.
CURRENT ISSUES AND PROPOSED
SOLUTIONS
Many important topics in VANETs are currently under
intensive research and discussion. These issues and their
background are presented in this section.
A. General Issues
The ordinary issues to VANETs are limitation in
bandwidth utilization, frequent link disconnection, small
effective diameter, security and privacy, among others [19].
Issue 1: Limitation in bandwidth utilization - There is no
central coordinator that controls communication. The main
idea is to allow usage of all users in this network to share the
same bandwidth without causing harmful interference.
VANETs face bandwidth allocations challenges due to the
random number of users in the application. The time delay
related to this issue is reduced by fair bandwidth utilization.
If a vehicle wants to send a message and there is no medium
for transmission, then it has to wait, which leads to high
latency. Bandwidth is important to the congestion control.
Bandwidth utilization is very important for sending large
amounts of information, otherwise the system will be
overload.
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Issue 2: Frequent link disconnection - VANETs changes
all the time and this happens dynamically and fast. This
brings changes in the network topology. Because of the
network high mobility and frequent fragmentation, the link
disconnects often due to the short connection time between
nodes in VANETS.
Issue 3: Small effective diameter - Maintaining complete
global topology is impossible due to weak connectivity
between nodes and results in issues when applying the
existing algorithm.
Issue 4: Security and privacy – In VANETs, vehicles
connect with other random vehicles without knowing their
intention. It brings vulnerability to the users to succumb to
different malicious attacks. The detection and prevention of
attacks in VANETs should be properly designed to ensure
the safety of users are not violated, in a real-time framework.
Issue 5: Routing protocols - Due to the above challenges,
designing an effective protocol, which transfers maximum
packets in minimum time, is not easy to implement. So the
design
of
an
efficient
routing
protocol
demands
advancements in MANET's architecture, to accommodate
the fast mobility of the VANETs nodes in an efficient
manner.
For the above issues, the proposed solutions are showing
in Table I.
TABLE I. ISSUES IN VANETS AND PROPOSED SOLUTIONS IN THE LITERATURE.
To solve issue 1, the solution proposed by Dongre et al.
[22], implements an algorithm that can control and detect the
traffic
congestion
and
can
send
only
one
message
broadcasted by the vehicle, which reduces the overhead on
the network, improving bandwidth utilization.
To solve issue 2, it is possible to use the OLSR
(Optimized Link State Routing) or its variations. OLSR is an
optimization over a pure link state protocol as it compacts
the size of data sent in the messages, and reduces the number
of retransmissions to flood these messages in the entire
network [23]. Today the OLSR has its variations. Gautami et
al. [24] have proposed a Meta-heuristic algorithm as
optimization
of
the
OLSR
protocol
to
enhance
the
performance of individual search methods in VANETs.
To solve issue 3, the proposed solutions include position-
based protocols, e.g., MFR (Most Forward within Radius)
[27], LAR (Location-Aided Routing Protocol) [28], EGR
(Energy-Aware Geographic Routing) [29]; they assume that
the vehicle is equipped with GPS (Global Positioning
System) device in order to find its own geographic position.
To solve issue 4, a combined group of protocols was
presented, but the final choice was SMT (Secure Message
Transmission) protocol [13]. The data is only transmitted in
the communication among registered vehicles. This protocol
ensures that the vehicle IDs are not exposed for anyone.
SMT utilizes MAC (Message Authentication Code) to check
the integrity and authentication of its origin.
B. Geo-localization
Currently, navigation technologies are GPS-dependent,
which has several problems. The most important problem is
price, especially if one is looking for an accurate GPS
system. Cheap GPS devices are not precise and can become
unusable for autonomous navigation [16].
Therefore,
current
researches
intend
to
develop
technology to obtain information about the position in real-
time applications such as real time navigation, traffic
behavior studies, and applications related to the location,
such as forward collision warning application of the vehicle
based central server [1].
In Fig. 1, we show the issues that the papers bellow tries
to focus on.
Figure 1. Relation between surveys and issues in VANETS.
Thenmozhi et al. [1] propose vehicle-to-vehicle model
that allows moving vehicles to send geographical and speed
data over VANETs to prevent accidents. Their method uses
Dedicated Short Range Communication (DSRC) Wireless
Devices and a repeater in vehicles that solves issues in four-
way interior road junctions by sending the data signal for
longer distances during local danger circumstances.
Mo et al. [14] consider the vehicle movement patterns
(position, speed, and direction) can be stored in the form of a
dynamic vector, which has implemented position updating in
central MOD (Moving Object Database). It has a vehicle
position data updating strategy with packet repetition based
on Kalman filter prediction. An algorithm with packet
repetition was designed; it can not only generate a position
updating data according to a preset threshold, but also
decides the packet repetition mode related to the distance of
two adjacent vehicles in order to reduce data loss. The
simulated results show that vehicle position data updating
frequency was obviously reduced and the reliability of the
communication is greatly improved through packet repetition
mechanism by using this position updating strategy. Their
experiment uses the colored noise Gauss to simulate the
noise of the Kalman filter to predicted background. They
choose the colored noise instead of white noise for the
Kalman filter, which does not cover all the noise that might
Geo-localization Issues
Traffic safety and
local danger warning.
[1]
Central management
of the position data.
[14]
Accurate localization
and registration.
[15]-[17]
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

be generated. They also consider that the delay transmission
is extremely small, which is not consistent with reality. As
justification, they assume that the presence of transmission
delay always makes position updating data outdated, so they
decided not to allow position data to be stored in the
database. For this situation they intend, as work, to research
about how to ensure the positional deviation error under the
control in the condition of high time delay.
Costea and Leordeanu et al. [15] have proposed a
complete system to geo-localization from aerial images in
the absence of GPS information. Their proposed pipeline
includes contributions with efficient methods to road and
intersection
detection,
intersection
recognition
with
geometric alignment to accurate localization, followed by
road detection enhancement. It proves that using learned
high-level features is feasible and it is possible to achieve a
high level of accuracy. It can be used as a GPS alternative, or
in conjunction with GPS, bringing valuable contributions to
the literature and to many applications that require offline or
online, real-time processing. The limitation of this approach
is that the high level of accuracy only happens if the
geolocation is from images alone.
Gupta et al. [16] propose new approach to geo-
localization position of a mobile platform. Their intent is to
solve
the
problem
of
accurate
mobile
platform
geo-
localization
as
a
combination
of
approximate
geo-
localization and accurate relative localization. The article
presents the algorithmic and implementation details of their
method and demonstrates it for several different types of
maps from different regions of the world. The relevance of
their results is a system that can provide a fully automatic
global localization at a low infrastructure cost.
Ounia et al.’s [17] have as objective to minimize and
simplify the computing process in the MS (Mobile Station)
during its geo-location phase needed especially to handover.
This work additionally considers designing EToA (Extended
Time of Arrival) as extended version of ToA (Time of
Arrival), following the same principle, using another aspect
of the computational process. As a result, the proposed
technique is convergent within a reduced number of
iterations. Moreover, the implementation simplicity and low
computational overhead constitute their major advantages.
C. QoS
Until now, no project has achieved a reliable, flexible and
adaptable way that meet the requirements of safety and
autonomous driving applications.
In order to guarantee the exchange of information and the
reliability in ad hoc networks, the researches should take into
account the implementation of QoS, where the routing
protocols are the main idea. These protocols aim to choose
the best route from source to destination, meeting the QoS
requirements, and calculating the QoS parameters. The
selection
and
improvement
of
these
protocols
have
fundamental importance to improve QoS in VANETs [9].
The current proposed solutions give us an idea of the
performance gains that were achieved so far, however, they
are specific to a particular application and context and
applied in all environments [8].
Nowadays, in the literature, the majority of routing
protocols that implement QoS require additional exchange of
messages control to determine the QoS parameters and do
not consider the problem of congestion during transmission
of the data. These protocols actually increase the overhead of
routing, causing wear in time and energy during a device
discovery path, increasing packet loss [9].
In Fig. 2, we present the issues most searched on QoS in
VANETs that are presented in [4][8][9].
Figure 2. Relation between research and QoS issues in VANETS.
The main idea of the work by Rizzo et al. [4] is to design
an architecture for the provision of various levels of QoS in
VANETs. The basis of their approach is in CONTACT
(Contact and Content Aware Communications for QoS
support
in
VANETs).
It
was
developed
through
the
investigation of several communication strategies capable of
adapting, at the same time, to the highly volatile and unstable
vehicular environment, to content attributes and properties,
and
to
a
diversified
set
of
application
performance
requirements.
Sumra et al. [8] present the SBC (Secure Business
Communication) model and explain the components of the
proposed model. It uses TPM (Trusted Platform Mobile) as
its
core
component
and
TPM
ensures
a
secure
communication
between
user
and
business
parties
in
VANETs.
With the purpose of reducing the overhead introduced to
collect information from neighbor nodes and to obtain an
accurate estimate of QoS parameters, Al-Ani et al. [9]
describe a new approach for calculating QoS parameters
locally and avoiding congestion during data transmission. It
uses the SNMP (Simple Network Management Protocol) to
estimate these values locally. With the help of the SNMP
agent, the QoS parameters are calculated locally without
exchanging any additional control message and without
synchronization.
Their
approach
evades
any
network
overhead for QoS computation as compared to other QoS-
aware routing protocols. This approach uses parallel and
global search abilities of ACO (Ant Colony Optimization)
algorithm to find multiple paths to the destination satisfying
the specified QoS requirements. Their results show that the
approach of QoS QoRA (Routing based on Ant Colony
Optimization) protocol is scalable and performs well in high
QoS Issues
Packet loss, end-to-end delay,
several layers inter-communication,
flexibility and adaptively supporting
infotainment traffic.
[4]
Availability, high level of QoS
requirements.
[8]
Overhead, congestion, fast and
reliable communication.
[9]
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

mobility, being a model to the congestion avoidance
mechanism that evades any network overhead for QoS
computation as compared to the other QoS-aware routing
protocols.
D. Traffic Safety
In general, vehicle network applications are classified as
secure applications and non-secure applications. Safety
applications are used to notify drivers of urgent events on the
road
to
avoid
accidents.
Non-secure
applications
are
applications used by drivers or passengers to access the
wireless network for entertainment as browsing websites,
access email, and play games [10].
Emergency messages are considered an effective solution
to improve road safety conditions. The notification allows
drivers to have more time to react to avoid accidents, and to
improve the safety of drivers and passengers. For this, the
vehicles are equipped with intelligent sensors that help to
detect road conditions, trying to minimize the problems of
local risk and improves traffic management [1].
For the efficiency of these notifications to be immediate,
the latency of transmission should be kept within the
tolerable range, falling on the subject of QoS.
Among the articles referred in this work, three have
related issues with traffic safety, as seen in Fig. 3.
Figure 3. Relation between referred work and Traffic Safety issues
in VANETS.
Chang et al. [10] have focused on the alert message
dissemination in VANETs. Their idea proposes a fault-
tolerant broadcasting protocol for disseminating the alert
messages on highway. The proposed protocol designates two
vehicles, which are the farthest and sub-farthest vehicles in
the transmission range of the source vehicle as the relay
candidates. In addition to this, they created an exponential
back-off method that can effectively reduce the number of
alert
messages.
This
method
improves
not
only
the
transmission delay of the alert messages but also the number
of the alert messages in vehicular wireless networks,
increasing the reliability of the system. Their simulation
results showed that the fault-tolerant broadcast protocol
outperforms
the
flooding
method
and
the
ACK
(Acknowledgement) based broadcast protocol, in terms of
the number of the alert messages, the number of the ACK
messages and the total number of messages. However, it
does not outperform the transmission delay of alert messages
and penetration rate.
Wang et al. [6] introduce ECPB (Efficient Conditional
Privacy-Preserving) authentication scheme based on group
signature for VANETs. Though group signature is widely
used in VANETs for security requirements, the existing
schemes based on group signatures suffer from longer
computational delays in the CRL (Certificate Revocation
List) checking and in the signature verification process,
leading to lower verification efficiency. In their scheme,
membership validity (a validity period) is required when a
vehicle applies for a group membership and this validity is
used to check whether the vehicle is still a group member or
not, which can be used as a substitute for the CRL checks.
Neglecting the CRL checks will sharply decrease the costs
incurred in the signatures verification. In addition, the
proposed scheme also supports batch verification. Their
experimental analysis proves that the proposed scheme
exhibits improved efficiency over the existing schemes, in
terms of verification delay and average delay. The security
analysis and experimental results show that ECPB delivers
higher efficiency verification requirements of VANETs, and
satisfies
the
Privacy-preserving
Communication
for
VANETs.
Ambareish et al. [11] proposed a beacon-based clustering
algorithm achieving a significantly higher cluster stability
than previous methods, like the CBLR (Cluster Based
Location Routing) algorithm [11]. The basis of their
approach is to use local mobility measure to decide which
cluster heads should remain in their roles and which should
change their state. In addition to the already existing states,
the authors introduced an EN (Emergency State) for
ambulances, police, and other emergency vehicles. In Table
II, we present two characteristics of VANETs that result in
the consequences that their paper tries to solve.
TABLE II. VANETS CHARACTERISTICS WITH RELATED ISSUES AND ITS
CONSEQUENCES.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper provided a summary of the most important
subdivisions of vehicular networks, presenting the most
accurate work in each subject of VANETs in order to enrich
and encourage research and future work for the development
of vehicle networks. It is worth noticing that the topics
covered in the articles studied highlighted the need for
performance improvements, control and management of
VANET networks, as the main ideas of this work.
For future work, we intend to find a method to reduce the
delay on transmission messages in VANETs, comparing our
results with the existing methods in the state-of-art.
Traffic Safety Issues
Alert message trasmission latency
and redundancy, broadcast storm.
[10]
Anonymous authentication,
overhead involved in storing,
communication, updating and
checking process.
[6]
Highly dynamic topology due to
vehicle speed, cluster formation and
re-ordering.
[11]
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The Information Technology Department of Tiradentes
University supports this work.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Thenmozhi and S. Govindarajan, “Safety related services
using smart vehicle connections”, International Journal of
Applied Engineering Research, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 2384-2387,
2016.
[2]
T. L. Willke, P. Tientrakool, and N. F. Maxemchuk, “A
survey of intervehicle communication protocols and their
applications”, Communications Surveys & Tutorials, IEEE,
vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 3–20, 2009.
[3]
W. G. Najm, J. Koopmann, J. D. Smith, and J. Brewer,
“Frequency of target crashes for intellidrive safety systems”,
Tech. Rep., 2010.
[4]
G. Rizzo, M. R. Palattellay, T. Braunz, and T. Engely,
“Content and context aware strategies for qos support in
VANETs”, IEEE 30th International Conference on Advanced
Information Networking and Applications (AINA), pp. 717 –
721, March 2016.
[5]
R.
Lacuesta,
J.
Gallardo,
J.
Lloret,
and
G.
Palacios,
“Integration of data from vehicular ad hoc networks using
model-driven
collaborative
tools”,
Mobile
Information
Systems, vol. 2016, Article ID 4291040, 15 pages, 2016.
[6]
Y. Wang, H. Zhong, Y. Xu, and J. Cui, “ECPB: Efficient
Conditional
Privacy-Preserving
Authentication
Scheme
Supporting Batch Verification for VANETs”, International
Journal of Network Security, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 374-382,
March 2016.
[7]
M. Tabassum, M. A. Razzaque1, M. M. Hassan, A. Almogren
and A. Alamri, “Interference-aware high-throughput channel
allocation
mechanism
for
CR-VANETs”,
EURASIP
J.
Wireless Comm. and Networking 2016, in press.
[8]
I. A. Sumra and H. B. Hasbullah, “Using trusted platform
module (tpm) to secure business communciation (sbc) in
vehicular
ad
hoc
network
(VANET)”,
International
Conference on Recent Advances in Computer Systems
(RACS-2015), January 2015.
[9]
A. Al-Ani and J. Seitz, “Qos-aware routing in multi-rate ad
hoc networks based on ant colony optimization”, Network
Protocols and Algoritms, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1 – 25, 2015.
[10] Y. Chang, T. Chung, and T. Wang, “A fault-tolerant
broadcast protocol for reliable alert message delivery in
vehicular
wireless
networks”,
7th
International
ICST
Conference on Communications and Networking in China
(CHINACOM), pp. 475 – 480, August 2012.
[11] B. Ambareesh , M. Aneesh , S. Anshad, D. Deepak, S.
Vishnu, K. Praveen, and D. K. Daniel, "A New Cluster Based
Protocol for Vanets", Imperial Journal of Interdisciplinary
Research (IJIR), vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 22 – 25, 2016.
[12] S. Gonzalez and V. Ramos, “Preset delay broadcast: a
protocol for fast information dissemination in vehicular ad
hoc
networks
(VANETs)”,
Journal
on
Wireless
Communications and Networking, in press.
[13] K. Kaushik and S. Tayal, “VANET’s Security Requirements
and Attacks – A Review”, International Journal of Advances
in Engineering Sciences, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 15-25, 2016.
[14]Y. Mo, D. Yu, J. Song, K. Zheng, and Y. Guo, “Vehicle
position updating strategy based on kalman filter prediction in
vanet environment”, Discrete
Dynamics in Nature and
Society, vol. 2016, Article ID 1404396, 2016.
[15] D. Costea and M. Leordeanu, “Aerial image geolocalization
from recognition and matching of roads and intersections”,
Cornel University Library (ARXIV), in press.
[16] A. Gupta, H. Chang, and A. Yilmaz, “Gps-denied geo-
localisation using visual odometry”, ISPRS Annals of the
Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information
Sciences, vol. III-3, 2016 XXIII ISPRS Congress, 12–19 July
2016, Prague, Czech Republic, in press.
[17] R. Ounia, M. Zaidib, “EToA: New 2D geolocation-based
handover decision technique”, Special Issue on Positioning
Techniques and Applications (ICT Express), vol. 2, no. 1, pp.
28–32, March 2016.
[18] P. C. Palmeira and M. P. Santos, “Survey in vehicular
networks using Mixim on OMNeT++”, Scientific Interfaces:
Exact and Technology, Journal Portal, Tiradentes Group, vol.
1, no. 2, pp. 47 – 56, 2015.
[19] R. Gupta and P. Patel, "A Survey on Vehicular Ad hoc
Networks", International Journal of Scientific Research in
Science, Engineering and Technology(IJSRSET), Print ISSN :
2395-1990, Online ISSN : 2394-4099, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 1251-
1259, 2016.
[20] E. C. Eze, S. Zhang, E. Liu, and J. C. Eze, “Advances in
Vehicular Ad-hoc Networks (VANETs): Challenges and
Road-map for Future Development”, International Journal of
Automation and Computing, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 1-18, 2016.
[21] J. A. Sanguesa, M. Fogue, P. Garrido, F. J. Martinez, J. Cano,
and C. T. Calafate, “A Survey and Comparative Study of
Broadcast Warning Message Dissemination Schemes for
VANETs”, Mobile Information Systems, vol. 2016, Article
ID 8714142, 18 pages, 2016.
[22] M. M. Dongre and N. G. Bawane, “Effective Road Model for
Congestion Control in VANETS”, Intenational Journal of
Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN), vol. 8, no. 2, April
2016.
[23] P. Jacquet, P. Muhlethaler, T. Clausen, A. Laouiti, A.
Qayyum, and L. Viennot, “Optimized Link State Routing
Protocol for Ad Hoc Networks”, Johns Hopkins Whiting
School of Engineering, 2016.
[24] R. Gautami, R. R. Sedamkar, and H. Patil, “Application of
Hybrid
Meta-Heuristic
Algorithm
for
OLSR
Protocol
Optimization in VANET”, International Journal of Current
Engineering an Technology, vol. 6, no. 3, June 2016.
[25] Y. Han, E. Ekici, H. Kremo, and O. Altintas, "Throughput-
efficient
channel
allocation
in
multi-channel
cognitive
vehicular networks", in INFOCOM, 2014 Proceedings IEEE,
pp. 2724–2732, 2014.
[26] Z. Lei, L. Tao, L. Wei, Z. Siting, and L. Jianfeng,
"Cooperative spectrum allocation
with QoS support
in
cognitive
cooperative
vehicular
ad
hoc
networks",
Communications, China, IEEE, pp. 49–59, 2014.
[27] H. Takagi, and L. Kleinrock, “Optimal transmission ranges
for randomly distributed packet radio terminals”, IEEE
Transactions on Communications, vol. 32, issue 3, pp.246-
257, 1984.
[28] Y. B. Ko, and N. H. Vaidya, “Location-aided routing (LAR)
in mobile ad-hoc networks”, Wireless Networks (ACM), vol.
6, issue 4, pp.307- 321, 2000.
[29] G.Wang, and G. Wang, “An energy-aware geographic routing
algorithm for mobile ad-hoc network”, 5th International
Conference on Wireless Communications, Networking and
Mobile Computing, 24th-26th Sept 2009.
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

