Mobile Staff Planning Support for Team Leaders in an Industrial Production Scenario
S¨onke Knoch, Melanie Reiplinger
German Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Research Department Intelligent User Interfaces
Saarbr¨ucken, Germany
Email: [first name].[last name]@dfki.de
Rouven Vierfuß
Miele
imperial-Werke oHG
B¨unde, Germany
Email: rouven.vierfuss@imperial.de
Abstract—Team leaders in industrial production scenarios face
the problem of short-termed reactions to unforeseeable events
in a factory. Adjustments in staff planning require many cal-
culation and coordination efforts that consume valuable time.
A mobile application is presented that assists team leaders in
this challenging task. The selection and identiﬁcation of relevant
information, its case-speciﬁc processing and visualization as well
as the persistence of worker data in a semantic network form
the cornerstones of this work in progress.
Keywords–Decision support; Staff planning; Mobility; Domain
model.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The developments towards Industry 4.0 [1] let the gap
between real and virtual worlds melt and foster the utilization
of the potentials of the Internet of Things [2]. The future
industrial production aims at highly individualized products
and an increasing ﬂexibility of production processes. These
developments involve a challenge for staff planning engineers
who have to answer this ﬂexibility in production with an
adaptive staff planning strategy. Rising quantity of data and
complexity makes this planning process even harder.
The coordination between planning engineers—in this sce-
nario called team leaders—to ﬁnd additional qualiﬁed workers
within the factory consumes time and is a difﬁcult task. To
assist teamleaders in this process, the concept of a planning
support system is suggested. In a deﬁned scenario, a mobile
application will support team leaders by visualizing the current
worker-to-production-line allocation and interconnecting the
team leaders to coordinate personnel placement in an efﬁcient
way. Therefore, information from several distributed informa-
tion sources is prepared and presented on a mobile device.
Relevant information dependent on the user’s role and speciﬁc
context of use is shown. Human ressource allocation can be
edited and optimized directly using the user interface.
In Section II, an overview of related work is given and
the distinction to the suggested approach is drawn. Section
III describes the industrial scenario that is taken as a basis
for the considerations made in the following sections. The
IT-infrastructure necessary to run the system is presented in
Section IV. In Section V, the domain model that gathers
and stores worker proﬁles and supports the system in its
task is developed. Section VI shows mockups of the mobile
application. Finally, Section VII contains a discussion of the
suggested approach and gives an outlook on future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
Current staff planning software is implemented as stand
alone solution or integrated in enterprise resource planning
(ERP) or manufacturing execution systems (MES). Time track-
ing is commonly part of the MES whereas time management
can be part of both, MES and ERP [3, 199-212]. Most of
these staff planning or workforce management systems focus
on the scheduling and optimal resource allocation task. User
interfaces present timetables with a view over a planned period
in a very functional way. Some of these software providers
offer mobile applications that allow access to the staff planning
systems. These systems lack adaptive context- and role-speciﬁc
information processing. The collaboration and coordination
aspects tackled in this work are neglected. Additionally, the in-
stallation, application and maintenance costs, especially related
to MES and ERP systems, are too high for many medium-sized
and small factories.
In research, the project ENgAge4Pro [4] focuses on age-
appropriate staff planning. Physical attributes, such as body
weight and height, are regarded therefore. The research project
EPIK [5] focuses on the optimal allocation of resources to
enhance efﬁciency. A mobile application was developed that
supports the worker with context-speciﬁc information. The
research project KapaﬂexCy [6] covers short-term production
scheduling. A mobile application allows to send employment
requests to workers. After receiving these requests, the workers
coordinate the takeover of the employment themselves. From
a hierarchical perspective, this is a bottom-up approach.
Unlike the project ENgAge4Pro, the main concern of the
staff planning support system is not ergonomics. In contrast
to the EPIK project, the system suggested is developed to
support team leaders in their planning task. Therefore, more
attention is paid to the appropriate presentation of relevant
information on the device. Optimized resource allocation will
be included in form of an additional function (not the object
of research). Compared to the KapaﬂexCy project, the team
leader application developed here implements the allocation of
employment in a top-down way. Nevertheless, worker-related
information can be used to provide feedback for their work.
III.
SCENARIO
The production of kitchen appliances in Germany is facing
several challenges. Companies require the ability to produce
their products under optimum cost, ﬂexibility due to rising
variants and a competitive market. Therefore, it is necessary
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Authentication
Home Screen
Trigger
Staff Shift
Execute
Staff Shift
User Administration
Wrapper 1
Factory Worker
ERP/MES-System
Manufacturing Line
APPLICATION-SIDE
SERVER-SIDE
Wrapper 2
Wrapper 3
Mediator (Web Service)
Wrapper 4
request 
access
access
granted
request 
profile
send
profile
lock
worker
acknowledge
lock
request 
worker
shift
confirm
worker
shift
Figure 1. Staff switching process and involved distributed data sources.
that the manufacturing industry makes efﬁcient use of re-
sources and energy in order to keep the high-cost country
Germany a competitive production location. Manufacturing
of steam ovens in Imperial/Miele plant ﬂoors follows the
“Miele Value Creation System”. Multiple U-shaped production
lines for diverse product classes allow for highly ﬂexible
handling of varying production programs. Each steam oven
is assembled by a single worker in a one-piece-ﬂow setting,
which entails high responsibility and a complex work content
for all employees.
Once per week, the plant’s foremen and team leaders plan
the production on the shop ﬂoor level, assigning resources
and capacities to production orders. Detailed planning is done
on a daily basis, considering the production program and
availability of workers. In case of unexpected staff shortage
or modiﬁed production volumes at short notice, the team
leaders re-assign available workers to production orders and
assembly stations, also across assembly lines. The process of
staff planning is demand-oriented and ﬂexible, and quickly
becomes complex and time consuming while trying to meet
the demands of multi-variant production scenarios with varying
production programs, small lot sizes on multiple lines and
customer-individual products. Furthermore, team leaders want
to foster a broad skill set in all employees by organizing a
rotating assignment of workers to varying tasks while, at the
same time, the high quality standards of Miele need to be
guaranteed by intense training on each particular product class.
A great deal of experience is needed in order to make
the right decisions, and an adaptive assistant system that
transparently combines data from production orders, human
resource management and the plant ﬂoor in order to support
decision-ﬁnding could signiﬁcantly facilitate and speed up the
daily staff planning process.
IV.
IT-INFRASTRUCTURE
To tackle the challenges described in Section III, we devel-
oped an application that supports the team leader in adjusting
the daily routing when speciﬁc events occur. This kind of
ad hoc planning involves heterogeneous information sources
that need to be prepared and consulted in order to support
reasonable decision making. The integration of these sources
is discussed in Section IV-B. The integrated information needs
to be preprocessed for the speciﬁc context and user role. The
development of a suitable user interface for the industrial
planning scenario is discussed in Section IV-A.
A. Application-side
Figure 1 shows the process that appears when a worker
is scheduled. The Authentication forms the entry point to
the application. The application loads role-speciﬁc proﬁles
for each user. As each team leader manages different man-
ufacturing lines, the respective lines are loaded and currently
allocated workers are presented on the Home Screen. If the
system registers any deviations from the planned schedule, it
visualizes warnings and encourages the team leader to act in
an ad hoc manner. One common reaction to hold the planned
quantities at the end of the day is the search for suitable
workers. For that reason, the application suggests suitable
workers for a respective production line and product. If the
team leader selects one of these workers the staff shift is
triggered. To avoid multiple allocation of the same human
resource, the selected worker is locked for 2 minutes. During
this time interval, the team leader is able to execute the staff
shift or search for another worker. If it was decided to schedule
the selected worker he or she executes the staff shift. The team
leader who supervises the respective worker is informed and
can deny or conﬁrm the worker shift. In the latter case, the
shift is persisted and written to the database.
To compute the qualiﬁcation of a worker (w) for a respec-
tive manufacturing line (l) and product (p), three parameters
were deﬁned:
experience(w, l, p)
Total time by a worker.
quality(w, l, p)
Defective pieces per shift by a worker.
productivity(w, l, p)
Pieces per shift by a worker.
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

These parameters are visualized in the detail view of
the front-end described in Section VI and allow the team
leader a vague estimation of the worker’s skills. The ranking
function rank(w, l, p) forms a weighted aggregation of these
parameters and represents the skill level of each worker on a
scale between 0 and 5. These weights are dynamic and adapted
to the speciﬁc use case.
B. Server-side
The information that is necessary to support the planning
process of a team leader as described in Section IV-A is located
at four different points that are sketched at the bottom of Figure
1. In the present case, the information system can be described
as a multi-computer, partitioned, distributed, shared nothing
system. Thus, a suitable strategy to integrate the information
has to be selected. To preserve the autonomy of the sources,
a virtual integration strategy was selected which leaves the
data at the sources. This kind of on-demand integration in a
decentralized manner enables us to keep the system design
easy to extend and to transfer data only when needed from
solely relevant sources. A mediator-based approach was chosen
to realize the virtual integration system. The Mediator provides
an interface implemented as a Web service and communicates
with the application. It lies in the responsibility of the mediator
to provide a structural and semantic data integration. Wrappers
are implemented for each information source to overcome the
heterogeneity on the data level and to enable the data ﬂow
between mediator and sources.
Focusing on the four data sources at the bottom of Figure
1, the ERP/MES-System forms the only system that is already
existing and available in a common factory. An ERP or MES
system in the considered scenario provides—in collabora-
tion or separately—access to time tracking and management
data. The domain model for the Factory Worker encodes the
worker’s skill matrix and working history. It is described in
detail in Section V. The domain model of the Manufacturing
Line describes the process steps and involved manufacturing
equipment and allows estimations about quantities that can
be achieved when a speciﬁc worker is scheduled on that
line. In combination with processing times it can be used to
calculate optimal resource allocations with algorithms from the
operations research ﬁeld. The factory worker model constitutes
new input data that allows new forms of optimization based
on the user model. The model of the manufacturing line
is not part of this work and is developed separately. The
User Administration is responsible for authentication and lock
requests.
V.
DOMAIN MODEL OF A FACTORY WORKER
The information about workers’ skills and experience that
is needed by the mobile application in order to generate useful
recommendations is taken from a worker model. The worker
model represents semantic relationships between the horizontal
and vertical roles of an employee in the factory (i.e., his tasks,
work content, and his position within the staff hierarchy) on the
one hand, and his skills (e.g. work experience) and individual
requirements on the other hand. Examples for the latter are
an employee’s handedness, language skills, allergies against
speciﬁc materials, or an inability to lift heavy weights or
to distinguish colors. A small excerpt of the worker model
Figure 2. Snippet of the worker model.
is visualized in Figure 2. Here, the qualiﬁcation of workers
is encoded within the History-nodes of a semantic network
between products, assembly lines, and employees. The appli-
cation can, for instance, query the model for workers that are
experienced assemblers of product p at assembly line l, and
rank them using weighted aggregation as described in IV-A.
The depicted example graph shows how information about
the worker history is encoded. The node History Kowalski
represents the qualiﬁcation-related data for worker Kowalski
wrt. the product DGC-XL when assembling at line U7. The
graph connects a model of the factory ﬂoor with a topology
of manufactured products and the staff’s proﬁles.
The worker model is implemented using the open-source,
Java-based graph database Neo4j [7]. Querying of the model
from within the application is realized by accessing Neo4j’s
RESTful interface. The model’s contents are derived from a
domain ontology (OWL) by automatically mapping the ontol-
ogy’s concepts and relations into the Neo4j graph database
format (T-Box). Once created, the graph can be populated
and updated at runtime with dynamically-changing data like
a worker’s history, retrieved by logging assembly operations.
There are several reasons for choosing a graph database
above conventional storage formats like, e.g., SQL databases.
Regarding performance for path operations (like in the above
example) in highly-connected data, relational databases can
become overburdened by queries of increasing complexity due
to joins and index lookups; whereas in graph databases, which
use index-free adjacency in traversing from node to node,
query latency is relatively independent of the database size
and the number of connections ([8], chapter 2). Note that
denormalization for relational databases is not an alternative
here, since the data model is not tailored exclusively to the
needs of the staff planning app, but is instead meant to provide
a ﬂexible, multi-purpose source of semantic information, with
diverse applications reading from and writing to the model.
This implies that a) we cannot anticipate what relations will
be queried most frequently at runtime, and b) we need to
prepare for easy model update (e.g., based on sensor data),
in order to keep the graph a realtime model of the staff data.
Consequently, there is no use in optimizinig read access for
speciﬁc relations at the cost of slower write access.
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

B
A
Figure 3. Mockups of the mobile application.
The most crucial beneﬁt of graph databases in the context
of Industry 4.0 is that they allow for an explicit, intuitive, and
easily-expandable modeling of the complex semantic depen-
dencies that exist in modern factories, and that the semantics of
such graphs can easily be understood even by users unfamiliar
with conventional modeling languages like UML.
VI.
USER INTERFACE DESIGN
A 7 inch tablet was identiﬁed to be most suitable for the
daily deployment in a factory environment. It is small enough
to ﬁt in a team leader’s pocket and offers enough space on
the screen to present relevant information. In order to start the
development of the screens, mockups of the mobile application
were designed. The result is shown in Figure 3.
After a successful sign in, the home screen is presented
(screen A). The screen visualizes the manufacturing lines and
allocated workers the respective team leader is supervising.
Events such as sick notes or delays are visualized by speciﬁc
symbols. The absence of a worker can result in a deviation of
the planned quantities for the day, which is visualized on top
of the manufacturing line columns. To get an impression of
the worker’s ﬁtness for the manufacturing process on a line, a
5 point ranking is visualized in form of wrenches.
If the team leader wants to break down this aggregation of
worker skills, he or she can switch to a detailed view. The three
qualiﬁcation parameters experience, quality, and productivity
(cf. Section IV-A) are visualized in form of bar graphs. As a
fourth parameter, time indicates when the recommended dwell
time limit on this line is reached. To trigger or execute a staff
shift, the team leader changes to screen B by touching the
matrix position he or she wants to edit on screen A. Screen B
presents a list of suitable workers according to the weighted
worker ranking. If the team leader selects a worker, his or her
impact on the planned quantity numbers is visualized on top
of the screen.
VII.
DISCUSSION AND OUTLOOK
In this work in progress, the concept of a mobile ap-
plication for team leaders, to support them in making ad
hoc planning decisions, was proposed. Recommendations of
suitable staff shifts are based on a dynamic worker model
that was implemented using a graph database. A Web service
makes relevant information available that is presented on a
mobile user interface.
In the next step, a prototype of the application is realized.
The linking of relevant information sources forms the ﬁrst chal-
lenge to allow a ﬁeld test in the factory. Feedback of the team
leaders will show if the desired improvements were achieved
and will ﬂow into enhancements of the prototype. Additionally,
a useful data exchange between information sources, such as
the factory worker model and the manufacturing line model,
might result in new optimization strategies for an optimal
worker-to-manufacturing-line allocation. On the other side, the
information from the factory worker model might be used to
provide workers motivating feedback on their daily work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Nadja Rutsch for the design of
the graphical user interface mockups presented in Figure 3.
This research was funded in part by the German Federal
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) under grant
number 01IS13015 (project SmartF-IT). The responsibility for
this publication lies with the authors.
REFERENCES
[1]
BMBF, “Project of the Future: Industry 4.0,” 2014, URL: http://www.
bmbf.de/en/19955.php [accessed: 2014-04-10].
[2]
K. Ashton, “That ’internet of things’ thing,” 2009, URL: http://www.
rﬁdjournal.com/articles/view?4986 [accessed: 2014-04-10].
[3]
J. Kletti, Manufacturing Execution Systems (MES).
Berlin; London:
Springer, 2007.
[4]
RWTH
Aachen
University
IAW,
“ENgAge4Pro
Project,”
2014,
URL:
http://www.iaw.rwth-aachen.de/index.php?article id=20&projid=
89&proalias=ENgAge4Pro [accessed: 2014-04-10].
[5]
Fraunhofer IAO, “EPIK Project,” 2014, URL: http://www.epik-projekt.
de/ [accessed: 2014-04-10].
[6]
——, “KapaﬂexCy Project,” 2014, URL: http://www.kapaﬂexcy.de/ [ac-
cessed: 2014-04-10].
[7]
Neo Technology, Inc., “Neo4j,” http://www.neo4j.org/, [Accessed 23-
June-2014].
[8]
I. Robinson, J. Webber, and E. Eifrem, Graph Databases.
Beijing:
O’Reilly, 2013. [Online]. Available: http://my.safaribooksonline.com/
9781449356262
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

