Augmented Object Development using 3D Technology 
An Object Redesign Process in the Ubicomp Domain 
Gustavo López, Daniel Alvarado 
Research Center on Information and  
Communication Technologies  
University of Costa Rica 
San José, Costa Rica 
{gustavo.lopez_h,daniel.alvarado_g}@ucr.ac.cr 
Luis. A Guerrero, Mariana López 
School of Computer Science and Informatics  
University of Costa Rica 
San José, Costa Rica 
{luis.guerrero, mariana.lopez}@ecci.ucr.ac.cr 
Abstract— The construction of augmented object´s prototypes 
is a difficult process because most of the time these prototypes 
contain several sensors embedded in real life objects. In this 
paper, we present our experience using 3D technologies 
(scanning and printing) to generate prototypes of augmented 
objects which allow an early evaluation of them. Three 
different objects with embedded sensing and actuating 
capabilities were designed and developed. We discuss several 
pros and cons of applying this technology when developing 
augmented objects. Our results show that the use of 3D 
technologies enhances the quality of the final prototypes and 
allows a better concept validation and evaluation. 
Keywords- 3D printing; fast prototyping; augmented objects; 
ubiquitous computing; HCI; usability; mixed reality. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
An augmented object is defined as a common object, 
which has been provided with additional functionalities 
through integrated computing or software systems [1]. This 
definition biases people to build an augmented object from 
an existing one by adding other capabilities. In contrast, 
Waiser [2] describes Ubicomp as invisible computers in 
different sizes, situated to specific tasks. 
Augmented Objects are normally developed to be 
incorporated in the Ubicomp domain. Therefore, they should 
be as seamless as possible depending on the goal of the 
objects, i.e., the capabilities added to the object. If the object 
to be augmented is selected from the natural context of use 
and additional capabilities are added, those capabilities 
should change it as little as possible. To do so the external 
look and functionalities of the object must be studied in order 
to add the capabilities without changing it. 
In this project, we propose a strategy to develop 
augmented objects using 3D technologies, i.e., using a 3D 
scanning of the original object, redesigning it and printing a 
3D version of such object with the least visible changes.  
We also evaluate the proposed strategy by building 
versions of objects with embedded capabilities changing the 
object only slightly and almost imperceptibly to users. 
 Our main goal is to provide a strategy to allow the 
construction of new versions of objects as if the embedded 
capabilities were already there in the original design. 
In a previous work, a process for the development of 
augmented objects (called AODeP) [3] was proposed and 
was later validated and improved [1].  
However, the construction process was not fully 
addressed. This project defines some guidelines that can be 
followed at that stage. 
Using augmented object as non-traditional interfaces for 
software systems can be difficult, especially when designers 
are reluctant to undergo a learning process. Our approach 
deals with that problem by designing familiar interfaces for 
the target users that resemble and function like the already 
known objects.  
We add new functionalities to an object requiring the 
least cognitive effort possible from the user. Our approach 
intent to understand the object and its capabilities to assure 
that the new capabilities engage well with the original ones. 
According to Hollinworth and Hwang [4], avoiding an 
increase in cognitive effort is achieved through the 
construction of physical objects that resemble or behave in a 
familiar way and context of the final user. 
Implementing interfaces with familiar designs, and that 
provides more comfortable environments, results in better 
acceptance from final users. It also helps to reduce the 
cognitive effort and the time spent by the user to adapt to the 
device or system [5].  
Furthermore, the use of 3D printing to make prototypes 
and construct real size devices in order to evaluate aesthetics, 
space distribution and functionality may also reduce the cost 
of production of the prototypes [6]. However, the use of low 
cost 3D printers could affect the possibility to print large 
objects.  
Sophistication and appearance need to be addressed when 
creating augmented objects [7]. It is no longer enough to 
attach some sensors on an artifact and name it an augmented 
object. It is necessary to redesign the objects and really 
embed the new characteristics. 
We use Human Computer Interaction (HCI) techniques 
to enhance the objects capabilities and evaluate them. HCI 
involves the study and design of interactions between people 
and computers through joint work of computer science and 
behavioral sciences. The main goal of HCI is to improve the 
interactions to create more usable interfaces [8][9].  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
shows some related work. Section III explains the 
construction process when embedding the new capabilities in 
objects. Section IV shows three examples of developed 
augmented objects. Section V discusses our findings. 
Finally, Section VI shows some conclusions. 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

II. 
RELATED WORK 
Augmented objects are also known as smart objects [10] 
or sentient artifacts [11]. Sánchez, Ranasinghe, Patkai and 
Mcfarlane [10] call smart object to a product which is 
capable of incorporating itself into both physical and 
information environments. Meanwhile, Kawsar, Fujinami 
and Nakajima [11] refer to sentient artifact to everyday life 
objects augmented with sensors to provide value added 
services. 
 Many augmented objects examples are present in the 
literature. However, most of these examples were all 
developed 
without 
following 
a 
formal design 
and 
development process and there is no special attention given 
to hiding the sensors or actuators. 
Since the appearance of new prototyping and modeling 
techniques for creating custom devices, HCI researchers 
have been developing new forms of using this technology to 
improve the user experience. Due to the development of 
these technologies, the design processes of hardware 
components can now focus not only on the internal 
electronic components of the device but also on the external 
components: functionality and aesthetics [12][13]. Another 
sought characteristic among the researchers of these kinds of 
techniques is the affordability and accessibility of the 
components 
that 
can 
be 
obtained 
through 
custom 
construction. 
Groups like Microsoft Research have been studying and 
experimenting with several physical prototyping techniques, 
combining different methods of generating structures like 3D 
printing and laser-cut wooden components [14]. These 
techniques provide great opportunities to integrate the design 
of the inner parts of a device, e.g., circuits or sensors with the 
design of the outer part of it, like shape, buttons and colors. 
The applications and advantages of custom component 
fabrication go beyond customer satisfaction or market driven 
design. It also benefits areas like education [15] because 
students can build and prove their designs in a real context. 
Some research groups have also been focusing in the 
inner parts or functionality of smart objects and tangible and 
more intuitive interfaces. However, authors use an approach 
that does not incorporate sensors. Instead of that they use 
conductive and capacitive interactions as a way to provide 
low cost prototypes with interaction capabilities [16].  
Wiethoff et al.[17] propose a method to quickly 
prototype tangible user interfaces without having a complete 
design or process of construction. This is achieved by 
making cardboard structures for the external parts and using 
conductive ink to design the tangible surface of the objects.  
Some research is also being made on 3D scanning quality 
and the influence of diverse factors, e.g., surface color, 
glossiness, ambient light, resolution in the scanning process 
and results quality [18][19]. 
3D Scanning and printing has been used to potentiate the 
transformation design practices. Stanislav and Chyon [20] 
demonstrated that 3D scanning and printing process enables 
a rediscovery of the artifacts when crafting. Authors also 
project the possibility of this technique used in redesign 
process by designers. 
III. 
CONSTRUCTION PROCESS 
The construction process detailed in this section is an in-
depth description of one of the steps proposed by Guerrero, 
Ochoa and Horta [3], in what they called Augmented Object 
Development Process (AODeP). 
AODeP is a method that ensures that all stages in 
developing augmented objects are addressed focused on the 
problem to solve and from an engineering perspective. 
AODeP was addressed in other studies [1] and some 
improvements were proposed however no details on the step 
five were presented. AODeP proposes six main stages to 
develop an augmented object: 
1. Problem definition 
2. Context of use definition 
3. Requirement definition 
4. Selection of the object 
5. Development 
6. Testing with users 
This paper addresses the fifth step of AODeP process. 
The development of an augmented object, assuming that a 
problem has been identified and requirements have been 
gathered; this is the next stage of the process.  
Several guidelines are available to conduct a prototype 
development in HCI literature. However, not many people 
address the problem of how to augment an object. If an 
object has been selected for augmentation the idea is to 
embed the sensors or actuators in it, while changing as little 
as possible its external looks and of course the original 
functionality of such object. 
We propose a Physical to Digital to Physical (P2D2P) 
process. Using a 3D Scanner the original object can be 
digitalized to be redesigned in order to make sure the new 
components fit the interior while changing the external looks 
and functionality the least possible. Once the object is 
redesigned, a 3D print process is used to obtain the new 
version of the object with the actual size of the original 
object with the new components. 
In this project, we use a NextEngine 3D Scanner HD to 
obtain the digitalized model. It is necessary to do at least two 
360° scans to get a clear model of the original object. The 
software we used was NextEngine ScanStudioHD. This 
method creates a virtual representation of the surface 
geometry. If there are components inside of the original 
object, such components should be also scanned in order to 
leave the required space for them in the new version of the 
object. Once the object is scanned, we export it in OBJ 
format and import it using Blender 3D computer graphics 
software [21]. 
 
 
a) 
 
b) 
Figure 1.  a) Pictures of the sensors to be embed in the augmented object. 
b) Low quality 3D models of the sensors. 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

a) 
 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
Figure 2.  a) Photo of the original object, b) Digitalized model of the original object, c) Simplified model, d) Redisigned model, e) Printed object  
Using this tool we create a simplified model in order to 
avoid manifold edges, flipped normals or face overlapping. 
With the new simplified model of the object, the redesign 
process starts. This process needs to be addressed 
individually for each object since the object characteristics 
and the new components are specific to a given problem. For 
instance, we want to fit a RFID emitter and an accelerometer, 
both from the Phidgets kit [22], into a board eraser. Figures 
1.a and 1.b show the sensors that we want to embed into the 
eraser. Figure 1.c shows the scanned digital representation of 
the sensors that would be used to measure and leave the 
required space inside the new object. 
Once the object has been redesigned and the space for the 
new characteristics has been added, the replication (printing) 
process begins. The new model is exported in a 
STereoLithography (STL) format.  
To process the STL file we used Replicator G [23] for 
Windows. Replicator G is the software that drives many 
computer numerical controlled machines. The model 
exported from the redesign process is positioned, scaled or 
rotated as needed to accommodate it in the print bed. 
The Flashforge Creator printer is used to print the new 
object. It uses open source controlling software and ABS 
plastic filaments. It also provides an accuracy of 0.0025mm 
on Z and 0.011 on XY axis. The cost for using the printer is 
US$0.003 per printed inch of filament. 
Figure 2 shows the whole process followed: 
1. Digitalize the object using the 3D scanner. 
2. Simplify the model reducing vertex count and 
avoiding problems in the model. 
3. Redesign the model to fit new and old components. 
4. Print and polish the final version of the new object. 
Figure 2.a shows the original object to be digitalized, 2.b 
is the digitalized model without any modification, 2.c shows 
the simplified model from the digitalized one, 2.d is the 
redesigned model and finally, Figure 2.d shows the printed 
object.  
IV. 
EXAMPLES 
This section presents three examples of augmented 
objects we built using our P2D2P process. We redesign the 
objects in order to incorporate sensors and actuators to the 
environment changing few physical aspects of the real 
objects and context. All the prototypes presented in this 
section have a software component. However, we will 
briefly discuss it in this paper since our main goal is to 
describe the physical redesign of the objects.  
A. First augmented object: An automatic post-it note 
Email service has been developing for the past 40 years. 
In the past few years many companies, especially phone 
builders, have been developing nontraditional interfaces for 
email services and special notification systems to let people 
know they have received an important email. It does not 
matter if the mail is used for personal or business reasons 
there are always some emails that are more important than 
others and of course there is also spam mail.  
We built an augmented object to notify a user when they 
have an unread important mail in their inbox. The metaphor 
that we decided to use was a post-it note, because normally, 
when you missed an important message, this kind of note is 
used to let you know about it. 
The context of use selected was an office setting and the 
post-it note is displayed on top of the monitor of the 
computer, it could be on the keyboard or anywhere else. 
The developed system consists of two software parts. 
One part is a Web page for configuration and the other a 
daemon that samples the inbox of the configured email 
account and determines if there is an important unread mail, 
if so, it sends a signal that displays the post-it note.  
The case for this augmented object was printed in order 
to fit the needed components and so that it would disturb the 
least possible the context of the post-it. If an unread 
important mail is detected, a signal is sent and the servo 
contained in the case shows the post-it, otherwise it hides the 
note. Since we used general purpose components as sensors, 
the size of the prototypes are bigger than they would be if 
more specialized sensors were used. 
The physical components of the post-it note are: (1) a 
servo motor, (2) a servo controller, (3) USB cables and 
power cable, (4) the note, (5) case and (6) case cover. Figure 
3 shows the prototype set in angle to visualize the case and 
components.  
We incorporate an HCI technique in order to validate the 
experience of use for this prototype. We conducted a Diary 
Study by asking selected participants to keep a diary of usage 
over 8 days.  
The importance of this study was that the non-intrusive 
design of the object allowed the participants to keep using 
the original object as if a regular post-it note was there. The 
purpose of the notification is achieved when the participant 
observes the post-it note and realizes he/she got an important 
unread mail. The main complaint of the participants in the 
study was that the prototype was wired and that makes it 
intrusive to the environment. 
 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
a) 
 
 c) 
 
b) 
 
d) 
Figure 3.  a) Front picture of the post-it displayed, b) Back picture of the 
post-it hidden. c) Angle picture of the case and post-it displayed, d) Angle 
picture of the post-it hidden. 
We intent to perform one more iteration with the 
prototype to create a wireless version. Of course we were not 
able to redesign the full monitor; so, we developed this 
prototype trying to have a non-intrusive post-it note without 
affecting the monitor's functionality. 
B. Second augmented object: A whiteboard eraser 
One of the biggest problems that ubiquitous computing 
tries to solve is the automation of environments through what 
is called ambient intelligence. For instance, we designed an 
augmented whiteboard eraser to automate a classroom. This 
device is an example of overcoming the problematic of solid 
objects when trying to embed sensors or actuators. 
Normally, when prototyping the developers attach the 
sensors on the outside of the objects but this may make them 
difficult to use, or can change the physical appearance of the 
object. We found this problem when trying to use a 
whiteboard eraser for recognition of the professor’s presence 
in a classroom and to know if the whiteboard is being used. 
The context of use of this prototype is a university setting.  
Common whiteboard erasers have two parts: a base and a 
plush. The base is normally made of wood or some kind of 
styrofoam and these materials are not pliable enough to 
insert sensors. On the other hand, the modification of the 
plush could jeopardize the functionality of the eraser. 
Therefore a redesign is needed to embed the sensors.  
The physical components added to the augmented eraser 
were: 
(1) 
a 
Radio-frequency 
identification 
(RFID) 
transmitter; (2) a 3 axis sensor; (3) a plastic base; and (4) the 
plush. Figure 4 shows the original eraser and the printed 
version. There are no external differences although the 
printed version contains the sensors. An RFID receiver is on 
the classroom entrance and on the marker holder on the 
whiteboard. 
 
 
a) 
 
b) 
Figure 4.  a) Picture of the physical eraser to be augmented. b) Augmented 
Object developed using a 3D printer. 
Depending on the eraser position the classroom changes 
settings, e.g., turning the lights on or off. 
To evaluate the structure and functionality of the eraser 
we gave it to five faculty members of the School of 
Computer Science and Informatics at University of Costa 
Rica. They just used it as a common eraser and did not know 
anything about the object or the research goals. Users held it 
and used it in a common environment and were not able to 
find any difference between the regular eraser and the 
augmented one. 
One important result of the interviews was that none of 
the interviewed persons were able to distinguish that there 
were sensors or anything different about the eraser. One 
issue that was derived from the questioning of the faculty 
members was that the erasers are commonly disposable so 
we should provide exchangeable plushes if we want to 
continue to use the base and sensors.  
 
a) 
b) 
Figure 5.  a) Small printed eraser used in context. b) Big printed eraser 
used in classroom.  
Figure 5 shows the use of the printed version of the 
eraser. We used two different models to consider external 
complexity. Figure 5.a shows a rectangular eraser, and figure 
5.b shows a more complex 8 shaped eraser. 
C. Third augmented object: A real size classic doodler 
With the emergence of interactive video beams such as 
eBeam products [24], most of the interaction is being done 
by software and clicking in some places of the projection 
area. In this study, we used a Classic Doodler metaphor [25] 
to create a real size classic doodler that would allow the user 
of the interactive video beam to erase a part of the projected 
scene by using a little slider placed on the marker holder of 
the whiteboard used to project. 
 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
Figure 6.  Front Picture of the printed doodler. 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Picture of the Doodler slider in context 
The only hardware component needed to build this 
prototype was the slider (Figures 6 and 7). In order to embed 
the slider in the marker holder we printed the holder to 
provide the space needed for the slider sensor. It is important 
to mention that this augmented whiteboard requires a 
connection to a computer. This connection is used in order to 
interact with the projector software that allows the user to 
write on the board. Instead of having to interact with a 
computer, having to erase with the mouse, or create a new 
blank document to be projected on the screen, the user can 
simply use the slider at the bottom of the board to erase all 
the contents of the board.  
This object gives extra functionality that does not 
interfere with any of the other functionalities that the board 
already has. Finally, this augmented object does not add 
much cognitive effort in order to use it because of the 
simplicity of the device.  
Figure 8.a shows a projected image with annotations 
using the Epson BrightLink projector software and the 8.b 
shows the object being used to erase the comments.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
In this project, we found that 3D printed prototypes can 
not only be built to allow embedded sensors but also to 
enhance their capabilities. For instance, if the sensor to be 
embedded is a vibration sensor the case could be built to 
hold the sensor in a better way to enhance its functionality. 
This characteristic is present in the design of our email 
notifier. It was built so that the inner workings of the device 
are not visible to the user except the user sees what should be 
seen, which is the post-it itself. This ensures that the 
cognitive load for using the object is low (the physical 
circuits are hidden). 
Another example of a redesigned object was the 
whiteboard eraser. In this prototype, we performed an 
interview, and no faculty member was able to distinguish 
that the sensors that were placed inside the redesigned object. 
In this way, the principle for ubiquitous computing was 
achieved: to embed the systems in a way that they are 
invisible to the users.  
We found that printed prototypes can hide the new 
components to avoid cognitive load for the final users. 
Printed prototypes also avoid affecting the physical 
appearance of the object. 
In our email notifier prototype, the augmented post-it was 
an actuator but we occlude it behind the monitor. Therefore, 
the physical appearance of the monitor remains intact except 
when the note is displayed. 
The most valuable use of 3D printing models for rapid 
prototyping of augmented objects is the possibility of an 
internal redesign. As we told before an extensive evaluation 
of the object that would be redesigned is required. However, 
once the evaluation is performed the redesign process can 
help to introduce new devices to increase the object 
capabilities. 
Our eraser validates the fact that, if a solid object is 
selected to be augmented, an internal redesign would allow 
the use of sensors without changing the physical appearance 
and the functionality of the object. However, the use of low 
cost 3D printers restricts the printing size. 
 
 
a) 
 
b) 
Figure 8.  a) Interactive projector being used to draw some circles over an image, b) Doodler used to erase the previously drawn circles
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The quality of the redesigned object can also be affected 
by the size of the sensors or actuators. With the whiteboard 
eraser the model was divided and printed in several parts. As 
an example, the printing time for each of the objects 
presented in this paper was approximately two and a half 
hours. 
In our research lab, we have been developing prototypes 
for the past few years without using a 3D printer. We found 
that a printed prototype is better in terms of cost and quality. 
Without considering the cost of the 3D printer itself, i.e., 
considering only the filament and the design and printing 
time.  
The cost for creating 3D printed prototypes is very low, 
especially if we can use free and open source software design 
tools. The cost of each of the prototypes presented in this 
article did not reach US$10 on total printed material cost. 
The sensors and actuators reach over US$250 (US$90 for the 
servo controller, US$12 the servo, US$6 for the RFID 
reader, US$2 the RFID and US$140 the main board 
controller). These prices correspond to the multipurpose 
sensors. Specific sensors can be cheaper.  
We have found that 3D printing might not be the best 
option for small models or models that need some very 
precise parts, because of the coarseness and the quality of the 
printed object. It can be advantageous when dealing with 
cases or protective structures. Printing more precise models 
or devices, or even certain parts of a device that might need 
more finesse can be very counterproductive due to the lack 
of precision it provides.  
Modeling an object following the process described in 
Section 3 could be facilitated by using a 3D scanner to 
digitalize the objects. It is interesting to mention that this 3D 
redesign process could be incorporated to the development 
process described in AODeP methodology. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The use of 3D printing models can improve the quality of 
the prototypes and allows a better and quicker evaluation of 
them. When the prototypes involve an actuator that cannot 
be easily incorporated into the object, it is useful to create a 
case to hide the components and reduce as much as possible 
the cognitive load for the user. 
It is important to try not to modify the physical and 
aesthetic characteristics of the objects when augmenting 
them. This will help keep the principle of the ubiquitous 
computing: to make the computer invisible. 
The examples presented in this paper show the use of 3D 
printing in prototyping. However, it is not enough to 
generate a systematic process of augmented object 
prototyping. As future work, we will design and create more 
printed objects and will try to generalize the creation step of 
the augmented object development process. 
Based on the evidence presented in this paper we also 
present a crucial improvement to AODeP methodology by 
incorporating the redesign of the augmented objects with a 
finer level of detail. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank the Students Association at the School of 
Computer Science at Universidad de Costa Rica for letting 
us borrow the 3D printer and the UCR Computer Center for 
the 3D Scanner used in this research. This project was 
partially 
supported 
by 
CITIC-UCR 
(Centro 
de 
Investigaciones en Tecnologías de la Información de la 
Universidad de Costa Rica), grant No. 834-B4-159. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. López, M. López, and L. Guerrero, “Improving the Process 
for Developing Augmented Objects: An HCI Perspective”, 
Proc. Ubiquitous Computing and Ambient Intelligence. 
Context-Awareness 
and 
Context-Driven 
Interaction 
(UCAmI'13), Springer International Publishing, Dec. 2013, 
pp. 111-118, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-03176-7_15. 
[2] M. Waiser, The Computer for the 21st Century, ACM Special 
Interest Group on Mobility of Systems, Users, Data, and 
Coputing, 
Vol. 
3, 
pp. 
3-11, 
1999, 
doi: 
10.1145/329124.329126.  
[3] L. Guerrero, H. Horta, and S. Ochoa, “Developing 
Augmented Objects: A Process Perspective”, Journal of 
Universal Computer Science, vol. 16, Aug. 2010, pp. 1612-
1632, doi:10.3217/jucs-016-12-1612. 
[4] N. Hollinworth and F. Hwang, “Investigating Familiar 
Interactions to 
Help 
Older 
Adults 
Learn 
Computer 
Applications More Easily”, Proc. 25th BCS Conference on 
Human-Computer 
Interaction 
(BCS-HCI 
'11), 
British 
Computer Society, Jul. 2011, pp. 473-478, doi: 
[5] C. Leonardi, C. Mennecozzi, E. Not, F. Pianesi, and M. 
Zancanaro, “Designing a familiar technology for elderly 
people”, Gerontechnology, vol. 7, May. 2008, pp. 151, doi: 
10.4017/gt.2008.07.02.088.00. 
[6] N. Jarvis, D. Cameron, and A. Boucher, “Attention to Detail: 
Annotations of a Design Process”, Proc. 7th Nordic 
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Making Sense 
Through Design (NordiCHI '12), ACM, Oct. 2012, pp. 11-20, 
doi: 10.1145/2399016.2399019. 
[7] S. Hodges, S.Taylor, N. Villar, J. Scott, and J. Helmes, 
“Exploring physical prototyping techniques for functional 
devices using .NET gadgeteer”, Proc. Seventh International 
Conference 
on 
Tangible, 
Embedded, 
and 
Embodied 
Interaction 
(TEI'13), 
Feb. 
2013, 
pp. 
271-274, 
doi:10.1145/2460625.2460670. 
[8] S. Card, T. Moran, and A. Newell, "The keystroke-level 
model for user performance time with interactive systems", 
Communications of the ACM 23 (CACM), ACM, Jul. 1980, 
pp. 369-410, doi:10.1145/358886.358895. 
[9] J. Carlisle, "Evaluating the impact of office automation on top 
management communication".Proceedings of the June, 
National Computer Conference and Exposition, (AFIPS '76), 
ACM, 
June. 
1976, 
pp. 611–616, 
doi:10.1145/1499799.1499885.  
[10] T. Sánchez, D. Ranasinghe, B. Patkai, and D. Mcfarlane, 
“Taxonomy, Technology and Applications of Smart Objects”, 
Information Systems Frontiers, Vol. 13, April. 2011, pp. 281-
300, doi: 10.1007/s10796-009-9218-4. 
[11] F. Kawsar, K. Fujinami, and T. Nakajima, “Augmenting 
Everyday Life with Sentient Artefacts”, Proc. 2005 Joint 
Conference on Smart Objects and Ambient Intelligence: 
Innovative Context-aware Services: Usages and Technologies 
(sOc-EUSAI '05), ACM, Oct. 2005, pp. 141-146, doi: 
10.1145/1107548.1107587. 
 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

[12] D. Mellis and L. Buechley, “Collaboration in Open-source 
Hardware: 
Third-party 
Variations 
on 
the 
Arduino 
Duemilanove”, Proc.ACM 2012 Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW '12), ACM, Feb. 2012, 
pp. 1175-1178, doi: 10.1145/2145204.2145377. 
[13] D. Mellis and L. Buechley,” Case Studies in the Personal 
Fabrication of Electronic Products”, Proc. Designing 
Interactive Systems Conference (DIS '12), ACM, June.2012, 
pp. 268-277, doi: 10.1145/2317956.2317998. 
[14] S. Hodges, N. VillarJ. Scott, and A. Schmidt, “A New Era for 
Ubicomp Development”, IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 11, 
Jan. 2012, pp. 5-9, doi: 10.1109/MPRV.2012.1 
[15] M. Eisenberg, and L. Buechley, “Pervasive Fabrication: 
Making Construction Ubiquitous in Education”, Journal of 
Software, 
vol.3, 
March 
.2008, 
pp. 
62-68, 
doi: 
10.4304/jsw.3.4.62-68. 
[16] D. López-de-Ipiña, J. Vázquez, D. García, J. Fernández, I. 
García, D. Sainz, and A. Almeida, “EMI 2 lets: A Reflective 
Framework for Enabling AmI”, Journal of Universal 
Computer Science, Vol. 12, Mar. 2006, pp. 297-314, doi: 
10.3217/jucs-012-03-0297. 
[17] A. Wiethoff, H. Schneider, M. Rohs, A. Butz, and S. 
Greenberg, “Sketch-a-TUI: Low Cost Prototyping of Tangible 
Interactions Using Cardboard and Conductive Ink”, Proc. 
Sixth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded and 
Embodied Interaction (TEI '12), ACM, Feb. 2012, pp. 309-
312, doi: 10.1145/2148131.2148196. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[18] N. Zaimovic-Uzunovic and S. Lemes, “Influences of surface 
parameters on laser 3D scanning”, Proc. International 
symposium 
on 
measurement 
and 
quality 
control 
(ISMQC2010), IMEKO, Sept. 2010, pp. 408-4011. 
[19] S. Lemes and N. Zaimovic-Uzunovic, “Study of ambient light 
influence on laser 3D scanning”, Proc. 7th international 
conference on industrial tools and material processing 
technologies (ICIT & MPT), Slovenian tool and die 
developpment centre, Oct. 2009, pp. 327-330. 
[20] J. Sadar and G. Chyon, “3D Scanning and Printing As a New 
Medium for Creativity in Product Desig”, Proc. Second 
Conference on Creativity and Innovation in Design (DESIRE 
'11), 
ACM, 
Oct. 
2011, 
pp. 
15-20, 
doi: 
10.1145/2079216.2079218. 
[21] Blender, http://www.blender.org/, [retrieved: June, 2014]. 
[22] Phidgets, http://www.phidgets.com/, [retrieved: June, 2014]. 
[23] Replicator G, http://replicat.org/, [retrieved: June, 2014]. 
[24] eBeam, http://www.e-beam.com/, [retrieved: June, 2014]. 
[25] Doodle Pro® Classic Doodler, http://www.fisher-price.com/, 
[retrieved: June, 2014]. 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

