User-centric IoT: Challenges and Perspectives
Abdelghani Wafa∗, Corinne Amel Zayani†, Ikram Amous† and Florence S`edes∗
∗Paul Sabatier University, IRIT, Toulouse, France
Emails: {wafa.abdelghani, ﬂorence.sedes}@irit.fr
† Sfax University, MIRACL, Sfax, Tunisia
Emails: {corinne.zayani, ikram.amous}@isecs.rnu.tn
Abstract—The Internet of Things (IoT), this emerging technology
connecting everyone, and everyones ’things’, is not about objects,
gadgets, databases, applications and proﬁts to be made from it,
but about people it enriches. Researchers, developers, industries,
telecommunication companies, and scientiﬁc communities have
been interested in this paradigm and have proposed different
solutions from different perspectives. They are mainly focused on
the technical level, like performance, interoperability, integration,
etc. However, whenever use cases are targeting human users,
the focus must not be merely on these sides, but on human
factors as well. Thus, it is essential to apply a user-centric
approach allowing identiﬁcation of application-speciﬁc features
and understanding users needs, motivations and beliefs. This
survey aims at encouraging other IoT system developers and
researchers to pay attention to the relationship between people
and IoT systems. We emphasize the value of adopting a user-
centric vision. The goal is not to provide solutions, but rather to
raise the right issues.
Keywords–Internet of Things; User-centric Internet of Things;
Social Internet of Things; Social Cyberspace; Internet of People.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The Internet of Things is a computing concept that de-
scribes the idea of everyday physical objects being connected
to the Internet and being able to identify themselves to other
devices. IoT is expected to be dominated by huge content-
oriented trafﬁc, intensive interactions between billions of per-
sons often on the move and heterogeneous communications
among hosts and smart objects [1]. It provisions millions
of services, with strict real-time requirements and striking
ﬂexibility in connecting everyone and everything.
Interconnected things, such as sensors or mobile devices
sense, monitor and collect all kinds of data about human social
life. Those data can be further aggregated, fused, processed,
analyzed and mined in order to extract useful information to
enable intelligent and ubiquitous services [2].
This paradigm is the result of the evolution of a whole
range of new trends following undeniable progress at differ-
ent levels, such as the evolution of mobile and ubiquitous
technologies, the evolution of sensors, wireless and cellular
communication networks, as well as the evolution of data
storage and processing technologies (Cloud Computing, Big
Data, etc.).
Researchers,
developers,
industries,
telecommunication
companies, and scientiﬁc communities have been interested
in this paradigm and have proposed different solutions from
different perspectives. They have tried to deal with different
problems, such as the heterogeneity of involved devices and
communication protocols [3] [4], the security of communica-
tions and the minimization of energy consumption [5].
Nevertheless, consumption of IoT products and services
remains above expectations [6]. It must be admitted that the
user is somewhat excluded. The user is at the heart of IoT
systems. It is both the source of data and the consumer.
Adopting a user-centric vision is, therefore, a promising new
trend. Advantages are numerous. Navigability and resources
discovery are improved [7]. Scalability and heterogeneity
problems are addressed [8]. The quantity and the variety
of contextual data are increased [7] and the community is
exploited to establish trustworthiness [9].
We wish through this survey to focus on the user-centric
IoT. We emphasize the value of adopting such a vision, we
study the user-centric IoT environments, the user in such a
context, his needs, and barriers and obstacles to the acceptance
of IoT products and services from users’ point of view. The
goal is not to provide solutions, but rather to raise the right
issues.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2, we introduce and compare different visions of
the IoT paradigm and we underline and classify its main
challenges. In Section 3, we focus on the user-centric IoT. We
deﬁne the user in such a context, we report related paradigms
and we underline highlights and advantages of adopting such
vision. In Section 4, we report and analyze IoT challenges
from a user vision. In Section 5, we compare researchers
challenges with users challenge to give a glance at the open
issues on which research should focus more. Conclusion and
future research hints are given in Section 6.
II.
INTERNET OF THINGS
The IoT is emerging as one of the major trends shaping
the development of technologies in the information and com-
munication sector at large [5]. The shift from an Internet used
for interconnecting end-user devices to an Internet used for
interconnecting physical objects that communicate with each
other and/or with humans in order to offer a given service,
implies to rethink again about conventional approaches usually
used in networking, computing and service provisioning.
The IoT is a technological phenomenon generated by
innovative advancements in information and communication
technologies related to: (i) Ubiquity, (ii) Pervasiveness and (iii)
Ambient Intelligence [10].
A. One Paradigm, Many Visions
Manifold deﬁnitions of IoT are suggested from the research
community which testiﬁes to the complexity and to the multi-
disciplinarity of this paradigm. The term IoT is broadly used
to refer to:
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

•
The global network connecting smart things through
extended Internet technologies.
•
The set of technologies supporting such a vision (e.g.,
Radio Frequency IDentiﬁcation (RFIDs), sensors, ac-
tuators, machine-to-machine communication devices,
etc.)
•
The set of applications and services leveraging such
technologies to give birth to new industrial opportu-
nities [5].
From a device-centric perspective, the IoT is based on
the concept of smart things, which are able to sense, detect
or measure physical phenomena (e.g., temperature, light, etc.)
or to perform actions having an effect on the real world [5].
This encompasses devices considered in RFID research [11],
as well as those considered in Wireless Sensor Networks and
Sensor/Actuator Networks [12] [13].
From a network-centric perspective, the IoT can be con-
sidered as a highly heterogeneous, dynamic and distributed
networked system, composed of a great number of smart
objects generating and consuming data [5].
From a data-centric perspective, IoT refers to entities
processing as providers and/or consumers of data related to
the physical world. This fact motivates the adoption of content-
centric network architectures and principles [5].
In literature, many architectures are suggested for repre-
senting the IoT. However, the most common and basic adopted
architecture is composed of three layers: (i) Physical layer
also called perception layer, device layer or sensing layer;
(ii) Network layer; and (ii) Application layer also called
Service layer. (i) Physical layer concerns identifying, naming,
addressing and managing IoT objects. (ii) Network layer
encompasses networks and protocols used for allowing IoT
objects to communicate and to interact. (iii) Application layer
encompasses Data Management and Services Management
modules and offers ﬁnal IoT services to end-users.
B. Underlined Challenges
Although well known for a while, the IoT paradigm is still
in its infancy and the road ahead is long. Researchers, projects,
and industries are focusing on different issues. We cite in this
section the main underlined challenges.
a) Heterogeneity and interoperability: IoT is charac-
terized by a high heterogeneity at different levels. From devices
level, IoT is a set of heterogeneous devices expected to present
dissimilar capabilities from computational and communication
standpoints. Identifying, addressing, naming and managing
such devices in a standardized way is the ﬁrst challenge [3]
[14].
From a network-centric perspective, allowing those devices
with various communication capabilities to communicate and
interact through various networks and using different commu-
nication protocols is the second challenge [4]. It covers basic
connectivity issues from the physical layer to the application
layer without considering the content of information.
From a data-centric vision, IoT is about exchanging and
analyzing massive amounts of data, to transform them into
useful information and to guarantee interoperability among
various applications and services. It is essential to provide data
with standardized formats, models and semantic descriptions
(meta-data), using well-deﬁned languages. This will enable IoT
applications to support automated reasoning, a key feature for
enabling the proliferation of such a technology on a wide scale
[15].
From a service-oriented vision, the main challenge relates
to how to integrate and compose functionality provided by
smart objects into services. This requires designing: (i) ar-
chitectures and methods for creating a standardized represen-
tation of smart objects able to resolve the heterogeneity of
devices/resources and (ii) methods for seamlessly integrating
and composing resources/services of smart objects into value-
added services for end users [5]. Table I shows the main
protocols used for each IoT layer.
TABLE I. PROTOCOLS IN DIFFERENT IOT LAYERS
Application
Layer
HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP),
Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP),
Embedded Binary HTTP (EBHTTP),
Licklider Transmission Protocol (LTP),
Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP),
IP Flow Information Export (IPﬁx),
Domain Name System (DNS),
Network Time Protocol (NTP),
Secure SHell Protocol (SSH),
Device Language Message Speciﬁcation(DLMS),
Distributed Network Protocol (DNP),
Network
Layer
Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6),
Routing Protocol for Low-power (RPL),
User Datagram Protocol (UDP),
Universal Logging Protocol˜(uIP),
Serial Line Internet Protocol (SLIP),
IPV6 LowPower wireless Area Network (6LoWPAN)
Physical
Layer
IEEE 802.11, IEEE 802.15, IEEE 802.16, Z-Wave,
Ultra˜WideBand protocol˜(UWB),
Highway Addressable Remote Transducer protocol (WirelessHART),
Infrared Data Association protocol(IrDA), Konnex protocol (KNX)
b) Scalability: As daily objects become connected to
a global networked infrastructure, scalability issue arises at
different levels, including: (i) identifying, addressing and man-
aging due to the size of the resulting system and to the con-
strained nature of typical IoT devices which do not enable quite
memory and computing capabilities; (ii) data communication
and networking due to the high level of interactions, com-
munications and data exchanges among involved entities; (iii)
information and knowledge management due to the massive
amount of data and information sensed, detected, generated
and analyzed and (iv) service provisioning and management
due to the high number of real-time services execution options
that could be available and the need to handle heterogeneous
resources [5].
c) Energy-optimized solutions: For a variety of IoT
entities, minimizing the energy to be spent on communi-
cation/computing purposes will be a primary constraint [5].
While techniques related to energy harvesting (through piezo-
electric materials or micro solar panels) will alleviate devices
from constraints imposed by battery, energy remains a scarce
resource which may not be wasted and which may be prop-
erly and reasonably consumed. Thereby, energy optimization
concerns also the network level, because communication is
recognized as the most energy-consuming task. It concerns
also the application layer which justiﬁes the need to design
services, applications, and solutions that tend to optimize
energy consumption even at the expense of performance.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

d) Trust, security and privacy: Trust is a multidimen-
sional, multidisciplinary and multifaceted concept. The con-
cept of trust covers a bigger scope than security, thus it is more
complicated and difﬁcult to establish. It is also related to the
concept of privacy that is the ability of an entity to determine
whether, when, and to whom personal information could be
disclosed. Trust, security and privacy are highly related crucial
issues in emerging information technology areas, such as IoT
[16].
A number of studies aim to improve identity trust and
achieve privacy preservation in ubiquitous systems such as
IoT. Fongen [17] propose a framework for authentication and
integrity protection designed for IoT environment in order to
ensure scalability and lightweight requirements. Gambs et al.
[18] propose an implementation of a speciﬁc inference attack
called the de-anonymization attack, based on Mobility Markov
Chain (MMC). They suggest some distance metrics in order
to measure the similitude among two MMCs and aggregate
these metrics to create de-anonymizers able to recognize users
in an Anonymized Geo-located Data-set. In [19], the authors
propose an extended trust protocol to support secure mobility
management in order to adapt the network to changes of lo-
cation and infrastructure. This extension aims to improve fault
tolerance capacity, connectivity, dependability and scalability
in IP-based Wireless Sensor Networks.
Some other works, focus on data transmission and commu-
nication trust which is strongly related to security. A security
protocol to support data exchange amongst objects was pro-
posed by [20] and combined with a security framework for
enhancing security, trust, and privacy for embedded systems.
Lightweight symmetric encryption and asymmetric encryption
in Trivial File Transfer Protocol (TFTP) were proposed to
make the given protocol appropriate to the constrained nature
of IoT devices. In [21], the authors propose mechanisms to
ensure security at the network layer and at the application layer
and perform an experimental study to identify the most appro-
priate secure communication mechanism for current sensing
platforms. Raza et al. [22] introduce SVELTE, an intrusion
detection system for the IoT, implemented and evaluated to
permit resiliency face to routing attacks, such as spoofed or
altered information, sinkhole, and selective-forwarding.
Some other works aim to establish trust management of a
whole and propose various trust frameworks and architectures.
In [23], the authors propose a system architecture that offers a
solution to several challenges, such as general system security,
network security, and application security with respect to basic
information security requirements (conﬁdentiality, integrity,
availability, authority, non-repudiation, and privacy preserva-
tion). Quan et al. [24] propose a trusted architecture for a
farmland wireless sensor network which includes four layers:
(i) a perception logical layer, (ii) a mark recognition logical
layer, (iii) a decision-control logical layer and (v) a trusted
interface logical layer. This architecture aims to afford trusted
and reliable data transmission in Wireless Sensor Networks.
An IoT architecture investigated by EU FP7 IoT-A project [25]
aims to consider both service privacy and IoT access security
aspects for dealing with service accommodation, identiﬁcation,
and IoT-A platform realizations. Gessner et al. [26] propose a
set of trust-enhancing security functional components which
covers both basic IoT resources access control and essential
functions, such as identity, trust and reputation management.
This component composition provides mechanisms for secur-
ing communications between subjects to ensure data integrity
and conﬁdentiality, service trust and privacy of users.
III.
USER-CENTRIC INTERNET OF THINGS
The IoT is a vision of ubiquitous connectivity. With
sensors, code, and infrastructure, any object can become
networked. But the question we need to ask is: should they
be? And if so, how? Public debate over the IoT is polarized.
Commentators tend to voice either excessive optimism or total
pessimism, with precious little in between.
Optimists describe IoT as a magical realm of “enchanted
objects”, where our possessions gently anticipate our every
need. The other camp paints a darker picture. They claim
that, at best, the IoT is just another excuse for rampant con-
sumerism, whose only contribution will be to clog basements
with yet more unnecessary junk. They afﬁrm that everyday
household objects will be turned into enemy spies, placing
us under constant surveillance. We will be nudged and ma-
nipulated at every moment. Our lives and possessions will be
perpetually exposed to hackers.
The solution is intuitive: we need to forget about things. We
need to stop obsessing over smart objects and start thinking
smart about people. This is the true potential of the IoT. It
could put our vast stores of tacit embodied knowledge to
work online. It could unite the physical and digital worlds.
It also could put us in control of our own information and
contextual integrity, against a moral and political backdrop
that is resolutely committed to human rights, the rule of law
and social cohesion. It could become an Internet, not of smart
things, but of smart empowered people.
A. The User in Intelligent Systems
The user is a human, deﬁned by different characteristics:
his name, his age, the country where he lives, his Job, his
school level, but also his interests, his domains of expertise and
his preferences. In computing systems, all these characteristics
are classically represented by a proﬁle. The user is also repre-
sented by the context where he evolves. A user context includes
his location, his current activity, objects and other users in
proximity but also his social context. The social context of a
user is represented by a set of social relationships entertained
with other users and forming the user social networks.
In intelligent systems, the user plays several roles. He is
both the source of information, the provider of services and the
consumer. The user is therefore in the heart of these processes.
That is why some paradigms have appeared giving focus to the
user. Several works focus on detecting user proﬁle [27], user
social characteristics [28] [29] and to adapting treatments and
process to user context [30]. Those works can be reused to
achieve a user-centric IoT.
B. Related Paradigms
In this section, we will address some new IoT paradigms
aiming to give focus to the user.
1) Internet of People: Miranda et al. [31] deﬁne the Internet
of People (IoP) as bringing the IoT closer to people in order
to easily integrate into it and fully exploit its beneﬁts. This
new paradigm aims to put people at the center of innovation
strategies and be able to make a proﬁt from the power of
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

collective intelligence. More than just smart applications and
smart cities, the potential of IoP resides in smart people.
IoP includes numerous topics, such as Biometric Sensors
and Identiﬁcation Technology, Wearable Technology, Brain
Informatics Processing, Body Area Network technology, So-
cial Computing, and Collective Intelligence, Technology for
Biomedical and healthcare application etc.
In [31], the authors deﬁne a set of features they believe
are essential foundations for any approach to the IoP: (i)
IoP should be social and let devices interact with each other
and with people more socially than does the IoT; (ii) IoP
should be personalized which mean that interactions must
be personalized to users sociological proﬁles and contexts;
(iii) IoP should be proactive and not manually commanded
by the user; (iv) IoP should be predictable which means
that interactions must be triggered according to a predictable
context that the user has previously identiﬁed, and for which
a speciﬁc behavior has been deﬁned.
2) Social Internet of Things: IoT embodies a large number
of smart objects that, through standard communication pro-
tocols and unique addressing schemes, provide information
and services to ﬁnal users. Making objects smart was only
the ﬁrst step of an evolutionary process that affected modern
communication devices and has been triggered by the advent
of IoT in the telecommunication scenarios [1].
The second step consists of the evolution of objects with
a certain degree of smartness to objects with an actual social
consciousness. These objects can interact with the surrounding
environment and feature a pseudo-social behavior with neigh-
bors or within circles and communities. The third step consists
of the birth of social objects that act in a social community
of objects and devices giving birth to the Social Internet of
Things (SIoT) [1].
SIoT objects are able to autonomously establish relation-
ships with other objects, to join communities and to build their
own social network which may be different from their owner’s
ones. SIoT has the potential to support novel applications and
networking services for the IoT in more effective and efﬁcient
ways. Thus, within a given social network of objects, a key
objective will be to publish information/services, ﬁnd them,
and discover novel resources to better implement services also
through an environmental awareness. This can be achieved by
navigating a social network of friend objects instead of relying
on typical Internet discovery tools that cannot scale to trillions
of future devices [1].
Short, SIoT permit to address some IoT challenges, such
as scalability and heterogeneity, to allow trust-based social
relationships among people and objects, to improve objects
navigability and discovery by narrowing down its scope to a
manageable social network of everything and to increases the
quantity and the variety of contextual data
3) Physical Cyber Social Computing:
[32] propose
Physical-Cyber-Social (PCS) computing, that takes a human-
centric and holistic view of computing by analyzing obser-
vations, knowledge, and experiences from physical, cyber,
and social worlds. Some of the main challenges in health-
care, sustainability, crime prevention, and mitigation require
a holistic approach to computing for providing actionable
information. With the increased digitization of the physical
world culminating in a massive data generated from sensors,
mobile devices, and personal/social observations has led to
a deeper view into our physical, cyber, and social worlds.
The data generation rate has surpassed the ability to store all
observations. PCS computing is envisioned to derive insights
from these observations to provide actionable information to
humans. Providing actionable information by taking a human-
centric approach is the vision of PCS computing.
4) People as a Service:
[33] People as a Service (PeaaS)
is a mobile-centric computing model that allows a users socio-
logical proﬁle to be generated, kept, and securely provided as
a service to third parties directly from a Smart-phone. PeaaS
emphasizes smart-phones capabilities and relies on them for
inferring and sharing sociological proﬁles. These proﬁles are
not disclosed and are preserved on the device, making it easier
for owners to keep their virtual identity under their own control
and to preserve them privacy while still enabling third parties
to make proﬁt from users identities.
Serving individuals virtual sociological proﬁles through
Smart-phones are different from other mobile-centric models
that only provide data, such as GPS localization and tempera-
ture. PeaaS allows a variety of information to be collected, such
as moods, tendency, preferences, social statuses, daily habits
and health habits of a group of peoples in order to delimit
their digital projection. However, ﬁltering and analyzing this
information to infer users characteristics and speciﬁcity or
to generate relevant information is not a trivial task. Various
techniques, including activity recognition approaches and af-
fective computing, are used in PeaaS for building the richest
sociological proﬁle possible [33].
5) Social Devices: Social Devices is an IoT model, in-
troduced by [34]. The motivation behind the model was that
smart-phones have not only a lot of information about their
owners, but also modalities that enable them to resemble
humans. They can translate text into speech, for example. At
present, Social Devices concept is supported by a middleware
platform. This allows proactive triggering of interactions be-
tween devices of co-located people. Additionally, it offers a
complete set of Web-based tools to deﬁne interactions and their
triggering contexts.
6) Social Sensing: Social Sensing is an integral paradigm
of the IoT when objects being tracked are associated with in-
dividual people. Mobile phones, smart watches, smart glasses,
and wearable sensors are good examples of sensing objects.
Such paradigms have tremendous value in enabling social net-
working paradigms in conjunction with sensing. The growing
capability of basics hardware to track a wide variety of daily
data, such as location, speed, and video leads to tremendous
opportunity in enabling a connected and pervasive world of
users that are ubiquitously connected to the Internet [35].
C. Highlights and Advantages
Adopting a user-centric vision is, therefore, a promising
new trend. Advantages are numerous.
•
Navigability and resources discovery are improved by
narrowing down them scopes to a manageable social
network of everything [7].
•
Some IoT challenges, such as scalability and hetero-
geneity are addressed [7].
•
The scalability is guaranteed like in human social
networks [8] and the heterogeneity of devices, network
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

and communication protocols is resolved by the use
of social networks.
•
A larger data source becomes available as it comes
from a set of users, a network of users, or a community
rather than from a single user.
•
The continuous feed of data from communities gives
us big data team [9] and the quantity and the variety
of contextual data is increased allowing improved ser-
vices intelligence and adaptability to users’ situational
needs [7].
•
A better user adaptation that will lead to the increased
consumption of IoT products [9] and a better informa-
tion ﬁltering become possible, because communities of
objects collaborate to provide a common view [36].
•
Models designed to study social networks can be re-
used to address IoT related issues (intrinsically related
to extensive networks of interconnected objects) [8].
•
The focus and the consideration of user-side chal-
lenges will increase the acceptability of IoT products.
•
The community is exploited to rate the trustworthiness
of potential providers of information and services [36].
So, a level of trustworthiness can be established for
leveraging the degree of interaction among things that
are friends [8].
IV.
IOT CHALLENGES AND PERSPECTIVES: A USER
VISION
The high cost of intelligent devices is one of the problems
posed by users. According to statistics [37] drawn up in 2014
on a sample of 2000 French users, 59 % of users consider the
price of IoT devices as one of the greatest constraints. High
prices are not the only constraint. Indeed, the price constraint
can disappear if these objects become useful and necessary.
We expose in this section the main IoT challenge from the
users point of view. We have relied on statistics and have
chosen in this section the most cited users’ problems, including
the usefulness and usability of connected objects but also and
above all, their ability to respect the users’ privacy.
A. Utility
The majority of users ﬁnd that these smart objects are
not useful enough and that they do not bring much to their
daily lives. The same statistic [37] show that 45 % of all users
questioned and 52 % of users who are older than 50 years old
do not see the usefulness of objects being conveyed, although
the number of applications and IoT objects for the health and
well-being of the elderly is quite high. Developers, designers,
and creators of IoT objects and services are faced with a new
challenge: developing more useful and interesting scenarios
that can meet the speciﬁc need of users.
A study from LAPOSTE [38] carried out with a national
sample of 1032 peoples classiﬁed areas of IoT applications
according to users’ expectations. This study revealed that
proximity services are at the forefront, followed by home
automation services and then health-care and wellness services.
According to the same analysis, proximity services allow the
rapid intervention of trusted personnel for isolated persons, the
keep of elderly or dependents people at home or the safety
of children. For home automation services, 77 % of users
surveyed place an emphasis on security and protection against
theft and intrusion. 74 % place more emphasis on ﬁre risk
services and energy-saving services. As for the ﬁeld of health
and well-being, 45 % of users give importance to services
that make it possible to practice a sporting activity regularly.
Another study [6], classiﬁes health-care services on the ﬁrst
position, security management services on the second position
and home automation and energy consumption management
services in the third position.
The cited study [37] tried to clarify which prototype of
users are most willing to use connected objects and which
connected objects are most used. This study found that 23%
of users interviewed have at least one intelligent object. For
the most part, the latter are men, receiving a wage of more
than 1500 euro and living for the most part in the Paris region.
This study ranked the object “connected weather station” at the
top of the list of most used intelligent objects. In the second
position are connected gas, electricity and water meters, con-
nected watches and bracelets, and connected alarm systems. In
the third position, connected sphygmomanometers and scales,
connected sockets and remotely controllable heating systems.
Other objects are also used, such as connected refrigerators, but
also connected baby monitors (which monitors babies quality
of sleep) and connected baby scales (which monitor the growth
curve of a baby).
Note that other areas are neglected and little known by
users. Let us mention, for example, the ﬁeld of transport and
vehicular networks, although it is quite developed. We also
note that applications and devices using the social environment
of the user or the notion of collaboration are few.
B. Usability
The usability or the ease of use of connected objects and
IoT services is also one of the brakes to the acceptability of
these products by consumers. Indeed, a study [38] afﬁrms that
74 % of users perceive the multiplication of applications to
control each object as a brake on the purchase and use of the
latter. Another study [39] shows that nearly 12 % of users who
do not have connected objects say that it is useless to buy
objects that are not compatible with all types of computers
and Smart-phones. 15% say it is not easy to manage multiple
connected objects at the same time. 9 % say they do not know
how to operate these objects.
Establishing interoperability is a potential solution. It
makes intelligent objects reconﬁgurable and autonomous, thus
minimizing human intervention. It also allows easier control
and management when it comes to a large number of objects.
Integration of the social component and contextualization also
present possible solutions to increase the quantity and variety
of data in order to offer more intuitive, intelligent, personalized
and adapted services.
C. Trust and Privacy
The mentioned study [39] tries to classify the brakes to the
acceptance of IoT objects by users. 43% of users queried say
they are afraid of the use that can be made of their personal
data. 18 % ﬁnd that the connected objects are not operational. 8
% believe they are unreliable. The second cited survey [6] joins
the ﬁrst one and states that: 33 % of the users questioned are
afraid of what is done with the data collected by IoT objects;
19 % ﬁnd that these objects quickly become obsolete and 17
% ﬁnd they are not very efﬁcient and very reliable.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The number increases when it comes to some more critical
areas, especially the health ﬁeld. Indeed, a barometer [40]
was established in 2016 by the company VIDAL (company
dedicated to information on health products), on a sample
of 1402 doctors, revealed the following percentages: 33% of
doctors surveyed say they have no conﬁdence in healthcare
applications and services in terms of securing personal data.
84 of the doctors questioned would not recommend connected
health objects to their patients. However, there are a number of
factors that could encourage them to advocate beneﬁts, such as
certiﬁcation and labeling of the object (39%), its therapeutic
area (37%) and the proﬁle of its manufacturer or designer
(8%). Doctors ﬁrst trust their peers to make healt-related
connected objects (scientists societies 67%, university doctors
53% and confreres developers 42%). In addition, certain pro-
motional arrangements are more likely to convince doctors of
the adoption of connected health objects. Recommendations
made by scientists societies (67%), medical press (58%) and
medical congresses (51%) are the most convincing.
Those apprehensions are not unjustiﬁed. Some past events
conﬁrm the fear of users. The ﬁrst examples of dysfunctions
observed date back to 2011. A pharmaceutical company had
to warn its users that the rheumatology calculator application
it had developed produced erroneous scores [41]. The follow-
ing year, another laboratory had to recall its application of
calculation of doses of insulin [42]. Then, Apple announced
the removal of blood glucose monitoring from its health
management application [42]. This has drawn attention to the
fact that these solutions are not so simple to implement even
for a technology champion.
According to these different statistics, we distinguish two
major problems: trust and privacy. We also distinguish three
levels of trust: trust in the object or IoT devices, trust in
IoT services and applications, trust in the service provider or
in the designer of the devices. We also distinguish a fourth
level: trust in the recommender of the service or IoT object.
We believe that trust management in IoT environments should
necessarily consider these four levels in order to improve users’
acceptability of IoT products and allow them to overcome their
fears and apprehensions.
Several properties can allow measuring trust for each
dimension. For example, reliability, connectivity, energy rates
permit to measure trust in IoT devices and objects. Quality of
Services (QoS), functional characteristics and non-functional
characteristics (delay, availability, throughput, response time,
etc.) permit to measure trust in IoT services and applications
[43]. Expertise, past experiences, and QoS can be used to
measure trust in service providers [44]. And centrality, honesty,
and similarity of proﬁle and interest can be used to measure
trust in services and objects recommenders [45].
The problem of privacy concerns the protection of users’
personal data. Indeed, the huge amounts of data that are
collected by the connected objects with sensors, are usually
stored on the Cloud and thus become exposed. The user must
be able to control and choose whether or not to give access to
his information. The de-anonymization techniques also make it
possible to reduce this problem. Indeed, with these techniques,
the majority of the data remains exposed, but the data which
makes it possible to identify to whom they belong (name,
address, age, etc.) are suppressed or hidden.
V.
SYNTHESIS
Some users’ challenges are addressed by researchers, such
as trust and privacy. However, the proposed solutions remain
intangibles by users. Giving users the hand to participate in
setting their own rules, the same way as proposed in social
media, might be a potential solution. Reusing works and
researches conducted in the context of usable security [46] [47]
and usable privacy [48] [49] allows to resolve those challenges.
Ensuring interoperability and resolving heterogeneity can
help to improve the usability of connected objects, but this is
not a radical solution. We can have different solutions, such
as applying HMI solutions [50] [51] which permit to have
cognitive and adaptable users’ interfaces, especially when use
cases are targeting elderly and disabled persons.
Utility is a problem that is almost neglected, although it
may be the key to improving the acceptability of connected
objects by users. Researchers should focus on ﬁnding scenarios
and use cases that can interest and motivate users.
VI.
CONCLUSION
The IoT is emerging as one of the major trends shaping the
development of the technologies sector at large. Researchers,
developers and, industries have been interested in the IoT
paradigm and have proposed different solutions for different
issues, such as heterogeneity, scalability, and energy optimiza-
tion.
Nevertheless, consumption of IoT products and services
remains below expectations. Indeed, according to several stud-
ies and statistics, users claim other problems such as the cost
of connected objects, but also and above all, their utility and
usability. These problems are not addressed by researchers.
Users also express their fears about the privacy of their
personal data and do not trust connected objects. The problems
of privacy and trust are addressed in the literature, however,
the proposed solutions remain intangible by users.
We tried in this work to address these problems and to
indicate some solution and some horizons of research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was ﬁnancially supported by the PHC Utique
program of the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Min-
istry of higher education and research and the Tunisian Min-
istry of higher education and scientiﬁc research in the CMCU
project number 18G1431.
REFERENCES
[1]
W. Abdelghani, C. Zayani, I. Amous, and F. S`edes, “Trust management
in social internet of things: a survey,” in Conference on e-Business,
e-Services and e-Society.
Springer, 2016, pp. 430–441.
[2]
M. Nitti, R. Girau, L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “A subjective
model for trustworthiness evaluation in the social internet of things,”
in Personal Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), 2012
IEEE 23rd International Symposium on.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 18–23.
[3]
X. Jia, Q. Feng, T. Fan, and Q. Lei, “Rﬁd technology and its applications
in internet of things (iot),” in Consumer Electronics, Communications
and Networks (CECNet), 2012 2nd International Conference on. IEEE,
2012, pp. 1282–1285.
[4]
C. Han, J. M. Jornet, E. Fadel, and I. F. Akyildiz, “A cross-layer
communication module for the internet of things,” Computer Networks,
vol. 57, no. 3, 2013, pp. 622–633.
[5]
D. Miorandi, S. Sicari, F. De Pellegrini, and I. Chlamtac, “Internet of
things: Vision, applications and research challenges,” Ad hoc networks,
vol. 10, no. 7, 2012, pp. 1497–1516.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

[6]
OpinionWay,
“Les
franais
et
les
objets
con-
nect´es
(french
people
and
connected
objects),”
https://drive.google.com/ﬁle/d/0B6mEkutxBkwnXzlvQmpKLWZSNHc/view,
03 2016, accessed: 2018-02-09.
[7]
D. H. Ali, “A social internet of things application architecture: applying
semantic web technologies for achieving interoperability and automa-
tion between the cyber, physical and social worlds,” Ph.D. dissertation,
Institut National des T´el´ecommunications, 2015.
[8]
L. Atzori, A. Iera, G. Morabito, and M. Nitti, “The social internet of
things (siot)–when social networks meet the internet of things: Concept,
architecture and network characterization,” Computer networks, vol. 56,
no. 16, 2012, pp. 3594–3608.
[9]
S. Geetha, “Social internet of things,” World Scientiﬁc News, vol. 41,
2016, p. 76.
[10]
A. Dohr, R. Modre-Opsrian, M. Drobics, D. Hayn, and G. Schreier,
“The internet of things for ambient assisted living,” in Seventh In-
ternational Conference on Information Technology: New Generations
(ITNG).
IEEE, 2010, pp. 804–809.
[11]
G. Roussos and V. Kostakos, “Rﬁd in pervasive computing: state-of-
the-art and outlook,” Pervasive and Mobile Computing, vol. 5, no. 1,
2009, pp. 110–131.
[12]
I. F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, “Wireless
sensor networks: a survey,” Computer networks, vol. 38, no. 4, 2002,
pp. 393–422.
[13]
I. F. Akyildiz and I. H. Kasimoglu, “Wireless sensor and actor networks:
research challenges,” Ad hoc networks, vol. 2, no. 4, 2004, pp. 351–367.
[14]
C. Sun, “Application of rﬁd technology for logistics on internet of
things,” AASRI Procedia, vol. 1, 2012, pp. 106–111.
[15]
D. Singh, G. Tripathi, and A. J. Jara, “A survey of internet-of-things:
Future vision, architecture, challenges and services,” in Internet of
things (WF-IoT), 2014 IEEE world forum on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 287–
292.
[16]
Z. Yan, P. Zhang, and A. V. Vasilakos, “A survey on trust management
for internet of things,” Journal of network and computer applications,
vol. 42, 2014, pp. 120–134.
[17]
A. Fongen, “Identity management and integrity protection in the internet
of things,” in 2012 third international conference on emerging security
technologies.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 111–114.
[18]
S. Gambs, M.-O. Killijian, and M. N. del Prado Cortez, “De-
anonymization attack on geolocated data,” Journal of Computer and
System Sciences, vol. 80, no. 8, 2014, pp. 1597–1614.
[19]
A. J. Jara, L. Marin, A. F. Skarmeta, D. Singh, G. Bakul, and D. Kim,
“Mobility modeling and security validation of a mobility management
scheme based on ecc for ip-based wireless sensor networks (6lowpan),”
in 2011 Fifth International Conference on Innovative Mobile and
Internet Services in Ubiquitous Computing.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 491–
496.
[20]
M. A. M. Isa, N. N. Mohamed, H. Hashim, S. F. S. Adnan, J. Manan,
and R. Mahmod, “A lightweight and secure tftp protocol for smart
environment,” in Computer Applications and Industrial Electronics
(ISCAIE), 2012 IEEE Symposium on.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 302–306.
[21]
J. Granjal, E. Monteiro, and J. S. Silva, “On the effectiveness of end-
to-end security for internet-integrated sensing applications,” in Green
Computing and Communications (GreenCom), 2012 IEEE International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 87–93.
[22]
S. Raza, L. Wallgren, and T. Voigt, “Svelte: Real-time intrusion detec-
tion in the internet of things,” Ad hoc networks, vol. 11, no. 8, 2013,
pp. 2661–2674.
[23]
H. Ning, H. Liu, and L. Yang, “Cyber-entity security in the internet of
things,” Computer, 2013, p. 1.
[24]
Z. Quan, F. Gui, D. Xiao, and Y. Tang, “Trusted architecture for
farmland wireless sensor networks,” in Cloud Computing Technology
and Science (CloudCom), 2012 IEEE 4th International Conference on.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 782–787.
[25]
D. Seal, ARM architecture reference manual. Pearson Education, 2001.
[26]
D. Gessner, A. Olivereau, A. S. Segura, and A. Serbanati, “Trustworthy
infrastructure services for a secure and privacy-respecting internet of
things,” in Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and Communica-
tions (TrustCom), 2012 IEEE 11th International Conference on. IEEE,
2012, pp. 998–1003.
[27]
R. Z. Reba¨ı, L. Ghorbel, C. A. Zayani, and I. Amous, “An adaptive
method for user proﬁle learning,” in East European Conference on
Advances in Databases and Information Systems.
Springer, 2013, pp.
126–134.
[28]
M. Mezghani, A. P´eninou, C. A. Zayani, I. Amous, and F. S`edes,
“Analyzing tagged resources for social interests detection,” International
Conference on Enterprise Information Systems, 04 2014, pp. 340 – 345.
[29]
D. Tchuente, M.-F. Canut, N. Jessel, A. P´eninou, and F. S`edes,
“D´erivation de proﬁls utilisateurs `a partir de r´eseaux sociaux: une
approche par communaut´es de r´eseaux ´egocentriques (derivation of
user proﬁles from social networks: a community approach of egocentric
networks),” Ing´enierie des syst`emes d’information, vol. 18, no. 1, 2013,
pp. 11–37.
[30]
E. Khanﬁr, C. El Hog, R. B. Djmeaa, and I. A. B. Amor, “A web service
selection framework based on user’s context and qos,” in Web Services
(ICWS), 2014 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2014, pp.
708–711.
[31]
J. Miranda et al., “From the internet of things to the internet of people,”
IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 19, no. 2, 2015, pp. 40–47.
[32]
A. Sheth and P. Anantharam, “Physical cyber social computing for
human experience,” in Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference
on Web Intelligence, Mining and Semantics.
ACM, 2013, p. 1.
[33]
J. Guillen, J. Miranda, J. Berrocal, J. Garcia-Alonso, J. M. Murillo, and
C. Canal, “People as a service: a mobile-centric model for providing
collective sociological proﬁles,” IEEE software, vol. 31, no. 2, 2014,
pp. 48–53.
[34]
N. M¨akitalo et al., “Social devices: collaborative co-located interactions
in a mobile cloud,” in Proceedings of the 11th International Conference
on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia.
ACM, 2012, p. 10.
[35]
C. C. Aggarwal, N. Ashish, and A. Sheth, “The internet of things:
A survey from the data-centric perspective,” in Managing and mining
sensor data.
Springer, 2013, pp. 383–428.
[36]
L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “From” smart objects” to” social
objects”: The next evolutionary step of the internet of things,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 52, no. 1, 2014, pp. 97–105.
[37]
IFOP, “Les franais et la mobilit´e digitale (the french and digital mobil-
ity),” http://www.ifop.com/media/poll/2846-1-study ﬁle.pdf, 04 2014,
accessed: 2018-02-09.
[38]
LaPoste, “Objets connect´es: Ce qu’en attendent les franais (connected
objects: What the french expect),” https://www.docapost.com/wp-
content/uploads/2015/01/infographie-la-poste-generique.pdf, 12 2014,
accessed: 2018-02-09.
[39]
M. Nitti, R. Girau, and L. Atzori, “Trustworthiness management in the
social internet of things,” IEEE Transactions on knowledge and data
engineering, vol. 26, no. 5, 2014, pp. 1253–1266.
[40]
VIDAL,
“L’utilisation
de
smartphones
par
les
m´edecins
(the
use of smartphones by doctors),” http://www.vidalfrance.com/wp-
content/download/info/Barometre Mobile-VIDAL-CNOM-2016.pdf, 3
2016, accessed: 2018-02-09.
[41]
A. Morris, Medical Research and Technology, ser. Cutting-Edge
Science and Technology. ABDO Publishing Company, 2016. [Online].
Available: https://books.google.tn/books?id=N1kgCwAAQBAJ
[42]
B. Patrick and L. Jacques, “Connected health: From e-health to con-
nected health,” CNOM, Tech. Rep., 06 2015.
[43]
J. B. Bernabe, J. L. H. Ramos, and A. F. S. Gomez, “Taciot: multidi-
mensional trust-aware access control system for the internet of things,”
Soft Computing, vol. 20, no. 5, 2016, pp. 1763–1779.
[44]
N. B. Truong, T.-W. Um, B. Zhou, and G. M. Lee, “From personal
experience to global reputation for trust evaluation in the social internet
of things,” in GLOBECOM 2017-2017 IEEE Global Communications
Conference.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–7.
[45]
R. Chen, F. Bao, and J. Guo, “Trust-based service management for
social internet of things systems,” IEEE transactions on dependable and
secure computing, vol. 13, no. 6, 2016, pp. 684–696.
[46]
S. Lee, “A study on the need of the usable security in the corelation
between it security and user experience,” International Journal of
Internet, Broadcasting and Communication, vol. 9, no. 4, 2017, pp.
14–18.
[47]
P. Realpe-Mu˜noz, C. A. Collazos, T. Granollers, J. Mu˜noz-Arteaga, and
E. B. Fernandez, “Design process for usable security and authentication
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

using a user-centered approach,” in Proceedings of the XVIII Interna-
tional Conference on Human Computer Interaction. ACM, 2017, p. 42.
[48]
H. Harkous, “Data-driven, personalized usable privacy,” EPFL, Tech.
Rep., 2017.
[49]
J. Angulo, S. Fischer-H¨ubner, E. W¨astlund, and T. Pulls, “Towards us-
able privacy policy display and management,” Information Management
& Computer Security, vol. 20, no. 1, 2012, pp. 4–17.
[50]
U. E. Manawadu, M. Kamezaki, M. Ishikawa, T. Kawano, and
S. Sugano, “A multimodal human-machine interface enabling situation-
adaptive control inputs for highly automated vehicles,” in Intelligent
Vehicles Symposium (IV), 2017 IEEE.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1195–1200.
[51]
J. D. Bauer, H. F. I. Kenneth, and R. N. Flores, “Intelligent human-
machine interface,” Jun. 21 2011.
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

