High-performance Wireless Sensor Node Design for Water Pipeline Monitoring
Fatma Karray, Mohamed W. Jmal, Mohamed Abid
Digital Research Center of Sfax
Computer and Embedded System laboratory
National Engineering School of Sfax
Sfax, Tunisia
Email: fatma.karray@enis.tn, mohamedwassim.jmal@enis.rnu.tn, Mohamed.Abid@enis.rnu.tn
Abstract—Water utilities owners are facing critical challenges
in repairing and maintaining pipeline infrastructure. Leakages
in water pipeline infrastructure cost millions of dollars every
year. The need for a reliable, continuous and efﬁcient system for
pipeline monitoring becomes crucial. Wireless Sensor Network
(WSN) is a very promising technology to detect leaks in an
autonomous way. In this paper, we present a WSN system for
water pipeline monitoring. A wireless sensor node based on Zynq
System on Chip is developed and simulated. A leak detection
algorithm based on Kalman ﬁlter is also implemented and
accelerated using the Zynq platform. The experimental results
show that the usage of high-performance platforms is suitable
only if the power management techniques are employed or for
video applications.
Keywords–Wireless sensor network; Water pipeline monitoring;
Leak detection; node design; Zynq platform; Kalman Filter.
I.
INTRODUCTION
With the rapid evolution of embedded systems, Wireless
Sensor Networks (WSNs) have invaded our daily life in the
last years. One of the most important applications of WSNs
is Water Pipeline Monitoring (WPM). In fact, a large amount
of water is wasted daily due to leakages in pipelines. This is
aggravated by the lack of automatic systems [1]. Hence, WSN
could play a primordial role in such application by decreasing
the human intervention and providing continuous monitoring.
WSN is composed of a large number of nodes that are widely
deployed to inspect physical phenomena (pipeline leakages in
our case) in a cooperative way.
The node, which is the main component of the network,
integrates four units: sensing unit, treatment unit, communica-
tion unit and power unit [2]. The node is generally powered by
a battery, which makes the node power considered as a major
constraint. The main goal of the node design is to preserve
energy consumption and extend the lifetime of the battery.
Therefore, the majority of nodes used for WSN are based
in general on ”limited resources” microcontrollers (MCUs),
which make some processing tasks difﬁcult or impossible in
some cases [3].
An investigation on high-performance platforms becomes
essential. In that line, we aim in this paper to design a robust
WPM system using WSN. For this purpose, we propose a leak
detection algorithm using a modiﬁed Kalman ﬁlter (KF) for
accurate inspection. Moreover, we suggest a wireless sensor
node platform based on a high-performance Zync system on
chip (SoC).
The paper is organized as follows: In section II, we review
the leak detection methods existing in the literature. Section
III also reviews the WSN node platforms used for WPM
from MCUs to FPGAs (Field-Programmable Gate Array). In
section IV, we detail our proposal in terms of leak detection
algorithm and wireless sensor node platform. Section V shows
and discusses the experimental results. We ﬁnish this work
with conclusion and perspectives in section VI.
II.
LEAK DETECTION METHODS
Pipeline infrastructure could be threaten by several factors.
This, in fact, affects the fresh water quality in pipes. It begets
also economical losses and countless damages such as leaks,
obstruction, corrosion, etc [4]. In this context, preserving the
pipeline infrastructure is crucial. This could be accomplished
by using and automating pipeline inspection. In this work, we
are interested in leak detection methods.
Plenty of leak detection techniques exist in the literature
[5]. These methods depend on the instrument used or the
inspected physical parameter. The shared principle of these
techniques is the exploitation of the pipeline material’s physi-
cal properties and/or the water ﬂow’s characteristics to detect
damages and abnormalities. From these methods, we could
cite:
A. Visual Inspection Techniques
These methods are the oldest ones that employ video or
image sensors to inspect leaks in pipes. Depending on the
instrument used for inspection, many techniques are proposed
for this method like the laser scan and the Closed-Circuit
Television (CCTV) inspection [4]. The CCTV technique is
composed of a robot with a camera traveling inside the pipe to
inspect the pipe. We should mention that the visual methods
are not based on the same idea. Laser scan technique employs
laser and could be used inside or outside the pipeline. Pulse-
based, phase-based and triangulation are techniques based on
scanning [4]. Visual inspection techniques are used in WSNs
by attaching Charge-Coupled Device (CCD) or CMOS image
sensors to the computing unit in the sensor node. The captured
images and/or videos are streamed to the base station for
analysis [6].
B. Acoustic Techniques
Several acoustic techniques exist for leak detection. These
techniques are widely used, especially for small leaks. They are
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

non-destructive. In WSN, some sensors are used such as hy-
drophones, piezoelectric sensor, accelerometers and vibration
sensor and deployed inside and/or outside the pipeline. The
principle of this technique is the detection of acoustic waves
or noise caused by escaped liquid when a leak occurs. This
escaped liquid ﬂows turbulently and causes acoustic signals
[7]. For instance, the authors in [8] propose a leak detection
method for pressurized pipeline using acoustic emissions.
Another work [9] exploits acoustic signals to inspect leaks in
underground pipes. The authors in [10] tested the feasibility
of acoustic emission for pressurized pipe using R15a acoustic
sensor. The acoustic signals are very weak and operate in noisy
environments. Almost all the time, the distinction of these
signals is very difﬁcult. Pre-ampliﬁers as well as ﬁlters are
required to avoid noise. This technique is not very adequate
for underground pipes due to the deployment difﬁculties [11].
C. Ultrasound Techniques
The ultrasound techniques are based on ultrasound waves
detection. These waves are in general of mechanical vibrations.
They propagate along the pipe and are reﬂected then. This
allows leaks detection and measuring pipeline wall thickness.
The ultrasonic sensors could be used inside or outside the pipe.
Many ultrasound techniques exist, such as discrete ultrasound,
immersion testing, straight beam, phased array, etc [12]. The
guided wave technique could be deﬁned as ultrasound wave
traveling in delimited pipes. For this reason, this technique
is widely used for an economical and easy inspection [13].
The authors in [14] prove the effectiveness of ultrasonic
guided waves for high temperature pipes. Jeffrey et al. pro-
pose a pipeline monitoring system that exploits ultrasound
guided waves for corrosion detection. The sensors are placed
outside of pipeline [15]. Another work suggests a modular
WSN system to monitor the pipeline wall thickness using
the ultrasound method [16]. Despite the effectiveness of the
ultrasound techniques, they should be employed jointly with
other technique to enhance the accuracy of the detection and
avoid false alarms. Moreover, these techniques suffer from high
power consumption.
D. Electromagnetic Techniques
The electromagnetic methods are based on the principle of
measuring variations in the electrical properties of a subsur-
face. From the electromagnetic methods used for leak detection
in water pipelines, we could mention: Ground-penetrating
radar (GPR), Magnetic ﬂux leakage (MFL), Ultra-wideband
(UWB) pulsed radar system (P-Scan) [4].
E. Computational Pipeline Monitoring (CPM) Techniques
CPM methods exploit internal pipeline parameters like
pressure, ﬂow, temperature with algorithmic tools to monitor
and detect leaks. The data is collected using pressure sensors or
other sensors and then analyzed mathematically or statistically
to provide an alarm. From the CPM techniques, we can cite
the Mass Balance and the Real Time Transient Modelling
(RTTM) [17]. The Mass Balance method is based on mass
conservation. The leak in such method is detected when the
difference between the upstream and the downstream ﬂow
exceeds a given threshold. Although this method is simple,
cost effective and easy, it suffers from false detection [18].
RTTM analyzes the pipeline hydraulic behavior to predict the
existence of leaks. It is based on the resolution of momentum
calculations and numerous ﬂow equations to detect and also
localize leaks. The main drawback of this method is the
computational complexity [19].
CPM methods are exploited in WSN. The use of WSN
enhances the accuracy and the autonomy of such system.
WSN is considered as a hybrid method that combines different
kinds of sensors and algorithms to get precise, easy and early
information about the leak. From the WSN projects, PipeNet
[20] is a well-known project that adopts acoustic, pressure
and vibration sensors for leak detection and localization. The
sensor node is based on Intel mote. MISE-PIPE [21] employs
soil properties, pressure and acoustic sensors. Furthermore,
SmartPipe [22] uses soil properties and pressure sensors for
underground pipeline inspection and monitoring. These two
methods are coupled to improve the system accuracy. WSN
seems a promising leak detection and localization tool. It en-
hances the performance by improving algorithms or combining
methods by using more than one kind of sensors. However,
there is no attention given to architecture of nodes [3]. Almost
all WSN platforms for pipeline monitoring are based on simple
MCUs. In the following, node platforms used for WPM are
presented.
III.
WSN NODE PLATFORMS FOR WATER PIPELINE
MONITORING
Some researches on pipeline monitoring focus on improv-
ing the leak detection techniques. Others are working on the
placement and replacement of nodes while some others try
to improve the network communication especially for under-
ground pipelines. Insigniﬁcant interest is devoted to the nodes
architecture and design. A typical WSN node consists mainly
of a processor, a radio transceiver, memories, an antenna,
sensors and a battery. Commercial motes based on MCUs are
the most used in WPM applications. Other technologies and
platforms are not widely investigated. Few works describing
alternatives to MCUs such as DSPs, ASICs (Application-
speciﬁc integrated circuit) and FPGAs for WPM are presented.
A. Nodes based on MCU
MCU is an integrated circuit that includes a microproces-
sor, memories and input/output peripherals. It is characterized
by its low cost and its low power consumption. For this reason,
it is exploited in many WSN projects like [3][20][21][23][22],
etc. In fact, advances in MCU technology allow easy and
low cost implementations. It permits also data processing. The
MCU allows also to manage the communication and the power
consumption of the node. Various WSN projects that employ
MCUs exist in the literature [24].
For example, PipeNet [20] is a WPM project that allows
leaks detection and localization. Many signal processing algo-
rithms have been implemented such as WT, cross-correlation
algorithm, pattern recognition algorithms and other algorithms.
The sensor node is based on Intel mote, which consists of an
ARM7 core, a 64KB RAM, a 512 KB Flash, and a Bluetooth
communication.
PipeProbe [25] is designed for pipeline monitoring. The
PipeProbe node has a hydro molecule form. It consists
of a EcoMote and a MS5541C pressure sensor, nRF24E1
transceiver, an antenna, a 32 KB external EEPROM, a ﬂex-
PCB expansion port and a battery.
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

SPAMMS [6] is another WSN system for WPM. It is
an autonomous and cost effective system for leak control,
localization and maintenance of the pipeline by using static
and mobile sensors and a robot. Different kinds of sensors
are used like CCD, chemical, pressure and sonar sensors. This
high number of sensors leads to high processing requirements.
The sensor node is composed of MiCA1 mote (mobile sensor),
an EM4001 ISO RFID system and a robot agent. Mica1 is a
mote that contains a ATMega103 MCU, a 4 Kb of RAM, a
512 Kb of EEPROM and a 128 Kb of Flash memory.
SmartPipe [22] is also a WSN for underground pipeline
monitoring. It is a non-invasive solution that employs force
sensitive resistor sensors and sol proprieties sensors. The
sensor node contains a PIC16LF1827 MCU, an eRA400TRS
radio transceiver, two temperature sensors and one FSR based
pressure sensor.
Another work, TriopusNet [23] is a mobile WSN for
pipeline monitoring. The node encompasses a Kmote, a spheri-
cal case, a motor, a MS5541C pressure sensor and gyro-scope
sensor. The Kmote is composed of a MSP430 MCU and a
CC2420 transceiver. This work aims to automatically place or
replace failed nodes using a replacement algorithm.
MCUs are widely exploited in WPM application thanks to
their low cost, their low power and their ﬂexibility. However,
they have some drawbacks such as the limited processing
capabilities and the small memory size. Other alternatives to
MCUs are cited in this paper.
B. Sensor nodes based on DSP
General purpose processors are not usually adequate for
some speciﬁc applications like Fourier transforms, ﬁltering,
signal processing and image processing algorithms. The DSP
(Digital Signal Processor) is a microprocessor optimized for
real time digital signal processing applications. It allows high
speed streaming and processing data thanks to its speciﬁc
architecture comparing MCUs. Despite the advantages of
DSPs, only few implementations are dedicated for WSN-
WPM application. For instance, the authors in [26] suggest an
implementation on DSP of a leak detection algorithm based on
FFT correlation of sound sensor data for underground pipeline
monitoring. Zhang et al. employ a DSP to process acoustic
signals with correlation function for leak detection [27].
DSPs are efﬁcient for signal processing algorithms. How-
ever, they are power consuming processors. That is why, they
are not largely used for WSN-WPM application.
C. Sensor Nodes based on FPGA/ASIC
ASIC/FPGA technologies are not broadly used for node de-
sign in monitoring applications. To the best of our knowledge,
few works use FPGA or ASIC directly or indirectly. The sensor
node, suggested in [20], is composed of a OEM piezoresistive
silicon sensor. This sensor includes an ASIC compensation-
based technology, which allows to achieve an accuracy better
than 0.2%. FPGA is used, in general, as prototyping platform
to achieve faster calculation of complex applications. It offers
hardware and software high speed and ﬂexibility. Moreover,
the price and the performance is more favorable than an
ASIC [28]. It permits also system reconﬁguration after a ﬁeld
deployment [29]. For instance, the authors in [27] propose a
FPGA system for data acquisition. This FPGA is employed as
co-processor with a DSP for leak detection and localization
using acoustic sensors. The system is composed of a FPGA,
DSP, acoustic sensors, a LCD, a wireless module and an
ADC. Another work suggests a leak detection method based
on magnetic ﬂux for pipeline inspection. The node prototype
is implemented on Altera Cyclone FPGA [30].
The design of a sensor node based on ASIC or FPGA for
the WPM application could offer an efﬁcient and a ﬂexible
system. However, it can also result in high power consumption.
Hence, saving energy and power consumption is a crucial issue
for WSN nodes design. Moreover, many challenges should be
satisﬁed for WSN-WPM. In fact, it is crucial to ﬁnd a trade-
off between the energy, the performance, the small size, the
low cost, the time-to-market and the security [31]. For this
purpose, we aim to design an efﬁcient sensor node using a
high performance platform and a reliable algorithm.
IV.
PROPOSED LEAK DETECTION SYSTEM USING WSN
WSNs face several challenges in WPM applications [32]
in terms of reliable inspection, external analyses, a non-real
time processing and high false alarm rates. Therefore, a novel
WSN system that gets over the limitation of this technique
and enhances the performance of the sensor node is essential.
For this purpose, a novel KF leak detection method has been
implemented and accelerated using Zynq platform.
A. Leak detection algorithm
KF is a recursive data processing algorithm proposed by
Kalman in 1960 [33]. It is largely explored in WSNs due to its
low requirements of memory, its low complexity and its ability
to predict data. We implement a modiﬁed KF to ﬁlter noise and
to detect and locate leaks. Various works that use KF exist for
WPM application. For example, the authors in [34] suggest a
linear KF for detecting leaks using the hydraulic measurements
and the linearity of data within one week. The authors in [35]
propose an Extended KF for pipeline monitoring. Torres [36]
has employed an extended KF and a set of observers to detect
and locate leaks in water pipes. To the best of our knowledge,
this work is the ﬁrst that explores KF for WSN and WPM at
the same time. Our approach is applied to long distance above
ground pressurized pipelines. We detail brieﬂy the algorithm
steps [33]. The KF is based on two steps: the prediction and
the correction. In the ﬁrst step, the estimated state x, which is
a vector of the pressure and the ﬂow in this case, at time k
is elaborated from the updated state at k-1. In the ﬁrst step,
the prediction of the current state and the covariance matrix is
given by:
ˆx−
k = A.ˆxk−1 + B.uk
(1)
where A is the transition matrix, B is the transition matrix of
inputs; uk is the input vector;
P −
k = A.Pk−1.AT + Qk
(2)
The second step is the correction step. This step aims to get
an improved estimate by incorporating new measurements into
the predicted estimate using the Kalman gain (Kk).
Kk = P −
k .HT .(H.P −
k .HT + Rk)−1
(3)
ˆxk = ˆx−
k + Kk(zk − Hˆx−
k )
(4)
Pk = (I − KkH)P −
k
(5)
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

KF estimates pressure and ﬂow variations caused by leaks
using the innovation variation. When the variation exceeds a
threshold, this indicates the existence of leaks.
B. Sensor nodes design and SW/HW implementation
After implementing the algorithm, we need to focus on
improving the performance of the node. We should mention
again that little interest is given to the sensor node architecture
in WPM applications. For this purpose, testing and evaluating
a high performance platform is essential. A high-performance
sensor node allows in-node processing, real time and quick
response. It provides also satisfaction of the application’s re-
quirements. It decreases the human intervention and facilitates
pipeline monitoring.
1) Node design and implementation: A SoC technology
has been chosen for this work. It is an innovative platform
that allows to perform complex computational tasks, to reuse
Intellectual Properties (IPs) and to miniaturize devices by
integrating the greater part of the components in a single chip
[1]. In this context, we implement a SoC using Zybo board.
This board is built around the Xilinx Zynq-7000 family; the
Z-7010. The Z-7010 incorporates a dual core ARM Cortex-A9
processor and Xilinx programmable logic equivalent to Artix-
7 FPGA in a single device. It includes also a DDR3 memory
controller with 8 DMA channels, an Advanced Microcontroller
Bus Architecture (AMBA) Interconnect and I/O peripherals
(USB (Universal Serial Bus), SPI (Serial Peripheral Inter-
face), UART(Universal Asynchronous Receiver Transmitter),
I2C(Inter-Integrated Circuit), etc). The Programmable logic
block consists of 4,400 logic slices, 240 KB of block RAM,
80 DSP slices, Internal clock speeds exceeding 450MHz,
analog-to-digital converter (XADC), etc. The ﬁrst basic built
architecture contains the ARM Cortex-A9 processor, an AXI
GPIO, a memory controller and the AXI interconnect, as
shown in Figure 1.
2) Leak Detection Algorithm Implementation: The applica-
tion detailed in the subsection IV-A is implemented in C. We
introduce also a new function Prodmatrix, which affects the
matrix multiplication. Hence, the steps of the algorithm will
include the following function:
•
Xestimate, Pestimate and Prodmatrix for the predic-
tion step.
•
KGain, Xupdate, Pupdate and Prodmatrix for the
correction step.
•
other code for the leak calculation.
The application and the hardware are performed using Vivado
14.4 and the Software Development Kit (SDK) provided by
Xilinx. In fact, after generating the bit stream of the design,
the project is exported in the SDK to run the leak detection
algorithm and to program the board. SDK offers also the
possibility of application proﬁling as it integrates the GNU
gprof. The GNU gprof is composed of the gcc compiler and the
gprof. In fact, proﬁling allows the application’s performance
analysis. The goal of this task is to select the complex function
(in the algorithm), which is the most time consuming for
hardware implementation. This part is very important since
it requires a careful selection of the right function needed to
be transformed into a hardware accelerator to speed up the
application and to enhance the performance of the system.
However, this is not always possible as it depends on many
other parameters. Hence, a compromise between time, energy
and area is crucial. Proﬁling has provided us statistics about
the execution time and the number of calls. After proﬁling the
leak detection algorithm a gmon.out ﬁle is generated.
Table I gives the execution time of each function in the
leak detection algorithm for one iteration. The Prodmatrix
is the most time consuming function in the algorithm. It is
characterized also by a high number of call. Thus, we choose
to implement it into hardware.
TABLE I. Execution Time of the Algorithm functions
Function
Cycles
Time
Xestimate
159
0.35
Pestimate
860
0.75
Xupdate
180
0.5
Pupdate
566
1.25
KGain
249
0.75
Prodmatrix
522
1.75
C. Hardware Accelerator Implementation
Hardware acceleration is used to make some tasks more
efﬁcient than in software implementation and to speed up
the execution time of the system. Two methods are adopted
to implement the Prodmatrix hardware module: with Vivado
High-Level Synthesis (HLS) and manually. Vivado HLS is a
tool provided by Xilinx to accelerate the creation of IPs. It
allows to rapidly transform a C code to a RTL description. It
permits also resource allocation and partitioning and IP module
generation. We have used also Pragma directives to optimize
the hardware IP like INTERFACE directive, as shown in Figure
4.
The hardware accelerator aims to speed up the execution
time by transforming a software function or algorithm executed
by the processor into a hardware block attached in our case to
the ”AXI-lite” bus. In this step, the choice of the connection
mode and the register number is necessary. The register
number depends on the Input/Output number of the accelerator.
Then, the Prodmatrix hardware accelerator appears in the IP
catalog to be integrated with the architecture, as shown in
Figure 2. The bitstream is then generated and exported to the
SDK to test the accelerator results. After that, we implement
the all KF into a hardware block, as given in Figure 3.
The two accelerators are generated manually (VHDL pro-
gramming) and with Vivado HLS. The different results of the
implementations will be detailed in the next section.
V.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we compare the results to decide the best
architectural design selection. The metrics that we have used
are time, power and space. As explained before, the Zybo
board is used to perform the previous implementations. All
the results are given for one iteration.
A. Execution Time
The execution time is essential to test the efﬁciency of the
application. It inﬂuences also the power consumption of the
node. It is evaluated using proﬁling technique in the all cases,
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 1. Proposed Sensor Node Implementation
Figure 2. Hardware Acceleration and Integration of the Prodmatrix
Figure 4. Pragma directives
as shown in the Figure 5. In the software implementation,
the execution time is very low compared to the hardware
accelerator, which is slightly abnormal. However, this could
be explained by the high frequency of the processor and the
difference of frequencies between the processor and the FPGA.
Another reason is the usage of AXI-lite. The AXI4-Stream
could maybe enhance the results.
B. Resource Utilization
Resources utilization is an important metric in SoC design.
In fact, optimal resources allow optimal area, which could
save energy and miniaturize node platform. We present the re-
sources of all ﬁve implementations. Table II shows the different
area occupancy including the look up tables (LUTs), Random
Access Memory blocks (BRAMs), Flip Flops (FF) and Digital
Signal Processing (DSP) blocks in the programmable device.
These values are calculated using Vivado tool. The implemen-
tations of Vivado HLS are not optimal, a lot of resources are
used. These implementations exploit DSP blocks more than
other implementations.
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 3. Hardware Acceleration and Integration of the KF
Figure 5. Execution Time of different implementations (µs)
TABLE II. Resource utilization (%)
Resources
SW
Prodmatrix
Kalman Filter
M
Vivado HLS
M
Vivado HLS
LUT
8.4
13.84
16.33
17.9
72.99
BRAM
26.67
3.3
10
3.33
50
FF
14.78
7.32
9.05
9.01
40.47
DSP48
0
10
17.5
0
62.5
C. Power Consumption
The power consumption of the node is a crucial criterion.
In this work, we measured the power consumption of the ﬁve
architectures using Vivado power report. This report details
the static and the dynamic powers related to intrinsic leakage,
design, inputs data patterns, etc. The total on-chip power for
the software implementation was 1.484 W while the power
of the Prodmatrix HW accelerator is 1.487 W for the manual
implementation and 1.485 W for the Vivado HLS implemen-
tation. KF HW accelerator has as power consumption 1.726
W with manual implementation and about 2 W for the Vivado
HLS implementation. As we remark, the power consumption
is very high in all implementations. This again is related to the
high frequency and performance of the cortex-A9 processor.
VI.
CONCLUSION
We have detailed in this paper a WSN node platform design
for water pipeline monitoring. A leak detection algorithm
based on KF is implemented and accelerated using Zybo
board. Five designs have been implemented for the node and
compared using Xilinx Electronic Design Automation tools.
The evaluation is based on three metrics: the execution time,
the resource utilization, and the power consumption.
The results were not promising. This is due to several fac-
tors. First of all, the frequency of the processor is very high. In
general, a high frequency processor will result in a high power
dissipation. Moreover, the difference of frequency between
the processor (650Mhz) and the programmable logic block
(450Mhz) may decrease the performance of the accelerators
and the communication between these two components. Fur-
thermore, the usage of AXI-lite was also not very promising.
In fact, this bus is characterized by its small logic footprint, a
light-weight and single transaction memory mapped interface.
We note also that the built accelerator using Vivado HLS is
not optimized compared to the manual accelerator.
As future work, to reduce the power consumption of
the node, many techniques should be implemented. On one
hand, we could adjust the frequency of the processor and
decrease it to meet the frequency of the FPGA and to save
power. Moreover, the AXI4-Stream with the usage of a Direct
Memory Access (DMA) may enhance the performance and
accelerated the data reading. In fact, the AXI4-Stream offers
a high-speed streaming data. On the other hand, the usage of
power management techniques like wake up receiver, dynamic
voltage and frequency scaling will be explored in the future.
Finally, other processors with moderate frequency and features
like ARM cortex M3 will be investigated.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the King Abdulaziz City
for Science and Technology (KACST), which supports this
work under a research grant (project no. 35/1012).
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

They would like to thank also Mrs. Mariem Chabbouh and Dr.
Mouna Baklouti for their effort.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. M. Obeid, F. Karray, M. W. Jmal, M. Abid, and M. S. BenSaleh,
“Towards realisation of wireless sensor network-based water pipeline
monitoring systems: a comprehensive review of techniques and plat-
forms,” IET science, measurement & technology, vol. 7, 2016.
[2]
F. Karray, M. Jmal, M. Abid, M. S. BenSaleh, and A. M. Obeid,
“A review on wireless sensor node architectures,” in Reconﬁgurable
and Communication-Centric Systems-on-Chip (ReCoSoC), 2014 9th
International Symposium on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–8.
[3]
F. Karray, A. Garcia-Ortiz, M. W. Jmal, A. M. Obeid, and M. Abid,
“Earnpipe: A testbed for smart water pipeline monitoring using wireless
sensor network,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 96, 2016, pp. 285–
294.
[4]
Z. Liu and Y. Kleiner, “State of the art review of inspection technologies
for condition assessment of water pipes,” Measurement, vol. 46, no. 1,
2013, pp. 1–15.
[5]
R. Li, H. Huang, K. Xin, and T. Tao, “A review of methods for
burst/leakage detection and location in water distribution systems,”
Water Science and Technology: Water Supply, vol. 15, no. 3, 2015,
pp. 429–441.
[6]
J.-H. Kim, G. Sharma, N. Boudriga, and S. S. Iyengar, “Spamms: A
sensor-based pipeline autonomous monitoring and maintenance sys-
tem.” COMSNETS, vol. 10, 2010, pp. 118–127.
[7]
M. Ahadi and M. S. Bakhtiar, “Leak detection in water-ﬁlled plastic
pipes through the application of tuned wavelet transforms to acoustic
emission signals,” Applied Acoustics, vol. 71, no. 7, 2010, pp. 634–639.
[8]
D. Ozevin and J. Harding, “Novel leak localization in pressurized
pipeline networks using acoustic emission and geometric connectivity,”
International Journal of Pressure Vessels and Piping, vol. 92, 2012, pp.
63–69.
[9]
C. Qi and D. Que, “Design of pipeline leakage point location system
and simulation of related algorithm,” in Information and Automation
(ICIA), 2013 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 92–
96.
[10]
A. Mostafapour and S. Davoudi, “Analysis of leakage in high pressure
pipe using acoustic emission method,” Applied Acoustics, vol. 74, no. 3,
2013, pp. 335–342.
[11]
K. Anupama, N. Kamdar, S. K. Kamalampet, D. Vyas, S. Sahu,
and S. Shah, “A wireless sensor network based pipeline monitoring
system,” in Signal Processing and Integrated Networks (SPIN), 2014
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 412–419.
[12]
A. Santos and M. Younis, “A sensor network for non-intrusive and
efﬁcient leak detection in long pipelines,” in Wireless Days (WD), 2011
IFIP.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–6.
[13]
J. L. Rose, J. Mu, and Y. Cho, “Recent advances on guided waves
in pipe inspection,” in Proceedings of the 17th World Conference on
Non-Destructive Testing, Shanghai, China, 2008, pp. 25–28.
[14]
L. Schubert, B. Weihnacht, T. Klesse, and B. Frankenstein, “Monitoring
of high temperature steel pipes by ultrasonic waveguide solutions,” in
Ultrasonics Symposium (IUS), 2012 IEEE International.
IEEE, 2012,
pp. 2758–2761.
[15]
J. D. Bergman, S. J. Lee, H. Chung, and I. Li, “Real-time active pipeline
integrity detection (rapid) system for corrosion detection and quan-
tiﬁcation,” in EWSHM-7th European Workshop on Structural Health
Monitoring, 2014.
[16]
A. El Kouche, H. Hassanein, and K. Obaia, “Monitoring the reliability
of industrial equipment using wireless sensor networks,” in Wireless
Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), 2012
8th International.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 88–93.
[17]
J. Xu, Z. Nie, F. Shan, J. Li, Y. Luo, Q. Yuan, and H. Chen, “Leak
detection methods overview and summary,” in ICPTT 2012: Better
Pipeline Infrastructure for a Better Life, 2013, pp. 1034–1050.
[18]
J. Doorhy, “Real-time pipeline leak detection and location using volume
balancing,” Pipeline Gas J, vol. 238, no. 2, 2011, pp. 65–67.
[19]
A. F. Colombo, P. Lee, and B. W. Karney, “A selective literature
review of transient-based leak detection methods,” Journal of Hydro-
environment Research, vol. 2, no. 4, 2009, pp. 212–227.
[20]
I. Stoianov, L. Nachman, S. Madden, T. Tokmouline, and M. Csail,
“Pipenet: A wireless sensor network for pipeline monitoring,” in
Information Processing in Sensor Networks, 2007. IPSN 2007. 6th
International Symposium on.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 264–273.
[21]
Z. Sun, P. Wang, M. C. Vuran, M. A. Al-Rodhaan, A. M. Al-Dhelaan,
and I. F. Akyildiz, “Mise-pipe: Magnetic induction-based wireless sen-
sor networks for underground pipeline monitoring,” Ad Hoc Networks,
vol. 9, no. 3, 2011, pp. 218–227.
[22]
A. M. Sadeghioon, N. Metje, D. N. Chapman, and C. J. Anthony,
“Smartpipes: Smart wireless sensor networks for leak detection in water
pipelines,” Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks, vol. 3, no. 1, 2014,
pp. 64–78.
[23]
T. T.-T. Lai, W.-J. Chen, K.-H. Li, P. Huang, and H.-H. Chu, “Triopus-
net: Automating wireless sensor network deployment and replacement
in pipeline monitoring,” in Proceedings of the 11th international con-
ference on Information Processing in Sensor Networks.
ACM, 2012,
pp. 61–72.
[24]
F. Karray, W. M. Jmal, M. Abid, D. Houssaini, A. M. Obeid, S. M.
Qasim, and M. S. BenSaleh, “Architecture of wireless sensor nodes
for water monitoring applications: From microcontroller-based system
to soc solutions,” in Environmental Instrumentation and Measurements
(IMEKO), 2014 5th IMEKO TC19 Symposium on, 2014, pp. 20–24.
[25]
Y.-C. Chang, T.-T. Lai, H.-H. Chu, and P. Huang, “Pipeprobe: Mapping
spatial layout of indoor water pipelines,” in Mobile Data Management:
Systems, Services and Middleware, 2009. MDM’09. Tenth International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 391–392.
[26]
G. Gaizi and Y. Zongzuo, “Design and implementation of leak detector
using dsp based on correlation calculation,” in Future Computer and
Communication (ICFCC), 2010 2nd International Conference on, vol. 1.
IEEE, 2010, pp. V1–492.
[27]
L. Zhang, Y. Wu, L. Guo, and P. Cai, “Design and implementation
of leak acoustic signal correlator for water pipelines,” Inf. Technol. J,
vol. 12, 2013, pp. 2195–2200.
[28]
K. Yifan and J. Peng, “Development of data video base station in
water environment monitoring oriented wireless sensor networks,” in
Embedded Software and Systems Symposia, 2008. ICESS Symposia’08.
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2008, pp. 281–286.
[29]
Y. E. Krasteva, J. Portilla, E. de la Torre, and T. Riesgo, “Embedded
runtime reconﬁgurable nodes for wireless sensor networks applications,”
IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 11, no. 9, 2011, pp. 1800–1810.
[30]
J.-j. XIN, S.-l. HUANG, L.-l. LIU, and W. ZHAO, “Design of super
multi-channel and high-speed data acquisition system based on fpga [j],”
Electrical Measurement & Instrumentation, vol. 10, 2008, pp. 34–36.
[31]
S. Kumar, C. R. Krishna, and A. Solanki, “A survey on security
architecture and key management systems in a wireless sensor network,”
International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security (IJC-
SNS), vol. 17, no. 4, 2017, p. 263.
[32]
A. Lay-Ekuakille, G. Griffo, and P. Vergallo, “Robust algorithm based
on decimated pad`e approximant technique for processing sensor data
in leak detection in waterworks,” IET Science, Measurement & Tech-
nology, vol. 7, no. 5, 2013, pp. 256–264.
[33]
R. E. Kalman, “A new approach to linear ﬁltering and prediction
problems,” Journal of basic Engineering, vol. 82, no. 1, 1960, pp. 35–45.
[34]
G. Ye and R. A. Fenner, “Kalman ﬁltering of hydraulic measurements
for burst detection in water distribution systems,” Journal of pipeline
systems engineering and practice, vol. 2, no. 1, 2010, pp. 14–22.
[35]
A. Benkherouf and A. Allidina, “Leak detection and location in gas
pipelines,” in IEE Proceedings D (Control Theory and Applications),
vol. 135.
IET, 1988, pp. 142–148.
[36]
L. Torres, “Location of leaks in pipelines using parameter identiﬁcation
tools,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.5437, 2014.
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

