Heads Up Displays (HUD) as a Tool to Contextualize the User in 3D Virtual Worlds 
 
Aliane Loureiro Krassmann, Felipe Becker Nunes, Tito Armando Rossi Filho, 
Liane Margarida Rockenbach Tarouco, Magda Bercht 
Graduate Program of Informatics in Education 
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS) - Porto Alegre/RS – Brazil 
E-mail:{alkrassmann, nunesfb}@gmail.com, rossitito@hotmail.com, liane@penta.ufrgs.br, bercht@inf.ufrgs.br 
 
 
Abstract—Virtual Worlds are open 3D environments that can be 
used to implement virtual laboratories and simulations, 
improving student interaction. However, it is often seen that 
their freedom characteristic can cause dispersion for the user, 
making it difficult to navigate and focus. This paper presents a 
proposal to reduce the difficulties of this impasse, with a Heads 
Up Display (HUD) solution that dynamically and constantly 
senses the locations visited by the avatar, and presents it in the 
form of a “heat map”. An experiment was conducted with 16 
individuals that formed the experimental and the control groups 
(with and without the HUD). The results reveal the usefulness of 
the HUD, allowing to see that this resource provided a real-time 
view of the user interaction and places visited, helping him/her 
navigate the Virtual World. 
 
Keywords-virtual worlds; heads up display; heat map. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Virtual Worlds (VW) are complete 3D environments 
where 
virtual 
laboratories 
and 
simulations 
can 
be 
implemented, and users represented by their own avatars can 
move around, meet and interact with other avatars [1]. 
According to [2] it opens the possibility for students to 
perform lab practices at any place, time and at reduced costs 
and risks of human accidents from eventual problems during 
experiences. 
Although 
the 
development 
of 
these 
environments is quite a lengthy process, long term benefits of 
its use may arise, since it can be used several times [3]. 
VW offers a great level of freedom, as the user not only 
can chose when to learn, when to enter the environment, but 
also what to learn and in what order, which is in agreement 
with active modern pedagogical approaches. Due to the great 
diversity of didactic materials that can be inserted in this type 
of environment, such as texts, videos and images, different 
types of rooms can be created, separated by type of content, 
so that the user can interact with each topic and their 
respective educational materials. This opens the possibility 
for the users to navigate through different locations within 
the VW. 
However, this openness of the environment and freedom 
received by the users is often seen as a cause of dispersion, 
leading to several implications, as engagement hindrance or 
discouragement on the following of their pedagogical 
trajectory. According to Mayer [4] environments designed to 
make users discover materials completely on their own are 
harder to use. Csikszentmihalyi [5] highlights that activities 
stimulate more flow if they embody certain rules and clearly 
state what the users should do. 
In a complementary way, Sivunen and Nordbäck [6] 
found that team dispersion could be one of the causes of low 
social presence among participants. Gütl [7] discovered that 
if users spend too much time learning to use a complex 
interface they might leave these environments. In [8], the 
authors explored how examples of reflective guidance, 
directive signs, symbols, footprints and notice boards within 
the environment might be helpful to achieve the learning 
goals, getting some positive results. 
Ubiquitous computing techniques can help overcome 
these drawbacks. In an educational ubiquitous computing 
enhanced environment, the fundamental issue is how to 
provide learners with the right information at the right time 
in the right way [9]. The so called ubiquitous learning 
systems aim to provide personalized learning support based 
on students’ preferences, learning status, personal factors as 
well as the characteristics of the learning contents and 
learning environments [10]. 
In this study, we propose the use of ubiquitous 
computing techniques to provide a context-aware VW, 
using Heads Up Display (HUD), a device that can be 
attached to the user’s screen for different purposes. Our 
work dynamically infers user’s context, working as a “heat 
map” that changes the color according to the locations of 
the 3D environment that the user has visited. It is assumed 
that this could help with students navigation, decreasing the 
losing of focus and keeping them aware of the locations 
they still have to visit. Therefore, the hypothesis of this 
research is: “using a heat map HUD in 3D VW can facilitate 
engagement and increase interaction time”. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
presents the related work. Section III explains the research 
method. Section IV addresses the results analysis and 
discussion. Section V presents the conclusion. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
 
Virtual Worlds projected for learning purposes contain a 
variety of educational resources modelled inside it. In this 
sense, it is desirable for the user to spend long times 
navigating it. Users who spend more time in the VW tend to 
interact more with educational objects [11]. 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

However, one of the most complicated aspects of 3D VW 
is scaffolding or guidance, since it is very large and flexible 
[8]. Ubiquitous computing techniques can help overcome this 
challenge, improving student performance and consequently 
improving 
institutional 
cost 
effectiveness 
[12]. 
One 
illustrative example of a context-aware 3D VW is an 
environment for teaching Computer Networks presented by 
[13], where student’s context is used to adapt the materials, 
tools and information according to their level of expertise. 
In consonance with this trend, several researches have 
benefited from the use of Heads Up Display (HUD) device 
capabilities to personalize and dynamize VW. Shah, Bell and 
Sukthankar [14] implemented a recommendation system that 
suggests places to visit, personalized with the user’s 
destination preferences. To acquire data on users’ travel 
patterns, they developed a custom tracker object using the 
Linden Scripting Language (LSL), which periodically 
prompts the user to enter information describing its current 
location. The tracker object appears as an HUD that can be 
worn on the right or left of the avatar and monitors the user’s 
current (x, y, z) location. 
In the study of [15] participants were each given a HUD 
that allowed them to indicate up to eight emotional states 
throughout the presentation (four positive and four negative). 
The goal of using the device was to identify and analyze 
which aspects invoked emotional responses and what kinds 
of information were considered trustworthy or untrustworthy. 
One of the promising VW applications that seem to 
demand such a device is the visit of virtual museums. 
Sookhanaphibarn and Thawonmas [16] emphasize that 
personalization can play a key role for increasing the number 
of return visitors. They have mentioned the idea of using 
HUD to show personalized recommendations in VW, 
similarly to what has already been implemented for physical 
museums, but with the advantages of requesting simple 
implementation and no additional cost. 
Ward and Sonneborn [17] implemented a HUD that 
provides subtitles of dialogue in many languages, including 
English, French, German, Spanish, Italian, and Portuguese. 
Also, the HUD records the avatar’s position so users can 
know where they are in the build and receive audio, pictorial 
and textual information about what they are seeing on their 
visit, like a virtual version of the sort of devices used in real 
life museums. 
In the field of displaying locations to situate the user, the 
Virtual Learning Environment (VLE) MOODLE in more 
recent versions (2.7 onwards) has a plugin that implements 
the “heat map” concept to help user navigation, using a color 
scheme (yellow, orange and red) to represent the “heating”. 
The heat map highlights areas as well as components that 
highly attracted student’s attention by counting the number of 
mouse clicks [18]. 
Similarly to the studies presented, in this paper we show 
the results of the development and application of a context-
aware HUD that works as a heat map, “heating” as the 
locations in the VW are visited more often, allowing the user 
to be aware of his navigation behavior. The HUD is 
attached to the user’s screen and keeps sensing the places 
visited, registering into a database and retrieving this 
information in real time. Our research differs from the ones 
mentioned because of the heat map characteristic of the 
HUD, towards investigating an unprecedented hypothesis 
that this device could help on improving engagement and 
interaction time. Also, our heat map counts local visitation 
per user, showing it individually to each one. 
 
III. 
MATERIALS AND METHOD 
 
This research is an exploratory quasi-experimental 
study, in which a case study was performed with a 
convenient sample of university students that had a 
minimum level of computer skills. To investigate the 
hypothesis, the sample was separated in two groups: 
control, who did not use the heat map, just interacted with 
the VW without this device, and, experimental, who used 
the VW with the heat map device, and experimental, that 
used the VW with the heat map device. 
A region in a Virtual World from project AVATAR [19] 
(from the Portuguese of Virtual Learning Environment and 
Remote Academic Work), on the open source platform 
Open Simulator was used. Students enrolled in courses at 
the authors’ university and colleagues that work on the 
project were invited to spontaneously participate in the 
experiment, which took place on Universidade Federal do 
Rio Grande do Sul facilities. Singularity [20] and Firestorm 
[21] viewers were used to enter the VW, because these 
pieces of software are capable of representing the 3D 
graphical environment in an appropriate form. 
A. The Virtual World 
Two virtual laboratories were used: Waves and Wireless 
Networks, which are introduced on [22]. According to the 
authors, in these virtual labs students from Secondary or 
Technical education have the opportunity to visualize the 
practical side of some abstract concepts that are part of their 
daily life. Figure 1 shows a screenshot of the environment 
entrance. It can be seen that an instruction manual and a 
control panel were placed at the beginning of the path, to 
give 
the 
user 
introductory 
information 
about 
the 
experiment, for example, on how to move around, use the 
didactic materials and what is expected in this visitation. 
 
Figure 1 - Waves and Wireless Networks Laboratories entrance. 
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Due to the comprehensiveness of these two teaching 
contents it was decided divide them into 12 topics, 
distributed along 12 specific locations in the two laboratories, 
which are presented in Table 1.  
 
TABLE I. 
LOCATIONS AND TOPICS DISTRIBUTION 
 
Location 
   number 
 
Content topic/subject 
1 
Wave Characteristics 
2 
AM and FM Radio Waves 
3 
Wave Phenomena 
4 
Electromagnetic Spectrum 
5 
Introduction to Wireless Networks I 
6 
Introduction to Wireless Networks II 
7 
Wireless Network Topologies 
8 
Infrared and Bluetooth 
9 
Range of Wireless Networks I 
10 
Range of Wireless Networks II 
11 
Range of Wireless Networks III 
12 
Material interference in propagating the wireless network 
 
Didactic materials, such as videos, slides, images, texts, 
animated digital media, audios, web pages embedded in QR 
(Quick Response) Code and simulations according to the 
subjects are available in these locations, each one identified 
as to their type through luminous plaques.  
B. The heat map HUD 
In the experimental group, a HUD was attached at the top 
right of the users screen with a numerical map of the 
environment. The HUD is composed of 12 prims (primitives 
– 3D object unit) that are linked. Each prim has its own 
texture that identifies the number and the topic of the 
location, and its own scripts to change its color, “heating” 
according to the frequency of access and time elapsed on 
avatar visitation. To do this, the classification presented in 
Table 2 was idealized and adopted. 
 
TABLE II. 
HEATMAP CLASSIFICATION ON HUD 
 
Color 
Tag 
Frequency 
Time elapsed 
Yellow 
Weak 
Second time 
2 minutes 
Orange 
Medium 
Third time 
3 minutes 
Red 
Strong 
Fourth time 
4 minutes 
 
Besides LSL (Linden Scripting Language) programming 
language, Open Simulator Scripting Language (OSSL) was 
used to program the HUD. To capture data from each user in 
real time, sensors programmed with scripts were inserted in 
each one of the 12 locations of the VW. These sensors collect 
data and send it through HTTP requests to PHP (Hypertext 
Preprocessor) files in the server. These PHP files treat the 
data and insert them in the table created in a MySQL 
database. 
Data stored in the table “Heat map” of the database were 
as follows: a) user’s name; b) name and identifier of the 
location visited; c) time user remained in that location; d) the 
current heat map status for the user at that location; e) time 
records. When visiting a location for the first time, a new 
complete record is inserted in this table, and only the current 
heat map status attribute is subsequently updated, according 
to an incremental analysis of time elapsed.  
In this sense, if the user has remained at one of the 12 
locations for more than two minutes, it is assumed the user 
is visiting this location for the second time, so the prim on 
the HUD that corresponds to this location turns yellow; after 
three minutes it turns orange and after four minutes it turns 
red. A sensor checks every five seconds for the presence of 
an avatar and consults in the database if this specific avatar 
has already visited the place, registering it after every 
minute (60 seconds) in an incremental way. The prim also 
has the ability, by touching it, to tele transport users avatar 
to each one of the 12 locations. 
Figure 2 shows the heat map following the user avatar at 
different scenarios of the VW. It can be seen, for example, 
that this user has visited Location 5 very often (red), but 
Location 3 lacks visiting, as it is still white (top screen). It 
also shows in the bottom screen that Location 8 is now red, 
as the user is currently at this location again and probably 
has spent more 2 minutes observing a simulation (from 
yellow – 2 minutes; to red – 4 minutes). 
 
 
Figure 2 – Heat map HUD under different scenarios. 
 
The locations were signalized with circles on the floor 
and the sensors are programmed to sense avatars presence 
in a radius of eight VW meters. Messages are sent to the 
user about the simulation or educational materials he is 
currently seeing during this visit. 
As mentioned by [21], VWs such as Open Simulator — 
developed using open-source software — allow developers 
and teachers to access student logs and retrieve valuable 
information on learners’ in-world behavior and interaction. 
This possibility, explored in this research, is important not 
only in terms of assessment: it also facilitates the 
identification of learner profiles and VW behavior patterns. 
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

C. The experiment 
Initially, students were informed about the experiment 
goals, the voluntary aspect of their participation, as well as 
about the complete confidentiality of any data gathered about 
them. Each one received an individual login to access the 3D 
environment. Users were instructed to navigate freely and 
intuitively in the VW, without any pedagogical path or 
visitation time previously defined. The purpose of this choice 
was to provide users with freedom to interact in places they 
considered appropriate, visiting the desired materials and 
remaining in a location as long as they were interested. 
Immediately after the session, a questionnaire was 
administered, containing demographic questions about the 
participants including age, gender, instructional level and 
VW experience, and items about the navigation in the 
environment and the impressions regarding the heat map 
(HUD). 
In order to compare the results between control and 
experimental groups, five questions related to the users 
impressions concerning the environment characteristics have 
been evaluated, which can be seen in Table 3. 
TABLE III. 
QUESTIONS RELATED TO THE ENVIRONMENT 
 
Characteristic 
Question 
Easy and Intuitive 
Operation 
Q1: Was the system operation easy and 
intuitive? 
Easy Navigation 
Q2: Were you capable of orienting yourself in 
the environment? 
Provided 
Information 
Q3: Did the system adequately inform you about 
what was going on? 
Provided 
Instructions 
Q4: Did the system clearly indicate what could 
(or couldn’t) be done? 
Overall 
Impression 
Q5: Would you like to use virtual labs like these in 
your area of application? 
 
Additionally to the questions that were administered to 
both control and experimental groups, a set of questions was 
answered only by the experimental group, since they were 
specifically related to the impression about the use of the heat 
map. These questions can be seen on Table 4. 
TABLE IV. 
QUESTIONS RELATED TO THE HEAT MAP HUD 
 
 _ 
Characteristic 
 Question 
 
Localization Support 
Q6: Did the heat map help you to orient 
yourself in the environment? 
Information Format 
Q7: Did the heat map provide interaction 
information in an adequate manner? 
Timely information 
Q8: Did the heat map provide the information 
in the appropriate time? 
Usefulness 
Q9: Was the heat map useful? 
Design 
Q10: Was the heat map design pleasant 
(colors, format)? 
Overall Impression 
Q11: Would you prefer to use the environment 
with or without the heat map? 
 
Except for Question “Q11” that was in multiple choice 
format, all the others were in the 5-point Likert scale format,  
with 1 being strongly disagree and 5 strongly agree. The 
results of the experiment performed are presented as follows. 
IV.  RESULTS ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION 
 
A total of 16 individuals participated in this study, as 
can be seen in Figure 3, which shows the sample’s 
demographic data. 
 
Figure 3 – Sample’s demographics. 
 
Regarding the instruction level of the participants, both 
groups were very similar in this inference: 50% of 
individuals held Bachelor’s or Master's Degree and 50% 
were Doctoral students. Concerning previous knowledge on 
VW, individuals of control group had more previous 
knowledge than the experimental group: while 50% of 
individuals of control group answered the Likert scale on 
either levels 4 or 5, only 25% of individuals from the 
experimental group answered in these levels. 
A. Quantitative Analysis 
The answers related to the evaluation of the experience 
of exploring the environment (Questions 1 to 5) were 
positive in general, which can be seen in Figure 4. Out of all 
responses to the questionnaire, about 78% were positive 
(levels 4 or 5 of Likert scale), around 13% were neutral 
(level 3) and only 7.5% were negative (levels 1 or 2). A 
comparison between control and experimental groups, 
taking into consideration all responses (Questions 1 to 5), 
shows a similar result, but there were more responses at 
level 5 from the experimental group than from the control 
group (55% versus 40%). 
 
Figure 4 - Summary of questionnaire answers. 
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

In order to test whether the identified differences in 
responses were statistically significant and therefore could be 
extrapolated to the population of users, statistical tests have 
been performed using nonparametric Mann-Whitney test 
with 95% confidence level. The test checks whether the two 
groups come from the same population, that is, test whether 
the two independent groups are homogeneous and have the 
same distribution [23]. 
For all questions the null hypothesis (there are no 
significant differences) tests of the responses medians have 
not been rejected, since all p-values were above 0.05. 
However, this must be taken with a proper caution, due to the 
fact that it was a small sample (only 8 respondents per 
group). 
This result shows that both groups predominantly agreed 
that: the system operated satisfactorily and its navigation was 
intuitive (Q1); they were able to locate themselves in the 
environment autonomously and without major difficulties 
(Q2); the environment was properly identified, with clear 
information about the contents and rooms available (Q3); the 
system has conveniently indicated what should be done and 
which instructions should be followed (Q4); and finally, 
users have generally indicated that they would like to use this 
environment in their domain area (Q5). This reveals an 
interesting result, showing that both groups well accepted the 
resources and considered their navigation adequate and that 
the process of interaction occurred properly. 
Concerning the user’s impression about the heat map 
HUD itself, the general responses can also be seen in Figure 
4. The experimental group that used the VW with the HUD 
considered that this device helped them to navigate during 
their trajectory in the environment (Q6): around 87% of 
participants gave positive answers (4 or 5 points). The same 
percentage was obtained for Q7, allowing to infer that 
experimental group understood that the heat map provided 
information about their interaction in real time and in an 
appropriate way. On the other hand, the positivity on answers 
decrease to 75% on Q8, but reasonably allowing inferring 
they considered the heat map showed information in an 
appropriate time. They have unanimously strongly agreed 
that this device was useful for navigation (Q9). The heat map 
design characteristic was not so positive according to the 
answers (Q10). Despite of that, 75% of answers were 
positive, allowing to conclude that the arrangement of the 
heat map colors and format was considered adequate. This 
demonstrates that besides the approval of the environment in 
both groups, the experimental group indicated a positive 
tendency regarding the use of heat map HUD, emphasizing 
that this feature added even more to the quality of interaction 
in VW. 
In addition, all of experimental group participants stated 
preference on using the Virtual World with the heat map 
HUD (Q11). The average time spent on visiting the 
environment was 35 minutes for the experimental group and 
32 minutes for the control group. 
In this sense, although not statistically proven, some 
differences between the two groups were identified in the 
quantitative analysis. There were slightly more positive 
responses (at levels 4 or 5) from the experimental group 
than the control group. Considering also that there was a 
little more time spent in the environment from the 
experimental group, we can conclude that our hypothesis 
“using a heat map HUD in 3D VW can facilitate 
engagement and increase interaction time” is true. 
B. Qualitative Analysis 
The participants from both groups of the study were 
invited to add comments about their experience at the end 
of the questionnaire and 75% of them provided inputs to 
help clarify their ratings and also some suggestions. Among 
the positive comments from participants of control group 
they have mentioned the environment is an interesting and 
productive way of learning, with potential to be a teaching 
instrument of the highest quality. According to them it is 
interesting the proposal to visualize some concepts, helping 
to make it less abstract. One of the participants teaches the 
same subject of the labs and mentioned he would like to use 
the environment in his class. 
Among the negative comments in control group, they 
have mentioned there is some information overload, with 
many warnings and messages overlapping, disrupting the 
interaction. Some revealed that although intuitive enough, at 
times they did not know where to go or what to do, 
highlighting the need for more tips or indications. In this 
context, a user feedback is transcribed below: 
“There are arrows on the floor that indicate the 
direction, but after each ‘section’ ends, there is no 
indication of where we should go (I believe it to be 
intentional, giving the student freedom), but it could be 
suggested to the student.” 
Among the positive comments from participants of 
experimental group, some of them mentioned the heat map 
helped them navigate, being very useful. As mentioned by 
most of them, the environment is of easy interaction and 
location, well intuitive, with beautiful and nice design. They 
revealed that they had a great user experience, finding the 
labs and the simulations very interesting. One participant 
has mentioned he wanted to participate in the test of the 
next version of the VW. A clipping of a participant 
comments is presented below. 
“It was very interesting for a first experience, a very 
interactive way to learn. I had some difficulty locating 
myself in a few moments but the heat map helped me.” 
Among the negative comments, participants from the 
experimental group mentioned that sometimes the heat map 
in a specific position covered important parts of the screen, 
reducing the visibility. In this sense, they have suggested the 
heat map could be hidden in those cases. Some participants 
revealed the system does not clearly state what should be 
done, because the chat box where the instructions and 
explanations are sent is in a barely visible place in the left 
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

corner. On the other hand, it was also mentioned by other 
users that there is information overload when the dialog 
(information) appears on the whole screen, even if it is 
transparent. One of the suggestions was to dedicate half of 
the screen for the chat box. 
In this qualitative analysis, the usefulness of the heat map 
can be seen. While the control group highlighted the need for 
more indications or suggestions about where to go in the 
environment, the experimental group pointed out the device 
helped them navigate, and no comment of this kind (loss of 
direction) was received from them. 
 
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
The use of context information from user interaction in 
VW can be useful in different application scenarios, one of 
them being educational. The access of students’ logs 
facilitates assessment and the identification of learner profiles 
and patterns [24]. The collecting of information from users 
behavior in the environment can allow the accomplishment of 
different types of actions to assist the students during their 
interaction. 
In this way, the study presented in this paper focused on 
the use of context information of users to present a real-time 
heat map, in HUD format, of their activities in the 
environment. The objective was to help user navigation in the 
environment, highlighting the places visited and how often, 
working as a tool to contextualize the user in 3D Virtual 
Worlds. 
The results from the experiment demonstrated the 
acceptance of the hypothesis that using the heat map HUD in 
3D VW can facilitate engagement and increase interaction 
time, as we have collected important indications about the 
implications of using this device, in which the users 
emphasized the usefulness of knowing their on navigation 
pattern to aid in their interaction. On the other hand, the users 
who did not have the HUD device coupled to their screen 
complained about loss of directions and the need for more 
guidance. 
The HUD showed to be flexible, as it can be attached to 
particular users and it functions individually. Flexible 
guidance (guided and unguided navigation) can also be 
provided to meet the needs of different students’ learning 
styles and levels of knowledge [8]. The device can be used in 
other Virtual Worlds, by importing the HUD 3D object. This 
type of application can benefit especially new users, helping 
on guidance in this new environment. 
As a limitation of this research, it can be mentioned the 
sample 
size 
relatively 
small, 
consisting 
of 
sixteen 
respondents, which limits the degree of external validity and 
generalizability of the results. This study could be 
reelaborated in the future to include a greater number of 
participants to increase validity. Also, data could be captured 
in other VW, from other areas, to compare the results among 
different environments. As a future research we intend to 
analyze the records from the database and establish an 
automatic way to give feedback to students and to allow 
teachers to see reports of users behavior, as well as compare 
the registers with pre and post tests of knowledge, to see if 
certain navigation patterns could be connected to good 
learning performances. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
D. J. H. Burden, “Deploying embodied AI into virtual 
worlds”, Knowledge-Based Systems vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 540- 
544, 2009. 
[2] 
F. B. Nunes, M. C. Zunguze, F. Herpich, F. F. Antunes, A. 
G. Nichele, L. M. R. Tarouco, and J. V. De Lima, 
“Perceptions of pre-service teachers about a Science Lab 
developed in OpenSim”, International Journal for Innovation 
Education and Research, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 71-94, 2017. 
[3] 
A. Mastrokoukou and E. Fokides, “Development and 
Evaluation of a 3D Virtual Environment for Teaching Solar 
System's Concepts”, Procedings from the 3rd International 
Symposium on New Issues on Teacher Education, vol. 2, 
2015. 
[4] 
R. E. Mayer, “Multimedia learning”, Psychology of learning 
and motivation, vol. 41, pp. 85-139, 2002. 
[5] 
M. 
Csikszentmihalyi, 
“Finding 
flow”, 
1997. 
http://wiki.idux.com/uploads/Main/FindingFlow.pdf 
[6] 
A. Sivunen and E. Nordbäck, “Social Presence as a Multi‐ 
Dimensional Group Construct in 3D Virtual Environments,” 
Journal of Computer‐ Mediated Communication, vol. 20, 
no. 1, pp. 19-36, 2015. 
[7] 
C. Gütl, “The support of virtual 3D worlds for enhancing 
collaboration in learning settings”, Techniques for fostering 
collaboration in online learning communities: Theoretical 
and practical perspectives, pp. 278-299, 2010. 
[8] 
O. Baydas, T. Karakus, F. B. Topu, R. Yilmaz, M. E. 
Ozturk, and Y. Goktas, “Retention and flow under guided 
and unguided learning experience in 3D virtual worlds”, 
Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 44, pp. 96-102, 2015. 
[9] 
H. Ogata, and Y. Yano, “Context-aware support for 
computer-supported ubiquitous learning”, the 2nd IEEE 
International 
Workshop 
in 
Wireless 
and 
Mobile 
Technologies in Education, pp. 27-34, 2004. 
[10] J. G. Hwang, “Definition, framework and research issues of 
smart learning environments-a context-aware ubiquitous 
learning perspective”, Smart Learning Environments, vol. 1, 
no. 1, pp. 4, 2014. 
[11] J. Cruz-Benito, R Therón, F. J. García-Peñalvo, and E. P. 
Lucas, “Discovering usage behaviors and engagement in an 
Educational Virtual World”, Computers in Human Behavior, 
vol. 47, pp. 18-25, 2015. 
[12] V. Kellen, A. Recktenwald, and C. Bumgardner, “P–An 
Open 
Source 
Personalization 
Platform 
for 
Higher 
Education”, University of Kentucky, Lexington-USA, 
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/1e5b/8023cbfa9d281a2ce4e 
d71577d2eadc0b4ce.pdf , 2010. 
[13] F. Herpich, G. B. Voss, F. B. Nunes, R. R. Jardim, and R. D. 
Medina, “Immersive virtual environment and artificial 
intelligence: 
A 
proposal 
of 
context 
aware 
virtual 
environment”, In The Eighth International Conference on 
Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and 
Technologies (UBICOMM), 2014. 
[14] F. Shah, P. Bell, and G. Sukthankar, “A Destination 
Recommendation System for Virtual Worlds”, in FLAIRS 
(Florida 
Artificial 
Intelligence 
Research 
Society) 
Conference, pp. 475-476, 2010. 
[15] J. Keelan, L. B. Ashley, L. B., Morra, D., Busch, V., 
Atkinson, K., and Wilson, K. “Using virtual worlds to 
conduct health-related research: Lessons from two pilot 
studies in Second Life. Health Policy and Technology”, vol. 
4, no. 3, pp. 232-240, 2015. 
[16] K. Sookhanaphibarn, R. Thawonmas, “Digital Museums in 
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

3D Virtual Environment, Handbook of Research on Methods 
and Techniques for Studying Virtual Communities: Paradigms 
and Phenomena”, Information Science Reference, vol. 1, 
2010.  
[17] T. B. Ward, and M. S. Sonneborn, “Creative expression in 
virtual worlds: Imitation, imagination, and individualized 
collaboration”, Psychology of Popular Media Culture, vol. 1, 
pp. 32-47, 2011. 
[18] Rakoczi, G., “Cast your eyes on moodle: An eye tracking 
study investigating learning with Moodle”, In Proceedings of 
the 4th International Conference Moodle. Si, 2010. 
[19] AVATAR Project. Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do 
Sul. http://www.ufrgs.br/avatar/. 
[20] Singularity 
Viewer 
Official 
website.     
http://www.singularityviewer.org/. 
[21] Firestorm 
Viewer 
Official 
website. 
http://www.firestormviewer.org/. 
[22] A. L. Krassmann, T. A. Rossi Filho, L. M. R. Tarouco, and 
M. Bercht, “Initial Perception of Virtual World Users: A Study 
about Impacts of Learning Styles and Digital Experience”, 
International Journal for Innovation Education and Research, 
vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 95-112, 2017. 
[23] N. Nachar, “The Mann-Whitney U: A Test for Assessing 
Whether Two Independent Samples Come from the Same 
Distribution”, 
Tutorials 
in 
Quantitative 
Methods 
for 
Psychology, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 13-20, 2008. 
[24] A. Balderas, A.Berns, A., Palomo-Duarte, M., Dodero, J. M., 
and Ruiz-Rube, I., “Retrieving Objective Indicators from 
Student Logs in Virtual Worlds”, Journal of Information 
Technology Research (JITR), vol. 10 no. 3, pp. 69-83, 2017. 
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

