Exploring Techniques for Monitoring Electric Power Consumption in Households 
 
Manyazewal Fitta, Solomon Biza, Matti Lehtonen, Tatu Nieminen 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
Aalto University, School of Science & Technology  
Espoo, Finland 
manyazewal.fitta@tkk.fi, solomon.biza@tkk.fi, 
matti.lehtonen@tkk.fi 
Giulio Jacucci 
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT and 
Department of Computer Science  
University of Helsinki  
Helsinki, Finland 
giulio.jacucci@hiit.fi
 
 
Abstract—Recent works in ubiquitous computing have 
addressed analysis of electric power for energy conservation by 
detailing and studying consumption of electrical appliances. 
We contribute with an approach to develop techniques for 
fingerprinting and monitoring consumption of electric power 
in households. The approach builds on previous works and 
employs three phases: feature extraction of attributes such as 
real power and current harmonic contents, event detection and 
pattern recognition. A load library is foreseen that stores 
appliance characteristics as corpus data for training and 
recognition. We report early findings achieved using a high 
definition sensor directly applied to the loads showing 
promising results but also challenges in event detection 
(smaller state transitions, challenges in detecting and pairing 
switch on and off events). These studies are important in order 
to be able to address opportunities of identifying and 
monitoring directly at the appliance level or sensing the total 
load of the network. Future applications include monitoring 
and detailing of loads in a “balance sheet” and context aware 
service with advice tips for energy users. 
Keywords- 
ubiquitous 
computing; 
load 
monitoring; 
fingerprinting; pattern recognition; energy awareness 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In ubiquitous computing, measuring electric power 
consumption has been pursued for energy conservation and 
also as a means to recognize user activities [1]. Power 
measurement and analysis can be done at whole-house level 
as demonstrated in [2] and [3], on selected plugs as shown in 
[4] or by placing sensors near electrical devices [5]. The 
current state is that several electrical appliances can be 
identified either by using measurement from the main power 
entry point or with sensors placed near the appliance. While 
researches successfully showed a way to finger print 
appliances switching on and switching off, less explored 
activities are beyond these simple operations such as the 
analysis of specific uses of the device. Appliances can have 
nominally the same instantaneous power usage and yet 
perform quite different operations. Such variety of operations 
can be possibly tracked by utilizing different attributes with a 
state of the art sensor that monitors electrical parameters 
such as active power, power factor, harmonic distortion, 
crest factor and energy consumption. 
In this paper, we discuss techniques for appliance 
identification and monitoring system that uses measurement 
data received from sensors installed in customer premises for 
applications in energy awareness and power quality 
monitoring. Two techniques, namely, device fingerprinting 
and balance sheet application are being developed, which are 
foreseen to provide detailed information about residential 
electric power consumption in a near-real-time processing 
environment. 
This paper is organized as follows: a review of related 
work is presented in Section II; the two techniques being 
developed are introduced in Section III; Section IV discusses 
device fingerprinting in detail and Section V presents 
preliminary findings; Section VI explains the balance sheet 
application. Finally, Section VII concludes the paper, 
pointing out major problems and further improvements. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Earlier researches conducted on nonintrusive appliance 
load monitoring system (NIALMS) were based on the 
principle that the waveform of a total site load changes in 
predictable manner as appliances are individually turned on 
and off [7].  
One of the pioneering researches on load identification 
was made in the US at Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology [6]. An algorithm was developed for two-state 
appliances and a recorder was installed next to the existing 
energy meter, with sampling rate of 2 kHz, to record step 
changes in real and reactive power (∆P, ∆Q). The time 
stamped edge data are then stored for semi-automatic 
identification by employing a library of load models and 
finding a possible match. The main limitations of this work 
were inability to detect edges (events) for appliances that are 
always in continuous operation and to distinguish between 
appliances with similar power consumption profiles.  
Another study, in Finland, at VTT Technical Research 
Center implemented a 3-phase power quality monitoring 
energy meter and it developed its own load identification 
algorithm that required a prior manual set up for the naming 
of appliances and building a signature library (the manual 
set up is a one-time intrusive activity in which signatures are 
observed and named as appliances are manually turned on 
and off) [7]. The system utilized fundamental frequency 
signatures (∆P, ∆Q) for edge detection and load 
identification.  
471
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

Subsequent studies put into practice supplementary 
methods such as higher-order current harmonics and 
transients to be used as additional parameters in load 
identification [8]. Higher harmonics studies showed that 
evaluating power consumption data at higher frequencies 
helps to disaggregate certain loads that have overlapping 
consumption profiles at fundamental frequency. Another 
advanced approach presented in [9], in addition to the 
parameters at higher harmonics, used phase shift between 
the fundamental input current and the source voltage for 
load identification.  
The study on transients was based on the principle that 
appliances can be identified by their unique load transient 
shapes [8]. Events detected from the aggregate power 
stream are matched to previously recorded and defined 
transient signatures. However, the test results for the 
sampled devices indicate that similar transient patterns can 
be achieved only for switch-on transitions.  
On the pattern recognition aspect, an algorithm for 
identifying the type of domestic appliances based on fuzzy 
logic theory is proposed in [10]. It identifies an electric load 
by comparing its transient with a database of known 
transients and selecting the closest match. The algorithm 
was tested on a few sample waveforms and it is stated that 
promising results were obtained.  
Other researches of interest in this field include - load 
monitoring system developed in Germany using existing 
energy meters fitted with optical sensors, appliance 
identification algorithm based on Dynamic Time Warping 
for 
micro 
grids 
and 
NIALMS 
based 
on 
Integer 
Programming, which are presented in [11], [12] and [13] 
respectively.  
III. 
FINGERPRINTING AND CONSUMPTION BALANCE SHEET 
CALCULATION 
The device fingerprinting concept is based on the fact 
that different appliances exhibit different operational 
electrical characteristics. Fingerprinting adds the capability 
to monitor appliances individually or at least in categories, 
which in turn provides the possibility for near-real-time 
monitoring of appliances’ energy consumption and thus the 
corresponding energy cost.  
The BeAware project fingerprinting research is aimed at 
exploring various electrical characteristics of household 
appliances that have the potential to be used in load 
identification techniques. On the other hand, the balance 
sheet feature provides the aggregate energy consumption 
report and more importantly, the respective share of 
categories of appliances that are not directly monitored by 
the sensor. 
Before 
commencing 
the 
development 
of 
the 
fingerprinting and balance sheet applications, an extensive 
series of measurements on various household appliances was 
conducted. The primary objectives were to obtain a technical 
load classification and to examine the operating behaviors of 
different loads using the measurement results.  
It was observed that most appliances fall in one of the 
four major classes: resistive load, electronic load, motor 
driven load or general inductive load. From an operation 
point of view, appliances can also be divided as: 
• 
Short-cyclic, long-cyclic or continuously-operating 
depending on their ON cycle time 
• 
Mono-mode or multi-mode depending on the 
number of sequences of tasks they perform  
• 
Two-state or multi-state depending on the number of 
distinct switch-on states they possess 
In addition, closer studies were performed on switch-on, 
switch-off and steady-state characteristics, duty cycle and 
current harmonic contents of individual appliances.  
IV. 
DEVICE FINGERPRINTING APPLICATION 
The device fingerprinting process is depicted in Fig. 1.  It 
consists of three steps - feature extraction, event detection 
and pattern recognition [14]. The load library stores 
appliance signatures that are used for matching purpose 
during pattern recognition stage. 
A. Feature extraction  
Different attributes such as real power, current harmonic 
contents and power factor are extracted from voltage and 
current waveforms. Feature extraction is performed by a 
sensor installed in the customer premise.  
For this particular work, TOPAS 1000 power quality 
analyzer [20], a product of LEM NORMA GmbH, Austria, 
was used for feature extraction. It is capable of measuring 
harmonics up to 50th order. The unit has 8 electrically 
isolated analogue inputs that can be used for current and 
voltage measurement. Each channel is equipped with a 16-bit 
analogue-to-digital converter. Sampling of all channels is 
synchronous based on a common clock signal. The sampling 
rate is synchronized with the line frequency and is typically 
6400 Hz on a 50 Hz line. 
B. Event detection  
Changes in the extracted features are detected and 
classified as events based on static or dynamic thresholds. 
The information obtained from the event detection stage is 
required for: 
• 
Triggering the appliance identification (pattern 
recognition) stage 
• 
Computing the appliance’s duration of operation 
(length of time it was connected) 
• 
Estimating  the energy consumed in that period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Fingerprinting process. 
 
 
472
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

There are several ways in which events can be defined. 
‘For example, events can be changes in the average real 
power exceeding a certain threshold, the appearance of a 
known start up transient shape or any other suitable 
condition’ [14]. It is possible to select a single method or to 
have a combination of different methods for detecting 
events. 
After selecting a suitable method, it is necessary to define 
an appropriate threshold. Previous works such as [3], [6], [7] 
and [15] utilized changes in average real and/or reactive 
power for detecting events based on static thresholds. For 
instance, in [15] changes are classified as events if they 
exceeded 200 W. Opting for a static threshold presents its 
own challenges: choosing a large setting means it will not be 
possible to detect the operation of small appliances and on 
the contrary, a small setting means the system becomes too 
sensitive for appliances with large power consumptions.  
The event detection technique in our work will employ a 
dynamic threshold, which allows the detection of events for 
different appliances over a wide range of real power 
consumption. The advantage is that the threshold adjusts 
itself according to the power consumption level of the 
appliance connected to the sensor, which avoids the need for 
equipment-specific settings.  
The other challenge in event detection is the need to 
distinguish between genuine events and fluctuations that 
normally occur during the operation of majority of 
appliances. Fig. 2 shows the load curve of a sample desktop 
computer during a half hour operation. In this particular 
example, only the switch-on and switch-off transitions 
(marked with bold arrows) shall be classified as events. 
C. Pattern recognition  
At this stage, a set of averaged steady-state load features, 
captured after the occurrence of a corresponding event, is 
processed to find its match from a load library using pattern 
recognition. A study conducted on load monitoring 
techniques compared the performance of four different 
training classifiers in noise free (laboratory) as well as real 
world situations [16]. The tested classifiers were – Gaussian 
Naïve Bias, 1-Nearest Neighbor (1-NN), AdaBoost and 
Decision Tree. One of the conclusions of the study indicates 
that 1-NN algorithm, which is a specific instance of the k-
NN algorithm (k=1), has a decent performance in 
classification tasks when applied in load monitoring. For the 
sake of its simplicity and adequate performance, it was 
studied in further detail so as to explore its applicability in 
the BeAware fingerprinting process.  
The nearest neighbor algorithm was originally suggested 
in [17] and nowadays it is among the most applied 
classification methods. Its operation is based on comparing a 
new record with a set of training records in order to find the 
ones that are similar to it [18]. The training phase of this 
algorithm consists of storing the training records and their 
class labels. 
Every record with n attributes represents a point in an n-
dimensional space. When given a new record, the k-NN 
algorithm searches the space for the k training records that 
are nearest to the new record and then predicts the label of 
the new record using the class labels of these nearest 
neighbors.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Events and fluctuations during an appliance operation. 
In this algorithm, nearness is defined in terms of a 
distance metric such as Euclidean distance. For any two 
records consisting of n continuous attributes or two points in 
an n-dimensional space, p = (p1, p2... pn) and q = (q1, q2... qn), 
the Euclidean distance d(p,q) is defined as – 
 
 
 
                                                                                      
      (1) 
 
After calculating the distances between the new record 
and the respective training records, the resulting values are 
sorted and k nearest neighbors are selected. A training record 
will qualify as nearest neighbor if its distance from the new 
record is less than or equal to the kth smallest distance.  
The next step is to provide a classification decision for 
the new record based on the class labels of the selected k 
nearest neighbors. Generally, two methods exist: unweighted 
voting, in which the class label most frequent among the 
neighbors is simply selected as the class label of the new 
record without considering the preference of the neighbors, 
and  weighted voting, in which more weight is given to the 
neighbors that are closer to the new record. 
A common weighting scheme is to give each neighbor a 
weight of 1/d, where d is the distance to the neighbor. Thus, 
the nearer neighbors will have more influence on 
determining the class label than the more distant ones. After 
weighting the neighbors, the sum of weights of neighbors 
with the same class label is calculated. Finally, the class label 
corresponding to the neighbors with the largest sum of 
weights is selected as the class label (identity) of the new 
record. 
If the features of records, for instance x1, x2... xn of x, are 
on different scales then it is necessary to remove scale 
effects. A common way to do this is to transform the records 
by applying Z-score standardization, in which a raw feature 
 
 
 
473
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

value xij is transformed using the mean and standard 
deviation of all feature values, given by the relationship: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     (2) 
   
 
 
 
 
 
       
where xij is the jth feature of the ith record, µj is the arithmetic 
mean and σj is the standard deviation of all the jth features. 
The distance calculated using these transformed values is 
called standardized Euclidean distance. For the ith record xi 
and new record y, the standardized Euclidean distance can be 
written as: 
 
 
 
 
      (3) 
 
Since the jth mean cancels out when computing the 
differences between the corresponding feature values, the 
standardized Euclidean distance is in effect the normal 
Euclidean distance with a weight attached to the respective 
squared differences, which is the inverse of the jth variance 
(1/σj
2).  
In order to apply this pattern matching technique in the 
fingerprinting process, all measured appliances are modeled 
as records using their steady-state attributes and stored in a 
load library. Another important aspect is the accuracy of 
pattern recognition; validation of the classification accuracy 
is usually performed by using k-fold cross validation (also 
possible with leave-one-out cross validation at k=1). The 
result obtained will be indicative of the classification 
accuracy for the particular dataset, which is characterized by 
its number of attributes, size of instances (records) and 
number of class label types. 
D. Load library  
The basis for the pattern recognition phase is the 
preparation of a load library that shall consist of known 
appliance signatures. Taking into account the parameters that 
will be measured and transmitted by the sensor, a given 
appliance can be characterized by the following average 
values - active power (P), power factor (PF), crest factor 
(CF), total harmonic distortion (THDI), fundamental power 
factor (FPF) and 3rd harmonic, 5th harmonic and 7th harmonic 
currents.  
It is planned to create a large load library using appliance 
samples, which will be collected during the project trial 
phase. The information that will be stored in the load library 
also provides the opportunity to monitor the performance of 
an individual appliance; for instance, to track any 
degradation in its efficiency through time. 
V. 
PRELIMINARY FINDINGS 
Preliminary tests were done for the event detection and 
pattern recognition stages using measurement data collected 
from a number of household appliances during the 
measurement period, which are listed in Table I.  
For the event detection part, an algorithm with dynamic 
threshold was developed, which detects events using criteria 
that are defined based on standard deviation of a stream of 
active power measurement. For test purpose, accumulated 
active power values (recorded at one second interval) were 
simulated as incoming data.  
The tests done on the available two-state appliances 
resulted in the correct detection of 87.50% of the total 
possible switch-on events and 90.63% of the total switch-off 
events.  
The following points were observed from the event 
detection tests –  
• 
Switch-on events belonging to appliances with large 
starting current (such as refrigerators) were not 
detected. Besides, the falling edge of such an initial 
spike can be wrongly detected as a switch-off event. 
Hence, an improvement is needed to search for the 
first stable transition point. 
• 
In the case of multi-state appliances (such as a fan 
operating at different speeds), improvement is 
needed to detect smaller state transitions (other than 
the two large switch-on and switch-off events, 
intermediate transitions can possibly occur due to 
user selection or automatic settings). 
• 
By observing  the number of switch-on and switch-
off event pairs (especially if they occur within a 
short period of time as in the case of microwave 
oven), it is possible to substantiate the output of the 
pattern recognition algorithm.  
 
TABLE I.  
APPLIANCES LIST WITH PARTIAL PARAMETER VALUES   
 
Appliance name 
P [Watt] 
PF 
THDI 
1 
Coffee maker 
2079.16 
0.99 
1.24 
2 
Space heater 
1196.09 
0.99 
0.91 
3 
LCD  PC monitor 
33.93 
0.51 
156.92 
4 
LED lamp 
16.33 
0.47 
178.93 
5 
Desktop computer  
110.35 
0.77 
81.60 
6 
CRT television 
84.14 
0.76 
79.42 
7 
CRT PC monitor 
88.49 
0.76 
83.19 
8 
Vacuum cleaner  
1119.10 
0.96 
24.56 
9 
CFL 
14.37 
0.57 
110.75 
10 
Table fan 
26.80 
0.61 
12.04 
11 
Freezer 
334.27 
0.68 
10.23 
12 
Incandescent lamp 
60.83 
0.99 
1.35 
13 
Refrigerator 
99.50 
0.73 
8.16 
14 
Laptop 
23.36 
0.37 
233.61 
15 
Dishwasher - wash cycle 
76.81 
0.89 
6.17 
16 
Fluorescent lamp 
53.78 
0.52 
9.42 
17 
Cloth washer- spin cycle  
420.85 
0.79 
47.04 
18 
Toaster 
754.30 
0.99 
2.03 
19 
Halogen lamp 
53.88 
0.99 
1.43 
20 
Microwave oven 
796.87 
0.73 
27.92 
∑
=
−
=
n
j
j
ij
j
j
ij
y
x
y
x
d
1
2
2
)
)*(
1( /
)
,
(
σ
 
 
474
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

The pattern recognition stage was also tested with the 
available appliance samples using the nearest neighbor 
approach explained in the previous section. By removing one 
appliance record from the load library at a time, the 
classification capacity was checked for the available records, 
which yielded an overall accuracy of 62.30%.  
The respective values for active power (P), power factor 
(PF) and total harmonic distortion (THDI) are provided for 
selected samples from each appliance type in Table I. These 
three attributes are among the eight parameters used for 
defining a given sample during recognition phase. 
This test is equivalent to a first-time classification, i.e., 
without prior knowledge about the appliance nature except 
the availability of other records from the same family of 
appliances in the load library. For instance, if there are 3 
coffee maker records in the load library, one will be removed 
temporarily and a possible match is searched for this record 
from 
the 
library. 
It 
is 
expected 
that 
subsequent                    
re-classifications of the same set of appliances using data 
acquired from new measurements will have a much 
improved accuracy owing to the fact that the data obtained 
from these new measurements will closely match with the 
respective steady-state features already available in the load 
library. This is assuming that newer measurements are 
conducted while the appliance is operating under normal 
condition and also assuming that there is no degradation in 
the performance of the appliance through time. 
 The first-time classification itself can be improved by 
increasing the size of the load library via the collection of 
more appliance samples during the project trial phase. 
Furthermore, it is planned to improve the overall reliability 
of the system by modeling the operation of more complex 
appliances, such as those with multiple states and those 
performing sequences of tasks, using other techniques such 
as Hidden Markov Model in conjunction with the nearest 
neighbor algorithm. 
VI. 
BALANCE SHEET FOR LOAD DISAGGREGATION 
The 
device 
fingerprinting 
application 
relies 
on 
information received from the sensor, which at present is 
designed for precise measurement at socket outlet level. This 
calls for the development of a supplementary technique to 
keep track of the consumption that is not directly monitored. 
The balance sheet application is designed to serve this 
purpose, i.e., to compute the power consumption of the loads 
that are not monitored individually and thus disaggregate 
their consumption and provide their respective energy cost.  
Such inaccessible loads are directly connected to the 
electric supply network, which include significant domestic 
loads such as electric Heating, Ventilation and Air 
Conditioning (HVAC). The parameters proposed to estimate 
these 
permanently 
connected 
loads 
are 
electrical 
consumption and external factors (temperature, season and 
time of day). 
A. Electrical consumption 
Electrical consumption share of an unidentified load is 
calculated by the balance sheet from the aggregate 
consumption data and individual consumption shares of 
plugged-in devices. For plugged-in devices, the sensor 
records and transfers consumption readings of each 
appliance. The calculated consumption share of an 
unidentified load is cross-checked with the offline range of 
consumption profile for common significant household 
appliances. The reference offline consumption profile is 
developed from the data gathered during the project trial 
phase. 
When a match is obtained, the system will keep on 
checking for external factors or indicators to ensure the 
reliability of the estimation. The proposed external, non-
electrical parameters used for load identification are 
temperature, season and time of day data during operation. 
Evaluating as many applicable parameters as possible will 
allow the system to provide a more accurate estimate for load 
identification. Even if a match is not found from the offline 
reference, the system still checks for the availability of 
external parameters indicating the load type. If no related 
external factor exists, then the load is labeled as anonymous 
load together with its calculated consumption share from the 
balance sheet. 
B. External factors 
  The proposed external factors, temperature, season and 
time of day, are essential parameters to consider for 
implementing a probabilistic approach in order to estimate 
significant loads. However, experimental study results are 
required on each parameter to confirm the relation with 
electrical consumption. In this project, an indoor temperature 
reading device will be installed at the base station, which is a 
measurement gateway installed at each household, and the 
temperature 
data 
will 
be 
analyzed 
with 
electrical 
consumption data of significant loads. In addition, outdoor 
temperature measurement will also be provided as an input 
to the system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Snapshot of part of the balance sheet model. 
 
475
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

Even if the applicability of the parameters is not verified 
yet using probabilistic approach, practical assumptions were 
considered for the model balance sheet so as to simulate the 
load identification. For instance, temperature reading is 
expected to have inverse relationship with electrical heating 
system consumption. Air conditioners are likely to operate 
during the summer season and there is a common time of the 
day for certain residential appliances to be used. 
The model balance sheet developed is a dynamic web 
page presenting graphically (with a pie chart) consumption 
shares and cost shares of plugged-in as well as directly 
connected loads. After estimating or identifying the 
permanent loads as well as receiving the outputs of the 
device fingerprinting algorithm for plugged-in devices, their 
individual consumption is used in the balance sheet 
calculation. The percentage shares are finally calculated from 
the individual shares and the total household energy 
consumption. These percentages are given as inputs to the 
pie chart, which accordingly displays the consumption shares 
as shown in Fig. 3. 
VII. 
CONCLUSION 
Given 
the 
rapid 
developments 
in 
sensor 
and 
communication technologies, systems for analysis of 
electrical power are of great interest to ubiquitous computing 
for application in energy conservation or recognition of user 
activities. Different approaches have been documented in the 
literature about monitoring the total load and trying to 
fingerprint individual loads by utilizing different parameters 
from simple instantaneous power through optical interfaces 
to more sophisticated sensing. We proposed an approach that 
opens the possibility to integrate sensors also at the plug 
level as a new commercial solution and also utilizing 
advanced analysis based on various electrical attributes. 
The approach comprises three phases: feature extraction, 
event detection and pattern recognition. In feature extraction, 
detailed characteristics are extracted such as active power, 
power factor and harmonic contents. In event detection, 
changes in extracted features are detected for triggering 
appliance identification, computing duration of operation and 
the energy consumption. The pattern recognition phase starts 
with a given set of averaged steady-state load features, 
captured after the occurrence of a corresponding event, and 
is then processed to find a match from a load library using 
pattern matching techniques.  
The approach has been experimented using a high 
definition sensor (power quality analyzer) and has resulted in 
promising findings as well as certain challenges. Some issues 
were encountered in identifying state transitions of 
appliances with complex operations and detecting switch-on 
and switch-off events of certain types of appliances. The 
pattern recognition phase in this work is implemented using 
the nearest neighbor approach and it can also be enhanced by 
employing other techniques such as HMM. 
 The 
preliminary 
results 
are 
promising 
showing 
satisfactory success rates even with small number of samples 
in the load library. Such a sensor-based system is foreseen to 
be applied in real time analysis and monitoring of loads at 
socket outlet level as well as at whole-house level. This 
allows the accurate tracking of different appliances followed 
by the identification of other significant loads from the 
remaining unknown consumption, thereby enabling the 
creation of a “balance sheet” of electric power consumption 
for a specific household.  
A fully developed working system needs to overcome a 
number of problems that include production of hardware and 
refinement of techniques presented here including collection 
of a database of load signatures. In addition to appliance 
monitoring and detailing of loads in a “balance sheet”, future 
applications in the BeAware project [19] will include the 
development of context aware services with advice tips for 
energy consumers that are triggered when specific situation 
arises, for example, when users open too many times or for 
too long the refrigerator door. Research will have to explore 
which situations can be exploited in order to provide such 
services through the utilization of advanced monitoring 
techniques. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been co-funded by the European Union 
through the 7th Framework ICT Programme in the BeAware 
Project 224557. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Fogarty, C. Au, and S.E. Hudson, “Sensing from the Basement: A 
Feasibility Study of Unobtrusive and Low-cost Home Activity 
Recognition,” Proc. 19th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface 
Software and Technology (UIST 06), ACM Press, Oct. 2006, pp. 91–
100, doi: 10.1145/1166253.1166279. 
[2] 
S.N. Patel , T. Robertson , J. A. Kientz , M.S. Reynolds,  and G.D. 
Abowd , “At the Flick of a Switch: Detecting and Classifying Unique 
Electrical Events on the Residential Power Line,” Proc. 9th 
International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp 07), 
Springer-Verlag, Sept. 2007,  pp. 271-288, ISBN ~ ISSN:0302-9743, 
978-3-540-74852-6. 
[3] 
G.W Hart, “Nonintrusive Appliance Load Monitoring,” Proceedings 
of the IEEE, vol. 80, no. 12, Dec. 1992, pp. 1870-1891, doi: 
10.1109/5.192069. 
[4] 
X. Jiang, S.D. Haggerty, P. Dutta, and D. Culler, “Design and 
Implementation of a High-Fidelity AC Metering Network,” Proc. 
2009 International Conference on Information Processing in Sensor 
Networks (IPSN 09), IEEE Computer Society, Apr. 2009,  pp. 253-
264, ISBN:978-1-4244-5108-1. 
[5] 
Y. Kim, T. Schmid, Z.M. Charbiwala, and M.B. Srivastava, 
“ViridiScope: Design and Implementation of a Fine Grained Power 
Monitoring System for Homes,” Proc. 11th  International Conference 
on Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp 09), ACM Press, Oct. 2009,  
pp. 245-254, ISBN: 978-1-60558-431-7. 
[6] 
Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), “Nonintrusive Appliance 
Load Monitoring System (NIALMS) Beta-test Results,” Technical 
Report, Sept. 1997, TR-108419. 
[7] 
H. Pihala, “ Non-intrusive Appliance Load Monitoring System Based 
on a Modern kWh-meter,” VTT publications, no. 356, May 1998. 
[8] 
C. Laughman et al., “Power Signature Analysis,” Power and Energy 
Magazine, vol. 1, no. 2, Mar-Apr. 2003, pp. 56-63, doi: 
10.1109/MPAE.2003.1192027. 
[9] 
Y. Nakano et al., “Non-Intrusive Electric Appliances Load Efficient 
Monitoring 
System 
Using 
Harmonic 
Pattern 
Recognition- 
Performance Test Results at Real Households,” The Fourth 
International Conference on Energy Efficiency in Domestic 
Appliances and Lighting (EEDAL), June 2006, London. 
 
476
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

[10] S.R. Kamat, “Fuzzy Logic Based Pattern Recognition Technique for 
Nonintrusive Load Monitoring,” Proc. IEEE Regional 10 Conference 
(TENCON 2004), IEEE Press, Nov. 2004, vol.3, pp. 528-530, doi: 
10.1109/TENCON.2004.1414824. 
[11] M. Baranski and J. Voss, “Nonintrusive Appliance Load Monitoring 
based on an Optical Sensor,” Proc. IEEE Power Tech Conference 
2003 IEEE Bologna, June 2003, IEEE Press, vol. 4, 8 pp.,              
doi: 10.1109/PTC.2003.1304732.  
[12] F. Kupzog, T. Zia, and A.A. Zaidi, “Automatic Electric Load 
Identification in Self-Configuring Microgrids,” Proc. AFRICON 2009 
(AFRICON 
09), 
IEEE 
Press, 
Sept. 
2009, 
pp. 
1-5, 
doi: 
10.1109/AFRCON.2009.5308129. 
[13] K. Suzuki, S. Inagaki , T. Suzuki, H. Nakamura, and  K. Ito,  
“Nonintrusive Appliance Load Monitoring based on Integer 
Programming,” Proc. SICE Annual Conference, IEEE Press, Aug. 
2008, pp. 2742 – 2747,  doi: 10.1109/SICE.2008.4655131. 
[14] H.S. Matthews, L. Soibelman, M. Berges, and E. Goldman, 
“Automatically Disaggregating the Total Electrical Load in 
Residential Buildings: a Profile of the Required Solution,” 
Proc. Intelligent Computing in Engineering (ICE08), July 2008, pp. 
381-389, ISBN: 978-1-84102-191-1 
[15] M.L. 
Marceau 
and 
R. 
Zmeureanu, 
“Nonintrusive 
Load 
Disaggregation Computer Program to Estimate the Energy 
Consumption of Major End Uses in Residential Buildings,” Energy 
Conversion and Management, vol. 41, October 1999, pp. 1389-1403. 
[16] L. Soibelman, H.S. Matthews, M. Berges, and E. Goldman, 
“Automatic Disaggregation of Total Electrical Load from Non-
intrusive Appliance Load Monitoring,” Carnegie Mellon University, 
Feb.2009, 
<dodfuelcell.cecer.army.mil/rd/NZE_Workshop/7d_Soibelman.pdf> 
[Accessed  11.03.2010]                                                  
[17] T.M. Cover and P.E. Hart, “Nearest Neighbor Pattern Classification,”  
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 13, no. 1, Jan. 1967, 
pp. 21-27, ISSN :  0018-9448. 
[18] M. 
Moradian 
and 
A. 
Baraani, 
“K-Nearest-Neighbor-Based-
Association-Algorithm,” Journal of Theoretical and Appllied 
Information Technology, vol. 6, Dec. 2009,  pp 123-129. 
[19] G. Jacucci et al., “Designing Effective Feedback of Electricity 
Consumption for Mobile User Interfaces”, PsychNology Journal,   
vol. 7,  no. 3, 2009, pp. 265-289. 
[20] LEM Norma GmbH,  “TOPAS 1000 Power Quality Analyzer”, 
Operating  Instructions,  2003,  A 5505 1 GA 3 E Rev. A. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
477
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

