Using the White Space for Digital Inclusion 
 
Abdelnasser Abdelal and Aysha Al-Hinai 
Department of Information Technology 
College of Applied Sciences- Ibri 
Ibri- Sultanate of Oman 
Email: {abdelnasser.ibr, ayshah.ibr}@cas.edu.om
Abstract-People who do not have Internet access in the world are 
about 66 percent. These individuals are lagging behind, in the 
digital sense, due to their remote location, lack of economies of 
scale, quasi-nomadic nature, and/or low-income. WiFi-based 
municipal, commercial, and/or Community Wireless Networks 
have emerged as solutions to provide shared and affordable 
wireless Internet access to such digitally isolated communities. 
However, the spectrum used by WiFi (e.g., 2.4 Ghz) is becoming 
crowded. In addition, the spectrum used by WiMax is regulated 
in most countries. Therefore, the white space spectrum has 
emerged as another solution for affordable and shared 
connectivity solutions. White space refers to spectrum allocated 
for broadcasting services but not used. This paper provides a 
brief overview of the white space spectrum, compares it with the 
WiFi spectrum, outlines key existing projects, suggests a 
research agenda, and concludes with some policy implications 
and future work. We hope that this paper brings the attention 
of the IT community, policymakers, and community activists to 
the capabilities of white space.  
Keywords- white space; digital inclusion; IEEE 802.11af; 
broadband policy. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Pervasive 
computing 
and 
ubiquitous 
communications are increasingly becoming essential to 
conduct our daily life affairs. The Internet, in particular, has 
grown to be a superhighway for accessing tremendous social 
economic, social, entertaining and personal services and 
opportunities. The International Telecommunication Union 
(ITU) estimates that 3.8 billion people do not have affordable 
mobile broadband and 2.6 billion cannot afford it [5]. 
According to the Internet World Stats [33], the percentage of 
people who do not have affordable high speed Internet is 85 
in Africa; 73 in Asia, 37 in Europe; 22 in North America. In 
addition, 66 % of the world populations do not have access to 
affordable and reliable Internet services. These people are 
lagging behind, in the digital sense, because they are not part 
of the information society. Such communities usually lack 
viable commercial incentives to attract telecommunication 
companies. This could be due to their remote location, harsh 
terrain, 
high 
costs 
of 
deploying 
and 
maintaining 
infrastructures, low income and willingness to pay, and 
insufficient population density and/or limited capacity 
[29][17]. As a result, the market mechanisms have failed to 
achieve digital inclusion of the society at large. A study by the 
World Bank estimates that an increase of 10 percent in 
broadband penetration can boost the economic growth in 
developing countries by 1.38 percent [8]. 
Wireless communications can provide the much 
needed high-speed Internet access to any community in any 
location 
either 
through 
terrestrial 
telecommunication 
infrastructures (e.g., WiFi, and WiMax) or satellite 
backbones. Wireless communications are particularly 
beneficial to a wide range of populations [16]. For example, 
those who by their nature are quasi-nomadic (e.g., the 
healthcare practitioners, real estate brokers, municipal 
employees, nomadic herders, the mobile business persons, 
etc.) would find these emerging infrastructures to be of great 
benefit. Another group that would benefit from these 
emerging technologies is those who live in rural and 
underserved areas. Such areas usually do not have sufficient 
economies of scale due to lack of the population density, harsh 
geographical location, and/or low income of their residents. In 
other words, these areas do not have the necessary commercial 
incentives to attract telecommunication companies. Such 
social settings, we believe, require innovative and customized 
solutions for the digital inequality problem.  
Wireless standards (e.g., Wi-Fi and WiMax) have 
gained the capabilities to provide a wide range of customized 
connectivity solutions that suit different social settings. They 
enable individuals to use laptops, Wi-Fi phones, Personal 
Digital Assistants (PDAs) security cameras and other portable 
communications devices. In addition to providing mobile and 
flexible 
real-time 
communications, 
these 
emerging 
communication technologies achieve significant time, money 
and effort savings to their users. As a result, wireless 
communications have the potential to provide ubiquitous and 
affordable Internet access and assist all communities to 
become and remain full participants in the emerging Internet-
based "Information Age.” Therefore, numerous societies have 
built autonomous Community Wireless Networks (CWNs) 
with their own resources, taking advantage of the free 2.4 GHz 
spectrum and available open source [4][32]. 
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

However, the 2.4 Ghz band has become too crowded because 
many communication technologies use it. These include 
Bluetooth devices, WiFi enabled devices, cordless phones, 
etc. Frequency regulation bodies in some countries have 
unregulated chunks of white space frequencies. For example, 
the switching to digital television has deregulated spectrum 
frequencies between 50 MHz and 700 MHz. In addition, 
WiMax spectrum is regulated in most countries.  
White space has emerged as an alternative, or 
complement, for the licensed spectrum or the unlicensed one 
which is becoming more crowded. The term “White space” 
refers to the unused or sparsely occupied spectrum 
frequencies allocated to broadcasting services or guard 
channels of cellular networks in particular areas of a country 
[6][7][14][15]. In every town, there is a number of TV 
channels remained unused or have been abandoned after 
transferring to digital TV.  
Innovators, researchers, and technology vendors, 
regulation authorities are working on devices, software, 
database, and policies that focus on reusing these frequency 
bands. They believe that reusing this spectrum can enhance 
the wireless landscape by offering the potential for substantial 
bandwidth and long transmission ranges [14]. It would also 
benefit rural and underserved communities which cannot 
afford high Internet fees of traditional Internet Service 
Providers (ISPs) as it improve market competition.  
Therefore, there are two types of white space [7][ 15]: 
i. 
Spectrum allocated for TV channels but not used 
locally;  
 
ii. 
Spectrum allocated between radio bands to prevent 
channel interference. For instance, UK has allocated 
chunks of spectrum and left it open as buffering gaps 
between the high-powered transmissions carrying 
broadcast TV in order to avoid interference. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. We 
first discusses in Section II the importance of white space. 
Section III discusses the research issues related to white space. 
Then, in Section IV, we compare the white space spectrum 
with WiFi.  In Section V and VI, we discuss the regulations 
and highlight the existing white space key projects. Finally, in 
Section VII, our designed project is described.  
II. THE IMPORTANCE OF WHITE SPACE 
It is believed that opening up this white space to lower-
powered devices can provide more wireless spectrum for data 
transmission to support a large range of devices and services. 
This spectrum is important because:  
i. 
Having high-speed Internet access has become crucial 
for people, organizations, and governments to conduct 
their business. White space-based communications 
would play a key role in supporting the exponential 
growth of mobile data communications. This is 
because the current spectrum allocated for wireless 
networks (e.g., cellular and Wi-Fi, WiMax) would not 
be enough. In particular, it is estimated that the number 
of Internet-connected devices would exceed 50bn 
worldwide by 2020, according to data from Cisco [7].  
According to Hengeveld [5], the Internet of Things 
(IoT) will connect more a large number of devices 
which makes reusing this spectrum a necessity.   
ii. 
It can cover the shortage of available spectrum and thus 
enabling communication to devices that are not well 
served with the previously allocated spectrums. For 
example, white space could be used to provide wireless 
broadband Internet access, similar to Wi-Fi, but over 
much longer distances. It can also support mobile 
devices like tablets and smart phones. In addition, it 
could be used as an extension of fixed-line broadband 
to reach places that are not connected via traditional 
cables. Moreover, white space has the capabilities to 
penetrate walls and underserved areas because it does 
not require line-of-sight technology, unlike satellite 
communications and microwave broadband. Reusing 
spectrum or using unused one increases the amount of 
available spectrum. 
III. RESEARCH ISSUES 
Hengeveld [5] suggests a research agenda for the 
white space-based communications. According to Hengeveld 
[5], research on white space could include proving broadband 
to rural communities, building campus networks, conducting 
basic research, and initiating lab trials. In addition, regulatory 
authorities may conduct pilot trials, studies for technical and 
do economic feasibility, develop prototype devices, support 
field test, and design measurements. With respect to the 
commercial 
sector, 
Hengeveld 
suggests 
opportunities 
including developing volume devices, adopt projects for rural 
broadband networks, implement campus networks, build 
smaller form factors,    and develop standards-based devices. 
In addition, they could also work on building databases for 
available white space, provide certifications, implement use 
case experimentation, and adopt vertical integration. 
White space devices allow secondary users to use 
this portion of spectrum which is not used by the primary 
user.  Therefore, there is a major concern regarding 
interference between the primary signal and secondary 
signal. Researchers should find solutions that protect the 
secondary signal from interfering with the primary one. 
Another research area is finding new methods of access and 
suitable business models for this new connectivity solution. 
Table 1 shows key database providers, hardware providers, 
and other important technology vendors. 
 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

TABLE I. THE WHITE SPACE ECOSYSTEM [5] 
Database 
Providers 
(United States) 
Hardware 
Providers 
(today) 
Other 
Potential 
Players 
(growing interest) 
Frequency 
Finder, Inc. 
Adaptrum 
Atheros 
(Qualcomm) 
Google 
Airspan 
ARM 
Comsearch 
6Harmonics 
Alcatel-Lucent 
Key Bridge 
Carlson 
Broadcom 
LS Telcom AG 
KTS 
CSR 
Microsoft 
Lyrtech 
Dell 
Neustar 
MLED 
Hewlett Packard 
Spectrum Bridge 
(Approved) 
Neul 
Intel 
Telcordia 
Technologies 
(Ericsson) 
 
Shared 
Spectrum 
 
LG Electronics 
Marvell 
Semiconductor 
Nokia, Inc. 
Research in Motion 
Samsung  
 
British Telecom plans to use white space for the purpose of 
providing affordable Internet access to about 500,000 
households who currently lack Internet access [5]. According 
to its experimental tests, white space devices can provide 
speed up to 4 to 8 Mbps. In addition, the signal range could 
research 6 KM transmitter.   
The key findings of the Cambridge project is that 
white space devices is their ability to successfully co-exist 
with broadcasters and other regulated data communications 
[5]. In addition, scientists suggest that white space could be 
used for a wide spectrum of applications. This trial project 
also evidences a growing industrial interest and readiness. 
The results and recommendations of such trial projects will 
assist regulatory authority to make the right decisions 
concerning white space in their countries. Similarly, we are 
working on a campus based network to be used for basic 
research, bring about awareness, and provide connectivity to 
our university and neighboring communities. Table 2 
provides a brief description of selected projects.  
IV. COMPARISON WITH OTHER SPECTRUMS 
In this section, we need to compare white space with Wi-
Fi standards in terms of signal range, data rate, and regulation 
issues. White space can be a novel choice for Wireless 
Internet Service Providers (WISPs) or public wireless access 
with greater broadband capabilities as compared to WiMAX 
or Wi-Fi. White space spectrum can outperform other 
wireless technologies (e.g., Wifi and WiMax) in terms of: 
1. Providing superior communication range and it is 
able to penetrate solid obstacles such as trees and 
buildings. Unlike Wi-Fi, which has a relatively 
limited range, and can be blocked by obstacles, a 
network utilizing white-space technology can cover 
greater ranges than Wi-Fi while requiring less 
equipment. For instance, Super-WiFi [13] which is 
a project based on white space spectrum could 
provide a maximum transmission range of 250m.  
2. No Line-of-Sight (LOS) is required between the 
points being connected because it operates in low-
frequency and thus it can penetrate obstacles 
without the need for towers and additional 
infrastructure needed to prevent interference. 
The long range characteristics of white space could 
support cellular offloading, rural broadband backhaul, Wide-
coverage hotspots, bridges among small networks, sensor 
network, and wireless surveillance system [5]. 
V. WHITE  SPACE  REGULATIONS 
The fixed spectrum allocation scheme used 
nowadays leads to immense underutilization of the scarce 
spectrum space. For instance, Shared Spectrum Company 
conducted a research aiming to quantize the white space 
spectrum in Washington DC. The results of that research 
detected 62% of white space even in the most crowded areas 
of the city [20].  
Thus, a critical change is happening in the spectrum 
regulations. This is introducing and enabling spectrum 
sharing between primary or licensed users and license-
exempt or secondary users. The sharing is toll free for the 
secondary users with a condition that they must not cause any 
disturbance to the primary users of the spectrum. The first 
instance of sharing the spectrum was sharing the unused UTF 
digital TV spectrum bands. Regulatory bodies, such as FCC 
from the USA and Ofcom from UK, stated that other 
spectrum should follow the digital TV white spectrum to 
share the unused spectrums [18]. The FCC has enabled the 
digital TV white space sharing in 2008 [19]. Cognitive radio 
is an example of a technology that relies on TV white space 
for communication and this technology is now running in the 
real-word environment. 
 
 
 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

TABLE II.  REGULATORY LANDSCAPE OF TV WHITE SPACES.  
Country/ 
Region 
Law 
Regulat
ion 
Polic
y  
Trials/Pilots 
United 
States 
Done 
Done 
Done 
Trials 
complete/Pil
ots ongoing 
UK 
Pending 
Pending 
Done
  
Trials 
complete/Pil
ots planned 
Finland 
Done 
Done 
 
Trials 
complete/Pil
ots planned 
Canada 
Pending 
Pending 
 
Trials 
ongoing 
Singapore 
  
 Pending 
  
Trials 
complete/Pil
ots planned 
South 
Korea 
  
  
  
Trials 
planned 
European 
Commissi
on 
  
 Pending 
Done 
Trials 
ongoing 
China 
  
  
  
Trials 
ongoing 
Japan 
  
  
  
Trials 
planned 
Brazil 
  
  
  
Trials 
planned 
 
VI. WHITE SPACE-BASED PROJECTS 
A number of white-space based wireless networks 
have emerged all over the world. For instance, the local 
government in Wilmington, North Carolina, has built the 
“smart city” network to extend monitoring and managing 
capabilities to areas that have been unreachable except by 
physical visits [11][22]. This experimental network is used 
for traffic monitoring (using wireless cameras), providing 
free Wi-Fi in city parks and unserved areas, and monitoring 
quality of water in remote wetlands. A future plan involves 
providing e-healthcare and offering broadband service to 
local schools using this white space-based solution.  
Another whitespace project was held in Cambridge, 
England on June 29, 2011 and it was a commercial trail on 
whitespace Wi-Fi. It was conducted by Microsoft. In the 
demonstration, whitespace system successfully provided a 
broadband IP connectivity allowing an Xbox to stream live 
HD videos from the Internet. 
The Blue Ridge Mountain terrain in Claudville has 
made Internet access hard to come by. Its citizens earn 
$15,574 per capita, and hence, the big ISPs haven't rushed to 
Claudville. However, the white space provided cheaper high-
speed internet connectivity to some rural areas of Claudville 
[2].  
 
The Smart Grid network uses white space for smart 
grid technologies in California, USA [1]. In particular, the 
purpose of the network is to provide more efficient, and 
greener and lower cost utilities wireless network. It is built by 
a consortium of Plumas‐Sierra Rural Electric Cooperative & 
Telecommunications, Plumas County, and Spectrum Bridge 
Inc. and Google. The experimental trails have proven the 
white space is an effective option to deal with difficult terrain 
and offer another 
medium 
for 
affordable 
wireless 
connectivity.  It has proven to have good propagation 
characteristics, the ability to penetrate foliage and no need for 
line of sight. In other words, whit space has the capability to 
overcome major technical challenges in difficult train areas.  
 
West Virginia University in July 2013, became the first 
university in the USA to use available broadcast TV channels 
in order to provide wireless broadband on campus and nearby 
[21]. It  has partnered with the Advanced Internet Regions 
consortium to build a wireless network for its campus and 
surrounding area using the TV white space [21]. These 
frequencies were left empty after TV stations moved to digital 
broadcasting. Another purpose is to study the viability of 
delivering connectivity to rural areas and small towns for the 
purpose of sustaining economic development, improving 
quality of life, and improving their competitive advantages in 
the knowledge economy. Another focus of our project is to 
measure the impact of our prospective network on building 
human capital and social capital for its remote community. 
Table 3 provides a brief description of selected projects.  
VII. RESEARCH DESIGN 
We are planning to establish a pilot TVWS based 
network in our university campus. The network would utilize 
TV white space and solar-powered base station. This new 
network will coexist with the current WiFi network we have. 
It will be used to provide broadband access in case the 
college’s wired or wireless networks went down and to enable 
cheap Internet access to the surrounding society. We used a 
tool called “show my white space” version 2.6, which is 
developed by Spectrum Bridge. The tool is used to search and 
locate available TV white space channels in a certain area. The 
tool could not detect any available white space channels 
neither in our town nor in the capital. However, it detected 
several available channels in Cambridge area, as shown in 
Figures 1 and 2.  
 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

TABLE III. DESCRIPTION OF KEY WHITE SPACE-BASED PROJECTS. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Cambridge area. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.Available white space in the Cambridge area. 
The reason could be that all the channels are already occupied 
by primary users or the white space concept is still not applied 
in practice. This means that the spectrum space in the area is 
underutilized and wasted. So, we recommend that the unused 
spectrum should be released, or deregulated, as it can provide 
free Internet access to the public in rural areas. It would also 
enhance related basic research.  
VIII. CONCLUSION 
TV band white spaces are unused spectrum left 
between broadcast channels. They exist in different places on 
different channels. More specifically, it is a spectrum band 
that is licensed to primary users, the part of spectrum that is 
unused by the primary user at specific locations and 
sometimes at specific time. Indeed, the use of white space will 
provide a new source of bandwidth and thus invaluable 
connectivity, while not having to rely upon traditional mobile 
phone networks. It can provide connectivity to both mobile 
and fixed devices and the internet where Wi-Fi cannot reach. 
Currently, we are building a pilot network in our campus to 
bring about the awareness, suggest relevant broadband policy, 
conduct basic research, and measure its social and economic 
effects on rural areas.  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Atiyeh, (2014) Spectrum Bridge, retrieved June 2014, from 
http://spectrumbridge.com/Libraries/Press_Releases/Nation_s_First_
Smart_Grid_White_Spaces_Network_Trial_June_23_2010.sflb.ashx 
[2] N.  Anderson, (Feb 21 2014) First white space broadband deployment in 
small Virginia town, are technical. Retrieved June 2014, from 
http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2009/10/first-white-space-
broadband-deployment-in-small-virginia-town/ 
[3] 
Cambridge 
(2011), 
retrieved 
February 
2014, 
from 
http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/oct/02/white-space-
broadband-microsoft-google-wireless-rural 
[4] J. Damsgaard, M.A.  Parikh, and B.  Rao, (2006) Wireless Commons: 
Perils in the Common Good, Communications of the ACM, 2006, vol. 
49, no. 2. 
[5] P. Hengeveld, (2012) Increasing Role of PPPs in ICT Ecosystem, ITU 
Regional Experts Group Meeting for Europe, Geneva, Switzerland 14-
15 November 2012 retrieved June 2014, from http://www.itu.int/ITU-
D/eur/rf/ppp/agenda_presentations.htm 
[6] S. Geirhofer, L. Tong, and B.M. Sadler, "Cognitive Radios For Dynamic 
Spectrum Access - Dynamic Spectrum Access in the Time Domain: 
Modeling and Exploiting White Space," Communications Magazine, 
IEEE, vol.45, no.5, May 2007, pp.66, 72,  
[7] S. Gibbs, (2013), White space broadband: your questions answered. 
Retrieved 
June 
2014, 
Retrieved 
from: 
http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/oct/02/white-space-
broadband-microsoft-google-wireless-rural 
[8] The Broadband Commission (2012) The State of Broadband 2012: 
Achieving Digital Inclusion for All, accessed on 5th of March, from 
http://www.broadbandcommission.org/documents/bb-
annualreport2012.pdf 
[9] West Virginia University (2011), Retrieved June 2014, Retrieved from 
http://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2013/07/white-space-
internet-may-finally-spread-through-us 
[10] TV White Space (2014) Breakthrough Technology. Carlson Wireless 
Technologies, 
Retrieved 
June 
2014, 
from 
http://www.carlsonwireless.com/solutions/tv-white-space-rural-
broadband.html 
Project  
Region  
Project Specifications 
Smart City 
Wilmington, 
North 
Carolina, 
USA 
Using white space spectrum 
to connect the city’s 
infrastructure and public 
services. It also provides 
public Wi-Fi to some 
previously underserved 
communities  
[11, 12]  
Cambridge 
Project 
Cambridge, 
UK 
White space implementation 
trial  
West Virginia 
University 
Project 
Virginia, USA 
Provide wireless broadband 
on campus and the 
surroundings.  
Claudville 
Claudville, 
Virginia, USA 
High-speed internet 
connectivity to rural areas of  
Claudville [2] 
Smart Grid\ 
Plumas, 
California, 
USA 
Real-time broadband 
connectivity to 
remote substations and 
switchgear  
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

[11] N. Patel, February 26th, 2010, White space 'Smart City' network goes 
up in Wilmington, North Carolina, Engadget, and Retrieved July 2014 
from 
http://www.engadget.com/2010/02/26/white-space-smart-city-
network-goes-up-in-wilmington-north-ca/ 
 [12] J. Van De Beek, J. Riihijarvi, A. Achtzehn, and P. Mahonen, (2011, 
May). UHF white space in Europe—a quantitative study into the 
potential of the 470–790 MHz band. In New Frontiers in Dynamic 
Spectrum Access Networks (DySPAN), 2011 IEEE Symposium on 
(pp. 1-9). IEEE. 
[13] J. W. Mwangoka, P. Marques, and J. Rodriguez, (2011, May). 
Exploiting TV white spaces in Europe: The COGEU approach. In New 
Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks (DySPAN), 2011 
IEEE Symposium on (pp. 608-612). IEEE. 
[14] P.  Bahl, R. Chandra, T. Moscibroda, R. Murty, and M.Welsh. (2009) 
White space networking with wi-fi like connectivity, In Proceedings of 
the ACM SIGCOMM 2009 conference on Data communication 
(SIGCOMM) ACM, New York, NY, USA, 27-38. 
[15] B. Ray, (2011). How to Build a National Cellular Wireless Network for 
£50m, the Register. Retrieved June 2014. 
[16] Cisco (2007), Municipalities Adopt Successful Business Models for 
Outdoor Wireless Networks, accesses February 28. From :  
http://www.cisco.com/en/US/netsol/ns621/networking_solutions_whi
te_paper0900aecd80564fa3.shtml 
[17] S.O. Siochrú, and B. Girard, (2005) Community-based Networks and 
Innovative Technologies: New models to serve and empower the poor,  
series of Making ICTs Work for the Poor, the United Nations 
Development program, accessed on October 5th, 2008, from 
http://propoor-ict.net 
[18] M. Fitch, M. Nekovee, S. Kawade, K. Briggs, and R. MacKenzie,  
(2011) Wireless service provision in TV white space with cognitive 
radio technology: A telecom operator's perspective and experience," 
Communications Magazine, IEEE , vol.49, no. 3, pp. 64,73. 
[19] K. Harrison, S.M. Mishra, and A. Saha, "How Much White-Space 
Capacity Is There?," New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum, 2010 IEEE 
Symposium on , April 2010, pp.1,10, 6-9  
[20] W. Wang, and X. Liu (2005, September). List-coloring based channel 
allocation for open-spectrum wireless networks. In IEEE Vehicular 
Technology Conference vol. 62, no. 1, p. 690.  
[21] West Virginia University (2013) Nation’s first campus 'Super Wi-Fi' 
network, 
retrieved 
March 
2014, 
from 
http://wvutoday.wvu.edu/n/2013/07/09/nation-s-first-campus-super-
wi-fi-network-launches-at-west-virginia-university 
[22] K. S. Nanavati, (2012). Channel bonding/loading for TV white spaces 
in IEEE 802.11 af. 
[29] C. Middleton, G. Longford, A. Clement, and A.B. Potter, (2006) ICT 
Infrastructure as Public Infrastructure: Exploring the Benefits of Public 
Wireless Networks, the proceedings of the 34th Research Conference 
on Communication, Information and Internet Policy.  
[30] Adaptrum Demonstrates TV Whitespace Solution at Cambridge TV 
Whitespace 
Trial 
Launch 
Event. 
 
From 
http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/adaptrum-demonstrates-
tv-whitespace-solution-at-cambridge-tv-whitespace-trial-launch-
event-125001269.html. Retrieved June 2014. 
[31] (July 9th, 2013). Nation's first campus 'Super Wi-Fi' network launches 
at 
West 
Virginia 
University, 
From 
http://wvutoday.wvu.edu/n/2013/07/09/nation-s-first-campus-super-
wi-fi-network-launches-at-west-virginia-university. Retrieved March 
2014. 
[32] E. Vos, (2005) Reports on Municipal Wireless and Broadband Projects, 
March 2005 Report, from www.muniwireless.com 
[33] The Internet World Usage Statistics (2014), accessed February 28, 
2014, from: http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm 
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

