Performance Evolutions of Velocity-Aware Routing Protocol for Mobile Ad hoc 
Networks 
 
 
 
Muneer O. Bani Yassein, Alaa N. Alslaity 
Department of Computer Science 
Jordan University of Science and Technology,  
Irbid 21100, Jordan 
masadeh@just.edu.jo, analslaity08@cit.just.edu.jo 
 
Ismail M. Ababneh  
Department of Computer Science 
Al al-Bayt University 
 Mafraq 25113, Jordan 
ismael@aabu.edu.jo 
 
 
Abstract— In recent years, Mobile Ad hoc Networks 
(MANETs) became an attractive research target. Several 
protocols were proposed to facilitate the vital operations of 
such type of Networks. Many routing protocols have been 
proposed in the literature, as routing operation is considered as 
one of the most important procedures used in MANETs. 
Among the so many protocols, on-demand routing protocols 
are of major contribution to handle the routing operations 
effectively. Ad hoc On-demand Distance Vector Routing 
protocol (AODV) stands to provide an excellent example of the 
on-demand routing protocols. AODV corresponds to the 
unique nature of MANETs by incorporating several features 
for discovering and initiating paths on an on-demand fashion, 
reducing both control and processing overhead, providing a 
multi-hop routing capability and maintaining the dynamic 
topology. Nevertheless, many opportunities for further 
improvements are still possible. In this paper, we attempt to 
incorporate mobility-aware features along with the AODV 
routing protocol features so as to handle mobility encountered 
by mobile nodes, to improve the performance and to add some 
promising capabilities. Our suggested protocol computes the 
node mobility periodically and uses this computed value to 
make useful routing decisions thereafter. Simulations are done 
using GloMoSim 2.03 simulator. According to the results, our 
proposed protocol proves its superiority over the original 
AODV protocol in terms of the reduced overhead and the 
increased packet delivery ratio. 
Keywords-Mobile Ad hoc Networks (MANETs); Routing; 
AODV; Mobility; Velocity Awareness.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A Mobile Ad hoc Network (MANET) is a group of 
mobile nodes that communicate and collaborate with each 
other without the need to any means centralization or pre-
existing infrastructures. Due to the lack of the centralized 
access points, the mobile nodes are required to act as both 
hosts and routers and the same time to perform the routing 
process properly. Mobile ad hoc networks can be used in 
numerous 
situations 
and 
can 
provide 
tremendous 
opportunities, particularly if there is a need for establishing 
a network for a limited period of time in a location where 
wired infrastructure is nonexistent or very difficult to 
deploy. The applications of MANETs include search and 
rescue operations, academic and industrial applications, and 
Personal Area Networks (PANs). 
Compared with the other types of networks, MANETs have 
the following exclusive characteristics: bandwidth and 
transmission rate limitations, energy constraints and dynamic 
topology [9]. 
Mobile ad hoc networks, as the name indicates, are 
mainly characterized by the dynamic topology due the 
mobility of nodes, hence, the name “Mobile”. There are no 
restrictions on nodes mobility and nodes are free to move 
any time towards any direction and at any speed [2]. In 
addition to mobility issues, a MANET has security and 
energy constraints as well as bandwidth limitations.  
In our work, we concentrate basically on mobility 
considering it as a major factor in MANETs that affects the 
overall performance of the network. This is because the 
frequent and high mobility of nodes can cause frequent link 
breakages, resulting in a less reliable routes and a more route 
re-initiation. The extra route discovery process requires more 
Route Request Packets (RREQ), Route Reply Packets 
(RREP), and Route Error Packets (RERR) [3], this in turn, 
leads to more control packets overhead. 
The primary objective of this paper is to take the 
previously mentioned limitations into consideration to design 
and implement a stable and overhead efficient routing 
protocol. The proposed protocol concerned mainly on the 
network overhead caused due to the usage of uncontrolled 
flooding and that caused due to the mobility nature of 
MANETs. In this protocol, nodes calculate their mobility 
periodically and use it mainly to establish a reliable route 
towards the destination during route discovery process. 
Simply put, a reliable route is the one with low mobility, yet; 
low probability of failure. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 
overviews the state of the art works in mobility aware 
protocols. Section 3 illustrates our proposed protocol and 
the methodology of quantifying mobility. The simulation 
environment and the experimental results are discussed in 
Section 4. Finally, Sections 5 concludes the paper and 
provides our future directions. 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

II. 
RELATED WORK  
Mobility is considered as one of the main challenges in 
MANETs. In [4], link duration is proposed as mobility 
metric to evaluate the overall network mobility status. The 
authors defined link duration as the time period during 
which two mobile nodes remain within the transmission 
range of each other. They used this metric as a major clue to 
indicate network performance, because long-lived links 
increase network stability. 
Idrees et al. [5], proposed a mobility-aware scheme 
such that Hello Packets were used to enhance mobility 
awareness in the AODV. Upon receiving a Hello Packet, 
along with the assistance of the GPS coordinates of the 
source node, a lightweight mobility aware agent on each 
node of the network compares these coordinates with 
previous ones and then can determine information about the 
mobility of the originator node. When a node receives a 
RREQ packet and needs to send a RREP (it is either the 
destination or it has an active route to the desired 
destination), it will use the mobility awareness to choose the 
best neighbor which is not moving frequently. This process 
of selecting a best neighbor is done at each intermediate 
node. As a result, a path with the maximum number of low 
mobile nodes is established between source and destination. 
In their proposed work, Qin et al. [6] considered three 
parameters that are used for monitoring the mobility status 
by individual nodes. These parameters are: node degree, 
average link duration and number of link breakages. These 
parameters can be obtained by “hello” messages exchange 
and they assist each node in sensing the status of its 
neighbors. In addition, a node can know how many links 
may be broken if it has not received “hello” messages from 
the previously connected nodes within some period of time, 
and then it can calculate the link duration for each broken 
link, and the average link duration at the moment. In order 
to examine the effect of the three proposed parameters, they 
are deployed and monitored at different mobility levels and 
with different mobility models.  
Liang Q and Thomas [6] observed that the number of 
link breaks obtained by a node has nearly linear relationship 
with node mobility, which is defined as the relative speed 
between two nodes. The correlation is based on the average 
of all the nodes in the network, and the value of this metric 
fluctuates significantly for each node during the simulation. 
In [7], Enneya et al. proposed a mobility-aware method 
to improve the performance of AODV. They define 
mobility metric and used it in both route discovery and 
route maintenance. In route discovery, the hop-count metric 
that is used in standard AODV is dropped, and it is replaced 
with a combination of two mobility parameters: average and 
mean of the “calculated mobility” along the path between 
any source node and destination. Consequently, more stable 
routes were obtained. In route maintenance, the local repair 
mechanism was extended in order to avoid the RERR 
packets by allowing the node that detects a broken link to 
choose an alternative route based also on the mobility 
metric. This affects the overall overhead of re-initiating the 
route discovery process and also reduces the use of RERR 
packets. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
Mobility is of a major importance factor in the ad hoc 
networks environments. Depending on the nodes’ mobility 
level, the overall network topology can be described. That 
is, if nodes are of low mobility and change their physical 
location seldom, then the network topology is said to be 
stable (or semi-stable). However, if nodes move very 
rapidly, then no expectation can be made on the network 
topology because what holds true for a specific period of 
time cannot be guaranteed to still true at the time after. 
Through the literature, it is shown that the majority of ad 
hoc routing protocols are incapable to handle high mobility.  
 
In the literature, there are many mobility metrics that 
are used to quantify nodes mobility [7]. In our approaches, 
we depend solely on the locally available topological 
information, such that the change in the (x, y) coordinates 
for a particular node provides a good indication of the 
network movement pattern and mobility. 
This section provides a detailed discussion of our 
proposed protocol and the contribution it adds over the 
traditional AODV protocol. 
A. Our Protocol 
In our work, we propose a Velocity-aware Ad hoc On-
demand Distance Vector (VA-AODV) protocol that is 
capable to periodically compute mobility and make useful 
routing decisions accordingly. Our VA-AODV protocol 
offer major contributions and improve the performance of 
the original AODV protocol. 
Unlike the AODV, wherein, the source node broadcasts 
the RREQ message to all its neighboring nodes (regardless 
to their mobility status) for the sake of finding the intended 
destination node, our VA-AODV protocol takes into 
consideration the mobility of neighboring nodes and picks 
the nodes with lower mobility to perform the route 
discovery process. In other words, in our VA-AODV, each 
node computes its own mobility periodically (i.e., every 
HELLO_INTERVAL). Then, broadcasts the value of its 
own mobility along with the HELLO message to inform its 
neighbors about its mobility status. Each node in turn, 
updates its neighbor table by adding ascending-ordered 
entries of (node ID, velocity) pairs for all neighbors, such 
that the ascending order is based on nodes’ velocity. 
In VA-AODV, when a source node wishes to 
communicate with a destination and it does not have a route 
to that destination, it initiates a route discovery process by 
referring to its neighbor table and picking a set of nodes 
with lower velocities to participate in the route discovery 
process (instead of choosing the whole neighbors, as the 
case in AODV).  
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

We refer to the selected set of neighbors, which will 
participate in the route discovery process as the 
CoveringSet, and it is defined as the set of 1-hop neighbors 
that cover the overall 2-hop neighbors. The CoveringSet 
should satisfy two conditions; it should ensure full coverage 
for the 2-hop neighbors, and it should consist of the 
neighbors with lower velocities as much as possible. 
Building CoverinngSet is a distributed process in that each 
node builds its own CoveringSet independently. 
The process of VA-AODV is done as follows: when a 
node (S) wants to communicate with a destination node (D) 
that is not within the transmission range of S, it firstly 
creates its CoveringSet using its neighbor table. Starting 
from the first entry in the neighbor table (remember that this 
table is sorted in an ascending order based on the velocity), 
S checks whether the current neighbor add additional 
coverage for some 2-hop nodes or not. If so, current 
neighbor is inserted to the CoveringSet, otherwise S 
continues with the next neighbor. This process repeated 
until achieving full coverage for the entire 2-hop neighbors 
regardless the number of nodes that are in the CoveringSet. 
Hence, the number of nodes participated in the CoveringSet 
are not defined in advance, rather it depends on the 
coverage condition (i.e., the CoveringSet should covers the 
entire 2-hop neighbors). Once node S finished building its 
CoveringSet, it appends this set to the RREQ packet and 
broadcast it to its neighbors, only those neighbors who's IDs 
included in the CoveringSet will relay the packet. The same 
applies for the intermediate nodes where they look their 
neighbor table up and decides which neighbors are allowed 
to relay the RREQ further. Therefore, the overall selected 
route is stable and more reliable. 
B. Velocity Quntfication 
In our VA-AODV protocol, we assume that each node 
is equipped with a GPS device from which it obtains its 
own (x, y) coordinates. The availability of position 
information as well as the continuous tracking of the 
changes in this information within a specific period of time 
t provides each node with the ability to calculate its own 
distance crossed during that time t, which can be used for 
the purpose of speed calculation. 
To explain our velocity quantification methodology, let 
us denote the position of node i at time t as Pi,t which is 
actually obtained from the coordinates pair  (xt, yt). Further, 
let the position of the same node at time t+α be denoted as 
Pi, t+ α  which corresponds to (xt+ α, yt+ α), then the 
crossed distance for this node during the time period T = 
(t+α ) – t is denoted as DT   and is computed as given in 
equation 1: 
 
                              (1)
 
 
Because each node sends hello messages to its 
neighbors every HELLO_INTERVAL, it can calculate its 
velocity (or speed) at the end of each HELLO_INTERVAL 
and append the value of speed with the hello message. In 
other words, let ε be the HELLO_INTERVAL time, and 
given the crossed distance DT, then the velocity Vε of node 
i during the period of time T can be calculated as follows:     
  
                                                                          (2) 
 
Upon receiving the hello message, each recipient node 
updates its neighbor table such that a new entry will be 
added for the originator of the hello message if it does not 
already exist. The added entry will be of the form 
<nbrAddr, Vε>, where Vε is the velocity (speed) at which 
the distance DT was crossed. 
 
C. Our Contribution 
 Our Velocity-Aware Ad hoc On-demand Distance 
Vector (VA-AODV) routing protocol is designed to work in 
mobile ad hoc networks as an adaptive, decentralized and 
mobility-aware protocol that outperform the original 
AODV in the following aspects: First, the VA-AODV 
controls the route discovery process by selecting a set of 
nodes (with low velocity) to send (or relay) the RREQ 
messages, this in turn will reduce the control overhead 
associated with the traditional AODV. In addition, the 
nodes perform mobility quantification in a simple and 
distributed manner based on the locally available 
information about position changes. This in fact, provides 
very precise information about velocity. Our mechanism of 
mobility aware routing guarantees more stable and reliable 
routes since each node chooses only stable routes, this will 
decrease the number of broken links, and thus, reduces the 
number of reinitiating route discovery trials and reduces the 
number of dropped packets, as consequent, the packet 
delivery ratio is increased and the network overhead is 
decreased. In particular, our velocity-aware approach 
contributes mainly in terms of reducing the overall control 
overhead (since the number of relayed RREQ packets by 
intermediate nodes is reduced). 
 
IV. 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION  
In order to evaluate the performance of our VA-AODV 
protocols, the proposed mechanism is simulated using 
GloMoSim 2.03 simulator [8]. The simulation environment 
and parameters are clarified in the subsequent sections. 
A. Simulation Environment 
The simulation area that is considered for simulations 
is 600 m × 600 m. The mobility of nodes is represented by 
the choice of a uniform speed between a minimum speed, 
νmin=0 and a maximum speed νmax, where νmax = 2, 5, 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

10, 20 and 40 m/s. this wide range of speeds used (from 
2m/s up to 40m/s) is selected carefully to show us the 
behavior of the proposed protocol for any speed. The 
Mobility model used through simulation is the Random way 
point and the channel capacity is 2 Mbps. We aim to assess 
the behavior of VA-AODV in the dense networks, so that, 
and through empirical, all the experiments done using 40 
nodes with 250m transmission range. Also we used the 
Constant Bit Rate (CBR) traffic generator, and the number 
of sources is set to be 24 nodes selected randomly and send 
to a randomly chosen different receivers. Each source 
generates 1 and 5 packets/seconds for different scenarios. 
The time for simulation is 300s and bidirectional link 
between each pair of adjacent nodes is considered. In the 
MAC layer (i.e., Data Link layer), we used the IEEE 802.11 
communication protocol.    
B. Simulation Parameters 
We evaluate the performance of our proposed protocol 
using the following simulation parameters [11]: 
 
• 
Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR): the packet delivery 
ratio is a ratio of the correctly delivered data packets.  
• 
Routing Overhead: the routing overhead ratio is the 
ratio of the network control packets sent to the 
correctly delivered data packets. 
• 
Saved Rebroadcasts (SRB): the saved rebroadcast 
represents the ratio of the number of route request 
(RREQ) packets retransmitted to the total number of 
route request (RREQ) packets received by any node 
[10]. 
C. Simulation Results 
In this section, we provide a performance comparison 
between the AODV protocol and our proposed protocol, 
VA-AODV in terms of control overhead, PDR and SRB. 
The following scenarios show us the effects of speed with 
number of nodes equal 40 nodes; in the first scenario, each 
source node sends 1 packet/second (i.e., the traffic load= 
1Pkt/s), while in the second one we used traffic load = 
5Pkts/s.  
Figures 1, 2 and 3 show the performance results for the 
control overhead, PDR and SRB, respectively for a number 
of nodes =40 and a traffic load of 1 packet/second. Figure 1 
shows the superiority of our protocol over the AODV in 
terms of reducing the average control overhead. This is due 
to the fact that our protocol tends to control flooding by 
selecting only a subset of nodes with low mobility to 
retransmit packets. This reduction of retransmissions saves 
a lot of control packets (RREQ, RREP, and RERR) from 
being sent, and this reduces the overall routing overhead. 
The figure shows also that as the maximum speed of nodes 
increases, the overhead encountered by AODV increases as 
well. This is because the faster the node’s movement speed, 
the less stable the links are, and the more the link 
breakages. The instability caused by high node speed 
requires sending more control packets (RREQs) needed for 
route re-initiation and (RERR) needed for local repair. 
 
 
 
The results in Figure 2 show that the Packet Delivery 
Ratio achieved by VA-AODV is much better than that of 
the AODV, especially for high speeds (20 and 40 m/s). This 
is expected because the velocity awareness of our protocol 
reduces the number of broken links by choosing the only 
stable nodes. This in turn guarantees a better delivery of 
packets. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 depicts the saved rebroadcasts achieved by our 
protocol in comparison with that achieved by AODV. As 
the figure shows clearly, our protocol significantly 
outperforms the AODV in terms of avoiding redundant 
retransmissions of the received packets. In addition, our 
protocol proves its stability and ability to save rebroadcasts 
even with high speed values, whereas the AODV protocol 
degrades clearly as the nodes speed increases.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Average Overhead vs. Speed 
Figure 2. Average PDR vs. Speed 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figures 4, 5 and 6 show the performance results for the 
control overhead, PDR and SRB, respectively for a number 
of nodes =40 and a traffic load of 5 packet/second. 
Figure 4 illustrates the superiority of our protocol over 
the AODV for all speed values. It can be inferred that with 
very low speed value (i.e., speed= 2m/s), the performance 
of both AODV and VA-AODV are almost similar, while 
the performance enhancement becomes evident for higher 
speed values. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 shows that for different speed of nodes, and as 
the number of packets transmitted increases, the average 
packet delivery ration decreases for the AODV while it 
remains stable for our protocol. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By varying the maximum nodal speed over a range of 
2, 5, 10, 20, and 40 m/s and having and having a traffic load 
of 5 packets/second, it can be shown in Figure 6 that VA-
AODV can achieve higher SRB when compared against 
AODV which uses blind flooding as a main mechanism for 
route discovery, thus redundant retransmission of packets 
occurred frequently.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Based on the simulation results illustrated in this 
section, it is clear that our proposed VA-AODV protocol 
enhances the performance of the original AODV protocol in 
terms of reducing the control overhead; increasing the 
packet delivery ratio and increasing the saved rebroadcast. 
The VA-AODV significantly outperforms the AODV 
protocol in terms of reducing overhead by 69%. Regarding 
packet delivery ratio, the experiments show that our 
protocol outperforms AODV by 2.79%. Finally, our 
protocol achieves substantial improvement of the saved 
rebroadcast performance metric, such that the VA-AODV 
outperforms AODV by 77.86%. Moreover, the results show 
that VA-AODV ensures stability, in that it gives stable 
results for different speeds. 
Figure 3. SRB vs. Speed 
Figure 5. Average PDR vs. Speed 
Figure 6. SRB vs. Speed 
Figure 4. Average Overhead vs. Speed 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we proposed an ad hoc on-demand, 
velocity aware routing protocol that achieves significant 
enhancement over the AODV in terms of reducing the 
average control overhead, increasing the average packet 
delivery ratio and increasing the saved rebroadcast of 
packets. The proposed VA-AODV protocol depends on the 
change of a node’s position during a specified period of 
time to calculate average node’s velocity as mobility 
indicator in order to assist in making a proper routing 
decision. Taking nodes velocity (as a mobility metric) into 
consideration ensures a better routing performance in terms 
of decreasing control packets overhead, increasing packet 
delivery ratio and increasing the number of save 
rebroadcasted packets. 
Although taking nodes velocity as a major factor for 
routing decisions gets better performance, it is not enough 
to depend on the node's absolute speed. There are three 
main parameters of the mobility; speed, position, and 
direction. In general, only one of these parameters is 
considered in selecting the next hop during the route 
discovery process [34]. Indeed, it is not sufficient to 
consider only one of these parameters as the only parameter 
for route discovery process. Thus, we should add other 
parameters (In addition to the velocity) to the algorithm in 
order to make it more precise and more reliable. Moreover, 
the proposed protocol needs more evaluation methods and 
simulations to ensure its superiority over other protocols. 
 
References 
[1] M Abolhasan, T Wysocki, and E Dutkiewicz, “A review of routing 
protocols for mobile ad hoc networks”, Ad Hoc Networks, 2(1), pp. 
1-22, 2004. 
[2] E. M. Royer and C. E. Perkins, “Evolution and future directions of 
the ad hoc on-demand distance-vector routing protocol,” Ad Hoc 
Networks, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 125-150, July 2003. 
[3] C. E. Perkins and E. M. Royer, "Ad-hoc on-demand distance vector 
routing", Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, 1999. 
Proceedings. WMCSA '99. Second IEEE Workshop on Digital Object 
Identifier, pp. 90-100, 25-26 Feb 1999. 
[4] J. Boleng, W. Navidi, and T. Camp, "Metrics to Enable Adaptive 
Protocols for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks", Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Wireless Networks (ICWN '02), Las 
Vegas, Nevada; pp. 293-298, 2002 June. 
[5] M. Idrees , M. M. Yousaf, S. W. Jaffry, M. A. Pasha, and S. A. 
Hussain, "Enhancements in AODV Routing Using Mobility Aware 
Agents", IEEE International Conference on Emerging Technologies, 
ICET 05, pp. 98-102, 17-18 September 2005. 
[6] L. Qin and T. Kunz, "Mobility Metrics to Enable Adaptive Routing in 
MANET", IEEE International Conference on Wireless and Mobile 
Computing, Networking and Communications,. (WiMob'2006), pp. 
1–8, 2006.  
[7] N. Enneya, M. Al Koutbi, and A. Berqia, "Enhancing AODV 
Performance based on Statistical Mobility Quantification", The IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Information 
& 
Communication 
Technologies: from Theory to Applications, ICTTA06, pp. 2455-
2460,  April 2006. 
[8] X. Zeng, R. Bagrodia, and M. Gerla, “GloMoSim: a Library for 
Parallel Simulation of Large-Scale Wireless Networks”, Proceedings 
of the 12th workshop on parallel and distributed simulation, Bnaff, 
Alberta, Canada, pp. 154-161, July 1998. 
[9]  M. Bani Yassein, S. Nimer, and A. Al-Dubai, "A new dynamic 
counter-based broadcasting scheme for Mobile Ad hoc Networks," 
Journal of  Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory,  vol. 19, no.  
1, pp. 553-563, 2011. 
[10] B. Sun, C. Gui, Q. Zhang, B. Yan, and W. Liu, “A Multipath on-
Demand Routing with Path Selection Entropy for Ad Hoc Networks”, 
The 9th International Conference for Young Computer Scientists, 
ICYCS, pp. 558-563, Nov. 2008. 
[11] A. Hanashi, A. Siddique, I. Awan, and M. Woodward, "Dynamic 
Probabilistic Flooding Performance Evaluation of On-Demand 
Routing Protocols in MANETs", Proceedings of the 2008 
International Conference on Complex, Intelligent and Software 
Intensive Systems; pp. 200-204, 2008. 
 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

