Co-creation of Sustainable Smart Cities 
Users, Participation and Service Design 
 Virpi Oksman, Antti Väätänen, Mari Ylikauppila 
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland 
Tampere, Finland 
e-mails: {virpi.oksman, antti.vaatanen, mari.ylikauppila}@vtt.fi 
 
 
Abstract—The starting point of this paper is to develop new 
ubiquitous and participative services for sustainable urban 
planning using mixed reality and other relevant technologies. 
To support communication between stakeholders, we have 
created a demo service that can be situated in public places 
such as interactive displays, designed for community content 
sharing, close to people flows in cities. It can also be used in 
public planning events as well as anywhere with personal 
devices. The service combines visualizations and virtual 
environments by mixing panoramic imaging and architectural 
drawings of future urban plans, and includes user-centred 
interactions such as questionnaires and commenting tools. In 
this paper, we focus on social issues and the implications of this 
kind of services, especially trying to understand user values, 
needs and preferences in participative urban planning service. 
Political decision makers, city officials and citizens participated 
in this research to clarify how they perceive the new digital 
concepts, and how these digital services should be designed and 
offered for users to support public participation and 
collaboration in future urban planning projects. Important 
changes in urban planning would be to increase information 
and communication and present more alternatives at the early 
stages of projects. According to the different stakeholders 
involved in this research, informing the public how their 
feedback has been taken into consideration and developing 
real-time feedback channels would enhance participatory 
urban planning.  
Keywords-participatory 
design; 
mobile 
mixed 
reality; 
ubiquitous services; urban planning; user experiences. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Urban planning has traditionally been perceived as a 
complex process. It includes different stages and multiple 
stakeholders, and it is not very understandable for lay people. 
Law defines urban planning process and it consists of certain 
phases, which require acceptance of stakeholders and 
decision makers. In Finland, statutory status of urban 
planning and land use ensures involvement of all citizens and 
other stakeholders who live in the target area. It guarantees 
any stakeholder the right to see the materials and to leave 
feedback before any decisions. According to the Land Use 
and Building Act, citizens are able also challenge the 
decisions if necessary. However, cities and communities 
have recently started to pay more attention to making the 
urban planning processes more participative. Negotiation 
between different stakeholders and considering citizens’ 
needs and preferences has become more important. In 
Finland, for instance, besides the official process the 
stakeholders can also be involved at earlier phase of planning 
process in order to get deeper understanding of target area. 
The participatory or co-creative approach which engages 
citizens and other stakeholders is beneficial in many ways. 
Co-creation and co-design benefits have been associated to 
improving processes of idea generation and decision-making 
and promoting co-operation and creativity. In addition, they 
have impact on improving users’ satisfaction and building 
trust or loyalty over the long-term [1]. 
Especially when urban planning ideas are presented and 
tested already in the early stages, the projects are more likely 
to proceed smoothly, in a good spirit and are not in danger of 
being delayed or halted as a result of political or social 
resistance. When possible problems in the planning can be 
detected already at the early stages, the result can be 
qualitatively better in many ways. There is also a possibility 
of minimizing economic risks when there is no need to make 
costly changes afterwards, when it is noticed that something 
went wrong in planning [1]. 
There is a wide range of different kinds of participatory 
urban planning tools, methods and technologies in the 
practice in different countries and cultural contexts [2][3]. 
Increasing participation demands developing easy-to- use 
services that are situated in places where people notice them 
and can be used anytime and anywhere users want to use 
them. In this paper, we focus on exploring qualitatively how 
different stakeholders, especially citizens and political 
decision 
makes 
perceive 
ubiquitous, 
mixed 
reality 
technologies as a part of future participatory urban planning. 
We are interested in how different technology concepts using 
any device and any location could open up and make the 
urban planning process more visible, easy-to-access and 
understand. Moreover, we study what kind of devices, 
applications, locations and situations would support users to 
participate in urban planning. Consequently, we are 
interested in how to find urban planning solutions that 
enhance co-operation and take into consideration user values 
such as maintaining the quality of living environments, clean 
nature and the protection of historic buildings. 
To understand different stakeholders’ views, we have 
conducted 13 interviews among political decision makers 
responsible for urban planning in local government and city 
officials. 
These 
interviews 
shed 
light 
on 
different 
stakeholders’ expectations towards participatory urban 
planning service and contributed to our first urban planning 
service demo, which is presented in this paper. In addition, 
we have conducted user studies in a small local community, 
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

where several environmental urban planning projects are 
taking 
place. 
These 
projects 
include, 
for 
instance, 
supplementary construction, green design and planning of 
noise barriers. Through interviews, demos and case pilots we 
aimed to gain an understanding of how users perceived this 
kind of participatory mixed reality services in real urban 
planning projects and how to develop the service further for 
large-scale participatory projects. 
This paper is structured as follows: Section II describes 
how the possibilities of mixed reality technologies have been 
experienced in urban planning. Section III describes the 
ubiquitous mixed reality concepts we discussed with 
different stakeholders to involve them to participative urban 
planning service design. Section IV describes the political 
decision makers’ and city officials’ views on participatory 
urban 
planning 
concepts. 
Section 
V 
addresses 
the 
environment project and goes into detail about the citizens’ 
feedback on participatory urban planning service demo. 
Finally, in Section, VI we present conclusions and our future 
work.  
II. 
THE ROLE OF MIXED REALITY SERVICES IN URBAN 
PLANNING: SOME EXPERIENCES 
Different technological approaches such as virtual reality, 
mirror worlds and mobile augmented reality have been 
experimented on for aiding public participation in urban 
planning [2][3][4]. Immersive visualisation tools help users 
to understand what is being proposed and planned as many 
non-experts have difficulties to understand maps and plans 
[5][6]. Technological barriers to participatory urban planning 
and e-government are coming down, particularly at the local 
municipal level, and there are new opportunities for public 
engagement based on local needs and capacities [8]. Design 
of interactive systems can affect citizen participation in local 
governance and urban planning. The interactive systems 
should be flexible and versatile and enable participatory 
design approach, which goes beyond professional design 
projects and allows users to suggest further adaptations. New 
types of user interaction and technology design solutions 
should be considered to encourage citizens and other 
stakeholders to participate [9]. There are several recent 
examples of this. A prototype of a mixed reality application 
supporting a range of devices for a collaborative multimodal 
interaction was developed by Wagner et al. to enable group 
of participants to create a vision of urban projects. The 
stakeholders and users involved in the urban planning project 
had various backgrounds ranging from local urban planning 
specialists to other stakeholders such as members of local 
commerce. Mixed reality visualizations proved useful in 
enriching the available repertoire of representations and 
enhancing stakeholders’ understanding of urban situations. 
3D visualizations, videos and sounds helped to express and 
co-construct their ideas. Sound was perceived also an 
important element in urban planning, but a more complex 
medium in the participatory process [7].  
Web-based solutions provide good support for the 
traditional methods used in the participatory urban planning 
process. These applications are especially suitable for 
acquiring local knowledge; they are an easy and inexpensive 
way to reach large and diverse groups of respondents. 
Noujua et al. noticed that there are also challenges related to 
the web-based participation; for instance that it may produce 
shallow information and the participation may be quite 
random [11]. 
A smartphone augmented reality system for urban 
planning was tested with 18 members of the public. The 
objective was to test if a smartphone augmented reality 
system would increase the willingness of the public to 
participate in urban planning events and if the participation 
was actually increased. The aim was also study qualitatively 
how the public perceived the smartphone augmented reality 
system in urban planning. The results of the study show, as 
expected, that the younger members (the 18–25 age group) 
of the test groups were more familiar with smartphone 
technology and saw the system as easy-to-use. Only the 
youngest age group showed an increase in willingness 
participate in urban events if the smartphone augmented 
reality system was used in the events. However, the study 
could not show any evidence that the actual participation in 
urban planning events would have increased because of the 
use of the smartphone-augmented system [4]. 
Increasing participation requires time and resources from 
all stakeholders. From city officials’ and other planning 
professionals’ point of view seeking citizen involvement via 
web based and mixed reality services does not necessarily 
decrease the workload, and the professionals need to be 
strategically prepared to manage new flows and ideas 
coming from citizens [4]. 
III. 
UBIQUITOUS MIXED REALITY CONCEPTS FOR URBAN 
PLANNING 
In the beginning of the interviews with political decision 
makers, city officials and companies, we introduced four 
ubiquitous mixed reality concepts for urban planning. The 
examples helped in figuring out the idea of new visual 
approaches to community planning and aimed to facilitate 
feedback and ideas related to the different approaches. 
A. Mixed reality mobile tools 
We described possibilities of visualizing urban planning 
solutions with smartphones and tablet devices. The idea is 
for users to be able to move around the surroundings under 
development and see merged virtual 3D objects and a camera 
view on a handheld device (Fig. 1). Moving in real 
environment and utilising mobile augmented reality (AR) 
solutions, which integrate virtual information into physical 
environment, help users to perceive scales and sizes related 
to the existing buildings and surroundings when virtual 
building objects will be located in their intended locations. 
The demonstrated mobile mixed reality tool for architectural 
sites has been described and evaluated in earlier studies 
[8][9][10]. Current trend in mobile devices supports the idea 
of utilising on-site AR solutions. Smartphones have 
advanced processors and cameras, they utilise large displays 
and tablet devices are already commonly used.  
 
190
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
Figure 1. On-site augmented reality solution 
B. Interactive public screens 
The other approach presented was interactive public 
screens with mixed reality and advanced control methods 
features (Fig. 2). The screen shows areas under development, 
and new digital visualizations are embedded into the views. 
One or several users can manipulate the views and 
community plan options using their gestures or the touch 
screen input method. Other users can watch and discuss the 
views at the same time. Gesture recognition would be 
implemented with the help of depth camera sensors or 
handheld control devices. On the other hand, utilisation of 
personal smartphones as a second screen device could also 
be applicable method in the public screen approach. This 
kind of public screens can be located next to the area under 
development, in shopping centres or in municipal office 
buildings.  
 
 
Figure 2. Interactive public screen in urban planning. 
C. Multiuser design tables 
Thirdly, the users can explore and co-create urban 
planning solutions using interactive and multiuser design 
tables. The tables can be a combination of tangible objects or 
3D printed building models, projected information and 
camera recognition systems. The users are able to browse 
different urban planning options or manipulate objects on a 
table, and they can receive more information using, e.g., 
pointing, touching or gestures. 
The user moves and indicates building options using AR 
markers on the table. A tangible 3D table-top system in 
which physical objects on a table can be recognized has been 
developed [10]. The same kind of table-top systems in urban 
planning includes the Spatial Design Table and the Bionicle 
Table [11][12]. They both enable 3D visualizations showing 
how different buildings look in their environments. 
D. Web-based service with panoramic visions 
One concept developed for participatory urban planning 
is web-based open service, which can easily be used with 
personal devices as they run on web browsers of different 
devices such as tablet devices and PCs. The user-centric 
service mixes panoramic imaging and architectural drawings 
of future urban plans, and includes user-centred interactions 
such as questionnaires and commenting tools so that citizens 
can participate and comment on timely issues, such as future 
urban planning, construction of green walls and urban 
gardening, and sustainable energy solutions. Fig. 3 is a 
screenshot of the web-based urban planning service, which 
visualizes sound barrier plans between a highway and a field. 
Left side includes map information of the area and how the 
sound barrier is located. The right side visualizes the sound 
barrier plans and its future construction phases embedded in 
panoramic images of surroundings. 
 
 
Figure 3. Web-based service with mixing panoramic imaging and 
architectural drawings of future urban plans and including user-centric 
feedback tools 
IV. 
POLITICAL DECISION MAKERS’ AND CITY OFFICIALS’ 
VIEWS ON THE PARTICIPATORY URBAN PLANNING CONCEPTS 
In the interviews with political decision makers we 
discussed how to increase the awareness of citizens’ 
opportunities to participate in planning of their living 
environment and how to increase real interaction with other 
stakeholders. The political decision-makers were selected 
from all the parties presented at these boards. The 
participating 
political 
decision-makers 
were 
both 
experienced and new decision-makers who were in their first 
term on the Board of Governors. They represented both 
genders and as members of environmental or technical 
boards they were in a central role in organizing services 
related to urban planning. The political decision-makers were 
selected from all the parties presented at these boards. 
A common concern was that people are not aware of the 
general process, they lack of information on the channels for 
interaction and participation and at which phase they have an 
opportunity of commenting and providing feedback. Active 
citizens who acquire knowledge are well informed about the 
future urban projects of their communities and their 
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

possibilities to contribute, but for the average citizen the 
statutory planning process is unfamiliar. In many cases, 
citizens do not realise that anything is going until before 
actual building begins in neighbourhoods and at that point it 
is too late to contribute. In addition it became clear, that 
recent participatory methods in urban planning are not 
suitable for all. As digital services may be unfamiliar to older 
generations, public urban planning events are tied to a certain 
time and place and in Finnish context situation is such that 
especially busy working generations and young people are 
easily left out. Encouraging young people and working 
families to participate in urban planning events is 
challenging.  
By providing better accessible information, easier ways 
for participation and open communication awareness and a 
general understanding of the nature of the planning process 
could be increased. 
Another concern was the state of planning when 
involvement of different stakeholders usually happens. Too 
mature, detailed plans and quality of materials were seen as 
the main problems from both the decision-makers’ and 
citizens’ point of view. Decision makers would like to have 
information on new projects at an earlier stage when 
planning has not yet reached a high level of maturity. They 
noted that they often face a situation where they can only 
accept or reject a proposal. There is a demand for alternative 
design solutions, a discussion of the impacts of different 
solutions and for a better illustration of the overall picture. 
Materials were also complained of as being too complicated 
and difficult to understand, not only from the decision 
makers’ point of view, but even more by average citizens. 
Also, the amount of material is often huge and that makes it 
almost impossible to go through all the information to get an 
overview and a clear understanding of the wider impacts of 
the project. The situation is the same with the citizen. That 
easily leads to uncertainty and resistance among the citizens, 
which may result in an increased number of complaints and a 
longer time for processing. 
Open communication between different stakeholders was 
seen as a way to enhance real co-operation and participation, 
which would help the discussion to resolve the problematic 
issues already at an early stage of planning. The numbers of 
complaints are assumed to decrease if different viewpoints 
can be taken into account as early as possible. 
Different concepts of participatory mixed reality tools 
(described in Section III) were presented for the 
interviewees. Participants were asked for feedback and to 
evaluate the possible impacts of the use of such tools. All the 
concepts were seen as interesting and the possible impact for 
urban planning process was seen positive. Use of public 
tools would enable more flexible and diverse ways for 
stakeholders to participate in commenting on the plans. It 
would make communication more effective when the 
information can be brought among people flows. Scalability 
of tools was also seen as positive. 
Of the presented technology approaches, the decision-
makers and city officials prioritized lightweight, web-based 
mobile solutions. Other presented solutions, such as the 
interactive design table and public screens, were also seen as 
viable in the long run. They were seen as suitable for large 
urban planning projects and as tools for both decision-
makers and citizens. Interactive public screens were seen as 
effective attention grabbers and information channels: they 
were considered a good way of spreading knowledge of 
urban planning projects. However, screens were seen as less 
suitable for collecting feedback and ideas from the general 
public. It was assumed that people would be hesitant to use a 
technical device that was for public use. The actual 
participation and feedback would happen via a personal 
mobile or other personal device, or in a more closed facility 
organized by the city or community. User interfaces that 
recognize gestures were seen as better suited to public spaces 
than touch screens. Touch screens in public use were 
perceived as uncomfortable especially because of hygienic 
reasons. 
Even if the need for easy-to-use, light and adaptive 
visualisation tools was recognised, a concern was how the 
tools will be adopted. Ability and willingness to take new 
technical solutions into use were seen as challenging. 
Another concern that was raised in discussions with 
decision makers was that, due to new tools, the amount of 
data is likely to be increased and for that reason new tools 
and methods are also needed to handle and analyse all that 
data effectively and to produce readable reports. Even now 
the amount of information and material is often great, 
especially in the case of larger planning projects, and a lot of 
effort is needed to go through all that material. 
Considering the earlier experiences of mixed reality 
technologies in urban planning and the feedback from 
political decision makers and city officials, we developed a 
service demo, which is an open urban planning service. It 
can easily be used with personal devices as they run on web 
browsers of different devices such as tablet devices and PCs. 
The service mixes panoramic imaging and architectural 
drawings of future urban plans, and includes questionnaires 
to acquire local knowledge. In the next Section, we describe 
how the demo was used in a local environment project and 
how citizens perceived use of this kind of service in urban 
planning. The interviews with political decision makers 
helped us to clarify what kind of technologies and what kind 
of user features would suit best for participatory urban 
planning. We have used this information in designing of our 
participatory urban planning demo. In the next Section, we 
will describe how we used this demo as a part of an 
environment project and how users responded to it.  
V. 
THE ENVIRONMENT PROJECT 
We conducted user studies and participatory urban 
planning pilots related to real environment projects with our 
service demo in Western Finland. In this region, there are 
several large future urban planning projects planned related 
to public traffic and development of city and community 
centres. For instance, the international airport area is under 
lively development. Local media reports frequently on new 
urban plans, and in local government there are debates for 
and against different urban planning and environment 
projects. We conducted our first user demo in a small local 
community. We wanted to ascertain how to support citizens 
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

and other stakeholders in involving them planning of the 
sustainability and quality of their living environments 
through digital services. We wanted to find out how our 
demo service suited this purpose, and how to develop it 
further, especially trying to understand user values, needs 
and preferences in participative urban planning. We first 
conducted a user study in a small village near the highway 
where a new noise barrier is planned to protect inhabitants 
from noise pollution. There are only town houses in this area, 
and residents of the village consisted mainly of families with 
children and older people. Our aim was to reach residents 
living near the noise barrier to respond to our inquiry, so we 
published an online questionnaire link in a municipal 
community web portal, community Facebook site and in a 
local newspaper. The query was available over a period of a 
few weeks in March and in April 2014. 
A. Citizens’ feedback on participatory urban planning 
demo and devices 
In all 25 respondents (12 males, 13 females) completed 
the web-based questionnaire, which included both multiple 
choice and qualitative open-ended questions. Most of them 
belonged to the age group from 35 to 44 year olds. They 
were quite highly educated: 10 of them had a bachelor’s 
degree, 6 of them had a Master’s degree and two of them had 
the level of doctorate.  
The survey included basic background information 
questions, and focused on topics such as clarifying 
requirements for a future community planning, perceptions 
on visualisation and participation services, and most 
preferred places and information channels and devices for 
utilising a future participatory urban planning service. Users 
were also asked to try out the web-based pilot service which 
mixed panoramic imaging and architectural drawings of the 
planned noise barrier near their homes. The demo illustrated 
noise barrier building stages and the area five and ten years 
later.  
Fig. 4 shows how users would like to have access to 
participatory urban planning service. From the options given, 
users would most likely to use the service from municipal 
web pages. They also preferred mobile devices as a 
convenient way of using the services in the local 
environments. However, users reflected that they would 
quite unlikely to use it from a municipal service point. Also 
municipal public events and notices in public transport were 
quite uncertain or unlikely places to access and use these 
services. In open-ended questions, users reflected that it 
would be problematic to give their opinions in such public 
places, if they wanted to maintain their privacy. One 
respondent pondered that it would be most convenient to 
participate with a personal device on a couch at home and it 
would be more likely to increase the possibility of 
participating in a public planning event also, if the plans are 
easy to access with personal devices and they are related to 
one’s own neighbourhood. 
 
 
Figure 4. Where and with what devices users would you like to have an 
access to participatory urban planning service? 
B. Citizens’ views on using participatory service in 
environment and sustainability related projects  
Fig. 5 provides an overview of the questionnaire 
responses to the question of presenting information related to 
municipalities’ community planning and construction 
projects. Half of the respondents stated that impacts on the 
environment and showing alternative plans are very 
important. Also, explicit information on timetables and 
upcoming phases are at least as important to more than four 
fifth of the respondents. Only the need for visualising 
influences of seasons of the year was not seen as very 
important. 
 
 
Figure 5. Importance of visualising and sharing different information on 
community planning projects through the participatory service. 
Fig. 6 indicates respondents’ feedback related to how 
well future visualization and participation tools are 
applicable for municipalities’ environmental development 
domains. Their attitudes towards environment-related 
development activities were mainly very positive. Only 
playgrounds had one negative feedback, but on the other 
hand nine users stated that playgrounds fit excellently with 
future community planning services. 
 
193
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
Figure 6. How well does the service suit different environment and 
sustainability projects? 
The results of the survey were very much in line with the 
issues discussed with decision makers. In open-ended 
questions, urban planning information was complained of as 
being difficult to find, and the participation process is 
perceived as being too complex. Opportunities to interact 
and be heard were claimed to be challenging. Respondents 
requested involvement at an earlier phase of the planning 
process, more alternative solutions to be compared, clear 
timetables and information on how the process is 
progressing. 
Respondents were mainly interested in the projects that 
are linked to their neighbourhood area, somehow reflect their 
everyday lives or projects that are supposed to have large, 
revolutionary influences not only geographical but also at the 
societal level. At present, the information on ongoing 
projects is sought from municipal websites and from the 
local newspaper, which are both listed as municipal official 
communication channels. 
Participants were asked how the visualisation service 
succeeded in visualising the example case. In general, the 
service was found to be interesting, useful, and easy to use. 
The way the service visualises planning material was seen to 
be beneficial compared to traditional methods. Especially the 
possibility of viewing the target area from different 
viewpoints in a real environment was seen to be valuable. 
This feature also helps to locate plans, e.g., new buildings in 
the current surroundings and to illustrate the effects on the 
landscape.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The design of participatory urban planning services can 
have a great impact in developing smart and sustainable 
environments. To have optimal user-satisfaction, services 
should be flexible and adaptive and provide access to plans 
at any time and with any devices users prefer. Citizens in 
general are interested in commenting on and participating in 
urban planning projects, which are related to their everyday 
lives and their own neighbourhood. Urban places such as 
public interactive screens at transportation or municipal 
service points are good options in informing about future 
plans, however, users may be more hesitant to use them to 
give comments or feedback than to use their own, personal 
devices. Young people have been a little more active in 
responding to on-line surveys, and interested in new 
technological approaches such as smartphone augmented 
reality, but it is still challenging to find a method to activate 
young people to participate and influence their living 
environments. 
Moreover, in order to become effective, co-creative and 
influential, the service should be either specially designed 
for each relevant user segment and research theme or 
activate large numbers of users to comment and share their 
ideas. Important changes in urban planning would be to 
increase information, communication, collaboration and 
present more alternatives at the early stages of projects. 
Also, informing the public how their feedback has been 
taken into consideration in urban planning is important. Up-
to-date information should be easy to find for instance under 
the same service. 
In the next steps of our participatory urban planning 
service development project, we will pilot the demo in a 
large urban planning project to demonstrate green design 
and urban farming in a city centre. Furthermore, another 
important question to study further is how to consider and 
use this user feedback in decision making so as to plan and 
co-create user-centric smart cities and sustainable living 
environments. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Steen, M. Manschot, and N. De Koning, “Benefits of co-
design in service design projects.” International Journal of 
Design, vol. 5, 2011, pp. 53-60.  
[2] G. Rambaldi, P. A Kwaku Kyem, M. McCall, and D. Weiner 
“Participatory 
Spatial 
Information 
Management 
and 
Communication in Developing Counties.” The Electronic 
Journal on Information Systems in Developing Countries, vol. 
25, 2006, pp. 1-90.  
[3] M. Majale “Employment Creation through Participatory 
Urban Planning and Slum Upgrading: The Case of Kitale, 
Kenya.”, Habitant International, vol. 32, 2008, pp. 270-282.  
[4] M. Allen, H. Regenbrecht, and M. Abbott, “Smart-Phone 
Augmented Reality for Public Partcipation in Urban 
Planning” Proceedings of the 23rd Australian Computer-
Human Interaction Conference. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
2011, pp. 11-20.  
[5] J. D. Salter, C. Campbell, M. Journey, and S.R.J. Sheppard 
“The Digital Workshop: Exploring the Use of Interactive and 
Immersive Visualisation Tools in Participatory Planning.” 
Journal of Environmental Management, vol. 90, 2009, pp. 
2090-2101.  
[6] S. R.J. Sheppard “Landscape Visualisation and Climate 
Change: the Potential for Influencing Perceptions and 
Behaviour.” Environmental Science & Policy, vol. 8, 2005, 
pp. 637-654.  
[7] I. Wagner, M. Basile, L. Ehrenstrasser, V. Maquil, J-J. Terrin, 
and M. Wagner, “Supporting Community Engagement in the 
City: Urban Planning in the MR-Tent.” C&T '09 Proceedings 
of the fourth international conference on Communities and 
technologies, ACM New York, NY, USA, 2009, pp. 185-194.  
[8] C. Skelton, M. Koplin, and V. Cipolla, “Massively 
participatory urban planning and design tools and process: the 
Betaville 
Project.” 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
12th 
Annual 
international digital government research conference: Digital 
government innovation in challenging times. ACM New York, 
NY, USA, 2011, pp. 355-358.  
194
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

[9] J. Saad-Sulonen, A. Botero, and K. Kuutti, “A long-term 
strategy for designing (in) the wild: lessons from the Urban 
Mediator and traffic planning in Helsinki“ Proceedings of 
Designing Interactive Systems (DIS’12). ACM New York, 
NY, USA, 2012, pp. 166-175. 
[10] V. Oksman, A. Väätänen, and M. Ylikauppila, “Future 
Illustrative and Participative Urban Planning.” Proceedings of 
CONTENT 2014, The Sixth International Conference on 
Creative Content Technologies, 2014, pp. 22-29.  
[11] J. Noujua and A. Jussila, “Exploring Web-based Participation 
Methods,” Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference 
on Participatory Design (PDC '08), Indiana University 
Indianapolis, IN, USA, 2008, pp. 274-277. 
[12] E. Seltzer and D. Mahmoudi, “Citizen Participation, Open 
Innovation, and Crowsourcing: Challenges and Opprtunities 
for Planning”, Journal of Planning Literature. Sage 
Publications, vol. 28, 2013, pp. 3–18.  
[13] T. Olsson, A. Savisalo, M. Hakkarainen and C. Woodward, 
“User 
evaluation 
of 
mobile 
augmented 
reality 
in 
Architecture”, Engineering and Construction, 2012, pp. 733–
740. 
[14] C. Woodward and M. Hakkarainen, “Mobile mixed reality 
system for architectural and construction site visualization”. 
In augmented reality –Some Emerging Application Areas”, 
Andrew Yeh Ching Nee (ed.), InTech, 2011, pp. 115-130. 
[15] P. Dalsgaard and K. Halskov, “Tangible 3D tabletops: 
combining 
tabletop 
interaction 
and 
3D 
projection”. 
Proceedings of NordiCHI 2012, ACM Press, 2012, pp. 109–
118. 
[16] H. Ishii, et al., “Augmented urban planning workbench: 
Overlaying drawings, physical models and digitalsimulation.” 
Proceedings of the 1st International Symposium on Mixed 
and Augmented Reality. IEEE Computer Society, 2002, pp. 
203-211.  
[17] R. Nielsen, J. Fritsch, J. K. Halskov and M. Brynskov, “Out 
of the box – Exploring the richness of children’s use of an 
interactive table”. Proceedings of the 8th International 
Conference on Interaction Design and Children (IDC '09), 
ACM New York, NY, USA , 2009, pp. 61-69. 
 
                 
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

