DDAAV  - Student Performance Detector 
Andreia Rosangela Kessler Mühlbeier 
UFSM – Universidade Federal de Santa Maria 
Santa Maria - Brasil 
andreiamuhlbeier@yahoo.com.br 
Aderson de Carvalho 
UFSM – Universidade Federal de Santa Maria 
Santa Maria - Brasil 
acarvalho@inf.ufsm.br 
Fabiana Santiago Sgobbi 
UFRGS – Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul 
Porto Alegre - Brasil 
fabianasgobbi@gmail.com 
Roseclea Duarte Medina 
UFSM – Universidade Federal de Santa Maria 
Santa Maria - Brasil 
roseclea.medina@gmail.com 
Liane Margarida Rockenbach Tarouco 
UFRGS – Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul 
Porto Alegre - Brasil 
liane@penta.ufrgs.br 
 
Abstract - The accelerated development and increasing use of 
virtual 
learning 
environments 
(VLE) 
motivates 
a 
transformation in education. This article presents a study of 
techniques and data mining tools (MD), which aims to research 
and analyze the student's behavior in the virtual environment, 
real-time execution of a course, providing feedback to the 
teacher 
about 
the 
students’ 
academic 
performance 
encouraging its participation to improve the performance and 
preventing the circumvention of the course. The results 
obtained from the research of tools and techniques 
demonstrate that it is possible to obtain these inferences during 
periods. 
 
Keywords – data mining; student achievement; weka; knowledge 
discovery in databases. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
The progress and the widespread use of technologies 
open up new perspectives in terms of classroom teaching, 
semi-classroom and distance learning. With support tools 
and access through mobile devices, the Virtual Learning 
Environments (VLE) are highlighted with great expansion 
in the educational process. However, virtual learning 
environments bring a transformation in education, allowing 
greater interaction in the environment among students, 
teachers, tutors, content and interfaces; this fact takes 
interactions as an effective part of the learning processes 
[1]. 
The data store large volumes of information in 
environments that are very rich sources of knowledge which 
end up being left out, sometimes by lack of knowledge in 
how to interpret them. [2] 
In this context, the process of evaluating the student's 
performance in virtual learning environments is held at the 
end of disciplines, scoring the cognitive performance of an 
often static way, practically without time for actions of 
retroactive recovery of this student. However, the need for 
these evaluation and monitoring actions during the course it 
is evident, to propose alternatives for its best achievement, 
in order to generate subsidies for early identification, in time 
to successfully complete the student's learning process. 
This research aims to research and analyze the student 
performance in the virtual learning environment, using data 
mining (MD) methods, through efficient techniques for 
Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD) in the 
information stored in the database, providing perform the 
mapping of student performance, in real-time execution of 
the course. With this mapping, the teacher will have a 
feedback that may assist in stimulating the participation and 
improving the performance of the student in the course. 
This paper is organized this way: Section II presents the 
virtual learning environments. Section III describes the 
theoretical basis for knowledge discovery in databases. 
Section IV describes the WEKA tool and its relevant 
characteristics. Section V presents the related work. Section 
VI presents the development of the research methodology. 
Section VII presents the Student Performance Detector 
(DDAAV), considering its pedagogical and technological 
aspects, and results. Section VIII presents the conclusions of 
this paper. 
. 
II. 
VIRTUAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS  
 
The Virtual Learning Environments (VLE) are softwares 
applications on web servers; they have a set of tools which 
allow the creation of courses and the development of 
learning. These environments often classify their users in 
three pre-set profiles: Administrator, Teacher and Student. 
However, it is valid to mention that there is another profile 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

as the Tutor, who works with the teacher, being responsible 
for pedagogical mediation [3]. 
One environment widely used in educational spaces is 
Modular Object-Oriented Dynamic Learning Environment 
(MOODLE); it is an Open Source software, which had its 
development started in the 1990s by Martin Dougiamas 
based on learning philosophies of constructivism and social 
constructivism, supporting the creation and management of 
courses with a focus on collaborative work and in a simple 
and intuitive environment to use [4]. 
Amid other existing free softwares applications which 
allow the teaching/learning process, it was opted for 
MOODLE to conduct this research. The choice is given by 
virtue of being an environment with lots of tools constantly 
updated where there is a broad group of users who 
collaborated with their evolution, in addition to integrating 
other techniques in their repositories. 
 
III. 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY DATABASES 
 
With the advancement of computer technologies which 
allows the storage and processing of a large volume of data, 
new technologies have been developed to assist in the 
extraction of information from these databases, through 
techniques such as Knowledge Discovery in Databases 
(KDD) and Data Mining (MD) [5]. 
The Knowledge Discovery process in Databases (KDD) 
presented by Fayyad [6], is "a non-trivial process of 
identifying valid standards, unknown, potentially useful and 
interpretable." It is to discover useful knowledge to the 
stored data from the application of modern techniques of 
data mining, evaluation of achieved standards and the 
interpretation of results. 
The KDD process involves complex steps and each one 
must be performed carefully as it is very important that the 
established objectives and the overall success of the 
application are achieved. The steps are divided into: Pre-
processing, data mining and post-processing [6]. 
A. Pre-processing 
This stage is the identification and understanding of the 
problem, considering aspects such as goals and the data 
sources of which you want to extract knowledge. The next 
step is the selection of data from the sources, according to 
the objectives of the process, and the processing of data in 
order to be subjected to the methods and tools, the standards 
extraction phase. 
B. Post-processing 
At this stage, the extracted knowledge is evaluated about 
its quality and/or utility so it can be used to support a 
process of decision-making, whether by a human expert or 
an expert system. 
C. Data Mining 
The data mining phase is the central step that runs the 
knowledge discovery itself; its algorithms are the 
responsible to produce, semi-automatically, knowledge from 
existing data. 
The MD process covers data selection, preparation, 
implementation tasks and/or techniques with their algorithms 
to make analyzes of the results in order to detect the 
extracted knowledge. The MD is divided into: 
a) Association. 
b) Classification. 
c) Estimate. 
d) Segmentation.  
e) Summarization. 
 
These tasks are performed by implementing algorithms 
with machine learning techniques such as: 
a) Genetic algorithms. 
b) Decision trees. 
c) Association rule discovery. 
d) Based reasoning cases.  
e) Neural networks. 
 
For the present study, the classification task that 
performs the decision tree technique, through the J48 
algorithm [7] was chosen. The choice reflects the objective 
of searching, through the conditions offered to the 2 
techniques, and identifying the student's performance with 
the result of some parameters. The decision tree respects a 
hierarchical test sequence, constructed along a tree structure 
with leaf nodes representing classes, where the algorithm 
expresses the rule through the path of the tree, from the root 
until a leaf node. The J48 algorithm is the ranking 
algorithm, implemented in Java, from the algorithm C 4.5 
release 8; it builds a decision tree model based on a set of 
attributes, and it uses this model to classify instances in a 
cluster [7]. 
 
IV. 
WEKA TOOL 
 
With the growing number of digital information, the 
interest in implicit knowledge discovery of informations 
grows. According to [8][9], there are some features that 
should be considered to choose a knowledge discovery tool. 
a) Ability to access a variety of data sources, being 
online and offline. 
b) Ability to include data models, object-oriented or 
non-standard models. 
c) Processing capacity related to the maximum number 
of  tables, records, or attributes. 
d) Variety of attributes’ types which can manipulate the 
tool. 
e) Type of query language. 
 
The Weka tool was developed at the University of New 
Zealand, in the Department of Computing. This tool uses 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

techniques to perform the following data mining tasks [10]: 
association, classification and clustering. 
Mining begins by reading data from a file formatted 
especially for the tool, the ARFF (Attribute-Relation File 
Format). The ARFF is a text file that describes a list of 
instances which share a set of attributes [10]. 
In Weka, there is a variety of techniques for the listed 
tasks, such: ID3, PRISM, OneR and Naive Bayes [7]. 
The choice of the tool WEKA for this work is justified 
because it makes the system portable and it presents a cross-
platform object-oriented language. The portability of 
language allows the tool to run on different platforms, and 
its object orientation produces advantages such as 
modularity, polymorphism, encapsulation, code reuse 
among others [11]. 
 
V. 
RELATED WORK 
 
The work of Maia et al. [12] focuses on the future 
performance of students in disciplines of an undergraduate 
degree, are made from the grades achieved in subjects taken 
already. In this model, students and course subjects were 
modeled as nodes and their representation as the edges that 
make up a graph. The authors reported that, among the 
subjects there is a large variation in the values of the 
average errors analyzed, ranging from 3.6% to 100%. 
However, the authors conclude that a significant mean error 
for a discipline could indicate: that it does not have great 
relationship with the other subjects in the curriculum, or the 
assessment has some degree of disconnection with the 
results obtained in other disciplines. 
In [13], to see high rates of dropout students in distance 
courses, one through an interview fieldwork was performed 
with a professional distance education, to identify some 
evidence of evasion courses. Based on the identified 
attributes, a prototype was designed to identify with the user 
log records stored in the database, information from these 
students. The work follows the KDD online database and 
used the WEKA tool, in particular the J48 algorithm that 
identifies behavioral prediction by the decision trees show. 
The author concludes the research, saying it can be 
identified through access to AVA, use patterns and certain 
diagnoses with evasion evidence thus propose corrective 
measures to ensure that a pass student to have a material 
behavior in the use of a VLE. 
Accordingly, VLE [14] used to support classroom 
courses, are characterized by storing a large volume of data. 
These environments need tools to filter useful information 
to detect student performance. The research investigated the 
data stored in the VLE to extract information related to 
student performance. To detect this information was 
necessary to select a set of attributes, considering three 
dimensions: 
usage 
profile 
of 
VLE, 
student-student 
interaction and two-way interaction student-teacher. The 
form used RandomForest [7] and MultilayerPerceptron [7] 
ranking algorithms available in the Weka tool is pointed out 
that in all the experiments we used the method K-fold 
Cross-Validation [7] as data layering technique. The results 
of using the MD techniques on the selected set of attributes 
demonstrated that it is possible to obtain inferences 
regarding student performance with overall accuracy rates 
ranging from 72% to 80%, but leaves specific that the 
accuracy rate may be insufficient to evaluate the quality of 
the classification model, since the number of instances of 
classes is unbalanced in the case study, due to each being in 
different scenarios. 
No analyzes focusing on student performance in the 
virtual learning environment and real-time course of 
execution were not identified in the current researches. 
However, there are indications that this type of analysis is 
important for the teacher to assist in stimulating 
participation and improvement in students' learning 
performance in MOODLE. 
 
VI. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
 
The nature of the research is ranked as a field research of 
qualitative-descriptive type. According to Lakatos and de 
Marconi [15], a field survey aims to obtain information 
about an issue, for which it is searched for a response in 
order to discover the relation between them. 
In the first stage of development, to the data mining 
application in VLE, a literature research was performed in  
order to have knowledge of how the knowledge discovery in 
databases was conducted to understand and analyze the 
operation of data mining steps (tasks and techniques) and 
the functionality of available data mining tools. 
The second stage involved two moments: the assembly 
of a hardware infrastructure that supported the installation, 
development and implementation of this work, consisting of 
a Dell Power Edge T300 server, with Intel Xenon Quadcore 
X3363 2.83 GHz processor with 4 physical cores and four 
virtual cores, 8GB of RAM, two 500GB hard drives and 
Windows Server 2008 operating system 64-bit. On this 
server, the following programs were installed: WampServer 
version 2.2, which provides softwares on its package that is 
necessary for the operation of MOODLE, as Apache version 
2.2.22 server; the database MySQL version 5.5.24; PHP 
version 5.2.13 and phpMyAdmin version 3.4.10.1. After, 
the installation of MOODLE VLE version 2.5.2 was done. 
For 
the 
development, 
editing, 
and 
environmental 
manipulation, a Philco laptop with Intel Pentium Dual-Core 
processor was used, SU 4100 1.3GHz, 2GB of RAM, a 
320GB hard drive and the operating system Windows 7 
Ultimate 64-bit. 
After the installation of MOODLE environment, to 
compose the research scenario it was worked with the 
database of the discipline Introduction to the Media 
Integration in Education. This which composes the 
curricular base of the course Specialization in Media in 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Education, Post-Graduate lato sensu, of Universidade 
Federal de Santa Maria (UFSM), offered in distance 
education mode, during the second half of 2012. The course 
integrates in this edition 134 (one hundred and thirty four) 
students divided into five (5) campuses (Cachoeira do Sul, 
Cruz Alta, Panambi, Restinga Seca and Santana do 
Livramento) and it is composed by 10 activities. 
In the third stage, the process of modeling the 
functioning of the block began. The proposed model was 
executed with the Astah Community tool, which allows the 
construction of Unified Modeling Language (UML) [16] 
diagrams, such as use case diagrams, activity diagrams, 
among others. The Astah Community [16] is afree modeling 
software for object-oriented systems design, based on the 
diagrams and in the notations of UML, which can generate 
code in Java language. 
The fourth step involved the installation of WEKA 
version 3.7.8 tool, developed in the programming language 
JAVA, which offers several pre-data processing algorithms 
and results analysis. In the software, files were generated in 
the extension (* .arff) with their respective rules, to run the 
J48 algorithm. This algorithm allows the construction of 
decision trees that classify and display in their branches the 
most relevant attributes, as name, campus, discipline, notes 
of the activities and situation. 
In the fifth step, it was executed the translation of the 
rules generated in WEKA software with the extension (* 
.arff) for the PHP language. The informations were 
extracted from the MOODLE environment database, in the 
form of an Excel electronic spreadsheet (note, campus and 
situation). After, they were processed in WEKA tool, which 
originated a file in notepad generated in the extension (* 
.arff). As a result, the generated file has been converted to 
PHP programming language [17] through the software PHP 
Editor. 
In the sixth stage, the construction of the block was 
performed, receiving the number of any proposed activities 
in the discipline to be analyzed, and the integration of it in 
the MOODLE learning environment. The block which was 
developed, works by a plug implemented through an 
application, allowing its application in the environment's 
interface. 
In the seventh step, tests were performed to validate the 
integration in each development stage, through the white 
box test (test performed by the developer). According to 
Sommerville [18], the tests are derived from the knowledge 
about the structure and implementation of the software, in 
other words, the developer seeks to test and to know all the 
system code, by examining the logical path to verify the 
operation of the tool. For this development, the following 
was used: basis path testing - aims to check if each 
statement of the system was performed at least once during 
the testing activities; condition testing - is based on verify if 
all logical conditions contained in the system, i.e., common 
error condition such as parentheses, relational operators and 
arithmetic expressions [19]. 
The first test was made after the generation of rules in 
the format (* .arff), when the consistency of J48 algorithm 
was verified. The second test was done after translating the 
rules to the PHP language. In the final test, the block was 
validated 
after 
its 
integration 
into 
the 
MOODLE 
environment. 
With the active plug-in, the teacher tells the number 
which corresponds to the activity proposed in the discipline 
and in response a report is submitted as a web page, 
informing only the students who obtained low performance. 
The result is stored in tables in the SQL - based database of 
MOODLE environment with information about the 
activities. 
Finally, in the eighth stage, monitoring reports were 
generated about student performance (creation with PHP 
language) and creation of the decision tree and graphics 
(WEKA software). 
 
VII. DDAAV – STUDENT PERFORMANCE DETECTOR 
 
The 
environment 
aims 
to 
detect 
the 
student's 
performance during the execution of the course, using data 
mining technique in each executed and evaluated activity. 
The research scenario consists of the discipline 
"Introduction to the Media Integration in Education", with 
134 students divided into five campuses and subdivided into 
10 activities with educational content in correlation to the 
main subject. 
The relevant attributes extracted from the environment 
are: name, campus, discipline, and the grades of the 
activities performed by the students and registered by the 
teacher. In the context of the executed work, performance 
can mean the evaluation of student interaction in the 
environment, the learning level in the proposed activities, 
level of participation and level of difficulty in interpreting 
the task.  
Figure 1 illustrates the course of the environment, 
displaying the proposed content and activities, the block 
"Student Performance" and the option of sending the 
number for any of the activities proposed in the discipline. 
As output results, WEKA tool presented the attributes 
(name, campus, discipline, observation of the activities and 
situation) after running the J48 algorithm, and some other 
information relevant for classifying attributes of this work. 
The selected attributes totaled 134 cases, representing 100% 
of all the stored in the database; the "Properly Classified 
Instances" where the attributes were correctly classified 
contains 123 bodies which means 91.79%, and the 
"Incorrectly 
Classified 
Instances" 
shows 
the 
misclassification of 11 cases which is only 8.21%. 
Figure 2 shown the performance of students in a report 
generated in the MOODLE environment. In the report, one 
can see the individual performance (student name) and 
general (discipline), with all the activities. 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The proposed work is justified by the importance of the 
teacher to follow, throughout the course, the implementation 
process, avoiding a posteriori analysis, i.e., with the results, 
the teacher is able to give special attention to students with 
difficulties in constant learning, directly, without requiring 
more than a tool for analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Environmental progress and block. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figura 2. Performance report of students. 
 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

VIII. CONCLUSION 
 
Currently, teachers and higher education institutions 
have faced a huge challenge which is to propose quality 
education and more individualized, to a growing number 
of students in various courses offered in different modes 
(presence, semi-presence and distance education). To 
assist in this process, VLE have been frequently used 
because they allow a greater control, various types of 
interaction, and the adoption of different methodologies 
and strategies. However, all this multiplicity and 
complexity of information can hamper the task of 
following and evaluating the student performance. 
In this sense, the KDD process that aims to discover 
new knowledge, assists in the exploration of large 
volumes of data and detects useful information, through 
the application of techniques and tasks which implement 
MD algorithms. 
The objective of this research was to apply data 
mining techniques in a VLE, presenting to the teacher a 
student's performance report during the execution of a 
course, which entails the prevention of the student's 
failure and consequently that occurs the evasion of the 
course. The report was extracted by means of integration 
of rules J48 classification algorithm, with the relevant 
attributes of the environment database. 
The DDAAV had as the research scenario, data from 
VLE MOODLE, which involves pedagogical processes 
between teachers and students in courses offered in virtual 
environments. The survey endorsed the difficulty of 
analyzing a large amount of data, which are available in 
the VLEs database and then highlighted the importance of 
using tools that help the teacher to follow the trajectory of 
the student, and monitor their performance within the 
course. 
In the survey, the difference between the virtual 
environments of learning existing is that the DDAAv has 
the advantage of the unification into a single report, 
information to the teacher about the trajectory of the 
student, consisting in a set of relevant data so that the 
teacher can prepare teaching strategies that meet the 
individual needs of students. Additionally, DDAAV 
obtains semi-automatically, the variables "Enough" and 
"Insufficient" which characterize the performance of the 
student, for the inference of measures by the teacher. 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Donnelly, “Interaction analysis in a 'learning by doing' 
problem-based professional development context”. Computers 
& Education, vol. 55 no. 3, p. 1357-1366, 2010.  
[2] C. Romero, S. Ventura, M. Pechenizkiy, R. Backer, S. J. D., 
“Handbook of Educational Data Mining”, Ed. C R C, p. 535, 
2012. 
[3] A. P. Rodrigues, "Virtual Environment Integration with 
Digital Learning Repository" 2012. Thesis (Ph.D. in Education.) 
- Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul - UFRGS, Porto 
Alegre, p.188. 
[4] MOODLE. “Statistics Documentation Moodle”. 2011. 
Available 
at: 
<http://docs.MOODLE.org/22/en/Statistics>. 
Accessed: Mar 2015. 
[5] R. Goldschmidt, E. L. Passos, “Data Mining: um guia 
prático”. Rio de Janeiro: Elsevier, 2005. 2ª. Reimpressão. 
[6] U. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, P. Smyth, “The KDD 
process for extracting useful knowledge from volumes of data”. 
Communications of the ACM, New York, vol. 39, no. 11, p.27-
34, 1996. 
[7] WEKA. Waikato environment for knowledge analysis. 2013. 
Available at: <http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/>.  
 Accessed: Abr  2015. 
[8] M. Goebel, L. Gruenwald, “A survey of data mining and 
knowledge 
discovery 
software 
tools”. 
In: 
SIGKDD 
Explorations, June, 1999. 
[9] L. A. Vieira, “Tools to estimate missing values in a database 
in the Pre-Processing Step of a KDD”. Work and Conclusion 
Course (Computer Science), University of Vale do Itajaí, 2008.  
[10] I. H. Witten, E. Frank, M. A. Hall, “Data mining: Practical 
machine learning tools and techniques”. San Francisco: Morgan 
Kaufmann, 3 ed., 2011. 
[11] D. Jacomini, “Entrants of Base Analysis in UNIDAVI”. 
Work Completion Course in Information Systems. New South 
Wales, in 2008. 
[12] R. F. Maia, E. M. Spina, S. S. Shimizu, “System Student 
Performance Forecast for Assisted Learning and Course 
Rating”. Proceedings of the XXI SBIE -XVI WIE, 2010. 
[13] C. S. de Afiune, “Educational Data Mining: Prediction 
Behavior in Distance Education Environments (DE)”. Term 
paper. State University of Goias, Anapolis, 2012, p. 108  
[14] E. Gottardo, “Academic Performance estimation Students 
in A AVA using Data Mining Techniques”. Dissertation (Master 
of Applied Computing, Federal Technological University of 
Paraná (UTFPR), 2012, p.85. 
[15] E. M. Lakatos, M. A. de Marconi, “Scientific Methodology 
fundamentals”. 5th . Ed . Editora Atlas . Faculty of Arts, 2003. 
[16] ASTAH, “Astah Community”. 2010. Available at: 
<http://astah.change-vision.com/en/product/stah-
community.html>. Accessed: Mar. 2014. 
[17] C.A. J. Oliviero. "Make a site with PHP 5.2 MySQL 5.0, E-
Commerce Driven project. "1st Edition. Ed. Erica Ltda. São 
Paulo, p.412, 2013. 
[18] I. Sommerville, “Software Engineering”. Edição 6: 
Addison-Wesley, 2003. 
[19] R. Pressman, “Software Engineering - A Professional 
Approach ”. 7th Edition, 2011. 
 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

