The Use of Augmented Reality as a Tool in Human Anatomy Classes
Michalany Turibio Glória, Fabrício Souza Nunes
Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology (IFTO), Palmas, Brazil
e-mails: {michalany290, fabriciosnunes}@gmail.com
Abstract- Recently, there has been a major increase in the use
of
Augmented
Reality
(AR).
Some
hybrid
teaching
methodologies use different technological resources to improve
teaching/learning programs. This research aims to assist such
programs that involve human anatomy classes by providing an
extended use of AR with the help of several tools, such as
wireless networks, smartphones, computers, and other devices.
Our goal is to simplify and further deepen the learning
experience for human anatomy students in undergraduate
health care courses. To achieve its goal, the research intends to
produce a smartphone app and apply it to the target audience.
Keywords- information technology; hybrid teaching; augmented
reality; human anatomy; telematics.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Teaching has always been fundamental to our culture as
human beings. Because it has constantly evolved, constant
improvement is also necessary.
Healthcare professionals are essential to society and thus
well-trained professionals are vital for improving services
provided to the population. This relevance has inspired us to
contribute to their professional education.
In this context, virtual reality can be useful and Cardoso
[9] affirms that virtual reality has the potential to provide an
education
as
a
process
of
exploration,
discovery,
observation and construction of a new vision of knowledge,
offering the apprentice an opportunity to better understand
the object of study.
The idea came after classes in the postgraduate course in
Telematics offered at the Federal Institute of Education,
Science and Technology - IFTO campus Palmas, located in
the municipality of Palmas in the state of Tocantins, Brazil.
This research aims to contribute to teaching and learning
experiences with content related to human anatomy. The
target audience are students from different institutions who
are learning such content.
Tools such as computers, smartphones, and the Internet,
are already used together for to purpose of teaching and
learning. They are also used in anatomy classes, but
generally at a high cost both for the educational institution
and for the student, creating an economical obstacle to
academic performance. Aiming to reduce such costs and
offer a tool that accelerates and facilitates the process of
teaching and learning, we intend to develop an app
(application)
for
smartphones
with
human
anatomy
contents, presented in three-dimensional image format. In
order to improve the users’ experience and visualization of
the
images,
our
idea
is
to
insert
augmented
reality
technology
to
bring
the
user
closer
to
the
actual
visualization of the object portrayed.
AR provides a view of reality by combining real-world
elements with elements of the virtual world that are created
in three dimensions in real time. The insertion of this
technology
applied
to
the
teaching
of
anatomy
can
contribute to a more dynamic class and a more interesting
presentation of the contents and so facilitate learning.
The app being developed was named Augmented Reality
Applied to Medical Study - RAMED and is in production; it
is currently in the prototyping phase and a first test has
already been done in order to map the user experience.
Resources from the LAB MATICA Tocantins laboratory
and from the AppSheet were used to construct the RAMED
prototype.
The rest of the document is structured as follows:
Section II lists current examples of mobile apps applied to
education; Section III explains the goals of this research and
describes the materials used in construction of the app
prototype; Section IV presents the results of the first
customer survey; Section V presents the potential of this
project and indicates its potential future uses.
II.
RELATED WORKS
Google AppSheet tools are frequently used to facilitate
database development and operation. In this paper, we are
going to present some activities that have used this tool for
facility development solution involving a database and
cellular applications.
Mobile devices play a fundamental role in spreading
information.
Manoel [2] affirms that cell phones and tablets are more
common than television sets nowadays and that there are, on
average, 4 mobile devices per person in a middle-class
family.
Moreira [4] presents a solution to assist the mathematics
teaching at the elementary school level by using a cellular
app with augmented reality. According to the author, the use
of this app in his classes, aided by the fact that all his
students possess a cellular device, made the classes more
attractive since everyone focused more on the exercises,
knowing that the answers would be provided by cell phones
and ranked as if in a game.
Magalhães et al. [1] also presented the use of a mobile
app, created using an Open Source tool, to assist music
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

teaching in high school classes. The authors demonstrably
improved
students'
results
using,
in
the
classes,
the
application developed
and
with subjective evaluations
provided by students. Additionally, Santos [5], shows that
the use of a mobile app can help safeguard environmental
preservation areas. For this purpose, they developed an app
that generates a kind of social network where anyone can
check whether there is any generating fact, spontaneous or
caused by humans, that is compromising rivers, forests, etc.
The app can take photos of the event and send them to the
network in real time, including the location, so that public
agents can reach the place.
Mobile
apps
have
also
been
used
to
improve
administrative procedures. Martins [3] proposed that, with a
cell phone, teachers of the municipal school system of
Palmas, in Tocantins can have access to the results of the
national “Brazil Test”, a objective test for measuring the
knowledge of students in the elementary school.
The
indicators
provide
important
information
for
teachers to work with their students during the school year
with methodological innovations. Without the use of the app
in question, the access to this information was not agile, and
was therefore irrelevant.
The use of AR can stimulate and help in the processes of
knowledge and, according to Cardoso [9], both sides of the
process can benefit; not only students, through the stimulus
and ease of access, but also teachers by enabling different
manners of teaching.
Cardoso [10] affirms that use of
AR stimulates and facilitates acquisition of knowledge by
the student, helping teachers in their educational practices as
well as providing various ways of teaching. The use of this
methodology adapts very well to contents where the
abstraction needed by the students becomes very complex.
Thus, in order to use mobile phones for helping to solve
problems, this research presents a prototype of RAMED that
aims to contribute to teaching human anatomy and that can
be applied to different undergraduate courses that need it.
III.
PROPOSAL
Society is increasingly looking for affordable and quality
education.
The knowledge of human anatomy is fundamental for
any courses that involve health and it has been one of the
most complex and difficult subjects to learn. Even with the
exhibition of anatomic parts in plastic and other tools, the
students tend to be bored, since the content is very
extensive. In this context, the possibility of an attractive and
easy-to-read learning form, but one that maintains the
quality of the classes, could prove useful.
In order to increase insertion of different technologies
for teaching, AR with its many resources, if applied to the
teaching of human anatomy can be an alternative to
dynamize classes, making the visualization of the contents
more interesting and contributing in this way to learning.
Anami [11] discusses AR immersion and navigation
properties and the contribution each of them can make to the
context of learning, mainly related to student involvement.
She also talks about the interaction in AR environments,
which provides links between student and content, students
and teacher, and between students themselves. The benefits
translate
into
better
cognition,
involvement,
experimentation, collaboration, adaptation to rhythm and
creation of appropriate environments.
Therefore, in order to use this technology for teaching
human anatomy, the smartphone format was proposed, since
it is considered to be a common and easily accessible tool
for the majority of the population.
We provide a database of images of organs and systems,
with visualization using AR technology.
It is assumed that a smartphone will provide greater
learning effectiveness considering the ease of access and
full availability of content. As a secondary benefit, it can
dynamize classes by being a new instrument to aid teaching.
A. Materials
The construction of RAMED was a project conceived
and carried by a group during the Mobile and Converged
Networks course, a curricular component of the Graduate
Program Course in Telematics at IFTO.
For construction of the prototype, the resources of the
LAB MÁTICA physical laboratory of the Federal Institute
of Education, Science and Technology - IFTO, Palmas -
TO, were used. This lab has computers with an Intel Core
processor I5-3330 with 8 GB of RAM and Ubuntu 16.04
LTS operating system. For the construction of the prototype
the
AppSheet
[6]
platform
was
used;
this
allows
construction of group applications.
In August of 2018, the first test with the application
prototype was carried out, with students of the Graduate
Program in Telematics course as user. This audience of a
total of 24 students, was chosen for the first design test
because of the qualifications for evaluation and accessibility
to the developers.
The main question focused on the usability of the
application and the test with the prototype was able to
provide answers. For access to the application, a link has
been made available via WhatsApp [7].
IV.
RESULTS
In order to learn about the evaluation of these first users,
a questionnaire was produced using the Google Forms [8]
tool and offered to users via a link released through
WhatsApp [7]. The questionnaire was made available to 24
people and answered by a total of 8 people, who had access
to the following questions shown in Table 1.
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

TABLE 1- DESCRIPTION OF THE QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
RELATED TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE USED IN THE USER SURVEY.
All responses were answered after using the prototype
for the purpose of demonstrating its action.
A. Data Analysis
The user experience, visualized through the answers to
the
questionnaire
showed
broad
knowledge
regarding
Augmented Reality (Fig. 1), a fact that was expected
considering that the audience surveyed has an affinity with
the computing area.
Figure 1 - Question 1 results.
Of this audience, 62.5% considered that Augmented Reality
can contribute greatly learning anatomy, and 37.5%
considered that it can contribute (Fig. 2). This demonstrates
that Augmented Reality is already an established technology
for aiding teaching and learning.
Figure 2 - Question 2 with the results on a sliding scale, where 1 is Very
Low and 5 Very High.
Experience in using RAMED memory was reported by
12.5% of the surveyed public who reported that access to
information was able to be fully realized. The others said
they understood somewhat or understood very little (Fig. 3).
This feedback demonstrates that the description of the
purpose needs to be improved.
Figure 3 - Question 3 with the results on a sliding scale, where 1 means for
I Very Low and 5 Very High.
In terms of the ability to develop a tool to support
learning 75% said it had a great possibility of becoming the
right type of tool, while 25% understood that there is some
possibility (Fig. 4). This shows that although the goal may
not
have
been
well
presented,
the
surveyed
public
understands that AR has the ability to be an educational
tool.
Figure 4 - Question 4 with the results on a sliding scale, where 1 is Very
Low and 5 Very High.
The usability of the app was evaluated as very good by
25% of the public, good by 37.5% and fair by 37.5% (Fig.
5). As a result, we realize that improvements are needed.
Figure 5 - Question 5 with the results on a sliding scale, where 1 is Very
Hard and 5 is Very Easy.
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The layout was positively evaluated with 62.5% rating it
as good, 25% as fair and 12.5% as very good (Fig. 6). From
this, it is observed that the current project is of good quality,
but needs improvement.
Figure 6 - Question 6 with the results on a sliding scale, where 1 is very
weak and 5 is excellent.
The design was rated by 50% of the public as good, 25%
as very good, 12.5% as fair and 12.5% as bad (Fig. 7). The
fonts used in the words and images are subject to revisions,
considering that they impact on the visual comfort and on
comprehension of the screen and menus contents.
Figure 7 - Question 7 with the results on a sliding scale, where 1 is very
weak and 5 is excellent.
The icons and colors presented received a positive
evaluation when 62.5% evaluated them as good, 25% as
very good and 12.5% as acceptable Fig 8.
Figure 8 - Question 8 with the results on a sliding scale, where 1 is very
weak and 5 is excellent.
The content available in the app was rated by 37.5% of
the audience as very good, by 50% as good or acceptable,
and by 12.5% as poor Fig. 9. The current content was
inserted in the app for testing purposes; in the future it is
intended for the teacher to insert the contents to be worked
on in the classes.
Figure 9 - Question 9 with the results on a sliding scale, where 1 is very
weak and 5 is excellent.
Participants were asked for feedback and in this regard,
and they pointed out failures in the operation of the buttons,
suggestions as to the exchange and insertion of buttons on
some
screens
and
highlights
for
titles
and
images.
Suggestions will be considered for future improvements in
the app.
B. Description of the Prototype
The RAMED prototype, after four months in production,
already
has
some
functionalities
ready
such
as:
visualization of images of human organs in 2D, interaction
by means of zoom, the possibility of consulting the menu
for the course and downloading it and the possibility of
giving feedback on use directly in the app. However, there
are still other functions to be implemented such as
Augmented Reality technology, the availability of high
definition images and the definition of student and teacher
users and their different operations within the app.
Some screens for the prototype are shown below.
Figure 10 - Demonstration screens: initial with logo and shortcut for menu.
Figure 10 is a Home Screen. This is the presentation of
the application where the drawings of human organs are
placed, and the name of the application highlighted. On the
same screen, there is also a description of the application
and a link to the course content.
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 11 - Demonstration screens: About and suggestion and complaint
screen.
Figure
11
is
the
screen
for
"Suggestions
and
Complaints" where the user can report their experience and
suggest any changes. The goal is to better understand the
user experience by enabling future improvements in the
usability of the application.
Figure 12 - Demonstration screens: side menu and suggestion and
complaint screen and users choose the modules that divide the content.
In Figure 12 is the side menu with the application screen
options. Each menu item directs the user to their needs.
Note that the About, Feedback, App Gallery, Create New
App, and Logout buttons will not be used for this app; the
App Sheet platform [6] automatically inserts them. The
available and functional buttons are Home, Suggestions and
Complaints and Integrated Organ Systems.
The colors used are suggestive for the health area. There
is also the screen with the application modules, where the
contents are divided by a system with an illustrative figure
on the side.
Figure 13 - Demonstration screens: Introduction screens.
Figure 13 is the "Introduction" screen, in which the
content of each topic appears in summary form to facilitate
the user's choice.
Figure 14 - Demonstration screens: Screen of the module with description
of the content, and below the options of images and screen after choosing
the image.
Figure 14 is the screen with module 1 which highlights
the module number and the name. Below is a summary of
the contents of the module. At the top is the figure
representing the module. In the future the drawing in camera
format will be the button to activate the AR attribute. On the
right screen is the full screen image where the user can view
the human tissues with resources for rotation, zoom and AR.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We can verify that the use of AR provides an important
learning tool for healthcare students in that it invigorates the
applied content, presenting a new way of interaction
between students and the anatomical structures presented.
This important new resource allows the teacher to explore a
new universe where virtual reality guides the students in
approaching the objects of their studies.
Despite the fact that the project is still at an early
development stage, it already presents practical uses by
providing the students with a database of images accessible
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

on the mobile device, facilitating visualization and study of
the anatomical structures.
Even though the app is based on the resources provided
by AR, at this stage of the project it is limited to the tool
used for testing the prototype. The implementation of this
important resource is planned for the next phases of
development of the project.
In the near future, research will be conducted with the
target audience in order to ascertain the effectiveness of the
tool among students. Field tests will be carried out with
undergraduate
students
in
human
anatomy,
such
as
medicine, nursing, physical education and physiotherapy at
higher education institutions located in the city of Palmas,
Tocantins, Brazil.
Improvements will be made to the format with a focus
on usability, utility, and content reliability. Teachers will
also be consulted to give their opinion on the format.
The augmented reality feature will be implemented and
access to it will be on the image preview screen, specifically
through a button in camera format, as shown on the
prototype screen in image 14. Titles will be inserted on each
screen in order to improve the notion of location for the
user.
REFERENCES
[1]
W. M. Magalhães et al, “M-learning as a Motivational Method in
Music Education”, The Fourth International Conference on Human
and Social Analytics - HUSO, 2018. in press.
[2]
A. J. Manoel, “The technology revolution”, Magazine Sitio Novo,
Católica do Tocantins, Palmas, 2017. in press.
[3]
B. Martins et al, “Mobile Technology to Support Didactic”,
Strategies, The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social
Analytics - HUSO, 2018. in press.
[4]
C. Moreira, “The math can be good”, EDUCOMP. Rio Grande do
Norte, 2018. in press.
[5]
M. Santos, et al, “Mobile Technology and Conservation Areas: A
Case Study”, The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless
and Mobile Communications - ICWMC, 2018. in press.
[6]
Appsheet, Available from: <https://www.appsheet.com/>, Accessed:
2018.10.02.
[7]
Whatsapp, Available from: <https://www.whatsapp.com/>, Accessed:
2018.10.02.
[8]
Google
Forms,
Available
from:
<https://www.google.com/forms/about/>, Accessed: 2018.10.02.
[9]
A. Cardoso, et al, “Technologies and tools for the development of
virtual and augmented reality systems”, Editora Universitária UFPE
(2007): 1-19.
[10] R. G. S. Cardoso et al,
“Use of augmented reality in aid to
education”, Annals do Computer on the Beach, p. 330-339, 2014.
[11] B. M. Anami, “Good practices of augmented reality applied to
education”, Course Completion Work (College in Computer Science),
State University of Londrina, v. 49, 2013.
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

