Searching for Temporal Dependencies in the Privacy Concerns
of Location-Based Service Users
Antonios Karatzoglou
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
and Robert Bosch,
Corporate Sector Research
and Advance Engineering
Germany
Email: antonios.karatzoglou@kit.edu
antonios.karatzoglou@de.bosch.com
Julia Anken,
Florian Banscher,
Lukas Diewald
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Germany
Email: {julia.anken,
florian.banscher,
lukas.diewald}
@student.kit.edu
Michael Beigl
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Pervasive Computing Systems
Germany
Email: michael.beigl@kit.edu
Abstract—As the number of Location-Based Service (LBS)
users grows steadily worldwide, the need for data protection and
privacy-respecting methods and standards grows with it. There
exists a big variety of privacy enhancing approaches by now.
However, very few seem to have explored the impact of time on
people’s sense of privacy. In this work, we attempt to answer
the question whether and to what degree privacy concerns with
respect to location sharing are time-dependent or not. For this
purpose, we designed and carried out 2 different user studies, a
Web survey and a 4-week long experimental study. Our analysis
shows evidence towards an existing dependency between time and
the users’ willingness to share their location. Moreover, the effect
appears to be highly user-speciﬁc and correlates with certain
personal features, such as conviviality and the general personal
view on privacy and data protection.
Keywords—Data protection and Privacy; Location Based Ser-
vices; Semantic Trajectories and Locations.
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, mobile service providers rely increasingly
on context and in particular on location awareness in order
to raise the quality of their service. As a result, the num-
ber of Location-Based Service (LBS) users has experienced
enormous growth worldwide. Only in the US, it has been
doubled in the last 5 years and expected to reach 242 million
in 2018 [1]. Location-Based Services go nowadays beyond
the sole knowledge of the coordinates of some single point
on a map, e.g., for navigation purposes. Moreover, they make
use of additional knowledge about the location, such as its
type, corresponding activities and its opening hours, in order
to be able to provide targeted recommendations to the users.
In this case, this kind of semantically enriched locations may
be referred to as semantic locations and the corresponding
trajectories as semantic trajectories [2]. Semantic trajectories
support an application-oriented and thus a more sophisticated
way for modeling, analyzing and predicting human movement
patterns like in [3]–[6]. Since most modeling approaches are
data-driven, a large amount of tracking data is necessary in
order to achieve a good performance. However, large high-
quality datasets are hard to ﬁnd. Rising privacy concerns and
strict privacy guidelines further aggravate this problem. Two
recent reports underpin this fact and show that almost half of
teen and over a third of adult smartphone app users have turned
off the location tracking feature at some time on their phones
or tablets because they worried about who might access their
data, [7] and [8].
Due to this fact and due to privacy becoming a generally
very important issue of our data-overﬂowing society, many
developers and researchers lay their focus on ﬁnding new
methods to protect the privacy of LBS, and not only, users.
This led to the emergence of so called Privacy Enhancing
Technologies (PET) [9] and Privacy by design approaches [10].
These aim at taking human values and privacy explicitly into
account and incorporating them into the development process
of services, while at the same time acting in accordance
with the data protection laws. There exists a great variety
of different approaches and ideas behind these methods. In
the location and tracking scene, current works base primarily
on spatial obfuscation techniques, such as GPS grid masking
[11] and spatial cloaking [12] to name but a few. According
to these techniques, certain location types or spatial areas
that are considered to be sensitive, such as hospitals, are
being obfuscated either by reducing the spatial resolution or
by anonymizing single individuals behind a bigger group of
people.
However, the aforementioned methods are static and despite
the dynamic nature of human behaviour none seems to have
investigated the impact of time on the users’ privacy concerns
so far. In the presented work, we attempt to explore whether
and to what degree time affects the users’ sensitivity when it
comes to providing information about their location. In other
words, we want to ﬁnd out if there exist situations, in which
a user experiences a certain location sometimes more and
sometimes less critical in terms of revealing the particular
location. For instance, a visit to a bar in the evening might
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

for some users be alright to share, whereas a visit to the
same bar in the morning not, especially when social standards
and values are taken into account. Adapting to this kind of
potential temporal privacy concerns would make location-
based applications more trustworthy and user-friendly. In order
to explore such temporal effects, we conducted and evaluated 2
user studies, an online survey and a 4-week long experimental
study. During both studies, the participants were asked to
provide information about their willingness to reveal their
location together with a brief explanation.
The rest of this work is structured as follows. In Section
II, we provide a brief overview on some of the most related
work in the ﬁeld of privacy and privacy protection. Sections
III and IV describe in their ﬁrst parts the details of our two
user studies. Their second parts include our evaluation results
and interpretations. Finally, in Section V, we summarize our
work and provide some concluding thoughts.
II. RELATED WORK
The ﬁrst part of this section provides insight into some
basic work in the theory of privacy and privacy protection.
The second part gives a short overview of location protection
related work used in Location-Based Services.
A. Privacy Theories
A big variety of privacy theories has been developed so far.
Here, we discuss two of these theories, which have been most
frequently applied over time and veriﬁed by diverse studies:
the privacy theory by Westin and the privacy regulation theory
by Altman [13].
The privacy theory by Westin was developed in 1967 [14].
In his work, Westin regards privacy as
the claim of individuals or groups, to determine for
themselves when, how and to what extend informa-
tion about them is passed on to others.
When privacy is viewed in the context of social interaction,
Westin describes it as
the wilful and temporary withdrawal of a person
from the general society.
His theory supports the existence of different levels of privacy
that can be determined based on the following four states
(or dimensions) of privacy: Solitude, Intimacy, Anonymity and
Reserve and their corresponding degree of achievement. In
addition, Westin found in [15] that the driving factors behind
privacy attitudes depend on the one hand on the individual’s
level of distrust in companies or institutions and on the other
hand on her fears of technology abuse, a fact that applies very
well to our LBS use case. Westin’s fundamental work led to
the development of scales for measuring privacy such as the
Marshall dimensions of privacy preferences described in [16].
Altman’s privacy regulation theory [17] extends and reﬁnes
in part Westin’s work. In Altman’s view, privacy is a dynamic
rather than a static interaction withdrawal process, in which
individual people (or groups of people) selectively control
the access to themselves. In particular, his theory takes into
account that people may open themselves to others at a certain
time and close themselves off at another time. Thus, people’s
desired privacy level changes over time, a fact that can be
attributed to different external or internal factors. Altman
further describes an optimization process with two ends and
an optimal interaction level somewhere in the middle. On the
one hand, there is the end with too much interaction and on the
other hand, the end with too little interaction. Both ends are
considered to be unsatisfactory. The ideal privacy level, i.e., the
optimal level of interaction lies in-between, can change over
time and is different for each person. Finally, Altman’s theory
considers a set of behavioural mechanisms that can serve to
achieve the desired level of social interaction and thus, of
privacy. Verbal, para-verbal and non-verbal behaviour, as well
as, similar to Westin’s work, physical (territorial) distance and
isolation from the rest represent some of them.
Westin’s and Altman’s work has been often applied and
adapted respectively to match the requirements of our techno-
cratic society, in which the physical world merges increasingly
with the virtual one. Work, such as in [18] and [19], extend
privacy by adding the notion of roles and boundaries in the
virtual space and deﬁning in this way virtual territories.
B. Privacy Protection Methods for Location-Based Services
and Applications
Due to location being a strong personal identiﬁer, privacy
protection methods are an essential part of LBS. The location
history of LBS users reveals loads of private and sensitive
information about the user, which in turn may be used to
provide deep insights into their personal lives, their identity,
as well as into their personality and character. This makes
location data particularly critical. Therefore, their protection
is of great importance. There exist various location protective
approaches. k-anonymity and l-diversity, represent two of them
and are brieﬂy introduced below.
k-Anonymity is a so called spatial cloaking technique. It
builds up a coarse, cloaked area over the location of a single
LBS user and enlarges it until k − 1 other persons (users) are
included in it [12] [20]. By doing so, the LBS provider or an
attacker cannot distinguish an individual entry of a single user
from at least k − 1 other entries in the cloaked area and thus
the single user remains unidentiﬁable. It is self-evident that
the value of k plays a signiﬁcant role in the performance of
k-Anonymity.
The so called Feeling-based Privacy model of Xu et al.
relies on the k-Anonymity method and considers privacy and
its protection as a feeling of the user [21]. For this reason, it
is difﬁcult to ﬁnd a practicable value for k and thus to reduce
the feeling of the individual user to a numerical value. In the
Feeling-based Privacy model, a user is able to set indirectly
his desired anonymity level by deﬁning spatial areas in which
he generally feels secure and comfortable, the so-called public
regions. The entropy of the selected areas is used to describe
their popularity, which in turn is used as the anonymity level
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

for subsequent requests to the LBS, and must be guaranteed
to the user. The result is a more personalized version of k-
Anonymity. However, both approaches wouldn’t work if the
k −1 other users were in a group, that is, if the corresponding
k − 1 (user-ID, location)-tuples contain same sensitive values
as, for example, the same exact location. In this case, the
cloaked area would be small and might fall inside a large
critical location such as a hospital area. This would allow an
attacker to still know the whereabouts of a user.
l-Diversity was introduced to solve this problem [20] [22].
This method extends the k-Anonymity approach by ensuring
that the (user-ID, location)-tuples of a certain cloaked area
contain at least l − 1 different location types. This leads to a
further enlargement of the cloaked area until it covers l − 1
different locations.
In the aforementioned methods, the exact position is ab-
stracted by including other users or different locations into the
region of interest. This makes it difﬁcult for LBS providers
or an attacker to gather private and sensitive information
and draw conclusions upon it. However, semantic information
about the k−1 included locations can still become problematic
for both models. For example, it is imaginable that a cloaked
area contains only semantically similar places. In this case,
it would be possible for an attacker to assign a semantic
meaning to the whole area. This could be for instance the case
if the cloaked area consisted solely of health service places,
such as hospitals or medical specialists. An attacker could
conclude that users from this cloaked area have either health
problems or know people that have health problems or work
in the health service domain. Similarly, if the cloaked area
referred to a university campus, an attacker could conclude
that the users are either students or belong to the academic
staff. Although personal information is being revealed in
both cases, the ﬁrst (hospital) case is regarded as a more
critical piece of information. Thus, locations show a different
degree of sensitivity depending on their type. For this reason,
recent approaches aim at protecting the semantics, that is,
the meaning of locations as well, such as in Damiani et al.’s
framework [23]. Lee et al. present in their work also such a
semantic cloaking method, where cloaked areas are built up
based solely on different semantic location types [20].
Finally, in [24], Marconi et al. extend the core idea of Xu et
al. by interpreting feelings as dynamic, time-varying features.
In their work, they deﬁne and evaluate new attacker models
that have additional access to temporal information, such as
the distribution of anonymized entries over the day. It could
be shown that as soon as the factor time is included in the
attacker models, the privacy protection assumed in the Feeling-
based Privacy model could not be maintained. Moreover, their
work is in line with our assumption that when it comes to
privacy, time plays a major role. In contrast to the presented
work, both Marconi et al. and Xu et al. evaluate their work on
synthetic data and their focus lies primarily on the optimization
of depersonalization servers.
III. USER STUDY I
A. Overview - Description
Our ﬁrst study included two parts. The ﬁrst part aimed
at establishing possible connections between demographic as
well as personality characteristics and the sense of privacy
among the participants. In the second part, we focused on
learning more about the use of LBS running on smartphones
with respect to privacy and willingness to share their location.
For this purpose, we confronted the participants with the
question whether they believe that the sense of privacy is
time-dependent in various contexts. The goal was to identify
the circumstances, with respect to time, under which, people
would most likely reveal their data. In addition, the obtained
data of this ﬁrst study served also an additional purpose,
namely as basis for the design and the content of our app in the
main, experimental study described in the following Section
IV. That is, we used the gained data in order to modify the
app accordingly and be able to provide our participants with a
high usability. This is particularly important when conducting
a long user study, because users tend to close or remove apps
with low usability more often.
For the purpose of our ﬁrst study, we used the Google
Forms online survey platform [25]. We asked a total of 52
people, which we recruited via email. Approximately three
fourths of the participants were 18-25 years, with most being
in education (e.g., college or university students or trainees).
The rest of the participants were uniformly distributed within
the range of 25-65 years old. In addition, three fourths were
male and about 80% show a strong to very strong afﬁnity for
technology.
B. Evaluation
Due to the limited space, in this section we will focus on
the most interesting ﬁndings. Figure 1 shows an interesting
but also expected trend with regard to location data protection
and the personality trait of conviviality. It can be seen that
the more sociable and extrovert people are, the less they care
about the protection of their location data. That is, people that
enjoy being more often with other people are more relaxed
with the idea of sharing their location, even with other parties.
In Figure 2, we can see the relation between location data
protection and whether the participants consider privacy to be
time-dependent or not. It is apparent that particularly people
who do not pay big attention to the protection of their location
data, do not consider privacy to be time-dependent. The other
way round, a large part of the people that care for their privacy
and to whom location data protection is important, consider
the sense of privacy to be changing over time. Our correlation
analysis resulted in a two-tailed signiﬁcance of 0.03 and a
Pearson correlation coefﬁcient of −0.302, which underpins the
indication of an inverse correlation between the two items.
Figure 3 presents the results of the belief that privacy is a
time-dependent feature in relation to the participants’ afﬁnity
for technology. What stands out in this ﬁgure is that solely
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Fig. 1. Conviviality vs. Location data protection.
1: self-effacing and introvert, 5: sociable and extrovert.
“Yes” represents: “Yes, Location data protection is important to me”.
Fig. 2. Time-dependent sense of privacy vs. Location data protection.
1: “No, it isn’t time-dependent”, 5: “Yes, it is time-dependent”.
“Yes” represents: “Yes, Location data protection is important to me”.
people with a strong afﬁnity to technology take the view that
privacy is indeed a time-dependent feature. This can be partly
attributed to the fact that people interested in technology, know
more about its potential, both positive and negative one. Thus,
they might be more aware of situations where sharing location
data can be critical and where ﬂexible, time-dependent privacy
rules could be of great importance. In general, it has been
Fig. 3. Afﬁnity for technology vs. Sense of privacy is time-dependent.
1: “I’m not interested in technology”, 5: “I’m very interested in technology”.
noticed that the interviewees have very divergent views on data
protection and privacy. Some participants were not interested
in data protection at all and have no problem being tracked
everywhere and at any time. Other, however, consider data
protection to be extremely important and want to be tracked
as little as possible or even not at all. A signiﬁcant group of
the participant lie in-between by stating that they agree with
sharing their location data only when it is necessary or brings
practical beneﬁts with it, e.g., for navigation purposes.
IV. USER STUDY II
A. Overview - Description
This section discusses our experimental study. Scope of
this study was to identify existing time-dependencies with
respect to privacy concerns in a real-world dataset scenario
and conﬁrm this way the results of our survey described in
the previous Section III. During our experiment, we tracked a
total of 10 mobile phone users over a period of 4 weeks. In
addition to the GPS tracking running in the background, the
users were asked to provide additional information or answer
a small set of questions whenever they changed their location
as described below:
• Location type: E.g., “restaurant”, “chinese restaurant”,
etc.
• Purpose of visit: E.g., “Eating with friends/family”,
“celebrating Christmas party”, etc.
• Would you share this location at any time? “Yes”,
“No”. In case of “No”, the user is additionally asked to
add the reason.
• Rating bar: The user is asked to rate the experienced
intrusion of his privacy with respect to sharing her current
location, whereby
1 star = “Uncritical, I have no problems with being
tracked right now”.
5 stars = “Critical, I don’t want people to know where I
am right now”.
• Description: E.g., “Critical, because no one should know
that I am at a party,” or “Not critical, because everyone
knows that I am working here anyway”.
For this purpose, we designed and implemented an Android
tracking and annotation app illustrated in Figure 4. During the
user study, both GPS and annotation data were encrypted and
stored locally in the users’ own devices in order to comply with
the data protection guidelines. Each app user was assigned
with a random User-ID. The per User-ID anonymized data
were then transmitted to us after the study was over. Finally,
we offered 3 Amazon coupons to the 3 participants that used
our app at most, that is, with the most annotated entries, as
an additional incentive for the participants of our study.
B. Evaluation
First, we preprocessed the data by ﬁltering out inconsisten-
cies and missing values. The ﬁltered data were then organized
in tables according to the type of information, e.g., “user-ID”,
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Fig. 4. Screenshot of our Android tracking and annotation app.
“timestamp”, “location label”, “purpose”, etc. We evaluated
potential temporal dependencies in our data with regard to
following aspects:
• Absolute time of day., e.g., 12:35pm, etc.
• Aggregated time of day in blocks:
– 6am-10am: “morning”
– 10am-12am: “mid-morning”
– 12am-14pm: “midday”
– 14pm-17pm: “afternoon”
– 17pm-21pm: “evening”
– 21pm-6am: “Night”
• Aggregated time in special blocks (events):
– During the week
– Weekend
– Non-lecture period & Holidays
– Christmas (24-26/12)
• Location category (based on the Foursquare venue tax-
onomy [26])
– Residence
– Work
– Food
– Business & Services
– University
– Culture & Entertainment
– Nightlife
– Natur & Leisure time
– Travel & Trafﬁc
– Event
– Others
The evaluation with respect to the location category is impor-
tant in order to identify and exclude eventual impacts of the
location type on the criticality rating of sharing the current
location (from now on referred to as privacy rating).
We analyzed the data of each user both separately and
combined. All in all, we had a total of 157 entries, which
corresponds to an average of 5.61 entries per day. We cal-
culated an average privacy rating of 1.847 and a standard
deviation of 1.287, with 1 and 5 representing the least and
the most critical score with regard to sharing the location at
the corresponding moment, respectively. This is a relative low
score. However, the data showed that 4 of our 10 users had no
privacy concerns at all when it comes to sharing their location.
They showed a permanent privacy rating of 1, regardless of
time and place. This fact puled our average privacy rating
down. Figure 5 presents the corresponding privacy rating
Fig. 5. Privacy ratings distribution over all users. 1 and 5 represent the least
and the most critical private rating score respectively.
distribution. The rating score 3 stands out as the second most
frequently chosen rating. As being the middle rating value, it
could be interpreted as users having occasionally substantial
but not extreme concerns over their location privacy. The rest
of the ratings are almost evenly spread out. Figure 6 contains
the privacy ratings of all users distributed over the time of
day. It can be seen that the privacy ratings are spread out over
the range 1 to 5 without forming any identiﬁable patterns with
respect to time. We can see the dense concentration of 1 values
that reﬂects the ratings of the aforementioned “biased” users.
We can also see the second dense concentration of 3 values. At
ﬁrst glance, despite the results of our ﬁrst study, time appears
to have no effect on the users’ privacy concerns. However, after
analyzing the data of single users separately, we could indeed
ﬁnd evidence of temporal dependencies. Figure 7 shows the
privacy rating distribution over time for user ID4775. What is
striking in this ﬁgure is that the particular user stated to be
more sensitive when it comes to sharing her location in the
afternoon hours between 14pm-20pm. A similar effect could
be partly observed in other users as well. However, it should
be noted here that high ratings came often in combination
with certain location categories as well, such as outdoor and
nightlife locations or friend’s homes. Thus, it might be the
location types that affect at most the users’ sense of privacy.
On the other hand, since certain locations are visited only
during speciﬁc times, this could be again indirectly interpreted
as a time-dependent effect as well, an effect that appears to
be rather user-speciﬁc.
In Figure 8, we aggregate the time of day into 6 blocks.
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Fig. 6. Privacy ratings of all users over time of day. 1 and 5 represent the
least and the most critical private rating score respectively.
Fig. 7. Privacy ratings of user ID4775 over time of day. 1 and 5 represent
the least and the most critical private rating score respectively.
Interestingly, both the mid-morning and the midday show an
elevated average privacy rating of 2.24 and 2.33. However, at
the same time, both show the least recorded entries, which may
have affected to a certain degree the averages. Furthermore, no
Fig. 8. Privacy ratings of all users over aggregated time blocks. 1 and 5
represent the least and the most critical private rating score respectively.
signiﬁcant differences could be observed when we compared
the ratings of during the week with the ones of the weekend.
The Christmas period seemed to be having a slight effect on
some users as we could observe a slight raise of high criticality
rating values in the particular period (24-26 December). This
could be attributed to the fact that people tend to concern
more about their location privacy in their free time, when
they are going out and when they are visiting relatives and
close friends. Finally, an interesting result could be observed
with regard to the location “home”. Although “home” is a
generally highly private location, the privacy ratings do change
signiﬁcantly over time, a fact that once again underpins our
hypothesis that privacy concerns are time-dependent.
V. CONCLUSION
Recent research has been increasingly working on develop-
ing ways to protect the users’ location data, with most focusing
on spatial or semantic obfuscation techniques. However, very
few seem to have investigated the impact of time on the
users’ privacy concerns. In the presented work, we attempt
to explore time as a factor inﬂuencing the willingness of
users to provide information about their location. In order
to achieve this, we conducted 2 separate user studies, an
online user survey as well as a 4-week long experimental
study. Our analysis revealed slight, yet still present, evidence
of an existing dependency between time and people’s sense
of privacy. The effect seems to be user-speciﬁc and is more
common in people that are strong advocates of data protection.
Certain personality traits, such as conviviality, also appear to
play a signiﬁcant role on the existence of time-dependencies.
Overall, the presented results strengthen the need for dynamic,
time-dependent location data protection techniques.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank all of our user study
participants, as well as Corbinian Grimm, Dennis Br¨ustle and
Kevin Kellner for their contribution to the Android app design.
REFERENCES
[1] eMarketer. (2015) Key trends in mobile advertising. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.statista.com/statistics/436071/location-based-service-
users-usa/
[2] C. Parent et al., “Semantic trajectories modeling and analysis,” ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 45, no. 4, p. 42, 2013.
[3] A. Karatzoglou, H. Sent¨urk, A. Jablonski, and M. Beigl, “Applying ar-
tiﬁcial neural networks on two-layer semantic trajectories for predicting
the next semantic location,” in International Conference on Artiﬁcial
Neural Networks.
Springer, 2017, pp. 233–241.
[4] A. Karatzoglou, S. C. Lamp, and M. Beigl, “Matrix factorization on
semantic trajectories for predicting future semantic locations,” in Wire-
less and Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications (WiMob),.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–7.
[5] J. J.-C. Ying, W.-C. Lee, T.-C. Weng, and V. S. Tseng, “Semantic
trajectory mining for location prediction,” in Proceedings of the 19th
ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic
Information Systems.
ACM, 2011, pp. 34–43.
[6] A. Karatzoglou, D. K¨ohler, and M. Beigl, “Purpose-of-visit-driven
semantic similarity analysis on semantic trajectories for enhancing the
future location prediction,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference
on Pervasive Computing and Communications (PerCom) Workshop
Proceedings.
IEEE, 2018.
[7] J. L. Boyles, A. Smith, and M. Madden, “Privacy and data management
on mobile devices,” Pew Research Center’s Internet & American Life
Project, 2012.
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

[8] Zickuhr, “Location-based services,” Pew Research Center’s Internet &
American Life Project, 2013.
[9] Y. Wang, “Privacy-enhancing technologies,” in Handbook of research
on social and organizational liabilities in information security.
IGI
Global, 2009, pp. 203–227.
[10] M. Langheinrich, “Privacy by design?principles of privacy-aware ubiq-
uitous systems,” in International conference on Ubiquitous Computing.
Springer, 2001, pp. 273–291.
[11] D. E. Seidl, P. Jankowski, and M.-H. Tsou, “Privacy and spatial pattern
preservation in masked gps trajectory data,” International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 785–800, 2016.
[12] L. Sweeney, “K-anonymity: A model for protecting privacy,” Int. J.
Uncertain. Fuzziness Knowl.-Based Syst., pp. 557–570, 2002.
[13] S. T. Margulis, “On the status and contribution of westin’s and altman’s
theories of privacy,” Journal of Social Issues, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 411–429,
2003.
[14] A. F. Westin and O. M. Ruebhausen, Privacy and freedom.
Atheneum
New York, 1967, vol. 1.
[15] A. Westin, “Opinion surveys: What consumers have to say about
information privacy,” Prepared Witness Testimony, The House Committee
on Energy and Commerce, 2001.
[16] N. J. Marshall, “Dimensions of privacy preferences,” Multivariate Be-
haviour Research, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 255–272, 1974.
[17] I. Altman, “Privacy regulation: Culturally universal or culturally spe-
ciﬁc?” Journal of Social Issues, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 66–84, 1977.
[18] N. Zhang, C. Wang, and Y. Xu, “Privacy in online social networks,”
2011, CiteSeer.
[19] M. Moloney and F. Bannister, “A privacy control theory for online
environments,” in System Sciences, 2009. HICSS’09. 42nd Hawaii
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–10.
[20] B. Lee, J. Oh, H. Yu, and J. Kim, “Protecting location privacy using
location semantics,” in Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD Interna-
tional Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, ser. KDD
’11.
ACM, 2011, pp. 1289–1297.
[21] T. Xu and Y. Cai, “Feeling-based location privacy protection for
location-based services,” in Proceedings of the 16th ACM Conference on
Computer and Communications Security, ser. CCS ’09.
ACM, 2009,
pp. 348–357.
[22] A. Machanavajjhala, D. Kifer, J. Gehrke, and M. Venkitasubramaniam,
“L-diversity: Privacy beyond k-anonymity,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov.
Data, 2007.
[23] M. L. Damiani, C. Silvestri, and E. Bertino, “Fine-grained cloaking
of sensitive positions in location-sharing applications,” IEEE Pervasive
Computing, no. 4, pp. 64–72, 2011.
[24] L. Marconi, R. Di Pietro, B. Crispo, and M. Conti, “Time warp:
How time affects privacy in lbss,” in Information and Communications
Security, M. Soriano, S. Qing, and J. L´opez, Eds.
Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 325–339.
[25] Google.
(2018)
Google
forms.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.google.com/forms/
[26] Foursquare.
(2018)
Venue
categories.
[Online].
Available:
https://developer.foursquare.com/docs/resources/categories
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

