Extending Moodle Services to Mobile Devices: The Moodbile Project 
 
 
María José Casany, Marc Alier, Enric Mayol, Jordi 
Piguillem, Nikolas Galanis, Services and 
Information Systems Department 
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya Barcelona-tech 
Barcelona, Spain 
mjcasany@essi.upc.edu, marc.alier@upc.edu, 
mayol@essi.upc.edu, jpiguillem@essi.upc.edu, 
ngalanis@essi.upc.edu 
Franciso J. García-Peñalvo, Miguel Ángel Conde, 
Informática y Automática Department 
Universidad de Salamanca 
Salamanca, Spain 
fgarcia@usal.es, mconde@usal.es
 
 
Abstract—Learning 
Management 
Systems 
(LMS) 
are 
widespread among most education and training institutions. 
Even though LMS are a mature technology, they have left the 
vanguard of innovation in e-learning to mobile devices and 
tablets. Mobile Learning (M-learning) may enhance e-learning 
by increasing communication and conversation opportunities 
to convents the learning process more collaborative and 
learner-centred. This paper describes a way to integrate 
mobile devices and educational applications with a LMS as 
Moodle through web services: The Moodbile Project. Rather 
than just creating mobile apps that replicates LMS 
functionalities on a mobile device, Moodbile provides to m-
learning developers with the necessary tools to allow mobile 
devices to interact with the LMS. In this paper, we describe 
our proposal of an open specification of web services to 
support the integration of mobile external applications with 
Moodle. 
Keywords-e-Learning; m-Learning; Moodle; LMS. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
E-learning has experienced an extraordinary growth over 
the last years; learning paradigms, technological solutions, 
methods and pedagogical approaches have been developed. 
We have reached a point in time when most of learning 
institutions have adopted Learning Management Systems 
(LMS). LMS are systems that organize and provide access to 
online learning services (such as access control, provision of 
learning contents, communication and administration of 
users and groups tools) for students, teachers and 
administrators [15]. 
Nowadays, the success of LMS is so great: over 90% of 
Spanish universities and colleges use a LMS [16], 95% of 
the learning institutions in the US also use an LMS [10], and 
79,5% of large companies use these systems during their 
training program [21]. In LMS, the standard organizational 
unit is the course, and this structure restricts students to the 
content designed for a particular course and to interact only 
with the other participants of the course. Therefore, student’s 
engagement in LMS is lower in contrast to their engagement 
in other environments or tools such as mobile devices, Web 
2.0 tools or game consoles. These environments provide 
opportunities for customization, communication and a sense 
of ownership impossible in current LMS [12], [17]. 
In this sense, LMS must evolve to adapt to new user 
requirements, technologies and opportunities. For example, 
LMS must be able to interact with external applications such 
as social networks, blogs, mobile applications, virtual 
environments etc. [17], and it must allow networked learning 
throw easy collaboration and communication tools. This 
interaction between the LMS and other tools will require 
flexibility and interoperability. 
The expansion of mobile devices with new browsing 
capabilities and touch interfaces provide new ways to learn 
(mobile learning or m-learning). M-learning is a new 
learning approach to support personal learning demands that 
may happen anywhere and/or at any time; or in response to 
the process of coming to know, by which learners in 
cooperation with their peers and teachers, construct 
transiently stable interpretations of their world [18]. M-
learning puts the control of the learning process in hands of 
the learner itself [8] and enhances collaboration and 
flexibility. 
One possible way to promote m-learning applications and 
to overcome some of their limitations may be the integration 
with the LMS. This integration will also facilitate LMS 
evolution, interoperability improvement and its adaption to 
new social needs and new technologies. 
In this paper, we propose a first step of an 
interoperability solution to extend LMS to the world of 
mobile devices. Section two describes the research scenario 
with a description of the problem of interoperability between 
m-learning applications and LMS, and a brief state of the art 
of the current approaches to the problem. Section three 
presents the Moodbile Project, and some details of our 
proposal to extend the Moodle Services Architecture to 
allow 
m-learning. 
Finally, 
section 
four 
summarizes 
conclusions and future work. 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

II. 
RESEARCH FRAMEWORK 
In this section, we describe opportunities of m-learning 
and two approaches to integrate m-learning applications to 
LMS. 
A. Mobile Learning: opportunities and challenges 
Portability of mobile devices and their ability to connect 
to the Internet makes such device ideal tools for the storage 
of learning experiences and reference materials, as well as, to 
be a general tool to enhance the learning process. The 
Horizon Report [9] identifies mobile phones as a priority 
technology for next years. Mobile technologies have a 
special role, because they increase our communication and 
conversation opportunities. 
M-learning introduces some opportunities and challenges 
in the learning process. Some of the contributions of m-
learning are: 1) it is learner-centered [13], 2) it is a new 
alternative for information delivery and 3) it enhances 
collaborative learning [18]. Therefore, we may state that m-
learning increases learning flexibility by customizing 
learning to be more personalized and learner-centered [3], 
[20]. 
On the other hand, m-learning faces several challenges 
such as: 1) lack of teacher confidence, training or technical 
difficulties with mobile devices [6], [22], 2) lack of 
institutional support [6], [22], 3) interoperability problems 
with LMS which usually are designed as monolithic systems 
[2] and 4) limited impact because many initiatives are 
isolated from the rest of the learning process [11]. 
One possible solution to overcome these challenges and 
to avoid LMS extinction is the integration of m-learning 
initiatives with LMS. This approach has several advantages. 
From the technological point of view, the LMS can be a tool 
to spread learning innovation, and m-learning projects can be 
more than isolated experiments because they would be 
integrated with the learning dynamics of educational 
institutions. From the student’s point of view, they could 
personalize their learning process thanks to mobile devices 
as well as collaborate with peers. From the teacher’s point of 
view, they could continue to use LMS as their working 
platform, leaving mobile devices for students. 
B. Integrating m-learning with LMS: Related work 
Integration between m-learning applications and LMS is 
not an easy task, because LMS do not usually include 
interoperability standards to communicate with external 
applications; they are usually designed as monolithic or 
layered systems [17]. The integration of m-learning 
applications with LMS has two scenarios: 
1) Extending the LMS to the mobile world 
The first scenario is based on the creation of m-learning 
applications that extend the scope of the LMS. Such mobile 
applications usually follow one of two different approaches: 
The first approach focuses on engagement with mobile 
devices and mobile native applications. The benefits of this 
approach include access to engaging design, free use of 
hardware features and fast and lightweight technology. 
However, the main limitation is that applications are device 
specific, which usually requires high development costs. The 
second approach focuses on the interaction with a browser, 
so the technology is ubiquitous and device-independent. 
However it may also be slower and it may be harder to 
access for some smart phones. For example, the LMS 
Blackboard is focused on native applications for mobile 
devices, while Moodle follow both approaches. 
Usability and online/offline work are important issues 
when extending LMS to the mobile world. Specific 
restriction on mobile devices to display information and to 
interact with the user, must be also taken into account. M-
learning applications also allow offline work when network 
coverage is not available, so it is required to synchronize 
local data of the device with LMS data [19]. To sum up, 
extending LMS to the mobile scenario transforms the LMS 
into a web platform that must provide services to mobile 
devices usually using web service technology. 
Some of the proposals in this scenario try to create a 
clone mobile LMS allowing most of the LMS functions in 
mobile devices, without taking into account limitations of 
mobile devices such as data input or screen size.  
2) Integrating external m-learning applications into the 
LMS 
The second scenario is based on the integration of 
external m-learning applications into the LMS. Since most 
LMS are not service oriented, any attempt to integrate 
external applications with the LMS must be done ad hoc. 
This approach has important disadvantages such as the 
difficulty in maintaining and extending the new integrated 
system or the limited impact of these solution [1], [2]. 
III. 
MOODBILE 
This section describes the main goals of the Moodbile 
project, an initiative designed to open up the LMS Moodle to 
the mobile scenario. First, we define the analysis 
requirements of the project. Second, we describe a layered 
architecture to adapt Moodle to the service oriented 
paradigm. Finally, we describe services we designed to allow 
mobile devices access to the LMS.  
A. Project definition and motivation 
The Moodbile project [23] aims to enable mobile 
learning applications to work together with the LMS. 
Moodbile is an open source project. Moodle is the host LMS 
platform. Rather than just creating mobile applications that 
replicate the LMS functionalities on a mobile device, 
Moodbile provides the developers of applications for 
education with the necessary tools to interact with the LMS. 
The motivation of the Moodbile project is to open up the 
most commonly used e-learning platforms and LMS, 
originally designed as monolithic or layered systems, to the 
service paradigm and to mobile world.  
To communicate Moodbile with the LMS, some Moodle 
functions are redesigned as services and they may also be 
used to integrate external applications into Moodle. 
B. Moodle Web Services Architecture 
Moodle Arquitecture is designed following the classic 
three-tiers architecture. Like a big amount of PHP 
applications, 
Domain 
Tier 
implements 
very 
atomic 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

functions, and the major part of business logic is located at 
Presentation Tier. 
With the design of Moodle Web Services Architecture, 
two main problems had been addressed. How to solve that 
the main business logic is located at the Presentation tier 
instead of the Domain Tier, and how to design the 
architecture to support a variety of web services protocols 
without coupling business logic and such protocols. 
The solution proposed to Moodle Head Quarter was the 
architecture shown in Fig.1. 
Domain and Presentation tiers have not been changed 
with respect to Moodle Architecture. Instead of refactoring 
both tiers, the External tier was created. This tier is an 
extension of the standard Moodle External tier and can 
basically access methods from the standard Moodle External 
tier and the Moodle core The External tier is responsible for 
the specification and implementation of services that Moodle 
provides to external consumers or apps. However, this tier 
replicates some minor business logic and control statements. 
To provide full support to the most widespread Moodle 
web services protocols, a Connectors tier was designed. The 
Connector tier contains specific components that adapt 
service’s specifications of the External tier to the provided 
protocols. At the same time, this tier handles authentication 
and session management. Protocols supported are REST, 
SOAP, XML-RPC, AMF among others. 
 
Figure 1.  Moodle Web Services Architecture 
The extension presented in Fig. 1 was created to solve the 
problem of integrating mobile applications with Moodle. 
Even though Moodle 2.0 already had a collection of web 
services, these web services focused on developing an API 
suitable for massive batch actions like user or course creation 
and inscriptions.  These methods are not suitable for the 
integration of mobile learning applications. Moreover, issues 
as security management are not properly provided by these 
web services. 
Therefore, Moodbile project was initiated to design a 
Moodle extension that would turn Moodle into a web 
services provider for mobile applications, with the design of 
a web-service layer to access most suitable Moodle features 
for mobile applications 
C. Moodbile Requirements  
Moodle’s External tier only provides basic services. 
Therefore, it must be extended to provide additional services 
to allow mobile application interact with the LMS. These 
features were identified and selected from related work 
(some of them described in section II.B) and from the 
analysis of the log of the Moodle server of our university, 
where we found the most used features accessed from mobile 
devices [5].  
In the first step of the Moodbile project we have 
considered to include the features like: view course 
activities, view course participants, view student’s grades, 
view resources, view and upload assignments, access forums 
and discussions, read and reply posts, view upcoming 
calendar events and view user profile. 
D. Moodbile’s Architecture 
This section describes the proposed extensions to the 
Moodle Web Services Architecture to provide additional web 
services for mobile applications [4], [7]. 
This extension involves extending the tree tiers: The Domain 
tier extension re-implements some features that Moodle does 
not provide in the proper way to be used by Web Services, 
and, some additional services and features specific are 
provided to support Moodbile functionality. The External 
tier is where the actual services for mobile integration are 
defined and implemented. The Connectors tier is used to 
provide additional web services protocols and authentication 
methods more suitable for mobile devices, such as Oauth 
[14]. 
This extension is based in the following additions: 
1) New authentication method. 
Moodle Web Services are oriented to academic 
management operations such as course creation, new users 
registration and students enrollment. Moreover, Moodle 
services consumers are under control of the same 
organization, so complex authentication methods are not 
required. 
Moodle 
users 
authenticate 
with 
their 
username/passwords or with special access tokens. To secure 
the connection, it may be enough to restrict IPs that will be 
able to invoke this web services. 
In a mobile environment, such mechanisms are not 
enough, since user/password or token authentication is not 
secure since this information is sent in each web service call 
from a mobile device, and it is not possible to establish a 
white list of authorized IPs. To solve this problem, Moodbile 
project applies an OAuth authentication mechanism allowing 
teachers and students to access Moodle using third-party 
applications in a secure way. 
2) New Connectors 
Moodle offers several web services protocols but some 
(or none) of them are not suitable to a mobile environment. 
For this reason, Moodbile purposes several new connectors. 
To give support to HTML 5 applications, an AJAX 
compatible 
connector 
with 
JSON 
messages 
was 
implemented. This connector shares Moodle session, so user 
must be logged in to use an HTML 5 client. In a similar way, 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

JSONP allows HTML 5 applications to access to Moodle 
Web Services using native authentication methods. 
JSON-RPC connector was implemented to add a 
lightweight protocol that can be used effectively form a 
mobile phone. This connector uses Moodle Web Services 
authentication methods. Finally, a JSON-RPC connector and 
a new REST connector are implemented using OAuth 
authentication. These connectors are the most commonly 
used for Moodbile clients for its ease to use and security 
improvements. 
3) New Services 
New services are defined into the External tier and 
grouped in packages [24]. Packages are classified into Basic 
Services, Course Content Services, Personal Content 
Services or Platform Services. 
a) Basic Services 
Course package provides basic services to retrieve user 
courses information. User package provides services to list 
course enrolled users and their profiles. 
b) Course content services 
Services in this group allow the interaction with course 
content and activities. Thus, Assignment package provides 
services to get assignments information and to submit 
homework. Forum package makes possible to manage 
forums information, discussions and posts. Resource 
package provides all the services related to digital resources 
access. 
c) Personal content services 
Services in this group provide access to users personal 
content. Blog package allows read, write and access to 
Moodle blogs. Calendar package give access to user 
calendar, scheduling and events. Grade package allows to 
retrieve users grades and outcomes. Message package allows 
to use the internal messaging. 
d) System Services 
Lang package provides I18N services to develop clients 
that use the same terminology of the host. File package 
allows upload and download files form Moodle in a secure 
way. And System package provides host and system 
information services 
4) Moodbile Clients 
Several mobile clients have developed based on HTML 
5, Android and iOS. They are being used to test Moodbile 
Architecture and Services and to research in m-Learning 
topics.  
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER WORK 
M-learning enhances collaborative learning and increases 
learning flexibility by allowing it to be more personalized 
and student-centred. But on the other hand, m-learning faces 
interoperability problems with LMS (the basic e-learning 
infrastructure of many educational institutions). The 
Moodbile project aims to propose an interoperability solution 
to integrate m-learning applications with the LMS, 
incorporating m-learning applications into the learning 
process of educational institutions. This will allow m-
learning applications to widen their scope instead of being 
isolated from the learning process. It also will allow LMS to 
be more flexible e-learning platforms. 
Moodbile aims to propose an open specification of web 
services to support the integration of external applications 
with the LMS. The initial version of the specification works 
for Moodle, but authors are working to adapt this 
specification to other LMS (such as Sakai and Olat) to create 
an LMS-independent specification. This specification is 
open-source and available for developers of third-part 
applications to use this specification. Authors are also 
designing special m-learning activities inside the LMS, that 
is, activities used from mobile devices but created inside the 
LMS. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been partially funded by the MiPLE 
project (TIN2010-21695-C02-02.8) of the Spanish Ministry 
of Science and Innovation. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Alier, M., Casany, M.J. and Piguillem, J., “Towards mobile learning 
applications integration with learning management systems,” 
Multiplatform e-learning systems and technologies: mobile devices 
for ubiquitous ICT-based education, 2007, pp. 182.  
[2] 
Alier, M., Casany, M.J., Conde, M.A. and García-Peñalvo, F.J., 
“Interoperability for LMS: the missing piece to become the common 
place for e-learning innovation,” International Journal of Knowledge 
and Learning, 6(2), 2010, pp. 130-141.  
[3] 
Bull, S. and Reid, E., “Individualised revision material for use on a 
handheld computer,” In J. Attewell & C. Savill-Smith (EDS) 
Learning with mobile devices, Learning and skills development 
agency 2004, pp. 35-42.  
[4] 
Casany, M.J., Alier, M., Conde, M.A. and García-Peñalvo F. J., 
“SOA initiatives for eLearning: a Moodle case,” In Advanced 
Information 
Networking 
and 
Applications 
Workshops, 2009 
(AINA'09), IEEE, pp. 750-755.  
[5] 
Casany, M.J., Alier, Mayol, E., “Using LMS activity logs to measure 
mobile access,” In Proceedings of third International Conference of 
Technology Enhaced Learning 2012. 
[6] 
Cobcroft, R.S., Towers, S. and Smith, J., Bruns, A., “Mobile learning 
in review: Opportunities and challenges for learners, teachers, and 
institutions,” In Proceedings Online Learning and Teaching (OLT) 
Conference 2006, pp. 21-30.  
[7] 
Conde, M.A., García-Peñalvo F. J., Casany, M.J. and Alier, M., 
“Adapting LMS architecture to the SOA: an architectural approach,” 
Fourth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications 
and Services 2009, IEEE, pp. 322-327.  
[8] 
Downes, S., “E-learning 2.0,” eLearning magazine: education and 
technology 
in 
perspectives, 
2006, 
pp. 
21-29 
http://elearnmag.org/subpage.cfm, (retrieved: 04/2012).  
[9] 
Johnoson, L., Smith, R., Levine, A. and Haywood, K., “Horizon 
Report 
2010,” 
Available 
at: 
http://wp.nmc.org/horizon2011/ 
(retrieved: 04/2012). 
[10] Lonn, S. and Teasley, S.D., “Saving time or innovating practice: 
Investigating perceptions and uses of Learning Management 
Systems,” In Computers & Education, 53(3), 2009, pp. 686-694.  
[11] Martín, S. et al., “Middleware for the development of context-aware 
applications inside m-Learning: Connecting e-learning to the mobile 
world,” In Proceedings of the Fourth International Multi-Conference 
on Computing in the Global Information Technology, ICCGI'09, 
2009, pp. 217-222.  
[12] Mcloughlin C. and Lee, M.J.W., “Social software and participatory 
learning: Pedagogical choices with technology affordances in the 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Web 2.0 era,” ICT: Providing choices for learners and learning, 
Proceedings ascilite Singapore 2007.  
[13] Naismith, L., Lonsdale, P., Vavoula, G. and Sharples, M., “Literature 
review in mobile technologies and learning,” FutureLab Report, 
2004. 
[14] OAUTH, “The OAuth 1.0 protocol RfC,” Internet Engineering Task 
Force (IETF). 2010. EHammer-Lahav E. Editors. available at: 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5849 (accessed 30/04/2012 
[15] Paulsen, M.F., “Online education Systems: Discussion and definition 
of terms,” In G.Web-Education Systems in Europe, Hagen: Zentrales 
Institut für Fernstudienforschung, FernUniversität, 2002, pp. 23-28.  
[16] Prendes, M.P., “Plataformas de campus virtuales de software libre: 
Análisis comparativo de la situación actual de la Universidades 
Españolas,” Informe del Proyecto EA-2008-0257 de la Secretaría de 
Estado de Universidades e Investigación, 2009.  
[17] Sclater, N.,  “Web 2.0, personal learning environments, and the future 
of learning management systems,” Research Bulletin, 13, 2008, pp. 
2008-2009.  
[18] Sharples, M., Taylor, J. and Vavoula, G., “Towards a theory of 
mobile learning,” In Proceedings of mLearn 2005, 1(1), pp. 1-9.  
[19] Trifonova, A. and Ronchetti, M., “A general architecture to support 
mobility in learning,” Advanced Learning Technologies, 2004. 
Proceedings IEEE International Conference on 2004, pp. 26-30.  
[20] Vavoula, G.N. and Sharples, M., “KLeOS: A personal, mobile, 
knowledge and learning organisation system,” In Proceedings of the 
IEEE International Workshop on Mobile and Wireless Technologies 
in Education Aug 29-30, Vaxjo, Sweden, 2002, pp. 152-156.  
[21] Wexler, S., Grey, N., Miller, D., Nguyen, F. and Barnevelda, A., 
“Learning Management Systems: The good, the bad, the ugly... and 
the truth,” E-learning Guild, 2008.  
[22] Zawacky-Richter O., Brown, T. and Delport, R., “Factors that may 
contribute to the establishment of mobile learning in institutions,” 
Results from a Survey. Interactive mobile technologies, 1(1), 2007, 
pp. 40-41.  
[23] Moodbile website: http://moodbile.org (retrieved: 04/2012). 
[24] Services 
created 
for 
Moodbile 
online 
documentation. 
http://docs.moodbile.org/index.php/Moodbile_WS_Documentation_v
0.2 (retrieved: 04/2012). 
 
 
 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

