Usability Evaluation Approaches for (Ubiquitous) Mobile Applications: A
Systematic Mapping Study
¹Rodrigo A. Cruz Reis, ²Ludymilla L. A. Gomes, ³Arilo Claudio Dias-Neto, 4Awdren de L. Fontão
¹²³Institute of Computing
Federal University of Amazonas
4INDT
Manaus-AM, Brazil
Emails: ¹rdgdosanjos@gmail.com, ²[llag] ³[arilo] @icomp.ufam.edu.br, 4fontao@microsoft.com
Abstract—In case of ubiquitous mobile applications, there is an
increased need for effective/efficient approaches to evaluate the
usability
of
these
applications.
The
technical
literature
provides several evaluation approaches found in several
sources, with different characteristics and classifications. This
paper presents the results of a systematic mapping study that
investigated usability evaluation approaches for (ubiquitous)
mobile applications. In total, we identified 101 usability
evaluation approaches for mobile applications, 28 of which
applied to ubiquitous mobile applications. They were classified
according to some attributes, such as: type of evaluation
technique, type of mobile apps to be evaluated, experiment
used to evaluate the approach, usability attribute/factors to be
evaluated, and characteristics of ubiquity evaluated by each
approach, representing the state-of-art in this research field.
Keywords-Usability;
Mobile
apps;
Systematic
Mapping;
Survey.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Smartphones have become very popular in our current
society. Advances in mobile technologies have allowed the
emergence/development of a wide range of software for
these mobile devices (called mobile applications or, simply,
mobile
apps)
[1].
This
platform
introduced
several
advantages. Perhaps, the most noticeable would be the
mobility to its users while using different mobile apps.
This large and growing number of mobile apps has
challenged software engineers to develop applications with a
high level of quality in order to become more attractive and
competitive in this new market [2]. Moreover, this platform
introduced some challenges and constraints to be considered
during the software development, such as small screen size,
limited connectivity, high power consumption rates and
limited input modalities [10].
According to Duh et al. [3], usability is a critical factor
for the popularity and success of mobile apps. A good
usability design improves the device user’s operability and,
thus, enhances the overall product quality. Users tend to
choose applications that are easy to learn, which take less
time to complete a particular task and seem to be more
"friendly" to the user [4]. Thus, various approaches aimed at
supporting the usability definition and evaluation for mobile
apps have been proposed in the technical literature.
Usability evaluation of software for desktop and mobile
devices platforms is an emerging areas of research [5]. In the
past, software usability was subjectively evaluated by
informal processes [4]. Researchers just selected some
usability attributes that they wanted to assess and then
measured what they considered important. In recent years,
usability measurement and analysis approaches have been
proposed and improved. Laboratory experiments, field
studies and hands-on measurements are some of the methods
most often applied by researchers [4][6]. Each of these
evaluation methods has its advantages and disadvantages.
Due to the highly dynamic context of use, offered by mobile
apps, laboratory and field usability testing involves different
challenges and may find different usability problems [3].
In order to analyze the scenario of evaluation usability
approaches for ubiquitous mobile apps and ubiquitous
mobile apps, this paper presents the results of a systematic
mapping study [7] that identified and characterized 101
different approaches. This study aims
to
complement
previous
characterization
studies,
such
as
the
studies
published in [4][6], in two aspects: (1) it updates the list of
approaches identified in the technical literature; (2) it
presents a different perspective on the identified approaches,
analyzing, for example, the categories of mobile apps and the
type of proposed evaluation approach (e.g., static or dynamic
analysis). Finally, some challenges and trends are presented
as a result of this study.
This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents
some definitions relevant to this paper and related work.
Section 3 presents the systematic mapping protocol. Section
4 presents the results obtained. Finally, Section 5 presents a
summary of this work and a brief discussion on future work.
II.
USABILITY EVALUATION IN MOBILE APPS
Several definitions for usability can be found in the
technical literature. For example, ISO-9241 [8] defines
usability as "the extent to which a product can be used by
specified users to achieve specified goals with effectiveness,
efficiency and satisfaction in a specific context of use”.
With the emergence and rapid deployment of mobile
technologies, the usability of applications developed for this
platform has been the focus of several studies. According to
Duh et al. [3], a good project, besides meeting the needs of
the market and providing the device user satisfaction, can
also reduce physical and mental stress, reduce the learning
curve, improve the operability of device use and, thus,
improve the overall product quality.
Zhang et al. [10] claimed that the mobile usability
includes some of the new challenges related to mobility, such
as: mobile context, connectivity, small screen size, different
display resolutions, limited capacity and power processing,
data entry methods, interaction with multi-touch screen,
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

show
different
resolutions
and
dimensions,
device
orientation changes and gestures such as tap, flick, and
pinch. Thus, an approach aiming to evaluate the usability of
mobile apps needs to deal with these challenges.
Software usability evaluation approaches have become
increasingly
popular
in
technical
literature
[11],[12].
Usability evaluation approaches aims to obtain a third-party
judgment
regarding
user’s
characteristics
to
assess
effectively and efficiently whether a user is able to view the
content or perform a task on a specified device [10].
Some previous studies presented a usability evaluation
analysis for mobile apps. In [4], the authors presented a study
that analyzed the methodologies used to empirically evaluate
the mobile usability, classifying as laboratory experiments,
field studies and measuring practice. The study described
advantages and limitations of each method, but did not
identify/characterize the publications on usability evaluation
in the technical literature.
In [6], the authors presented a longitudinal review of
Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) research methods for
the mobile platform published until 2012, analyzing more
than 140 papers. In this study, publications were classified in
terms of their research method (case study, field of study,
action research, laboratory experiment, survey, basic and
applied research, and normative writings) and purpose
(understanding, engineering, re-engineering, evaluation and
description). This study revealed that 68% of the material
evaluated in research on human-computer interaction in
mobile
apps
until
2009
involved
mobile
usability
evaluations, where 63% of these researches made through
laboratory experiments, 29% through field studies, and 7%
through surveys.
Duh et al. [3] described a study that investigated the
differences between the usability testing on mobile phones
conducted in laboratory and real-life situations. Significant
differences were found, including the frequency and severity
of usability problems found in both scenarios, user behavior
and subjective responses to the device and the interaction
between users and the devices.
Kjeldskov
et
al.
[5]
presented
and
analyzed
six
techniques for evaluating the usability of mobile apps in
laboratory. The six techniques were analyzed using two
usability experiments. The goal was to examine whether the
evaluation of mobile systems in a controlled environment is
similar to a real user behavior.
Finally, in [10], the authors presented an overview of
existing usability studies, focusing on usability testing, and
discussed the main issues investigated in the technical
literature. Then, they proposed a generic framework and
provided detailed guidelines on how to conduct such
usability studies.
We can observe that the studies and approaches that
address the evaluation of usability in mobile apps are
dispersed in different sources in the technical literature,
making it difficult to analyze empirical evidence known
about this research area. Thus, this paper describes a
systematic
mapping
study
conducted
to
identify/characterize/evaluate
usability
evaluation
approaches for mobile applications proposed at the technical
literature. The following sections present the planning and
results of this systematic mapping study that investigated
different
perspectives
related
to
usability
evaluation
approaches for mobile apps.
III.
SYSTEMATIC MAPPING ON USABILITY EVALUATION
FOR MOBILE APPS
According to Kitchenham et al. [7], a systematic
mapping consists of a type of secondary study where the
dimensions to be evaluated in a secondary study (population,
intervention, comparison and
outcomes) are
not fully
described. This study explores a less strict research protocol
when compared to protocols commonly used in systematic
reviews.
A
good
systematic
mapping
always
considers
the
following questions [13]: identifying all published materials
related to the investigation goal; choosing criteria for the
inclusion of materials; evaluating the quality of each
material; producing the results of each material impartially;
interpreting the results; and, presenting a reasonable and
neutral summary of the results.
This research follows a systematic mapping process
described by [7], which is composed of three stages: (1) Plan
the study; (2) Conduct the review; (3) Report the results. The
activities related to the planning and conducting of this
literature systematic mapping study will be described in the
following subsections. The results from this study are
described in the subsequent section.
A.
Research Questions
The objective of this study is to identify approaches and
types of research in usability evaluation for mobile apps and
also point out the areas where the available empirical
evidences were insufficient and therefore, more studies are
needed. In order to address the objectives of this research,
four relevant research questions were prepared:
• Q1. What types of approaches have been proposed for
usability evaluation of mobile apps?
• Q2. To which category of mobile app approaches are
employed usability evaluation approaches?
• Q3. What usability attributes/factors are evaluated by
these approaches?
• Q4. Which characteristics of computational ubiquity are
evaluated by this approach?
B.
Identifying and Selection of Primary Studies
The sources used for selection of primary studies in this
study were two digital libraries: IEEExplorer and Scopus
(according to its maintainer, this online indexing service
would cover the major computing digital libraries, such as
ACM Digital Library or Science Direct. Only IEEExplorer
would be partially indexed by Scopus).
The search string used for the search of primary studies
was structured according to the rules described in [14], and
was composed of the elements Population (P), Intervention
(I), Comparison [optional in a systematic mapping study] (C)
and Outcomes (O), as follows:
• Population:
"Mobile
Application"
OR
"Mobile
Software" OR "Mobile App" OR "Mobile System".
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

• Intervention: "usability" OR "user experience" OR
"HCI" OR "human computer interaction".
• Comparison: not applied to systematic mapping study.
• Outcome: "evaluation" OR "assessment" OR "measure"
OR "experiment" OR "test" OR "inspect" OR "review".
C.
Primary Studies Inclusion Criteria
A list of primary studies was obtained through the search
string from the selected sources of bibliographic material.
Then, the following criteria for inclusion of primary studies
that were related to the objective of this study, in order to
answer the research questions, were applied: (1) It describes
research that explores usability evaluation approaches for
mobile apps; (2) It must contain a full research publication;
(3) It must be written in English; (4) It must be available for
download.
Papers duplicated on different search sources (e.g.,
papers indexed by IEEExplorer and Scopus) would have
only one instance selected in this study.
D.
Systematic Mapping Execution
The activities of execution of research string and papers
selected in this study were made between January and
February 2014.
TABLE I.
NUMBER OF SELECTERD PUBLICATIONS PER PHASE
Source
Returned Papers
Filter 1
Filter 2
Filter 3
IEEEXplorer
317
10
8
1
Scopus
53
170
93
27
TOTAL
370
180
101
28
The
preliminary
research
offered
317
relevant
publications in the Scopus library and 53 in the IEEExplorer
library. The inclusion analysis of these papers was done in
three steps (Table I):
1. Tracking the initial set of papers based on the titles,
abstracts and introduction sections.
In total, 180
publications were pre-selected to step 2;
2. Complete
reading
of
the
paper.
A
total
of
101
publications were selected. In this step, the information to
answer questions Q1, Q2 and Q3, previously presented in
section III.A, was extracted from these papers.
3. Complete reading of the article from the ubiquitous
applications point of view. 28 publications were selected
in this phase, which were used to answer Q4.
E.
Data Extraction Form
For each selected paper, we extract the main information
aiming to characterize the usability evaluation approach:
• [YEAR] Publication Year.
• [CATEGORY] Type of evaluation technique:
oStatic: methods that do not involve software execution.
oDynamic: methods involving software execution with
real/simulated data in a real or simulated environment.
• [TYPE] Type of mobile apps evaluated by the approach,
classified according to [14] as:
oNative Apps: application specifically developed to
execute on a specific device platform.
oWeb Apps: application that runs over a browser
embedded in the device and does not have access to
some device’s internal resources.
oHybrid Apps (HTML5 and widgets apps): they get
stored in the device’s main screen and can take
advantage of all devices’ internal resources, but they
can be based on HTML5 and displayed through a web
browser.
• [EVALUATION] Type of empirical evaluation applied to
the approach, according to [6]: Case Study, Field Study,
Action research, Lab experiments, Survey research,
Applied research, Basic research, Normative writings.
• [ATTRIBUTES] Attributes evaluated by the approach
(classification
proposed
by
[15]):
Efficiency,
Satisfaction, Learnability, Memorability, Errors.
• [FACTORS] Usability factors evaluated by the approach
(rating also proposed by [1]):
oUser: It is important to consider the end user of an
application during the development process.
oTask: refers here to the goal the user is trying to
accomplish with the mobile application.
oContext of Use: refers here to the environment in
which the user will use the application.
• [UBIQUITOUS] Ubiquitous characteristics evaluated by
the
approach
(classification
proposed
by
[16]):
Pervasiveness services, Invisibility, Context awareness,
Adaptive behavior, Experiences Capture, Functionality
composition, Spontaneous interoperability, Heterogeneity
of devices, and Fault tolerance.
IV.
RESULTS ANALYSIS
The
usability
evaluation
approaches
for
mobile
applications were analyzed according to the characteristics
defined in the data extraction form (Section III.E). Thus, the
overall results for each research question (presented in
section III.A) and attributes extracted from the evaluation
approaches are discussed in subsequent sections.
A.
Analysis by Publication Year
In
this
study,
we
identified
usability
evaluation
approaches for mobile apps published from 2004 to 2014
(when the study was run).
Figure 1.
Analysis of papers by publication year.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The distribution of results is displayed graphically in
Figure 1, where it is observed that there was a considerable
increase in research on usability evaluation for mobile apps
in the community recently (mainly in the past 2 years). This
indicates the need for research in this area and shows the
evolution in the level of importance of the issue. With the
advances in mobile technology in bringing the concept of
ubiquity, this area tends to become more interesting for
future research [15].
We also noticed the number of usability evaluation
approaches for ubiquitous mobile apps remained stable from
2009 until 2013. This 5-year interval has 18 of the 28 papers
found in this study. This shows that the need for evaluation
in ubiquitous mobile apps is really relevant to the academy
and its interest in academic research is growing in the last
years.
B.
Analysis by Type of Evaluation Technique
In order to answer the question Q1 discussed in section
III.A, an analysis of evaluation techniques per category was
made (Figure 2).
Figure 2.
Analysis by evaluation technique category
We
observed
the
category
of
usability
evaluation
techniques most frequent are dynamic approaches (77/101
for mobile apps; 25/28 for ubiquitous mobile apps). This
result is justified due to the need of assessing the app on a
scenario closer to reality, possibly by using dynamic
approaches, making the evaluation more efficient.
C.
Analysis by Mobile App Category
In order to answer the question Q2 discussed in section
III.A, an analysis per mobile app category evaluated by the
identified approaches was performed (Figure 3).
Among the categories analyzed in this study, it is
remarkable that native apps have been more explored in
research with the purpose of evaluating usability attributes in
general and ubiquitous mobile apps. The reason could be the
requirements, accessibility, and restriction issues imposed by
mobile platforms. Then, the second more explored category
is web apps, due to the popularity of this type of application
for the mobile platform.
Figure 3.
Analysis of mobile application category
Finally, evaluations in hybrid apps are starting to emerge,
because it represents a new trend of development of mobile
apps, justifying the small number of research in the area. All
authors who proposed usability evaluation approaches for
hybrid apps highlighted that this category is emerging and
needs more research, not only for evaluation of usability, but
also for application development.
D.
Analysis by Empirical Evaluation Type
We also analyzed the type of empirical evaluation
applied to the selected approaches, as shown in Figure 4. The
results indicate that several authors have chosen to apply
empirical techniques as a strategy for the final assessment of
the
proposed
approaches.
The
results
indicate
the
predominance of Case Studies (40/101), followed by Field
Studies (29/101) and Lab Experiments (25/101). Three type
of empirical evaluation were not found in the selected
papers: Normative writings, Applied Research, and Basic
Research. Analyzing the results for Ubiquitous Mobile Apps,
they indicate approximate values between the same three
types of evaluation: Field Study, with (10/28, followed by
Case Study (9/28) and Lab Experiment (8/28).
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 4.
Analysis by type of experiment.
Trying to understand the result, we could observe the
types of investigation most applied to evaluate the proposed
approaches
(case,
field,
and
lab
study)
were
formal
investigations, having more credibility in the academy. This
scenario can justify the difference obtained when compared
to other types of investigations.
E.
Analysis by Usability Attributes
In order to answer the question Q3 addressed in Section
III.A, an analysis by usability attributes was performed, as
shown in Figure 5. We observed that user satisfaction is the
most investigated attribute in the identified approaches
(67/101 papers) on mobile apps, and it is the second more
investigated in ubiquitous mobile apps (15/28 papers). In this
analysis, a paper could address one or more attributes,
justifying that the sum of the numbers distributed among the
attributes is greater than the number of identified papers.
Figure 5.
Usability Attributes Analysis
It is not possible to conclude that a usability attribute, for
being more addressed than others, would be more or less
relevant to be evaluated for mobile apps. The results only
describe the state of the art on the use of these attributes in
the academy. However, an interesting aspect may be
observed: the Cognitive Load attribute was only used in
mobile apps that deal with context awareness requirements,
one of the features present in ubiquitous mobile apps
(question 4, to be discussed below).
F.
Analysis by Usability Factors
Yet to answer the question Q3 addressed in section III.A,
an analysis by usability factors was done, as shown in Figure
6. Analyzing the results, we observed that the factors user
(60/108) and tasks (66/108) are more frequent in the selected
papers. In general, most of the papers when dealing with one
of these factors also deal with the second one. The evaluation
of the factor context of use was observed only in approaches
that deal with context awareness requirements. In this
analysis, a paper could address one or more factors,
justifying that the sum of the numbers distributed among the
factors is greater than the number of identified papers.
Figure 6.
Analysis of Usability Factors
Furthermore, this also shows us that ubiquitous mobile
applications can be evaluated recitals three factors as context
of use with 21 identified papers, the user featuring 14 papers
and 17 papers task with a total of 28.
G.
Ubiquitous Features Analysis
In order to answer the question Q4 addressed in Section
III.A, an analysis of ubiquitous feature evaluated by the
identified approaches was done (Figure 7). In [16], a table
with ubiquity characteristics from a functional point of view
is presented.
Only 28 papers addressed the usability evaluation for
mobile apps with characteristics of computational ubiquity.
Among the 10 characteristics defined in [16], only 5 were
addressed in papers identified in this study, suggesting that
these would be the computational ubiquitous features that
could be evaluated by means of usability requirements.
Furthermore,
we
observed
that
the
definition
of
pervasiveness services suggests it as a main feature of
ubiquity. Thus, in the case of ubiquitous mobile apps,
pervasiveness services feature will always be present. This
explains why all 28 papers that deal with usability evaluation
approaches for ubiquitous mobile apps cite this feature, but
did not propose an approach to analyze this feature for
ubiquitous mobile apps.
The distribution of the papers among the ubiquitous
characteristics is presented in Figure 7.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 7. Feature of ubiquity analysis
By
analyzing
the
results,
we
observed
that
the
characteristics context awareness was addressed in 21
papers. We observed that in other characteristics, few studies
addressing usability evaluation were found. One factor that
may hinder this analysis is that each ubiquity feature has a
vast array of settings and areas that still need to be analyzed
from a usability point of view. We could observe that
research in the field of usability in mobile apps that deal with
each ubiquity feature is still quite scarce. This shows good
opportunities for research in this domain area.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
The number of mobile apps used in daily life is
continuously growing and so is the search on their quality.
Despite
this
evolution,
if
we
compare
the
demand
implementation of ubiquity characteristics, which is a factor
present currently in many apps, we can observe that there is
still a need for studies on mobile apps usability evaluation.
The results of this systematic mapping study revealed
some perspectives about the approaches to support the
evaluation of usability in mobile apps in the last 10 years.
For example, they indicate that such approaches mainly
utilize dynamic techniques (e.g., testing). Many publications
brought justification for use of such technique, saying that
the context of use was the main reason for choosing the
testing technique.
We also observed that native and web apps have been the
focus of usability evaluation approaches for mobile apps,
which indicates a need for attention to hybrid apps, which
are partly native and partly web application.
In order to evaluate the techniques, experimentation is
ahead of the other techniques. The justifications of the
authors are related to the restrictions that mobile apps need,
what could be settled in an empirical evaluation.
We also observed that a small number of studies covers
ubiquitous mobile apps. Soon, there will be the necessity for
more studies on this topic.
This systematic mapping was done in order to identify
which types of research in mobile app usability evaluation
are being used in the academy. With the results obtained
from the mapping, it is possible
identify the areas most
addressed by the community in which there are a large
number of studies and point out the areas where the available
evidence is insufficient and therefore more studies are
needed.
The need for studies focused on different ubiquity factors
oriented mobile apps is noticeable. Future work can be made,
such as: choose the type of mobile application category that
can be web applications, native applications or hybrid
applications and instantiate ubiquity factors to usability
evaluations. There is a clear need for approaches, processes,
tools to support the assessment of usability in ubiquitous
mobile applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank FAPEAM and INDT for their
financial support.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Harrison, D. Flood, and D. Duce, Usability of mobile
applications: literature review and rationale for a new
usability model, “Journal of Interaction Science 1 (1), 2013,
pp. 1-16.
[2]
Global
mobile
statistics
2011,
<http://mobithinking.com/mobilemarketing-tools/latest-
mobile-stats> 2014/05/13
[3]
H. Duh, G. Tan, and V. Chen, “Usability evaluation for
mobile device: a comparison of laboratory and field tests,”
Proceedings of the 8th conference on Human-computer
interaction with mobile devices and services (MobileHCI),
2006, pp. 181-186.
[4]
F. Nayebi, J. M. Desharnais and A. Abran, “The State of the
Art of Mobile Application Usability Evaluation,” In: 25th
IEEE
Canadian
Conference
on
Electrical
Computer
Engineering CCECE, 2012, pp.1-4.
[5]
J. Kjeldskov and J. Stage, “New techniques for usability
evaluation of mobile systems,” In: International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 2004, pp. 599-620.
[6]
J. Kjeldskov and J. Paay, “A longitudinal review of Mobile
HCI research methods,” In: International Conference on
Human-computer
interaction
with
mobile
devices
and
services (MobileHCI), 2012, pp. 69-78.
[7]
B. Kitchenham and S. Charters, “Guidelines for performing
Systematic Literature Reviews” in Software Engineering,
EBSE Technical Report EBSE-2007-001, Department of
Computer Science, University of Durham, 2007.
[8]
ISO 9241-11 “Ergonomic Requirements for Office Work with
Visual Display Terminals (VDTs)” International Standards
Organisation, Geneva, 1997.
[9]
ISO/IEC 25000.” Software Engineering -- Software product
Quality Requirements and Evaluation (SQuaRE) -- Guide to
SQuaRE”, (2003/2014).
[10] D. Zhang and B. Adipat, “Challenges, methodologies, and
issues in the usability testing of mobile applications,”
International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, vol.
18, no. 3, 2005, pp. 293-308.
[11] M. Billi, L. Burzagli, T. Catarci, G. Santucci, E. Bertini, F.
Gabbanini, and E. Palchetti, “A unified methodology for the
evaluation
of
accessibility
and
usability
of
mobile
applications,” Universal Access in the Information Society
(9:4), 2010, pp 337-356.
[12] K.
Hornbæk,
“Dogmas in
the assessment
of usability
evaluation methods,” Behaviour & Information Technology
(29:1), 2010, pp 97-111.
[13] E. Mendes, “A systematic review of web engineering
research”, Proceedings of the International Symposium on
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Empirical Software Engineering (ISESE), Australia, 2005, pp.
498-507.
[14] M. Pai, M. McCulloch, J. D. Gorman, N. Pai, W. Enanoria, G.
Kennedy and J. M. Colford Jr, “Systematic reviews and meta-
analyses: an illustrated,’ step-by-step guide. Natl Med J
India. Mar-Apr, 2004, pp 86–95.
[15] J. Nielsen, “Usability engineering. Morgan Kaufmann Pub,”
(1994).
[16] R. O. Spínola, H. T. Guilherme, “Towards a framework to
characterize ubiquitous software projects, Information and
Software Technology,” Volume 54, Issue 7, July 2012, pp
759-785.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

