Handling Positioning Errors in Location-based Services
Philipp Marcus and Claudia Linnhoff-Popien
Institute of Computer Science
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit¨at M¨unchen, Germany
Emails: {philipp.marcus, linnhoff}@iﬁ.lmu.de
Abstract—Location–based services (LBS) shall typically only
be provided within an authorized zone. This is enforced by
location–based access control (LBAC) and affected by occurring
positioning errors. Recent research has brought up different
approaches for LBAC strategies. However, up to now it is unclear
which strategy should be chosen for a given LBS and positioning
system under realistic boundary conditions. In detail, the false
authorization decision may cause severe additional costs when
operating the underlying LBS. Hence, this paper presents a
methodology to analyze the expected costs of LBAC strategies
under the occurrence of positioning errors. The correlation to the
practical costs occurring under realistic conditions is evaluated
in an extensive case study. It is shown that in certain situations
risk–based authorization is easily mislead by imprecise position
error estimates and thus games away its theoretical superiority.
In such situations, ignoring estimated errors may even yield lower
expected costs of operating the LBS. The presented methodology
contributes to ﬁnding the most suitable authorization strategy
when deploying a LBS. This ﬁnally helps to reduce costs occurring
from false authorization decisions when operating the LBS.
Keywords—Location–based Access Control; Risk–aware Autho-
rization; Positioning Errors
I.
INTRODUCTION
Mobile devices with their integrated positioning capabili-
ties enabled LBS, which nowadays are of substantial impor-
tance for most users and service providers [1]. A subclass of
LBS are zone–based. Here, a user is granted the authorization
to use a LBS if he resides within a predeﬁned authorized
zone. For example, imagine a museum that provides an audio
guide for mobile devices. The guide’s explanations for an
exhibition room shall only be audible if the user payed the
room’s entrance fee and is inside. In order to enforce such
authorization semantics, LBAC systems have been developed.
Those systems employ the user’s current location measurement
to decide about the permission to use a given LBS. Such LBS
require precise location measurements, which are unfortunately
inherently affected by a varying degree of uncertainty, for ex-
ample due to changing environmental inﬂuences or imprecise
sensors. Thus, the most precise formalization of the real user
location is done by adhering an according probability density
function (pdf) as the position estimate, which is ﬁnally derived
from measurements.
An appropriate LBAC strategy is crucial, as false authoriza-
tion decisions typically cause costs for false negatives and false
positives. Early approaches to LBAC focused on extending the
expressiveness of existing access control policies with spatial
information. In those approaches, possibly occurring errors are
ignored and only the most likely geographical point is used as
location estimate. Here, authorization decisions are derived by
checking whether the punctual location estimate is contained
within the polygon of the authorized zone. Those approaches
ignore possibly occurring positioning uncertainty and costs and
are thus called risk–ignoring for the rest of this paper. The sec-
ond category comprises threshold–based approaches to LBAC.
Here, the position estimate pdf is employed to derive the
probability that the user resides within the authorized zone. A
threshold is predeﬁned by the policy designer as the minimum
required probability in order to be authorized for using the
LBS. Here, costs are not considered and often, the derivation
of an appropriate threshold is left unspeciﬁed. Even risk–based
LBAC strategies were developed. Here, authorization decisions
are ﬁnally derived based on cost functions and the probability
that the user resides within the authorized zone. In detail, such
LBAC systems only grant the authorization if the expected
costs of a false positive undershoot the expected cost of a
false negative. This method is theoretically optimal [2].
However, up to now it is unclear which LBAC strategy
should be chosen in practice. Furthermore, it has not been
studied how the superiority of the risk–based approach depends
on the cost functions for false authorization decisions and the
accuracy of the positioning system. In detail, there is urgent
need to clarify the effect of statistically imperfect position
estimates on the superiority of the risk–based approach. A
methodology for choosing that LBAC strategy with the lowest
expected cost of false authorization decisions when operating
the LBS is non–existent. Nevertheless, such a methodology is
urgently needed in order to avoid costly wrong decisions when
choosing the authorization strategy for a LBS.
In order to solve this problem, this paper presents a novel
approach to analyze the expected costs of false authorization
decisions in the forefront of a LBS’s deployment. In detail, a
methodology for computing the expected costs when operat-
ing the risk–ignoring, threshold–based and risk–based LBAC
strategy is proposed. Given the error characteristics of the
underlying positioning system, this facilitates the computation
of expected savings when operating the theoretically optimal
risk–based strategy compared to the risk–ignoring strategy.
This allows to illustrate the LBS’s sensitivity to statistically
imprecise position estimates of the positioning system. The
need for such analysis is demonstrated for an indoor–LBS in a
typical ofﬁce environment with WiFi ﬁngerprinting as location
provider. The theoretical optimality of the risk–based approach
is shown to be highly dependent on the LBS’s parameters
and the quality of the reported position estimates. The rest of
the paper is structured as follows: Section II gives a detailed
view on related work. Next, Section III presents the theoretical
approach to analyze the superiority of the risk–based LBAC
strategy. Section IV presents a case study to illustrate the
urgent necessity of a detailed analysis before choosing a LBAC
strategy. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

II.
RELATED WORK
Location information has been widely used for spatial au-
thorization systems and provisioning of LBS in particular. Of-
ten, these methods are called LBAC or spatial access control.
One important subset of LBAC systems employs the estimated
location in order to determine if the user resides within a
prescribed authorized zone. If true, the access right is granted.
Important approaches provide sophisticated spatial extensions
to role–based access control (RBAC) [3]–[5]. However, even
recently published work, for example from Abdunabi et al.
uses the reported user location without any consideration of
measurement uncertainty [6]. Unfortunately, these approaches
do not show the effectiveness of this strategy when applied to
realistic and error–prone location providers. It is left unclear,
if this strategy is suitable for a given authorized zone and
a concrete location provider. Ardagna et al. proposed an
approach which employs a conﬁdence value for the probability
that the user resides within a predeﬁned authorized zone [7].
If this value overshoots a predeﬁned threshold, the access
right is granted. Thresholds are derived empirically based on
estimates about the positioning system’s sensitivity to changing
weather and environmental conditions. Also, the number of
sensors is mentioned as an important factor when deﬁning a
threshold. However, no concrete methodology to provide any
justiﬁcation of derived thresholds is given. Shin et al. deﬁne
an authorization policy, which also grants access if the user
resides within an authorized zone with a conﬁdence value
larger than a predeﬁned threshold [8]. Here, the uncertainty
of a position ﬁx is modeled as a probability distribution. The
conﬁdence value is derived by integrating the probability dis-
tribution over the authorized zone. The thresholds are derived
for each access rule individually depending on whether the
authorized zone demands high security or is an area of low
sensitivity. Again, only very abstract and vague statements
about deriving a suitable threshold are mentioned. Krautsevich
et al. consider costs when making authorization decisions
based on the values of discrete attributes with uncertain values
[2]. A threshold–based authorization strategy is shown to be
cost–optimal in their scenario for a certain threshold based
on cost functions. However, the approach does not show
the inﬂuence of the uncertainty estimates’ quality on the
cost–effectiveness of their strategy. Marcus et al. proposed a
risk–aware approach for trajectory–based authorization using
probabilistic trajectories derived from an adapted particle ﬁlter
in combination with WiFi ﬁngerprinting [9]. Here, expected
costs and the corresponding risk are minimized by adhering
assigned cost functions of false authorization decisions and the
probability that the user’s trajectory satisﬁes the authorization
condition.
Error estimators of positioning systems are needed to oper-
ate threshold–based and risk–based LBAC strategies. Basically,
given an estimated location µ, an error estimate is a probability
distribution P(µ|x) describing the likelihood to observe an
estimated location of µ when standing at position x in the
real–world. Hightower et al. [10] use a commercial infrared
badge system and an ultrasound time–of–ﬂight badge system.
The infrared error estimates are a static bivariate Gaussian with
a covariance matrix Σ =

(µ, Σ). The most basic LBAC strategy is the risk–ignoring
authorization strategy as employed in [3]–[6]. Here, only the
estimated position µ is considered, when deriving the autho-
rization decision. In detail, this strategy performs a simple
point in polygon test to determine, if the estimated position
µ is contained within the authorized zone Z:
auth ⇔ µ ∈ Z
(1)
The main advantage of such systems is the low computational
overhead and the efﬁciency of point in polygon tests. In
detail, no error estimate needs to be derived and no complex
numerical operations need to be performed.
In order to consider the occurring uncertainty of a position
ﬁx (µ, Σ), the threshold–based LBAC strategy derives its
authorization decision based on the probability pZ that the user
resides within the authorized zone Z, [2,7,8]. This probability
is derived from the estimated position µ and the error estimate
Σ and needs to overshoot the threshold:
auth ⇔ pZ (µ, Σ) > threshold
(2)
A drawback of this strategy is the dependence on reliable
error estimators and the computational overhead of computing
pZ (µ, Σ). Furthermore, it is not clear, which threshold makes
sense for a given LBS.
A more sophisticated strategy is the risk–based strategy
[2] [9]. Here, the expected costs of granting or denying the
authorization request are compared. In particular, the autho-
rization request is only granted, if the expected cost cfp of
a false positive undershoot the expected cost cfn of a false
negative. The expected cost can also be interpreted as the risk
of each outcome:
auth ⇔ (1 − pZ (µ, Σ)) · cfp < pZ (µ, Σ) · cfn
(3)
This has the same computational complexity as the threshold–
based strategy. Its main advantage is its decision–theoretical
optimality given statistically perfect error estimates Σ, which
will be discussed in detail later in Section IV.
The risk–based strategy is a real generalization of the
threshold–based strategy. Obviously, according to (3), the risk–
based strategy depends on the static costs cfp and cfn and the
ratio cfp
cfn in detail. For each ratio cfp
cfn , there exists exactly one
value of threshold such that a threshold–based strategy with
threshold behaves exactly like a risk–based strategy with cfp
cfn .
This easily follows from resolving (3) to pZ, which ﬁnally
represents the corresponding value of threshold:
threshold =
cfp
cfn
1 + cfp
cfn
(4)
This correspondence is depicted in Figure 1. Clearly, the higher
the cost of a false positive compared to the cost of a false
negative, the higher the corresponding value of threshold,
which converges to 1. The knowledge of this correspondence
has two positive effects. On the one hand, existing LBAC
policies based on the threshold–based strategy can be assigned
comprehensible thresholds given the cost functions of the
underlying service or resource to be granted. This correspon-
dence ﬁnally allows to derive such values of threshold that
the threshold–based strategy also yields risk–optimal decisions
given the speciﬁc cost functions for the LBS to be deployed.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Ratio cfp/cfn
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Threshold
Fig. 1.
Correspondence of a risk–based LBAC strategy with a given value of
cfp
cfn to a threshold–based LBAC strategy with a predeﬁned value of threshold.
On the other hand, analysis of a risk–based strategy deployed
for a LBS also allows to assess a threshold–based strategy
with a corresponding threshold. However, in real situations,
both strategies are subject to the quality of the underlying
error estimator. Statistically imperfect error estimators may
under- or overestimate the real error, which is a severe weak
point compared to the risk–ignoring strategy. In order to ﬁnally
derive the most suitable LBAC strategy for a given LBS, ﬁrst,
the theoretically expected costs for each LBAC strategy are
derived in the next section.
C. The Expected Costs of LBAC strategies
In this section, a methodology is derived to compare the
LBAC strategies w.r.t. the expected costs of false authorization
decisions. These expected costs are highly dependent on cfp
and cfn and the uncertainty of underlying position ﬁxes. In
order to decide about the authorization of a requesting user to
use a given LBS, the underlying LBAC strategy is provided
a position ﬁx (µ, Σ) to check the authorization conditions
according to the aforementioned methods. Given this position
ﬁx, the statistical distribution of the user’s ground truth position
x around µ is denoted as the probability density function
Fµ,Σ(x). Note, the distribution of error estimation scale pa-
rameters Σ is denoted as Ferr in the following.
In the next step, a methodology is presented, which allows
to assess the expected costs E(costsi) for each LBAC strat-
egy i ∈ {risk–ignoring, risk–based, threshold–based}. This is
achieved by employing a function costsi(µ, Σ) denoting the
expected costs arising from a possibly false decision when
authorizing a user with position ﬁx (µ, Σ) with LBAC strategy
i. Therefore, for each LBAC strategy i, the expectation of
occurring costs is derived w.r.t. the set R ⊆ R2 of possible
estimated locations µ ∈ R and the distribution of occurring
error estimates Ferr(Σ):
E(costsi) =
1
|R|
Z
µ∈R
Z ∞
0
costsi(µ, Σ) · Ferr(Σ) dΣ dµ (5)
The rest of this section focuses on deriving the function
costsi (µ, Σ) for each LBAC strategy i in order to ﬁnally derive
its expected overall costs E(costsi) according to (5).
In order to derive E(costsi) for each LBAC strategy i,
the function costsi(µ, Σ) needs to be speciﬁed ﬁrst. Here, a
prerequisite is the computation of the probability pZ (µ, Σ) that
a user with position ﬁx (µ, Σ) resides within the authorized
zone Z:
pZ (µ, Σ) =
Z
x∈Z
Fµ,Σ(x) d x
(6)
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

In the following, p is used as an abbreviation for pZ (µ, Σ) if
no ambiguities exist. Finally, this allows to derive the expected
costs for each LBAC strategy given a position ﬁx (µ, Σ).
1) Deriving Expected Costs of Risk–ignoring Approaches:
Given a position ﬁx (µ, Σ), the risk–ignoring approach simply
checks if µ ∈ Z. Nevertheless, the user’s ground truth position
x is distributed according to the position ﬁx’ pdf Fµ,Σ(x) and
consequently lies outside of Z with probability of (1 − p).
Thus, if the authorization request with the estimated location
µ is denied, the probability of a false negative is p. Contrary,
if the authorization is granted, the decision is a false positive
with probability (1 − p). Assume both cases to cause costs cfn
and cfp, respectively. This ﬁnally allows to derive the expected
costs:
costsrisk–ignoring (µ, Σ) =

(1 − p) · cfp,
iff µ ∈ Z
p · cfn,
else
(7)
Note, that given a position ﬁx µ, the risk–ignoring strategy
unfortunately may even choose that authorization decision with
higher expected cost.
2) Expected Costs of Threshold–based Approaches: Given
a position ﬁx (µ, Σ), the threshold–based strategy derives its
authorization decision based on checking whether probability
p that the user resides within Z exceeds a predeﬁned threshold.
The probability is derived according to (6). Finally, this allows
to compute the expected costs for the threshold–based strategy
for each possible position ﬁx (µ, Σ):
coststhreshold–based (µ, Σ) =

(1 − p) · cfp,
iff p ≥ threshold
p · cfn,
else
(8)
Again, despite the expected cost of an authorization decision,
only the satisfaction of the threshold is considered.
3) Expected Costs of Risk–based Approaches: The risk–
based LBAC strategy ﬁrst computes the expected costs of
either granting or denying an issued authorization request.
Clearly, this results from multiplying the cost of cfp and cfn
with their individual probability of occurrence (1 − p) and p.
Finally, that authorization decision is taken, which promises
lower expected costs. Formally, the expected costs for granting
or denying the authorization request compute as:
costsrisk–based (µ, Σ) = min ((1 − p) · cfp, p · cfn)
(9)
Clearly, the risk–based approach always derives that authoriza-
tion decision with the minimal expected costs. Thus, when-
ever the risk–ignoring or threshold–based strategy choose that
authorization decision with lower expected costs by chance,
the risk–based strategy will consequently also choose that
decision. This implies, that the expected costs of the risk–based
strategy theoretically are a lower bound for the expected cost
of any other LBAC strategy.
D. Analyzing the Expected Costs of LBAC strategies
As seen above, the expected costs of the risk–based
LBAC strategy are a theoretical lower ound for the expected
costs of the risk–ignoring and threshold–based strategy. The
percentaged savings E(S) w.r.t. any LBAC strategy j
∈
{risk–ignoring, threshold–based} compute as:
E (S) = E (costsj) − E (costsrisk–based)
E (costsj)
(10)
The theoretically expected savings E (S) from fewer false
authorization decisions are laying the foundation for deciding
about the overall most cost–effective authorization strategy.
Given the boundary conditions Z, Ferr and R of a LBS,
the expected savings E (S) strongly depend on the ratio
cfp
cfn
of the LBS’s costs for false authorization decisions. Hence,
the theoretically expected savings E (S) for a ratio of cfp
cfn will
ﬁnally play a major role when choosing the practically most
cost–effective LBAC strategy. This will be explained later in
Section IV in detail.
The dependence of E (S) on cfp
cfn is exemplary depicted in
Figure 2 for ﬁve theoretical examples with increasingly more
inaccurate positioning systems and an authorized zone of 5 ×
5 m. Note, µ is the mean of Ferr in this ﬁgure. The curves are
derived using (5). Clearly, the expected savings E (S) show
0
2
4
6
8
10
cfp/cfn
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
E(S)
µ =0.30, λ =1.60
µ =0.46, λ =2.40
µ =0.61, λ =3.19
µ =0.76, λ =3.99
µ =0.91, λ =4.79
Fig. 2.
Theoretically computed expected savings E (S) for ﬁve different
distributions of inverse Gaussian distributions of Ferr.
a minimum for each distribution of errors Ferr. The valleys
around the minima of the graph E(S) spread with increasing
accuracy of the positioning system. This coincides with the
intuition, that the expected savings from operating the risk–
based strategy are higher if the positioning system is more
inaccurate.
The dependence of the expected savings on the ratio
of costs
cfp
cfn is a direct consequence of the dependence of
costsrisk–based(µ, Σ) on cfp
cfn . Given a ﬁxed value of Σ, savings
can only arise for such estimated locations µ where the risk–
based approach takes a different authorization decision than
the risk–ignoring approach. Clearly, the larger the set of such
estimated locations µ, the larger the expected savings. This
correlation is depicted in Figure 3 in 1D for a authorized
zone of 5 m, and Gaussian error estimates with a ﬁxed
value of Σ = 3.5 m. The difference of cost functions for
the risk–based and risk–ignoring LBAC strategy is marked
green. Here, cost functions cfp = cfn = 1 were chosen, i.e.,
the risk–based LBAC strategy only authorizes a request with
position ﬁx (µ, Σ) if p > 0.5 according to (4). As the risk–
ignoring strategy authorizes all µ ∈ Z, the risk–based approach
only derives a more cost–effective decision for such µ with
p(µ, 3.5 m) < 0.5.
If the ratio of costs was increased, the shape of cost
functions in Figure 3 changes accordingly. In detail, the
threshold required by the risk–based LBAC strategy rises
according to (4), which increases the set of µ ∈ Z where
the risk–based approach denies the authorization and thus
has lower expected costs. However, if the threshold implied
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Location [m]
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Probability
Z
p(µ, Σ =3.5m)
costsrisk−ignoring(µ ,Σ =3.5m)
costsrisk−based(µ, Σ =3.5m)
Fig. 3.
A 1D example of an authorized zone Z showing the expected costs
for the risk–ignoring and risk–based strategy for a ﬁxed value Σ and cost
functions cfp = cfn = 1. The green area marks difference of costs.
by the ratio of costs ﬁnally overshoots the maximum of p
within Z, all authorization requests will be denied by the risk–
based strategy. Equally, if the ratio is decreased, the threshold
required by the risk–based strategy decreases according to (4).
If the required threshold undershoots the value of p on the
boundary of Z, the set of location estimates authorized by
the risk–based strategy also includes µ ̸∈ Z. If the ratio of
costs converges to 0, the set of authorized µ and the expected
savings converge to inﬁnity. Both authorization strategies yield
the same expected costs if the threshold implied by the ratio
of costs according to (4) corresponds to the value of p on the
boundaries of Z. In that case, the risk–based and the risk–
ignoring approach show identical behavior. If the distribution
of Ferr shows a high probability for such Σ which cause an
identical or nearly identical behavior of the risk–based and
risk–ignoring strategy, the expected savings E(S) will ﬁnally
have a lower minimum. Intuitively, the lower the value of
this minimum and the wider the valley around it, the more
sensitive is the risk–based strategy to statistically imprecise
error estimates Σ. In detail, the risk–based strategy might
be mislead by wrong error estimates and game away the
theoretically small beneﬁt. Thus, the next section evaluates
the weakness of the risk–based strategy when deployed with
realistic error estimators.
IV.
USE CASE: DEPLOYING A ZONE–BASED LBS IN AN
OFFICE ENVIRONMENT
The expected savings of the risk–based strategy are now ex-
emplary evaluated in a use case in a typical ofﬁce environment.
Here, WiFi ﬁngerprinting is used as the underlying positioning
system. A radiomap of 206 ﬁngerprints was recorded within
an area of 1400 m2 as depicted in Figure 4. An overall set
of 1500 test ﬁngerprints was recorded, each labeled with the
room where it was recorded. All areas outside the labeled
rooms shown in Figure 4 were assigned the label outside.
Positioning is performed according to prior work, where a
kNN approach with k = 4 is used [13]. The position estimate
is derived as the weighted mean of the nearest neighbors.
Two error estimators, a Laplace and Gaussian error estimator,
were used in order to compare the impact of the statistical
quality of returned error estimates on the expected savings
E(S). The Gaussian error estimator returns bivariate normal
distributions and is deﬁned according to prior work [13]. In
detail, the aforementioned scale parameter Σ corresponds to
02
01
03
04
06
05
07
09
08
10
Fig. 4.
The recorded radiomap of ﬁngerprints (points) used for WiFi
ﬁngerprinting, installed access points (diamonds) and labeled ofﬁces.
the covariance matrix of the returned Gaussian and is deﬁned
as Σ =

0
2
4
6
8
10
cfp/cfn
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
E(S)
E(S) with Laplacian Err. Est.
E(S) with Gaussian Err. Est.
E(S) with Laplacian Err. Est. (agg. rooms)
E(S) with Gaussian Err. Est. (agg. rooms)
Fig. 6.
In our experiment, the Gaussian error estimator clearly compromises
the theoretical optimality of the risk–based approach under realistic conditions.
rooms have a negative minimum. For both, the Laplace and
the Gaussian error estimator, the expected savings for the
run with aggregated rooms are slightly lower than for the
single, non–aggregated rooms. This stems from the intuitive
fact, that the application of the risk-based strategy is more
promising if the rooms are small compared to the estimated
errors. Consequently, for aggregated rooms, the minimum for
the theoretically expected savings is lower than for non–
aggregated rooms and hence, the small superiority is gamed
away more easily by imprecise error estimates. Finally, the
evaluation results show several important implications. First,
the optimality of the risk–based strategy strongly depends on
the statistical correctness of the underlying error estimator.
The extent of its statistical error compared to the authorized
zone also shows a negative effect on the expected savings of
the risk–based LBAC strategy. Hence, the cost–optimal LBAC
strategy can only be determined by recording a set of test data
around the authorized zone of the LBS in the forefront of its
deployment. This test data needs to be evaluated with a suitable
error estimator for the underlying positioning system. If the
expected savings E(S) are negative or near 0 for the LBS’s
ratio of costs
cfp
cfn , the application of the risk–based strategy
is most likely inferior to the risk–ignoring strategy. However,
when such evaluations are performed in order to decide about
the most suitable LBAC strategy, a large number of test data
is necessary in order to obtain statistically sound results.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper examined the problem of choosing an appropri-
ate location–based authorization strategy, for example needed
for LBS, under the occurrence of positioning errors. First,
expected costs of operation were theoretically derived for three
distinct authorization strategies. The risk–ignoring, threshold–
based and risk–aware strategy. It was shown that the superiority
of the risk–aware to the risk–ignoring strategy strongly de-
pends on the ratio of costs of false positive and false negative
decisions and is minimal for a speciﬁc ratio of these costs.
In a practical evaluation, the risk–aware policy was shown
to be easily mislead to suboptimal decisions when operated
with statistically imperfect error estimators. This clearly shows
that in practice the widely accepted theoretical superiority
of risk–based authorization strongly depends on the ratio of
costs and the quality of the error estimator. Furthermore, it is
shown that the superiority of the risk–based approach needs
to be empirically asserted if the LBS’s ratio of costs is near
the theoretical minimum of expected savings. Clearly, when
deploying a LBS, choosing the right authorization strategy is
crucial in order to minimize the expected costs arising from
false authorization decisions. Regardless of the importance of
the correct choice, this question has not been studied under
realistic assumptions up to now. Thus, the results presented in
this paper show that the theoretically optimal strategy is not
the most effective strategy in all cases under realistic boundary
conditions. A methodology to assess the theoretically expected
savings of the risk–based and threshold–based strategy is
presented. This ﬁnally allows to analyze if the risk–aware
strategy shows only little improvement given a speciﬁc LBS
and ﬁnally indicates if its application needs to be empirically
justiﬁed. Finally, the presented approach helps to deploy LBS
more cost–efﬁciently and thus supports their acceptance and
efﬁciency. Future work is seen in developing quality of service
metrics for LBS based on the expected costs of their operation.
In detail, the effects of imprecise position estimates on LBS
require further research.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. K¨upper, Location-Based Services: Fundamentals and Operation.
Wiley, 2005.
[2]
L. Krautsevich, A. Lazouski, F. Martinelli, and A. Yautsiukhin, “Cost-
effective enforcement of Access and Usage Control Policies under
Uncertainties,” Systems Journal, IEEE, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 223–235, 2013.
[3]
F. Hansen and V. Oleshchuk, “SRBAC: A Spatial Role-based Access
Control Model for Mobile Systems,” in Proceedings of the 7th Nordic
Workshop on Secure IT Systems (NORDSEC’03).
Citeseer, 2003, pp.
129–141.
[4]
S. M. Chandran and J. B. Joshi, “LoT-RBAC: A Location and Time-
based RBAC Model,” in Web Information Systems Engineering–WISE
2005.
Springer, 2005, pp. 361–375.
[5]
I. Ray and M. Toahchoodee, “A Spatio-temporal Role-based Access
Control Model,” in Data and Applications Security XXI.
Springer,
2007, pp. 211–226.
[6]
R. Abdunabi, I. Ray, and R. B. France, “Speciﬁcation and Analysis of
Access Control Policies for Mobile Applications.” in SACMAT, 2013,
pp. 173–184.
[7]
C. Ardagna, M. Cremonini, E. Damiani, S. di Vimercati, and P. Sama-
rati, “Supporting Location-Based Conditions in Access Control Poli-
cies,” in Proceedings of the 2006 ACM Symposium on Information,
Computer and Communications Security, ser. ASIACCS ’06.
ACM,
2006, pp. 212–222.
[8]
H. Shin and V. Atluri, “Spatiotemporal Access Control Enforcement
under Uncertain Location Estimates,” in Data and Applications Security
XXIII.
Springer, 2009, pp. 159–174.
[9]
P. Marcus, M. Kessel, and C. Linnhoff-Popien, “Enabling Trajectory
Constraints for Usage Control Policies with Backtracking Particle
Filters,” in MOBILITY 2013, The Third International Conference on
Mobile Services, Resources, and Users, 2013, pp. 52–58.
[10]
J. Hightower and G. Borriello, “Particle Filters for Location Estimation
in Ubiquitous Computing: A Case Study,” in UbiComp 2004: Ubiqui-
tous Computing.
Springer, 2004, pp. 88–106.
[11]
P. Zandbergen, “Accuracy of iPhone Locations: A Comparison of
Assisted GPS, WiFi and Cellular Positioning,” Transactions in GIS,
vol. 13, pp. 5–25, 2009.
[12]
P. A. Zandbergen, “Positional Accuracy of Spatial Data: Non-normal
Distributions and a Critique of the National Standard for Spatial Data
Accuracy,” Transactions in GIS, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 103–130, 2008.
[13]
P. Marcus, M. Kessel, and M. Werner, “Dynamic Nearest Neighbors
and Online Error Estimation for SMARTPOS,” International Journal
On Advances in Internet Technology, vol. 6, no. 1 and 2, pp. 1–11,
2013.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

