Augmented Reality as a Technological Solution in the Teaching/Learning Process in
Civil Engineering Course Classes: a Case Study
David Araujo and Luiz Philipe
Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology
Palmas, Brazil
E-mails: {iftodavidpereira, lpadias}@gmail.com
Abstract - This paper is about the use of Augmented Reality
(AR) in civil engineering classes at Federal Institute of
Education,
Science
and
Technology,
Palmas,
Brazil.
It
considers that AR is an expanding technology that is already
used in some areas and can also be applied to education. AR
can provide support for the teaching/learning process provided
to the student through visualization and manipulation since
learning improves when one sees what is being explained in a
dynamic image. This kind of technology adds information and
improves the current educational environment. This article
proposes a solution with an application to assist teachers, more
specifically concerning an undergraduate course in civil
engineering.
Keywords-Technology; Telematics; Augmented Reality; Civil
Engineering; Education.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Traditional methods are still used for teaching students in
most universities, colleges and schools around the world.
However, those methods have proved to be insufficient,
considered in terms of their efficiency [1]. Students want a
more dynamic approach in the classroom and this is possible
with the use of technology. Augmented reality can be used to
bring a new approach to a class, making it a more an exciting
experience.
This research focuses on the challenge of developing an
application with the use of AR as a contribution to
expanding the concept of learning from theoretical to
practical
experiences.
The
purpose
of
the
application
developed is to serve as a teaching material resource for
teachers to assist them in their classes and allow the students
to empirically explore some key concepts of the Basic
Sanitation I and II classes, which are undergraduate courses
in civil engineering and as a proof of concept regarding the
efficiency of augmented reality use in the teaching/learning
process.
In this work we present an easy way for developing
augmented reality solutions, without the need to know
computer programing. We then introduce the AppSheet tool
as the means for doing that.
II.
RELATED WORKS
We will present in this section, some works that use the
Google Appsheet as an easy way for developing solutions
involving database and cellular applications, in order to
demonstrate the real importance of the Google AppSheet
tools for facility the development and database operation.
Currently, technology is being used to offer ubiquitous
information solutions for all areas and problems. Mobile
devices provide a fundamental contribution in this process of
disseminating
information.
Magalhaes
et
al.
[2]
also
presented the use of a mobile application, created using an
Open Source tool, to complement the teaching of music in
second-year
high
school
classes.
The
authors
have
demonstrated the improvement in student results, through
implementing classes with the use of this tool and with
subjective evaluations provided by students.
In this regard, Manoel [3] claims that cell phones and
tablets are more common than TV sets nowadays, and there
are, on average, four mobile devices per person in a middle-
class family.Santos et al. [4], on the other hand, show that
mobile
applications
can
be
applied
in
environmental
preservation areas. To this end, the authors developed an
application that generates a kind of social network where
anyone can check to see if there is some triggering event,
spontaneous
or
caused
by
human
activity,
which
is
compromising rivers, forests, etc. The application can take
photos of the event and send them to the network in real time
and with the exact location, public agents can act.
Based on these numbers, Moreira [5] presents a solution
to
complement
the
teaching
of
mathematics
at
the
elementary school level, with the use of a mobile application.
According to the author, the use of this application in
mathematics classes, aided by the fact that all the students
have a mobile device, has made school more attractive for
students, since all of them focus more on exercises, knowing
that the answers will be provided by cell phones and ranked
as if in a game.
Mobile applications are also being used to streamline
administrative procedures. This was proposed in Martins et
al. [6], where with the help of a mobile phone, teachers in the
city of Palmas, Tocantins, can have quick access to the result
of a national student ranking test, called "Provinha Brasil",
that shows indicators of use of learning in Portuguese
Language
and
Mathematics
courses.
These
indicators
provide important information so that teachers may respond
within
the
same
school
year,
using
methodological
innovations to help students make up their deficiencies.
Therefore, in order to continue to encourage the use of
mobile applications for resolving problems with the help of
mobility, this research presents the construction of a mobile
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

application that uses AR as a tool for assisting teachers in
their classes.
III.
PROPOSAL
According to Brighenti et al., even if students study for a
long time, this may not be enough for them to adequately
understand the topics presented by the teacher/professor.
That happens because many students do not interact with the
teacher in the classroom. Because of that, interaction with a
teacher is probably the best way to encourage students for
effective participation in or out of the classroom. The
application of technology for improving availability of data
content in the classroom can be a step towards improvement
over the traditional methodologies.
Given that technology is currently present in various
areas and that advances in information technology are
changing the lives of everyone, it is necessary to include IT
in educational processes. It is possible, with the use of AR, to
improve some methods or methodologies in the teaching-
learning process used in the classrooms.
Civil engineering is an area that requires considerable
work from teachers and students. Technological resources
may bring more interaction in the classroom and may make
the classes more attractive. The possibility of viewing
objects in 3D and interacting with them, can provide teachers
and students with a new experience in the learning/teaching
process.
This paper proposes the development of a solution to
assist undergraduate course teachers in improving the reality
of the teaching/learning process and its objective is to assist
the education professionals involved in teaching in the state
of Tocantins with this technology tool. The case study
proposes to support teachers in the civil engineering course
with a case study in Basic Sanitation classes. This solution
can aid professors of any area, through the use of
technological resources that enable collaboration that can
help students to shorten the distance between theory and
practice in the classroom through information technology.
Below is an image that graphically explains the flowchart
of the solution. Figure1.
Figure 1.
Solution Flowchart.
As seen in Figure 1 above, the screens are being
presented, i.e. the modules of the proposed solution. The
Minimum Viable Product (MVP) has a login screen, a course
menu, and a menu of topics. Users will be able to access
these screens with a few clicks and thus access the content
provided by the teachers. The application has two levels of
access: Administrator level for teachers to manage content
and Default level for users accessing digital files via mobile
device.
A. Materials
The materials used to develop the MVP, the prototype
called AR applied in civil engineering (S.C.A.T.) used the
AppSheet [6] tool of Google [7] that is simply software in a
Web platform that enables the development of mobile
device-independent devices in a simple and dynamic way.
Not only does the AppSheet stand out due to its
practicality and agility in the development of mobile
applications, but another striking quality in this software is
it’s the integration with the free Google tools, notably
Google Drive [8] used for storing data and application
information. In this scenario, Google Sheets [9] were used as
a database to store application settings and data during
development and testing.
During the construction of the MVP the laboratory of the
graduate course in Telematics of the Federal Institute of
Tocantins was used, where the implementation of the tasks
proposed by the group and the use of the tools cited above
were also done. Computers (desktops) in the Telematics
laboratory were used during the classes as well as personal
smartphones of the researchers with IOS and Android
operating systems. All those tools guaranteed that the content
produced during the work was safe and available at any time,
in the cloud. Below is the list of materials used in this
research:

Desktop computer with Linux operating system
Ubuntu version 16.04 LTS.

Personal email accounts, Gmail [10] email provider,
from survey participants.

For
the
construction
of
application
usability
validation forms, Google Forms [11] was used, due
to its practicality in sharing with respondents.

To produce the application flowchart, the software
was used on a web platform called Cacoo [12].

To test the prototype, the personal smartphones of
the researchers were used, these being: a 5s from
Apple with operating system version 11.2.6 and J5
of Samsung with operating system version 6.0.1.

For dissemination and sharing of the link to forms,
social
networks
were
used:
Facebook
[13],
Instagram [14], Twitter [15] and WhatsApp [16],
with the aim of involving a larger number of
respondents.
B. Methods
This Section will present the methodology used in the
solution proposed in this article. The research was developed
in the Graduate course in Telematics. The work of the
research group consisted of meetings in the Computer
Science Laboratory of the Federal Institute Palmas campus,
alternating
with
some
virtual
meetings.
According
to
Magalhaes et al. "since the course uses Problem-Based
Learning (PBL) methodology, the first part of each meeting
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

was dedicated to solving problems that were presented to the
research group by a tutor. The second part of the meetings
was dedicated to the search for solutions.”
For virtual meetings the research group used tools such
as YouTube [17], WhatsApp, Gmail, Hangouts [18], Docs
[19], Sheets, Slides [20], Forms, and Overleaf [21]. In order
to provide students and teachers with technological tools to
support
the process
in
the
classes
using
information
technology, much of the research was dedicated to creating
an application as a solution capable of providing content
such as high-quality images, related to civil engineering in
digital formats available in the cloud and accessible through
mobile devices such as smartphones, regardless of the
operating system of the device.
A review of the literature was first carried out to
assemble the necessary requirements for development of the
Augmented
Reality
in
Civil
Engineering
(RAEC)
application, with an emphasis on learning and assimilation of
content.An MVP was created, which is simply a version of
the application with the minimum possible features, but that
maintains the essence and all the features proposed for the
application. During application development the research
group was guided by a tutor in the process of developing the
initial and other test versions.
To develop the application with the AppSheet tool, three
electronic spreadsheets were used that contained data to
model, create the tables and serve as a database for the
application. During construction of the project Programming
Object Orientation (POO) techniques were applied to create
the
tables
of
courses,
topics
and
menus,
since
the
configuration of the AppSheet tool for the display of
contents was inherited from the experience of researchers in
the area of programming and software development.
After creating the application database through the
worksheets created by the research group, these were
imported into the AppSheet tool, assuming that the tool
allows creation of an application in three ways, namely:
building an application from examples set by the tool itself,
from a blank template or from existing data in spreadsheets.
The research group chose the third option. After choosing
which option to follow, it was necessary to inform the name
of the tool and the application category. The initial functions
of the application are: Add, edit and delete.
Soon afterwards, the authors began working on the flow
that users would use to have access to the content that the
application would provide. To create the flow the authors
used the Cacoo tool mentioned in the previous section. After
discussing and drawing the flow of application functionality
and navigability, the research group began the application
design improvements, that is, the authors began to insert
pertinent to the civil engineering course; the researchers also
put in buttons and icons, changed the standard fonts of the
texts and customized Application default messages.
For
the
testing
phase
of
the
application,
when
implementing the functionality of the application, in order to
make all the necessary configurations in the tool for the
perfect functioning of the prototype the researchers had to
enter the App Stores of survey participants’ smartphones and
install the AppSheet application to have access to the project
developed. Fictitious data were thus removed and then data
such as the course name were added to the main screen of
the
application,
along
with
the
courses
and
all
the
information in the fields created in modeling the tables.
These courses served as the case study.
Tests of the application were carried out by all the
students and the faculty of the Graduate course in Telematics
and participating friends of the researchers; the tests were
necessary for the prototype to obtain contributions of
opinions, suggestions and criticisms so that the Group could
have the chance to analyze possible improvements and
functionality of flow and design in the application. The
application was tested by more than 40 people who
contributed to the advancement of the proposed solution.
IV.
RESULTS
A public opinion survey was carried out with the students
in the graduate course on usability improvements and
navigability of the prototype for the proposed solution with
the research presented in this article and the results obtained
through the preparation of five questions with an emphasis
on usability and navigability, with each issue containing ten
alternatives, on a scale of one to ten. With this research, it
was possible to create an MVP version of the proposed
application and this version went through several tests to
analyze inconsistencies in the project, including tests on
multiple platforms.
With this research the research group attempted to extract
information that would add value to the design of the
application as well as enable the navigation flow so that
people could conclude an activity in a few steps and thus
have rapid access to the contents available in the application.
Below is the graph with results obtained from applying the
questionnaire.
The
questions
applied
were:
Did
you
encounter any difficulty in navigating between the screens?
Regarding usability of the application, can you easily
identify what screen it is on? Has the application adapted to
the screen size of your Smartphone or Tablet? Can you
identify what kind of application this is?
For the first question, according to Figure 2 we obtained
a percentage of 77.8% replying "yes," while 22.2% replied
"no."
Figure 2.
Graph with the answers tothe first question in the form.
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The graph in Figure 2 presents the result of the answers
obtained from the first question applied in the design
evaluation questionnaire for the RAEC application to
measure the navigability of the prototype on the different
screens of the application This result was considered
satisfactory by the researchers, because the App is still in the
early stages.
For the second question, according to Figure 3 the results
were that 90% answered "yes" to question two, while 10% of
the answers obtained in question two were "no."
Figure 3.
Graph answers to question two.
Figure 3 shows the percentage of responses obtained
through application of questionnaire, question 2, to evaluate
the usability design of the application; the results were
satisfactory for the researchers because 90% of the people
who answered the questionnaire said they were able to easily
identify which screen they were on.
In question 3, the goal was to analyze the application's
adaptation across multiple smartphones and platforms.
According to Figure 4, the results were that 100% of the
people who tested the application said that it adapted as
expected.
Figure 4.
Graph with the answers to question 3.
In Figure 4, the graph is used to present the results
acquired by applying the questionnaire. Question 3 evaluated
the behavior of the application, and the answers indicated
that the software was adapted perfectly in different types and
screens of mobile devices.
For the fourth question, according to Figure 5 a total of
77.2% answered "yes" to question 4 and 22.2%, replied "no."
This is a positive point for motivating researchers to follow
up on the research. That is because the App is still at an early
stage. Nonetheless, 77.8% of the people who answered the
questionnaire affirmed that they were able to identify the
application.
Figure 5.
Graph Graph with the answers to question 4.
The graph presented in accordance with Figure 5 shows
the result of question 4 used to evaluate whether the people
who tested the prototype were able to identify what type of
application was being used, and once again the result was
satisfactory for researchers.
For the fifth question, according to Figure 6 we obtained
a total of 90% "yes" answers to question 5, while 10%
replied "no."
Figure 6.
Graph with the answers to question 5.
According to Figure 6, the graph presented above shows
the result of question 5, which elicited information as to
whether the texts: fonts and sizes of the texts had a pleasing
appearance and were easy to read by users who tested and
responded to the Questionnaire. The graph shows that 90%
of people answered positively.
A. Expected Results
The MVP developed by researchers provides all the
features proposed for the final version of the application that
will be used by teachers of Basic Sanitation I and II of the
civil engineering course, except that the use of augmented
reality increased the presentation to an hour, with static
images presenting the topics to be addressed by these project
courses.
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

For better contextualization of the features proposed by
the application developed by this research group follows the
screenshots of the main application screens.
Figure 7.
Home screen and screen listing courses.
According to Figure 7, the prototype has several screens:
the first image of Figure 7 is the main screen, that is, the
home screen for the app. When any user of the app is
accessing it, the software will start on this screen. The
second picture in Figure 7 is the course menu screen after the
user has passed the main screen and selected the course to be
consulted. On this screen the user can choose which course
to access and verify the details of the chosen course; the user
can also edit or add a new course.
Figure 8.
Screen details of the courses and screen listing topics.
When accessing a specific course, the user will have
access to the details of the course, in addition to adding a
new topic and accessing any of the topics covered by the
course, according to the first image of Figure 8. When
selecting a topic, the user can view the information that is
available for this topic and also edit it.
The expectation of the research group is that the final
version of the application will have all the functionalities
presented
in
the
above
figures,
along
with
the
implementation of a new functionality that will utilize
augmented reality technology. That functionality is added in
the second image of Figure 8, and with this new functionality
users can point the camera from their mobile devices to a
bookmark that will display virtual images on their device
that can be manipulated by users.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The authors believe that information technology can
continue to make major contributions to education; this has
been demonstrated over time with the use of multimedia
resources used in the classroom. Newer technologies, such as
microcomputers, smartphones, and tablets must also be used
in the classroom. It is in this sense that the research reports
presented in this article show that the authors believe that
technology can change the teaching-learning scenario. Based
on the research, the authors believe that with the use of
technology in the classroom it is possible to more quickly
identify the weaknesses of each class or even of each student
in using technological resources.
This prototype mobile application focuses on being a tool
towards a solution for educational problems than can assist
the teacher and the students in the classroom in a more
intuitive, faster and effective way. It is worth pointing out,
therefore, that there is a need to invest in education
technology. In light of that, the expectation of the researchers
is that this prototype can be tested in the educational
environment and provide contributions to professionals for
possible improvements and thus become a useful tool with
more updated versions.
However, some obstacles still exist: the lack of financial
investments
in
Brazilian
schools
for
research
and
implementation; difficulties in access to new technology by
the students; and of course, integration of AR as proposed in
our research. To that end, further research will be needed on
the subject and new implementations will remain to be dealt
with in future work, so that they can provide the expected
results being empirically tested in the classroom.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Brighenti, V. Biavatti, T. Souza, “Methods of teaching-learning
approach in the perception of students” GUAL Magazine. 2018, pp.
2-22.
[2]
W. Magalhaes, D. Magalhaes, J. Carvalho, J. Monteiro, and C.
Monteiro,
“M-learning
as
a
Motivational
Method
in
Music
Education,” The Fourth International Conference on Human and
Social Analytics - HUSO, 2018, pp. 2–8.
[3]
J. Manoel, “The technology revolution, ”New Place Magazine.
Catholic of Tocantins, 2017, pp. 10–16.
[4]
M. Santos, E. Martins, J. Scarton, J. Edmundo, W. Oliveira, and C.
Monteiro, “Mobile Technology and Conservation Areas: A Case
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Study,” The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless and
Mobile Communications - ICWMC, 2018, pp. 20–16.
[5]
C. Moreira, “Math can be good,” EDUCOMP, 2018, pp. 21–27.
[6]
B. Martins, G. Quixabeira, L. Barros, and C. Monteiro, “Mobile
Technology to Support Didactic Strategies, ”The Fourth International
Conference on Human and Social Analytics - HUSO, 2018, pp. 2–6.
[7]
“AppSheet,”
2018,
Available
from:
https://www.appsheet.com/
[accessed: 09-18].
[8]
“Google,” 2018, Available from: https://www.google.com/ [accessed:
09-18].
[9]
“Google
Drive,”
2018,
Available
from:https://www.google.com/drive/ [accessed: 10-18].
[10] “Google
Sheets,”
2018,
Available
from:
https://www.google.com/sheets/about/ [accessed: 09-18].
[11] “Google
Gmail,”
2018,
Available
from:
https://www.google.com/gmail/ [accessed: 10-18].
[12] “Google
Forms,”
2018,
Available
from:
https://www.google.com/forms/about/ [accessed: 09-18].
[13] “Cacoo,” 2018, Available from: https://cacoo.com/ [accessed: 10-18].
[14] “Facebook,”
2018,
Available
from:
https://www.facebook.com/
[accessed: 09-18].
[15] “Instagram,”
2018,
Available from: https://www.instagram.com/
[accessed: 09-18].
[16] “Twitter,” 2018, Available from: https://twitter.com/ [accessed: 09-
18].
[17] “WhatsApp,” 2018, Available from: https://www.whatsapp.com/
[accessed: 10-18].
[18] “Youtube,” 2018, Available from: https://youtube.com/ [accessed:
10-18].
[19] “Hangouts,” 2018, Available from: https://hangouts.google.com/
[accessed: 09-18].
[20] “Google
Docs,”
2018,
Available
from:
https://www.google.com/docs/about/ [accessed: 10-18].
[21] “Google
Slides,”
2018,
Available
from:
https://www.google.com/slides/about/ [accessed: 09-18].
[22] “Overleaf,”
2018,
Available
from:
https://www.overleaf.com/
[accessed: 10-18].
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

