How Internet of Thing Makes the Energy Grid Smart 
The rise of the Energy of Things  
 
Giampaolo Fiorentino 
Research & Development Lab 
Engineering- Ingegneria Informatica 
Rome, Italy 
e-mail: giampaolo.fiorentino@eng.it 
Antonello Corsi 
Research & Development Lab 
Engineering- Ingegneria Informatica 
Rome, Italy 
e-mail: antonello.corsi@eng.it 
Pietro Fragnito 
Research & Development Lab 
Engineering- Ingegneria Informatica 
Rome, Italy 
e-mail: pietro.fragnito@eng.it 
 
 
Abstract—The high penetration of intelligent appliances has 
turned whole buildings into effective and efficient prosumers. 
These distributed and autonomous intelligent Commercial 
Prosumer Hubs, constituted of Distributed Energy Resources 
(DER)  clusters raising an actual decentralized Demand Side 
Management (DSM), behave like Smart Virtual Power Plants. 
An Aggregator manages the new Smart Virtual Power Plant 
enabling the electricity production and consumption to be 
measured, reported and controlled in real time. This new 
infrastructure maximizes the response capacity of the vast, 
small-commercial prosumer base (e.g., tertiary buildings, 
offices, etc.), presenting incentives and delivering benefits 
through their automated active participation in the energy 
market, aligning consumption by asking consumers to reduce 
their power usage rather than increasing the power generation 
facilities. Under this approach, prosumers that cooperate 
might receive incentive payments from the power company. In 
comparison, the Internet of Things (IoT) paradigm claims to 
solve this issue expanding Demand Response services based on 
the analysis of occupants historical interactions with the 
lighting, ventilation and air conditioning controls. In this 
respect, an overlay smart network for efficient grid control, 
running on top of the existing energy grid and incorporating 
high levels of distributed intelligence within autonomous and 
semantically enhanced Prosumer Hubs (local hub) will bring to 
the new concept of Internet Of Energy. This new smart 
network addresses the present structural inertia of the 
Distribution Grid by introducing more active elements 
combined with the necessary control and distributed 
coordination 
mechanisms, 
as 
well 
as 
Demand 
Side 
Management Operator. 
 
Keywords-Internet Of Things; Energy of Things; Smart 
Grid; Demand Side Management; Energy Flexibility; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The great amount of intermittent renewable energy 
resources injected into electric power systems can 
significantly modify the net demand profile [1]. This recent 
phenomenon with the current rather inelastic nature of the 
demand curve can generate big issues on the electric grid, 
most important of which are frequency fluctuations and 
voltage imbalances [2].  
These problems are found in the majority of current 
electric grids due to the large number of passive elements 
that constitutes today's electrical network. 
Different approaches were proposed to overcome these 
problems [3]. 
The most common solutions are those that use the 
devices flexibility to balance the grid. Flexibility is the 
capability of shifting production or consumption of energy in 
time following an external signal, in order to provide a 
service within the energy system. 
The problem with this approach is that flexibility is 
obtained compromising the final user comfort [4]. 
With this regard, the INERTIA project [5] has been 
thought to extend Demand Side Management strategies by 
incorporating a new entity: an enhanced Distributed Energy 
Resources. This new entity includes local generation and 
consumption capacity and will provide flexibility without 
impacting users comfort. Therefore, it  addresses the present 
“structural inertia” of the grid by introducing more active 
elements combined with the necessary control and 
distributed coordination mechanisms. 
This new kind of DER, semantically enhanced 
(generation, consumption and flexibility), is the core of our 
solution and will constitute an active and flexible knot  
equipped with local information based on environmental, 
occupancy, and historical data. 
 The adopted solution  enables a mechanism that allows 
consumers to actively participate in the Demand Side 
Management without affecting the customer’s comfort level, 
as well as turning the customer into an active and proactive 
prosumer. The entrance in the landscape of this new actor 
will lead to a most effective participation of all elements in 
the grid.  
Of course, the best natural way to do this is following the 
Internet of Thing Paradigm. 
According to this approach, every DER has a 
computational model and a communication part in embedded 
systems, that paves the way towards highly sophisticated 
networked devices that carry out a variety of tasks not in a 
standalone mode, as usually today, but taking into fully 
account dynamic and context specific information. 
These DER “objects” are able to cooperate, share 
information, act as part of communities and generally be 
active elements of a more complex system. Our solution is a 
real instance of the so called Ubiquitous Computing: 
different systems and subsystems (each having its 
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

computational capacity) that are driven simultaneously to 
cooperate with each other as in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  INERTIA framework 
 
This paper learns from the progress of the existing efforts 
in demand side management that allows for intelligent 
demand aggregation and dynamic demand on much higher 
levels than those of individual appliances and is organized as 
follows. Section II describes the modeling devices that are 
the focus of INERTIA together with systems and 
subsystems, that are provided with different communication 
and 
integration 
protocols: 
DERs, 
Key 
Performance 
indicators, sensors, mobile devices with a specific user 
interface. Section III describes the approach followed to 
aggregate these device models in the whole system. Section 
IV describes the pilot DEMO implemented in Europe. At the 
end conclusions, close the article. 
II. 
INTERNET OF THINGS REVOLUTION FOR ENERGY 
EFFICENCY IN SMART GRID  
The Internet of Energy (IoE) is a new conception of the 
power grid that allows promoting a transition from the 
current energy system to a new modulated one. IoE provides 
an architecture with distributed embedded systems to 
implement a real-time interface between the smart grid 
(which depends of electrical generating energy sources but 
also of  flexibility concept before explained) and a cloud of 
devices (electric vehicles, commercial and residential 
buildings, offices, electrical devices, appliances, etc.). 
This provides the capacity to produce, store and use 
energy efficiently, balancing the supply and the demand 
using a cognitive Internet of Energy, which will harmonize 
the grid by processing data, information and knowledge 
through the Internet.  
This innovation causes all network elements of a physical 
model to be instantly connected and able to contribute 
actively to the network to the purpose of DSM. 
A. DER flexibility modeling 
The DER models are aimed at simulating the individual 
and aggregated behaviour of the different devices/systems 
taking into account the complete operational context 
(environmental 
conditions, 
occupants, 
time, 
device 
operational characteristics, etc.). These will allow creation of 
multi-dimensional DER flexibility profiles reflecting the 
real-time load demand elasticity as a function of multiple 
parameters such as price and occupancy prediction. 
To this purpose, DER modeling consists of two main 
parts: 
 
DER 
models: 
DER 
models 
contain 
the 
mathematical formulation defining the electric 
demand (consumption, generation and storage) of 
the DER in function of dynamic input parameters 
and static parameters (configuration) affecting 
DER’s demand. For example: the DER model for a 
HVAC (Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning 
) system contains the mathematical model that 
calculates the power consumption of the HVAC 
given the HVAC characteristics (rated power, 
efficiency, thermal characteristics of the building) 
and several inputs that change dynamically 
(temperature 
set 
point, 
outdoor 
temperature, 
occupancy, etc.). 
 
Control models: control models presented in this 
document refer to the local controllers associated to 
each controlled DER. The models described here 
represent the components that contain some local 
intelligence including the capability to simulate set 
point schedules provided by the centralized 
optimizer and by which of means it is possible to 
extract flexibility. 
These models have the objective of simulating the final 
state of the device and are able to provide the forecasted 
flexibility. For example an HVAC DER model would have 
also as input the expected occupancy of a thermal zone and 
in case that this value is 0 it will tell us that all the energy 
forecasted will be available under the form of flexibility to 
the system. The  main  output  of  each  DER  model  is  the  
power  consumption  during  the simulation  time  step. 
 
Figure 2.  HVAC model 
Other auxiliary outputs are also provided. These auxiliary 
outputs are needed in order to feed the model with input data 
for the next simulation step. Other key output of the models 
is the heat gains generated by the DER and the occupants. 
This heat gains are used together with the thermal models of 
building zone to calculate the power consumption of HVAC 
systems which are one of the main power consuming devices 
in buildings [6]. Inputs needed by each DER model are 
separated into configuration and dynamic type. 
 For the correct creation of a profile, we need to divide 
the DER models in four categories: local demand, 
generation, thermal zone and thermostatically controlled 
appliance [7]. While local demand and generation are models 
that simulate consumption and electricity production, a 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

thermal zone model represents the thermal losses and gains 
of a building area, which is controlled by a thermostat. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  HVAC power consumption as parameter function 
  
 A thermal zone contains a set of construction elements 
describing how the heat is transferred from one area to 
another, also the loads and the occupants of the thermal zone 
need to be considered since they act as heat producing 
elements. All these elements together with the desired 
temperature set point in the thermal zone define the required 
parameters to obtain the heat demand that is used as input for 
the HVAC DER as in Figure 3. 
At last, we have the thermostatically controlled 
appliances whose operations are driven by a temperature 
thermostat.  
Thermostatically controlled appliances can be used to 
cool or heat a certain space or element. For a cooling 
appliance, when the temperature measured by the thermostat 
reaches the high temperature limit the appliance starts 
cooling and therefore consuming power and when the 
temperature reaches the lower limit the appliance stops 
cooling and stops consuming power. For a heating appliance, 
the operation procedure is exactly the same but the 
consuming period is started at the low temperature limit and 
stops at the high temperature limit. 
There 
are 
two 
main 
appliances 
operating 
as 
thermostatically controlled appliances  
 
Refrigerators/Freezers: their objective is to 
maintain the temperature between a certain 
temperature range where this temperature range 
is usually below the ambient temperature. 
 
Water Heaters: They are in charge of heating 
the water inside a tank maintaining it within a 
predefined temperature range. 
 
To simulate a thermostatic device one important parameter 
to keep in mind is the percentage of consumption time (on 
time) with respect to the operating cycle (on + off times) that 
is called duty cycle and defines the power consumption 
profile of the appliance.  
The shorter duty cycle time periods reflect low activity 
indicating that the appliance is only supplying the thermal 
losses through its shell. While the larger duty cycle time 
periods reflect increased heating/cooling demand indicating 
that the appliance is being used (hot water is being drawn 
from the water heater or food is being filled or removed from 
the fridge). 
Depending on the usage of the appliance, the duty cycle 
is larger when the appliance is being used and shorter when 
the appliance is not being used.  
This consideration leads to the approach that calculates 
energy consumption of the appliance, according to the usage 
patterns that may be inferred from occupancy data. This 
means that during time periods with higher usage of the 
appliance the on time periods will be larger than at times 
where the appliance is not used. Given therefore the energy 
consumption during the operating cycle, the duty cycle 
linked to different usage levels and the occupancy data is 
possible to model the appliance. 
B. Sensor and Occupancy 
The behavior of occupant has been shown to have large 
impact on building control and appliances consumption. 
Consequently, user activity and presence is considered as a 
key element and has been used for control of various 
devices. Innovative approach of INERTIA will consist on 
bring occupancy related information in the DER models. The 
most natural way to do this is through a sensor cloud that 
will provide the model for the real time occupancy 
extraction, along with the monitoring part related to the 
energy consumption and production. This kind of behavioral 
modelling approach is going to take occupancy related data, 
control actions of the users on the DER and the 
environmental conditions as parameters. Provided that an 
identification mechanism is installed in the building under 
consideration and some of the occupants are equipped with 
RFID cards, two types for the Occupancy and Flow Model 
are defined: the first one (Overall) refers to the occupants as 
a group, while the other one (Individual) refers to specific 
individuals. Using Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) 
equipment for some occupants will improve prediction 
accuracy and user profiling, as it will be possible to track 
occupants’ location at any time having more specific 
information concerning their habits and schedules. With data 
provided from occupancy , INERTIA will provide short-term 
(near real time) and mid-term (next day) occupancy and flow 
prediction allowing for more efficient management of 
building’s energy resources and providing the essential 
information for optimal local demand side management 
strategies. The estimate method will be based upon comfort 
parameter expressed as a discomfort probability, and based 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

on an analysis of the past history of the user’s interactions 
with DER.  
C. Key Performance Indicators 
Key performance indicators are becoming a common 
instrument in public and private organizations used to 
analyze and monitor performance, and finally to drive 
informed decisions. In general, measuring the total 
performance of a system is used to learn, improve and cover 
the goal settings while also to provide the tools for the 
extraction of the optimal policy. Thus, the importance of 
well-defined performance indicators is even higher when 
dealing with optimization frameworks as the one examined 
within the INERTIA Project. Since these different coexisting 
sub-systems pose different performance constraints (energy 
related constraints, users comfort related constraints, 
business & flexibility related constraints) which are most 
often conflicting, INERTIA will adopt a holistic approach 
that will equally address and balance those aspects within a 
single integrated performance framework. 
D. User Interface system in IoT context 
The User Interface system of an application based on IoT 
is the synthesis of the interconnection of active entities. It 
should represent in a human friendly mode the modeling 
behind these entities and these interconnections.  So in IoT, 
we have a lot of active elements and the User Interface 
system should connect all these active elements with the last 
and probably most important active element one: the final 
user. For this reason, the User Interface system should not 
only merely shows entity’s data but also especially gives to 
user the possibility of being an active actor of its IoT world.  
For INERTIA project, being an active user means that 
the user should be involved in profiling and forecasting in 
order to address the “structural INERTIA” of the 
Distribution Grid. How? Sharing his habits, his preferences 
about devices and comfort and his activities. This surely 
leads to privacy issues that must be treated in a suitable way 
(e.g.,: with anonymous data collecting, Privacy by Design 
[8]). Furthermore, since we are talking about IoT, User 
Interface 
system 
must 
fit 
security 
and 
scalability 
requirements.  
 
1) Architecture 
 
Each “thing” feature in IoT is uniquely identifiable 
through its embedded computing system and is capable to 
interoperate within the existing Internet infrastructure in 
order to coexist actively with others entities. This means the 
User Interface system should be able to communicate, in 
scaling way, with all these things, by filtering and 
synthetizing their data and also routing user’s inputs. The 
solution identified and explained in this paper uses the 
Model View Presenter design pattern in order to: 
 
 
Makes View Model-independent 
 
Moves application logic outside de View 
 
Fits best scaling and security policies 
 
The three main roles (Model, Presenter and View) can be 
summarized as seen in Figure 4.: 
 
Model: all devices, entities and systems connected 
through the internet forming what we call Internet of 
Things; e.g., data base storing sensors data, devices, 
sensors, controller, etc.; 
 
Presenter: the “middle man” transforming all Model 
data into information. It also connects the user with 
others IoT entities – systems, devices, sensors – 
according to the idea of user as active element like 
all other “things”; 
 
View: the graphical component that displays data and 
routes user commands to the presenter. It gives the 
user the chance to “touch with hands” the IoT 
entities; 
 
 
Figure 4.  Model view presenter 
2) Presenter – a deeper analisys  
 
Presenter is the system’s back end. It collects data from 
the Model, transforming these data into information and 
presents information to the View. Since we are talking about 
a system working in real time mode, the Presenter should fits 
this requirement. Anyway, an effective real time is not 
feasible, so it might be better talking about to call it “near-
real time” flows of information.  
How we do this? Essentially the Presenter builds an 
internal intermediate representation of user’s model. This 
intermediate model stores information such as for example 
user’s DERs, occupancy area, comfort values and 
consumptions. Periodically the Presenter queries the entities 
of IoT (or the store in which the IoT entities send data) to 
instantiate and populates the intermediate model. At each 
time (T) the Presenter compares this intermediate model with 
the previous one at time (T-1). All changed values of the 
intermediate model will be sent to the View. In this way the 
Presenter sends to View information changed only when 
they are changed, minimizing traffic, minimizing payload 
and diminish view’s responsibility. 
 
 
 
 
 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

3) View – functionalities  
 
Thanks to the View, the user is an active part of 
INERTIA world (see Figure 5). The View component of the 
design pattern is organized into different subcomponents: 
a) HOME view: user monitors status and consumption 
of all DERs (personal and zonal), taking under control his 
comfort status. He also monitors his position in the building; 
b) PREFERENCES view: user submits to INERTIA 
world his preferences about his devices, such as for 
example, HVAC winter or summer temperature, elettrical 
vehicle time-in and SoC, personal devices start and stop; 
c) CALENDAR view: user submits to INERTIA world 
his habits and commitments such as for example “surgey in 
operating room from 11:00 am to 3:00 pm” or “training 
every Monday from 6:00 pm to 9:00 pm in the workout 
room”; 
d) HISTORICAL view: user monitors the historical data 
about consumption at different time; 
 
 
Figure 5.  Personal user interface 
 
E. Communication technologies 
All the components of the user interface architecture 
must communicate with each other. The connection between 
Presenter and View uses a socket connection. A socket is an 
end-to-end link over a single TCP connection, having the 
following features: 
 
Full duplex  
 
Bidirectional 
 
Always on 
 
Rapid data transformation due to a header much 
smaller then HTTP header 
These features fit very well with an application working 
in (near) real-time mode, in which the user is an active 
element that should be always connected with the INERTIA 
world, possible submitting inputs, examining status of DERs 
and devices frequently. 
The issue with this communication architecture is the 
limit of the number of connections in relation with the 
message rate per second [9]. For these reason it’s important 
to have the possibility in scaling to multiple servers and 
minimizing the messages sent from server to client. 
Communication between Inertia IoT Entities (Model) and 
the Presenter is made by the Linksmart [10]: this is an Open 
Source Middleware allowing developers to incorporate 
heterogeneous physical devices into their applications 
through easy-to-use web services for controlling any device. 
So for each entity we have a RESTful service that can be 
used to access data and control devices. 
III. 
BOTTOM UP APPROACH 
In the INERTIA concept, the DER will constitute active 
and flexible components carrying contextual knowledge of 
their local environment.  
To deploy the INERTIA strength, DER will form 
dynamic clusters comprising self-organized networks of 
active nodes that will efficiently distribute and balance 
global and local intelligence. This aggregation is done in two 
steps. The first will be at the single building level and the 
second to the level of cluster of building.  
A. Local control and automation hub (Building Automation 
System) 
A whole tertiary building can be represented by a 
building automation system named Local Control Hub 
(LCH).  
Thanks to Building Automation Systems, all individual 
building subsystems DER can become part of a single central 
system, also able to learn users’ needs and behavior, to 
anticipate solutions or provide recommendations. These 
systems make use of forecasting, optimization and 
evaluation algorithms that acquire real-time data from smart 
sensors and meters, placed in strategic points of the building, 
capable of detecting internal microclimate parameters, space 
and ICT infrastructure use, attendance, weather data and 
energy quality. Based on the input data analysis, the system 
suggests actions to support building management optimizing 
energy consumption; users, on the other hand, as an active 
part of the system can monitor consumption instant by 
instant, by tablet or smartphone, and improve their behavior 
accordingly, becoming agents of saving themselves.  
In this respect, the objects become self-recognizable and 
acquire intelligence due to the ability to communicate 
information about them and gain access to aggregate 
information from any other devices, allowing these systems 
to operate in real time. 
Some ambient user interfaces (UIs) continuously collect 
data resulting from the occupant’s interaction with existing 
traditional building hub devices and provide the necessary 
incentives through different interaction GUIs - e.g. through 
mobiles, monitors - , driving them to more energy- efficient 
choices.  
B. Aggregator Control Hub.  
The aggregator is an energy stakeholder that in a scale of 
aggregation following immediately the building and 
therefore manage different clusters of Local Control Hub 
using their portfolio, trading with the market stakeholders on 
behalf of small customers. 
 Aggregators gather, analyze and efficiently organize 
their customer load portfolio’s and define specific active 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

demand (AD) strategies and services based on market needs. 
They act as an intermediary between suppliers and network 
operators and the different commercial and industrial (C&I) 
prosumers belonging to their portfolios.  
IV. 
DEMO  
Tests are underway to validate the proposed solution 
faced by INERTIA and the validation is done by means of 
simulations and laboratory tests. We have three field tests, 
which are a combination of actual field-testing and 
developed prototypes sited in Sweden, Greece and Spain. 
It should be pointed that within the pilot we use one real 
Local  Hub and a portfolio of simulated one that in their turn 
are two different kind of models. 
The first kind is formed by simulated DERs, occupancy 
profiles, user preferences that all together constitute local 
hub set. This is a complex simulation approach since it 
implies deploying full LCH systems with all its components. 
 In light of this we made a second kind of building 
consumption profiles obtained from typical penetration in the 
pilot and based upon real DERs. Consequently it has been 
created  a set of several building stereotypes. 
The high level simulation then starts by obtaining a set of 
real consumption profile data (hourly or 15 minutes data) 
coming from building consumption measurements made in 
real pilot or from available typical building profiles. Then, 
the mix of controllable DERs is used together with the 
consumption profiles in order to calculate the flexibility 
made available at the simulated LCH. At the end by means 
of the portfolio of simulated LCHS it is created a mix of 
local control hub with different consumption and flexibility 
characteristics. 
Then, we developed one test related to the network 
operation scenarios that involve the whole INERTIA chain 
stating form the DSO simulating some problem in the 
network seeding the corresponding DR signal to the 
aggregator, that deploying the needed control actions over 
the LCHs in its portfolio and finally the LCHs operating the 
final DERs that offer flexibility (Figure 6). 
The test is considered successful under the fulfillment of 
the following conditions: 
 
The simulation of the congestion problem in the 
network provokes the calculation of DR signals 
(demand reduction) by the DSO Control Hub. 
 
These signals are sent to the Aggregator Control 
Hub that in turns sends the required control requests 
to the LCHs (real and simulated) 
 
The real LCH and micro-level simulated LCHs 
receive the control requests and operate the final 
DERs 
 
The demand at the MV supply level corresponds to 
the DR signals that were delivered 
 
The ACH generates demand forecasts updated 
according to the control actions taken 
 
The DSO Control Hub considers the updated 
demand forecasts and verifies that the congestion 
problem is solved 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Flexibility requested 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Demand side management has the capacity to overcome 
some of the major barriers of controlling and balancing 
supply and become a powerful tool at the hands of 
distribution grid. Moreover, as DERs continuously set an 
indispensable part of the EU Grids infrastructure, demand 
capacity and flexibility becomes a key performance factor 
with shared profit opportunities for all stakeholders involved.  
In addressing the "structural inertia" of existing Distribution 
Grids by introducing more active elements combined with 
the 
necessary 
control 
and 
distributed 
coordination 
mechanisms our project is an attempt in linking Internet of 
Things/Services principles to the Distribution Grid Control 
Operations. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] H. Farhangi, "The path of the smart grid." Power and Energy 
Magazine, IEEE 8.1, 2010, pp 18-28. 
[2] H. Lund, A. N. Andersen, P. A. Østergaard, and B. V. 
Mathiesen, "From electricity smart grids to smart energy 
systems–a 
market 
operation 
based 
approach 
and 
understanding." Energy 42.1, 2012, pp 96-102. 
[3] A. H. Mohsenian-Rad,  V. W. Wong, J. Jatskevich, R. 
Schober, A.  Leon-Garcia,  "Autonomous demand-side 
management based on game-theoretic energy consumption 
scheduling for the future smart grid."Smart Grid, IEEE 
Transactions on 1.3, 2010, pp 320-331. 
[4] R. Belhomme, R. C. R. De Asua, G. Valtorta, A. Paice, F. 
Bouffard, R. Rooth, A. Losi, “Address-active demand for the 
smart grids of the future." SmartGrids for Distribution, 2008. 
IET-CIRED. CIRED Seminar. IET, 2008. 
[5] http://www.inertia-project.eu/inertia/ 
[6] J. Froehlich, E. Larson, S. Gupta, G. Cohn, M. Reynolds, S. 
Patel, "Disaggregated end-use energy sensing for the smart 
grid." IEEE Pervasive Computing 10.1,2011, pp 28-39. 
[7] N. Lu, Y. Zhang, "Design considerations of a centralized load 
controller using thermostatically controlled appliances for 
continuous 
regulation 
reserves." Smart 
Grid, 
IEEE 
Transactions on 4.2, 2013, 914-921. 
[8] https://www.privacybydesign.ca “accessed June 2015” 
[9] http://drewww.github.io/socket.io-benchmarking/ “accessed June 
2015” 
[10] https://www.linksmart.eu/redmine  “accessed June 2015” 
 
 
  
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

