Towards Self-Adaptable, Scalable, Dependable and Energy Efficient Networks:  
The Self-Growing Concept  
 
N. Alonistioti1, A. Merentitis1, M. Stamatelatos1, E. Schulz2, C. Zhou2, G. Koudouridis3, B. Bochow4,                              
M. Schuster4, P. Demeester5,  P. Ballon5, S. Delaere5, M. Mueck6, C. Drewes6, L. Van der Perre7,                                  
J. Declerck7, T. Lewis8, and I. Chochliouros9                                                                            
1 Department of Informatics & Telecommunications, University of Athens, Greece – {nancy, amer, makiss}@di.uoa.gr                            
2 Huawei Technologies Duesseldorf GmbH, Germany – {egon.schulz, chan.zhou}@huawei.com 
3 Huawei Technologies Sweden AB, Sweden – george.koudouridis@huawei.com 
4 Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft zur Förderung der angewandten Forschung e.V., Germany – bernd.bochow@fokus.fraunhofer.de 
5 Interdisciplinary Institute for Broadband Technology, Belgium – {pieter.ballon, simon.delaere}@vub.ac.be 
6 Infineon Technologies, Germany – {markusdominik.mueck, christian.drewes}@infineon.com 
7 Interuniversitair Micro-Electronika Centrum VZW, Belgium – {vdperre, dclerckj}@imec.be 
8 Toshiba Research Europe Ltd, United Kingdom – tim.lewis@toshiba-trel.com 
9 Hellenic Telecommunications Organisation S.A, Greece – ichochliouros@oteresearch.gr 
 
 
Abstract— In next generation systems and networks, the 
incorporation of mechanisms achieving robust, predictable and 
self-adaptive behavior with minimum cost will be a key 
requirement. Towards this goal we introduce the notion of the 
“self-growing network”. The latter, in its initial deployment 
stage, is limited to a single dedicated purpose (energy-efficient 
networking, spectrum efficient communications, control and 
surveillance use, etc) but can evolve/grow into a multi-purpose, 
versatile infrastructure, that serves a broader range of 
applications by utilising combinations of self-x and cooperating 
features. The self-growing network paradigm considers (i) 
mechanisms for energy efficient interaction of the wireless 
network elements and (ii) mechanisms for the reliable and 
efficient evolvement towards later lifecycle phases. The Self-
growing system incorporates the network(s) as well as user 
services and applications thus creating self-growing solutions 
applicable to wide range of purposes and impacting various 
beneficiaries, such as providers, consumers and end users. 
Keywords-self-growing; 
self-adaptation; 
cooperation, 
distributed systems; low energy 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In future large-scale distributed systems, the emergence 
of mechanisms achieving robust, predictable and self-
adaptive behaviour will be an important evolution step. At 
the same time, as systems get more complex in terms of 
scale and functionality, reliability and dependability are 
getting increasingly important and self-adaptation techniques 
for achieving dependable system operation under cost and 
energy constraints will be a key concept. In this context, key 
challenges lie in the efficient cooperation of heterogeneous 
elements in order to provide advanced problem solving 
capabilities and improved as well as reliable services.  
Furthermore, innovations for low energy are considered a 
fundamental parameter in the efforts to combat climate 
change and to achieve sustainable economic growth. Low 
energy solutions create an attractive business case by 
offering significant benefits in terms of operational cost, 
long-term product reliability, sustainability, and increased 
lifetime of wireless or mobile elements. For this purpose, a 
promising path lies in the study and development of energy-
aware distributed and cooperating systems for monitoring 
and control, in particular based on wireless networks for 
providing radio and environmental context information. 
Current wireless network development is driven by 
horizontal mass-markets (“one size fits all”). Vertical 
markets and niche applications demand for (costly) dedicated 
configurations or developments. Consequently, the evolution 
of a wireless network often demands for infrastructure and 
terminal replacement. Extending system and network 
capabilities, switching services or switching the purpose of 
an operational network usually requires costly (manual) 
reconfigurations and upgrades, while usually results in 
temporary unavailability of system services. Promising 
solutions for these problems are expected to require 
foundational multi-disciplinary research, leading to an 
integration of next generation technologies. Such integration 
is leveraging on capabilities for spontaneous ad-hoc 
cooperation between objects, self-adaptive behaviour, 
exploitation of dynamic information, predictability of non-
functional properties (e.g., energy consumption), etc.  
Furthermore, the constantly rising complexity of such 
dynamically changing network infrastructures can only be 
managed and maintained by highly trained professionals – 
making the requirements for self-growing and self-adapting 
wireless infrastructures an absolute must in order to ensure a 
large scale deployment. 
As a summary, energy efficient and dependable 
operation at the level of cooperating wireless elements, 
network compartments and networks as a whole is becoming 
an increasingly difficult objective, given the ever-increasing 
complexity 
in 
heterogeneous 
telecommunication 
environments. In this context, the evolution of mechanisms 
to cope with energy-aware and dependable cooperation of 
wireless elements becomes a fundamental enabler for future 
heterogeneous large scale distributed systems.  
324
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The 
concept of the self-growing network is introduced in Section 
II. Section III presents the considered uses cases and 
elaborates on the potential benefits for every use case. 
Finally, Section IV concludes the paper.   
II. 
THE CONCEPT OF THE SELF-GROWING NETWORK 
In order to provide tangible solutions for the challenges 
discussed in the previous section, it is necessary to progress 
in two major research directions: 
 
Solutions for optimised energy consumption, 
adaptability and dependability in a small scale, 
purpose-driven 
network 
through 
balancing 
autonomic and cooperative approaches, 
 
Mechanisms for the self-evolvement of the 
network/system, towards a large-scale, multi-
purpose network/system. 
At the beginning of its lifecycle, defined in this paper as 
the progression through a series of differing stages of 
development which can potentially provide different 
services, a self-growing network (Figure 1) is set up on-
demand, dedicated to a single purpose. Relevant use cases 
might be for example monitoring and/or controlling 
applications with a focus on distributed and cooperating 
systems, including construction sites, delivering wireless 
services within a complex home/office environment 
requiring network parameter negotiation with a multitude of 
neighbouring networks, etc. These applications usually have 
strict requirements in terms of energy consumption, thus 
solutions for optimised energy consumption are exploited. 
During the self-growing networks’ lifecycle, it can evolve to 
serve several different objectives as needed utilizing 
mechanisms for self-evolvement.  
The considered evolution may include for example 
providing 
general 
voice 
and 
data 
communications, 
integrating sensor networks in the vicinity, or supporting 
safety of life applications under exceptional situations. In the 
course of this it may coexist and cooperate with other 
wireless networks of distinct owners and interest groups 
evolving in the deployment area towards using or 
augmenting existing capacity. The sensor networks in 
particular may serve a multitude of purposes, including 
environmental sensing, radio parameter sensing, etc. 
Interoperability with existing network infrastructures and 
wireless standards enables geographical and/or functional 
on-demand extensions. Towards the end of its lifecycle, the 
self-growing network may still remain active and serve as a 
dedicated purpose network or as a failover for applications 
associated with other networks sharing the same area.  
The 
self-growing 
concept 
incorporates 
both 
collaborative 
and 
autonomic 
aspects. 
Specifically, 
cooperative behaviour and problem solving is critical in the 
self-growing initial stage, the small-scale network, as well as 
in the evolvement to a larger scale network, able to serve 
different purposes and larger systems. For example, the 
combination of cooperation paradigms with the inherent 
redundancy of monitoring and control functionalities in 
distributed wireless networks not only allows the objects to 
dynamically adhere to the most energy efficient pattern but 
also provides error resiliency features, graceful performance 
degradation in the presence of faults, as well as efficient 
utilisation of redundancy for fault tolerance that are very 
important for large scale networks. 
Moreover, autonomic capabilities constitute key enablers 
for self-growing network paradigms. In this context, the 
degree of autonomicity in an object (network device, 
network compartment/cluster, as well as a network and the 
system as a whole) is balanced against the requirement for 
efficient cooperation in order to maximize the gains in both 
energy efficiency and dependability. At the end of the day, 
the mechanisms and the enablers for the self-growing 
concept from the small scale to the large scale might form a 
complete toolbox that can be applied to a wide range of 
application areas or network purposes. It is expected that 
self-growing capabilities coupled with autonomic and self-
adaptation features will pave the way for scalable, energy 
efficient heterogeneous wireless networks thus impacting 
various beneficiaries spanning from value providers to end 
users.  
The 
proposed 
approach 
pursues 
to 
increase 
dependability, cost and energy efficiency, and also flexibility, 
resilience, and robustness of a heterogeneous wireless 
network by utilizing reconfigurable wireless communication 
nodes and distributed cooperative control functions. In 
contrast, existing solutions that are optimised for a single 
purpose are expensive and lack flexibility; flexibility would 
for example allow creating hybrid solutions without 
significant effort for incorporating additional network and 
service gateway functions to achieve interoperability.  
 
Figure 1: Self-Growing Network Life Cycle. 
Regarding self-evolvement, the envisaged methodology 
resembles the structure and approach discussed in the context 
of self-growing neural networks presented in e.g., [1],[2]. 
This concept allows initiating a learning process from a very 
limited training space and supports response to an extension 
of the training space later on by “growing” the capacity or 
number of decision elements. A practical implementation of 
this concept could be repository/ontology based by providing 
a database of decision making capabilities that is 
dynamically composed of contributions of participating 
networks. A similar approach has been presented in the 
context of self-growing robot control software to respond to 
changes in service requirements [3]. Leveraging on these 
notions we will identify and develop a suitable cognitive 
architecture that will enable participating networks to 
reconfigure their topologies and optimisation goals on 
325
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

demand. Furthermore, we will develop and formalize the 
decision making framework as well as its related baseline 
functions in order to enable describing, planning and 
controlling the targeted behaviour of participating networks 
in the process of self-growing in a concise and scalable way. 
III. 
USE CASES 
Three major uses cases are given next to emphasize on 
potential benefits by applying the approach in certain 
scenarios and to provide concise examples of possible 
implementations of the approach. These use cases intend to 
underline the toolbox nature of the approach mentioned 
earlier. It is shown that the use cases given here can benefit 
even though the approach may be applied only to a limited 
extend. 
A. Construction Sites 
The first use case addresses both wide-area and in-
facility construction sites as well as moving work zones. 
Network evolution is achieved by deploying heterogeneous 
equipment and by continuously updating operational 
policies. This is an example where the network grows by 
cooperating, collaborating and integrating with neighbouring 
networks. Network deployment and purposes can be planned 
and optimised prior to start deploying equipment. Moving 
work zones are considered a special application of this 
concept in that they usually rely on short-living 
configurations with respect to a given geographical area. 
Road, railway or inland waterway construction scenarios 
may apply, explicitly requiring the use of mobile nodes and 
networks. Additionally, first-responder or military scenarios 
apply where autonomous vehicles pave the way deploying 
sensors and communication repeaters on their path.  
In the initial stage of the deployment of the self-growing 
network, network equipment is deployed whenever needed 
for the given purpose and provides sensor network and 
surveillance services as well as a first step towards a large 
scale, distributed sensor network. Equipment is mostly 
dedicated to linking sensor (and actuator) functions, or to 
provide 
simple 
point-to-point 
and 
broadcast 
communications. In case of moving work zones nodes may 
need to support focused environmental monitoring in 
addition to RF and network monitoring. 
In intermediate stages of deployment, the network is 
augmented by voice and data communication, positioning, 
machinery monitoring and control services and supports 
safety of life applications, e.g., for construction site workers 
or emergency teams. This can be achieved by integrating 
with, for example, neighbouring wireless local area networks 
or even microcells (by spontaneous ad-hoc cooperation 
between objects). Moving work zones will demand for more 
network flexibility in terms of environmental or radio scene 
adaptation capabilities since planning may not be possible to 
the same degree as applicable to permanent sites. 
In the final deployment stage, network equipment might 
be left embedded in buildings and may provide wireless 
repeater functions (e.g., through elevator shafts), or may 
provide sensor network functionality to support facility 
management and monitoring. The infrastructure released by 
moving work zones may be utilized later on by other 
networks evolving in the vicinity or by vehicular networks 
for example. Network-centric computing with dynamic 
resource discovery and management will enable a seamless 
evolution of the network environment whenever new 
networking components are added. 
Expected benefits of the self-growing concept in this use 
case include the reduced development cost for network 
nodes, the increased sustainability and flexibility of the 
system, the sharing of deployment cost, the extended 
lifecycle of the network, as well as the potential for less 
effort in planning and managing.  
B. Embedded Incident Area Network 
This use case addresses the deployment of a network in a 
limited 
geographical 
area 
utilizing 
for 
example 
a 
reconfigurable picocell and femtocell infrastructure as a pre-
planned implementation of the self-growing network 
concept. In contrast to scenarios previously discussed that 
start from a main purpose associated with wireless sensor net 
functionality, this scenario starts from a general voice and 
data communications use case serving off-the-shelf end-
systems. The 
network 
then 
grows 
with 
upcoming 
requirements from the deployment area. In case of an 
exceptional event on demand reconfiguration capabilities 
allow to switch to a purpose focusing on safety of life. The 
temporary switch of purpose then will designate the network, 
part of the network, or single network nodes to implement an 
incident area network until the incident is resolved. This 
interruption of planned operation will leave the network in a 
potentially undetermined state and thus requires self-
adaptation for returning to pre-planned operation.  
In the initial deployment stage nodes provide general 
voice and data communications only. The network may need 
to support mesh configurations (e.g., as a wireless backhaul) 
considering the potential need to cover larger areas with 
singular attachment points to a wide-area communications 
infrastructure. Intermediate deployment stages may extend 
the network into sensor nets and/or safety applications. In 
this direction, a continuous deployment of (heterogeneous) 
nodes either providing sensor/actor or communication 
capacity allows to optimise the coverage of the area in terms 
of placing functionality where it is needed to, for example, 
monitor dynamic geological phenomena with a suitable 
spatial resolution.  
Under normal conditions, safety functions in this use case 
are mainly used in locating/tracking personnel, in health 
monitoring of personnel, in area monitoring (e.g., detecting a 
landslide) or in providing emergency call capacity where 
needed. In an incident case, the network can be reconfigured 
to 
guide 
emergency 
teams 
within 
the 
area. 
The 
reconfiguration might be flexible depending on the type of 
incident (e.g., focused on the location of the incident) and 
might be initiated manually by a network management action 
or automatically triggered by sensors in this location (e.g., 
after detecting sensor nodes going dysfunctional). 
The use of off-the-shelf end-systems is beneficiary 
especially for this use case: safety functions are gaining from 
geo-location features provided by state-of-the-art handsets, 
326
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

and in an emergency situation the network may be allowed 
to actively place a call, causing an acoustic signal to guide 
emergency response teams more accurately even in difficult 
environments. In the final stage of the deployment, the 
general voice and data communications capacity of the 
network can be reused, e.g., by transferring it to an operator 
for establishing a new managed (commercial) infrastructure, 
or by setting up the initial phase of a new use case scenario, 
for example a construction site as discussed above. 
Expected benefits of the self-growing concept in this use 
case include the support of service centric, on-demand 
adaptation capabilities to respond – potentially without 
requiring human user interaction – to changing application 
requests. Furthermore, this is achieved without imposing 
additional cost for network development/deployment to 
support safety-of-life applications. 
C. Self-Growing Home and Office Environment 
This use case addresses the deployment of a 
heterogeneous wireless network in a limited geographical 
area, such as a home and office environment. The objective 
is that such a network guarantees the provision of voice and 
data communication services, but also acts as a large scale, 
distributed and cooperating system for monitoring and 
control, possibly incorporating Wireless Sensor Networks. 
The utilisation of a network entity in a home or office 
environment may vary a lot during a normal day, for 
example it may not be used at all when there is no one at 
home or in the office. The energy efficient parameterisation 
of the corresponding network is a key challenge, due to both 
the variation in usage and the high percentage of households 
that are expected to apply the corresponding concepts in the 
future. However, this potentially great number of adopters 
also implies that the inherent potential for energy savings is 
huge. A further challenge lies in the efficient inter-network 
parameterisation, to support spontaneous ad-hoc cooperation 
between objects and exploit network-centric computing 
paradigms with dynamic resource management.  
In practice, the deployment of such a network is expected 
to be done in various stages. In an initial stage of 
deployment, households and/or offices will deploy a network 
designed for an initial estimate of capacity and Quality of 
Service requirements. For cost reasons, typically common-
off-the-shelf 
equipment 
is 
employed 
without 
any 
consideration concerning potential needs for a future 
evolution of such networks. Also, its integration taking into 
account corresponding deployments of distinct owners 
and/or interest groups in the vicinity is typically not 
considered in such an early phase. 
In an intermediate deployment stage, the initial 
deployment evolves with needs for higher Quality of Service 
and the interconnection of a constantly increasing number of 
devices, partially building of novel radio components (for 
example, UWB components on top of an available WLAN 
and cellular network environment). The need for an overall 
network integration becomes apparent taking corresponding 
deployments in the vicinity into account. This furthermore 
includes a required evolution towards a distributed and 
cooperating system being able to support monitoring and 
control, incorporating wireless sensor networks. Self-
growing networks are expected to provide a framework 
meeting both challenges, through the optimised integration 
of novel devices into a given network and the efficient 
overall system configuration taking the overall networking 
environment in the vicinity into account. Specifically, the 
approach will provide algorithms that lead to an automated 
parameterisation of all network components in the managed 
environment as well as in its vicinity; in particular, an overall 
change of the network configuration is considered if novel 
radio components are deployed. 
In the final deployment stage, the home/office 
environment reaches a stable level of a high-density 
heterogeneous network deployment. The self-growing and 
self-optimised evolutionary approaches have lead to a stable 
network deployment, ensuring a low level of overall energy 
consumption and an optimum exploitation of the available 
system capacity. Typically, such stable stages exist for some 
time but eventually the network evolves further, and the 
network thereby enters the “intermediate stage” again. 
Expected benefits of the self-growing concept in this use 
case include the seamless evolution of a home/office 
network without any user involvement together with the 
minimization of efforts to be spent for planning and 
maintenance. At the same time, the proposed mechanisms 
facilitate 
an 
overall 
low-power 
and 
high 
capacity 
optimization of the network taking device deployment and 
parameterisation in the vicinity into account. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In future large-scale distributed systems, the emergence 
of mechanisms supporting robust, predictable and self-
adaptive behaviour will be an important evolution step. 
Towards this goal we have introduced the notion of a self-
growing network that during its lifecycle, can evolve (grow) 
to serve different objectives. The CONSERN project aims at 
defining and developing the required mechanisms for 
realizing the self-growing network paradigm. From the 
analysis of three major uses cases it is clear that the number 
of affected entities (e.g. users, operators, manufacturers) is 
considerable and the potential impact is very significant. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research leading to these results has received funding 
from the European Community's Seventh Framework 
Programme 
(FP7/2007-2013) 
under 
grant 
agreement 
CONSERN n° 257542. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. K. Cios, "Self-growing neural network architecture using crisp and 
fuzzy entropy", Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) 
Conference Series, 1992. 
[2] C. L. Tseng, Y. H. Chen, Y. Y Xu, H. T. Pao, and H.-C. Fu, "A self-
growing probabilistic decision-based neural network with automatic 
data clustering", Neurocomputing 61 (2004): 21 - 38. 
[3] H.-M. Koo, and I.-Y. Ko, "A Repository Framework for Self-
Growing Robot Software", Asia-Pacific Software Engineering 
Conference 0, 2005, pp.515-524.  
 
327
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

