Wireless Multihop Networks with Network Coding Communication
Using Collision Detection of Control Messages
Yusuke Aoi and Hiroaki Higaki
Department of Robotics and Mechatronics,
Tokyo Denki University, Japan
Email: {aoi,hig}@higlab.net
Abstract—In some wireless network applications using bidirec-
tional wireless multihop transmissions of sequences of data
messages, intermediate wireless nodes hold temporarily data
messages in both directions with high probability. Network coding
methods have been proposed for reduction of forwarding and
end-to-end transmission delays and for increase of end-to-end
data message throughput. However, for collision-free transmis-
sions, 2-hop neighbor intermediate nodes are required to be
suspended during a data message transmission. Some extended
Request To Send/Clear To Send (RTS/CTS) controls have been
proposed for network coding support; however, for avoidance of
collisions between control messages, longer transmission delay is
inevitable. This paper proposes a novel RTS/CTS control method
for supporting network coding in bidirectional data message
transmission. Here, the CTS and ACK control messages are
transmitted with the usual Short Inter Frame Space (SIFS)
interval and their correct simultaneous transmissions are detected
by their collisions. In simulation experiments, 30.1% higher end-
to-end throughput of data messages is achieved by the proposed
RTS/CTS control in comparison with conventional methods.
Keywords–Wireless
Multihop
Transmissions;
Bidirectional
Communications; Collision Avoidance; RTS/CTS Control.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In wireless multihop networks, such as wireless ad-hoc
networks, wireless mesh networks and wireless sensor net-
works consisting of numerous mobile and/or stationary wire-
less nodes with wireless transmission/reception devices, data
messages are transmitted along a wireless multihop trans-
mission route. It is a sequence of neighboring nodes, which
forwards data messages from their previous-hop node to their
next-hop node. Advantages of wireless multihop transmissions
are reduction of end-to-end transmission delay by avoidance
of collisions of wireless signals simultaneously transmitted
by multiple nodes, reduction of required transmission power
consumption in each node and improvement of data message
reachability in wide-area and large-scale networks with a large
number of nodes. Transmissions of data messages are realized
by cooperation of all the intermediate nodes included in a route
||N0 . . . Nn⟩⟩ from a source node N0 to a destination node
Nn. Each intermediate node Ni (1 ≤ i ≤ n − 1) receives data
messages from its previous-hop intermediate node Ni−1 and
forwards them to its next-hop intermediate node Ni+1.
In transmissions of a sequence of data messages, collisions
between successively transmitted data messages might degrade
their performance, i.e., such collisions cause longer end-
to-end transmission delay and lower end-to-end throughput.
Since most wireless LAN protocols, such as IEEE802.11, sup-
port Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance
(CSMA/CA) [7], neighbor intermediate nodes Ni and Ni+1
do not transmit data messages simultaneously. However, Ni−1
and Ni+1 might transmit data messages simultaneously since
Ni−1 is out of the wireless signal transmission range of Ni+1
and vice versa. Though their next-hop nodes Ni and Ni+2 are
different, a collision of data messages can occur at Ni since
Ni is included in wireless signal transmission ranges of not
only Ni−1 but also Ni+1, as shown in Figure 1. Hence, data
messages transmitted by not only Ni−1 but also Ni+1 reach
Ni and the collision can occur at Ni. Retransmissions of data
messages due to such collisions by the hidden-terminal prob-
lem at intermediate wireless nodes and transmission intervals
for contentions, i.e., for avoidance of collisions caused by 1-
hop and/or 2-hop neighbor intermediate nodes cause longer
transmission delay for forwarding of data messages in each
intermediate node. This makes end-to-end transmission delay
of data messages longer. Hence, the source node should reduce
its transmission rate of data messages. However, lower end-to-
end throughput of data messages should be accepted.
Ni-1
Ni+1
Collision
Ni
Ni+2
Figure 1. Collision of Successively Transmitted Data Messages due to the
Hidden-Terminal Problem in Wireless Multihop Networks.
In Peer-to-Peer (P2P) type network applications in which
multimedia data such as voice, picture and video data is
transmitted bi-directionally, sequences of data messages are
transmitted concurrently in both directions along a wireless
multihop transmission route between two terminal wireless
nodes, N0 and Nn. Here, it is expected that collisions of
data messages transmitted in the same and/or the opposite
directions occur much more frequently than the cases of uni-
directional transmissions of a sequence of data messages. For
improvement of performance of bi-directional transmissions,
the introduction of network coding communication has been
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

proposed [2]. As shown in Figure 2, an intermediate node Ni
broadcasts a network coded data message me for transmission
of data messages mf from Ni−1 and mb from Ni+1, e.g.,
me := mf ⊕ mb. On receipt of me, Ni−1 and Ni+1 induce
mb and mf by using me broadcasted by Ni and mf and mb
buffered in Ni−1 and Ni+1, respectively, e.g., mb = me ⊕ mf
in Ni−1 and mf = me ⊕ mb in Ni+1. By using this net-
work coding communication, fewer messages are transmitted
than the usual combination of two one-to-one data message
transmissions from Ni to Ni−1 and from Ni to Ni+1. In
addition, by reducing the number of transmitted data messages,
the opportunities of collisions among data messages and/or
control messages, such as ACK control messages, are reduced.
Hence, end-to-end performance such as transmission delay and
throughput of data messages is expected to be improved.
me
Ni
Ni-1
me
mf
mb
Ni+1
Figure 2. Network Coding Communication in Wireless Multihop Networks.
However, collisions between data and/or control messages
caused by bi-directional transmissions of sequences of data
messages might cause reduction of transmission performance.
Hence, the RTS/CTS control should be introduced for colli-
sion avoidance, which should be modiﬁed for network coding
communication since the original one is designed for ad-hoc
communication and uni-directional wireless multihop trans-
mission of data messages. This paper proposes a novel ex-
tended RTS/CTS control for network coding communication
which improves end-to-end transmission performance.
In Section II, we explain related works. Our proposed novel
RTS/CTS control method for network coding communication
is proposed in Section III. Performance improvement by our
proposal is evaluated in Section IV. Finally, we conclude in
Section V.
II.
RELATED WORK
This section explains conventional methods to exchange
control messages such as RTS, CTS and ACK for colli-
sion avoidance in network coding communication in wireless
multihop networks. Some of them are designed for wireless
multihop networks and the others are designed for wireless
ad-hoc networks, i.e., for supporting 1-hop data message
exchanges between neighbor wireless nodes. However, for
comparison with our proposal, they are explained as being
used for data message transmissions along a wireless multihop
transmissions. That is, as being network coding communica-
tion methods among successive intermediate nodes, Ni−1, Ni
and Ni+1. Hence, Ni has two data messages, one is received
from Ni−1 and is about to be forwarded to Ni+1 and the other
is received from Ni+1 and is about to be forwarded to Ni−1,
conﬁgures a network encoded data message by using these data
messages and then broadcasts the network encoded message to
its wireless transmission area including both Ni−1 and Ni+1.
COPE [2] and IFNCPA (Inter-Flow Network Coding with
Passive ACK) [4] propose methods to exchange ACK control
messages in network coding communication. If both Ni−1
and Ni+1 send back ACK control messages to Ni with a
SIFS interval after receipt of network coded data message
broadcasted from Ni in accordance with a wireless LAN
protocol IEEE 802.11, a collision between these two ACK
control messages occurs at Ni and Ni fails to receive these
ACK control messages. Hence, Ni cannot detect the correct
receipts of the network coded data message in Ni−1 and
Ni+1. In order to avoid collisions between the ACK con-
trol messages transmitted simultaneously, COPE proposes a
method in which an ACK control message for receipt of the
network coded data message is piggybacked to the next data
message transmitted by Ni−1 and Ni+1, as shown in Figure
3. COPE was originally designed not for wireless multihop
communication but for wireless ad-hoc communication. Since
Ni−1 and Ni+1 independently require to transmit their next
data message, collisions of the piggybacked ACK control
messages are expected to be avoided; however, the intervals of
the ACK control messages after receipt of the network coded
data message depend on the applications in Ni−1 and Ni+1.
The network coded data message tends to be retransmitted
frequently.
Ni+1
Ni+2
Ni
DIFS
Ni-1
ACK
Ni-2
DATA
Backoff
Network Coded DATA
Figure 3. ACK Control Message Piggybacked to Data Message in COPE.
IFNCPA is based on the same idea in COPE but is designed
for wireless multihop communication. On receipt of the net-
work coded data message broadcasted from an intermediate
node Ni, both of its neighbor intermediate nodes Ni−1 and
Ni+1 extract the data messages to be received. Since all three
wireless nodes are in a route, both Ni−1 and Ni+1 are required
to forward data messages received from Ni. Thus, after a DCF
Inter Frame Space (DIFS) interval and their random backoffs
for collision avoidance, Ni−1 and Ni+1 forward the received
data message to their neighbor intermediate nodes Ni−2 and
Ni+2, respectively. Since Ni is included in wireless transmis-
sion ranges of both Ni−1 and Ni+1, it can overhear these
data messages which play the role of passive ACK control
messages for the network coded data message broadcasted by
Ni. Different from the ACK control messages piggybacked
to the next data messages in COPE, the passive ACK control
messages in IFNCPA are surely transmitted after an estimated
interval since the data messages are surely forwarded, as shown
in Figure 4. This solves the retransmission problem in COPE.
However, it is highly possible for Ni−1 and Ni+1 to forward
the data messages simultaneously since Ni−1 and Ni+1 are
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

hidden terminals for Ni. As a result, these forwarded data
messages might collide at Ni. This means a failure of passive
ACK control message transmissions to Ni. Hence, for network
coding communication, the RTS/CTS control is mandatory
for collision avoidance between the ACK control messages.
Ni+1
Ni+2
Ni
DIFS
Ni-1
Ni-2
DATA
Backoff
Network Coded DATA 
Figure 4. Pseudo ACK by Overhearing of Forwarded Data Message in
IFNCPA.
In transmissions of data messages along a route, for avoid-
ance of collisions caused between 1-hop neighbor intermediate
nodes, i.e., between exposed ones, and between 2-hop neigh-
bor intermediate nodes, i.e., between hidden ones, data and
control message transmissions by 1-hop and 2-hop neighbor
nodes, Ni−2, Ni−1, Ni+1 and Ni+2 should be suspended for
data message transmissions by Ni. Thus, the introduction of
the RTS/CTS control is inevitable. In the usual RTS/CTS
control for a data message transmission from Ni to Ni+1, Ni
broadcasts an RTS control message which reaches both Ni−1
and Ni+1 and then Ni+1 broadcasts a CTS control message
which reaches both Ni and Ni+2. Even if Ni−1 receives an
RTS control message from Ni−2, Ni−1 never sends back a
CTS control message. Therefore, a data message from Ni
never collides with another data message transmitted along
the route. However, in network coding communication, Ni
transmits data messages to both Ni−1 and Ni+1 by broad-
casting the network coded data message. So, the RTS control
message transmission from Ni−2 should also be avoided. This
means that the transmission of the CTS control message is
required not only for Ni+1 but also for Ni−1. For collision-
free transmissions of network coded data messages, it is
required for Ni to receive the CTS control messages from
both Ni−1 and Ni+1. In the original RTS/CTS control in
wireless LAN protocols such as IEEE 802.11, a CTS control
message is broadcasted with the SIFS interval after receipt of
the broadcasted RTS control message. Hence, CTS control
messages from Ni−1 and Ni+1 surely collide at Ni in network
coding communication.
In CSMA with RTS/CTS [5] and NC-MAC [1], the order
information of the transmissions of CTS control messages is
included in an RTS control message. As shown in Figure 5,
according to the order the information is piggybacked onto
the RTS control message from Ni, one of Ni−1 and Ni+1
broadcasts a CTS control message with the SIFS interval after
receipt of the RTS control message and the other broadcasts
a CTS control message with an interval enough for avoidance
of a collision between the CTS control messages at Ni. This
method is also applied to avoid collisions between the ACK
control messages transmitted to Ni by Ni−1 and Ni+1 after
receipt of a network coded data message from Ni. Though,
different from the CTS control messages broadcasted by Ni−1
and Ni+1, the ACK control messages are unicasted to Ni by
Ni−1 and Ni+1, these are transmitted simultaneously, which
causes a collision at Ni. Hence, the order information of the
ACK messages is included in the network coded data message.
This method works well for avoidance of collisions of the CTS
and ACK control messages at Ni; however, the required time
duration for a transmission of a network coded data message
causes a longer data message transmission delay and lower
end-to-end throughput of data messages.
RTS
Ni
Ni+1
Ni-1
CTS
ACK
SIFS
Network Coded DATA
Figure 5. Collision Avoidance of CTS and ACK Control Messages in
NC-MAC.
Adaptive Round-Robbin Acknowledge and Retransmit
(ARAR) [3] is a method for a multicast data message trans-
mission in a wireless ad-hoc network. A sender node Ns
broadcasts an RTS control message to all its neighbor nodes
in its wireless transmission range. After a SIFS interval,
all the receiver nodes which successfully receive the RTS
control message send back a CTS control message to Ns.
If multiple receiver nodes simultaneously send back the CTS
control messages to Ns, these collide at Ns and Ns cannot
receive these CTS control messages correctly, as shown in
Figure 6. Hence, Ns cannot determine which receiver wireless
nodes received the RTS control message correctly. However,
Ns identiﬁes the following three cases: (1) no receiver nodes
correctly received the RTS control message if no CTS control
message is sent back to Ns. (2) only 1 receiver node correctly
received the RTS control message if only 1 CTS control mes-
sage is transmitted and received by Ns correctly, i.e., without
collisions. (3) multiple receiver nodes correctly received the
RTS control message if multiple CTS control messages are
transmitted and collide at Ns. Our proposal for performance
improved network coding communication is based on this 3-
cases identiﬁcation in ARAR.
III.
PROPOSAL
We suppose wireless multihop networks with bi-directional
and concurrent transmissions of sequences of data messages
along a wireless multihop transmission route between two
RTS
N1
N2
Ns
Ni
Collision
CTS
SIFS
・・・・・・・
Figure 6. Collision of CTSs in ARAR.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

terminal wireless nodes. Here, most of the intermediate wire-
less nodes temporarily hold data messages in transmission for
both directions in their buffer. This is because data message
transmissions between two successive intermediate nodes are
based on the half-duplex communication. Hence, there are so
many opportunities to apply the network coding communica-
tion in which each intermediate node encodes data messages
transmitted in different directions into one combined data
message and broadcasts it to transmit it to its neighbor interme-
diate nodes in both directions that the end-to-end transmission
performance such as end-to-end transmission delay and end-
to-end throughput is expected to be improved. However, as
discussed in the previous section, a sequence of data messages
transmitted along a route tends to collide at intermediate nodes
due to exposed and hidden node problems. Especially, it is
more difﬁcult to avoid and/or reduce collisions in bi-directional
and concurrent transmissions of data messages along a route.
Hence, collision avoidance methods such as the RTS/CTS
control should be introduced. On the other hand, since an
intermediate node broadcasts a network coded data messages
to transmit original data messages to both directions to its two
successive intermediate nodes in both directions different from
the original one-way transmissions, an extended RTS/CTS
control is required to be designed. Though some methods
for the RTS/CTS control in network coding communication
have been proposed as in the previous section; however, their
additional overhead is unignorable. Thus, the advantage of the
network coding communication is tremendously reduced.
In order to solve this problem, this paper proposes a
novel extended RTS/CTS control and transmissions of ACK
control messages for network coding wireless multihop trans-
missions based on ARAR supporting multicast transmissions
of data messages in wireless ad-hoc networks. As shown in
Figure 7, in order for an intermediate node Ni to broadcast
a network coded data message me of data messages mf and
mb received from Ni−1 and Ni+1, respectively, Ni broadcasts
an RTS control message destined to Ni−1 and Ni+1 to
all its neighbor nodes within its wireless signal transmission
range. On receipt of the RTS control message, Ni−1 and/or
Ni+1 broadcast CTS control messages destined to Ni to
all their neighbor wireless nodes within their wireless signal
transmission ranges after a SIFS interval if it is possible for
Ni−1 and/or Ni+1 to receive a data message from Ni, i.e.,
Ni−1 and/or Ni+1 have not yet received RTS or CTS control
messages from their neighbor wireless nodes. Neither Ni−1
nor Ni+1 is transmitting a data message since it is possible
for Ni to transmit the RTS control message; this means that
Ni has not received an RTS control message from Ni−1 and/or
Ni+1.
Among the neighbor nodes of Ni, which have received the
RTS control message from Ni, it is possible only for Ni−1
and Ni+1 to broadcast CTS control messages. Hence, there
are only the following 4 cases for Ni on receipts of CTS
control messages (Figure 7):
•
Both Ni−1 and Ni+1 broadcast CTS control messages
and Ni detects a collision of them.
•
Only Ni−1 broadcasts a CTS control message and Ni
receives it.
•
Only Ni+1 broadcasts a CTS control message and Ni
receives it.
•
Neither Ni−1 nor Ni+1 broadcasts a CTS control
message and Ni receives no CTS control messages.
SIFS
RTS
Ni-1
CTS
Ni
Ni+1
Ni-1
Ni
Ni+1
Ni-1
Ni
Ni+1
Ni-1
Ni
Ni+1
Network Coded DATA
(a) CTSs from both Ni-1 and Ni+1.
(b) CTS only from Ni-1.
(c) CTS only from Ni+1.
(d) No CTSs from Ni-1 and Ni+1.
Collision
Figure 7. Acceptance of CTS by Collision Detection.
If both Ni−1 and Ni+1 broadcast CTS control messages,
these CTS messages collide at Ni since both of them are
transmitted with the same SIFS interval after receipts of the
RTS control message from Ni. However, since it is impossible
for Ni to detect a collision in all the other 3 cases, by detection
of a collision Ni determines that the collision is caused by the
concurrently transmitted CTS control messages from Ni−1
and Ni+1. That is, Ni ﬁnds that both Ni−1 and Ni+1 notify Ni
of their possibility for receipt of a forthcoming data message by
transmissions of their CTS control messages and broadcasts
a network coded data message me of mf and mb.
If either Ni−1 or Ni+1 broadcasts a CTS control message
in response to the RTS control message from Ni, Ni receives
the CTS control message without a collision. Thus, Ni ﬁnds
that only one of the successive intermediate nodes in a route
broadcasts the CTS control message, which means that only
the sender intermediate node is ready for receipt of a data mes-
sage from Ni and the other is currently impossible to receive
it. Then, Ni broadcasts the network coded data message or
the original data message to the successive intermediate node
broadcasting the CTS control message. The data message is
expected to be received correctly by the receiver node. In
addition, no collisions are caused at the successive intermediate
node of Ni, which does not broadcast a CTS control message
since it does not broadcast it due to not to be a sender or
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

a receiver node but a receipt of an RTS or a CTS control
message from its neighbor node other than Ni. Otherwise,
both Ni−1 and Ni+1 has already been received RTS and/or
CTS control messages from their neighbor nodes and are
not possible to receive data messages from Ni. Ni tries to
rebroadcast an RTS control message after a DIFS interval.
Same as CTS control messages, ACK control messages
for a network coded data message broadcasted by Ni are
broadcasted by Ni−1 and Ni+1 and their collisions are treated.
After detection of a collision between the CTS control mes-
sages from Ni−1 and Ni+1, Ni broadcasts a network coded
data message m destined to Ni−1 and Ni+1 with a SIFS
interval. On receipt of the network coded data message m,
Ni−1 and/or Ni+1 transmit ACK control messages to Ni
after a SIFS interval if Ni−1 and/or Ni+1 receive the network
coded data message correctly. Among the neighbor nodes of
Ni, which have received the RTS control message from Ni, it
is possible only for Ni−1 and Ni+1 to transmit ACK control
messages. Hence, there are only the following 4 cases for Ni
on receipts of ACK control messages (Figure 8):
•
Both Ni−1 and Ni+1 transmit ACK control messages
and Ni detects a collision of them.
•
Only Ni−1 transmits an ACK control message and
Ni receives it.
•
Only Ni+1 transmits an ACK control message and
Ni receives it.
•
Neither Ni−1 nor Ni+1 transmits an ACK control
message and Ni receives no ACK control messages.
If both Ni−1 and Ni+1 transmit ACK control messages,
these ACK messages collide at Ni since both of them are
transmitted with the same SIFS interval after receipts of the
network coded data message from Ni. However, since it is
impossible for Ni to detect a collision in all the other 3 cases,
by detection of a collision Ni determines that the collision is
caused by the concurrently transmitted ACK control messages
from Ni−1 and Ni+1. That is, Ni ﬁnds that both Ni−1 and
Ni+1 notify Ni of their receipt of the network coded data
message by transmissions of their ACK control messages.
If either Ni−1 or Ni+1 transmits an ACK control message
in response to the network coded data message from Ni, Ni
receives the ACK control message without a collision. Thus,
Ni ﬁnds that only one of the successive intermediate nodes
in a route transmits the ACK control message, which means
that only the sender intermediate node received the network
coded data message from Ni and the other failed to receive
it. Then, Ni tries to retransmit a data message destined to
the successive intermediate node from which Ni does not
receive an ACK control message. In this case, it is possible
for Ni to transmit either only the original message failed to
transmit to the node or another network coded data message
for the original message failed to transmit to the node and
another buffered data message destined to the other successive
intermediate node of Ni. For performance improvement point
of view, the latter, i.e., a network coded data message is
desirable to be transmitted. Otherwise, both Ni−1 and Ni+1
has already been received RTS and/or CTS control messages
from their neighbor nodes and are not possible to receive data
messages from Ni. Ni tries to rebroadcast an RTS control
message after a DIFS interval.
Ni
Ni+1
Ni-1
ACK
SIFS
Ni
Ni+1
Ni-1
Ni
Ni+1
Ni-1
RTS
Ni
Ni+1
Ni-1
Collision
(a) ACKs from both Ni-1 and Ni+1.
Network Coded DATA
(b) ACK only from Ni-1.
(c) ACK only from Ni+1.
(d) No ACKs from Ni-1 and Ni+1.
Figure 8. Acceptance of ACK by Collision Detection.
In the proposed method, the concurrent transmissions of
CTS control messages transmitted by Ni−1 and Ni+1 are
recognized by Ni by the collision of the messages at Ni. The
collision is detected not only by Ni but also all the nodes
included in both of the wireless signal transmission ranges of
Ni−1 and Ni+1. The nodes included in the wireless signal
transmission range of Ni receive the RTS control message
from Ni and is notiﬁed of the transmission request for a
network coded data message by Ni and the NAV which
represents the interval when the neighbor nodes suspend to
initiate a data message transmission and keep silent. However,
the nodes out of the wireless signal transmission range of Ni
and detect the collision of the CTS control messages cannot
achieve the NAV . Hence, it is possible for such nodes to
broadcast an RTS or a CTS control message to initiate a
transmission or a receipt of a data message though Ni−1 and
Ni+1 are included in the wireless signal transmission range of
the nodes as shown in Figure 9. The probability of occurrences
of collisions at Ni−1 and/or Ni+1 caused by a data or a
control message depends on the distances between successive
intermediate nodes Ni−1, Ni and Ni+1, i.e., the lengths of
communication links ⟨Ni−1Ni⟩ and ⟨NiNi+1⟩, their angle and
transmission request ratio of data messages along the route.
IV.
EVALUATION
This paper proposes a novel RTS/CTS control for colli-
sion avoidance in bi-directional wireless multihop transmis-
sions of sequences of data messages supporting P2P type
multimedia network applications. In order to evaluate the
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Ni-1
Ni+1
Collision
Ni
Figure 9. NAV Unacceptable Areas due to Collision of CTS Messages.
advantage of the proposed method, which allow two successive
intermediate wireless nodes to broadcast CTS control mes-
sages and to transmit ACK control messages concurrently with
the same SIFS interval after receipts of a broadcasted RTS
control message and a network coded data message from Ni,
this section evaluates end-to-end throughput of data messages
in simulation experiments.
Here, two terminal nodes and all the intermediate nodes
are located with 100m spaces. All the nodes communicate
with a 101m wireless signal transmission range by IEEE
802.11b wireless LAN protocol. Hence, in this simulation,
only collisions of control and/or data messages along the route
are considered. That is, there are no other routes. Appropriate
routing tables are assumed to be set in advance in all the
nodes. Length of routes are 2–19 hops, i.e., there are 1–18
intermediate nodes in a route and sequences of data messages
are transmitted in both direction between the two terminal
nodes. End-to-end throughput of data messages are evaluated
in the proposed method in comparison with a naive wireless
multihop transmission with the original RTS/CTS control and
without network coding communication and NC-MAC where
the transmission order of CTS and ACK control messages
are indicated by the intermediate node broadcasting a network
coded data message (See Section 2). All the related protocols
are implemented on ns-3 simulator [6].
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 16
 18
Throughput [Mbps]
Route Length [hop]
Proposal
NC-MAC
No Network Coding
Figure 10. End-to-End Throughput of Data Message.
Figure 10 shows the results of the simulation experiments.
The horizontal axis represents the length of routes and the
vertical axis represents the average end-to-end throughput of
data messages.
First, the end-to-end throughput of data messages in NC-
MAC is averagely 11.5% higher than the naive transmissions
with the usual RTS/CTS control and without network coding
communication. In cases of more than 9-hop routes, the per-
formance improvement is almost the same as 7.8%. Anyway,
it is clear that the advantage of network coding communi-
cation and avoidance of collisions between data and control
messages is reasonable. However, as mentioned in Section 2,
6-phase transmissions, i.e., RTS, CTS, CTS, network coded
data message, ACK, ACK are required in NC-MAC and 8-
phasetransmissions, i.e., RTS, CTS, original data message,
ACK, RTS, CTS, original data message, ACK are required
in the naive approach.
Next, in the comparison between our proposed method
and NC-MAC, NC-MAC is superior to the proposed method
in routes with less than 4 hops. However, in routes with
more than 4 hops, the proposed method performs much better
than NC-MAC. This is because the proposed method requires
only 4-phase transmissions RTS, CTS, network coded data
message, ACK by introduction of collision detection for
receipt of concurrently transmitted CTS and ACK control
messages. Totally, the proposed method achieves 30.1% and
42.2% higher end-to-end throughput of data messages than
NC-MAC and the original RTS/CTS control without network
coding communication, respectively.
V.
CONCLUSION
This paper has proposed a novel RTS/CTS control for
collision avoidance in network coding communication for
bi-directional concurrent transmissions of sequences of data
messages in wireless multihop networks. Here, receipt of CTS
and ACK control messages from two successive intermediate
nodes are recognized by an intermediate node transmitting a
network coded data message by their collision. The results
of simulation experiments show that the proposed method
achieves more than 30% higher end-to-end throughput of data
messages. For higher performance, the authors is designing a
more cooperative protocol for network coding communication
to have more opportunities to apply the network coding
transmissions of both directional data messages.
REFERENCES
[1]
X. Deng and Y. Yang, “An Efﬁcient MAC Multicast Protocol for
Reliable Wireless Communications with Network Coding,” Proceedings
of IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, 2011, pp. 1–6.
[2]
S. Katti et al., “XORs in The Air: Practical Wireless Network Coding,”
Proceedings of the International Conference on Applications, Tech-
nologies, Architectures, and Protocols for Computer Communications,
vol. 36, no. 4, 2006, pp. 243–254.
[3]
J. Xie, A. Das, and S. Nandi, “An Improvement to The Reliability of
IEEE 802.11 Broadcast Scheme for Multicasting in Mobile Ad Hoc
Networks,” Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Sensor
and Ad Hoc Communications and Networks, 2004, pp. 359–366.
[4]
A. Makoto, T. Yumi, O. Chikara, and T. Hisashi, “A Study on Inter-
ﬂow Network Coding with Passive ACK for Efﬁcient and Reliable
Bidirectional Communication : Optimal Waiting Time for Encoding and
Timing Control for Passive ACK,” Technical Report in IEICE, vol. 115,
no. 172, 2015, pp. 43–48.
[5]
U. Daisuke, D. Satoshi, M. Masahiro, and S. Takatoshi, “RTS/CTS Ef-
fect on Two-Hop Wireless CSMA Network Coding,” Technical Report
in IEICE, vol. 109, no. 276, 2009, pp. 65–70.
[6]
“NS-3,” 2018, URL: https://www.nsnam.org/ [accessed: 2018-09-25].
[7]
“Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer
(PHY) Speciﬁcations,” Standard IEEE 802.11, 1997.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

