Study on Secure Mobile Communication based on the Hardware Security Module 
 
Junho Lee, Haeng-Seok Ko, SangHyun Park, Myungwon Seo, and Injung Kim 
System R&D Division, The Attached Institute of ETRI 
P.O.Box 1, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon-si, KOREA 
e-mail: {gladday, hsko, shpark, mwseo, cipher}@ensec.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents a survey of information 
protection methods for secure mobile communication. Most 
existing software-based information protection systems have a 
greater risk for the loss or theft and have difficulty in 
maintaining.  In order to solve these problems, we considered 
methods of information protection method based on hardware 
security 
module 
that 
are 
best 
adapted 
to 
mobile 
communication environment. 
Keywords - hardware security; secure mobile communication. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Over the past four years since Apple’s release of the 1st-
generation iPhone in 2007, there has been an explosive 
growth in the demand for smartphones and other mobile 
devices such as tablet PCs. This surge in the use of mobile 
devices, however, has not been accompanied by adequate 
security policies to ensure the safety of communication. As a 
result, the mobile environment is affected by the same 
problems that have been plaguing the fixed PC-based 
Internet environment, such as the spread of malicious codes, 
hacking and then the resulting leakage of private information 
[1]. Cell phone tapping and information theft are particularly 
serious threats to the safety of using mobile devices for 
government agencies and companies as well as for the 
general public.  
To resolve these security issues, the US Army, for 
example, is using special smartphones like the L-3 
Guardian○
R  Secure Mobile Environment Portable Electronic 
Device (SME PED) by L3 Communications, in a robust 
security move [2]. These types of special smartphones, 
which were designed for secure communications, are 
however, too onerous for civilian use, whether by businesses 
or by consumers.  
For standard smartphones that are not for encrypted 
communication, one way of increasing the security of 
communication is using a separate cipher device to enable 
cipher communications [3]. Another popularly used method 
is using a software encryption solution, which hooks IP 
packets [4]. Both methods require the modification of the 
hardware or software of the smartphone, which necessitates 
assistance from the manufacturer. However, smartphone 
manufacturers are generally unwilling to assist with the 
process, for reasons pertaining to device stability or costs.  
This paper discusses ways of protecting information 
stored in mobile devices from various forms of cyber threats. 
Fig. 1 below illustrates the structure of UMTS (the name of 
the 3G mobile network selected by the 3rd Generation 
Partnership Project [3GPP]). As it can be noted from this 
image, the UMTS network consists of two main parts: a core 
network and UMTS terrestrial radio access network 
(UTRAN), where the user equipment connects to the 
UTRAN. Communication within the UMTS network takes 
place in two separate domains: voice data is transmitted 
through the circuit-switched (CS) network, while data 
packets are transmitted in packets through the packet 
switched (PS) network. In this paper, we will focus on end-
to-end methods for protecting user data for secure 
communication within 3G PS networks. We will begin by 
examining the characteristics of the environment for end-to-
end mobile communication, and then we will proceed to 
discuss methods of information protection that are best 
adapted to this environment. 
II. 
PREVIOUS APPROACHES 
One of the most widely used methods for enabling secure 
communication in a smartphone is by connecting a cipher 
device to the earphone jack [3]. The voice data is received 
through the microphone of the cipher device and is encrypted 
by its digital signal processor (DSP) before it is transmitted 
to the receiving party. The DSP of the cipher device decrypts 
the received encrypted data also before it is transmitted 
through the earphone. This method has the advantage in that 
it does not require the modification of the phone module and 
can be used for any type of mobile phone. However, this 
approach is limited to circuit services, and doesn’t provide 
secure communication for data packets. Another major 
disadvantage is its costliness, due to the DSP, battery, and 
codecs used for the module.  
Node-B
Node-B
SRNC
DRNC
MSC/VLR
GMSC
HLR
SGSN
GGSN
SRNC
DRNC
Node-B
Node-B
CS domain
PS domain
UTRAN
Core Network
UTRAN
Security
module
Security 
module
 
Figure 1. Structure of the UMTS network 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Another method consists of encrypting the data by 
hooking up IP packets by rooting the smartphone. This 
method is advantageous in that data can be encrypted for all 
applications used in the smartphone. But the encrypted data 
also runs the risk of becoming exposed to malicious software 
attacks or hacking attempts because of the rooting process. 
More recently, a new method for cipher communication 
using a secure USIM, instead of a simple USIM (Universal 
Subscriber Identity Module), has been proposed [4]. This 
paper proposes a WAP public key infrastructure (WPKI) 
method, which allows for the remote management of card 
applications through the USIM chip. Using the WPKI 
concept, secure communication can be enabled on 
smartphones by adding a cryptographic algorithm to the 
security function of the USIM. In order to use the secure 
USIM, one must be able to hook IP packets. This requires 
that a number of modifications be done to the hardware as 
well as the software of a smartphone. However, as has been 
mentioned earlier, most manufacturers are refusing to assist 
with introducing such modifications to their phones on the 
basis of stability risks or costs. Another flaw with this 
method is that it is vulnerable to tampering attempts.  
There are also ways of enabling secure communication 
through a smartphone application. Although software-based 
security solutions, involving no separate hardware module, 
cost less and offer a greater degree of user-friendliness, 
storing security algorithms and keys inside the device itself 
makes them run the risk of becoming stolen through hacking. 
Information that is stolen from within the smartphone can be 
remotely deleted or controlled, when the phone is lost or 
stolen, but this does not work when the network is blocked. 
 
III. 
 INFORMATION PROTECTION METHODS OPTIMALLY 
ATTUNED TO THE MOBILE DEVICE ENVIRONMENT 
The existing methods discussed above are not precisely 
aligned with the specific environment for mobile devices; 
hence, they are poorly adapted for use with mobile devices. 
In this section, we will analyze the characteristics that are 
specific to the mobile device environment and we will 
propose methods for the protection of information that are 
best adapted to this environment. 
A. Characteristics of the Mobile Device Environment 
1. An explosive growth in data traffic, resulting from a 
sharp surge in the use of smartphones 
The widespread use of services like mobile voice over IP 
(mVoIP) with smartphone and mobile devices in general has 
caused the sharing of data in overall telecommunications 
traffic 
to 
jump, 
shrinking 
the 
sharing 
of 
voice 
communication commensurately [5]. mVoIP is a technology 
for converting voice data into packets of IP data and 
transmitting them using a real-time transport protocol (RTP). 
This technology makes calls dramatically cheaper and is, for 
this reason, rapidly replacing traditional voice call services. 
What 
this 
means 
is 
that, 
going 
forward, 
secure 
communication solutions will be needed mostly for data, 
rather than for voice communication as such. 
2. Limited Resources 
The biggest advantage of a smartphone is its portability. 
Users are, therefore, naturally highly sensitive to the issue of 
battery life. Even the best of smartphone security systems 
will be shunned if such systems shorten life of the battery 
and take up an excessive amount of resources, including 
memory, which results in the slowing down of the device. 
Therefore, an information protection solution for a 
smartphone must be designed in a manner that is adapted to 
the mobile device environment; namely, it must have a very 
little impact on battery life.  
3. Risk of Loss or Theft  
There is a greater risk for mobile devices being lost or 
stolen, as they are portable devices. It is, therefore, important 
for a security policy to take this risk into consideration. The 
method, currently used, which consists of deleting the 
information stored in a smartphone when it is lost or stolen, 
by remotely controlling the device, has the fatal flaw of 
ceasing to be effective as soon as the network is blocked. 
Accordingly, any solutions for protecting information in the 
event of the loss or theft of a smartphone must be hardware-
based, to be more effective. 
4. User-friendliness 
Since the huge success enjoyed by Apple’s iPhone, 
developed with a focus on user interface (UI), it has now 
become an accepted fact that user-friendliness is the prime 
factor to consider when designing a smartphone. An 
application, no matter how great, will fall out of favor and 
become irrelevant, if it is not easy to use. The same is true 
for 
secure 
communications 
applications. 
A 
secure 
communication solution involving complicated procedures 
or requiring multiple interconnected devices runs the risk of 
becoming rejected by users. Therefore, security modules for 
secure communications must not be complex and the device 
connection must also be as simple as possible. 
B.  Hardware Security Modules 
For secure communication, cryptographic algorithms are 
generally placed in the device with the secret key kept offline. 
Password or certificate-based access is the most popularly 
used method. Using the password or the private key of the 
certificate, a session key is generated. The encryption takes 
place through the encryption algorithms hidden inside an 
ActiveX control or other software. During the encryption, 
malicious attempts, such as virus attacks or hacking, are 
monitored by the security software in real time. However, 
the security software alone is insufficient for detecting all 
malicious attempts to breach the security of a mobile device. 
This is because there are security threats other than malicious 
code. Hardware attacks, which extract data by causing 
interference in the hardware of the device, should also be 
contended with. There are also a great variety of hacking 
methods based on hardware attacks for mobile devices, such 
as the injection of errors into the device by decomposing it 
and disabling the internal logic. Currently, there are no 
countermeasures to attacks of this kind. Also, the cycle for 
OS (Operating System) upgrade by device manufacturers is 
quite short nowadays, and is usually only twice a year. 
Software patches applied at the upgrade are costly as well as 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

time-consuming. Hardware security modules are, therefore, 
the alternative to software solutions for resolving issues that 
cannot be properly resolved by the latter. As has been 
mentioned earlier in the discussion of the mobile device 
environment, resources for mobile devices are severely 
limited, and user-friendliness is paramount. When using a 
hardware security module, the following are some of the 
essential considerations: 
1. Limited resources: There is no built-in power supply 
device for the hardware security module, and electric power 
should be supplied from the mobile device. Therefore, it 
must be designed in a manner to minimize power 
consumption and memory usage.  
2. User-friendliness: To ensure its user-friendliness, the 
hardware security module should be made in such a way that 
it is automatically recognized by the mobile device, as soon 
as it is connected to the device. 
C. Method of Information Protection 
Fig. 2 shows a block diagram of the secure mobile 
communications system using a security module. Here, the 
hardware security module either directly handles the 
encryption and decryption of communications data or 
generates key streams needed for encryption and decryption. 
The security application of the mobile device, meanwhile, 
ensures the security of communication using the hardware 
security module. When the mobile device and module are 
connected, the caller is authenticated using a PIN or other 
similar methods. The caller must then share the session key 
with the receiver in order to proceed to secure 
communication. 
There are two different ways of implementing a secure 
communications system. One is having the security module 
directly handle the encryption and decryption process. In this 
case, the most important consideration is the power 
consumption of the module (in other words, the module’s 
impact on battery life) and the time delay resulting from the 
process. In order to process the voice data of VoIP in real 
time, the security module should be able to encrypt and 
decrypt them at a relatively fast speed. A normal phone 
conversation becomes difficult with any delay of 30msec or 
more [6]. Also, as the security module depends on the 
mobile device for its power supply, having it directly 
perform the encryption-decryption process then negatively 
affects battery life. 
The other method is having the security module, which 
generates the key streams that are needed for encryption and 
decryption. The secure communications application for the 
mobile device generates a cipher text by doing exclusive-or 
(XOR) operation with plain text, using the key stream 
obtained from the security module, and transmitting it to the 
call receiver. This method has a number of advantages over 
the first one. It uses less power, and the encryption time 
delay is minimal; making it ideal for secure VoIP calls. 
However, any loss or repetition of packets tends to affect all 
packets, making the call impossible. The capacity of self-
synchronization is, therefore, necessary in order to remedy 
this issue. 
Request of PIN number for user authentication
Response of PIN number
Verification of PIN number
Request of session key for secure communication
Response of session key 
Session key 
shared 
Session key
generation
PIN number 
verification
Security 
module
 
Figure 2. Secure mobile communications system 
D. A Key System and Key-sharing Method Adapted for the 
Mobile Device Environment 
In this section, we will look into the kind of key system 
and encryption-decryption method that are best adapted for 
the mobile device environment. Let us begin by comparing 
symmetric and asymmetric keys to see which of them are 
more suitable for mobile devices. For a group of N number 
of people to use a symmetric key-based encryption system, 
the number of secret keys shared between them is N(N-1)/2. 
The corresponding number for an asymmetric key-based 
encryption system is only N. For example, a group of 1 
million people using a symmetric key-based encryption 
system will need 500 million keys [7]. Therefore, an 
asymmetric key-based encryption system is more efficient 
than a symmetric key-based one in terms of the management 
of keys. On the other hand, the asymmetric key system 
requires a large amount of computation to calculate private 
keys from public keys; hence, this system is not well adapted 
for mobile devices that have limited resources. In this paper, 
we are primarily concerned with companies or organizations 
in which the number of secure communication users is 
limited, rather than with mass secure communication. 
Therefore, for the purpose of this study a secret key system 
based on a symmetric key system is a more suitable choice. 
When the number of users is N, we need a   key matrix, 
which may be expressed as follows: 
TABLE I.  
EXAMPLES OF A N×N KEY MATRIX 
 
User #1 
User #2 
 
User #N 
User #1 
K11 
K12 
 
K1N 
User #2 
K12 
K22 
 
K2N 
 
 
 
 
 
User #N 
K1N 
K2N 
 
KNN 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

User #1 and User #2 can have secure communication 
using K12, and User #1, by encrypting and decrypting files 
stored within the mobile device, using K11, can keep them 
safe from attacks from external sources. Here, the keys must 
be generated and assigned a priori by the highest level of 
organization that is reliable in the group. The size of the key 
matrix, meanwhile, is determined according to the number of 
users. A company with 1,000 employees, using a 256bit key, 
would need a storage space of 15MB, for example. 
In order to share the session key generated from the 
secret key, the algorithms must satisfy the following two 
conditions: first, they should be able to rapidly achieve initial 
synchronization. In order for users to have a trouble-free 
session of secure communication, the initial synchronization 
should occur within the first second from the initiation of a 
VoIP call. Secondly, the encryption algorithms must provide 
stability against replay attacks. For mobile devices, methods 
like IKE by IPSec [8] are preferable to Kerberos [9], which 
is more resource-intensive. 
E. Other Considerations 
- Host Mode Support for Mobile Devices 
For a mobile device to communicate with a security 
module through interfaces like a micro USB, it must be able 
to operate in the host mode for USB. Samsung’s Galaxy S2, 
released in early May, for example, is enabled to operate in 
host mode. Also given the increasing use of the host mode, 
smartphones based on Android OS are likely to support it in 
the near future as well. 
- Tamperproof Capacity against Hardware Tampering 
As mobile devices can be easily lost or stolen, 
tamperproof capacity is essential for security solutions. The 
effectiveness of software-based remote deletion and the 
control of information have proved limited. The security 
module discussed in this paper needs to be equipped with 
features for preventing tampering, which will erase all key 
information stored in a device, when either abnormal access 
or an attempt to open the module to steal keys or other secret 
data is detected. 
 
 
Figure 3. Block diagram of the security module 
F. Essential Components of a Hardware Security Module 
Based on the various requirements for a security module, 
discussed above, we can define its essential components as 
shown in Fig. 3 below. As can be seen in Fig. 3, a hardware 
security module consists of a processor for the encryption 
and decryption of data and communication with applications 
in a mobile device; NOR flash memory for managing boot 
programs; SRAM memory for storing secret keys; SDRAM 
memory for imaging the encryption-decryption process; a 
hardware module for preventing tampering; and a RTC to 
supply time data to the processor and peripheral devices. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper has been a discussion of methods for 
information protection that are the most appropriate for 
mobile devices. Most existing information protection 
systems use software-based security solutions, which are 
poorly prepared for the eventuality of loss or theft of the 
device, as well as being complicated to use and maintain. 
The best secure communications solution for mobile devices 
must, therefore, be hardware-based and be equipped with a 
tamperproof capacity. Furthermore, given the extremely 
limited resources of a mobile device, a symmetric key 
system is more desirable than an asymmetric key system. 
The mode of sharing session keys should be designed to 
ensure rapid initial synchronization and stability in the event 
of a replay attack. Finally, when block encryption algorithms 
are used, the time delay caused by encryption and decryption 
must be less than 30msec, as any delay beyond this is not 
suitable for VoIP calls. If stream encryption algorithms are 
used, the security module needs to be equipped with a self-
synchronization capacity so as to prevent packet losses or 
repetition from making voice communication impossible. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Dan Wallach, Smartphone Security: Trends and Predictions, 
Rice University, Feb. 2011. 
[2] http://www.l-3com.com/cs-
east/ia/smeped/ie_ia_smeped.shtml 
[3] Yeonsu Kim, Joonhee Youn and Hyun Park, “A Voice 
Encrypted 
Communication 
Module 
for 
Mobile 
Communication Terminals”, KR 10-2007-0089750, Sep. 2007. 
[4] Jae Hyung Joo, Jeong-Jun Suh, and Young Yong Kim, 
“Secure Remote USIM (Universal Subscriber Identity 
Module) Card Application Management Protocol for W-
CDMA Networks, “ ICCE, Las Vegas, NV, pp. 101-102, Jan. 
7-11, 2006. 
[5] Global Mobile Data Traffic Forecast 2010-2015, Technical 
report, CISCO VNI. 
[6] Karie Gonia, Latency and QoS for Voice over IP, Technical 
report, SANS Institute. 
[7] William Stallings, Cryptography and Network Security, 4th 
Ed., Prentice Hall, Nov. 2005. 
[8] Kerberos: 
The 
Network 
Authentication 
Protocol, 
http://web.mit.edu/Kerberos/  
[9] The 
Internet 
Key 
Exchange 
(IKE), 
RFC2409, 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2409  
  
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

