External Interference-Aware Distributed Channel
Assignment in Wireless Mesh Networks
Felix Juraschek
Mesut Güne¸s
Bastian Blywis
Distributed Embedded Systems - Institute of Computer Science
Freie Universität Berlin
Berlin, Germany
Email: {jurasch, guenes, blywis}@inf.fu-berlin.de
Abstract—Interference is one of the major causes for perfor-
mance degradation in wireless networks. Channel assignment
algorithms have been proven successful to decrease the network-
wide interference by using non-overlapping channels for oth-
erwise interfering links. However, external co-located networks
and devices are usually not considered in the channel assignment
procedure, since they are not under the control of the network
operator and their activity is therefore hard to capture. In our
work we ﬁll this gap by additionally considering the interference
resulting from external devices. The novelty of this approach is
that not only co-located IEEE 802.11 networks are captured, but
also other sources of interference that utilize the same frequency
band. We present the spectrum sensing component DES-Sense, a
software solution for 802.11a/b/g that detects congested channels
and does not require any changes to the drivers. We present a ﬁrst
algorithm for external interference-aware channel assignment
and show proof-of-concept results from the DES-Testbed, a
wireless mesh network with 120 multi-radio nodes.
Index Terms—channel assignment, spectrum sensing, dynamic
frequency selection, wireless mesh network
I. INTRODUCTION
Multi-radio mesh routers allow the communication over
several wireless network interfaces at the same time. However,
this can result in high interference of the wireless transmis-
sions leading to a low network performance. Channel assign-
ment for multi-transceiver wireless mesh networks (WMNs)
attempts to increase the network performance by decreasing
the interference of simultaneous transmissions. The reduction
of interference is achieved by exploiting the availability of
fully or partially non-overlapping channels.
With the success of IEEE 802.11 technology, there is a
dense distribution in urban areas of private and commercial
network deployments of WLANs. These co-located networks
compete for the wireless medium and can interfere with
each other, thus decreasing the achievable network perfor-
mance in terms of throughput and latency. Additionally, non-
IEEE 802.11 devices, such as cordless phones, microwave
ovens, and Bluetooth devices, operate on the unlicensed
2.4 GHz and 5 GHz frequency bands and can further decrease
the network performance. It is therefore an important issue
for efﬁcient channel assignment, to also address the external
interference. This task is not trivial, since the external networks
and devices are not under the control of the network operator.
In this paper, we present a method to monitor the activity
of external devices that utilize the same wireless channel.
We achieve this, by directly accessing the carrier sensing
statistics of the wireless network interface. We show a way
to distinguish between trafﬁc from our own network and the
channel usage of external devices. This allows to identify heav-
ily congested channels which should be avoided for our own
network. We present an algorithm that considers the channel
usage in order to calculate a truly external interference-aware
channel assignment. We present proof-of-concept results for
our sensing component DES-Sense in the DES-Testbed, a
WMN with more than 120 multi-radio mesh routers [1].
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In
Section II we present related work and Section III presents
the spectrum sensing component DES-Sense for the real-time
measurement of the channel usage. The paper concludes with
an outlook on future work.
II. RELATED WORK
Although channel assignment is still a young research area,
many different approaches have already been developed [2]. In
distributed approaches each mesh router calculates its channel
assignment based on local information. In contrast, centralized
approaches rely on a central entity, usually referred to as
channel assignment server (CAS), that calculates the channel
assignment for the entire network. Distributed approaches are
considered more suitable once the network is operational and
running, since they can react faster to topology changes due
to node failures or mobility [2].
A main trade-off in this ﬁeld exists between the channel-
diverse assignment and the network connectivity, since only
interfaces that are tuned to the same channel can communicate
with each other. One solution is to switch a dedicated interface
to a common channel to preserve the network connectivity [3].
Link-based channel approaches preserve the network topology
by assigning channels to links instead of interfaces [4][5],
thus being completely transparent to the routing layer. Another
solution is to have one interface per node on a ﬁxed channel
for receiving and dynamically switch to the channel of the
receivers ﬁxed interface for sending [6]. The Skeleton Assisted
Partition Free (SAFE) algorithm uses minimal spanning trees
(MSTs) to preserve the network connectivity [7]. However,
in these algorithms only the network-internal interference is
addressed.
267
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 1.
Architecture of DES-Chan with DES-Sense. The DES-Chan
framework comprises common services required by a wide range of different
algorithms. The DES-Sense module provides the channel occupancy statistics
to the algorithms.
With the standardization activities for IEEE 802.11h [8], the
dynamic frequency selection (DFS) mechanism was introduced
and research on algorithms that consider external interference
expanded. 802.11h was mainly introduced as a regulation in
Europe since the 5 GHz unlicensed spectrum is also used
for radar technology. An external interference-aware algorithm
for infrastructure WLANs has been proposed in [9], which is
realized by monitoring the utilized channel for beacons and
data trafﬁc of other WLAN networks.
Outside of IEEE 802.11, spectrum sensing is a fundamental
part of cognitive radios [10]. Spectrum sensing is required for
secondary users that operate in a licensed spectrum to detect if
primary users are present and depending on the result retreat
or utilize the wireless channel [11]. The SpiderRadio is an
implementation of a cognitive radio with spectrum sensing in
802.11a/b/g [12]. SpiderRadios are equipped with one radio
and the focus is on the detection of primary users. To realize
this approach, changes to the network interface drivers have
been carried out.
In our work, we present a novel approach to combine
the spectrum sensing with distributed channel assignment
algorithms for IEEE 802.11 networks. The goal is to enrich the
DES-Testbed, a 120 multi-radio wireless mesh network with a
software solution for spectrum sensing that detects congested
channels and does not require any changes to the drivers.
III. DES-SENSE
We developed the sensing component DES-Sense for real-
time measurement of the channel usage. It has been imple-
mented as a module for DES-Chan, a framework for empirical
research on distributed channel assignment [13][14]. DES-
Chan eases the development process of channel assignment
algorithms by providing several services, that are common to
a wide range of approaches. The architecture of DES-Chan
comprising DES-Sense is depicted in Figure 1.
A. Components
DES-Sense consists of the following two components:
• Sensing component - The sensing component is a daemon
that periodically retrieves statistics about the channel
occupancy. This is achieved by retrieving the carrier
sensing statistics of the wireless network card via the
driver. Based on the statistics we are able to determine
the percentage of a certain interval the medium was
sensed busy and therefore could not have been used
for wireless transmissions. We can efﬁciently determine
the channel usage and predict the future activity of
external networks and devices by using the statistics as
input for corresponding models. The sensing component
can be conﬁgured dynamically with the set of channels
C = {c1, c2, .., ck} that will be monitored and the duration
T = {t1, t2, .., tk}, each channel is monitored.
• IPC interface - For the integration into DES-Chan, an
inter process communication (IPC) interface is provided
that allows algorithms to retrieve the channel usage statis-
tics to fuse them into their channel assignment decision.
The algorithms can query the daemon via the interface
to update their channel usage statistics.
B. Challenges
Several challenges had to be addressed to efﬁciently use
this method. The carrier sensing statistics are retrieved via the
ath5k driver for Atheros-based interfaces [15], which is one
of the few drivers for the Linux system that currently provide
these statistics. However, from the carrier sense statistics
alone, it can only be derived that the channel has been utilized,
but not by which station. It is therefore hard, to distinguish
between trafﬁc from our own network and external networks
and devices. To solve this problem, the monitoring interface
can be set in monitor mode and thus capture and analyze
the received packets. This way, we can distinguish between
internal and external trafﬁc and can treat the channel usage of
our network different than that of other networks.
In order to assess the channel usage, we need to perform
periodic measurements on the available channels. With multi-
radio mesh nodes, this can either be solved with a dedicated
interface, that permanently monitors the channel usage. The
drawback of this approach is that the dedicated interface can
not be utilized for data transmissions. Another method is to
perform the monitoring measurements event-based, in case a
change of the link quality is observed, for example, when
the throughput drops. With this method, a trafﬁc ﬂow must
be stopped and can only be resumed after a less congested
channel is found and switched to. This will lead to a higher
delay for this particular ﬂow.
Another challenge results from the fact, that a wireless
interface can monitor only one channel at a time. This means,
that simultaneous monitoring of all available channels is
not possible with one wireless interface. The duration for
monitoring all channels is:
TM =
k
X
k=1
ti
(1)
268
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Depending on the values for ti, the risk exists that bursty
trafﬁc might not be monitored on a particular channel. How-
ever, with periodic measurements, we aspire to gather enough
data to derive realistic estimations of the future channel usage
time.
C. Algorithm
Our ﬁrst approach that incorporates the channel usage data
is the external interference-aware channel assignment (EICA)
algorithm. EICA assigns channels to links and is therefore
topology preserving. A conﬂict graph is used to formulate the
problem so that the number of edges in the conﬂict graph shall
be minimized. Each link is owned by the node with the higher
ID and only this node can change the channel of the link. The
node ID can be any unique identiﬁer, such as IP address, MAC
address, or host name.
At the network initialization, all links are assigned to the
same channel. Each node then iterates over all owned links
and changes the channel of the link which results in the
largest decrease of interference in the local neighborhood. The
largest decrease is achieved with the combination of link u
and channel k that removes the highest numbers of edges in
the local conﬂict graph. Additionally, we use the busy ratio
of the medium (BROM), with BROM ∈ [0, 1]. The BROM is
deﬁned as the ratio of the monitoring time ti and the channel
busy time of ci in ti. A BROM value of 0.5 would mean that
the channel has been sensed busy for 50% in ti. With this,
we derive the metric of the expected throughput (ET), which
is calculated using the bandwidth B of the wireless link as
follows:
ET = (1 − BROM) · B
(2)
The channel, which achieves the largest decrease in
network-wide interference with the highest (ET) is then se-
lected. The channel switch is executed using a 3-way hand-
shake. This procedure is repeated until the local interference
cannot be reduced any further, i.e., all possible (u, k) combi-
nations have been tried. In order to ensure the termination of
the algorithm, each combination is only tried once. The total
number of iterations is O(|Vc|K), where |Vc| is the number of
vertices in the conﬂict graph (of the whole network) and K is
the number of available channels.
D. Current state
As a proof of concept, we validated DES-Sense on the mesh
routers of the DES-Testbed at the Freie Universität Berlin [1].
The DES-Testbed comprises 120 multi-radio mesh routers and
is deployed in an unshielded environment over the computer
science faculty buildings where several co-located WLANs
exist to provide Internet access to the students and research
staff.
For a ﬁrst evaluation of the sensing component, we ensured
that no frames were sent by the DES-Testbed nodes, so
that we only capture the activity of external devices. We
activated one wireless interface on each testbed node and
started the monitoring phase of the available channels on the
Figure 2.
Channel busy ratio on the 2.4 GHz frequency spectrum. The
channels 1, 6, 11 are already utilized up to 40%, which implies that the
channels are already highly congested. Co-deployed to the DES-Testbed, the
APs of the university WLAN use exactly these channels.
2.4 GHz frequency band. The results of the channel usage
measurements for one particular node is shown in Figure 2.
The ﬁgure shows the BROM for the channels 1 to 12 of the
2.4 GHz band. As can be seen, the channels 1, 6, 11 are
already utilized up to 40%. This complies very well with
our knowledge that the co-located faculty WLANs used by
students and research staff are using exactly these channels.
It is interesting to note, that the BROM for all channels has
only little deviation. A further analysis of the captured packets
trafﬁc revealed, that at the time of the monitoring mostly
beacon frames were received, which are sent periodically from
the APs of the co-located networks.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper, we presented DES-Sense, our approach to
efﬁciently sense the channel occupancy with off-the-shelf
IEEE 802.11 hardware. Our distributed channel assignment
algorithm EICA will incorporate the measured BROM results
in order to calculate a truly external interference-aware channel
assignment. We showed a proof-of-concept for the measure-
ment of the BROM on the DES-Testbed, a static wireless mesh
network at the Freie Universität Berlin.
As this is work-in-progress, we are currently in the im-
plementation and experimental evaluation process of the algo-
rithm. The DES-Testbed, with more than 120 multi-radio mesh
routers, presents an ideal playground for the experimental
study, since many diverse scenarios can be created and mesh
routers can be also used as desired as noise generators. In a
large series of experiments, we will compare our algorithm to
the link-based [5] and interface-based [3] channel assignment
algorithms, which have already been implemented and tested
at the DES-Testbed.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Günes, F. Juraschek, B. Blywis, Q. Mushtaq, and J. Schiller,
“A testbed for next generation wireless networks research,” Special
269
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Issue PIK on Mobile Ad-hoc Networks, vol. IV, pp. 208–212, Oktober-
Dezember 2009. [Online]. Available: http://www.reference-global.com/
doi/abs/10.1515/piko.2009.0040
[2] W. Si, S. Selvakennedy, and A. Y. Zomaya, “An overview of channel
assignment methods for multi-radio multi-channel wireless mesh net-
works,” Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, pp. –, 2009.
[3] B.-J. Ko, V. Misra, J. Padhye, and D. Rubenstein, “Distributed
channel assignment in multi-radio 802.11 mesh networks,” 2007, pp.
3978–3983. [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.
jsp?arnumber=4204903
[4] S. Sridhar, J. Guo, and S. Jha, “Channel Assignment in Multi-Radio
Wireless Mesh Networks : A Graph-theoretic approach,” 2009.
[5] A. P. Subramanian, H. Gupta, S. R. Das, and J. Cao, “Minimum
interference channel assignment in multiradio wireless mesh networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 1459–1473,
2008.
[6] P. Kyasanur, J. So, C. Chereddi, and N. H. Vaidya, “Multichannel
mesh networks: challenges and protocols,” Wireless Communications,
IEEE [see also IEEE Personal Communications], vol. 13, no. 2, pp.
30–36, 2006. [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.
jsp?arnumber=1632478
[7] M. Shin, S. Lee, and Y. ah Kim, “Distributed channel assignment
for multi-radio wireless networks,” IEEE International Conference on
Mobile Adhoc and Sensor Systems Conference, vol. 0, pp. 417–426,
2006.
[8] IEEE,
“IEEE
802.11h-2003
-
Wireless
LAN
Medium
Access
Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) speciﬁcations, Amendment
5:
Spectrum
and
Transmit
Power
Management
Extensions
in
the
5
GHz
band
in
Europe,”
2003.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//standards.ieee.org/getieee802/download/802.11h-2003.pdf
[9] A. K. T. T. Z. T. L. Miliotis, V.; Apostolaras, “New channel allocation
techniques for power efﬁcient WiFi networks,” in Personal, Indoor and
Mobile Radio Communications Workshops (PIMRC Workshops), 2010
IEEE 21st International Symposium on, September 2010, pp. 347 – 351.
[10] T. Yucek and H. Arslan, “A survey of spectrum sensing algorithms for
cognitive radio applications,” Communications Surveys Tutorials, IEEE,
vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 116 –130, quarter 2009.
[11] R. Tandra, A. Sahai, and V. Veeravalli, “Uniﬁed space-time metrics to
evaluate spectrum sensing,” Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 49,
no. 3, pp. 54 –61, march 2011.
[12] R. Kai Hong; Sengupta, S.; Chandramouli, “SpiderRadio: An Incumbent
Sensing Implementation for Cognitive Radio Networking Using IEEE
802.11 Devices,” in IEEE International Conference on Communications
(ICC), 2010, pp. 1 – 5.
[13] F. Juraschek, M. Günes, M. Philipp, and B. Blywis, “Insights from
experimental research on distributed channel assignment in wireless
testbeds,” International Journal of Wireless Networks and Broadband
Technologies (IJWNBT), vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 32–49 pp., 2011.
[14] F. Juraschek, M. Günes, M. Philipp, and B. Blywis, “State-of-
the-art of distributed channel assignment,” Freie Universität Berlin,
FB Mathematik und Informatik, Tech. Rep. TR-B-11-01, Jan 2011.
[Online].
Available:
http://edocs.fu-berlin.de/docs/receive/FUDOCS_
document_000000009172
[15] Linux wireless, “Ath5k driver homepage,” last checked: 07/2011.
[Online]. Available: http://linuxwireless.org/en/users/Drivers/ath5k
270
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

