Exploring Social Accountability for Pervasive Fitness Apps 
Yu Chen 
Human Computer Interaction Group 
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, 
Lausanne, Switzerland 
yu.chen@epfl.ch 
 
Jiyong Zhang 
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, 
Lausanne, Switzerland 
jiyong.zhang@epfl.ch 
 
Pearl Pu 
Human Computer Interaction Group 
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, 
Lausanne, Switzerland 
pearl.pu@epfl.ch 
 
 
 
Abstract—Mobile fitness applications have gained increasing 
popularity to help users walk and exercise more. A key 
component in such apps is its ability to motivate users. 
Traditional gamification methods have focused on competition 
such as leaderboard for community users, self-reflection for 
individual users, or a combination of the two. Motivated by 
recent work showing a promising effect of social capital, we 
have designed and developed a mobile game, HealthyTogether, 
based on such ideas. We are further interested in how users 
behave in different settings of gamification methods compared 
to a baseline. To this end, we have designed and conducted an 
in-depth user study (N=24) involving 12 dyads playing these 
games in 4 conditions over a period of two weeks. We report 
here the design of the application as well as the user study. 
Among the various rewarding schemes, one that uses a hybrid 
concept of competition and social accountability gives the most 
desirable outcome.  
Keywords-health; 
pervasive 
fitness 
applications; 
gamification; competition; social accountability.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Wellness and lifestyle change have gained significant 
attention in recent years. Both research communities and 
commercial sectors are putting increasing effort to develop 
wearable sensors and mobile applications that help and 
“nudge” individuals to increase their physical activities, eat 
healthier diet, better manage their sleep and stress, and 
engage in social lives with family and friends.  
Many of the applications use gamification -- the use of 
game elements in non-game context [14] -- to motivate users 
to exercise more. Concrete methods include competition 
such as leaderboard for community users [9], self-reflection 
such as visualization for individual users [2][5][6], or a 
combination of the two [7][12]. Recent work shows a 
promising effect of social responsibility for the sake of 
helping each other especially among family members, 
friends, and people who share same interests and goals [1]. 
We define this concept as social accountability, which refers 
to a person’s awareness of another person’s goal and 
rendering himself/herself responsible to the goal’s successful 
fulfillment.  
In this work, we are interested in how users behave in 
various settings of gamification methods: competition, social 
accountability, a hybrid model of a mixture of competition 
and social accountability, and a baseline non-social setting. 
To this end, we have developed a mobile application, 
HealthyTogether, which enables dyads to participate in 
physical activities together, send each other messages, and 
earn badges. We use this application as an experimental 
platform for an in-depth user study (N=24) to evaluate how 
the various reward schemes influence users’ exercises and 
social interactions, both quantitatively and qualitatively.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. After 
covering 
related 
work 
in 
Section 
II, 
we 
present 
HealthyTogether in Section III, user study design in Section 
IV and results in Section V. We conclude this paper in 
Section VI.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Self-reflection is considered as a self-motivation and 
successful strategy for pervasive health applications. 
Research prototypes such as Shakra [4] and Houston [13] 
and commercial products such as Fitbit and Nike+ all 
visualize users’ daily activities to achieve self-reflection. A 
number of systems also present physical activities using 
metaphors. UbiFit Garden [12] visualizes users’ daily steps 
by the growing status of plants. The more activities a user 
takes, the healthier his plant looks. Fish’n’Steps [7] uses the 
metaphor of fish tank to visualize users’ step count. Recent 
work has employed informative art as a visualization tool, 
such as research prototype Spark. The above work mainly 
motivates users in an individual setting.  
Social interaction, including peer-support, cooperation, 
competition and belonging to a group has been a clear 
motivator for wellness activities [1][8]. Commercial products 
have widely adopted competition to motivate user, such as 
Nike+ and Fitbit. Fitster [9] is a research prototype that 
visualizes users’ steps in a social network and places users in 
a virtual competition environment. Kukini [16], Fish’n’Steps 
[7] and Life Coaching Application [11] support competition 
by helping users to form a team and explicitly introducing 
social interaction and social pressure.  
Research also shows that social communication can 
motivate users to exercise. Consolvo et al. [13] show that 
message exchange can help users to increase the 
responsibility and give support to group members [9]. 
Champbell et al. [16] suggest that communication using 
everyday fitness games can help enhance players' social 
relationship and sustainability in everyday fitness. 
Social accountability has been shown to be effective in 
helping users to achieve goals. Ahtinen et al. [1] have found 
out that connecting with family members and loved ones can 
221
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

help motivate users; connecting with people with similar 
wellness targets from communities within short distances can 
also increase motivation towards wellness activities. Stickk 
[15] helps users to achieve their goals by allowing them to 
appoint another person to monitor the progress and verify the 
accuracy of progress report. They can add supporters who 
can encourage them by commenting on their progress. Users 
can also put stake on the goal and specify where the stake 
would go if they fail in the goal. GoalSponsor [3] allows 
users to set up goals and sponsors whom they should be 
accounted for. A sponsor can be a friend, a professional in 
healthcare, or someone who has accomplished the goal 
successfully. Users are more committed in fulfilling the 
goals either because they do not want to let others down or 
because they do not want to lose reputation in front of others 
[3]. In the above work, the structure includes one person who 
has a goal to fulfill and another person who monitors the 
progress. 
To the best of our knowledge, current fitness applications 
have not well studied interaction schemes in which users 
mutually account for each other’s progress. We are 
motivated to investigate social accountability factor in 
pervasive fitness applications using an experimental platform 
called HealthyTogether. 
III. 
HEALTHYTOGETHER 
HealthyTogether is a mobile application that involves a 
pair of users to exercise together, and it is implemented on 
the Android platform. To measure users' physical activities, 
we choose the Fitbit sensor (as shown in Figure 1 a) and b)) 
among many off-the-shelf sensors as the activity tracker for 
our HealthyTogether system. Here, we describe the user 
interface design and the underlying rewarding mechanisms.  
A. Game Rules 
We designed a series of rewarding mechanisms for 
HealthyTogether in order to investigate the impacts of 
different social settings in pervasive fitness application. A 
user can win badges based on Karma Points, which are 
calculated as below. 
( )'
( )
( )
steps u
steps u
kp u
⋅
+
⋅
=
β
α
 
Based on different α and β values, HealthyTogether 
provides the following three reward settings: 
• 
Competition setting, whereα = 100%, β = 0; 
• 
Accountability setting, where α = 0, β = 100%; 
• 
Hybrid setting, whereα = 80%, β = 20%. 
In competition setting, a user's Karma points are calculated 
purely by his or her steps. To gain more badges, a user only 
needs to focus on his or her own activities even if he is 
exercising with a buddy.  Thus, we name this rule 
competition setting. In accountability setting, a user's 
Karma points are calculated by the steps of the buddy. 
Therefore, the more he encourages his buddy to exercise, 
the more points he earns. Thus, we name it accountability 
setting. On the other hand, even if a user does not move at 
all, he can still gain badges from the buddy's activities. In 
the hybrid setting, a user's Karma points are calculated 
based on both his (her) own and that of the buddy, 
proportionally. The idea behind this reward scheme is to 
encourage competition while also motivating users to cheer 
each other. Initially, we set α = 80%  and β = 20% based on 
the well-known Pareto Principle. In the future, we will also 
experiment different ratios of competition and social 
accountability, such as 50%-50% and 20%-80%. 
B. Badges 
HealthyTogether issues badges based on kp(u). The first 
badge is issued if kp(u)>500, to help users get started in a 
short time. This number is followed by 1,000 and 2,000 and 
then increases by every 2,000 points. HealthyTogether 
calculates Karma points in a daily basis but accumulates 
badges over time. For example, if a user earns 5,353 Karma 
points in a day, he can gain 4 badges, i.e., 500, 1000, 2000 
and 4000. If a user earns 5,353 and 6,086 points in the first 
two days, he can gain 4 and 5 badges respectively and a total 
of 9 badges.  
C. Interaction Design 
The main interface of the HealthyTogether system is 
shown in Figure 1 c).  It contains a ‘self’ tab and a ‘buddy’ 
tab. Each tab displays information about step count, active 
time and badges of the current day. We use a pie chart to 
visualize the proportion of time that a user is in various 
 
 
 
Figure 1. a) The FitBit tracker, b) FitBit in use, and c) the 
Samsung Galaxy. 
222
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

activity modes, i.e., sitting, lightly active, fairly active and 
very active. 
The badge area displays the total number and the badges 
that a user has earned. The badges are accumulated over 
time. In Figure 1 c), the user has earned 6 types of badges 
with a total number of 16. When he/she clicks on a badge 
icon, a dialog box pops out explaining the details of this 
badge type, including how many badges the user has earned 
and how he/she earned the badges.  
There is a messaging button on the top-right corner of 
each page. When it is clicked, users can either view message 
history (Figure 2 a)) or send messages to their buddies 
(Figure 2 b)). Users will receive a vibrated notification when 
buddies send them new messages.  
IV. 
USER STUDY 
To study different game settings in real situations, we 
designed an exploratory deployment study. We first 
conducted a user study (Study 1) that spans for six 
continuous working days, which was divided into a three-day 
control session and a three-day experimental session. After 
conducting the study, we were able to discover some 
interesting results. For example, participants suggested that 
we extend the study to two weeks, excluding the weekends, 
so that the control and the experimental sessions span over 
identical days of the week, thus minimizing the influence of 
a given day’s schedule to the physical activities being 
monitored. For example, a user may work in the office on 
Mondays but conduct experiments in the laboratory on 
Wednesdays. We therefore conducted the second study (we 
name it Study 2) with duration of two weeks. We refer to the 
control session as Phase I and experiment session as Phase II 
in both studies.  
A. Participants 
We recruited the participants on campus via word-of-
mouth. After one person signs up, we asked her to invite a 
buddy of her choice to join. Their ages range between 22 and 
33 and they never used Fitbit before. We required that each 
dyad should not work in the same office or too close to each 
other. We offered all participants a 50CHF gift card as 
compensation for their time.  
B. Materials 
We provided users with an Android phone with 3G SIM 
card and a Fitbit. Three users requested to use their own 
Android phones because it would be more convenient for 
them. We checked that their phones are compatible for 
installing HealthyTogether. 
C. Procedure 
Both Study 1 and Study 2 were structured as a two-phase, 
within-subjects design. Phase I allowed participants to 
become accustomed to using Fitbit and allowed us to collect 
baseline fitness data. In this phase, all participants use Fitbit 
alone without connecting with buddies. In Phase II, 
participants in baseline groups (Group A1- A3) continued to 
use only the Fitbit while groups in social settings (Group B1-
B3 in competition setting, C1- C3 in accountability setting, 
D1- D3 in hybrid setting) started to use Fitbit and 
HealthyTogether with buddies. The structure of Study 1 was 
the same as the Study 2, except the duration was extended to 
two weeks, with both phases extended from three days to 
five days. 
At the beginning of the study, we invited each pair of 
participants to our laboratory and helped them to set up their 
Fitbit accounts. We also had a short interview with them on 
their experience in using fitness sensors. At the end of Phase 
I, we invited participants in social settings to our laboratory 
again to install HealthyTogether with different game rules. 
Since our user study lasts for up to two weeks, we 
requested participants to fill in a daily experience survey 
related the study. At the end of each day, we sent a reminder 
email with the survey link to participants asking them 
whether they have anything to share with us about their 
experience using Fitbit or HealthyTogether. The survey only 
contains one question: “Do you have anything to share with 
us on your experience using Fitbit/HealthyTogether today?” 
Daily survey not only helps us to gain an in-depth 
understanding of users’ experience, but also facilitates us to 
explain their step data with activities during that day. 
At the end of the study, we organized a semi-structured 
interview. We invited two participants in each group to 
attend the session together, so that they could share their 
stories. We did not ask a fixed set of questions, but mediated 
the session with the following aspects: overall impression, 
experience, attitudes and aptitudes, motivation of usage, 
social relationship. 
V. 
RESULTS 
In this section, we report both quantitative and qualitative 
results collected in Study 1 and Study 2. To facilitate 
describing results, we encoded the two participants in each 
 
Figure 2. Screenshots of messaging components. 
 
223
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

dyad with ‘a’ and ‘b’ together with their group ID. For 
example, we encode the two participants in Group C1 as 
‘C1a’ and ‘C1b’ respectively. 
A. Quantitative results 
Study I 
We first investigate users' step count across the 6 days. The 
overall average daily step count is 7,439 (min=3,185, max = 
11,490). We then compare the average daily step count 
between baseline group (A1) and groups who used 
HealthyTogether (B1—D1) to evaluate the effectiveness of 
social interaction incentives (see Figure 3). Results show a 
slight decrease of steps from Phase I to Phase II across all 
groups. One explanation is the novelty effect of using Fitbit 
in the first 1—2 days, as reflected in daily survey. One 
interesting finding is that in Group A1 the average step count 
decreased by 20.4% but in Group B1—D1 it decreased by 
only 10.6%. This implies that HealthyTogether with social 
settings could help users to persist in physical activities. 
We further compare Group B1—D1 with different rules 
of calculating the accumulative Karma points of the three 
days. Results show that users in Group B1 (competition 
setting) have largest difference of Karma points (Δ kp = 
14,556) compared with Group C1 (Δ kp = 839) and Group 
D1 (Δ kp = 2,982). One explanation is that participants in 
Group B1 focus more on their own performance compared 
with other groups. In other words, it implies that the social 
accountability factor, applied in Group C1 and D1, could 
lead to more balanced performance of physical activities 
between buddies. 
Meanwhile, users exchanged 72 messages, shared by 
Group B1 (N=43), Group C1 (N=27) and Group D1 (N=2). 
The distribution shows that Group C1 (accountability 
setting) and D1 (hybrid setting) interact more compared with 
Group B1 (competition setting). Particularly, participants in 
Group D1 exchanged 59.2% more messages than Group C1. 
This implies that hybrid setting is most useful to encourage 
participants to interact with each other. 
Several topics emerged from the analysis of message 
content, and we present them with sample text in Table I. 
The distribution of each topic shared in Group B1—D1 is 
shown in Figure 4.  It reveals the following phenomenon: 1) 
in total, there are 27 chat messages, which have the largest 
share; 2) encouragement is the main topic that is relevant 
with physical activity (20 messages); 3) Group C1 has the 
largest share (13 messages) in encouraging messages; 4) the 
major topic of Group D1 is workout together (16 messages), 
and it only appears in Group D1. The results imply that 
hybrid setting introduces most conversation in the topic of 
workout together. 
 
Study 2 
The deployment of Study 2 is the same as Study 1 except 
for the duration. We first verify whether discoveries in Study 
1 still exist in Study 2. The average daily step count is 9,501 
(min=3,200, max = 24,334). Figure 5 is a distribution of 
average daily steps between baseline groups (Group A2, A3) 
and social setting groups (Group B2, B3, C2, C3, D2, D3) in 
two weeks. The distribution shows a steady increase of 
average daily steps in social groups from Phase I to Phase II. 
Comparing social setting groups and baseline groups, we 
found average steps increased by 9.8% from Phase I to Phase 
II in social setting groups but decreased by 10.1% in baseline 
groups. This is consistent with implication in Study 1 that 
social settings could motivate users to exercise compared to 
when they walk alone. 
We then compare groups using HealthyTogether in 
different social settings. Figure 6 shows each participant’s 
average daily steps in Phase I vs. Phase II. The average daily 
steps in competition groups (B2 and B3) have increased from 
9,747 to 10,128 (Δ =381). In accountability groups (C2 and 
C3), this number increased from 8,888 to 9,717 ( Δ =829), 
and in hybrid setting (D2 and D3) from 10,762 to 12,437 (Δ
=1,675). The average daily step increase of hybrid group is 
51% more than that of accountability group and three times 
more than that of competition group. If we assume that 
participants have the same schedule of the same workday in 
different weeks, and that Phase I is a baseline for 
participants, then the above results suggest that hybrid 
setting encourage users to walk more. 
 
Figure 4. Topic distribution of messages exchanged using 
HealthyTogether in Study 1. 
 
Figure. 3. Distribution of average daily steps for groups with non-
social setting vs. social setting in Study 1. 
TABLE I. MESSAGE TOPICS AND EXAMPLES 
Topics 
Examples 
Self-reflection 
“im at 9200.. maybe i can run more” 
Cheering 
“you should make it 8k for a new badge” 
Comparison 
“the first time i am higher than you!!!” 
Workout together 
“we should walk around the floor together to 
take a break:)” 
Chat 
“feeling so tired now, go to bed soon” 
 
224
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
We further compare the steps between participants in a 
dyad. As shown in Figure 6, dyads from both accountability 
groups (C2 and C3) and hybrid groups (D2 and D3) have 
increased steps together from Phase II to Phase I. On the 
other hand, in competition groups, average step count of B2a 
and B3a have increased 22.5% and 11.0% respectively from 
Phase I to Phase II while this number decreased for their 
buddies (2.1% for B2b and 17.8% for B3b). This implies that 
accountability factor helps dyads to walk more steps 
together. In Study 1, we found participants in accountability 
group and hybrid group are trying to achieve a balanced 
number of badges. Even though we do not have the same 
finding in Study 2, the results concur with the implication in 
Study 1 that users have more balanced working performance 
that both users in a dyad improve together. 
We then analyze the 86 messages sent between the dyads 
in Study 2. Participants in hybrid groups sent 58 messages, 
which is more than twice the number of accountability group 
(N=21) and seven times more than that of competition group 
(N=7). Figure 7 shows the distribution of message topics 
within groups of the three social settings. Different from 
Study 1, messages with topics about self-reflection and 
encouragement have the largest share in the total of 
messages (27.8% for both topics). We also discover that 
hybrid groups have the largest share of messages (81%) in 
the topic of self-reflection. The distribution accords with 
what we have found from Study 1 that 1) hybrid groups have 
most share of messages (75%) in the topic of workout 
together, and 2) encouragement is the major topic (54%) in 
accountability groups. If we consider the number of 
messages as one metric to evaluate social interaction, results 
in Study 2 further provide evidence that hybrid setting is 
more likely to stimulate social interactions. 
B. Qualitative analysis 
In this section, we report the results we found through the 
logged daily survey and post-study interviews from both 
Study 1 and Study 2.  
During the user interview, we found some qualitative 
results that are related to our findings from quantitative 
analysis. Overall, the feedback about HealthyTogether was 
very positive. First, HealthyTogether has helped them to 
compare with each other. As B1b said in the interview, “to 
check her (buddy's) steps and compare with mine is most 
important for me”. Second, they could interact with each 
other via HealthyTogether. B1a reported in survey: “I 
received message on the first day, so the next day I 
intentionally walked more between the buildings.” 
We also found some evidence that the accountability 
factor (applied in accountability and hybrid setting) could 
help users to care about each other. As C1b reported in her 
daily survey, “I discovered his step is twice more than mine. 
As his badges depend on my steps, I feel I should walk more 
in order not to discourage him.” This supported what we 
found in Study 1 that the participants in C1 have more 
balanced 
performance 
when 
using 
HealthyTogether. 
Additionally, when we asked whether users about their social 
relationship before and after using HealthyTogether, 
participants in D3 revealed that they were already very close 
friends. Participants in C1, C2, and D1, and D2 reported that 
they had developed further relationship with buddies after 
using HealthyTogether. For example, D1b said: “Even 
though we are colleagues, we did not talk much. Finding 
something to do together rapidly brought us closer.” For 
another example, C2a reported that she knows more about 
her buddy: “When I woke up, my buddy already had 3,000+ 
steps... She is already on campus...” However, we did not 
find the same report from competition groups. This suggests 
that social accountability could be helpful for a user to 
enhance social relationship with the buddy. 
Participants have reported their concerns regarding 
competition setting. Both B1a and B1b reported competing 
with each other cause demotivation. “I knew I would never 
beat him because he needs to walk a lot from home to 
 
Figure 5. Distribution of average steps non-social setting vs. social 
setting in Study 2. 
 
Figure 6. Average step count Phase I vs. Phase II in Study 2. 
 
Figure 7. Topic distribution of messages in Study 2 
225
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

work…” –B1b. “I clearly had advantage in winning the 
game and sometimes I’m afraid walking too much makes her 
pressure…” –B1a. B3a also reported that when he noticed 
his buddy walking less, he also became lazier. Admittedly, 
the demotivation effect could be caused by the unbalanced 
abilities in physical exercise. This suggests that choosing a 
suitable exercise buddy can be important in order to 
maximize the effect of competition. 
Evidence shows that the hybrid setting is more preferred 
than the accountability setting. “I feel a little bit wired if my 
badges only depend on my buddy's steps. Is it a little bit de-
motivating me?” mentioned by C3a. By comparison, instead 
of ‘depending on’ others, both D1 and D3 have reported they 
arranged activities together, such as walking to a farther 
away cafeteria to have lunch (D1), and going to Zumba 
course together (D3). D2a reported in his survey that his 
buddy gave him suggestions to increase the steps: “Without 
trying too hard, I almost reached 10k steps. Seeing his 
progress during the day motivated me to move more. It was 
also useful to talk to him (via message) - he gets a high step 
count by walking around while reading articles. I also did 
this walking in circles thing for about 1h, which helped my 
brainstorming.” Even though D2b (avg=20,372) have clear 
advantages over D2a (avg=5,852) in Phase I, this 
discrepancy did not demotivate either of them. Instead, 
D2a’s average daily step has increased by 57.3% 
(avg=9,207) from Phase I to Phase II and D2b has increased 
by 11.2% (avg=22,661). As D1a said: “Helping others to 
become better is a `plus' rather than `minus' to your life.” 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this work, we have developed a mobile application 
called HealthyTogether that allows dyads to participate in 
daily physical exercises as a game. We conducted an in-
depth user study with 12 dyads with a period of up to 2 
weeks and compared participants using HealthyTogether in 3 
social settings and a baseline non-social setting. Results 
show that social settings, even in the competition mode, can 
help users to persist more in physical activities compared 
with baseline group.  Additionally, the hybrid setting is more 
likely to motivate users to walk more and more actively help 
others.  Furthermore, the number of messages sent between 
participants in the hybrid settings is 8 times more than those 
in the competition setting and twice of those in the 
accountability setting. Integrating social accountability factor 
is also promising to enhance social relationship between 
buddies.  
In the future, we plan to conduct longitudinal studies 
with more users in various conditions to validate our findings 
with statistical analysis. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
We thank Swiss National Science Foundation for 
sponsoring this research work. We are also grateful for all 
anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Ahtinen, M. Isomursu, M. Mukhtar, J. Mäntyjärvi, J. 
Häkkilä, and J. Blom. Designing social features for mobile 
and ubiquitous wellness applications. The 8th international 
Conference 
on 
Mobile 
and 
Ubiquitous 
Multimedia 
(MUM’09), ACM. Nov. 2009.  
[2] C. Fan, J. Forlizzi, and A. K. Dey. Spark Of Activity: 
Exploring Informative Art As Visualization For Physical 
Activity. Proc. of the ACM Conference on Ubiquitous 
Computing (Ubicomp’12), ACM. Sept. 2012, pp. 2–5.  
[3] GoalSponsor. 
https://www.goalsponsors.com. 
Accessed: 
August 6, 2014.  
[4] I. Anderson, J. Maitland, S. Sherwood, L. Barkhuus, M. 
Chalmers, M. Hall, and H. Muller. Shakra: tracking and 
sharing daily activity levels with unaugmented mobile 
phones. Mobile Networks and Applications, 12(2-3), 2007, 
pp. 185-199.  
[5] I. Li, A. K. Dey, and J. Forlizzi. A stage-based model of 
personal informatics systems. Proc. of the SIGCHI conference 
on Human Factors in computing systems (CHI’10), ACM. 
Apr.2010, pp. 557-566.  
[6] I. Li, A. K. Dey, and J. Forlizzi. Understanding my data, 
myself: supporting self-reflection with ubicomp technologies. 
Proc. of the ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Computing 
(Ubicomp’11), ACM. Sept. 2011, pp. 405-414.  
[7] J. Lin, L. Mamykina, S. Lindtner, G. Delajoux, and H. Strub. 
Fish’n’Steps: 
Encouraging 
physical 
activity 
with 
an 
interactive computer game. UbiComp 2006, pp. 261-278.  
[8] J. Maitland, and M. Chalmers. Designing for peer 
involvement in weight management. Proc. of the SIGCHI 
conference on Human Factors in computing systems 
(CHI’09), ACM Press (2011), pp. 315-324.  
[9] N. Ali-Hasan, D. Gavales, A. Peterson, and M. Raw. Fitster: 
social fitness information visualizer. In CHI'06 Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. Apr. 
2006, pp. 1795-1800.  
[10] P. Klasnja, S. Consolvo, and W. Pratt. How to evaluate 
technologies for health behavior change in HCI research. 
Proc. of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in 
computing systems (CHI’11), ACM. May 2011, pp. 3063-
3072.  
[11] R. Gasser, D. Brodbeck, M. Degen, J. Luthiger, R. Wyss, and 
S. Reichlin. Persuasiveness of a mobile lifestyle coaching 
application using social facilitation. Persuasive Technology 
2006, pp. 27-38.  
[12] S. Consolvo, D. W. McDonald, T. Toscos, M. Y. Chen, J. 
Froehlich, B. Harrison, and J. A. Landay. Activity sensing in 
the wild: a field trial of UbiFit garden. Proc. of the SIGCHI 
conference on the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in 
computing systems (CHI’08), ACM. Apr. 2008, pp. 1797-
1806.  
[13] S. Consolvo, K. Everitt, I. Smith, and J. A. Landay. Design 
requirements for technologies that encourage physical 
activity. Proc. of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors 
in computing systems (CHI’06), ACM. Apr. 2006, pp. 457-
466.  
[14] S. Deterding, M. Sicart, L. Nacke, K. O'Hara, and D. Dixon. 
Gamification: using game-design elements in non-gaming 
contexts. In CHI'11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, ACM. May 2011, pp. 2425-2428.  
[15] Stickk. http://www.stickk.com. Accessed: August 6, 2014. 2 
[16] T. Campbell, B. Ngo, and J. Fogarty. Game design principles 
in everyday fitness applications. Proc. of the 2008 ACM 
conference on Computer supported cooperative work 
(CSCW’08), ACM. Nov. 2008, pp. 249-252.  
 
226
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

