Social Network-Based Course Material Transformations For A 
Personalized And Shared Ubiquitous E-Learning Experience  
 
Timothy Arndt  
 Dept. of Computer and Information Science 
Cleveland State University 
Cleveland, OH, USA 
arndt@cis.csuohio.edu  
   
 
 
 
Angela Guercio 
Department of Computer Science 
Kent State University – Stark 
North Canton, OH, USA  
aguercio@kent.edu 
 
Abstract—This paper describes our preliminary work 
in progress on using social networks to form learning 
communities for e-learning. Today’s learners are 
increasingly likely to engage in learning activities via 
some form of e-learning. In order to meet the needs of 
these learners, a personalized approach to web-based 
e-learning is very helpful. An adaptive approach is 
required to deliver courseware in such a situation. The 
e-learning system must adapt to the learner’s 
particular likes/dislikes, study session length, and 
learning style as well as to the characteristics of the 
learning device – screen size, bandwidth, networked or 
not, etc. We have previously described an XML-based 
approach in which metadata describing the learner’s 
situation are continuously collected and refined and 
may be transformed via XSLT to meet the learner’s 
needs at any particular moment. One problem with 
such an approach is that the personalization may be 
carried to such extremes that the e-learner may lack a 
supporting community of colleagues who share a 
common learning experience. In this paper, we propose 
the use of social networks to form subgroups of e-
learners in a class. The preferences of this group of 
learners will be harmonized in order to provide a 
common learning experience which can be exploited by 
the members of the group in order to meet their 
learning goals. Towards this end, an algorithm for 
determining the optimal group of friends (based on 
desired group size and social network connectivity) is 
given. This algorithm and the approach proposed will 
be further developed in our ongoing research by 
incorporating it with our previously developed 
customization system. 
Keywords - adaptive e-learning; personalized e-
learning; social networks; ubiquitous e-learning 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Several trends emerging today point towards the 
growing importance of ubiquitous learning – 
learning which takes place at any time and at any 
place. Among these trends are a growing population 
of non-traditional learners. Many of these learners 
have full or part time jobs which require them to fit 
the learning into a crowded schedule. Learning must 
take place wherever and whenever possible and it is 
not possible to fit this learning into a fixed, rigid 
schedule. Older non-traditional learners often have 
family obligations which render them non-mobile as 
well – the learning must come to them rather than 
the other way around. Younger, more traditional, 
learners also bring new demands to the learning 
environment. This generation is used to being 
entertained when and where they want, and may find 
traditional learning methods to be too constraining. 
In order to meet the needs of this generation, a more 
flexible, adaptive approach to learning.  
In our previous work, we have developed an 
XML-based approach in which both online course 
materials and user profiles (learning styles, viewing 
device, etc.) are described  using XML documents. 
XSLT stylesheets for various devices have been 
developed to support ubiquitous e-learning. The 
XSLT stylesheets successively transform the course 
materials in a dataflow transformation approach, 
resulting in a personalized learning experience. This 
previous work is discussed in more detail in the 
following section. 
While distance learning technology can make 
classes accessible to the groups described above, a 
potential problem is the isolation of the distance 
learner, especially when a personalized approach to 
e-learning is adopted. One advantage of classroom-
based learning is the support network of colleagues 
which can be exploited to reinforce learning. The 
vital importance of a shared learning experience has 
been noted by many researchers [1, 2, 3, 4]. This 
paper describes our work in progress that is geared 
towards leveraging social networking technology to 
reduce the isolation of e-learners and to form 
cooperative learning groups. Such an approach is 
advocated via several researchers in the field of e-
learning (see the related research described in 
Section 3). 
218
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The basic framework needed to meet these needs 
is clear – web-based e-learning will be the preferred 
method due to the ubiquitous nature of the web and 
its underlying facilities and protocols. Standards-
compliant web browsers are available on all 
manners of platforms, from servers down to cell 
phones and tablets and are generally available on 
PCs in open labs and libraries. On the back end, 
metadata may be used to describe both the learning 
materials as well as to give learner profiles needed 
for customization [5]. The use of metadata allows 
for open, standards-based learning environments to 
be implemented, as demonstrated by SCORM [6].  
In the following section, we briefly describe 
experimental prototypes which we have previously 
developed which illustrate different aspects of 
adaptability for ubiquitous e-learning. Section 3 
surveys related research in social networks for e-
learning. Section 4 presents a formal model of social 
networks and e-learning and an algorithm for 
forming learning communities in the e-learning 
context using social networks. This is the main 
contribution of this paper. Section 5 gives 
conclusions and discusses future research. 
II. 
 ADAPTABILITY FOR UBIQUITOUS E-
LEARNING 
This section briefly reviews our previous research 
in adaptability for ubiquitous e-learning. In our 
present research, we take this previous work as a 
starting point and add the use of social networks in 
order to form learning communities with a shared 
(adaptable) learning experience. 
In [7], we described our research in multimedia 
software engineering applied to distance learning – 
in 
particular 
the 
Growing 
Book 
project, 
a 
multinational research effort supporting multi-
lingual, multi-modal and multi-level learning. The 
metadata for courseware was described using an 
XML language called TAOML whose definition 
was 
given. 
We 
also 
described 
a 
dataflow 
transformer, based on XSLT, for transforming the 
courseware from one desired output format to 
another. 
A 
prototype 
data 
transformer 
was 
developed in Java and demonstrated. 
In [8], we further developed this approach, 
concentrating on ubiquitous e-learning and showing 
how the dataflow transformation approach could be 
used to support e-learning on different types of 
devices as well as diverse learning styles, described 
by user profiles. We moved towards standards-
compliant metadata for learning objects and we 
developed a prototype system capable of generating 
learning scenarios for several different types of 
devices. 
In the present research, we will leverage the use 
of social networking software in order to form 
shared learning communities so that students may be 
part of supporting group of learners, rather than have 
the completely personalized approach described in 
[4]. This approach is supported by several 
researchers whose results are given in the following 
section. 
III. 
 RELATED RESEARCH IN SOCIAL NETWORKS 
FOR E-LEARNING 
In this section, we review some previous research 
involving the use of social networks in e-learning. 
Before the emergence of social networking 
applications, researchers had already been working 
on ways to form groups of students for collaborative 
learning. Hoppe [9] described this as a matchmaking 
process driven by models of the students stored in a 
centralized 
repository. 
This 
idea 
was 
later 
implemented in such systems as Phelps [10] and 
iHelp [11], which formed profiles of students using 
characteristics such as knowledge, native languauge, 
cognitive styles, etc. 
Haythornethwait and de Laat [12] provide an 
overview of social network concepts such as actors, 
ties, relations and networks as well as an outline of 
the concept of networked learning and discuss how a 
social network perspective can be applied in the 
networked learning context. 
Chatti and fellow researchers present a social 
software driven approach to learning management 
[13]. They posit that social software can be used to 
build communities of learners as well as forming the 
basis of a personalized approach to learning. They 
also argue that today’s teenagers, having grown up 
with this technology will be well-suited for such an 
approach. An emphasis of this work is on the 
similarity of Knowledge Management (KM) and 
Learning Management (LM). 
Baird and Fisher [14] also note the reliance on and 
expertise in social software of the rising generation 
of students and proposes the use of social 
networking media to foster the building of learning 
communities as well as to facilitate self-paced and 
customized learning experiences in synchronous and 
asynchronous learning environments. This work 
reviews the literature in Social Learning Theory and 
lists various social networking media with hints of 
how they may be exploited in e-learning. 
Vassileva [15] addresses several issues related to 
educating 
students 
of 
the 
“Digital 
Natives” 
generation with social learning technologies. Among 
219
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

the issues addressed, the one most closely related to 
this research is finding the “right” people for the 
student to learn from or collaborate with. The author 
notes that with the rise of social network 
applications data about the relationships between 
users is becoming readily available to users. Among 
users not closely related to the user, trust and 
reputation are important mechanisms. The use of 
social networks to form a shared learning 
environment is not considered. 
Stuetzer et al. [16] examine the social networks 
formed during collaborative distance learning and by 
analyzing the relationships define five different actor 
roles identified the relationship between network 
structure and learning processes. 
IV. 
 FORMAL MODELS OF SOCIAL NETWORKS 
AND E-LEARNING 
In order to perform an initial study of the 
feasibility of this approach, we develop a formal 
model of the most important components of the 
system – the students in a class, their relations, and 
their learning preferences. 
We model the students in a particular distance 
learning class using an undirected graph, G = (V, E). 
Each vertex G in the graph represents a student in 
the class, and each edge V between two students V1 
and V2 represents friendship between the two 
students. If no edge exists, no friendship relation 
exists between the two students. The graph 
represents the social network of students in the class. 
Furthermore, each vertex V has an associated vector 
of values VEC = {VAL1, VAL2, …, VALn} where 
each VALi is a member of the domain DOMi, VALi ∈ 
DOMi. There exists a special default value DEFi ∈ 
DOMi for each DOMi. A vector represents the set of 
learning preferences for a student. Each value is a 
particular preference (for example the degree of 
background that a student has in a particular related 
area may be represented by a value in the range 0 – 
5).  
We will also make use of a distance function for 
these vectors DIST(VEC1, VEC2) which we will 
assume is defined (by the course instructor or some 
other actor) whose range is the set of non-negative 
real numbers.  The semantics of the function is that 
learning preferences which are more similar should 
have smaller distances than those which are less 
similar. The function must be defined in such a way 
that any two identical vectors have a distance zero. 
We cannot in general use a simple Euclidean 
distance since the domains of each element of the 
vector may be different. 
The idea is to form groups of friends who have a 
common set of learning preferences which after 
transformation of the learning materials based on 
those preferences, will lead to a shared learning 
experience. Since it is possible that we will not be 
able to find large enough groups of friends with 
identical learning experiences, we may need to 
harmonize their preferences by “averaging” the 
values of the vectors of the learning group members 
in order to achieve a common learning experience. 
Given the practical limits on the size of online 
classes, the size of our graph G can be considered to 
be of reasonable size, so the types of algorithms 
which attempt to find communities on the massively 
sized graph which is the World Wide Web [17] are 
not needed. 
The minimum size of a learning group MIN is 
given by the course instructor or coordinator as a 
parameter 
to 
the 
algorithm 
described 
with 
pseudocode below which forms the learning groups. 
 ALGORITHM LEARNING_GROUPS 
// Initialization phase 
Let set GROUPS be an empty set of 
(sub)graphs 
G is the graph of students 
MIN is the minimum group size 
// Clique detection phase 
Find all cliques of size at least 
MIN in G 
Add each of these cliques to the 
set GROUPS and remove them from G 
// Relaxation phase 
If G is not empty then 
Find all k-edge-connected 
components of size at least 
k=|G|-1 in G 
Add each of these components 
to GROUPS and remove from G 
If G is not empty set k=k-1 
and repeat until G is empty 
or k=0 
220
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

// Coalesce phase 
If |G|>MIN, add G to GROUPS else 
Remove a vertex from some element 
of GROUPS with size > MIN and add 
it to G. Repeat until |G|>MIN then 
add G to GROUPS 
// Consensus learning phase 
For each element of GROUPS, replace 
the vector associated with each 
member of the element with the 
average of all of the members 
The algorithm works by attempting to find groups 
of 
students 
from 
the 
graph 
with 
maximal 
connectivity that are at least as large as the size 
specified by the instructor. The algorithm first looks 
for minimally-sized cliques, removing them from 
the graph under consideration as they are found. In 
the relaxation phase, the algorithm looks for less 
well-connected sets of nodes, removing a group 
from consideration as it is found, and relaxing the 
connectivity requirement at each round. Finally, the 
left over nodes are put into their own group, and the 
preferences for each group found is calculated, 
based on the preferences of the individual members 
of the group. 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
 
This work presents our initial research in 
incorporating social networking into our previously 
described approach to customized e-learning. The 
motivation for this work is the observation by 
several researchers in distance learning [1, 2, 3, 4] 
that students in distance learning perform better 
when they have a shared learning experience 
providing a support group of colleagues. Thus, we 
have modified out previous approach, which aimed 
at producing a customized learning experience for 
each student, based on a user profile containing 
preferences, as well as information on the device 
used. Now we adopt an approach which provides a 
customized learning experience for a compatible 
group of students (with the size of the group being a 
parameter which can be chosen by the instructor). 
Possible weaknesses of this approach include the 
need to have available on social networking links for 
the students in the class. Hopefully, this will not be 
too much of a problem due to the popularity among 
the target group of students of such social 
networking sites as FaceBook and Google+. The 
approach also requires the instructor to be 
knowledgeable about the optimal size of a group to 
be input to the system. 
As this research is in an initial phase, the major 
result presented in this paper is the algorithm for 
group formation presented in section 3. 
As far as future research plans, we are currently 
working on a prototype system incorporating the 
group forming techniques described in section 3. 
This prototype will then be integrated with our 
previous 
systems 
for 
ubiquitous 
e-learning 
customization. A general learning model [18] will 
also be incorporated to allow modification of user 
profiles, and testing and validation of the approach 
will be done on a large class of undergraduates. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  R. D. Johnson, S. Hornik, and E. Salas, “An Empirical 
Examination Of Factors Contributing To The Creation Of 
Successful E-Learning Environments”, International Journal 
of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 66, no. 5, 2008, pp. 356-
369. 
[2] C. N. Gunawardena, “Social Presence Theory And 
Implications for Interaction and Collaborative Learning in 
Computer Conferences”, International Journal of Educational 
Telecommunications, vol. 1, no. 2/3, 1995, pp. 147–166. 
[3]  C. N. Gunawardena and F. J. Zittle, “Social Presence as a 
Predictor of Satisfaction Within a Computer-Mediated 
Conferencing Environment”, The American Journal of 
Distance Education, vol. 11, no. 3, 1997, pp. 8–26. 
[4] J. C. Richardson and K. Swan, “Examining Social Presence 
in Online Courses in Relation to Students’ Perceived 
Learning and Satisfaction”, Journal of Asynchronous 
Learning Networks, vol. 7, no. 1, 2003, pp. 68–88. 
[5] T. Arndt, A. Guercio, and P. Maresca, “Unifying Distance 
Learning Resources: The Metadata Approach”, Journal of 
Computers,  vol. 13, no. 2, 2001, pp. 60-76. 
[6] Advanced 
Distributed 
Learning 
– 
SCORM 
http://www.adlnet.gov/capabilities/scorm 
<Retrieved: 
September, 2011> 
[7] T. Arndt, S.K. Chang, A. Guercio, and P. Maresca, “An 
XML-Based Approach to Multimedia Software Engineering 
for Distance Learning”, in Future Directions in Distance 
Learning and Communication Technologies, T. Shih and J. 
Hung, Eds. London: Information Science Publishing, 2007, 
pp. 106-134. 
[8] T. Arndt and A. Guercio, “Course Personalization for 
Ubiquitous e-Learning”, ISAST Journal of Computers and 
Intelligent Systems, vol. 2, no. 2, 2010, pp. 1-11.  
[9] H.-U. Hoppe, “The Use of Multiple Student Modelling to 
Parameterise 
Group 
Learning”, 
Proceedings 
Artificial 
Intelligence and Education (AIED ’95), 1995, pp. 234-241. 
[10] J. Collins, J. Greer, V. Kumar, G. McCalla, P. Meagher, and 
R. Tkach, “Inspectable User Models for Just in Time 
Workplace 
Training”, 
Proceedings 
User 
Modelling 
Conference (UM ’97), 1997, pp. 327-337. 
[11] J. Greer, G. McCalla, J. Collins, V. Kumar, P. Meagher, and 
J. Vassileva, “Supporting Peer Help and Collaboration in 
Distributed Workplace Environments”, International Journal 
of AI and Education, no. 9, 1998, pp. 159-177. 
[12] C. Haythornethwait and M. de Laat, “Social Networks and 
Learning Networks: Using Social Network Perspectives to 
221
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Understand Social Learning”, Proceedings 7th International 
Conference on Networked Learning, 2010, pp. 183-190. 
[13] M. A. Chatti, M. Jarke, and D. Frosch-Wilke, “The Future of 
E-Learning: A Shift to Knowledge Networking and Social 
Software”, International Journal of Knowledge and Learning, 
vol. 3, no. 4/5, 2007, pp. 404-420. 
[14] D. E. Baird and M. Fisher, “Neomillennial User Experience 
Design Strategies: Utilizing Social Networking Media To 
Support “Always On” Learning Styles”, Journal of 
Educational Technology Systems, vol. 34, 2005-2006, pp. 5-
32. 
[15] J. Vassileva “Toward Social Learning Environments”, IEEE 
Transactions on Learning Technologies, vol. 1, no. 4, 2008, 
pp. 199-214. 
[16] C. M. Stuetzer, K. M. Carley, T. Koehler, and G. Thiem, 
“The Communication Infrastructure During The Learning 
Process In Web Based Collaborative Learning Systems”, 
Proceedings 3rd International Conference on Web Science 
(ACM WebSci ’11), 2011, pp. 1-8. 
[17] Y. Dourisboure, F. Geraci, and M. Pellegrini, “Extraction and 
Classification of Dense Implicit Communities in the Web 
Graph”, ACM Transactions on the Web, vol. 3, no. 2, 2009, 
pp. 1-36. 
[18] A. Gaeta, M. Gaeta, and P. Ritrovato, “A Grid Based 
Software Architecture for Delivery of Adaptive and 
Personalised Learning Experiences” Personal and Ubiquitous 
Computing,  vol. 13, 2009, pp. 207-217. 
 
 
 
222
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

