A Motivational Study Regarding IoT and Middleware for Health Systems
A Comparison of Relevant Articles
André Pedroza dos Santos, Dalfrede Welkener Soares Lima, Fhelipe Silva Freitas, Geiziany Mendes da Silva
CESAR – Recife Center for Advanced Studies and Systems
Recife, Brazil
e-mail:{anron@hotmail.com, welkener@gmail.com , freitaslouvor@gmail.com , geiziany.mendes@gmail.com}
Abstract—In this paper, we present the main concepts of the
Internet of Things (IoT), which consists of a mix of smart
devices, sensors and the Internet itself. In this research, we also
address the concept of middleware, which is a platform that
links both sensors and devices on IoT. In addition, we analyze
selected research on IoT in order to gather information to
construct a synopsis of the main facts in these articles. We
identified paramount facts studied in each of these articles, so
that we could perform a comparative analysis to highlight
similarities with broader relevance.
Keywords - IoT; middleware; e-health; health systems.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the last few years, we have witnessed a great
excitement about the Internet of Things, also known as IoT.
It is possible to notice the engagement of both companies
and universities searching for solutions to make the concept
of the “Internet of Things” become real. Each day new
researches, studies and tools emerge and innovative ideas are
born, creating a vast exploration of the field.
Nowadays, we live surrounded by electronic devices, at
home, at work or in in the simplest environments. Even
inside people’s bodies, they have many different roles which
makes us believe that the era of interconnected things has
already began.
In health, we find an opened and motivated field in the
search of technological solutions in order to achieve better
efficiency in business and also to be accessible by a larger
percent of the population. This way, patients who are
informed daily about their health can take a proactive role in
health care [1]. The contribution acquired by the evolution of
interactive technologies is deeply linked to a significant
improvement of productivity and quality of life.
In this context, e-health is introduced. It is defined as the
use of electronic devices and other technologies in order to
help with the practice of health care. That includes electronic
medical prescriptions and remote monitoring of patients [2].
The possibility of using wireless sensors on one’s clothes or
body increases comfort, convenience and the effectiveness of
the patients’ health treatment. Considering that these can be
monitored at distance without affecting the patients’ routine
[3].
The IoT is growing impressively in the scope of health
and general medical care. Such great expansion generates
increasingly interactive manners to deal with the patients’
clinical situation through apparatuses such as wireless
sensors and nanotechnology. It is remarkable the fact that the
medical monitoring can be done in real-time through various
devices, allowing patients to check their situation and getting
new orientations via smartphones or tablets. Although, the
immense potential brought by the insertion of the IoT in e-
Health brings forward some facts that demand to be
evaluated. The observable fact here is the interoperability
among gadgets, considering that it demands transparency
about the data shared on the devices. As Bui and Zorzi have
put it [4] this constitutes a myriad of heterogeneous devices
from many different manufacturers, each having their own
interfaces and this way creating operational barriers. Besides
that, another great concern points to a massive amount of
data transmitted in a single network, which raises questions
involving privacy and security.
The corcern in the questions above will mainly consist in
the insertion of middleware platforms. These have been
created to provide interoperability and to manage a variety of
objects
associated
with
the
users
and
interconnected
applications [5]. To e-health, the middleware platform can be
described as a moderator for the data shared, integrating
different devices of a heterogeneous environment and
providing
users
the
possibility
of
consulting
their
information through the Internet.
Baring the mentioned factors in mind, this study has as
its main objective to focus on investigating and presenting
articles that discuss the reasons of the motivation for creating
a middleware to helpful gadgets concerning human health
care, as well as the examples of mildware that already exists.
II.
INTERNET OF THINGS
Giving the definition for the Internet of Things is not an
easy job, since it is such an abstract idea, and yet there is
much more to be done until its concept is built. In her article
published in 2012, Talyta Singer [6] addresses various
concepts of IoT from different authors. As she describes
there, the IoT concept is an allusion to a global network in
which devices can interact among themselves without human
interference. This definition permeates one of the many
views about the concept of IoT, leading to us believe that a
lot has already been done. However, there is still a long road
until it becomes real.
This article holds no intention on formalizing or defining
the meaning of IoT, but only to point its use in health care.
When it comees to IoT, Atzori [7] points out three great
pillars: middleware, sensors and a basic knowledge to be
stimulated. So, it is confirmed the need to show some of the
reasons
and
implicationswhen
using
this
technology
concerning well being, monitoring, prevention and treatment
of any disease [8].
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

IoT connects countless smart devices to a specific
network. This way, technology may improve services in
hospitals, health care centers and the practice of home care.
To Paiva [9] the IoT is something that has to be present in
our daily routine and is a source of great motivation in the
health care research field for being a very promising area.
The perspective for such an event grows through the
popularization of the “Wearables”, which can collect data
without the need of human intervention. The data that comes
from these devices, such as pulse rate, temperature and else,
can go into a database, allowing medical monitoring from
distance. The benefits of IoT are quite notorious when it
comes to efficient diagnosis.
Figure 1.
IoT –Health System
Scenario. Source: [33]
It is clear that the IoT has very high potential for solving
communication problems between health care centers and
patients, this way, revolutionizing the treatment of diseases.
III.
MIDDLEWARE
The
IoT’s
environment
is
characterized
by
the
heterogeneity among many devices and softwares involved;
Those
can
execute
various
functions
through
distinct
protocols, which makes it a challenge to implement such
technology. To unify many resources of IoT, it is necessary
to provide models of high-level interfacing, abstracting
physical devices and services and guaranteeing a good
interoperability.
The interoperability can be described as the possibility of
interconnection
in
heterogeneous
environments
with
transparency, as Marcondes and Sayão have said [10]. This
unique interface doesn’t demand the users to know about
where and how their data is stored. In addition, to achieve a
cohesive interoperability it is necessary to establish a pattern
of communication among the gadgets. The model that offers
such integration with transparency is what we call a
middleware.
Figure 2.
Middleware Interface
in Personal Healthcare Information System [28]
For IoT, the middleware is the platform that integrates
the applications and involved gadgets, as well as processing
their communication. The middleware yet foments the reuse
of generic services in order to streamline the development of
applications, once it helps developers to deal directly with
the specifications of both devices and network. We can also
infer that the middleware mediates systems that are in
different layers. The use of an intermediate middleware layer
is needed to make interactions with the database from
specific XML [11],[12],[13].
The differentiated middleware platform for IoT is being
studied, but, for Teixeira [14] these proposals have not yet
reached a stage of maturity. Also according to the author,
several researches reveal points that require concentration on
analysis
and
even
more
research,
such
as:
robust
infrastructures tolerant to failures able to manage and process
the data collected through integrated intelligent devices; a
better
management
of
uncertainties
and
resolution
of
conflicts; and an adequate support to adapt environment and
dynamic applications in order to minimize the overload of
relevant
security
functions
on
the
platform
of
the
middleware.
When searching a better foundation, it is necessary to
present the main requirements and elements of a middleware
platform that includes the IoT environment, according to
Maia [15]:
•
A scalable interoperability support for the myriad of
heterogeneous devices to enable intelligent objects
(things) to communicate with users, Internet service
and with each other;
•
Mechanisms
for detection and
management
of
efficient devices that allow dynamic integration of
new devices in the IoT’s environment, as well as to
manage the condition and location of these devices;
•
Awareness
of
capacity
for
data
processing
management;
•
An
efficient
dynamic
support,
since
IoT’s
environment is inherently dynamic and applications
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

can be reconfigured at runtime according to the
changes in such environments;
•
The management of large amounts of data collected
from smart devices that must be made available to
applications and/or final users;
•
Issues related to security and privacy, authenticity
and
integrity,
which
are
important
highlights,
especially in critical applications; and;
•
Providing
a
high-level
interface
to
access
heterogeneous devices transparently. Hiding the
specifications of the integrated device applications
and/or final users;
This way, the middleware platform comes as a promising
solution for promoting interoperability between the IoT’s
devices and applications, as well as the final users.
IV.
E-HEALTH SCENERY
Standards for interoperability have been proposed in the
past twenty years to allow information exchange within a
health care environment and the establishment of an
accessible Electronic Health Record (EHR) to any health
institution and/or patient. Standards for interoperability in
health care need rules for sharing typical information of an
EHR, as the description of health status, treatments given
and results [16] Most
standards currently broadcast use
messages in text mode or Extensible Markup Language
(XML) documents to provide health information that can be
exchanged between systems. Nevertheless, there is still not a
finished and worldwide used standard, which indicates that
the interoperability of health systems can still be considered
one of the greatest challenges to be faced in the field of
health [17]
The use of a standard for interoperability allows any local
system to interpretate data using universal concepts and
terminology [18] Based on this definition, the idea of using a
standard for interoperability in health to integrate distinct
systems and use these same concepts and standardized
terminologies to access data internally, or to access the
database emerged itself. Representing requests by sending
messages according to syntax and semantics established by a
health standard
model makes it possible to
maintain
compatibility and consistency between systems and database.
V.
ANALYSIS OF RELEVANTS ARTICLES
In this section, we present a summary of the most
relevant articles for this research; the analysis criteria was
made based on the number of references and respective year
of publication.
In the article “A Web Platform For Interconnecting Body
Sensors And Improving Health Care”, [19] the authors
present the Health Care Devices’ Ecosystem EcoHealth
(EcoHealth), a web middleware platform that allows you to
connect and approach doctors and patients through the use of
body sensors, and thus provide better monitoring of health
and diagnosis for patients. EcoHealth is supposed to
integrate
the
information
gathered
from
multiple
heterogeneous devices in order to provide subsidy to
monitor, process, display, store and send notifications about
the patients’ health as well as vital signs in real-time by
using Internet standards. The article also presents the
EcoHealth’s
proposed
models,
its
logical
architecture,
implementation and propitious scenario for the use of
middleware. Thus, the article shows relevance to this
research by the extent of middleware information, IoT and e-
health, and presents the implementation of EcoHealth
middleware, which we will analyze in a further study.
During the analysis of these researches, we also selected
the study "On Middleware for Emerging Health Services"
[20] due to the fact that it shows the initial implementation
process of a middleware for emergency health services. It
also addresses the middleware requirements and challenges
arising from the development of technologies applied in
health care. Finally, this study describes the specific
requirements of the middleware “SBUS” since its early
stages.
The article “Uma Plataforma de Middleware para
Integração de Dispositivos e Desenvolvimento de Aplicações
em E-Health” [21] is another research that contributes
immensely to this research. This detailed study presents the
EcoHealth middleware platform to promote the integration
of heterogeneous body sensors to allow remote monitoring
of patients. It also brings an evaluation of the Eco Health
platform performance, considering an eHealth application
developed as proof of concept. It yet shows the main
objectives of the applicability of middleware, consisting of
monitoring through body sensors. Variables related to
environmental
health
enable
diagnosis
via
control,
visualization, processing and real-time data storage, enabling
the performance of hardware platforms in order to provide
emergency aid to patients at risk. The evaluation showed that
this platform can support a lot of physical devices working
with appropriate frequencies for monitoring vital signs.
Validating the middleware EcoHealth.
The article “E-Performance Modeling Of Proposed
GUISET Middleware For Mobile Healthcare Services In E
Marketplaces GUISET” [22] proposes middleware for using
in South Africa. The referred
platform provides useful
services for small and medium-sized companies in the
context of mobile services. The results of this study show
that the average unconditional waiting time remains the same
with the reduction of this as a priority in relation to the
preferred model. It is expected to be beneficial in mobile
health services where events are prioritized and attention has
to be given to urgencies.
In
“Service
Oriented
Middleware
Architecture
for
Mobile Personal Health Monitoring” [23] the authors present
a middleware service oriented approach. This platform aims
to
facilitate
the
development
of
health
and
welfare
applications,
enabling
semantic
interoperability
of
heterogeneous objects, services and applications. They also
demonstrate the functionality of collecting values of medical
devices, fusion of many sensors data, service orchestration,
and export of medical data in a service-oriented approach.
A connectivity kit of medical devices to access the
middleware available for developers to create applications
based on open standards is also displayed.
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Another
selected
article
was
the
“AMBIENT
HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS, Using The Hydra Embedded
Middleware
For
Implementing
An
Ambient
Disease
Management System” [24], which presents the Hydra
middleware. This platform consists of a modular approach
that solves interoperability problems among devices used in
health care environments. Hydra provides an interfacing
between interactive devices, such as the biosensors and data
from the software to be involved. The approach of this
middleware is in three layers, which guarantees structured
design applications and extensions. The Hydra is still
established as an effective platform for health ecosystems
that integrate foundations, as well as the services offered by
others.
We also selected the study “SIXTH: A Middleware For
Supporting
Ubiquitous
Sensing
In
Personal
Health
Monitoring” [25]. This article brings a middleware called
SIXTH,
which
was
motivated
by
the
importance
of
identifying the context in an AAL configuration and how this
can be best achieved through the convergence of various
sources of heterogeneous data. This study’s middleware is
open, extensible and offers integration of typical AAL
settings and wearable smart devices.
The “CORBAMed And DHE: Middleware Service
Approach In Healthcare Information Systems” [26] analyses
both situation and challenges health care system faced
nowadays, besides introducing two structures of middleware
systems of information, the CORBAMed and the DHE.
According to the authors, these two architectures can meet
the requirements of a system of health information due to the
maturity, scope and availability of middleware offered.
The article "Middleware For Heterogeneous Healthcare
Data Exchange: A Survey." [27] Brings a survey about the
HL7 middleware directed to the area of health. The presented
middleware is an international standard, based on the model
Open System Intercommunication (OSI), which sets a
pattern of exchange and transport information among health
organizations. This study is a survey of various middleware
cataloged through an exploratory research in the archives of
the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) and the
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE).
After the analysis of the selected researches presented in this
paper is an overview of the resource selected middleware.
Another selected article is the study entitled "A Novel
Middleware
Architecture
for
Personal
Healthcare
Information System" [28] has a progressive middleware
architecture directed to the medical sector and personal
health. The approached architecture is not just a middleware,
but provide a tool for analysis of data coming from the
sensors deployed in the patient's body. In this article we
implemented a Ubiquitous healthcare prototype that has a
data analysis report for physicians, patients and health
centers. The main data were obtained by a series of sensors
used in the experiment such as the ECG, temperature that are
considered important aspects for basic health.
VI.
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE ARTICLES
In this section, we decided to address the issues that we
considered of vital importance to the thematic context and its
applicability in the real context.
The IoT already permeates the lives of many people in
the world, so the possibility of using it for better quality of
life is what instigates the surveys conducted. As there are
countless devices involved with different manufacturers,
protocols and through different communication, it becomes a
challenge to face insertion of such technology. Currently, the
key focus areas of the IoT have developed massively with
the creation of middleware platforms.
Another important challenge for this issue is to ensure
interoperability in order to provide back the need of the
users.
Thus,
the
articles
were
selected,
[19],[20],[21],[22],[23],[24],[25],[26],[27],[28],[29],[30],[31
] to support the motivational research in middleware
development for IoT in e-health.
In general, the articles that were the basis for this
research are characterized by an attempt to solve these
problems in the e-health environment. Most of the studies
propose the development of a middleware architecture to
mediate devices, trying to solve the interoperability problems
applied to e-health. The results show that there are several
middleware platforms being developed, what shows a
tendency of use of the IoT to improve the monitoring process
in general health.
VII.
CONCLUSION
This article made a simple introduction about Internet of
Things, middleware, and e-health, and the relationship
between these elements. This study also showed a range of
researches related to the insertion of middleware for e-health,
leading us to believe that there is a significant motivation for
this feature. In many parts of the researches, the authors
encourage new ways of carrying out mediation between
interconnected devices on the Internet of things, so that,
creating new middleware ideas.
Although this paper was not meant to go deeper into the
development of a middleware, it was intended to foment
subsidy for a better comparison among the existing ones.
For further research, we plan to explore a middleware
architecture model best suited to the unique system of
Brazilian health. After a more appropriate analysis of the
advantages and disadvantages, to make a comparison study
of each middleware platform presented in this work.
REFERENCES
[1]
PEREIRA NETO,
André; BARBOSA, Letícia; SILVA,
Adriano da; DANTAS, Monica Lúcia Gomes (2015). O
paciente informado e os saberes médicos: um estudo de
etnografia virtual em comunidades de doentes no Facebook.
In: HCS-Manguinhos vol.22 supl. Rio de Janeiro Dec. 2015.
[2]
Boric-Lubecke,
O et
al.
(2014)
“E-healthcare:
Remote
monitoring, privacy, and securi- ty”, Proceedings of the 2014
IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium, USA, pp.
1–3.
[3]
Yuce, M. R. (2013) “Recent wireless body sensors: Design
and implementation”, Pro- ceedings of the 2013 IEEE MTT-S
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

International
Microwave
Workshop
Series
on
RF
and
Wireless
Technologies
for
Biomedical
and
Healthcare
Applications, IEEE, USA, pp. 1–3.
[4]
Bui, N., Zorzi, M. (2011) “Health care applications: A
solution based on the Internet of Things”, Proceedings of the
4th
International
Symposium
on
Applied
Sciences
in
Biomedical and Communication Technologies, ACM, USA.
[5]
Bandyopadhyay, S., Sengupta, M., Maiti, S., Dutta, S.. Role
of middleware for Internet of Things: A study. International
Journal
of
Computer
Science
&
Engineering
Survey
2011;2(3):94–105.
[6]
SINGER, Talyta. Tudo conectado: conceitos e representações
da internet das coisas. In: Simpósio em tecnologias digitais e
sociabilidade. 10 e 11 out. 2012, Salvador. Available in:
Andlt;http://www.simsocial2012.ufba.br/modulos/submissao/
Upload/44965.pdf Andgt; Accessed in: 06 Jun. 2016.
[7]
Atzori, L. et al. (2010) “The Internet of Things: A survey”,
Computer Networks, vol. 54, no. 15, pp. 2787–2805.
[8]
LORENZETTI, Jorge; TRINDADE, Letícia de Lima; PIRES,
Denise Elvira Pires de and RAMOS, Flávia Regina Souza.
Tecnologia, inovação tecnológica e saúde: uma reflexão
necessária. Texto contexto - enferm. [online]. 2012, vol.21,
n.2, pp.432-439. ISSN 0104-0707.
[9]
PAIVA.Fernando. Internet das Coisas vai produzir "tsunami"
de
sinalização
nas
redes
móveis.
Available
in:
<http://www.teletime.com.br/16/04/2015/internet-das-coisas-
vai-produzir-tsunami-
de-sinalizacao-nas-redes-
moveis/tt/409242/news.aspx> Accessed in: 06 Jun. 2016.
[10] MARCONDES, C. H. e SAYÃO, L. F. Integração e
interoperabilidade no acesso a recursos informacionais em
C&T: a proposta da Biblioteca Digital Brasileira. Ciência da
Informação, Brasília, v. 30, n. 3, p. 24-33, set./dez. 2001.
[11] KO, L. F.; LIN, J. C.; CHEN, C. H.; CHANG, J. S.; LAI, F.;
HSU, K. P.; YANG, T. H.; CHENG, P. H.; WEN, C. C.;
CHEN, J. L.; HSIEH, S. L. HL7 middleware framework for
healthcare
information
system.
In:
INTERNATIONAL
CONFERENCE
E-HEALTH
NETWORKING,
APPLICATIONS AND SERVICES, 8, 2006, New Delhi.
Proceedings... India: Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers (IEEE), 2006. p. 152-156.
[12] AL-WASIL, F. M.; GRAY, W. A.; FIDDIAN, N. J.
Establishing an XML metadata knowledge base to assist
integration of structured and semi-structured databases. In:
AUSTRALASIAN DATABASE CONFERENCE, 17.; ACM
INTERNATIONAL
CONFERENCE,
2006,
Hobart.
Proceedings... Darlinghurst: Australian Computer Society,
Inc., 2006. p. 69-78.
[13] COLLINS, S. R.; NAVATHE, S.; MARK, L. XML schema
mappings for heterogeneous database access. Information and
Software Technology, v. 44, n. 4, p. 251-257, 2002.
[14] Teixeira, T., Hachem, S., Issarny, V., Georgantas, N..
Service-oriented middleware for the Internet of Things: A
perspective. In: Abramow-icz, W.,Llorente, I.M.,Surridge,
M.,Zisman,A.,Vayssie`re,
J.,editors.Proceeding
soft
4th
European Conference Towards Service-Based Internet; vol.
6994 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Germany:
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg; 2011, p. 220–229.
[15] Maia, P. et al. (2014) “A Web platform for interconnecting
body sensors and improving health care”, Procedia Computer
Science, vol. 40, pp. 135–142.
[16] CEUSTERS, W.; SMITH, B. Strategies for referent tracking
in
electronic
health
records.
Journal
of
Biomedical
Informatics, v. 39, n. 3, p. 362-378, 2006.
[17] BICER, V.; LALECI, G.; DOGAC, A.; KABAK, Y. Artemis
message exchange framework: semantic interoperability of
exchanged messages in the healthcare domain. ACM Sigmod
Record, v. 34, n. 3, p. 71-76, 2005.
[18] ONABAJO, A.; BILYKH, I.; JAHNKE, J. Wrapping legacy
medical systems for integrated health network. migration and
evolvability of long-life software systems. In: WORKSHOP
AT THE CONFERENCE NETOBJECTDAYS, 2003, Erfurt.
Proceedings... Germany: Springer, 2003.
[19] MAIA, Pedro ; BATISTA, T. V. ; CAVALCANTE, Everton
R. de Sousa ; BAFFA, Augusto ; DELICATO, Flavia C. ;
PIRES, Paulo F. ; ZOMAYA, Albert . A Web Platform for
Interconnecting Body Sensors and Improving Health Care.
Procedia Computer Science , v. 40, p. 135-142, 2014.
[20] Singh, Jatinder, and Jean M. Bacon. "On middleware for
emerging health services." Journal of Internet Services and
Applications 5.1 (2014): 1-19.
[21] MAIA, Pedro P. C. ; BAFFA, AUGUSTO ; CAVALCANTE,
E. R. ; DELICATO, Flavia C. ; BATISTA, T ; PIRES, P. F. .
Uma
Plataforma
de
Middleware
para
Integração
de
Dispositivos e Desenvolvimento de Aplicações em e-health.
In: XXXIII Simpósio Brasileiro de Redes de Computadores e
Sistemas Distribuídos - SBRC 2015, 2015, Vitória - ES.
Anais do Simpósio Brasileiro de Redes de Computadores e
Sistemas Distribuídos, 2015.
[22] Akingbesote, Alaba Olu, et al. "Performance Modeling of
Proposed
GUISET
Middleware
for
Mobile
Healthcare
Services in E-Marketplaces." Journal of Applied Mathematics
2014 (2014).
[23] Ahlsén,
Matts,
et
al.
"Service-oriented
middleware
architecture for mobile personal health monitoring." Wireless
Mobile Communication and Healthcare. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2011. 305-312.
[24] Eikerling, Heinz-Josef, et al. "Ambient Healthcare Systems
Using the Hydra Embedded Middleware for Implementing an
Ambient Disease Management System." (2009).
[25] Carr, Dominic, et al. "SIXTH: a middleware for supporting
ubiquitous sensing in personal health monitoring." Wireless
Mobile Communication and Healthcare. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2012. 421-428.
[26] Zhang, Dongsong, and Ralph Martinez. "CORBAMed and
DHE:
Middleware
Service
Approach
in
Healthcare
Information
Systems."
Effective
healthcare
information
systems (2002): 249.
[27] Petry, Karine, et al. "Utilização do Padrão HL7 para
Interoperabilidade em Sistemas Legados na Área de Saúde."
XI CONGRESSO BRASILEIRO DE INFORMÁTICA EM
SAÚDE. Vol. 11. 2008.
[28] Taleb, Tarik, Dario Bottazzi, and Nidal Nasser. "A novel
middleware
solution
to
improve
ubiquitous
healthcare
systems aided by affective information." IEEE transactions on
information technology in biomedicine 14.2 (2010): 335-349.
[29] Ko, Li-Fan, et al. "HL7 middleware framework for healthcare
information system." IEEE Healthcare 1 (2006): 50-165.
[30] Kamal, Rossi, Nguyen H. Tran, and Choong Seon Hong.
"Event-based
middleware
for
healthcare
applications."
Communications and Networks, Journal of 14.3 (2012): 296-
309.
[31] Zhang, J. K., W. Xu, and D. Ewins. "System interoperability
study for healthcare information system with web services."
Journal of Computer Science 3.7 (2007): 515-522.
[32] Power, Gemma, et al. "An adaptive middleware applied to the
ad-hoc nature of cardiac health care." Proceedings of the 5th
Annual International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous
Systems:
Computing,
Networking,
and
Services.
ICST
(Institute for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and
Telecommunications Engineering), 2008.
[33] Gffhealthcare
<http://gtt.com.br/gtthealthcare/blog/wp-
content/uploads/2015/08/IoT.png
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-505-0
UBICOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

