 
Monitoring, Modeling and Visualization System of Traffic Air Pollution – A Case 
Study for the City of Skopje
 
N. Koteli1, K.Mitreski1. D. Davcev1 
1Faculty of Computer Science and Engineering 
University “Sts. Cyril and Methodius”, 
Skopje, R. Macedonia, 
nikola.koteli@finki.ukim.mk, 
kosta.mitreski@finki.ukim.mk, 
danco.davcev@finki.ukim.mk, 
M.Ginovska2 
2Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Information 
Technologies 
University “Sts. Cyril and Methodius”, 
Skopje, R. Macedonia 
gmarga@feit.ukim.edu.mk 
 
Abstract - Air quality dispersion models can be used to 
provide information about the impact of individual emission 
sources or source categories on the air quality and to predict air 
quality as a result of changes in emissions, such as increase of 
traffic, emission control measures, etc. Dispersion models can 
be used to complement the data gained by monitoring as the 
spatial coverage of air quality information provided by 
monitoring is often limited. They are also an important tool for 
supporting air quality improvement plans and programmes. In 
this paper, based on combination of few existing air pollution 
models, we are presenting, as a main contribution of this paper, 
the first this-kind of study for the city of Skopje. This study uses 
measurements for emissions of many physical and chemical 
parameters from traffic sources in order to produce the general 
picture of the pollution on annual level. Our system based on 
real time air pollution visualization is easy extendible to 
national and trans-boundary levels, that is one of the most 
important EU recommendations. At the same time, this is the 
first step in building the real time decision (not only prediction) 
support system. 
 
Keywords-dispersion; modelling;traffic;monitoring;system; 
visualization;air;pollution 
 
 
I. INRODUCTION 
Air pollution is a global threat to human health which is 
growing daily. It can be described as the pollution of the 
atmosphere with gases, or dust of solid materials, particulate 
matter as well as other substances that can endanger human 
health, animal life and plant life, reducing visibility and a 
number of other consequences. 
Problems such as global warming, acid rain and ozone 
destruction are well known, although it may seem distant 
from our everyday life in urban environments. These are 
global issues affecting the entire world community. In 
addition to these global problems, these recent decades, an 
important and worrying issue for the experts for healthy 
environment, as well as for all residents in urban areas is the 
air pollution in the most populated urban places. The 
relationship of air pollution and health status of the people  
is top priority issue. It is estimated that worldwide, 2 million 
people and more than half of them are in developing 
countries, die every year from air pollution. In many cities 
worldwide there are health risks from exposure to particulate 
matter (PM) and Ozone (O3) [19]. The majority, 51% of the 
European population lives in these urban areas, and their 
daily activities and economic activities are concentrated in, or 
around that area [16]. Transport by motor vehicles across the 
road infrastructure close to the residential buildings is the 
main a n d  i m m e d i a t e source of air pollution in this areas. 
The lack of knowledge of the health impacts from pollution, 
is a big obstacle in defining the actions and mobilizing local, 
and international resources. [19] 
Although the network of monitoring stations is very 
important in such an urban environment because it provides 
information on actual concentrations of certain parameters of 
air, it cannot cover every point of interest. Consequently, 
only the most important points could be monitored. 
Air dispersion modelling could be used to estimate and 
predict the concentration of the pollutants in air using mainly 
emission and meteorological data. Air dispersion models 
include mathematical algorithms based on combination of 
physical and chemical parameters so that they can simulate 
the spread of pollutants in the air as well as the complex 
processes of air pollution creation. Dispersion modelling of 
air will allow the implementation of effective control of 
pollution as well as the development of strategy to reduce 
emissions of harmful substances that pollute the air. In this 
way, it will be possible to develop a plan to reduce the 
environmental pollution and satisfy the EU environmental air 
quality standards [20].  
In addition, we propose a particular system for urban 
environment air quality monitoring, modelling and 
visualization (applied for our city’s environment because 
each environment has its own space, meteorological 
parameters and configurations) that:  
1. Extends monitored air pollution data (that is the 
number of points representing monitoring stations in real-
time [18]) to each particular point above the rooftops of the 
city and visualizes on map in continuous color coded layer, 
taking the limit values for color coding according the limits 
defined by EU environmental air quality standards per 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

parameter.  
2. Predicts the air pollution from street network traffic, on 
street canyons level, in the most traffic jammed parts of the 
city’s street sections applying the Operational Street 
Pollution Model (OSPM) [17] to our environment 
configuration. 
3. Visualizes the air pollution as the network of sections, 
by developing effective and usable visualization tool as a part 
of our system. 
The idea with this kind of system is to raise the public 
awareness and to help the city planners and regulatory 
institutions to get real-time feedback in one smart city 
concept. 
In Section II of the paper, we will present the state of the 
art in Monitoring, Modeling and visualization of traffic air 
pollution. The case study will be described in Section III 
while the paper will be concluded in Section IV. 
 
II. MONITORING, MODELING AND 
VISUALIZATION OF TRAFFIC AIR POLLUTION- 
STATE OF THE ART 
 
Climate change of local, regional and global scale has an 
outstanding need for a systems that monitors, models and 
visualizes the distribution of air pollution emissions with 
high spatial resolution. There is a lot of interdisciplinary 
research in this area. In [11] and [13], the monitoring module 
of the system is based on network of sensor devices that 
among other parameters monitor air pollution and traffic 
data. Modelling module is always the required complement 
of a distributed data collection module for the prediction of 
the air pollution state. Air pollution monitoring data are 
correlated to health problems in [10]. In addition, in [12], an 
application that helps local government developing more 
accurate prevention and health care plans has been 
developed. Systems that use visualization of data and cloud 
solutions connected with air pollution data are described in 
[7], [8] and [21]. In [7], a geographical approach for air 
pollution map generation using parallel processing and cloud 
computing system is presented. In this way, the information 
is available anytime, anywhere. In [8] a system for 
processing large amounts of data is proposed. It uses GIS and 
air pollution visualization by introducing customized cloud 
computing technology with major goal on reducing the 
processing time of the visualization. In [21] BigSmog system 
using cloud computing framework and big spatio-temporal 
data for big smog analysis conducts parallel correlation 
analysis of the factors and scalable training of artificial neural 
networks for spatio-temporal approximation of the 
concentration of PM2.5. Global warming as air pollution 
related problem, especially for emission of greenhouse gases 
from traffic, is analyzed in [9]. A tool for emission estimation 
has been developed. Sensor-based Emissions Monitoring 
System is described in [14], while more general cloud 
computing for Internet of Things and sensing-based 
applications is presented in [15].  
In our study, we combined and adopted many of these 
technics and technologies to develop a robust, long-term 
system for traffic air pollution monitoring, taking into 
account all the related parameters and providing in this way 
a case study as per EU recommendations with extensive 
number of experimental data. Our study is different from 
others because it was realized according to the EU Air quality 
directives as well as WHO (World Health Organization) 
recommendations, especially contributing in the process of 
real time air pollution visualization. In this way, it is easy 
extendible to national and trans-boundary levels, that is one 
of the most important EU recommendations. At the same 
time, this is the first step in building the real time decision 
(not only prediction) support system. 
 
III. OUR CASE STUDY 
A. Real-time monitoring data in city of Skopje 
The real time monitoring data network of stations on the 
area of Skopje is composed of eight air quality measurement 
stations. These stations are: 
• 
two urban traffic stations 
o 
“Centar”  
o 
“Rektorat”  
• 
two urban background stations 
o 
“Karpos”  
o 
“Finki” 
• 
one suburban background station 
o 
“Gazi Baba” 
• 
one urban industrial station 
o 
“Lisice” 
• 
two rural industrial stations 
o 
“Mrsevci”  
o 
“Miladinovci” 
Seven of them are controlled and maintained by the 
“Ministry of environment and physical planning in Republic 
of Macedonia” (MOEPP) and one is controlled and 
maintained by our “Laboratory for Eco informatics at Faculty 
of computer science and engineering, Sts. Cyril and 
Methodius’ University in Skopje” (Ecolab FINKI). The 
position and configuration of the network of the air quality 
measurement stations is as displayed on map in Figure 1. 
Figure 1. Map of air quality measuring stations 
 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The measured air quality parameters are as follows: 
• 
Particulate matter with diameter per particle less 
than 10 micrometers (PM10) 
• 
Particulate matter with diameter per particle less 
than 2.5 micrometers (PM2.5) 
• 
Ozone (O3) 
• 
Carbon monoxide (CO) 
• 
Nitrogen dioxide (NO2) 
• 
Sulfur dioxide (SO2) 
B. Real-time visualization of the monitored data 
Workflow diagram of the visualization module of our 
system is presented in Figure 2. 
Figure 2. Schema of monitoring and real-time visualization of 
monitored data module of our system 
The process of visualization is based on the newest ‘up to 
time’ data as the average of the air parameter concentration 
per hour for each parameter. The data are provided by the 
network described in section A and stored in the server 
database. They are used for generation of the grid raster 
layers by interpolation technique. The layers are color-coded 
and scaled from green to red depending of the concentration 
level. Then the geo- referenced interpolated concentration 
layers are automatically published as World Mapping 
Service (WMS) and publicly available at [18]. 
The client side that displays the web content layers uses 
the java script library that makes connection to the publicly 
available WMS server, catches the latest raster layer data and 
displays it. The view can be changed to view each air quality 
parameter layer separately or to view combination of two or 
more parameter layers together. An example of the real-time 
visualization on our web is shown in Fig 3. 
 
Figure 3. Web real-time concentration visualization 
C. Modelling part - Application of our collected data in the 
model 
The model used in our work was OSPM (Operational 
street pollution model) [17]. In Figure 4 an extended visual 
based modelling module in our system is presented. 
Figure 4. Extended visual based modelling module in our system 
On the basis of the traffic data from one of the main 
streets in the city of Skopje, based on our extended visual 
based modelling module as described in Figure 4, we 
generated our modelled data charts in Part D of this Section. 
The needed and collected information and data are on 
meteorological conditions and concentrations of air 
parameters in the area which is modelled in the duration of 
an entire year. This type of data is actually measured data or 
data previously obtained with a mean value over the years 
that actually reflect the meteorological situation at the level 
of a year. This data can also be data obtained with the 
prediction for next year which follows the use of modelling 
in order to obtain predictive model of pollution. The density 
of this type of data is on hourly level interval for one year 
timespan. These data contain data for temperature, speed and 
direction of wind, global solar radiation, and relative 
humidity, and also background concentrations of PM10, O3, 
CO, NO2, and PM2.5. 
Emission information and data of the type of fuel used in 
transport and their composition in terms of substances 
important for pollution is taken (provided) from the largest 
supplier 
of 
fuel 
in 
the 
Republic 
of 
Macedonia, 
MAKPETROL. 
Traffic information and data on the number of vehicles 
moving on the street are classified by the type of vehicle: bus, 
car, van, truck. The real distribution of flow per class is for 
24 hours timespan. Also the distribution by volume and 
type/technology of motor vehicles and fuel has been 
determined. The classes of ‘type/technology of motor 
vehicles and fuel’ in our case are also provided. Data for the 
distribution of vehicles in terms of volume and type of engine 
and motor fuel are provided from city corresponding 
institutions. 
 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Information and data of the average speed of vehicles that 
travel along the street. This parameter is taken to be 50 km / 
h (actual speed limit for the road). 
Street configuration information and data about the 
height and placement of buildings along the 'Partizanski 
Odredi' street canyon (under investigation in this study) are 
presented in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5. Part of the street 'Partizanski Odredi' together with the 
configuration of the buildings 
D. Experimental work with model and results (charts with 
different views and grid raster layers) 
 
In the model, we define three modelling scenarios about 
the flow of the vehicles. Each of these three scenarios has 
two sub scenarios (about the mean speed of the vehicles), 
resulting in total of 6 as follows.   
Scenario 1 is a scenario that is based on the real measured 
data of flow of vehicles. In this scenario the vehicles per 24 
hour period is 32000. 
Scenario 2 is a scenario that is based on the double of (2x) 
real measured data of flow of vehicles. In this scenario the 
vehicles per 24 hour period is 64000. 
Scenario 3 is a scenario that is based on the triple of (3x) 
real measured data of flow of vehicles. In this scenario the 
vehicles per 24 hour period is 96000. 
The sub scenarios per every scenario refer to average 
speed of vehicles that travel along the street (50 km/h and 80 
km/h).  
In this way, we define the following six scenarios: 
Scenario 1.1 (32000 vehicles/24h, 50 km/h) 
Scenario 1.2 (32000 vehicles/24h, 80 km/h) 
 
Scenario 2.1 (64000 vehicles/24h, 50 km/h) 
Scenario 2.2 (64000 vehicles/24h, 80 km/h) 
 
Scenario 3.1 (96000 vehicles/24h, 50 km/h) 
Scenario 2.2 (96000 vehicles/24h, 80 km/h) 
 
Results from the applied modeling for the above six 
scenarios are presented as charts on Figure 6-9. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. BENZENE Concentration Charts 
 
 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
Figure 7. CO Concentration Charts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. PM10 Concentration Charts 
 
 
 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
Figure 9. PM2.5 Concentration Charts 
Visualization of the color coded concentration data layers 
on street network are given in Figure 10.  
 
Figure 10. Color coded concentration data layers of street network 
The suggested view is generated by interpolating 
measured data (as the average value for each parameter) and 
the layer is clearly represented by colors. In this way, the real 
situation of the street pollution in the last hour up to the 
present moment is presented. The data is collected and 
presented in real-time. 
The aim for this kind of system is to be able to give not 
only automated real-time visualization of measured data, but 
also 
automated 
near-future 
modelled 
air 
pollution 
visualization, and make all of that available on the web like 
an internet service.  
 
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we presented our system for monitoring 
modelling visualization of the traffic air pollution of the city 
of Skopje. 
The benefit of this kind of system is the real-time aspect 
of the system with the combination of public availability of 
the generated color coded layers [18]. Another part that this 
system is incorporating inside is the prediction of the 
pollution by change of the traffic parameters using OSPM. 
This kind of visualization will be further improved in our 
future work. 
 From the experimental results we can conclude that the 
recommended limit values for health protection according to 
the latest EU Air quality standards (50 µg/m3 for pm10 daily 
average, 25 µg/m3 for pm2.5 yearly average) are 
significantly exceeded for PM10 and PM2.5 parameters 
concentration as it is visible from the Figures 8-9. The CO 
parameter values are in the normal range below the limit 
values of 30 mg/m3 according to WHO (World Health 
Organization). The Benzene is also in normal range below 
the 5 μg/m3 limit value as recommended by EU Air quality 
standards. 
In the future, we plan to extend our study for other streets 
in the city of Skopje, as well as for other cities in our country 
and the Balkan region. We also plan to use the cloud 
computing for the process of modeling, visualization and 
other processing of these very large (big) air pollution data in 
real time. 
The real time modelling and visualization of the air 
pollution is the first step that can lead to real time decision 
(not only prediction) support system. It will also allow better 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

planning and abating decisions from the authorities on the 
local, regional or trans-boundary global level. 
 
V. References 
 
[1] In Chae J., Guohua L., Sang B. L., Sensor-Based Emissions 
Monitoring System, IEEE lib. – pp. 336-339 (2013) 
[2] Lee K., Murray D., Goodfield D., Anda M., Experiences and Issues for 
Environmental Engineering Sensor Network Deployments – Digital 
Ecosystems Technologies (DEST), 6th IEEE International Conference, 
E-ISBN: 978-1-4673-1701-6, pp 1-6 (2012) 
[3] Pummakarnchana 0., Tripathi N., Dutta J., Air pollution monitoring 
and gis modeling: a new use of nanotechnology based solid state gas 
sensors - Science and Technology of Advanced Materials, pp 251–255 
(2005) 
[4] Pengfei You, Yuxing Peng, Hang Gao, "Providing Information 
Services for Wireless Sensor Networks through Cloud Computing," 
Services Computing Conference (APSCC), 2012 IEEE Asia-Pacific , 
vol., no., pp.362,364, 6-8 Dec. 2012  
[5] Bae, W.D., Alkobaisi, S., Narayanappa, S., Liu, C.C., "A Mobile Data 
Analysis Framework for Environmental Health Decision Support," 
Information Technology: New Generations (ITNG), 2012 Ninth 
International Conference on , vol., no., pp.155,161, 16-18 April 2012  
[6] Mell P., Grance T., The NIST definition of Cloud Computing, 
technical report, National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(2011) 
[7] Jong Won Park, Chang Ho Yun, Shin-gyu Kim, Yeom, H.Y., Yong-
Woo Lee, "Cloud computing platform for GIS image processing in U-
city," Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT), 2011 13th 
International Conference on , vol., no., pp.1151,1155, 13-16 Feb. 2011 
[8] Jong Won Park, Chang Ho Yun, Hae-Sun Jung, Yong-Woo Lee, 
"Visualization of Urban Air Pollution with Cloud Computing," 
Services (SERVICES), 2011 IEEE World Congress on , vol., no., 
pp.578,583, 4-9 July 2011 
[9] Junyan Zhao, Junkui Zhang, Siqi Jia, Qi Li, Yue Zhu, "A MapReduce 
framework for on-road mobile fossil fuel combustion CO2 emission 
estimation," Geoinformatics, 2011 19th International Conference on , 
vol., no., pp.1,4, 24-26 June 2011 
[10] Oliver Ling, Hoon Leh, Ting, Kien Hwa, Shaharuddin, Ahmad, 
Kadaruddin, Aiyub, Yaakob, Mohd Jani, "Air quality and human 
health in urban settlement: Case study of Kuala Lumpur city," Science 
and Social Research (CSSR), 2010 International Conference on , vol., 
no., pp.510,515, 5-7 Dec. 2010 
[11] Suakanto, S., Supangkat, S.H., Suhardi, Saragih, R., "Smart city 
dashboard for integrating various data of sensor networks," ICT for 
Smart Society (ICISS), 2013 International Conference on , vol., no., 
pp.1,5, 13-14 June 2013 
[12] Bae, W.D., Alkobaisi, S., Narayanappa, S., Liu, C.C., "A Mobile Data 
Analysis Framework for Environmental Health Decision Support," 
Information Technology: New Generations (ITNG), 2012 Ninth 
International Conference on , vol., no., pp.155,161, 16-18 April 2012 
[13] Lee, K., Murray, D., Goodfield, D., Anda, M., "Experiences and issues 
for environmental engineering sensor network deployments," Digital 
Ecosystems Technologies (DEST), 2012 6th IEEE International 
Conference on , vol., no., pp.1,6, 18-20 June 2012 
[14] In Chae Jeong, Guohua Li, Sang Boem Lim, "Sensor-based Emissions 
Monitoring System," Information Science and Service Science and 
Data Mining (ISSDM), 2012 6th International Conference on New 
Trends in , vol., no., pp.336,339, 23-25 Oct. 2012 
[15] Rao, B.B.P., Saluia, P., Sharma, N., Mittal, A., Sharma, S.V., "Cloud 
computing for Internet of Things and sensing-based applications," 
Sensing Technology (ICST), 2012 Sixth International Conference on , 
vol., no., pp.374,380, 18-21 Dec. 2012 
[16] World 
Health 
Organisation 
http://www.who.int/gho/urban_health/situation_trends/urban_populati
on_growth_text/en/, last accessed 05.03.2014 
[17] Operational Street Pollution Model, (www.au.dk/ospm), last accessed 
05.03.2014 
[18] http://www.skopjefinki.ekoinformatika.mk. last accessed 05.03.2014 
[19] World Health Organisation 
http://www.who.int/phe/air_quality_q&a.pdf?ua=1, 
last acessed 06.07.2014 
[20] Eu Air Quality Standards 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/air/quality/standards.htm, 
last accessed 06.07.2014 
[21] Jiaoyan Chen, Huajun Chen, Jeff Z. Pan, Ming Wu, Ningyu Zhang, and 
Guozhou Zheng. 2013. When big data meets big smog: a big spatio-
temporal data framework for China severe smog analysis. In 
Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on 
Analytics for Big Geospatial Data (BigSpatial '13). ACM, New York, 
NY, 
USA, 
13-22. 
DOI=10.1145/2534921.2534924 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2534921.2534924 
 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

