Management of Forest Fires Using IoT Devices
Josu´e Toledo-Castro, Iv´an Santos-Gonz´alez, Candelaria Hern´andez-Goya, Pino Caballero-Gil
Department of Computer Engineering and Systems. University of La Laguna
La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
Email: [alu0100763492, jsantosg, mchgoya, pcaballe]@ull.edu.es
Abstract—Effectiveness and response time in emergency situa-
tions management are key factors that directly inﬂuence the
number of victims. The analysis of environmental conditions in
real time (such as weather events and polluting gases) could
provide relevant data on the environment that could help prevent
or detect an emergency situation. Nowadays, IoT (Internet of
Things) devices and sensors allow the monitoring of different
environmental variables, such as temperature, humidity, pressure
and concentrations of pollutant gases, such as carbon monoxide
and carbon dioxide. Radical changes and combinations of these
variables could indicate the occurrence of adverse weather events
that could cause a natural disaster, such as a forest ﬁre. Thus,
the developed system integrates IoT devices and sensors that can
perform a real time control of different atmospheric variables
and polluting gases, in order to activate alerts when pollution
levels increase excessively or when detecting certain conditions
that are considered to be possible factors for causing adverse
climatic events. These events can favour the occurrence of ﬁres
and other emergency situations. Particular attention has been
paid to the communication security among IoT devices, Web
service and mobile devices. Moreover, a secure data transmission
protocol, a block cipher algorithm and a secure authentication
scheme have been implemented.
Keywords–IoT; sensors; emergency situations management;
weather events; forest ﬁres; atmospheric pollutions.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, emergency situations involve huge losses, both
material and personal. Adverse natural events and atmospheric
pollution caused by human activities become disasters when
they exceed a limit of normality and cause damages to the
ecosystems and various diseases for the population. The effects
of these events can be ampliﬁed due to poor planning of
resources, such as lack of security or control steps, emergency
plans and alert systems that can increase the options for
predicting their occurrence or controlling their progress once
they have occurred.
The existence and combination of certain atmospheric
conditions in addition to unusual and excessive presence of
pollutant gases (carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide) can
anticipate the occurrence of an increasingly frequent natural
disaster: forest ﬁres. Generally, these kinds of events usually
result in serious emergency situations that cause the need of
mobilization of different emergency management agencies and
services.
The land topography, different types of vegetation in the
area and weather conditions are the main factors that affect for-
est ﬁres generation and progress. The control and monitoring
of atmospheric variables (temperature, relative humidity and
atmospheric pressure) in addition to the concentration levels
of certain pollutant gases (such as CO2 and CO) can favour
the detection of ﬁre generation and the monitoring of their
progress.In this sense, some factors (excessive temperature
increase, relative humidity decrease or dioxide and monoxide
levels increase) could be important indicators to detect ﬁre
emergence or its proximity. It is important to name ”the rule
of 30” [1], which is based on three relevant factors associated
with the forest ﬁres detection: temperature values above 30°C,
humidity values below 30% and wind speed values above 30
Km/h in the same area. The use of this rule as forest ﬁres
prevention standard can contribute to determine which areas
have a high probability of ﬁres occurrence, in order to enable
the deployment of preventive mechanisms and action protocols
that could favour the environmental conservation.
Thus, an information system has been developed that
integrates IoT devices and sensors which are able to register
atmospheric variables, such as temperature, humidity and
pressure in addition to pollutant gases, such as CO2 and CO
(which are very important in the air quality measurement).
These gases can affect people’s health and are emitted dur-
ing forest ﬁres excessively as result of combustion of huge
amounts of biomass. Furthermore, this system is responsible
of realising a real time management of alerts that could be
activated according to the latest events as well as realising the
coordination of operations required between emergency teams
situated in affected area and the emergency services platform.
In Section 2, we present the state of art and the prelim-
inaries about the general topic that is addressed. Then, the
proposed system is explained in Section 3. The developed
system is explained in detail in Section 4 and the system
security is detailed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 contains
some brief conclusions and future research lines.
II.
PRELIMINARES
In the ﬁeld of IoT applications for the control of forest ﬁres,
several kinds of systems can be used for the warning, preven-
tion and monitoring of these natural disasters. For example,
this is the case of the application Forest Fire Danger Meter
[2] available for Android. It stands out mainly because it is a
calculator to ﬁnd the ﬁre hazard according to the classiﬁcation
of McArthur Forest Fire Danger Index [3], taking as reference
the following parameters: temperature, relative humidity, wind
speed, dryness factor, vegetation and pending.
In the same ﬁeld, Incendios CyL [4] beta application is un-
der development. Although it currently only provides data for
the province of Soria, this application has as its fundamental
objective to realize a meteorological forecast which indicates
in which recreational areas tourists are allowed to make a ﬁre,
prohibitions and recommendations of how to act in nature, etc.
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Another important element in the area of emergency
situations and forest ﬁres management is how Geographic
Information Systems (GIS) [5] have become very relevant
in the forest ﬁres prevention and control. GIS allows real
time access to data in the area, creating strategies to evacuate
affected people, performing simulations, establishing health
care points and redeﬁning transport routes depending on the
affected areas among other aspects. In fact, this system has
been used recently by organizations such as the Civil Guard
during the work of extinguishing the last ﬁre in La Palma
Island in 2016 and in other cases, such as a Portugal forest
ﬁre in 2017 [6].
Similarly, Senticnel [7] ﬁre detection system (NTForest
company) uses sensors and IoT technology to collect informa-
tion on humidity, temperature and other environmental factors
that could allow to predict the evolution of this type of natural
disasters and encourage their extinction.
Due to the importance of natural disasters and emergency
situations management, multiple projects and IoT applications
exist. The system Find&Rescue [8] offers a global online
vision of emergency teams through a speciﬁc device carried
by each emergency team member. Several IoT applications are
based on the deployment from helicopters [9] of different kinds
of sensors, which could register environmental data: tempera-
ture, gases, etc. In the MERIS project, a real time application
allows accessing the information of the status of recoverable
victims through devices and sensors that control vital signs
[10]. The management of emergency tactics is done using
sensor technologies, such as liDAR and the Esphera platform:
helicopter tracking through a 3D environment, integration of
video from different resources and others aspects [11]. iSafety
is a comprehensive emergency management system, which
allows the integration of smart sensors and other applications
to realize a real time emergency situation control [12].
Taking into account the previous applications, the proposed
system in this paper offers new improvements, such as the use
of innovative IoT technologies and a data treatment focused
on the prevention, detection, activation of alarms and manage-
ment of operations for the extinction of ﬁres. A system with
secure communications has been conﬁgured that allows the
monitoring of different variables of the environment and the
processing and visualization of the information registered in
real time guaranteeing the access for all users through diverse
platforms.
III.
PROPOSED SYSTEM
The developed system is based on a sensor network and
distributed wireless IoT devices able to obtain data from the
environment and process it in real time. The main goal is
to provide information to the systems responsible for the
management and strategic planning in emergency situations
generated mainly due to forest ﬁres. In this sense, the system
consists of gathering data of magnitudes and atmospheric
variables that determine the meteorological conditions and the
presence of polluting gases in each zone to transform it into
useful information that could be visualized through interactive
elements (maps, graphs, statistics and gauges) (Figure 1).
Atmospheric variables and pollutant gases control and
monitoring can favour forest ﬁres prevention in different ways.
Firstly, it helps to prevent and determine possible risk areas for
forest ﬁres. Taking into account values collected by IoT devices
and ”the rule of 30”, temperature measurements that exceed
30°C and humidity values below 30% in a same zone could
implicate a preventive management process through alerts
activation. The main reason is the existence of meteorological
conditions that are favorable to forest ﬁres generation. In
addition to these factors, the pressure value is relevant in the
ﬁeld of early detection of periods of storms or anticyclones
that can improve or aggravate the weather conditions in case
of ﬁre. Secondly, the control and monitoring of atmospheric
variables and pollutant gases can also favour the early forest
ﬁres detection (when values and measurements provided by
the IoT devices imply unusual meteorological conditions in the
area, such as an abrupt rise of temperature values, decrease of
humidity in the area or periods of anticyclone). In addition, an
excessive increase of the CO2 and CO concentrations could in-
dicate an evidence of biomass combustion. Thirdly, the control
and monitoring of atmospheric variables and pollutant gases
can also favour the control of the forest ﬁres progress. The
monitoring of the commented variables in the surroundings of
the burned zone allows to control the ﬁre progress through
detection of progressive increases of temperature, humidity,
and CO2 or CO concentrations. In this way, it is possible to
realize a real time management of the area occupied by forest
ﬁre.
The developed information system is composed of three
important parts: IoT devices, Web services and mobile appli-
cation.
Figure 1. Operation of the system
A. IoT devices
Every IoT device distributed in the environment commu-
nicates wirelessly through 4G with the Web service, which is
the responsible for storing and processing all data. So, these
devices have integrated 3 different sensors that are able to
interact with the environment and collect multiple variables:
temperature, humidity, atmospheric pressure and pollutant
gases, such as carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide (indicators
of air quality). In addition, they are based on Arduino and are
composed of a motherboard that is assembled with a 4G mod-
ule to send the collected data. Other hardware elements are also
necessary to integrate the multiple sensors that allow to register
the atmospheric variables. The use of a 4G module allows
registering the location of each distributed device guaranteeing
their visualization and representation through interactive maps.
Once the IoT device is in the environment, the atmospheric
variables and the pollutant gases of the area where it is located
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

are captured. Besides, it is necessary to add some other device
parameters: battery level, latitude and longitude (to manage
their locations from the Web service) and International Mobile
station Equipment Identity (IMEI) parameter that allows them
to be uniquely identiﬁed in the system (Figure 2).
Figure 2. IoT devices functions
Temperature, humidity and pressure measurements have
been registered by a same digital sensor. Regarding the
temperature, the operational range is situated between -40°C
and +85°C. In the case of humidity, the measurement range
of relative humidity is 0 - 100%, taking into account the
temperature values. Regarding atmospheric pressure, measures
are situated between 30 - 110 kPa, based on the sensor sensing
capacity. Furthermore, CO2 and CO data have been collected
using 2 other different sensors. In the case of carbon monoxide
gas, the measurement range limits the registration of data
between 30 - 1000 particles per million (ppm) every second.
Finally, the CO2 sensor can register values from 350 ppm to
10000 ppm.
Overall, measurement values change depending on each
monitored zone and other factors, such as altitude, typical
climate or the presence of human activities (car pollution,
industries, etc.). For example, taking into account CO2 and CO
gases, some tests developed have evidenced that measurements
are decreaser at outdoor areas than at indoor areas or cities.
While in forests the sensors register values around 8 ppm (CO)
and 350 ppm (CO2), these results are usually higher in cities or
indoor areas (CO2 and CO concentrations above 400 ppm and
10 ppm, respectively). The increase of the concentrations of
these gases is much more evident from the burning of biomass
in forest ﬁres.
B. Web service
Once all the required data is available, the information is
sent to the Web service that manages the resources. In this
sense, it is responsible for database management of the entire
information system: new measurements, users and active IoT
devices. In addition, the Web service stores measures and
manages their visualization through graphs and other interac-
tive elements (graphs, indicators, gauges, etc.) that allow the
interpretation of meteorological conditions and contamination
levels of each registered area by users.
Other functionalities of the Web service could be to
synchronize all system information among all users in real
time by connecting IoT devices, mobile devices and the Web
application. However, the data synchronization process needs
information that system obtains by a continuous monitoring
of new measurements. This aspect allows to activate alerts
depending on whether registered values represent a potential
hazard for forest ﬁre generation or other emergency situations.
In this case, notiﬁcations will be sent to the active users
through the mobile application. In addition to these notiﬁca-
tions, new information about activated alerts and the state of
variables (temperature, humidity, etc.) will be updated in the
Web application.
The Web service has been conﬁgured to allow bidirectional
real time communication based on events through any platform
or browser. Websockets [13] are used in order to satisfy this
requirement. So, the server will send data to the connected
users without the need of making client requests. When new
data is processed (new measurements, activation of alerts, new
IoT devices, etc.), the server transmits it to all listening sockets,
so the information accessed by users is updated automati-
cally. This advantage offered by this technology avoids the
need to manually update the application to see new changes.
Continuous availability of updated information is an essential
requirement for prevention, detection and extinction of forest
ﬁres or other emergency situations.
The system conﬁguration is exposed to users through
automatic updating of graphs and gauges, interactive maps or
updating information that is associated with the state of each
monitored environmental variable.
Every security failure or unusual system event is stored in
database for future security audits. This data is sent in real time
thanks to the use of sockets to the system administrator who
can display this information through a special management
interface. In addition to having access to registered failures,
the administrator can also add new IoT devices, changes their
conﬁguration parameters and changes variable atmospheric
limits depending on the weather conditions of each zone. Only
the role of the administrator has the speciﬁc privileges to
perform these operations and to see this type of information.
C. Mobile application
Finally, an Android mobile application has been developed
with the objective of representing locations of IoT devices,
measures and averages for each variable monitored through
graphs that users could interpret easily. Moreover, this ap-
plication is responsible for synchronizing notiﬁcations and
activated alerts that have been sent from the server (when a
measure registered recently represented a potential hazard for
the generation of an emergency situation). In the application,
the authenticated users can interact with a map that represents
locations of IoT devices through latitude and longitude param-
eters and markers. When one of them clicks on a marker, a new
interface will be displayed showing all available information
about the device selected: location, description, level of the
battery in addition to all registered measures of each monitored
variable in that day (Figure 3). Users can also access a bar
chart that represents the real time averages of measurements
for each atmospheric variable or pollutant gases.
However, another important element is the alert control
panel. This section is used for representing all notiﬁcations
and alerts activated from the server when a measurement
involves a danger for forest ﬁres generation. Each notiﬁcation
received informs the users about the exact zone associated with
the danger, the variable and a description to identify which
alert level has been increased. This functionality has been
conﬁgured through the cloud messaging Firebase services and
an identiﬁcation token that the server needs to identify each
mobile device when it’s necessary to notify and synchronize
a new alert. Only notiﬁcations or alerts that are associated
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 3. Mobile application view
with the mobile device location can be received. In addition,
notiﬁcations are controlled by a time period. In this sense, a
same alert that repeats constantly will not be sent from the
server to the same mobile device until 10 minutes have passed
since last notiﬁcation was sent. This rule was set to avoid
overloading the application.
Finally, this mobile application has been considered espe-
cially useful for emergency teams located in affected areas
when forest ﬁres or emergency situations are active. For that,
it has also an operational panel integrated to show all actions
and required operations for ﬁre extinction.
D. Alerts management
One of the features of the developed information system
is the introduction of an alarm management component that is
activated every time when a new measurement arrives at the
server. To this end, the system veriﬁes if the value associated
with each monitored variable (temperature, humidity, CO2,
etc.) represents a potential danger that indicates the proximity
of an adverse weather event that could favour the occurrence
of a forest ﬁre or another type of emergency situation.
For this reason, some reference limits and ranges have been
deﬁned for each atmospheric variable and pollutant gas. So,
when a new measurement does not increase these limits, the
value is considered as normal or stable, in addition to the fact
that it does not indicate any danger or the need to activate any
alerts. There are three main alert levels associated with these
ranges or limits (Table I).
TABLE I. VARIABLE ALERTS MANAGEMENT
Variable
Alert: level 3
Alert: level 2
Alert: level 1
Temperature
>= 30°C
>= 37°C
>= 40°C
Humidity
<= 30 %
<= 20 %
<= 10 %
CO2
>= 350 ppm
>= 2000 ppm
>= 5000 ppm
CO
>= 10 ppm
>= 25 ppm
>= 50 ppm
In the case of temperatures, all values above 30°C have
been considered as reference to activate a level 3 alert taking
into account ”the rule of 30” that considers zones characterized
by temperatures above 30°C and humidity values below 30
% as risk areas for forest ﬁres. Temperatures below this
limit are situated in a normal range and are not considered
a risk factor to activate any type of alert. An increase of the
registered measurements above 37°C means that environmental
conditions have aggravated, so a level 2 alert is established.
Finally, temperatures above 40°C imply potentially dangerous
meteorological values for the activation of forest ﬁres. In these
cases, a level 1 alert is activated.
Humidity values considered normal and beneﬁcial to the
health of people are between 40 % and 60 %. Taking into
account ”the rule of 30” again, measures below 30 % involves
the activation of a level 3 alert. Most radical values below 20
% and 30 % imply the generation of a level 2 and level 1
alerts, respectively. Atmospheric conditions favour forest ﬁres
generation when relative humidity percent is lower especially
if temperature alerts have been established in the same area at
the same time. Values close to 0 % and 100 % are harmful to
the health of people, because they can complicate physiological
processes, such as sweating or elimination of ﬂuids. For these
reasons, activation of level 3, 2 and 1 alert has been considered
in the same way when the server receives measures of 70 %,
80 % and 90 % relative humidity, respectively.
In the case of atmospheric pressure, control of its variations
is so relevant for detecting of storms and anticyclones that
could improve or aggravate forest ﬁres generation conditions
and their advance. Activation of alerts for this variable has
been conﬁgured taking into account the occurrence of abrupt
pressure changes [14]: excessive rises of 1 mb/h in a period
of 6 hours (evidence of the proximity of strong winds) and
excessive drops of 1 mb/h in a period of 6 hours too (evidence
of the storm generation).
Other very important elements for early forest ﬁre detection
are the air pollutant gases, such as CO2 and CO. These
chemicals are emitted during forest ﬁre disasters and they can
cause serious health issues for people. In this sense, excessive
rises of their concentrations are relevant factors at the time of
considering forest ﬁre activation in a certain zone.
Carbon monoxide is ﬁxed in the hemoglobin of blood and
impedes the transport of oxygen. It can cause death in people
when its value is too high. The limit value considered in a time
of 8 hours is around 10 ppm [15], so it is the reference for
activating a level 3 alert. Taking into account IoT devices are
distributed in forest areas mainly (where air quality is better)
and some studies of CO measures emitted in forest ﬁres [16],
level 2 alert is activated since 25 ppm values and level 1 alert
for CO concentrations above 50 ppm.
Regarding CO2, the activation of level 3 alert has been
considered at 350 ppm, taking into account multiple results that
establish this value as the limit to be considered to prevent the
worsening of the climate change [17]. From this value, other
studies propose the establishment of 2000 ppm as reference
for level 2 alert activation and CO2 measures over 5000 ppm
for level 1 alert. With level 2, some health problems could
be experimented (headaches, drowsiness, nausea, tachycardias,
etc.). Besides, oxygen privation could occur for level 1 alert
[18].
Each new measurement of each atmospheric variable or
pollutant gas is analyzed taking into account thresholds asso-
ciated with these alert levels. Depending on each monitored
zone, these limits can change because of the weather con-
ditions and environment. For these reasons, an interface of
system management has been conﬁgured in the Web service
to manage alert levels and their graphical representation.
In agreement with common European criteria [19], each
level of alert is associated with a speciﬁc color. The color
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

code is used to indicate visually the state and range of values
in which each registered measurement is situated. This code in
addition to the graphic interface components allow for a quick
interpretation when a measurement value of an atmospheric
variable or pollutant gas is normal or dangerous.
•
Green color indicates all measurements that do not
favour certain dangerous weather conditions for forest
ﬁres generation. So, alerts are not activated.
•
Yellow color. There is no meteorological risk for
the general population. However, measurements could
mean that there is some danger for some speciﬁc
activities or locations. It is associated with a level 3
alert.
•
Orange color. It includes important and unusual me-
teorological risks. These weather conditions may be
dangerous for common activities. It is associated with
a level 2 alert.
•
Red color. Extreme weather risks. All unusual and
very intense meteorological events that usually involve
dangerous situations for population. It is the riskiest
alert, so this color refers to level 1 alert.
Since the server checks if an alert has been detected, the
next step is to register it in the system and to transmit in real
time the new data to all connected users through notiﬁcations
(for the mobile app) or update special information panels (for
the Web application). The creation of a new alert implies the
declaration of some attributes, such as alert level (3, 2 or
1), IoT device, variable values that have activated the alert,
a description, and the alert activation date.
E. Data visualization
In the Web service, the visualization of information and
resources are mainly focused on four aspects: geolocation of
IoT devices that are available, new registered measurements,
atmospheric variables and pollution levels (through the devices
on each zone), activated alarms in the server (when some
of the processed values are out of the normal range for
each monitored variable) and the management of emergency
teams that are situated in the zone affected by the forest
ﬁre. Every new registered measurement by an IoT device
can be represented in the Web service through different types
of graphics and gauges. Furthermore, there are two different
modules to represent them depending on the registration time.
To represent these values from the environment, some
elements, such as charts and gauges, have been conﬁgured.
Firstly, the Web service interface shows to users independent
line graphs to represent (through dotted lines) variable values
registered by devices for each atmospheric variable or pollutant
gas. In addition, bar diagrams are used to make real time
comparisons between different magnitude groups: a group for
atmospheric variables (temperature, humidity and atmospheric
pressure) and another group for pollution gases (CO2 and
CO). Other important graphic element are gauges. They are
used to represent only the latest value available from each
variable monitored from the environment. Line graphs and
gauges are organized together in a way to show all data
associated with magnitude measurements. Finally, there is an
alert control panel that indicates to users the real time state
of each magnitude or variable registered in the monitored
environment. Every time that new values are collected by the
server from IoT devices, this panel updates and changes its
information.
Each linear graph is formed by a dotted line that shows
each measurement of the corresponding atmospheric variable,
so users can interpret their variations visually. Updating these
graphs occurs automatically each time a new value is registered
in the system. Moreover, users can group measurements taking
into account different time periods through a control button
panel at the top left of the graph. In addition to these aspects,
each graph has got colored bands as background to represent
different ranges of values and limits that are deﬁned depending
on each atmospheric variable. Colours have been used taking
into account the same color code that was explained in the
previous section: green color (normal values), yellow color
(level 3 alert), orange color (level 2 alert) and red color
(level 1 alert). So, users have access to the exact value of the
measurement (through the dotted line), the time that measure
was registered and the range of values in which it was situated,
in addition to which level alert was activated (Figure 4).
Figure 4. Temperature linear graphic
Other graph components have been developed, as follows:
•
A special and interactive map that changes typical
markers to colored circles depending on the average of
all registered measurements on each zone, taking into
account the same color codes and the deﬁned limits
or alert levels for each atmospheric variable.
•
Another interactive map that manages the emergency
teams location when a forest ﬁre has been activated.
•
A graph comparison module that allows to make
comparisons and simultaneous reviews of the mea-
surements registered by different IoT devices.
IV.
SECURITY
System security has been divided in two different ﬁelds:
IoT devices conﬁdentiality and secure authentication.
Firstly,
before
sending
each
measurement
registered
through 4G by the sensors of distributed devices, data values
(temperature, humidity, latitude, longitude, IMEI, etc.) are
ciphered through the use of AES 128 key bits algorithm
[20]. Moreover, Cipher Block Chaining (CBC) mode has been
used so each block of plaintext is XORed with the previous
ciphertext block before being cyphered. In this way, each
ciphered block depends on all plaintext blocks processed up to
that point. In addition to CBC mode, Zero padding has been
used so the padding system is based on null characters. When
data reaches the cloud server, it is deciphered using the same
algorithm. Then, IoT device identiﬁcation is veriﬁed by IMEI
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

parameter and data measurements are processed and stored in
the database if veriﬁcation is correct.
Secondly,
secure
authentication
has
been
developed
through Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP)
guidelines veriﬁcation [21] in order to protect the system
against different attacks.
In this sense, each speciﬁed standard guideline has been
veriﬁed in order to guarantee a secure authentication process.
In particular, the following aspects have been considered. It
is a requirement that all authentication processes are to be
performed exclusively on the server. Besides, authentication
tokens have been used, avoiding the use of cookies to save
user information. In this way, users are authenticated and each
HTTP request is accompanied by a token in the header from
that moment. This token is conﬁgured through a ciphered
signature only available in the server. This technique allows
adding more security to the authentication system and avoiding
Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSFR) [22] attacks. Also HTTPS
has been used for the transport of credentials. The encryption
of authentication keys allows to use external services to the
application as Google Maps API. Finally, we have included the
registration of possible attacks to the system and the addition
of metadata for future security audits.
V.
CONCLUSION
The proposal presented in this paper describes a new
information system that has been developed taking into ac-
count innovative technologies, IoT devices and the use of
sensors with the aim of helping to improve the management
of emergencies. Speciﬁcally, devices based on Arduino have
been used. During the development of this solution, multiple
challenges, such as the use of data transmission protocols (4G),
interaction with hardware devices, integration of sensors and
the transformation of registered data into useful information
for the visualization of users have been solved. Furthermore,
the integration of different technologies (mobile devices, Web
service and IoT devices), the synchronization of all system data
among different platforms (new alerts, measurements, etc.) and
more considerations have been done.
Given the importance of conﬁdentiality and authenticity,
the system has been provided with security services. Speciﬁ-
cally, OWASP guidelines and AES CBC encryption have been
applied. This proposal is a work in progress, so several lines
of work are still open. First, we will try to incorporate new
sensors in the system that allow to control new environment
variables, in order to improve prevention, detection and man-
agement of emergency situations. Secondly, we will try to
increase interaction possibilities with emergency teams and
workforce that are situated in the zone affected by forest ﬁre, in
order to gather more data as multimedia real time information.
Finally, we will try to introduce and combine more layers
and content types in the system for improving development
of action protocols and forest ﬁres extinction.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Research supported by Binter-Sistemas grant and the Span-
ish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness, the Euro-
pean FEDER Fund, and the CajaCanarias Foundation, under
Projects TEC2014-54110-R, RTC-2014-1648-8, MTM2015-
69138-REDT, TESIS- 2015010106 and DIG02-INSITU.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Lecina-Diaz, A. Alvarez, and J. Retana, “Extreme ﬁre severity
patterns in topographic, convective and wind-driven historical wildﬁres
of mediterranean pine forests,” PloS one, vol. 9, no. 1, 2014, p. e85127.
[2]
“Forest
Fire
Danger
Meter
app,”
2015,
URL:
https://www.greenappsandweb.com/noticias/4-apps-para-luchar-contra-
los-incendios-forestales/ [accessed: 2017-07-24].
[3]
L. Sanabria, X. Qin, J. Li, R. Cechet, and C. Lucas, “Spatial interpola-
tion of mcarthur’s forest ﬁre danger index across australia: observational
study,” Environmental modelling & software, vol. 50, 2013, pp. 37–50.
[4]
“Incendios
CyL
Application,”
2016,
URL:
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.cesefor.Incendios
[accessed: 2017-07-10].
[5]
M. S´anchez, A. Fern´andez, P. Illera, and L. Ponferrada, “Los sistemas
de informaci´on geogr´aﬁca en la gesti´on forestal,” in Teledetecci´on.
Avances y Aplicaciones. VIII Congreso Nacional de Teledetecci´on.
Albacete, Espa˜na, 1999, pp. 96–99.
[6]
“GIS,
a
tool
in
the
ﬁght
against
ﬁre,”
2017,
URL:
https://esriblog.wordpress.com/2017/07/04/el-gis-una-herramienta-
en-la-lucha-contra-el-fuego/ [accessed: 2017-07-12].
[7]
“Senticnel System,” 2017, URL: https://www.senticnel.com/ [accessed:
2017-07-12].
[8]
“Telematic
management
of
emergency
teams,”
2017,
URL:
http://iotparaemergencias.com/HTML/index-equipos en.php [accessed:
2017-07-10].
[9]
“Rain
of
sensors
to
manage
catastrophes,”
2008,
URL:
http://www.agenciasinc.es/Noticias/Lluvia-de-sensores-para-gestionar-
catastrofes [accessed: 2017-07-07].
[10]
A. Abril, J. Portilla, and T. Riesgo, “Monitorizaci´on de emergencia de
v´ıctimas de cat´astrofes. proyecto meris,” Cuadernos Internacionales de
Tecnolog´ıa para el Desarrollo Humano, 2007, n´um. 6, 2007.
[11]
O. F. Price and C. E. Gordon, “The potential for lidar technology to
map ﬁre fuel hazard over large areas of australian forest,” Journal of
environmental management, vol. 181, 2016, pp. 663–673.
[12]
“iSafety system ,” 2017, URL: http://www.digitalavmagazine.com/2013/-
04/10/indra-integra-en-isafety-su-solucion-global-de-gestion-de-
emergencias-para-smart-cities/ [accessed: 2017-07-20].
[13]
V. Wang, F. Salim, and P. Moskovits, “The websocket protocol,” in The
Deﬁnitive Guide to HTML5 WebSocket.
Springer, 2013, pp. 33–60.
[14]
“Atmospheric
pressure
variations
,”
2017,
URL:
http://lasrutasdemoskys.blogspot.com.es/2017/03/la-presion-
atmosferica.html?m=1 [accessed: 2017-07-21].
[15]
“CO
concentration
limits
for
the
health
of
peo-
ple
,”
2000,
URL:
http://http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/ES/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32000L0069&from=ES [accessed:
2017-07-20].
[16]
B. Carballo Leyenda, J. A. Rodr´ıguez-Marroyo, J. L´opez-Satu´e,
C. ´Avila Ord´as, R. Pern´ıa Cubillo, and J. G. Villa Vicente, “Exposici´on
al mon´oxido de carbono del personal especialista en extinci´on de
incendios forestales,” Revista Espa˜nola de Salud P´ublica, vol. 84, no. 6,
2010, pp. 799–807.
[17]
“350
ppm
for
CO2
concentrations
,”
2015,
URL:
http://www.tecnozono.com/350ppm [accessed: 2017-07-15].
[18]
G. R. Van der Werf, D. C. Morton, R. S. DeFries, J. G. Olivier, P. S.
Kasibhatla, R. B. Jackson, G. J. Collatz, and J. T. Randerson, “Co2
emissions from forest loss,” Nature geoscience, vol. 2, no. 11, 2009,
pp. 737–738.
[19]
“Alerts
interpretation
by
code
of
colors
,”
2017,
URL:
http://www.aemet.es/es/eltiempo/prediccion/avisos/ayuda
[accessed:
2017-07-18].
[20]
J. Daemen and V. Rijmen, “Rijndael, the advanced encryption standard,”
Dr. Dobb’s Journal, vol. 26, no. 3, 2001, pp. 137–139.
[21]
D. Fox, “Open web application security project,” Datenschutz und
Datensicherheit-DuD, vol. 30, no. 10, 2006, pp. 636–636.
[22]
A. Barth, C. Jackson, and J. C. Mitchell, “Robust defenses for cross-
site request forgery,” in Proceedings of the 15th ACM conference on
Computer and communications security.
ACM, 2008, pp. 75–88.
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

