Passive vs. Active Measurement: The Role of Smart Sensors
Mikl´os Kasza, Vilmos Sz˝ucs, ´Ad´am V´egh
Department of Software Engineering
University of Szeged
Szeged, Hungary
{kaszam,vilo,azvegh}@inf.u-szeged.hu
Tibor T¨or¨ok
H-Lab Nonproﬁt Ltd.
M´orahalom, Hungary
tibor.torok@h-lab.eu
Abstract—The growing availability of ubiquitous computing
capabilities can enhance life quality. New smart sensor devices
are constantly appearing in various markets, including the
health industry. The functions provided by such modern sensor
devices enable system developers to create healthcare systems
that were unimaginable earlier. More and more health monitor-
ing devices provide functions that can ease the life of the elderly
and ill people. However, this rich set of smart devices pose
challenges to system developers and health industry specialists
as well. In order to ﬁnd optimal healthcare system solutions,
lots of tests and trials have to be done. In our paper we present
three different telemedicine systems of increasing complexity
and some analysis results based on real-life clinical trials
utilizing the described systems. We examine the willingness
of users to use the systems and draw interesting conclusion
from those examinations.
Keywords-telemedicine; healthcare; smart sensors; measure-
ment
I. INTRODUCTION
The western society is aging and there is an increasing
pressure on the primary care system. Signiﬁcant efforts are
put on IT developments of the primary care in order to be
able to cope with this increasing demand. The implemen-
tation of the interoperable Electronic Health Record (EHR)
systems is in the focal point of these developments. The
EHR systems themselves could only partially fulﬁll the
“right information, at the right time for the right person
in the right format” criteria. The available and integrated
information sources are of critical importance. One such
information source is telemedicine, which could provide
wide variety of raw and processed information with very
ﬁne granularity.
A key motivator behind these telemedicine systems is to
overcome difﬁculties of health care services in a convenient
and professional way. Systems of this type offer solutions for
collecting various physiological data sets directly from the
homes of the patients and they do this without the need of
medical supervision. Additionally, by utilizing various data
mining and signal processing techniques, these systems can
process and aggregate the collected data and transfer and
visualize the right information, at the right place, at the right
time for medical experts or even for relatives.
In the recent years, we have developed three different
telemonitoring systems in two large R&D projects. The
key differences between these projects were the budget
and time constraints, which also affected the requirements
and functionalities expected from each system. Being con-
strained by these factors different system architectures were
developed. Each system was evaluated in a Living Lab (LL)
experiment with the involvement of real patients and doctors.
In this paper, we examine each system and summarize the
observations relying on the LL tests.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section
II discusses related work and the novelty presented in this
article. Section III outlines the setup and the capabilities
of the different telemedical solutions applied. Section IV
discusses the methodology applied during the clinical trials,
Section V analyses the results and Section VI concludes the
paper.
II. RELATED WORK AND NOVELTY OF THE ARTICLE
The literature describing the results of the different
telemedicine related projects is huge. The usability of differ-
ent telemedical applications is studied in several articles and
dissertations [1], [2], [3], [4]. A recent medical study ([5])
found that by applying EHR and telecare solutions, costs
of the care can be reduced signiﬁcantly. Additionally, in
the same paper, seven key improvement areas are identiﬁed
based on the ﬁndings about current EHR solutions. Out of
those seven areas, our comparison of systems at various
complexity levels is related to at least the following four:
registries, team care, personal health records and telehealth.
Additionally, the Proseniis project targets the improvement
of clinical decision support, care transitions and measure-
ment. However, these results are not covered in this paper,
since the other two systems do not target these issues and
thus only the features closely related to patient-involvement
are discussed. This approach can be easily aligned with
additional results of the same study, i.e., that the extent
to which EHR solutions are patient-centered is a crucial
question; and despite the fact that more patient-oriented
approaches can lead to promising savings, patient-orientation
is largely ignored.
333
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Additionally, in spite of the massive literature we have
not found studies and articles about comparing different
telemedical approaches on the technology level. Which is
better: a mobile phone-based telemedical system, a dedicated
PC-based or a dedicated home-hub-based system? Is it worth
putting efforts in implementing proactive systems? What is
the cost of the complex measurement procedures? Do the
current touch screen-based mobile phones serve as viable
platforms for elderly people?
In this paper we show our ﬁndings about the aforemen-
tioned questions based on the evidences gathered from real
clinical trials. The results are unique as we were able to
conduct long-running real-life clinical trials using different
telemedical solutions developed by our team.
III. SOLUTIONS COMPARED
In this section, three telemedicine systems are presented.
All of them were applied in clinical trials and were used to
collect physiological data. These data serve as a basis for
the evaluation addressed later in this paper. En each case
several sensor devices were integrated into the systems and
a so-called Hub was also placed in the homes of the patients.
The Hub is responsible for managing sensors, collecting and
transmitting measured data to a central server. A set of web-
based user interfaces are also provided by the server to make
measured data available for doctors and nurses and even for
relatives.
Although all telemedicine systems follow this common ar-
chitecture, some variance can be observed between them. As
a major difference the types of sensors that were integrated
to each system were varying from system to system. In
addition, a diverse set of physiological data were targeted to
collect. Furthermore, various hardware devices were applied
for the role of Hubs. Based on each hardware solution, the
capabilities and functionalities offered by the Hubs were
different in each system. The characteristics of a Hub deﬁned
whether a thin or thick client solution was built upon the
device. Moreover, these kinds of distinctions affected the
functionalities offered by the central server (for end-users
and for Hubs), as well.
A. Medistance
In the case of the Medistance system ([7]), the inte-
grated Hub was designed and developed for the minimal
requirements (of a telemedicine system) on purpose. It is
a dedicated device with the ability to communicate with
sensors, collect measured data and transmit them to the cen-
tral repository. In Figure 1, an overview of the Medistance
system architecture can be seen.
The only expectation this system needs to meet is to
collect physiological data and to present them in charts and
diagrams for doctors in web browsers. The main goal of the
system is to provide a solution that enables the patients to
Sensors
Internet
Central Server
Dedicated Hub
Figure 1.
Architecture of the Medistance System.
seamlessly share their measurements with doctors. Accord-
ingly, it does not deal with the enforcement of prescribed
measurement scheduling, supervision and warnings.
B. Telenor EDH
In the Telenor EDH system, the set of integrated sensors
is expanded. A smart phone is used to provide the Hub
functionality, which brings mobility into the system. The
client application running on the mobile phone enables the
development of adequate user interfaces in order to help the
users with the usage of Hub and sensor devices (Figure 2).
As an addition to the base functionalities of the Hub
(i.e., sensor management and data transmission), the user
interfaces support the correct measurements by providing
user guides and illustrated ﬂows. The measurement schedul-
ing and related warning messages are driven by events
downloaded and periodically synchronized from the central
server. Accordingly, on the server side doctors have the
facilities for setting up and conﬁguring the scheduling and
regularity of measurements even during runtime.
C. ProSeniis
The ProSeniis System ([8]) is the most complex in terms
of functionalities. Unlike the Hubs applied in the Medistance
and the Telenor EDH systems, a thick client was built upon
a device that is equivalent to a personal computer. The
hardware capabilities offered by the Hub were used for
developing a rich client application with widely conﬁgurable
software. In Figure 3, the architecture of the system can be
seen.
The
thick
client
application
includes
measurement
scheduling and signal processing algorithms that enables the
evaluation of physiological data on demand. With the help
Sensors
Internet
Central Server
Mobile Hub
Figure 2.
Architecture of Telenor EDH System.
334
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

PC Hub
Internet
Sensors
Figure 3.
Architecture of Proseniis System.
of this assessment methodology the Hub can provide feed-
back to patients about their health status during run-time.
Additionally, it can warn them about missed measurements
or about the need of measurement repetitions. Moreover,
doctors could control not only the scheduling, but the signal
processors as well (by deﬁning parameters and conﬁgu-
ration for them). The system automatically synchronizes
the modiﬁcations with the Hubs. Furthermore, the central
server provides end-user programming functions in the form
of an editor interface. This facility is useful for building
custom data ﬂows by combining available measurement
speciﬁcations and signal processors. In practice, by using
this functionality, doctors can fully deﬁne the business logic
of the Hubs during run-time.
IV. METHODOLOGY
The results of the research projects were tested in clinical
trials organized by the local living lab ([6]). In the projects,
the LL is responsible for the communication between the
patients and the workgroups by forming a common infras-
tructure for information collection. The aim was to provide
information to the workgroups through an iterative workﬂow
where there is usually no direct communication between
the patients and the development teams. The long-term and
mid-term projects were running simultaneously, both at the
hospitals of the University of Szeged. The time frame and the
tools used in the experiments were different for the projects
below.
A. Telenor EDH
The Telenor EDH project was an industrial project spon-
sored by Telenor Hungary, Inc. and NOKIA. The goal of
this project was to develop a mobile platform for e-Health
applications, so the home hub can be a mobile phone (smart
phone) instead of a PC, or other dedicated device in the
patient’s home.
1) Subjects and Duration: During the project time frame
three groups of patients were monitored with different type
of sensors. The members of ﬁrst group of patients were
suffering from diabetes mellitus, the second group consisted
of patients with different heart conditions, and the patients of
the last group were suffering from hypertension. Ten patients
were selected for each group. The clinical trial has lasted for
three months, divided to two phases. Tier 1 had duration of
one month; Tier 2 has lasted for two months.
2) Materials used: For the different patient groups dif-
ferent devices were allocated:
• Patients suffering from diabetes: Nokia (low-end)
smartphone, Dcont blood glucose meter, A&D UC321-
PBT weight scale.
• Patients with different heart conditions: Motorola
(high-end) smartphone, TensioDay TD3 blood-pressure
monitor, A&D UC321-PBT weight scale.
• Patients suffering from hypertension: Omron blood-
pressure monitor, Medistance data transfer hub.
3) Protocol: The clinical investigation plan has deter-
mined the minimum amount measurements to be taken by
the participants of the trial. These minimum requirements
differ in the given patients groups:
• Patients suffering from diabetes: one daily blood glu-
cose measurement was expected, except in the ﬁrst 2
days, when six measurements were required (before
and after breakfast, before and after lunch, before
and after dinner). Weight measurement was prescribed
every morning, as well.
• Patients with heart conditions: one blood-pressure mea-
surement and one weight measurement was expected
every morning in the duration of the trial.
• Patients suffering from hypertension: in Tier 1 patients
were expected to measure their blood-pressures twice a
day, two times every occasion (2x2). In Tier 2 patients
had to measure their blood-pressures twice a week, two
times on every occasion.
In Tier 1, in addition to the system logs, every patient had
to log their measured values in the logbook provided by the
project.
B. ProSeniis
The ProSeniis project has aimed to develop a telemonitor-
ing system to receive valuable information of the patients’
everyday activity and their current health status. The target
groups of the patients were the ones suffering from neuro-
logical diseases, such as dementia, Parkinson’s disease, and
also stroke. The project is funded by the National Ofﬁce for
Research and Technology in Hungary and concentrates on
the development of a ready-to-use remote home care solu-
tion including the hardware, the software and the medical
protocols.
1) Subjects and Duration: Three groups of patients were
involved in the project suffering from different illnesses. The
members of the ﬁrst group of patients are suffering from
mild/moderate dementia, the second group consists of stroke
survivors, and the patients of the last group are suffering
from Parkinson’s disease. For each group, three patients
335
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

were selected. Also there is a control person, who is not
suffering from any neurological diseases. In total there were
41 patients involved in the project.
The project’s trials had three phases, Tier 1 lasted for two
months, Tier 2 for another 2 months and Tier 3 lasted for 8
months.
2) Materials used: The following devices are used in the
project:
• Intel Health Guide as home hub
• A&D UA767-PBT blood-pressure monitor
• A&D UC321-PBT weight scale
• CardioBlue ECG holter
• Bayer Breeze 2 blood glucose meter
• Actigraph
• QuietCare motion sensors
3) Protocol: The protocol of the clinical trial expected
daily measurements from each patient from all groups:
• Patients suffering from dementia: blood-pressure mea-
surement, constant use of Actigraph, constant use of
QuietCare.
• Stroke survivor patients: blood-pressure measurement,
ECG measurement, constant use of Actigraph, constant
use of QuietCare.
• Patients suffering from Parkinson’s disease: blood-
pressure measurement, constant use of Actigraph, con-
stant use of QuietCare.
• Control person: blood-pressure measurement, ECG
measurement, weight measurement, blood glucose mea-
surement, constant use of Actigraph, constant use of
QuietCare.
V. RESULTS
During the experiments the aforementioned systems gath-
ered a total of 16,000 individual measurements. The analysis
of these measurements leads to some interesting results.
Since the systems under test concern different types of
patients and collect different sets of usage data, we had to
ﬁnd a metric that is common in all systems. Willingness
turned out to be such a good metric. In our terminology
willingness means the ratio of the number of the planned
measurements and the actual number of the measurements
carried out by the patients. For example, willingness (for
a speciﬁc measurement type at a speciﬁc patient) of value
110% means that the patient did the measurement process
10% more than it was prescribed. (Note that willingness
is not the same metric as popularity.) Table I contains the
willingness factor of each system. Note, that only blood-
pressure, blood-sugar and weight measurements were con-
sidered during the analysis, since these are the common
measurement types that are covered more or less by all the
systems.
As it can be seen from the table the willingness values
are very heterogeneous and some of them were surprising
Table I
WILLINGNESS FACTORS OF EACH SYSTEM (WITH MINIMUM AND
AVERAGE VALUES)
System
Measurement
Min.
Avg.
Medistance
Blood-pressure
137%
198%
EDH Symbian
Blood-sugar
24%
114%
Body weight
42%
81%
EDH Android
Blood-pressure
95%
176%
Body weight
91%
134%
Proseniis
Blood-pressure
30%
159%
Body weight
12%
127%
even for us. After some investigation it turned out that
several non-technical factors affect these values along with
the technical ones. The most relevant metrics are:
A. The type of measurement and the types of illnesses they
are related to
As a major non-technical factor, the type of illness the
patients suffer from determines the willingness. For example,
patients suffering from heart problems are more willing to do
blood-pressure measurements on a daily basis than they are
to do weight measurements at the same rate. This statement
is clearly supported by the EDH Android and the Proseniis
measurements. Additionally, the Medistance-related trial has
shown that in the case of heart problems, even willingness
of around 200% can appear on average.
B. Whether the measurement is directly visible at the Hub’s
user interface
As an extreme case, one can see that the body weight
measurement on the EDH Symbian system has the lowest
willingness value out from all the systems. Considering
that this type of measurement offered a deﬁnitely easy
process, this was a surprising result. After some further
analysis we discovered that this was the only measurement
type that does not have a direct function button on the
Hub’s dashboard interface. The weight sensor initiated the
measurement process and the users were able to accept the
data upload but no other function was to be interacted with
for a successful result. This fact can make the users doubtful
about the availability of the weight measurement functions
and can let them forget even about the existence of that type
of measurement as well.
C. The complexity of the measurement process
As a simple metric for measuring process complexity
we used the number of steps that were required in or-
der to complete a measurement process. Considering this
metric the measurements can be classiﬁed as follows. The
measurement requiring the least number of steps is the
EDH Symbian weight measurement with only 2 steps in-
volved. The measurement requiring the most number of
336
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

steps is EDH Symbian blood-glucose measurement that
leads through a relatively long 8-step process. All the other
measurements consisted of 4-5 steps. Excluding the EDH
Symbian weight measurement (see previous subsection) we
can state that measurements of higher complexity enjoy
smaller willingness levels. Additionally, the LL got negative
feedbacks from users exercising the longer procedures due to
complexity, so it can also be determined that the popularity
is also decreased in such complex cases.
D. The device role that is used to initiate the measurements
At the start of the data analysis it was anticipated that
the measurements initiated directly from sensor devices had
higher willingness levels. (We classify these measurements
passive as opposed to active measurements where the Hub
initiates the measurement process.) A sound reasoning be-
hind this would be that in these types of measurements
the user interaction steps follow the way the information
naturally ﬂows (i.e., the sensor-hub-center route) and thus
constitute a process that is easier to understand. However,
the willingness results do not show such clear trends in this
ﬁeld, since the measurements with the highest and lowest
willingness levels all utilize the passive method.
E. Whether alerts help the users to remember the required
measurements.
Generally, the presence of user alerting features can
obviously lead to higher willingness levels. Simply put, with
the help of a dependable alerting the users do not forget
to do the measurements prescribed for them. However, the
analysis has shown that in the case of the selected set of
patients, the availability of such a mechanism did not play
a role, at least with regards to willingness. The ProSeniis
system containing a proper alerting system performed on the
average. However, it is important to note that the selected
patients were well aware of their illnesses. This way, most
of them could easily remember to do measurements as part
of their daily routines (similarly to their pre-trial lives).
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Excluding one measurement type, the willingness values
were above 100%. A key reason of such a high willingness
level lies in the patient-sample selection process (i.e., the
selected people were the ones willing to participate in
the trials). On the whole, measurements related to blood-
pressure were had the highest willingness values. The mea-
surement (and thus the illness) type has proven to be a
major factor with regards to willingness. Additionally, the
applied forms of user interaction determined the willingness
values of the various measurements. When the possibility
of the interaction was not clearly visible for the patient,
the willingness level was low. On the other hand, when
the interaction involved a relatively complex process, the
willingness values lowered.
Surprisingly, two factors that were anticipated as major
ones affecting the willingness were not signiﬁcant. One of
them, the initiator device role can be considered unimportant
when sampled from the selected patient set. The effects of
the similarities between the natural data traversal path and
the order of steps of a measurement process need further
investigations. On the other hand, the vanishing effect of
the presence of an alerting system is reasonable considering
the selected patient sample. However, this is also an area
where further (even social and psychological) tests should
be run.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work presented was partly funded by the National
Innovation Ofﬁce, Hungary (project No. OM-00191/2008-
AALAMSRK ’ProSeniis’), Telenor 19/55 1I066, Nokia Ko-
marom 19/55 1C117 and GOP-1.1.2-07/1-2008-0007.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Suh, L. S. Evangelista, C. Chen, K. Han, J. Kang, M. K. Tu,
V. Chen, A. Nahapetian, and M. Sarrafzadeh, An automated
vital sign monitoring system for congestive heart failure pa-
tients, Proceedings of the ACM international conference on
Health informatics - IHI ’10, Arlington, Virginia, USA: 2010,
pp. 108-117.
[2] M. Sarriegui, G. Sez, H. Prez, M. Elena, R. Cros, E. Brugus,
A. Leiva, G. Aguilera, and J. Enrique, Mobile Telemedicine
for Diabetes Care, Mobile Telemedicine A Computing and
Networking Perspective, CRC PRES, Taylor & Francis Group;
ISBN: 9781420060461, 2008.
[3] J. G. Cleland, A. A. Louis, A. S. Rigby, U. Janssens, and
A. H. Balk, Noninvasive Home Telemonitoring for Patients
With Heart Failure at High Risk of Recurrent Admission and
Death: The Trans-European Network-Home-Care Management
System (TEN-HMS) study, Journal of the American College
of Cardiology, vol. 45, 2005, pp. 1654-1664.
[4] S. Scalvini, M. Vitacca, L. Paletta, A. Giordano, and B. Balbi,
Telemedicine: a new frontier for effective healthcare services,
Monaldi Arch Chest Dis, vol. 61, 2004, pp. 226-233.
[5] D. W. Bates and A. Bitton, The future of health information
technology in the patient-centered medical home. Health Aff
(Millwood). 2010; 29(4) pp. 614-621.
[6] “Introduction”. Home Page of H-Lab Nonproﬁt Ltd. Retrieved
from http://www.h-lab.eu/ at 06.07.2011.
[7] “Medistance
Home
Page”.
Retrieved
from
http://www.medistance.hu/ at 26.04.2011.
[8] I. Vass´anyi, G. Kozmann, B. V´egs˝o, I. K´osa, T. Dulai, D. Muhi,
and Z. Tarj´anyi, Alpha: multi-parameter remote monitoring
system for the elderly, MIE’2010, Cape Town, South Africa,
2010.
337
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

