A Study on the Security of Authentication Systems
Otuekong Umoren, Hector Marco-Gisbert
School of Computing, Engineering and Physical Sciences
University of the West of Scotland
High St, Paisley PA1 2BE, UK
Email: {Otuekong.Umoren,Hector.Marco}@uws.ac.uk
Abstract—In the age of digitalization, passwords play a signiﬁcant
role to protect user information. The growing number of data
breaches has become a major problem allowing unauthorised
parties to access conﬁdential data. Over the years, passwords
have been the ﬁrst factor of authentication that is used in various
segments, such as web applications, banking, e-commerce, and
applications for authentication, etc. In most cases, the passwords
are usually assigned to or created by the authorized user, and
must be kept secret to keep unauthorized users from having access
to information it is meant to protect. However, recent attacks have
shown that these passwords are vulnerable to attacks such as, the
dictionary, brute force, man in the middle, trafﬁc interception,
social engineering, and key logger attack, etc. In this paper, we
discuss different types of passwords that prevent unauthorised
access to protect users’ information. We analyze various attack
techniques that are leveraged in many ways to obtain passwords.
We also discuss the available protection techniques that aim
to protect passwords. However, our analysis reveals that the
protection techniques are not sturdy and fail to provide enough
protection against the most utilised attack techniques, hence,
requiring to have more advanced techniques in place.
Keywords–graphical password; cryptographic key; password
authentication; graphical authentication; biometric.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The use of passwords to authenticate users has been
a common practice all over the world. The username and
password best describes the single-factor authentication [1],
these passwords, which are usually what the authorized user
knows and are mainly used by Automated Teller Machine
(ATM), web applications, mobile applications, computers, au-
tomobiles, etc. The passwords serves as a layer of protection
for user information and other valuable data. The best way to
secure a piece of information is to allow access to only the
authorized user [2]. However, passwords have several issues,
one of those is the limitations of humans to recall alphanumeric
passwords, as a good password should be easy to remember
by the authorized user and hard to guess by an unauthorized
user [3] [4]. Users hardly select passwords that are easy to
recall and difﬁcult to guess, Yan et al. in their publication
identiﬁed the limitations of human memory as one of the
issues of password authentication [5]. If users were not needed
to recall passwords, a password that is difﬁcult with long
characters and strings to be used as long as the system permits
it.
The words that most users can recall are usually names
or short dictionary words, which makes these passwords
vulnerable to dictionary attacks [6]. Some users often have
this false idea that using popular slangs and keyboard layout
or arrangement like “QWERTY” constructs strong passwords
because those words cannot be found in the dictionary. An inci-
dent occurred on a social web application "rockyou.com",
where there was a security breach and users’ credentials that
were stored in plaintext were compromised. The poor password
policies were major vulnerabilities in their system [2]. Some
passwords use words or names in users’ native language that
are easy to remember but are also vulnerable to dictionary
attacks, while other passwords are difﬁcult to recall and secure
against guessing. In order to have a strong password in place,
the user might want to write the password in a secure place
but that could also lead the password to be compromised [5].
The users can set complex text-based passwords, which can
be difﬁcult to remember as well as difﬁcult to break, whereas
simple passwords can be easily remembered and it may not
take much effort to compromise [7]. Despite their vulnerabilities,
passwords still have an important role in users’ experience
on the web application, mobile application, and many other
areas where security is needed [8]. Hence, it is very important
to have a proper security measure in place to have a sturdy
password.
This paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we discuss
different aspects of currently implemented passwords types.
Section III reviews various security threats that can be executed
to compromise user passwords. In Section IV, we talk about
the current protection techniques that are in place to provide se-
curity. Section V analyses the major authentication techniques
in terms of security, vulnerability, and possible attacks. Finally,
the concluding Section VI discusses the accomplishments from
this research work. It also indicates the future work to be
initiated to meet the current challenges revealed through this
research.
II.
BACKGROUND
In this section, we discuss various aspects of the passwords
that are utilised in the current digital format. Our discussion
includes reviewing the basic features and also weaknesses of
the password types to determine their robustness.
A. Text-based passwords
Text-based passwords are the most implemented and
widely adopted passwords in various segments. While humans
ﬁnd it difﬁcult in recalling complicated passwords, various
schemes are available to assist users to keep multiple pass-
words secure. The major problems associated with passwords
are memorizing strong passwords and also they are vulnerable
to various pernicious attacks. Text-based passwords have been
considered insecure for long, and mostly replaced by graphical
passwords that can be considered to have improved security
and usability [9]. In most cases, a strong password should
comprise upper and lower case characters (a-z, A-Z), numbers,
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

and special characters. They should not be based on language,
names, slangs, and must not contain meaningful information,
and also must not be written down [10]. Users tend to use
different passwords for different networks. In most cases, the
password that is being used less, often difﬁcult to remember
when having many passwords [3]. The use of a text-based
password on multiple platforms or password reuse is often
not advisable, because if the password is compromised on one
platform, it could be used on another platform or account by
the attacker.
B. Graphical Passwords
Graphical passwords are authentication systems that au-
thenticate users through the selection of images or locations
on images [11]. It is an authentication scheme where the au-
thorized user is authenticated or the identity of the authorized
user is veriﬁed through their knowledge on images or graphical
objects. This authentication method is often considered as a
very secure authentication method. It has its strengths and
advantages, such as reduced spooﬁng attacks. However, like
any other authentication methods, it also has weaknesses. One
of the major disadvantages is the usability issue [12]. Graph-
ical authentication is categorized into three parts, these are
cued recall, recognition, and recall-based authentications. In
the recognition-based authentication, the user must recognize
and choose images seen previously, while in the recall-based
authentication, the user must choose spots on the images [3].
The server requires to store the images and prepare one or more
challenges for users for every round of the authentication. Like
other authentication systems, graphical authentication has it’s
vulnerabilities, the most common and obvious is the shoulder
surﬁng attack.
C. Biometric
This authentication method of biometric works with recog-
nition. Unlike graphical passwords where the recognition pro-
cess is carried out by the user, the task of recognition is carried
out by the biometric authentication system. In this scheme,
the user’s biometrics, such as ﬁngerprint recognition, face
recognition, signature veriﬁcation, are processed and stored
in the database, and those data are matched to authenticate
user [12]. Although, the unique nature of some of these
biometric features serve as advantages for this authentication
method, the cost, and difﬁculty of implementation can be a
major disadvantage.
Biometric authentication techniques use features that can-
not be forgotten or misplaced. Such secure authentication
approaches are the major features of this authentication sys-
tem [13]. There are different biometric features used in
biometric authentication, these are facial recognition, IRIS
technology, hand geometry, retina geometry, voice recognition,
etc [14].
1) Finger Print Technology: The ﬁngerprint is described as
the impression of the friction edges of the part of the human
ﬁnger, this comprises of connected ridge units of friction ridge
skin [14]. To capture these ﬁngerprints, a ﬁngerprint reader or
scanner must be in place. The ﬁngerprint scanners are based on
thermal, optical, silicon, or ultrasonic principles. The optical
ﬁngerprint scanners are the most common, work by capturing
the reﬂection changes on the areas where the ﬁngers touch on
the surface of the scanner. They are based on a source of light,
a light sensor, and a reﬂection surface that changes reﬂection
as the pressure changes.
2) Facial Recognition: The facial recognition technology
uses a computer application and camera, digital image, or
video to identify and verify a person. It is categorized into
two parts; the facial metric relies on both the position and
distances of the facial features, and the eigenface, which is
based on a ﬁxed set of eigenfaces [14].
3) IRIS Technology: IRIS technology uses a video-based
image acquisition system to obtain the unique patterns of the
iris of the eye. This iris pattern is captured by a grayscale
camera within a distance of 10 to 40 centimeters of the camera.
When the grayscale image of the iris is captured, the computer
application attempts to locate the iris in the image, and creates
a net of curves if the iris is found [14].
III.
SECURITY THREATS
Password vulnerability is not restricted to platforms, op-
erating systems, web applications, or devices such as routers.
Attackers use different methods to steal passwords, sometimes
with the help of bugs and outdated or insecure ﬁrmware. In this
section, we analyze various attack techniques that are executed
to steal users’ passwords.
A. Brute Force Attack
The brute force attack applies to all the possible password
characters and combinations to break encrypted passwords
usually when the passwords are saved as encrypted text. This
attack technique is also known as an exhaustive key search and
can be used on any encrypted data [15]. Although, the attack
method is considered to be time-consuming but relatively very
effective on passwords that are short [12]. It involves an
intensive combination search, similar to a burglar trying all
possible combinations on a safe [16]. Brute force attacks can
be made more effective through the use of a time-space trade-
off, such as Oechslin’s rainbow technique, which speeds up
the process of breaking passwords [17].
Figure 1. An example of a brute force attack
An authentication system allows unlimited trials; hence,
the computational power of the attackers’ system plays a vital
role for the attack to be successful. In Figure 1, we show
that an attacker uses an automated tool. For the attack to
be successful, three attacking steps are conducted; 1. Attempt
with different password combinations with several trials, the
generated passwords are then hashed. 2. The digest requires
to be compared to those in the stolen ﬁle, and 3. A match is
found with the correct password’s digest.
B. Dictionary Attack
In a dictionary attack, the attacker uses a combination of
meaningful words, mostly daily and occurring words, and tries
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

to match those words with the password. Many users tend
to use names, slang, or their favorite things as passwords,
this makes this attack relatively easier than a brute force
attack [12]. The dictionary attack checks the words in the
dictionary and tries to match the passwords with those words;
for instance, English words from the English dictionary, Slang
from attackers dictionary, etc.
Figure 2. An example of a dictionary attack
An example of a dictionary attack is shown in Figure 2. The
attack goes through 3 steps; 1. The attacker generates digests
from dictionary words. 2. The digests are then compared to
those in the stolen digest ﬁle, and 3. The process continues
until a match is found.
C. Shoulder Surﬁng
In this attack, the attacker monitors and observes the
victims as they input their password. The attacker usually pays
attention to the victim’s keyboard to see the combination of
keys. There are several ways this attack can be accomplished.
The attacker can make use of a hidden Close Circuit TV
Camera (CCTV) to observe the victim’s activity from another
location [12]. Shoulder surﬁng attack involves an attacker
spying on the victim during the user’s login activity [18].
D. Phishing Attack
A phishing attack is a web-based attack where the attacker
redirects the victim to a legitimate website with the aim
of stealing the victim’s password [12]. Assume a scenario in
which the user needs to visit www.facebook.com but is di-
rected to a copy with www.faceb00k.com by the attacker.
The user unknowingly inputs his login information, presuming
that to be a legit website, which is received by the attacker.
Once the attack is accomplished, the attacker redirects the
victim to the legitimate website.
A phishing attack could be executed by an attacker by
masquerading as a known service to trick a user into giving
away information. Some users usually fall victim to this
because they only depend on visual cues to identify these web
applications. A simple execution of this attack would require
the attacker to create an identical copy of legitimate websites
or an email address similar to a legitimate email address, these
looks very convincing to users, especially when the users are
not familiar with the browser security indicators and have to
depend on what they see for protection [19].
For phishing attacks to be successful, a man-in-the-middle
attack must be executed ﬁrst. An example of a phishing attack
is shown in Figure 3. The very ﬁrst step involves the attacker
sending an email with a fake page to Alice. Alice visits the
malicious page sent by the attacker. In the next step, any data
input by Alice is sent to the attacker. Finally, the attacker uses
the credentials to visit the real page.
Figure 3. An example of phishing attack
E. Keyloggers
The keyloggers or key sniffers are software programs that
are secretly installed on the victim’s device [12]. The program
monitors the victim’s activities by observing and recording
the keys pressed by the victim. The keylogger creates a log
ﬁle of the keys used by the victim and sends this log ﬁle
to the attacker usually through an email address. Hardware
keyloggers are also very beneﬁcial to conduct this attack [20].
The hardware keyloggers are small electronic devices plugged
at the end of the cable of the keyboard, inside the keyboard or
installed inside the computer. The devices store the keystrokes
in their in-built memory after they are attached to the computer,
and often remain undetected by the antivirus.
F. Video Recording Attack
In this attack, the victim’s password or keyboard activities
are recorded using a video recording device such as a cell
phone [12]. The attacker monitors the video for the attack
to be successful. This attack serves the same purpose as a
shoulder surﬁng attack, and can be very effective if properly
executed. An attacker may perform the video recording on-site
or prior to executing the attack [21]. Depending on the device
used a video usually can be recorded from 2 to 9 meters. Since,
many users tend to use similar patterns, the captured data from
victim’s device can be used to compromise other devices of
the victim.
G. Spooﬁng Attack
In this attack, the victim is presented with a copy of a
known legitimate website requiring the victim to input his
username and password [22]. Both the username and password
are then saved on the attacker’s device without the victim
being aware of the incident. Any digital medium that is
connected through the network can be spoofed, for example,
Internet Protocol cameras, wireless networks, etc. The wireless
networks are most vulnerable to spooﬁng attacks as the attack
method can result in various other attack techniques [23].
There are various types of spooﬁng attacks, such as
Address Resolution Protocol (ARP), Domain Name Sys-
tem (DNS), and Internet Protocol (IP) spooﬁng. Figure 4 shows
a DNS spooﬁng attack where the attacker injects a fake DNS
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 4. An example of a DNS spooﬁng attack
entry into the DNS server. BOB sends a request to visit his
intended website; however, Bob’s request is redirected to the
malicious website enabling the attacker to exploit.
H. Sweeper Attack
In this attack technique, the attacker takes advantage of
the password autoﬁll function to steal user’s login credentials
for several websites at the same time without the user hav-
ing a visit to those websites. This attack method works on
password managers that support sync services and the autoﬁll
function [24]. It is popularly executed in web browsers through
input ﬁelds and can be used to harvest users’ login details,
debit card information, and other personal data.
I.
Man-in-the-Middle Attack (MITM)
In this attack technique, an attacker monitors communica-
tions between users to capture the transmitted data [25]. This
attack is usually performed in a Local-Area Network (LAN),
and enabling the attacker to perform both DNS spooﬁng
and Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks [26]. Man-in-the-Middle
Attack (MITM) exploits the system where the HTTP server
sends a certiﬁcate to the web browser using its public key [27].
If the certiﬁcate does not come from a trusted source, the
communication path becomes vulnerable enabling the attacker
to replace the legitimate certiﬁcate from the HTTP server with
a fake certiﬁcate.
Figure 5. An example of man in the middle attack
A successful MITM permits an attacker a channel to carry
out other attacks, such as the phishing attack. An example of
MITM is shown in Figure 5. Bob is connected to a website,
where the attacker monitors communication between Bob and
the service. The attacker is able to capture the transmitted data.
IV.
CURRENT PROTECTION TECHNIQUES
In this section, we discuss 3 most advanced protection
techniques that are available to defend against the attacks
discussed in Section III.
A. Graphical Authentication
The concept of graphical passwords works with the user be-
ing authenticated with images [28]. Graphical passwords were
introduced to remove the burden of human memory, this means
by clicking an image or drawing, a complicated password can
be created that the user would not memorize. Typically, the
user has to select points on the image to get authenticated. The
system is built on recognition, whereby the user must recognize
previously seen images and choose memorable locations on
these images. With the type of graphical password system, the
user might be required to perform recall asks and recognition
tasks. The graphical password is proposed as an alternative
to text-based passwords [7]. Graphical authentication replaces
text-based passwords with images since humans can recall
details in static pictures better than words. In other words,
humans can remember things they have seen for a long time,
which makes graphical passwords easy to recall and difﬁcult
to guess.
B. Biometric Authentication
Biometric authentication systems validate user’s iden-
tity through human features, physiological and behavioral
traits [14]. These features are unique and provide users with
secure and automatic recognition. The system helps overcome
the problems and limitations in authentication systems. Bio-
metric system is classiﬁed into unimodal and multimodal;
the unimodal system uses one biometric feature and the
multimodal system uses multiple biometric features. The multi-
modal system is improved and overcomes the limitations of the
unimodal systems that focus on the inaccuracy in the unimodal
system.
C. Token-Based Authentication
A token is a string that a server generates for a client and
can be passed through an HTTP request [35]. The client’s
application exchanges authentication credentials for an authen-
tication token and when requested it just sends the token. When
the server receives the token, it looks for the credential of the
user to determine if the user is authorized to the requested
information. Tokens usually have an expiration time, after
that they become invalid. However, there is a possibility for
tokens to be leaked while they remain valid. A server is
able to determine if a token is too old and could reject it
if it is invalid [35]. Both hardware and software tokens are
utilized. Hardware tokens are usually physical devices, where
the software tokens are applications on devices, an example
is the Google authenticator application. The tokens display
random digits called One-Time Passwords. The One-Time
password is a common form of authentication in a multi-factor
authentication and are generated randomly by a server. These
randomly generated passwords are used once and are resistant
to snifﬁng and replay attacks.
V.
SECURITY ANALYSIS
In this section, we analyse the major password-based
attacks towards the available protection techniques discussed in
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Section IV. Our analysis shows the effectiveness of protection
techniques.
The brute force attack possesses a high risk to authentica-
tion systems. Although the large password space of graphical
authentication is robust and effective, it does not offer full
protection against brute force [31]. The attackers’ chance and
ability to break a large password fully rely on the obtained
computational power. The biometric authentication’s randomly
created passwords offer almost similar protection against brute
force attacks as graphical authentication; however, the ran-
domly created passwords fail to provide complete protection
against brute force attacks [32]. Token-based authentication
offers high-level protection against brute force attacks. The
short lifetime of the randomly generated passwords makes the
token-based authentication somewhat resistant to brute force
attacks [32].
Dictionary attack does not pose great risks on the protec-
tion techniques as it does with brute force attack. However,
it requires a lot of effort on recognition-based graphical
passwords than recall-based graphical passwords [29]. The
biometric authentication and token-based authentication are
both resistant and highly effective against a dictionary attack.
The biometrics’ data upon its extraction is converted and stored
as random digits or random alphanumeric texts. The randomly
generated one-time passwords and their short life-time is also
very effective against the dictionary attack [32].
Shoulder surﬁng can be very destructive if executed prop-
erly. Graphical authentication cannot be relied on for complete
protection against shoulder surﬁng [29]. The authentication
activity carried out on the screen could be exposed to an
attacker, thus it does not make graphical authentication ef-
fective against shoulder surﬁng. Biometric authentication is
very effective against shoulder surﬁng. Although, token-based
authentication is resistant to shoulder surﬁng, the possibility
of exploitation mainly depends on the short lifetime of the
one-time-passwords [32]. A short lifetime makes the system
effective, whereas a long lifetime makes it vulnerable.
All the discussed protection techniques are very effective
against spyware and malware. Graphical authentication is
resistant to spyware as the authentication activity is carried out
on screen [11]. The biometric and token-based authentication,
on the other hand, may generate some security concerns. The
short lifetime of the one-time password makes the token-
based authentication resistant to this spyware. Spooﬁng attacks
is a scalable attack, the graphical authentication is effective
against this attack. Biometric authentication is vulnerable to a
spooﬁng attack. On the other hand, Token-based authentication
is resistant to the spooﬁng attack. Graphical authentication is
very effective against a man-in-the-middle attack, the man-in-
the-middle attack is not feasible on graphical authentication.
Biometric authentication is vulnerable to this attack, this
is possible through a spooﬁng attack [33], that makes the
biometric authentication less effective on this attack.
A combination of two or three protection techniques dis-
cussed would mitigate attacks such as the brute force, dictio-
nary, shoulder surﬁng, man-in-the-middle attack, and spyware,
hereby protecting systems. This combination would consist of
the graphical authentication and the token-based authentication
in a two-factor authentication, with the graphical password as
the primary authentication and token-based authentication as
the secondary authentication. As shown in Table I, token-based
authentication is more effective than other discussed protection
techniques. The table highlights notable security features in
the protection techniques, their respective vulnerabilities and
attacks that would exploit these vulnerabilities. A combination
of graphical authentication (knowledge factor) and biometric
authentication (inherent factor) would be decent for security
and usability. However, the combination of the graphical
password (knowledge factor) and token-based authentication
(possession factor) in a two factor authentication would be
the best combination of the discussed protection techniques
to mitigate security threats such as the dictionary, brute force,
shoulder surﬁng, malware and spyware (key loggers), spooﬁng
and phishing attacks.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have discussed various passwords types
showing their vulnerability by indicating various security
threats. We have also discussed the current protection tech-
niques, and outlined the challenges of authentication systems.
Our analysis has shown that although traditional attacks, such
as spyware, brute force attacks, etc, are difﬁcult to execute
on graphical and biometric authentication, graphical passwords
make some resistance. However, graphical passwords are not
widely used and vulnerable to attacks in different ways. We
have also shown that text-based passwords are not secure
enough and are vulnerable to major attacks, whereas the bio-
metric, token-based and graphical authentication are making
it more difﬁcult to break passwords. Furthermore, we have
revealed that all protection techniques fulﬁll the purpose of
security to a minimal extent, but vulnerable to different attacks.
Therefore, a robust security technique should be in place.
For our future work, we aim to design a sturdy security
technique considering the limitations revealed through this
research. The future research work will be an ultimate security
approach mitigating the vulnerabilities discussed in this paper.
TABLE I. AUTHENTICATION TECHNIQUES AND THEIR VULNERABILITY TO ATTACKS
Authentication Technique
Security features
Vulnerabilities
Possible Attacks
Graphical Passwords
Large password space [29], De-
coys [30] randomly assigned im-
ages [31]
User’s activity can easily be moni-
tored on screen [29]
Brute
force
search
[31]
[29],
Guessing
[29],
Shoulder
surﬁng
[29],
spyware
[29],
Dictionary attack [29]
Biometric
Randomly created passwords, Lim-
ited attempts [32]
Biometric hardware [33]
Spooﬁng attack [33] [34], Denial-
of-service attack [33], Replay at-
tack [33], Man-in-the-middle at-
tack [33]
Token-based
Short
token
life
time
[32],
Large
entropy
[32],
One-time
password [32]
Difﬁcult to replace [32]
Lost or stolen token [32], Denial of
service [32]
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

REFERENCES
[1]
A. Nath and T. Mondal, “Issues and challenges in two factor authentica-
tion algorithms,” International Journal of Latest Trends in Engineering
and Technology (IJLTET), ResearchGate, 2016, pp. 318–327.
[2]
T. Touchette, B. Hewitt, and M. Huson, “Password security: What
factors inﬂuence good password practices,” 03 2012, pp. 1–9.
[3]
S. Wiedenbeck, J. Waters, J.-C. Birget, A. Brodskiy, and N. Memon,
“Authentication using graphical passwords: Effects of tolerance and
image choice,” in Proceedings of the 2005 symposium on Usable
privacy and security, 2005, pp. 1–12.
[4]
E. M. W. R. Chowdhury, M. S. Rahman, A. B. M. A. A. Islam,
and M. S. Rahman, “Salty secret: Let us secretly salt the secret,” in
2017 International Conference on Networking, Systems and Security
(NSysS), 2017, pp. 115–123.
[5]
J. Yan, A. Blackwell, R. Anderson, and A. Grant, “Password memora-
bility and security: Empirical results,” IEEE Security & privacy, vol. 2,
no. 5, 2004, pp. 25–31.
[6]
S. T. Haque, M. Wright, and S. Scielzo, “A study of user password
strategy for multiple accounts,” in Proceedings of the third ACM
conference on Data and application security and privacy, 2013, pp. 173–
176.
[7]
A. Gokhale and V. Waghmare, “Graphical password authentication
techniques: A review,” International Journal of Science and Research
(IJSR) ISSN (Online Index Copernicus Value Impact Factor, vol. 14,
no. 7, 2013, pp. 1–7.
[8]
D. Florencio and C. Herley, “A large-scale study of web password
habits,” in Proceedings of the 16th international conference on World
Wide Web, 2007, pp. 657–666.
[9]
Z. Li, W. He, D. Akhawe, and D. Song, “The emperor’s new password
manager: Security analysis of web-based password managers,” in 23rd
{USENIX} Security Symposium ({USENIX} Security 14), 2014, pp.
465–479.
[10]
D. Charoen, “Password security,” International Journal of Security (IJS),
vol. 8, no. 1, 2014, p. 1.
[11]
G. Agarwal, S. Singh, and R. Shukla, “Security analysis of graphical
passwords over the alphanumeric passwords,” International Journal of
Pure and Applied Sciences and Technology, vol. 1, no. 2, 2010, pp.
60–66.
[12]
M. Raza, M. Iqbal, M. Sharif, and W. Haider, “A survey of password
attacks and comparative analysis on methods for secure authentication,”
World Applied Sciences Journal, vol. 19, no. 4, 2012, pp. 439–444.
[13]
V. Maty´aˇs and Z. ˇR´ıha, “Biometric authentication — security and
usability,” in Advanced Communications and Multimedia Security.
Springer, 2002, pp. 227–239.
[14]
M. C. Debnath Bhattacharyya, Rahul Ranjan and F. Alisherov, “Biomet-
ric authentication: A review,” International Journal of u-and e-Service,
Science and Technology, vol. 2, no. 3, 2009, pp. 13–28.
[15]
K. Apostol, “Brute-force attack,” 2012.
[16]
N. Kumar, “Investigations in brute force attack on cellular security
based on des and aes,” IJCEM International Journal of Computational
Engineering & Management, vol. 14, 2011, pp. 50–52.
[17]
P. Oechslin, “Making a faster cryptanalytic time-memory trade-off,” in
Annual International Cryptology Conference. Springer, 2003, pp. 617–
630.
[18]
S. Man, D. Hong, and M. Matthews, “A shoulder-surﬁng resistant
graphical password scheme - wiw.” vol. 3, 01 2003, pp. 105–111.
[19]
I. Fette, N. Sadeh, and A. Tomasic, “Learning to detect phishing emails,”
in Proceedings of the 16th international conference on World Wide Web,
2007, pp. 649–656.
[20]
S. Sagiroglu and G. Canbek, “Keyloggers: Increasing threats to com-
puter security and privacy,” IEEE technology and society magazine,
vol. 28, no. 3, 2009, pp. 10–17.
[21]
G. Ye, Z. Tang, D. Fang, X. Chen, W. Wolff, A. J. Aviv, and Z. Wang,
“A video-based attack for android pattern lock,” ACM Transactions on
Privacy and Security (TOPS), vol. 21, no. 4, 2018, pp. 1–31.
[22]
G. C. Kessler, “Passwords - strengths and weaknesses,” Intemet and
Internetworking Security, 1996.
[23]
Y. Chen, W. Trappe, and R. P. Martin, “Detecting and localizing
wireless spooﬁng attacks,” in 2007 4th Annual IEEE Communications
Society Conference on Sensor, Mesh and Ad Hoc Communications and
Networks.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 193–202.
[24]
D. Silver, S. Jana, D. Boneh, E. Chen, and C. Jackson, “Password man-
agers: Attacks and defenses,” in 23rd {USENIX} Security Symposium
({USENIX} Security 14), 2014, pp. 449–464.
[25]
R. Rahim, “Man-in-the-middle-attack prevention using interlock pro-
tocol method,” ARPN J. Eng. Appl. Sci, vol. 12, no. 22, 2017, pp.
6483–6487.
[26]
G. N. Nayak and S. G. Samaddar, “Different ﬂavours of man-in-the-
middle attack, consequences and feasible solutions,” in 2010 3rd Inter-
national Conference on Computer Science and Information Technology,
vol. 5.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 491–495.
[27]
F. Callegati, W. Cerroni, and M. Ramilli, “Man-in-the-middle attack to
the https protocol,” IEEE Security & Privacy, vol. 7, no. 1, 2009, pp.
78–81.
[28]
M. Shukran, M. Yunus, K. B. Maskat, W. Shariff, and M. S. B. Arifﬁn,
“Pixel value graphical password scheme-graphical password scheme,”
Australian Journal of Basic and Applied Sciences, vol. 7, no. 4, 2013,
pp. 688–695.
[29]
S. S. Biswas and S. Sankar, “Comparative study of graphical user
authentication approaches,” International Journal of Computer Science
and Mobile Computing, vol. 3, 2014, pp. 361–375.
[30]
R. G. Rittenhouse, J. A. Chaudry, and M. Lee, “Security in graphical
authentication,” International Journal of Security and Its Applications,
vol. 7, no. 3, 2013, pp. 347–356.
[31]
M. D. Haﬁz, A. H. Abdullah, N. Ithnin, and H. K. Mammi, “Towards
identifying usability and security features of graphical password in
knowledge based authentication technique,” in 2008 Second Asia In-
ternational Conference on Modelling & Simulation (AMS).
IEEE,
2008, pp. 396–403.
[32]
L. O’Gorman, “Comparing passwords, tokens, and biometrics for user
authentication,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 91, no. 12, 2003, pp.
2021–2040.
[33]
M. Joshi, B. Mazumdar, and S. Dey, “Security vulnerabilities against
ﬁngerprint biometric system,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.07116, 2018.
[34]
N. K. Ratha, J. H. Connell, and R. M. Bolle, “Enhancing security
and privacy in biometrics-based authentication systems,” IBM systems
Journal, vol. 40, no. 3, 2001, pp. 614–634.
[35]
J. Kubovy, C. Huber, M. J¨ager, and J. K¨ung, “A secure token-based
communication for authentication and authorization servers,” in Interna-
tional Conference on Future Data and Security Engineering.
Springer,
2016, pp. 237–250.
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

