MAD Science: Increasing Engagement in STEM Education
through Participatory Sensing
Scott Heggen, Osarieme Omokaro, Jamie Payton
Department of Computer Science
The University of North Carolina at Charlotte
9201 University City Blvd., Charlotte, NC, USA 28223
{sheggen, oomokaro, payton}@uncc.edu
Abstract—In this paper, we introduce the Mobile Application
Development for Science (MAD Science) curriculum, which
utilizes participatory sensing as a central theme to increase
middle school students’ engagement and interest in science and
technology. Participatory sensing involves the general public
in collecting and sharing information about the surrounding
environment through the use of sensing (e.g., camera, GPS,
accelerometer) and input capabilities on handheld mobile
devices, such as smartphones. We present the results of a
pilot offering of the MAD Science curriculum as part of a
10-week after-school program for middle school children. Our
results indicate the potential for participatory sensing as a tool
for increasing engagement in technology; after participating in
the MAD Science program, students viewed technology more
favorably, indicated increased enjoyment of technology, and
indicated increased interest in pursuing education and careers
in science and computing.
Keywords-participatory sensing; public participation in sci-
entiﬁc research; broadening participation; education
I. INTRODUCTION
In order to support innovation and competitiveness in
a global economy, governments are making signiﬁcant in-
vestments to encourage interest in and improve educa-
tional methods for science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) ﬁelds. Providing early interventions
is essential to increasing engagement in STEM education
and interest in STEM careers; the majority of youth have
formed “life aspirations” that impact educational and career
choices even before the age of fourteen [1].
In response to this need, we have developed the Mobile
Application Development for Science (MAD Science) cur-
riculum as an intervention for middle school children to
increase engagement with technology, increase engagement
with and knowledge of science, and increase the desire to
pursue an education and career in science and technology.
The MAD Science curriculum is centered around participa-
tory sensing, in which participants collect data samples for a
focused data collection campaign using the sensors embed-
ded in their mobile phones, such as the camera, microphone,
and GPS sensors. Participatory sensing has its roots in public
participation in scientiﬁc research (PPSR) projects, which
have been shown to be effective in their use of open inquiry
and investigation to increase engagement in science [1][2]
and to improve knowledge about science [2][3]. The use
of participatory sensing as a tool for investigating scien-
tiﬁc questions promotes inquiry-based learning, which has
been advocated for many years as a strategy to increase
engagement in STEM education. Given the focus on modern
sensing, computing, and communication technology as a tool
for data collection, we believe that participatory sensing is
well-suited to build upon the impact of PPSR to increase
engagement, interest, and knowledge in technology as well
as science.
In this paper, we present the MAD Science curriculum
and the results of a pilot implementation as part of a 10-
week after-school program for middle school students. In
the MAD Science program, students engage as practitioners
of STEM by creating a participatory sensing application,
collecting data samples using mobile phones to address a
civic problem that they have identiﬁed in their community,
analyzing the results, and presenting them to the community.
In the pilot offering of MAD Science, twenty-one middle
school students created two software applications in order
support their socially relevant participatory sensing data
collection campaigns, and used the applications during local
ﬁeld trips to collect scientiﬁc data. Students analyzed the
data in the MAD Science program, and presented ﬁndings
to over 50 visitors at a community event. Our results indicate
that engagement with technology was affected positively
by the MAD Science program. Students’ desire to pursue
an education and career in science and technology also
increased as a result of the MAD Science program.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II describes the previous works to motivate our research.
Section III describes the MAD Science curriculum and its
implementation. Section IV provides insight into the impact
the curriculum had in our pilot program. Finally, Section V
provides our concluding remarks and future direction for the
project.
II. RELATED WORK
Public participation in science has proven to be an ex-
tremely valuable tool for increasing knowledge and engage-
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

ment in science. Raddick et al. [4] identify four ways in
which PPSR can be used to increase scientiﬁc literacy:
increasing content knowledge, providing an experience of
the process of science, creating opportunities for changes
in attitude toward science, and providing an opportunity
for direct communication with scientists. The Center for
the Advancement of Informal Science Education (CAISE)
released a report on the value and potential of PPSR projects
as a form of informal science education [2], using metrics
that assessed the engagement or interest in science; skills
in using technology; and awareness, knowledge and under-
standing of scientiﬁc concepts and processes. The CAISE
report concludes that “...enlisting people into PPSR projects
is probably one of the most expedient methods for informal
science educators to engage people in science in a fun and
meaningful way.”
Additional studies have shown that directly engaging
participants in the process of inquisitive thinking in PPSR
projects improves knowledge about science [3]. For exam-
ple, ReClam the Bay (RCTB) [5] promotes education in wa-
ter quality, bay ecosystems, and the environmental beneﬁts
of shell ﬁsh by involving students in the growth and study
of a shellﬁsh in a science classroom. The project reported
signiﬁcant gains in content knowledge for middle, high
school and even college students, and participant commit-
ment to continuous education and habitat management goals.
Similarly, the Salal Harvest Sustainability Study [6], a PPSR
project promoting responsible harvesting of Salal shrubs,
revealed that training in research design, data collection
and data interpretation methods improved the harvesters’
knowledge of scientiﬁc concepts and processes. The study
showed increased skill set on the job and empowered com-
munity involvement, which informed better resource man-
agement and harvesting practices for the harvesters. Lastly,
the Alliance for Aquatic Resource Monitoring (ALLARM)
Acid Rain Monitoring Project [7] was able to empower
participants, promote stewardship, increase knowledge and
awareness of aquatic systems and health via various training
and mentoring programs in Pennsylvania. The participants
were trained in data management, data interpretation and
statistical analysis skills, as well as effective presentation of
data to address their issues. An evaluation of the ALLARM
project revealed limited gains in project knowledge, but
showed increased engagement, deep project commitment
and solid data collection skills.
Advances in mobile computing, sensing, and communi-
cations technology has made it possible to utilize smart-
phones as a platform to support remote data collection
for scientiﬁc purposes. Modern smartphones are typically
equipped with several standard sensing modalities (e.g.,
camera, GPS, accelerometer) that can be used to capture
and report observations of phenomena. This idea, in which
volunteers use a software application deployed on a mobile
phone to collect and share data for a purpose, is referred
to as participatory sensing [8]. With over 5.8 billion users
of mobile phones [9] worldwide, participatory sensing has
the potential to reach a large number of volunteers, and can
be used to collect data across large geographic areas with
differing habitats.
Participatory sensing can be viewed as an extension of
PPSR that incorporates the use of digital sensing technology
and software applications to capture, report, and analyze
data samples. The positive impact of PPSR projects for
engaging the public in science can be viewed as an indicator
of the potential for participatory sensing as a mechanism
for increasing engagement in science. In addition, the use
of computing, communication, and sensing technologies,
including purposed sensors [10] and mobile phones [11],
introduces the students to modern technology that is familiar
and exciting, and has the potential to increase engage-
ment in both science and technology. For these reasons,
our MAD Science curriculum uses participatory sensing to
engage middle school students in science and technology,
to increase interest in education and careers in science and
technology, and to increase knowledge of STEM concepts.
This approach is closely related to the Mobilize program
at UCLA [12], in which high school students use traditional
programming languages to develop software applications for
participatory sensing. While both programs utilize partici-
patory sensing to increase engagement and knowledge of
STEM, our MAD Science program is designed as an early
intervention, targeting middle school students in the years
before they form their life aspirations.
III. THE MAD SCIENCE CURRICULUM AND
IMPLEMENTATION
The MAD Science curriculum was implemented at a
local middle school through a national after-school program,
which aims at expanding the learning day beyond the
classroom in low-income communities. The goal of the after-
school program is to provide extended learning time for
students in an effort to close the “achievement gap”; the
majority of students involved in the after-school program
are Latino or African American, and over 75% qualify for
free or reduced lunch. The after-school program recruits
volunteers from the community to teach about their areas of
expertise in an “apprenticeship,” where students gain access
to professionals in the community who volunteer as teachers.
Apprenticeships emphasize hands-on learning activities to
keep kids engaged and promote information retention. Each
apprenticeship runs for 1.5 hours, one day a week, for
ten weeks. The national after-school program in which we
implement the MAD Science apprenticeship is supported
by the National Science Foundation and its impact has an
expanding reach; with programs in 18 cities and 31 middle
schools across the United States, the after-school program
serves approximately 4,500 middle school students each year
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

and aims to grow to serve over 10,000 students in the next
four years.
The ﬁrst MAD Science apprenticeship was held in spring
2012 with twenty-one students from grades six to eight.
Throughout the apprenticeship, the students applied the sci-
entiﬁc method within the context of a participatory sensing
data collection campaign. Students identiﬁed issues within
the local community and put forth a hypothesis about the
cause and a possible solution. Students then identiﬁed what
data would be needed to evaluate the hypothesis, and created
a participatory sensing campaign to collect the needed
data. In doing so, students formulated the requirements
for a participatory sensing application to support the data
collection campaign, which was then implemented by our
research team and deployed on mobile phones to enable data
collection by the students. Once data was collected using
the participatory sensing application, students analyzed how
the data supported or refuted the hypothesis. At the end of
the apprenticeship, the students demonstrated their acquired
skills and knowledge to their friends and family. We describe
the details of the apprenticeship below, and the results of its
initial implementation are presented in Section IV.
A. MAD Science Lesson Structure
Each apprenticeship lesson is designed as an active
learning experience, with a focus on hands-on activities to
engage students and reinforce learning. Lessons follow the
structure presented in Table I. First, every lesson began with
a modiﬁed version of the classic Taboo c⃝ game that was
used to teach vocabulary related to participatory sensing
and STEM concepts, particularly focusing on the scientiﬁc
method, sensing and communication technology, data collec-
tion, and data analysis. This activity encouraged the students
to actively participate in learning the vocabulary of STEM
by describing the terms in their own words and connecting
terms to their own personal knowledge bases. As a member
of the after-school program’s staff noted, “...this activity
got students to really think about what these words mean,
which enabled them to better understand and articulate the
material throughout the lesson.”
Table I: The MAD Science Lesson Structure
Activity
Approx.
Time
Purpose
Ritual
10m
A fun, short activity or game to engage
students and is relevant to the topic of the
day.
Introduction
5m
Share the lesson objectives and agenda.
Activity 1
20m
An activity centered around the objectives
for the lesson
Activity 2
20m
An activity centered around the objectives
for the lesson
Activity 3
20m
An activity centered around the objectives
for the lesson
Teachback
10m
Guided questions to ensure the students
understood the day’s content
Following the ritual Taboo c⃝ game, an overview of the
lesson was presented to the students, connecting the ideas of
the planned activities to the broader theme of participatory
sensing. The remaining one-hour lesson was broken into
three hands-on activities, a time frame that seems effective
for keeping the middle school students focused and engaged.
Each activity was used to introduce and reinforce ideas
related to the scientiﬁc method, standards and procedures
for data collection, validity of data samples and data sets,
sensing technology, and mobile phone communication. Each
lesson ended with a “teachback,” where the students would
describe the knowledge they’d gained throughout the lesson.
To encourage participation, rewards in the form of “mascot
bucks” were commonly distributed for correct responses;
these mascot bucks can be redeemed at the middle school’s
“reward store” for school-related items and apparel with the
school logo.
B. MAD Science Lessons and Objectives
The MAD Science apprenticeship consisted of 10 ses-
sions, each lasting 90 minutes. Table II provides an overview
of the topics introduced in each session and the associated
lesson objectives. Below, we describe lesson activities and
their connection to the MAD Science goals of increasing
engagement and interest in science and technology.
Weeks 1 through 4: (Re)Shaping Students’ Opinions of
Science and Technology
Our ﬁrst objective was to challenge negative perceptions
of science and stereotypes of scientists, and to present
positive role models. In one activity, students were asked
to view photos of people performing various activities and
to comment on whether or not the person was acting as a
scientist (Week 1 in Table II). The photos were selected to
include a racially diverse group of scientists who do not ﬁt
the “nerd” or “geek” stereotype, and often depicted people
using technology in pursuit of science. The primary purpose
was to dispel student’s notions about scientiﬁc work; we
intended to show that scientists do not spend all of their time
in a sterile lab environment, that scientists engage in work
that helps to better society, and that scientists were accessible
people that could be from their own community. The second
activity (Week 4 in Table II) introduced the students to
a scientist, who talked about career path in becoming a
professor of computer science, answered students’ questions
about her education and the daily activities of a scientist,
and interacted with students as they addressed their own
scientiﬁc activities in the MAD Science lesson. The students
seemed to gain new knowledge about professions in science
and valued this opportunity to hear from an actual scientist;
one student responded, “I learned that as a researcher you
can learn about things that really interest you.”
The second objective was to get the students to feel more
comfortable with the idea of doing science. During week
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Table II: The MAD Science Curriculum
Schedule
Topic
Activity Objectives
Week 1:
Participatory Sensing Taboo
Introduction to Science, the Scientiﬁc
Method, and MAD Science
Dispel misconceptions about the role of a scientist, and the procedures they use to
conduct science
Week 2:
Let’s get excited about Science!
Show the students how they can be scientists through citizen science, and introduce
them to the two campaigns they will be conducting
Week 3:
Sensors, sensors, sensors!
Describe each sensor in the phone and demonstrate how they can be used to collect
samples for a scientist
Week 4:
How to Collect Data... The right way!
+ Guest Speaker
Connect the students to a real scientist; prepare the students to collect data by introducing
them to standard data collection procedures
Week 5:
Data collection Field Trip 1
Take the students to the local stream to collect images of pollution, pipes, wildlife, and
interesting phenomena
Week 6:
Data collection Field Trip 2
Take the students to the gymnasium to collect accelerometer readings while the students
perform different physical activities
Week 7:
What does it all mean?!
Categorize, analyze, and interpret the results of their collected data; draw a conclusion
about what was found in both campaigns
Week 8:
Student Presentation Preparation
Plan the presentations and demonstrations the students will be giving; reinforce the
subjects taught in the prior weeks
Week 9:
Student Presentation Preparation
Build and practice the presentations and demonstrations the students will be giving
Week 10:
Student Presentations
The students present their work to family, friends, and guests
2 of the apprenticeship, the students were reintroduced to
the scientiﬁc method, which had been previously covered in
their traditional middle school science courses. The students
then formed small groups to identify and solve a problem in
their local community. The majority of students immediately
identiﬁed pollution as a problem. The students were then
led through a series of group activities to help them solve
the problem of pollution in their community. Unknowingly,
they were following the steps of the scientiﬁc method,
which we discussed at the end of the lesson during a
“teachback” activity. Tying the students personal interest in
a community problem to the technical aspects associated
with the scientiﬁc method showed the students the value
of conducting science in a methodical manner. A student
said of this activity, “MAD Science taught me that we can
be citizen scientists and that we can use science to make
a difference in our community.” To further engage students
in science by doing science, the students were introduced to
an important concept in the scientiﬁc method: the validity of
experimental data (Week 4 in Table II). The lesson discussed
poor data collection practices and errors in data samples.
Students were then shown a series of images of people
as they collected data for a particular purpose, and were
asked to identify if the methods being used were “good”
or “bad.” The students were adamant about justifying their
reasoning for selecting “good” or “bad” without prompting
from the session leader. The students were not simply
answering the question, but they were reasoning through
each data collection method and applying their knowledge
of the scientiﬁc method to evaluate the appropriateness of
the method for collecting data.
The third objective was to engage the students with
technology through participatory sensing. To begin, the
students needed some basic knowledge of mobile phones and
embedded sensors. Six sensors common in mobile phones
were introduced during week 3 (accelerometer, camera,
camcorder, microphone, ambient light sensor, and GPS)
using a hands-on activity. For example, in an activity used
to explain GPS and localization, four students volunteered
to represent GPS satellites, and a ﬁfth student to represent
the GPS receiver. Using strings to represent the distance
between the receiver (whose position is unknown) and each
satellite (whose positions are known), the students learned
why GPS requires four satellites to accurately determine the
receivers location. Reﬂecting on this activity, an after-school
program staff member that supervised MAD Science stated,
“Instead of sitting in a desk and listening to a lecture about
the science behind mobile sensors, this activity had students
learning this science by getting them out of their seats and
demonstrating these processes. As a result of these types
of hands-on activities, students were not only engaged but
possessed a good understanding on the concepts covered as
evidenced through frequent “teachbacks” during and at the
end of lessons.”
Weeks 5 and 6: Running a Participatory Sensing Campaign
Midway through the apprenticeship, the students are ready
to begin their participatory sensing campaign. The students
were split into two groups, with each group responsible for
conducting a speciﬁc participatory sensing campaign. To do
so, each group followed the scientiﬁc method, deﬁning the
problem, forming a hypothesis, and identifying data collec-
tion procedures for their campaign. All students participated
in data collection for both campaigns. The group responsible
for the campaign analyzed the collected data.
The ﬁrst group focused on pollution in the local water-
shed. In designing their data collection procedures, students
identiﬁed the need for a participatory sensing application
that uses the camera and GPS sensors to identify stretches
of water with pollution, pipe run-offs, construction near
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

the stream, and other factors that would affect the stream’s
health. The MAD Science research team implemented a par-
ticipatory sensing application to meet these speciﬁcations,
and students took a ﬁeld trip in the next session to a local
park adjacent to a small stream that is part of the Upper
Little Sugar Creek Watershed, which is in the students’
local community. Using the mobile application in Figure
1a deployed on ﬁve mobile phones, the students worked in
teams to gather 52 images of the stream where they identiﬁed
pollution, pipes feeding into the stream, and other unhealthy
activities. One student remarked, “My favorite activity in the
MAD Science apprenticeship was the ﬁeld trip. We were
able to go outside and interact with the environment. I really
like taking pictures with the phone and then looking at them
afterward to see what they told us about the creek.”
The second group wanted to show that certain physical
activities exert more energy than others, and therefore may
have more impact on personal health. They chose to use the
accelerometer to capture data about a person’s motion while
performing these activities, and use this data to determine
which activity is best for your health. Again, the MAD
Science research team implemented a participatory sensing
application that met these speciﬁcations (Figure 1b). Mobile
phones were attached to the students’ arms, legs, or placed in
their pockets, and students took turns using the participatory
sensing application to collect data while performing a vari-
ety of activities, including playing basketball, running, and
jumping rope. A student said of this activity, “I especially
liked the sports that we played to collect data about the types
of movements we did. This was fun, and afterward I could
explain the types of movements that the phone collected.”
(a)
(b)
Figure 1: Participatory sensing applications for (a) watershed
pollution campaign and (b) physical activity campaign
Both of these activities marked a signiﬁcant point in the
program. Students were now able to see the connection
between a technological novelty (the mobile phone) and the
value they can provide as a tool that can be used to answer
questions of interest to their peer group and the broader
community. Even without having seen any data that they had
collected, the activities provided the students with a sense
of accomplishment, and they understood they were acting
as scientists, providing meaningful data in a systematic way
for a purpose. The after-school program staff that supervised
MAD Science said of these activities, “The students not only
did a great job working in groups to collect data at [the park],
they really enjoyed themselves.” and “Every student I spoke
to about gathering [the physical activity] data was ﬂuent in
the terminology and what the data represented. I was very
impressed!”
Weeks 7 through 10: Analyzing and Presenting the Results
Starting in week 7, the students focused on interpreting
the meaning of their data and presenting the results. The
watershed pollution team focused on tagging and catego-
rizing the images based on their content. Figure 2 shows
a sample of the images and the tags produced by the
students. The physical activity team compared the data from
different activities to determine which activity exerted the
most energy. Figure 3 shows the accelerometer readings that
students used to analyze two activities, playing basketball
and jumping rope. The after-school program staff that su-
pervised our apprenticeship said that “...the data analysis
activities were a success because they had students analyzing
the data without even knowing it. I think this was possible
because our data (pictures and interactive graphs) and the
way students collected it (taking pictures and performing
fun physical activities) attracted students attention.”
(a)
(b)
Figure 2: Sample data collected by the students for the
watershed pollution campaign
While all of the activities were important, the ﬁnal three
weeks played a signiﬁcant role in ensuring comprehension.
At the end of the apprenticeship, the after-school program
asks the students to show off their hard work to their parents,
friends, and invited guests. The MAD Science students chose
to do two activities: a presentation of their application of
participatory sensing for watershed monitoring and physical
activity, and a demonstration of the two mobile applications
they used to collect data. The students developed their slides,
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

(a)
(b)
Figure 3: Sample data collected by the students for (a) basketball and (b) jump rope
practiced their speeches, and worked together in teams to
prepare for the big event. During this time, the students
were reﬂecting on their prior weeks to remember what they
had learned. For example, in week 3, the students were
introduced to the terms “azimuth,” “pitch” and “roll” while
learning about the accelerometer sensor. In order to create a
clear, concise presentation for the physical activity data they
collected, the students had to revisit and fully understand
these terms. In week 8, the students would ask what these
terms meant. By week 9 and 10, however, the students would
approach one of the teachers and demonstrate the concepts
to the teacher out of sheer pride. The students were excited
to show what they had learned, and were enthusiastic to
explain the concepts to their friends and family.
IV. MAD SCIENCE IMPACT
Our pilot offering of the MAD Science apprenticeship
included 21 students (5 female, 16 male) between the ages
of 10 and 14 that were participants in the after-school
program at a large urban middle school. This group consisted
primarily of students that are underrepresented in STEM:
12 students were African American, 8 were Latino, and
1 was Native American. Eighteen of the 21 students in
our MAD Science apprenticeship qualiﬁed for free/reduced
lunch. Three of the students were identiﬁed as having special
needs.
The students were issued a pre- and post-survey (Table III)
to assess the impact of the MAD Science apprenticeship
on engagement in science, engagement in technology, and
attitudes towards education and careers in both science and
computing. To protect the privacy of students, these surveys
were administered without any identifying information. To
evaluate the impact of MAD Science on knowledge acqui-
sition in science and technology, student grades were also
collected by the middle school and provided to the research
team in aggregate form, and interviews were conducted with
the students and the after-school program staff after the
MAD Science apprenticeship concluded.
A. Engagement with Technology
Our ﬁrst objective in the MAD Science apprenticeship
was to increase the students’ engagement with technology.
In the pre- and post-surveys given to students (Table III),
questions 1, 2, 3, 11, and 18-21 are intended to assess
this objective. Figure 4 summarizes the results of each of
these items from the pre-survey and post-survey. Since the
number of respondents to the pre-survey (16) was different
than for the post-survey (19), responses were normalized
and are displayed as a percentage. For questions with a
positive implication (e.g., I like computers), we expect to
see an increase in size for bars at the top of each column
(strongly agree and agree), i.e., a decrease in size of the
blue and orange bars in Figure 4 that correspond to disagree
and strongly disagree responses, respectively. The reverse is
true for questions with a negative implication (e.g., I think
computers are boring), i.e., an increase in size of the blue and
orange bars that correspond to strongly disagree and disagree
(respectively) and a decrease in purple and green bars that
correspond to strongly agree and agree (respectively) in
Figure 4 are expected. Questions with a negative implication
are indicated in the chart labels with asterisks.
The results in Figure 4 indicate that the MAD Science
apprenticeship had a small but positive effect on the stu-
dents’ engagement with computers. While only question
20 (I will use mobile phones in many ways in my life)
resulted in a statistically signiﬁcant change (P-value =
0.0379), the responses to all questions from pre-survey to
post-survey shifted in a positive way, indicating that the
students’ engagement with technology increased throughout
the apprenticeship, and the students viewed technology more
favorably by the end of the apprenticeship. Questions 1, 3,
and 11 (I know a lot about computers; I am good at using
computers; It is fun to use computers) all showed positive
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 4: Pre- and post-survey results regarding engagement with technology.
Table III: The pre-survey and post-survey taken by the MAD
Science students. Questions 1 to 21 used a Likert scale with
strongly agree, agree, neutral, disagree, and strongly disagree
options.
Rate each item by how much you agree or disagree with the
statement:
1. I know a lot about computers.
2. I like using computers.
3. I am good at using computers.
4. People like me are interested in computers.
5. I am interested in learning more about what I can do with computers.
6. I might be interested in a career in the ﬁeld of computing.
7. Someday, I might like to major in computing in college.
8. People who like computers are often weird.
9. Studying computing in high school would be a good idea.
10. I like to ﬁgure things out for myself.
11. It is fun to use computers.
12. I don’t think I would like working with computers in my job.
13. I am not smart enough to be good at computing as a major or
career.
14. Learning about science to solve problems is interesting.
15. I am not smart enough to be good at science as a major or career.
16. Learning about science is boring.
17. I am good at science
18. Mobile phones can be used to help people.
19. Mobile phones are only for fun
20. I will use mobile phones in many ways in my life.
21. Knowing how to work with mobile phones will help me get a
good job someday.
22. Please check beside the ways you use computers:
a. Word processing
b. Computer Games
c. Web search for school
d. Chatting online
e. Sending email
f. Web search for personal interests
g. Solving math and science problems
h. Myspace/Facebook
23. Please check beside the ways you use mobile phones:
a. Texting
b. Games
c. Search the web
d. Chatting online
e. Sending email
f. Myspace/Facebook
gains, indicating the engagement with computers were hav-
ing a positive impact on the students. The results for question
2 (I like using computers) indicates a decrease in the average
response value from pre to post, but this is because three
new respondents that did not participate in the pre-survey
selected “agree” in the post-survey; overall, the percentage
of students that agreed or strongly agreed that they liked
using computers remained the same at approximately 95%.
Table IV summarizes the results of questions 22 and
23, which measure the students’ usage of computers and
mobile phones. Computer usage saw an increase in 8 of
the 11 categories, and mobile phones saw an increase in 5
of the 6 categories, suggesting an increase in the students’
interactions with both technologies. The largest gain for both
computer and mobile phone usage was seen in their usage
of Myspace/Facebook (20% for computers, and 22.3% for
mobile phones). The most interesting gain is in computer
usage for solving math and science problems, which showed
a 17.3% gain.
Table IV: Students’ usage of technology from Pre-survey
and Post-survey
How do you use computers?
Pre-survey
Post-survey
Word processing
73.3%
61.1%
Computer Games
100.0%
94.4%
Web search for school
80.0%
83.3%
Chatting online
73.3%
77.8%
Sending email
73.3%
61.1%
Web search for personal interests
80.0%
88.9%
Solving math and science problems
53.3%
70.6%
Myspace/Facebook
46.7%
66.7%
How do you use mobile phones?
Pre-survey
Post-survey
Texting
66.7%
83.3%
Games
80.0%
88.9%
Search the web
80.0%
88.9%
Chatting online
66.7%
66.7%
Sending email
46.7%
55.6%
Myspace/Facebook
33.3%
55.6%
B. Engagement with Science
Our second objective was to increase the students’ engage-
ment with science; assessment of this objective is addressed
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

by survey questions 14, 16, and 17 (Table III). Figure 5 sum-
marizes the results of these questions from the pre-survey
and post-survey. The survey results were contradictory to
our expected results; responses showed very little variation
from pre-survey to post-survey. This result is surprising,
given the previous success of PPSR projects for engaging
students in science. However, if we look more closely at
the pre-survey results, we see that approximately 60% of
students agreed or strongly agreed that “learning about
science to solve problems is interesting”, over 50% disagreed
or strongly disagreed that “learning about science is boring”,
and 75% of students agreed or strongly agreed that “I am
good at science.” We plan to investigate this result further
by surveying a larger population of middle schools students
that do not participate in the after-school program and those
that do, in order to determine if this is an issue related
to “self-selection” of students that are already interested in
science that chose to attend our apprenticeship, which has
the word “science” in the title. We must also address possible
limitations of our survey, increasing the number of science-
based questions. Finally, we plan to interview students and
teachers to better understand what activities they found to
be challenging and interesting activities that center around
science, and to try to distill characteristics that will help us
to create more engaging activities in the future.
Students who participated in the MAD Science appren-
ticeship performed better in science than their middle school
peers; 95% of MAD Science students maintained an A/B
grade or improved a C/D/F grade in science, compared
to 70% in the middle school as a whole. Again, since
the after-school program is voluntary, this result may be
accountable to self-selection bias; unfortunately, aggregated
science grades for the entire middle school, participants in
other apprenticeships within the same middle school, and
participants in other apprenticeships across the nation-wide
network of the after-school program were not available at
the time of this publication for comparison.
Post-program interviews with after-school program staff
that supervised the MAD Science apprenticeship and with
the MAD Science students provide some anecdotal evidence
that the program did, however, have a positive impact on
students’ engagement with science. A staff member stated
“Turning data into a hands-on activity made this type of
science come alive to the students. I witnessed several “light
bulb” moments in the kids as they understood the material
through real-world examples.” A student explained, “I think
you make science better by making it fun with hands-on
activities. Instead of writing and sitting in desks the whole
time, we should be interacting with materials and doing
experiments.” Another says, “This apprenticeship sparked
my interest in science more because it was fun to gather data
and make conclusions about things that impact me and my
community.” Lastly, another student claims, “MAD Science
helped me become more conﬁdent in my science abilities
because it revisited topics that we learned in our science
class, like the scientiﬁc method. I was able to recall what
the scientiﬁc method is, which allowed me to understand
what we were talking about and made me want to participate
more in activities.”
C. Aspirations to Pursue a STEM Education or Career
Our third objective of the apprenticeship was to increase
the students’ desire to pursue a STEM-based education or
career. Questions 6, 7, 9, 12, 13, and 15 evaluate this
objective. Figure 6 summarizes the results of these ques-
tions from the pre-survey and post-survey. All responses
improved from pre-survey to post-survey, indicating the
students viewed STEM-based learning more favorably after
the apprenticeship. Questions 13 (I am not smart enough to
be good at computing as a major or career) is of particular
interest, as it indicates the students understand computing
is an attainable long-term goals. Questions 6, 7, and 9 (I
might be interested in a career in the ﬁeld of computing;
Someday, I might like to major in computing in college;
Studying computing in high school would be a good idea)
also showed small improvements, indicating the students are
becoming more interested in studying computing. The after-
school program staff state that “After the apprenticeship the
kids seemed ﬁred up about learning, and excited to learn
more. I would deﬁnitely say that includes going to college”
and “This apprenticeship exposed students to a number of
possible careers in computer science that require a college
degree. I believe that because students were exposed to
these careers and skills through hands-on activities that were
engaging and fun, they deﬁnitely became interested about
these careers and going to college.”
Based on the student responses to engagement in tech-
nology, we expected an interest in pursuing an education
and career in computing. However, since we did not see
a gain in engagement with science, we did not expect
to see a gain in the students’ interest in an education
and career in science. Nonetheless, question 15 (I am not
smart enough to be good at science as a major or career)
speaks differently, as it was the only question resulting in
a statistically signiﬁcant change (P-value = 0.0259). One
student validated these ﬁndings by stating, “MAD Science
made me more interested in pursuing a career in science,
speciﬁcally research.” Our future work includes identifying
the cause of this discrepancy and ensuring that our survey
questions reﬂect the students’ opinions about science more
accurately.
D. Secondary Responses
While not a direct objective of this study, a small improve-
ment was also noticed in students’ math scores. In the MAD
Science apprenticeship, 86% of students maintained an A/B
grade or improved a C/D/F grade in math. That compares
to 82% for students in the after-school program, 73% in
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 5: Survey results regarding engagement with science. Responses to questions marked with an * are expected to trend
toward “Strongly Disagree” from pre-survey to post-survey.
Figure 6: Survey results regarding aspirations to pursue an education in STEM. Responses to questions marked with an *
are expected to trend towards “Strongly Disagree” from pre-survey to post-survey.
North Carolina, and 60% in the nation-wide network of the
after-school program.
E. Summary of Results
The results of the MAD Science apprenticeship indicate
the potential for participatory sensing as a tool for increasing
engagement in science and technology. Students viewed
technology more favorably, enjoyed interacting with tech-
nology, and aspired to pursue a career in computing because
of the apprenticeship. While students did not indicate more
interest in science, the students did indicate an interest in
continuing an education or career in science.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have presented the MAD Science cur-
riculum, which aims to increase engagement and interest
in science in middle school students through the use of
participatory sensing as a central theme. The program ad-
dresses the issues of engagement and interest in science and
technology by taking an inquiry-based learning approach to
problems that are relevant to the students and their com-
munity, and exploiting “cool”, accessible, and ubiquitous
technology (i.e., mobile phones) to empower the students to
understand and address the problem. The pilot offering of
the MAD Science apprenticeship indicates that participatory
sensing shows promise as a tool for increasing engagement
in technology, and the desire to pursue an education in
science and technology, for middle school children.
We plan to use the results of this initial pilot offering of
MAD Science to extend and improve the curriculum and
the study of its impact. While our pre- and post- surveys
included items to assess engagement with mobile phones,
the questions were repetitive and did not provide meaningful
information. In addition, students that participated in the
MAD Science program showed improvement in grades in
mathematics, which we did not anticipate; we will include
assessment items on future surveys to evaluate the impact
of the program on engagement in and attitudes about math-
ematics. Finally, we plan to extend the curriculum in a
way that increases knowledge about and skills related to
computational thinking. While our current curriculum takes
an instructionist approach (i.e., students gain knowledge by
using participatory sensing applications), we plan to develop
additional activities that take a constructionist approach
(i.e., students gain knowledge by creating participatory
sensing applications). We plan to develop a Scratch-like
programming interface that allows students to write code for
their own participatory sensing applications in a high-level,
visual programming language. In addition to introducing
computational concepts, we believe that an approach in
which students build the technology that they will be using
throughout the apprenticeship will result in a greater sense
of ownership, and we suspect that this sense of ownership
will ripple across all aspects of engagement.
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Mr. Jeremy Gaden and
the Citizen Schools staff for their feedback and support in
the implementation of the MAD Science apprenticeship, the
STARS Alliance for providing mobile phones to support this
project, and most importantly, the Citizen Schools students
for their participation in the MAD Science apprenticeship.
REFERENCES
[1] R.
Tytler,
J.
Osborne,
G.
Williams,
K.
Tytler,
and
J. Cripps Clark, “Opening up pathways: Engagement in
STEM across the primary-secondary school transition,” Aus-
tralian Department of Education, Employment and Workplace
Relations, Tech. Rep., 2008.
[2] R. Bonney, H. Ballard, R. Jordan, E. McCallie, T. Phillips,
J. Shirk, and C. Wilderman, “Public participation in scientiﬁc
research: Deﬁning the ﬁeld and assessing its potential for
informal science education,” Center for Advancement of
Informal Science Education (CAISE), Tech. Rep., 2009.
[3] C. Cooper, J. Dickinson, T. Phillips, and R. Bonney, “Citizen
science as a tool for conservation in residential ecosystems,”
Ecology and Society, Journal of integrated Science and Res-
idence Sustainability, vol. 12, no. 2, p. 11, 2007.
[4] M. Raddick, G. Bracey, K. Carney, G. Gyuk, K. Borne,
J. Wallin, S. Jacoby, and A. Planetarium, “Citizen science:
Status and research directions for the coming decade,” AGB
Stars and Related Phenomenastro 2010: The Astronomy and
Astrophysics Decadal Survey, vol. 2010, p. 46P, 2009.
[5] ReClam
the
Bay.org,
“Reclam
the
bay,”
http://reclamthebay.org/edu.html/, 07.27.2012.
[6] H. L. Ballard and L. Fortmann, Collaborating experts: inte-
grating civil and conventional science to inform management
of salal (Gaultheria shallon), K. Hanna and D. Slocombe,
Eds.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK., 2006.
[7] C. C. Wilderman, A. Barron, and L. Imgrund, “Top down
or bottom up? ALLARMs experience with two operational
models for community science,” in Proceedings of the Fourth
National Monitoring Conference, 2004.
[8] J. Burke, D. Estrin, M. Hansen, A. Parker, N. Ramanathan,
S. Reddy, and M. Srivastava, “Participatory sensing,” in World
Sensor Web Workshop, 2006, pp. 1–5.
[9] International
Telecommunications
Union,
“Key
global
telecom
indicators
for
the
world
telecommunications
service
sector,”
http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/statistics/at -
glance/KeyTelecom.html, 07.27.2012.
[10] M. Silva, J. Lopes, P. da Silva, and M. Marcelino, “Sensing
the schoolyard: using senses and sensors to assess georefer-
enced environmental dimensions,” in Proceedings of the 1st
International Conference and Exhibition on Computing for
Geospatial Research & Application.
ACM, 2010, p. 40.
[11] S. Vihavainen, T. Kuula, and M. Federley, “Cross-use of
smart phones and printed books in primary school education,”
in Proceedings of the 12th international conference on Hu-
man computer interaction with mobile devices and services.
ACM, 2010, pp. 279–282.
[12] Mobilize, http://www.mobilizingcs.org, 07.27.2012.
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

