Mobile Learning (mLearning) Based on Cloud 
Computing: mLearning as a Service (mLaaS)   
Mohssen M. Alabbadi 
Computer Research Institute (CRI), King Abdulaziz City for Science &Technology (KACST) 
P. O. Box 6086, Riyadh-11442, Saudi Arabia 
alabbadi@kacst.edu.sa 
 
Abstract— Despite its hype, cloud computing, with its dynamic 
scalability and virtualized resources usage, is being widely 
deployed for several applications in many organizations. It is 
envisioned that, in the near future, cloud computing will have a 
significant impact in the educational and learning environment, 
enabling its own users (i.e., learners, instructors, and 
administrators) to perform their tasks effectively with less cost. 
On the other hand, mobile handheld devices are being lately used 
in the learning arena, creating mobile learning (mLearning), due 
to the quality of users' experiences employing them in banking, 
health, and other aspects of life. However, the existing mobile 
devices suffer some weaknesses that may hinder the future 
promotion of mLearning. Some of these weaknesses can be 
addressed using cloud computing. In this paper, the use of cloud 
computing for mLearning is discussed, creating mLearning as a 
Service (mLaaS), with focus on its potential benefits and 
offerings. Furthermore, user-centric service-focused system 
architecture of mLaaS is proposed. The proposed architecture 
has the major added features: transparency; collaboration, 
extended into intra-organizational sharing of educational and 
learning 
resources; 
personalized 
learning; 
and 
users' 
motivational effects. This last feature is a user-system 
interactivity, aiming to establish a new kind of relation between 
the learners and mLaaS. 
 
Keywords— Cloud Computing; Cloud Computing Services; 
Education Technologies; Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICT) in Education; Mobile Learning (mLearning); 
Personalized Learning; Web Services.  
I. INTRODUCTION 
These days, there are two emerging paradigms in 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT). The 
first one is the ―anytime, anywhere, on-the-move‖ paradigm, 
to be called the mobility paradigm, and the second one is the 
cloud computing paradigm. Both paradigms are radically 
transforming the way we communicate, access and utilize 
information resources, and connect with peers and colleagues, 
thus affecting all aspects of our lives ─ including shopping, 
banking, health care, etc.   
The mobility paradigm evolved from the lowering cost of 
mobile devices and the availability of wireless infrastructures.  
The mobile handheld devices are turning into indispensable 
ubiquitous tools that would replace the desktop and laptops in 
the near future [4]; the mobile phones shipments, with new 
capabilities in terms of hardware and software, had exceeded 
the laptop shipments since 2006 [34] and, in the fourth quarter 
of 2010 (4Q10), smartphone shipments alone outpaced 
Personal Computer (PC) shipments for the first time. These 
devices, with the ability, available only on several models 
now, to easily acquire and install 3rd-party applications, were 
first employed within gaming, movies, or other sectors of the 
entertainment industry, taking about 12-18 months for their 
adoption into mainstream industry [12]. This paradigm has 
established a new dimension for providing services such as 
mobile 
commerce 
(mCommerce), 
mobile 
business 
(mBusiness), mobile banking (mBanking), mobile health 
(mHealth), etc. Consequently, an impetus was generated to 
use this mobility paradigm in the learning environment, thus 
creating ―mobile learning‖ (hereafter, abbreviated as m-
learning or mLearning), with expected benefits to be reflected 
in more efficient and improved learning results.  
Cloud computing is an Internet-based computing paradigm, 
with its built-in elasticity and scalability, for delivering on-
demand computing services to its users in a pay-per-use basis, 
in a similar fashion as already done for other common utilities 
(i.e., water, electricity). It marks the reversal of a long-
standing trend, where end users and organizations are now 
willing to surrender a large measure of control to 3rd-party 
service providers [14]. The emergence of cloud computing 
was attainable because of several existing technologies and 
trends. All these factors made computing more distinctively 
distributed, thus migrating back to huge data centers. 
Networks of these computing plants, called ―IT factories‖ [8], 
with commercial realization, form ―cloud computing‖ [13]. 
Cloud computing provides its users a power of choice among 
less expensive (or free) competing services that are user-
friendly and more reliable with a tremendous advantages in 
terms of mobility, accessibility, and collaboration, allowing 
users, at any location, to use any device, such as a PC, or a 
mobile phone, etc. [8], [14]. The use of cloud computing will 
have a profound positive impact on the cost structure, with its 
dynamic 
re-arrangement, 
eliminating 
some 
of 
the 
expenditures and reducing others, to lower the total cost of 
ownership (TCO) of IT resources [14], on all industries using 
IT resources. This results in an indirect crucial impact on 
business creation by reducing barriers to entry and enabling 
quick growth, and the macroeconomic performance at national 
levels [10], extending to a global level.  
Cloud computing is being widely deployed for several 
applications in many organizations, in the private as well as 
the public sectors, including healthcare (in particular, for 
providing ICT to remote or less developed areas) and several 
activities of government agencies. Furthermore, it is 
296
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

envisioned that, in the near future, cloud computing will have 
a significant impact in the education, enabling more efficient 
cost-effective operations. The US market research firm IDC 
estimated the IT spending on cloud computing services to 
reach US$42 billion by 2012 [23]. 
Despite the significant momentum and attention recently 
being attracted by both cloud computing and mLearning, they 
were both treated as separate entities, with little work has been 
accomplished in their synergy. Mostly, the integration of the 
cloud computing and mLearning was viewed in terms of 
accessibility and mobility features of cloud computing. On the 
other hand, when viewed from the mobile device perspective, 
cloud computing, with its dynamic scalability and virtualized 
resources usage, could address some of the weaknesses 
inherited in mobile devices (such as low computational power, 
small storage space, and low resolution) that may hinder the 
future promotion of mLearning. This creates mLearning based 
on cloud computing, to be called mLearning as a Service 
(mLaaS).   
 The previous work on mLaaS, though very limited, 
extended from proof-of-concept prototypes [5], [13] to a basic 
framework [20]. However, the learning-focused services that 
can be provided by mLaaS were hardly emphasized.  In this 
paper, user-centric service-focused system architecture of 
mLaaS is proposed. This architecture has the following major 
features: transparency; collaboration, extended into intra-
organizational sharing of educational and learning resources; 
personalized learning; and users' motivational effects. This 
last feature is a user-system interactivity, aiming to establish a 
new kind of relation between the learners and mLaaS.     
The structure of the rest of the paper is as follows. Sections 
II and III describe mLearning and cloud computing, 
respectively, where their definitions are properly stated. In 
Section IV, mLaaS is introduced, where its potential benefits 
and offerings are highlighted. The user-centric service-
focused system architecture of mLaaS is described in Section 
V, where the design criteria of mLaaS are first specified. 
Finally, the concluding remarks are given in Section VI. 
II. MOBILE LEARNING 
Mobile learning can be defined as any service or facility for 
knowledge transfer of events, content, tools, and applications 
to the learner [3], regardless of location and time [21], 
resulting in learner's alteration in behaviour [12], where 
mobile handheld devices, such as mobile phones, Personal 
Digital Assistants (PDAs), and smart phones, are being used, 
while the learner, but not necessarily the learning material 
providers, could be on the move. The behaviourist 
requirement, in the aforementioned definition, indicates that 
learning is not deemed without the learner's alteration in 
behaviour [12], (physical or non- physical). Furthermore, the 
use of mobile handheld devices, possibly on the move, 
emphasizes the mobility feature of mLearning, thus excluding 
laptops and limiting mLearning to those devices that can be 
used while on-the-move [18], [26].  
Mobile learning is on the intersection of mobile computing 
and e-learning [25], [30], conveying e-learning through 
mobile devices using wireless connectivity; this intersection 
includes the use of desktops as well as laptops. It, however, 
breaks the constraints of time and space, which have become a 
very important barrier of E-learning, thus constructing a 
flexible and open learning environment. This environment can 
provide access, context, and collaboration to learners and 
additionaly supply facilitation measures for facilitators [12]. 
Furthermore, mLearning provides powerful features and 
functions such as 
mobility, reachability, localization, 
flexibility, and motivational effects due to self controlling and 
better use of spare time. 
Learning is a dynamic activity that can be closely linked to 
mobility with respect to space, time, and topic areas ‎[32], 
making a perfect match with mLearning ─ learning occurs at 
different places (e.g., learning institutes, workplaces, homes, 
and even places of leisure), at different times (e.g., working 
days, weekends, or holidays), and between different topic 
areas of life (e.g., education, work, self-improvement, or 
leisure) [32]. The diversity of space for adults daily self-
learning was studied in [29], reflecting opportunities for 
learning during the time that learners spend on the move. 
Mobile Learning actively engages learners, emphasizing 
learner centeredness to match all learners' styles of learning 
[26]. From an activity-centered perspective, the six existing 
learning theories (i.e., behaviourist, constructivist, situated, 
collaborative, informal, and lifelong learning theories) can be 
harnessed using mLearning. Furthermore, the ability to record 
information about new encountered experiences, using the 
enhanced features of the mobile devices, enables experiential 
learning [26]; according to experiential learning theory, ideas 
and concepts are not fixed, but are formed and modified 
through the present and past learners' experiences. 
Generally speaking, mLearning systems can be divided into 
three types: push-based, application-based, and browser-based 
mLearning systems [22]. The push-based systems use the 
mobile phone email or Short Message Service (SMS), 
whereas the browser-based systems require an Internet-
enabled mobile device, using HTML or Wireless Application 
Protocol (WAP). On the other hand, the application-based 
systems require the application to be downloaded into the 
learner's handheld device; this can be done either by 
connecting online to the website, containing the application, 
via the Internet, or by connecting to a PC, containing the 
application, via USB cables. These systems have been used, 
either as a single system or as a combination of two or more 
of them, in some k-12 schools and universities or in career 
development area, for class learning as well as in outdoor 
learning.  
III. CLOUD COMPUTING 
The emergence of cloud computing was attainable because 
of the following existing technologies and trends: the Internet 
technologies, in particular, World Wide Web (WWW), and 
Web 2.0 functionality; virtualization, for data center 
consolidation and providing separation and protection; grid 
and parallel computing; Web services and the adoption of 
technology standards; the catch up of telecommunications 
297
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

with hardware and software, where open standards were 
leveraged; and the falling cost of storage and computing 
devices, first led by minicomputers then PCs, and, more 
recently, by Internet-enabled handheld mobile devices. 
Despite its emergence, the term ―cloud computing‖ could 
mean 
different 
things 
to 
different 
IT 
professionals. 
Unfortunately, there are abound of definitions for ―cloud 
computing‖ in the literature, with hype and divergent 
viewpoints, leading to a non-standard definition of cloud 
computing; the Joint Information Systems Committee (JISC) 
confirm the confusion about the terms ―cloud‖ and ―cloud 
computing‖ [8]. In this paper, the ―U.S‖ National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST) definition is adopted, 
defining cloud computing as a ‟model for enabling ubiquitous, 
convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of 
configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, servers, 
storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly 
provisioned and released with minimal management effort or 
service provider interaction. This cloud model promotes 
availability and is composed of five essential characteristics, 
three service models, and four deployment models‖ [24].  
The five essential characteristics are: on-demand self-
service, broad network access, resource pooling, rapid 
elasticity, and measured service [24]. These characteristics 
emphasize user's unawareness of locations of IT resources, 
high utilization of resources, high usability, and the ability to 
use heterogeneous thick or thin client platforms for 
accessibility such as mobile phones, laptops, and PDAs 
through a thin client interface such as a web browser.   
There are three service models of cloud computing, where 
in all models the consumer does not manage or control the 
underlying cloud infrastructure including network, servers, 
operating systems, storage, or applications. The three service 
models are Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a 
Service (PaaS), and Software as a Service (SaaS) [24]. With 
IaaS, the consumer, based on demands, can provision 
processing, storage, networks, and other fundamental 
computing resources, so that the consumer can  deploy and 
run arbitrary software, including operating systems and 
applications, where the consumer has control over the 
operating systems, storage, deployed applications, and 
possibly limited control of select networking components (e.g., 
host firewalls). However, with PaaS, the consumer can deploy 
onto the cloud infrastructure consumer-created or acquired 
applications, created using programming languages and tools 
supported by the cloud provider, where the consumer has 
control over the deployed applications and possibly the 
application hosting environment configurations. On the other 
hand, in SaaS, the provider’s applications are available to the 
consumer, where the consumer may possibly have control 
over limited user-specific application configuration settings.  
There are four deployment models for cloud computing: 
private cloud, community cloud, public cloud, and hybrid 
cloud [24]. When the cloud infrastructure is owned solely for 
an organization, providing hosted services to a limited number 
of people behind a firewall, it is called a private cloud; it also 
called an internal cloud or a corporate cloud. But when the 
cloud infrastructure is shared by several organizations, 
supporting a specific community with some shared concerns 
(e.g., security requirements and compliance considerations), 
then it is called a community cloud. Both the private and 
community clouds may be managed by the organizations or a 
3rd-party and may exist on premise or off premise. On the 
other hand, public cloud makes its cloud infrastructure 
available to the general public or a large group and is owned 
by an organization providing the cloud services; it is also 
called external cloud. The hybrid cloud results from combing 
two or more cloud deployment models (private, community, 
or public) such that the models remain unique but are bound 
together by standardized or proprietary technology. Hybrid 
clouds aim to enable data and applications portability.  
IV. MLEARNING BASED ON CLOUD COMPUTING: MLAAS 
Both cloud computing and mLearning have attracted 
significant momentum and attention in both academia and 
industry but as separate entities. Cloud computing and 
mLearning were both in the list of the top 10 strategic 
technologies and trends identified by Gartner, the US analyst 
firm, consecutively since 2008 and 2010, respectively [11]. 
Since 2009, they both have been in the Horizon reports, with 
different adoption Horizons [15], [16], [17]; the Horizon 
reports, resulted from the collaboration between the New 
Media Consortium (NMC) and the influential EDUCAUSE 
Learning Initiative (ELI), aim to provide an educational-
orientated perspective on expected key emerging technologies 
for higher education as well as K-12 education, where the K-
12 editions are published as separate reports.  
A. Synergy of Cloud Computing and Mobile Computing 
Bringing together thin clients and cloud computing in the 
front end and the back end, respectively, is a natural synergy, 
liberating users to choose the most suitable access machines. 
This was envisioned by IT futurists such as Nicholas Carr who 
predicted the partnership of Google and Apple in the future, 
foreseeing a lightweight ubiquitous mobile device crafted by 
Apple to tap into Google’s cloud [33] and in the design 
criteria of the ―Intelligent IT Infrastructure‖ [7], a form of 
cloud computing, underdevelopment by Hewlett-Packard (HP). 
The joint Google-IBM cloud prototype, a dedicated data 
center for students at universities and colleges to gain the 
skills needed to program cloud applications, used a cell phone 
to download data from the cloud in its demonstration on 
February 2008 [6], to show its power. In the fall of 2011, 
Apple launched the iCloud service, a comparatively limited 
service, focusing on downloading content to devices to allow 
songs, photos, and documents saved on an Apple device to 
appear almost instantly on any other Apple product owned by 
that particular person (i.e., mobile or otherwise), without using 
e-mail or USB. Following the same steps with more 
enhancements, Amazon announced to deliver its vast cloud 
infrastructure to its Kindle Fire tablet, for watching videos, 
listening to music, reading books, playing games, running 
apps, and accessing Amazon's vast array of digital content 
easily. However, the synergy of cloud computing and mobile 
298
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

computing was only viewed as accessibility and mobility 
features of cloud computing.  
B. Synergy of Cloud Computing and mLearning (mLaaS) 
Mobile learning faces some challenges due to the inherited 
weaknesses of mobile devices. These weaknesses play an 
important role toward the implementation of mLearning, thus 
questioning the viability of mLearning. The weaknesses of 
mobile devices can be classified into two categories: 
 
User-interface Weaknesses: These include the small 
screen displays, low resolution, and restricted input 
capabilities of some of these devices. 
 
Computational Weaknesses: These mainly include the 
low processing power, small storage capacity, and 
limited software and applications capabilities. 
The user-interface weaknesses have been addressed in the 
literature in terms of usability and Technology Acceptance 
Model (TAM) to quantify learners' adoption and acceptance 
for some special applications or environments [1], [2]. 
Fortunately, these studies reflect a great acceptance of learners 
and students to mLearning for different applications in 
different environments. 
On the contrary, the computational weaknesses are mostly 
left unattended; indeed they were left to the manufacturers of 
these devices to be overcome and thus introduced as enhanced 
features in their future products. Unfortunately, there are 
hardly algorithms designed to adaptively optimize their 
performance with respect to the different hardware and 
software available in these devices. With respect to the 
devices, this feature-based solution is an internal solution, 
limited by the advances in several technologies. In addition, 
computational-demanding applications on mobile devices will 
increasingly require more and more computational power.  
Therefore, a solution is to be seek from outside the devices 
(i.e., outside the box solution).  
With cloud computing, most of the computing and storage 
tasks are performed in the cloud, thus placing low requirement 
on the client devices and relieving them from performing the 
high intensive computation or storage. Indeed, a simple 
mobile device (such as a feature mobile phone) with only 
Internet connectivity is sufficient to utilize the cloud services. 
Therefore, cloud computing enhances the computational 
capabilities of these devices to reach the level of high 
powerful computers, thus empowering mobile services to 
provide new ideas and solutions [9], [13].  
Some of the weaknesses of the mobile devices can be 
addressed by using cloud computing, with its dynamic 
scalability and virtualized resources usage. With mLearning, 
this creates mLearning based on cloud computing, to be called 
mLearning as a Service (mLaaS). The term mLaaS is not only 
meant to be symphonic with other cloud terms (e.g., IaaS, 
SaaS) but also to emphasize the service concept.  
From a business perspective, the meeting of cloud 
computing and mLearning signifies, indeed, a marriage in 
heaven. 
Cloud 
computing 
will 
supply 
the 
required 
infrastructure in terms of hardware, software, applications, 
and platforms, and mLearning will supply the users in mass 
quantities (i.e., all the learners and students). 
C. Benefits of mLaaS 
The characteristics and features cloud computing and 
mLearning will be inherited in mLaaS, making it reliable, 
flexible, cost efficient (due to the on-demand, pay-per-use 
costing model of cloud computing), self-regulated, and QoS-
guaranteed [20]. In addition, performing high computationally 
intensive applications (e.g., image retrieval, voice recognition, 
and gaming) on the cloud, called computation offloading, was 
shown to save energies on the mobile devices, thus extending 
the lifetime of their batteries [19].  
 With mLaaS, adaptability can be simply implemented on 
mLearning systems, making them tailored to the learner's 
ability level to establish personalized learning. Therefore, 
applications such as computerized adaptive testing (CAT) [31] 
can be easily implemented with mLaaS, which was difficult to 
implement with traditional mLearning systems, in particular 
application-based mLearning systems.    
V. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE OF MLAAS 
A proof-of-concept prototype of mLaaS was implemented 
based on iPhones and Google’s App Engine for an 
undergraduate computer course at the City University of New 
York, demonstrating high usability of learners [5]. A Hadoop-
based model for mLaaS was developed in [13], where its 
functional modules and workflow were analyzed. A basic 
framework and simulation application based on 3G for mLaaS 
was proposed in [20].  
The previous work on mLaaS, though very limited, reflects 
the applicability of mLaaS, at least from an implementation 
point of view. However, the learning-focused services that can 
be provided by mLearning are hardly emphasized. Therefore, 
learner-centric service-focused system architecture of mLaaS 
needs to be developed.  For this, the design criteria of mLaaS 
are first specified.    
A. Design Criteria of mLaaS 
The four major design criteria for mLaaS are: transparency, 
personalized learning, collaboration, and users' motivational 
effects. The transparency criterion aims at making mLaaS 
device neutral, allowing the use of variety of mobile devices 
and thus making the user unaware of the underlying 
telecommunications protocols and platforms. Personalized 
learning aims to make learning tailored to the learner's ability 
level. Collaboration allows collaborative learning, extended to 
sharing of intra-organizational educational and learning 
resources. The users' motivational effects create a learner-
system interactivity to establish a new kind of relation 
between the users and mLaaS, which reflects positively in the 
relation between the users and their organizations.  
B. Components of mLaaS 
The architecture contains three layers: the user and device 
layer, the services layer, and the infrastructure layer. The users 
of mLaaS include learners, instructors, and parents. In the 
following description, when a service is provided to certain 
users, the users will be indicated explicitly; otherwise it will 
be implied that the service is provided to all users.  
299
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

1)  The User and Device Layer  
It is the convenient entrance to the different services 
provided to the users. It contains three main modules: the 
Access Control Module, the Adaptation Module, and the 
Personalization Module. 
The Access Control Module uses a Single Sign-On (SSO) 
mechanism for authenticating users. The SSO allows the use 
of a single authentication credential (i.e., username and 
password) to access all the services of mLaaS. The use of SSO 
increases the usability of mLaaS and relieves some of the help 
desk operations. However, users can change their passwords, 
after being authenticated, through the My Setting Module in 
the service layer, as will be explained later. Learners and 
instructors are registered in the same manner as in the 
traditional system, whereas for parents, the registration is done 
using the regular postal mail. 
The Adaptation Module mainly consists of device and 
protocol adaptations. The purpose of this module is to 
transparently ensure the optimal applicability of users' devices 
to mLaaS and to further perform the necessary protocols 
conversion, if needed. This module provides transparency at 
the device and network levels, so that users are unaware of 
their devices applicability or the underlying protocols.  
The Personalization Module contains data about the user. 
The data of this module can be divided into dynamic (e.g., 
location, time) and static parameters (e.g., name, age, gender, 
address, mobile telephone numbers, native language, leisure 
time, and user's interests). The dynamic parameters are 
updated automatically by the system but the static parameters 
are provided manually by the users [28] during their first use 
of mLaaS; however, this can be delayed by the users, if they 
wish, with reminders every time they log into the system. 
Figure 1 shows user's authentication in mLaaS. This is 
consistent for all users. Along with the logon information, 
other information is transmitted by the device to mLaaS as 
well. The other information is related to the device, 
communication protocol, and some of the dynamic parameters 
of the user. Furthermore, the user is allowed to reset the 
password, in case it is forgotten; this is accomplished by 
sending, after user's request, the new password as an SMS by 
mLaaS to the user's mobile number. 
Fig. 1 Users' authentication 
2)  Services Layer  
It provides various services for the user. Users can easily 
access the services by clicking on the service. This layer 
consists of the following modules but other services can be 
easily added in the future, when needed.  
 Registry Module: Information of the last session 
conducted by the users is stored in mLaaS, allowing users 
to return to that particular session, if desired. This service 
plays an important role in keeping users' motivation, 
especially when communication is aborted accidently.  
 My Settings Module: With this module, users can change 
their passwords. Furthermore, it allows the learners and 
instructors to update their static personal information.  
 My Schedule Module: It shows the weekly schedule of 
the learner or instructor, with the ability to be displayed on 
day by day basis to show the set of activities related to a 
particular day. It is automatically updated by the eLearning 
systems to include dates for assignments, exams, reports, 
etc. However, the learner or instructor can update 
information in this module manually to include meetings 
and other activities such as medical appointments. This 
module provides a reminder service, where the learner or 
instructor can flag any activities to be reminded.   
 My Courses & Labs Module: It consists of a set of 
variety of services, including, but not limited to, access to 
lecture notes, assignments, labs handouts, and instructors' 
announcements. If applicable, it provides access to the 
labs, where learners can monitor their experiments. The 
instructors provide information for this module to be 
viewed by learners.  Furthermore, a discussion board is 
provided for each course and lab, where instructors and 
learners can post questions, comments, and answers.   
 My Progress Module: This module provides information 
about the progress of the learner, including grades, 
attendance, and instructors' comments. The instructors 
feed information to this module that can be checked by 
learners and parents.   
 My Campus Module: It consists of a set of variety of 
services, including, but not limited to, access to email, 
campus newsletters, and campus announcements.  It also 
provides a library service to check for the availability of a 
resource at the library.  Furthermore, it provides a public 
bulletin service, where learners and instructors post their 
ads such as the need/sale/rent of cars, houses, and rooms.   
 Recommendation Module: This module uses the ―My 
Schedule Module,‖ the ―Personalization Module,‖ and the 
―My Courses and Lab Module,‖ to recommend a service to 
the user. For example, if the user has an exam after three 
hours, as it is indicated in the ―My Schedule Module,‖ it 
will recommend to the user to review for the exam. In 
addition, if the ―Personalization Module‖ of a user 
indicates the timing as a leisure time, then it will 
recommend an activity, according to the user's interests, 
such as reading the news. This service establishes a new 
kind of relation between the user and mLaaS. Acceptances 
or rejections of the previous recommended services are 
also used to select a new recommended service.  
300
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 Outside Resources Module: It allows other learning or 
educational resources at other campuses to be accessed, 
thus realizing the intra-organizational sharing of learning 
resources. Furthermore, it provides access to other 
resources such as news papers and magazines. 
The welcome message of mLaaS, after successful 
authentication, of course, is depicted in Fig. 2. The welcome 
message typically shows some personalized parameters and 
reminders. For example, the figure shows the user name, time, 
and location. It also gives the user the ability to continue with 
last session or select a new service.  
Fig. 2  The welcome message after successful authentication 
The services provided by mLaaS to the learners are shown 
in Fig. 3. Similar services are provided to the instructors. For 
the parents, the provided services are only ―My Setting‖ and 
―My Progress.‖ However, through ―My Progress Module,‖ the 
parents can communicate with the instructors privately as in 
teacher-parents meetings. 
 Fig. 3  Services provided by mLaaS to the learners 
3)  Infrastructure Layer:  
This layer, managed by the cloud computing provider, 
establishes the infrastructure for mLaaS, where virtualization 
technologies for hardware and software are used to ensure the 
stability and reliability of this infrastructure. This layer can be 
implemented as a private cloud or using a public cloud 
provider. It consists mainly of the following three sub-layers: 
 Physical Sub-layer: It mainly supports the basic 
environment, including computers, storage, network 
interconnect devices, and database resources.   
 Virtual Resources Sub-layer: Using virtualization 
technology, IT resources are combined into resource 
pools: the computing, data, network, storage resource pool. 
Thus a large number of the same type of IT resource is 
configured into graph isomorphism or near graph 
isomorphism, providing high performance services..  
 Logic Sub-layer: The logic sub-layer maps the services to 
their clusters services by simply managing the underlying 
resource, scheduling user's requests, and provisioning the 
needed resources to access the services efficiently and 
securely. Both the logic sub-layer and the virtual resources 
sub-layer provide the core management for mLaaS. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
The use of cloud computing, with its dynamic scalability 
and virtualized resources usage, can empower mLearning by 
eliminating some of weaknesses of the mobile handheld 
devices, creating mLearning as a Service (mLaaS), focusing 
on the following four features: transparency; collaboration, 
extended into intra-organizational sharing of educational and 
learning resources; personnel learning; and motivational 
effects. Furthermore, the system architecture for mLaaS 
reflects its diversity and flexibility, where new features and 
services can be added to enhance learning and education 
environment.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author would like to thank Mr. Hasan Alabbadi for 
preparing the simulation of mLaaS.    
 REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. M. Alabbadi, ―MobiQiyas: A mobile learning standardized test 
preparation for Saudi Arabian students,‖ International Journal of 
Interactive Mobile Technologies (iJIM), Vol. 4, No. 4, October 2010, 
pp. 4-11. [Online]. Available (July 1, 2011): 
http://online-
journals.org/i-jim/article/viewArticle/1446  
[2] 
M. M. Alabbadi, ―Learners' acceptance based on Shackell's usability 
model for supplementary mobile learning of an English course,‖ In the 
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Computer 
Supported Education (CSEDU2010), April 7-10, 2010, Valencia, Spain, 
Volume 1, pp. 121-128,  J. A. M. Cordeiro, B. Shishkov, A. Verbraeck, 
M. Helfert, Eds. Setúbal, Portugal: INSTICC Press,  2010. 
[3] 
Ambient Insight, ―Ambient Insight’s 2009 learning and performance 
technology research taxonomy.‖ Monroe, WA, USA: Ambient Insight, 
LLC, Sep. 2009. [Online]. Available (July 1, 2011):  
http://www.ambientinsight.com/Resources/Documents/AmbientInsight
_Learning_Technology_Taxonomy.pdf. 
[4] 
J. Q. Anderson and L. Rainie, ―The Future of the Internet III,‖ 
Pew/Internet: Pew Internet & American Life Project, Dec. 14, 2008, 
Washington, DC, USA. [Online]. Available (July 1, 2011):  
http://www.pewinternet.org/~/media//Files/Reports/2008/PIP_FutureIn
ternet3.pdf.pdf. 
[5] 
X. Bai, ―Affordance of ubiquitous learning through cloud ccomputing,‖ 
In the Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Frontier of 
Computer Science and Technology (FCST 2010), I. Stojmenovic, G. 
Farin, M. Guo, H. Jin, K. Li, L. Hu, X. Wei, and X. Che, Eds., pp. 78– 
82, Aug. 18-22, 2010, Changchun, Jilin Province, China. IEEE 
Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2010.   
[6] 
S. Baker, ―Google and the Wisdom of Clouds,‖ Bloomberg 
BusinessWeek, Issue: 4064, December 13, 2007, pp.49-55, Bloomberg 
L.P. [Online]. Available (July 1, 2011): 
http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/07_52/b40640489258
36.htm. 
[7] 
P. Banerjee, ―An Intelligent IT Infrastructure for the Future‖ In the 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Symposium on High-
Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA - 15 2009),   pp. 3–4, 
February 16-18, 2009, Raleigh, NC, USA. IEEE Inc.: Los Alamitos, 
CA, USA, 2009. 
301
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

[8] 
R. Bristow, T. Dodds, R. Northam, and L. Plugge, ―Cloud Computing 
and the Power to Choose,‖ EDUCAUSE Review, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 14-
30, May/June 2010. [Online]. Available (July 1, 2011): 
http://net.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/ERM1030.pdf. 
[9] 
X. Chen, J. Liu, J. Han, and H. Xu, ―Primary exploration of mobile 
learning mode under a cloud computing environment,‖ In the 
Proceedings of the 2010 International Conference on E-Health 
Networking, Digital Ecosystems and Technologies (EDT 2010), 
Honghua Tan, Ed., Volume: 2, pp. 484-487, April 17-18, 2010, 
Shenzhen, China.  IEEE Inc., Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2010. 
[10] F. Etro, ―The economic consequences of the diffusion of cloud 
computing,‖ In The Global Information Technology Report 2009–2010: 
ICT for Sustainability, S. Dutta and I. Mia, Eds., pp. 107-112, Geneva, 
Switzerland: World Economic Forum and INSEAD, SRO-Kundig, 
2010. [Online]. Available, (July 1, 2011):   
http://www.weforum.org/pdf/GITR10/GITR%202009-
2010_Full%20Report%20final.pdf. 
[11] Gartner, Inc., Press Releases, Gartner Newsroom. [Online]. Retrieved 
(Aug. 30, 2011): http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=530109, for 
the year 2008; http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=777212, for the 
year 2009; http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1210613, for the 
year 2010;  and  http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1454221, for 
the year 2011. 
[12] S. J. Geddes, ―Mobile learning in the 21st century: Benefit for 
learners,‖ Knowledge Tree E-journal, Edition 6, 2004.Brisbane, QLD, 
Australia: Australian Flexible 
Learning Framework. [Online]. 
Available (July 1, 2011): 
http://knowledgetree.flexiblelearning.net.au/edition06/download/Gedde
s.pdf. 
[13] H. Gao and Y.-J. Zhai, ―System design of cloud computing based on 
mobile learning,‖ In the Proceedings of the 2010 3rd International 
Symposium on Knowledge Acquisition and Modeling (KAM 2010), 
Yanwen Wu, Ed., pp. 239-242, October 20-21, 2010, Wuhan, China, 
IEEE Inc., Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2010. 
[14] B. Hayes, ―Cloud computing,‖ Communications of the ACM, Vol. 51, 
No. 7, July 2008, pp. 9–11. [Online]. Available (July 1, 2011): 
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1364786. 
[15] L. Johnson, A. Levine, and R. Smith, ―The 2009 Horizon report,‖ 
Austin, Texas, USA: The New Media Consortium (NMC), 2009. 
[Online]. Retrieved (Aug. 30, 2011): http://www.nmc.org/pdf/2009-
Horizon-Report.pdf. 
[16] L. Johnson, A. Levine, R. Smith, and S. Stone, ―The 2010 Horizon 
report,‖ 2010, Austin, Texas, USA: The New Media Consortium 
(NMC), 
2010 
[Online]. 
Retrieved 
(Aug. 
30, 
2011): 
http://www.nmc.org/pdf/2010-Horizon-Report.pdf. 
[17] L. Johnson, R. Smith., H. Willis, A..Levine, and K. Haywood, ―The 
2011 Horizon report,‖ 2011, Austin, Texas, USA: The New Media 
Consortium (NMC), 2011 [Online]. Retrieved (Aug. 30, 2011): 
http://www.nmc.org/pdf/2011-Horizon-Report.pdf. 
[18] D. Keegan, ―The incorporation of mobile learning into mainstream 
education and training,‖ In the Proceedings of the 4th World 
Conference on mLearning (mLearn 2005), Cape Town, South Africa, 
October 
25-28 
2005. 
[Online]. 
Available 
(July 
1, 
2011:  http://www.mlearn.org.za/CD/papers/keegan1.pdf. 
[19] K. Kumar and Y-H. Lu, ―Cloud Computing for mobile users: Can 
offloading computation save energy?‖ Computer, April 2010, pp. 51-
56. Los Alamitos, CA, USA: IEEE, Inc., 2002. 
[20] Z. Luo, X. Qingji, L. Hua, and Y. Jingling, ―Research on 3G mobile 
learning based on cloud service,‖ In the Proceedings of the 2010 
International Conference on E-Product E-Service and E-Entertainment 
(ICEEE), pp. 1- 4, Nov.7-9, 2010, Henan, China. Los Alamitos, CA, 
USA: IEEE, Inc., 2010. 
[21] F. Lehner, H. Nösekabel, and H. Lehmann ―Wireless E−learning and 
communication environment: WELCOME at the University of 
Regensburg,‖ In The Proceedings of the First International Workshop 
on  M-Services - Concepts, Approaches, and Tools (ISMIS'02), Lyon, 
France, June 26, 2002, CEUR-WS.org, CEUR Workshop Proceedings, 
Vol-61, Z. Maamar, W. Mansoor, and W. van den Heuvel, Eds. 
[Online]. 
Available 
(July 
1, 
2011): 
http://ftp.informatik.rwth-
aachen.de/Publications/CEUR-WS/Vol-61/paper2.pdf 
[22] Y. Li, H. Guo, G. Gao, R. Huang, and X. Cheng, ―Ubiquitous e-
learning System for dynamic mini-courseware assembling and 
delivering to mobile terminals,‖ In the Proceedings of the Fifth 
International Joint Conference on INC, IMS, and IDC (NCM 2009), J. 
Kim, D. Delen, Park J., F. Ko, C. Rui, J. H. Lee, W. Jian, and G. Kou, 
Eds., pp. 1081-1086, August 25-27, 2009, Seoul, Korea, Los Alamitos, 
CA, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2009. 
[23] G. Lin, D. Fu, J. Zhu, and G. Dasmalchi, ―Cloud computing: IT as a 
Service,‖ IT Professional, Vol. 11, No. 2, March/April 2009, pp. 10-13, 
IEEE Inc., Piscataway, NJ, USA.  
[24] P. Mell and T. Grance ―The NIST definition of  cloud computing 
(Draft): Recommendations of the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology,‖ NIST Special Publication 800-145 (Draft), January 2011, 
Computer Security Division, Information Technology Laboratory 
(ITL), National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), U.S. 
Department of Commerce, Gaithersburg, MD, USA. [Online]. 
Retrieved (Aug. 30, 2011):  http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/drafts/800-
145/Draft-SP-800-145_cloud-definition.pdf. 
[25] M. Milrad, ―Mobile learning: Challenges, perspectives, and reality,‖ 
Mobile Learning Essays on Philosophy, Psychology and Education, K. 
Nyiri, Ed., pp. 151-164, Vienna: Passagan Verlag, 2003. 
[26] P. B. Muyinda, E. Mugisa, and K. Lynch, ―M-Learning: the 
educational use of mobile communication devices,‖ In the Proceedings 
of the 3th Annual International Conference On Computing and ICT 
Research (SREC 07), , J. M. Kizza, J. Muhirwe, J. Aisbett, K. Getao, V. 
W. Mbarika, D. Patel, A. J. Rodrigues, Eds., Volume III, pp. 290-301, 
Kampala, Uganda, August 5-8, 2007. Fountain Publishers: Kampala, 
Uganda, 2007. [Online]. Available  (July 1, 2011):  
http://cit.mak.ac.ug/iccir/downloads/SREC_07/Paul%20Birevu%20Mu
yinda%20,%20Ezra%20Mugisa%20,%20Kathy%20Lynch_07.pdf. 
[27] L. Naismith, P. Lonsdale, G. Vavoula, and M. Sharples, ―Literature 
review in mobile technologies and learning,‖ NESTA Futurelab Series, 
Report 11. NESTA Futurelab: Bristol, UK, 2004. [Online]. Available 
(July 1, 2011): 
http://elearning.typepad.com/thelearnedman/mobile_learning/reports/fu
turelab_review_11.pdf; also available: 
http://www.futurelab.org.uk/resources/documents/lit_reviews//Mobile_
Review.pdf. 
[28] S. A. Petersen and J-K. Markiewicz, ―PALLAS: Personalised language 
learning on mobile devices,‖ In the Proceedings the Fifth IEEE 
International Conference on Wireless, Mobile and Ubiquitous 
Technologies in Education (WMUTE 2008), pp.52-59, March 23-26, 
2008, Beijing, China. Los Alamitos, CA, USA: IEEE Computer 
Society, 2008. 
[29] M. Sharples, J. Taylor, and G. Vavoula, ―Towards a theory of mobile 
learning,‖ In the Proceedings of the 4th World Conference on Mobile 
Learning (mLearn 2005), October 25-28, 2005, Cape Town, South 
Africa. [Online]. Available (July. 1, 2011):  
http://www.mlearn.org.za/CD/papers/Sharples%20Theory%20of%20M
obile.pdf). 
[30] A. Stone, ―Designing scalable, effective mobile learning for multiple 
technologies,‖ In Learning with Mobile Devices, J. Attwell and C. 
Savill-Smith, Eds. London, UK: Learning and Skills Development 
Agency, 2004. 
[31] E. Triantafillou, E. Georgiadou, and A. A. Economides, ―The design 
and evaluation of a computerized adaptive test on mobile devices,‖ 
Computers & Education, Vol. 50, Issue 4, May 2008, pp. 1319–1330, 
Elsevier Science Ltd. Oxford, UK. [Online]. Available (July 10, 2011):  
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360131506001965. 
[32] G. N. Vavoula and M. Sharples, ―KLeOS: A personal, mobile, 
knowledge and learning organisation system,‖ In the Proceedings of 
the IEEE International Workshop on Wireless and Mobile 
Technologies in Education (WMTE 2002), M. Milrad and U. H. 
Kinshuk, Eds., pp. 152-156, August 29–30, 2002, Växjö, Sweden. Los 
Alamitos, CA, USA:  IEEE, Inc., 2002. 
[33] A. Weiss, ―Computing in the clouds,‖  networker, Vol. 11, Issue 4, Dec. 
2007, pp. 16-25, ACM Inc., New York, NY, USA. [Online]. Retrieved 
(Sep. 9, 2011): 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1327513&CFID=38803021&CFTO
KEN=28306426. 
[34] N. Wingfield, ―Time to leave the laptop behind,‖ The Wall Street 
Journal, Feb. 23, 2009, page R1. [Online]. Available (July 1, 2011): 
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB122477763884262815.html.  
302
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

