Human Behaviour Detection Using GSM Location 
Patterns and Bluetooth Proximity Data 
 
Muhammad Awais Azam, Laurissa Tokarchuk, Muhammad Adeel 
Department of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, 
Queen Mary University of London,  
UK, E1 4NS 
{muhammad.azam, laurissa.tokarchuk, muhammad.adeel}@elec.qmul.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— Human behaviours are multifarious in nature and it is 
a challenging task to predict and learn from daily life activities. 
The profusion of Bluetooth enabled devices used in daily life has 
created new ways to analyze and model the behaviour of 
individuals. Bluetooth integrated into mobile handsets can be 
used as an efficient short range sensor. The aim of this research 
work is the detection of unusual human behaviours from cell 
tower and Bluetooth proximity data using neural networks. The 
primary purpose is to find anomalies in individual’s daily life 
routines that will further help us to detect and predict unusual 
behaviour of elderly people and patients such as dementia 
patients. 
 
Keywords- Behaviour; Cell tower ID; Bluetooth proximity; Neural 
Network; Jaccard Index 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
Detection and prediction of human behaviour is a hot issue 
nowadays in social research circles. Modelling human 
behaviour such as individual routines from proximity data and 
relations with gathered data of daily life activity patterns is an 
emerging realm in ubiquitous computing. There can be 
different sensing devices e.g., Radio Frequency Identification 
(RFID), motion sensors, GPS enabled tracking devices [5], 
and other context aware devices that can be used for real time 
proximity detection and daily life data gathering purposes. In 
particular, devices such as mobile phones provide a rich 
platform for various forms of data gathering by using its 
integrated sensors such as Bluetooth ID, digital camera, 
microphones and GPS transceivers. These sensors can give an 
individual’s location, movement and proximity information 
for the whole period of cell phone usage. Specifically, 
Bluetooth radios are frequently incorporated into mobile 
devices [3]. 
 
Human behaviours and activities are analyzed by 
researchers 
using 
different 
sensor 
devices 
such 
as 
accelerometers, digital cameras and microphones. Frameworks 
have been presented to identify close proximity social 
behaviours [16], group actions in meetings [17] and audio 
visual perception of a lecture in smart environment [18]. In 
most studies, the majority of the sensing devices that are used 
in limited environment restrict their usage and thus it is only 
useful when activities take place in their proximity. This does 
not suit our case as we are interested not only indoor and 
limited environments but also outdoor movement and 
activities. 
 
The enormous penetration of Bluetooth devices have 
enabled them to be used as a personal identifier. Many 
researchers have exploited this capability by using the mobile 
as a sensing device. The mobile phone nowadays is an 
indispensable part of our society with many integrated sensors. 
Researchers have investigated using these sensors in social 
proximity sensing [8][19], social behavioural modelling and 
routine classification [1][2][3][4] and movement prediction 
[6][7]. The significance of these studies is that they have 
identified new techniques to recognize an individual’s 
behavioural patterns and abnormal movements.  In [1][2], 
Author Topic Model (ATM) and hierarchical Bayesian topic 
models like Latent Dirichlet Analysis (LDA) are used for 
routine classification. A framework for daily life activity 
recognition based on the user’s location and group affiliation 
is then presented. In [6][7], neural networks are used to detect 
and predict user movement based only on cell tower IDs. Our 
work is similar in one aspect with their work and that is; we 
have also utilized the probabilities of user being in different 
locations. Difference between our work and the work 
presented in [6][7] is that we have used real time data for our 
experiments and used both cell tower ID and Bluetooth 
proximity data.  
 
This work is an extension of [9], in which repeated patterns 
and behaviour of an individual was detected by using n-gram 
technique and considering only Bluetooth proximity data. The 
primary purpose of this research is to detect unusual daily life 
activity patterns and individual behaviours that deviate from 
their normal routines in order to aid in the detection of 
abnormal behaviour such as wandering behaviour, a 
behavioural disorder in dementia patients. Another aim is to 
determine the reliability of behaviour detection using only 
Bluetooth proximity data. So, behaviour detection is done by 
considering the record of cell tower ID’s and Bluetooth 
proximities because of the easy and economical availability of 
428
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

Bluetooth enabled devices such as mobile phone as sensing 
device. This detection of Bluetooth Proximate devices shows 
the regularity of user’s behaviour as discussed in [4]. 
According to [4], if the user in his daily life, repeat the 
activities and routines with less change, it will be known as 
‘low entropy’ behaviour. While a more change in daily routine 
patterns is considered as ‘high entropy’ behaviour. Now, if we 
consider the elderly people and patients specifically dementia 
patients, they have somewhat fixed and regular routines to 
follow [20] that make those individuals a low entropic user 
based on [4]. Therefore our interest is to study primarily the 
users with low entropy from the reality mining dataset [4].  
 
The results presented here use the reality mining dataset 
collected at MIT for the year 2004-2005. Nokia 6600 cell 
phones were used to record the data of 100 users over duration 
of 9 months. This research uses cell tower ID and Bluetooth 
proximity data to analyze the routines and behaviour of an 
individual that deviate from their normal routines. This paper 
presents the techniques used and corresponding analyses of 
the data that show the level of behavioural abnormality of 
individual’s routine by using cell tower IDs and Bluetooth 
proximity information.  
 
The rest of the paper is as follows: Section-II contains 
related work on abnormal activity detection and usage of 
Bluetooth as a sensing device. Section-III explains the 
methodology of our analysis that we have adopted to get the 
results. Section-IV discusses the results and Section-V 
contains the summary of the work and notes on the direction 
planned for our future work. 
 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
 
Detection of abnormality in human behaviour is very 
intricate and challenging task for researchers and has been in 
the past. Recently, with improvements in network systems and 
information technology, people have more easily been able to 
study the behaviours and activities of humans. Researchers 
have tried to detect the abnormal routines and daily life 
patterns of an individual inside the home and restricted 
environments [10][13].  Majority of work in this area has used 
sensing devices that either have short range of detection, less 
battery power and storage, or not very common that every 
person can use it without adding extra hardware, which is not 
possible for the scenarios outside the home. In [10], 
researchers have presented a framework for the detection of 
unusual human behaviour inside an intelligent house that is 
different from our case as we are considering the scenarios 
outside the home as well. They used motion sensors to detect 
the activities and unusual patterns based on Markov Chain. 
Vector quantization is used to reduce the sensor states and the 
change between these states is observed by transition 
probability. They detect the unusual behaviour by computing 
the distance between the state transition probabilities or by the 
likelihood of user action. The distance between the state 
transition probabilities was calculated by using either 
Kullback-Leiber distance or Euclid distance.   
 
In [13], researchers detect abnormal event in solitary elder’s 
daily life by mining the related data gained by sensors. They 
employ the association rules finding algorithm with time 
cluster to analyze the elder’s activities. In first step, they 
cluster each item of elder activity with time and then in the 
second step, all frequent item sets were found and strong 
association rules were created. Researchers in [15] work on 
the recognition of abnormal activities based on the 
Hierarchical Dirichlet Process Hidden Markov Model (HDP-
HMM). They incorporate a Fisher Kernel into the One-Class 
Support Vector Machine (OCSVM) to filter out the most 
likely normal activities. Then from those normal activities, 
they derive a model to detect abnormal activities and tried to 
reduce false positives. In [14], a model for abnormal 
behaviour detection is presented. That model considers user’s 
location based on the cell tower ID and used Dynamic 
Bayesian Networks (DBN) to predict user’s location. They 
proposed an X-Factor model, which is a DBN with a hidden 
variable. User’s location according to this model not only 
depends on the hour of the day and day of the week but also 
this latent variable that represents the abnormal behaviour.  In 
our work, we have applied neural network to detect abnormal 
behaviour of an individual by using cell tower ID and 
Bluetooth proximity data. This detection of behaviour will 
help us to aid elderly people and dementia patients. 
 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
 
The aim of this research is the detection of abnormal 
behaviour in an individual’s daily routines in order to aid in 
the detection of unusual behaviours in patients such as 
dementia patients, by using cell tower ID data and Bluetooth 
proximity data.  This section starts by evaluating the use of 
only cell tower ID data and describes the methodology used in 
this research. Same methodology is then applied on the 
Bluetooth proximity data with some changes that are 
discussed in more detail in results section. 
 
Cell tower ID gives information about the user’s location 
and movement. The cell tower ID data that is used in this 
study is classified into four different locations; i.e., Home (H), 
Work (W), Elsewhere (E) and NoSignal (N). This data is 
divided into twenty four time slots. Each time slot is 
represented by the associated presence information of the user 
(H, W, E, and N) during the one hour period. The presence of 
user at specific location depends on the hour of the day and 
day of the week. For example, if the user has a regular routine 
of going to office, then location of the user at 10a.m on 
Saturday morning can not be the same at 10a.m on Monday 
morning. The daily life activities of an individual depend on 
the entropy level of the user as discussed in [4]. If the user is a 
low entropy user, his routines do not change much as 
compared to high entropy users, whose routines and activity 
429
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

patterns change continuously. Figure 1 show the basic 
architecture used to get the behaviour of an individual. Data 
Base (DB) contains the classified information of cell tower ID 
data into H, W, E and N.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Data Processing Design  
 
A probability matrix is generated depending on the hour of 
the day and day of the week from this classified information. 
This means that every entry of this matrix depends upon the 
specific hour of the day and whether it is a weekday or a 
weekend. This matrix is utilised for preparing training data for 
the neural network that is used for the detection of level of 
abnormality in the user behaviour. The neural network used 
for this purpose is Multilayer Perceptrons (MLP). There are 
four inputs and one output of this MLP. Output is the 
behaviour of the user and the format of the input used for this 
neural network is: 
 
[Loci, Hourj, Dayk, Abn_Levelm] 
 
where Loci, gives the location i.e., H, W, E, N.  Hourj, gives the 
hour of the day i.e., between 1 and 24. Dayk, gives the day of 
the week, i.e., between 1 and 7. Abn_Levelm, gives the 
behavioural levels. Four different levels are assigned to 
behaviour depending upon the probability of being at any of 
the four places on a specific day and hour, shown in Table 1. 
 
This generates twenty four samples of training data for one 
day. So for each user, total training samples are (24 x number 
of days). 70% of this training data is used for training the 
neural network whilst the remaining is used for cross 
validation and testing purposes. Training of the neural network 
 
TABLE 1 
Probability 
Behaviour 
0 < p < 0.25 
Abnormal 
0.25 < p < 0.5 
Low Abnormal 
0.5 < p < 0.75 
Average Normal 
0.75 < p <1 
Normal 
is done till the cross validation error becomes less than 0.02, 
by using Mini-Batch training process [11], an advantage of 
using Mini-Batch training is that it is a compromise between 
batch and incremental training. Output of this neural network 
will give the level of abnormality of an individual for each 
hour of the day.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
 
The results discussed here are of one user with the entropy 
level 23.06, calculated by using the Shannon’s entropy 
 equation given below.  
∑
=
−
=
n
i
p i
p i
x
H
1
2
( )
( )log
( )
 
 
One month data is used to detect the behavioural levels of 
the user after training the neural network on about 70% of the 
data available for this specific user. First, only the cell tower 
ID data is used to detect the behaviour of the user. Figure 2 
shows the daily distributions of (H, W, E and N) transitions 
based on cell tower ID data of one month that is further used 
to detect the behaviour of the user through neural networks.  
 
Figure 3 shows the comparison of behaviour of an 
individual for two days. The trained neural network provides 
the behavioural levels for twenty four hours. As the entropy 
level of the user is quite low, this figure shows that most of the 
time the behaviour of the user is average normal. Now look at 
day-10 in Figure 2, there is an unusual detection of 
‘Elsewhere’ during 5-6am in the morning, which doesn’t 
happen normally in usual daily routine of the user. Figure 3 
shows the detection of that unusual behaviour for day-10 in 
that specific time duration.  
 
Figure 4 and Figure 5 shows the behaviour of the user for 
one month time duration. In week-1, the behaviour of the user 
remains average normal and this can be verified from Figure 2 
that shows the regularity in the distributions of ‘Home’ and 
‘Work’ patterns and shows that user did not make any unusual 
movements. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Distribution of (H, W, E and N) Transitions of Cell Tower ID Data 
430
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

 
Figure 3. Comparison of Two Days of Behaviour Detected from Cell Tower 
ID Data 
 
 
Figure 4. Week-1 and Week-2 Behaviour Detected from Cell Tower ID Data 
 
 
Figure 5. Week-3 and Week-4 Behaviour Detected from Cell Tower ID Data  
 
In week-2, there is a change in behaviour on third and fifth 
day of the week when the user’s (H, W, E and N) distributions 
show an irregular routine activity. In week-3 and week-4, 
some unusual routines are also detected in the behaviour of the 
user.  The results presented above show only the cell tower ID 
data. We will now discuss the results obtained by using the 
same technique on only the Bluetooth proximity data of the 
same user. Each time slot for Bluetooth proximity data 
represents one hour as in the case of cell tower ID data.  
 
Bluetooth proximity data is available in the form of detected 
devices as a result of a scanning performed by the user’s cell 
phone after every five minutes. Each scanning results a list of 
devices present within the range of 5-10m. The first aim was 
to cluster the data in ‘Home’, ‘Office’ and ‘Other Devices’, so 
that the above technique can be used with Bluetooth data. The 
Bluetooth proximity data is clustered into only three 
categories so that the results obtained from cell tower ID data 
and the Bluetooth proximity data can be combine together to 
see if we could get some interesting anomalies in behaviour of 
the user. In future work, the aim is to cluster the Bluetooth 
proximity data into more finer grained time periods and try to 
detect the anomaly in user’s behaviour in smaller time slots. 
The reason behind the clustering of Bluetooth data on finer 
scale is to classify the user behaviour in different activities 
that will provide one step further in the identification of 
unusual routines without using cell tower data.  
 
After analysing the data, user’s home computer device was 
given the name ‘Home’ (H). That means that all those time 
slots in which user detects his home computer device, 
considered as ‘H’ because it shows user’s presence in the 
home. For office, there are many devices that user detect 
during office hours. To obtain a cluster of devices that belong 
to office, we remove the weekends from one month data and 
use Jaccard index [12], to detect how similar the detected 
devices are throughout the office hours for all remaining 
weekdays. Jaccard similarity equation is:  
 
|
|
|
|
( , )
B
A
B
A
J A B
U
I
=
 
 
where, ‘A’ and ‘B’ are sets of detected devices in two 
consecutive days. First, ‘A’ and ‘B’ represent day-1 and day-
2, then day-2 and day-3 and so on up to the all remaining 
weekdays that left after removing the weekends from one 
month Bluetooth data. This gives us the similarity of detected 
devices during the office hours between the pairs of 
consecutive days, shown below in Figure 6. The average 
similarity between the detected devices is above 0.5. This 
means there are many devices that user detect repeatedly 
during his office hours. All those devices that user detect for at 
least 70% of the days during office hours goes in ‘Office’ 
cluster. All other devices go in ‘Other Devices’ cluster. After 
classifying the devices, a new data matrix is generated that 
contains twenty four time slots for each day as were in the 
case of cell tower ID data. Each time slot is assigned one of 
these clusters (i.e., Home, Office, Other Devices, No Devices 
Found) depending upon the number of detection of the devices 
belonging to a specific cluster. The same technique as used on 
cell tower IDs, described previously, is also used with 
Bluetooth proximity data.  Figure 7 shows the Home/Work 
distribution of locations depending on the Bluetooth data 
clusters while Figure 8 shows the fifteen days behaviour of the 
user detected from both cell tower ID and Bluetooth proximity 
data. An interesting observation can be made by analysing the 
results of both cell tower ID and Bluetooth ID data. It is 
observed that sometimes when behaviour detected from cell 
tower ID data is not unusual, a change in behaviour is detected 
from Bluetooth proximity data.  It can be said that it is more 
likely to be detecting unusual behaviour because during a 
regular routine of office hours of a weekday, user is supposed 
to detect ‘Office Devices’. Cell tower ID data will show his 
normal behaviour as the user is in Office, but may be there is 
some gathering or meeting of students or staff that is not part 
of the regular routine. Behaviour detected from Bluetooth 
proximity data can be pointing towards that activity.  
431
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

 
Figure 6. Jaccard Vertex Similarity 
 
 
Figure 7. Distribution of Home/Work Transitions of Bluetooth Data 
 
Figure 8. Fifteen Days Behaviour of Both Bluetooth and Cell Tower ID Data  
 
These results show that for low entropy users, the detection 
of unusual routines and behaviours by using only Bluetooth 
data is possible. These low entropy users follow specific 
routines as compared to high entropy individuals, who live 
more diverse lives. This study aims to aid elderly people and 
patients to detect abnormal and unusual behaviours to avoid 
any accidents. Normally patients and elderly people have fixed 
and limited routines to follow that can likely be detected using 
Bluetooth devices by clustering the Bluetooth device 
detections into different activities or communities. 
 
V. 
SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK 
 
In this paper, real time Bluetooth proximity and cell tower ID 
data is used to detect abnormal and unusual activities and 
routines of an individual by using neural networks. A low 
entropy user was selected for experiments due to the regularity 
and constancy in his routines. A successful detection of 
abnormal behaviour in this user’s routines is done by using 
cell tower ID’s and Bluetooth proximity data. Bluetooth 
proximity data is only clustered into three different categories. 
The idea was to combine the results of behaviour detection 
from Bluetooth proximity data with the results of cell tower 
ID data. To detect anomalies in more specific and lower level 
activities and routines, we need to cluster the Bluetooth 
proximity data into temporal clusters. In future work, we will 
try to cluster the Bluetooth proximity data on temporal scale to 
cover the minute details of the user’s behaviour and will also 
try to predict the behaviour based on these clusters and 
communities detection. This will help us to facilitate elderly 
people and patients who need more care and concern about 
their behaviour and unusual routines that can cause serious 
accidents. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
K. Farrahi and D. Gatica-Perez, “Daily Routine Classification from 
Mobile Phone Data”. In: Popescu-Belis, A., Stiefelhagen, R. (eds.) 
MLMI 2008. LNCS, vol. 5237, pp. 173–184. Springer, Heidelberg 
(2008) 
 
[2]  
K. Farrahi and D. Gatica-Perez, “What did you do today? 
Discovering daily routines from Large-Scale Mobile Data”. In: 
MM 2008: Proceeding of the 16th ACM international conference 
on Multimedia, pp. 849–852. ACM, New York (2008) 
 
[3] 
M. Hermersdorf, H Nyholm, J Perkiö, and V Tuulos. “Sensing in 
Rich Bluetooth Environments”- Workshop on WorldSensorWeb, 
in Proc. SenSys, 2006 - sensorplanet.org 
 
[4] 
N. Eagle and A. Pentland, “Reality mining: sensing complex social 
systems”. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 2006 – Springer, 
Vol. 10, # 4, 255-268 
 
[5] 
GPS enabled tracking devices, retrieved on 14-07-2010, 
http://www.elderoptionsoftexas.com/article_alzheimers_gps_tracki
ng_devices.htm 
 
[6] 
M. Vukovic, G. Vujnovic, and D. Grubisic, “Adaptive User 
Movement Prediction for Advanced Location-aware Services”, 
Proceedings of the 17th international conference on Software, 
Telecommunications and Computer Networks, pp. 343-347 (2009)  
 
 
[7] 
M. Vukovic, I. Lovrek, and D. Jevtic. “Predicting user movement 
for advanced location-aware services”. In 15th International    
Conference on Software, Telecommunications and Computer 
Networks, pages 1–5. SoftCOM 2007., 2007. 
 
[8]  
N. Eagle, “Machine Perception and Learning of Complex Social 
Systems”, Ph.D. Thesis, Program in Media Arts and Sciences,  
MIT, June 2005 
 
[9]  
M. A. Azam and T. Laurissa (2009). Behaviour Detection Using 
Bluetooth Proximity Data. Proceedings of Networking & 
Electronic Commerce Research Conference pp. 46-52 (NAEC 
2009). 
 
[10] 
K. Hara, T. Omori, and R. Ueno, “Detection of unusual human 
behaviour in intelligent house”; Proceedings of the 2002 12th 
IEEE workshop on Neural Networks for Signal Processing, pp. 
697-706, 2002. 
432
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

 
[11] 
Linear Neural Networks, retrieved on 14-07-2010, retrieved from 
http://www.idsia.ch/NNcourse/linear2.html 
 
[12] 
Jaccard 
Index, 
retrieved 
on 
14-07-2010, 
retrieved 
from 
http://www.statemaster.com/encyclopedia/Jaccard-index 
 
[13]  
T. Yiping, Z. Zhiying, G. Hui, L. Huiqiang, W. Wei, and X. Gang, 
“Elder Abnormal Activity Detection by Data Mining”, SICE 
Annual Conference in Sapporo, August 4-6, 2004, vol. 1, pp. 837–
840 (2004) Japan 
 
[14] 
N. Eagle, A. Clauset, and J. A. Quinn, “Location Segmentaion, 
Inference and Prediction for Anticipatory Computing”, AAAI 
Spring Symposium, 2009 
 
[15] 
D. H. Hu, X. Zhang, J. Yin, V.W. Zheng, and Q. Yang, “Abnormal 
Activity Recognition Based on HDP-HMM Models”, AAAI 
Publications, 
21st 
International 
Conference 
on 
Artificial 
Intelligence,  pp. 1715–1720, 2009  
 
[16] 
C. Wren, Y. Ivanov, I. Kaur, D. Leigh, and J. Westhues, 
“SocialMotion: Measuring the Hidden Social Life of a Building”. 
In: J. Hightower, B. Schiele, and T. Strang, (eds.) LoCA 2007. 
LNCS, vol. 4718, pp. 85–102. Springer, Heidelberg (2007) 
 
[17] 
I. McCowan,, D. Gatica-Perez, S. Bengio, and G. Lathoud,.: 
Automatic Analysis of Multimodal Group Actions in Meetings. 
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 
(T-PAMI) 27(3), 305–317 (2005) 
 
[18] 
R. Stiefelhagen, K. Bernardin, H.K Ekenel, J. McDonough,, K. 
Nickel, M. Voit, and M. Woelfel: Audio-Visual Perception of a 
Lecturer in a Smart Seminar Room. In: Signal Processing - Special 
Issue on Multimodal Interfaces, vol. 86 (12). Elsevier, Amsterdam 
(2006) 
 
[19] 
T. Nicolai, N. Behrens, and E. Yoneki, “Wireless Rope: 
Experiment in social proximity sensing with Bluetooth”. In fourth 
annual IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing, 
LNCS 4277, 2006 
 
[20] 
T. M. Gill, M.M. Desal, A. Evelyne, T. R. Holford, and C. S. 
Williams, “Restricted-Activity among Community-Living Older 
Persons: Incidence, Participants, and Health Care Utilization”, 
Annals 
of 
Internal 
Medicine.  
http://www.annals.org/content/135/5/313.full.pdf+html 
 
 
 
 
433
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

