TPM Framework: a Comprehensive Kit for Exploring Applications
with Textile Pressure Mapping Matrix
Bo Zhou∗, Jingyuan Cheng‡, Ankur Mawandia∗, Yujiang He‡, Zhixin Huang‡, Mathias Sundholm∗,
Muhammet Yildrim∗, Heber Cruz∗, Paul Lukowicz∗†
∗German Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
†TU Kaiserslautern, Germany
‡TU Braunschweig, Germany
bo.zhou@dfki.de, j.cheng@tu-braunschweig.de, ankur.mawandia@dfki.de,
yujiang.he@tu-braunschweig.de, zhixin.huang@tu-braunschweig.de,
mathias.sundholm@dfki.de, muhammet.yildrim@dfki.de,
heber.cruz@dfki.de, paul.lukowicz@dfki.de
Abstract—Based on a series of projects with textile pressure
mapping matrix (TPM) for ubiquitous and wearable activity
recognition in various scenarios, we have accumulated the
knowledge and experience to develop an open-access hardware
and software framework, which enables a broader education
and allows the scientiﬁc community to build their own TPM
applications. The hardware framework includes all the necessary
resources to manufacture the sensing equipment and instructions
to build the fabric sensors for an up to 32×32 TPM. The
software framework ‘Textile-Sandbox’ contains ready-to-use tools
and modules that support both running experiments and data
mining. The framework is evaluated with 10 master students
working in 4 groups. 4 applications are developed from scratch
and validated within only 40 hours. We present this framework
and the evaluated applications in this paper.
Keywords–Software Framework; Pressure Matrix; Smart Tex-
tile; Rapid Prototyping.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Textile pressure mapping matrix (TPM) is a sensing modal-
ity that measures the planar pressure intensity distribution of
the sensing textile, which is related to the people (parts of
their body) and analyze a complete modular and miniaturized
hardware system, software chains, and data processing and
data mining algorithms.
With every new application, we discover:
1)
TPM can be a general sensing modality for most of
the activity recognition applications, as most activities
are initiated by interactive force or support surface
counter force. Even for contact activities, force can
be propagated onto the ﬂoor. TPM can also be ﬁxed
on-body to measure the muscle activities. Pressure
force mapping provides both temporal and spatial
information about the activities, very distinct from
the dominating sensing modalities, such as inertial
measurement units in activity recognition. Its output
is similar to a video in the sense of data format and
processing methods.
2)
Various applications share certain similar exploration
procedures, as summarized in Fig. 2. The smart fabric
ambient 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(e)
  wearable
(d)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure 1. Various applications enabled by textile pressure mapping matrix
(TPM)
produced by Sefar [1] is tailored to ﬁt speciﬁc appli-
cation scenarios [2]. From the hardware perspective,
various versions of data acquisition electronics are
developed to explore implementation varieties of the
scalable modular architecture we proposed in
[3].
Different data mining and machine learning methods
are also evaluated according to the signal nature of
various applications.
It has come to a point that certain processes can be
generalized in both the hardware and software domain to
form a framework, which can greatly reduce time and effort
of the idea-to-implementation cycle. Though there are much
more application possibilities that can be interesting to be
evaluated, we work on developing and improving this open-
access framework, that can promote TPM in education and
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

the broader research community, and more developers can be
inspired to easily build their own applications.
The major contribution of this paper lies in:
1)
We offer the manufacturing resources and ﬁrmware
builds for the reﬁned data acquisition system.
2)
We present Textile-Sandbox, a well documented soft-
ware framework for application exploration with
TPM, including two labeling tools for ground truth
annotation and a three-layered Matlab-based data
mining tool, which can be both ran by a single click
and adjusted in depth.
3)
We validated the framework with 10 developers work-
ing in small groups, and 4 applications have been
prototyped within 40 hours (see Table I). The devel-
opers are computer science students with very limited
knowledge in the sensing modality and data mining.
Therefore, our framework can not only reduce the
time and effort spent in new application exploration,
but also greatly lower the entry barriers.
4)
We open all the code, resources, documentation and
ethics templates to the research community [4] [5].
We hope the TPM framework can support more researchers
in validating and exploring their own applications with textile
pressure sensing matrix.
Figure 2. Typical procedures in new application exploration with textile
pressure sensing matrix: the “Textile Sandbox” serves as the general
framework for data recording and mining
II.
RELATED WORK
A.
Planar pressure mapping development scene
In ubiquitous computing, planar pressure sensing is used
in shoes to analyze gait information [6] [7], on chair/seat to
detect user posture [8] [9] or recognize driver’s identity [10],
on furniture to recognize daily activities of the elderly [11].
A pressure sensing matrix equipped bed can recognize on-
bed rehabilitation exercises or monitor sleep posture and
stage [12] [13] [14]. Different kinds of pressure sensitive
ﬂoors have been used for indoor positioning [15] [16], gait
and person identiﬁcation [17] [18] [19] and human computer
interaction
[20] [21]. Similar to our own previous research,
these works focus on creating or enhancing concrete hardware
design, on creating data processing algorithms for speciﬁc
applications. No open-access software framework is available
from said works for a broader community to explore their own
applications.
There are also a few off-the-shelf pressure sensing matri-
ces. Sensingtex [22] provides a development kit for capturing
pressure data using prefabricate hardware serving as seat
cover, ﬁtness mat and mattress mat. Tekscan provides both
single pressure sensors and sensing matrices, that are used in
shoes, mat, seat and bed [23]. Texisense provides a sensor
matrix for monitoring walking and seating, accompanied by
TexiMonitor-SLT, a custom software for data readout
[24].
These commercial products come with ﬁxed hardware, that
is, the shape, dimensions, sample rate, etc. are all pre-ﬁxed.
Software is provided mainly for data read-out or for feature
analysis and only for certain applications. The freedom of
adapting these systems to new scenarios is thus greatly limited.
In summary, to the best of our knowledge, there is no
existing open-access framework that is based on customizable
hardware, and meanwhile provides ready-to-use data acqui-
sition and data mining tools, thus enabling easy and quick
exploration of new applications based on pressure sensing
matrix. Moreover, our work focuses on textile based pressure
mapping, instead of thin ﬁlm based methods, which is the case
with most of the above-mentioned works.
B. Frameworks for ubiquitous computing applications
To ease application exploration in ubiquitous computing,
a large number of frameworks were developed. A systematic
review on them can be found in Guinea et al.’s work in 2016
[25], based on 132 approaches. Below we name a few, which
inspired our Textile-Sandbox.
The iStuff toolkit [26] is composed of multiple physical
devices and a supporting software framework, which includes a
dynamically conﬁgurable intermediary to simplify the mapping
of devices to different applications, thus greatly simplifying
the exploration of novel interaction techniques in post-desktop
era of multiple devices. CRN Toolbox [27] as a modular
framework not only allows ﬂexible sensor conﬁguration and
sensor data processing, but also provides a graphical conﬁgu-
ration editor so that users can intuitively drag modules from
library into workspace. It thus enables fast implementation
of activity and context recognition systems. The Funf Open
Sensing Framework [28] is an extensible sensing and data
processing framework for mobile devices, which enables the
collection, uploading and conﬁguration of a wide range of data
signals accessible via mobile phones. It reduces greatly the app
developers’ effort through its 3rd-party developer API.
As to smart textile, Buechley built a construction kit
consisting of hardware components that can be stitched on gar-
ments to create interactive textiles [29]. Interactex [30] serves
as a visual, integrated development environment speciﬁcally
designed for smart textiles, including support on application
development, testing and circuit design. Plushbot [31] contains
a pattern interface for users to create and trace a plush toy; in
the background, the program combines the plush toy pattern
with computational pieces, allowing even children to create
and customize programmable toys.
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

In summary, supporting tool-kits and frameworks for ubiq-
uitous computing started to appear around 15 years ago. They
all share the common characters of modular design and easy to
conﬁgure, aim at enabling larger number of developers (spe-
cially software developers) to explore their own applications
with reduced time, effort and cost. We took these as guidelines
while developing our Textile-Sandbox.
(a)
Assembled PCB (front)
(b)    Assembled PCB (back)
(c)     3D printed Enclosure
(d)     3D printed Enclosure
Figure 3. The up-to-date hardware module from the hardware resources
III.
TPM APPLICATIONS: THE GENERAL WORKFLOW
The operation principles and detailed hardware designs
of our TPM has been presented in
[32] [3]. In short, a
TPM sensor consists of 3 layers in a sandwich-like structure.
The top and bottom layers are made of the same fabric,
composed of evenly spaced parallel metallic stripes on a PET
fabric substrate. The middle layer is a pressure sensitive semi-
conductive fabric. The bottom layer is 90 degree rotated from
the top layer. Each cross-section acts as a pressure sensor. The
resistances at all cross-sections are turned to voltage by simple
voltage-dividers and then turned from analog signal into digital
data by ADCs (Analog-to-Digital Converter) scanning through
the whole matrix. A complete scan of the matrix results in a
pressure mapping imagery. Repeated scans produce a video-
like data stream of pressure mapping imagery.
Exploring a application with TPM normally involves 4
steps (Fig. 2):
1)
Forming an idea: Motivated by a general scenario,
ﬁrst a rough analysis on involved activities shall be
carried out and a draft list of the activities shall be
deﬁned, then the hardware settings shall be ﬁxed,
including: where to put and how to ﬁx the sensor ma-
trix, the dimension and resolution of the matrix, the
scanning speed, the electronic placement and cable
routing. This step deﬁnes the hardware speciﬁcations
for the next steps.
2)
Adapting the hardware: Using pre-manufactured elec-
tronics, the speciﬁc hardware for this application
can be made by: 1) tailor the smart fabrics to ﬁt
the target surface, 2) connect the sensing fabric to
the electronics by careful soldering, 3) prepare the
ﬁrmware of the electronics (change of scanning ports
and speed) 4) ﬁt the hardware into the experiment
setting. A small-scaled matrix normally can be made
within several hours (see Fig. 4). After this step, raw
data can be gathered and visualized using our data
acquisition tool in real-time, available at [33].
3)
Experiment and data collection: Data can be collected
by several participants for an abundant amount of
repetitions. The ground truth (labels) are generated
either at runtime or ofﬂine. This step generates the
dataset for the next step.
4)
Data mining and evaluation: The dataset is split
into the training set and the testing set. Features
are calculated for all the activities and the result is
evaluated through n-Fold cross-validation.
IV.
HARDWARE RESOURCES
Through the accumulation of our previous works, we
have developed a mature hardware system to drive a sensing
matrix of up to 32×32 sensing points. The electronics, alone
measures at 6×4 cm, are centered around a dsPIC microcon-
troller, powered by a Li-Po battery with onboard charging
and protection circuits. It can be charged with a microUSB
(Universal Serial Bus) cable. The data transmission is possible
through Bluetooth Classic, USB 2.0 or serial port streaming,
or local SD card logging. Several LEDs including a full-
color LED (Light-Emitting Diode) provides a rich range of
status indication. It also has a 9-axis onboard IMU (Inertial
Measurement Unit) for sensor fusion purposes, and optional
ESD (Electrostatic Discharge) protection at the smart textile
connection ports.
With USB connection, a 32-by-32 sensor matrix can be
sampled at 40 frames per second with 12-bit analog resolution,
which is limited by the ADC sampling rate. With Bluetooth,
the refresh rate is limited to approximately 19.5 frames per
second due to the Bluetooth bandwidth (30KB/s). However,
as the matrix resolution decreases, the refresh rate can be
improved. For example, with USB data transmission, a 16-
by-16 matrix can be scanned at 160 frames per second.
(a) raw material
(b) assembled TPM hardware
Figure 4. With the instructions in the Textile-Sandbox, developers can easily
assemble tailored TPM sensors from raw material
In the open-access resources, the manufacturing ﬁles are
available together with the micro-controller ﬁrmware builds,
which streams out data of the full scan of 32 × 32 matrix. The
parameters can be easily modiﬁed to accommodate different
matrix resolutions. The 3D model of an enclosure (22×62×76
mm) for the electronics and the battery is also available. The
electronics connects to the smart fabric through 2.54cm-pitch
8×2 headers, which can be clamped onto widely available
1.27cm-pitch ribbon cables. All resources needed to produce
a hardware as shown in Figure 3 can be accessed in [4].
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

V.
SOFTWARE FRAMEWORK: TEXTILE-SANDBOX
A. Design Guidelines of the Textile-Sandbox
As our goal is to reduce application exploration effort,
and our target users are the computer science students and
researchers, who are new to pressure sensing, we identify the
following basic requirements on the software framework:
•
Per step support: Tools should be provided for data
recording and data processing/mining. We provide
two tools for data labeling, and a Matlab-based data
mining tool for feature extraction and classiﬁcation.
•
Conﬁgurable: Application-speciﬁc parameters (matrix
size, refresh rate, preprocessing parameters, data path)
are conﬁgured by an editable .cvs ﬁle.
•
Fast kickstart: Together with the framework, we pro-
vide a compact example of labeled dataset and conﬁg-
urations. After downloading the framework, users can
execute the whole data processing chain by calling a
single function and a few more mouse clicks.
•
Modular design: We divide our framework into three-
layered modules. User can sequentially execute each
module and validate its output. The intermediate out-
come of former steps are automatically saved, so that
the user can resume the data processing from any step.
•
Documented: An on-line “help” documentation is cre-
ated, serving as the nexus for resource downloading,
tutorials of experiment design, and how to use the
labeling tools and data mining tool (open access at
[33]).
Figure 5. Data processing ﬂow and corresponding design in Textile-Sandbox
B. Data Labeling Tools
As we follow the typical supervised learning method
in application exploration, generating accurate labels for
recorded data is the base for all data mining tasks afterwards.
We developed two labeling tools according to the nature of
two types of activities. The ﬁrst type of activities can be easily
controlled by the test subject him/herself to be ﬁnished within
a predeﬁned period in predeﬁned order. For example, using
foreﬁnger to plot a circle or to write “A” on the pressure mat.
The second type of activities shall happen in a more natural
way at the speed and the order that the test subject feels
comfortable. For example, having a meal contains activities
like eating salad, eating bread and drinking water. The test
subject however, would most likely want to mix the activities,
adapt the duration and sequence of each activity according to
his/her own eating habit. We developed a light-weight online
labeling tool for the ﬁrst type and an ofﬂine labeling tool for
the second (open access at [34]).
C. Data Mining Tool
We followed the general data processing chain in Figure
5 and developed a data mining tool, which allows the user to
process the pressure distribution dataset with minimal or no
coding. We implemented all the functions in Matlab with self-
developed algorithm, except the step “classiﬁcation”, where
the Classiﬁcation Learner app in Matlab [35] is used. The data
mining tool is divided into three layers. On the ﬁrst layer is the
main function, which calls the functions on the second layer in
a sequence way, so that the end result based on given dataset
can be obtained by executing just one function and few clicks.
The second layer matches each step in the data processing
chain. These functions further call the functions on the third
layer, where sub-tasks are performed.
In the data processing chain, ﬁrst the raw data, the con-
ﬁguration in the .cvs ﬁle, and the labels are loaded. The
preprocessing step utilizes several methods, such as DC re-
moval, upscaling, ﬁltering to enhance the data quality within
each frame (the reasons for applying these methods and the
implementations are reported in our former work [32]).
The next step is essential for the ﬁnal classiﬁcation perfor-
mance of every new application. Here the features are extracted
from the preprocessed data. We provided 21 basic features,
which are generally useful for most of the applications. These
features offer an initial classiﬁcation result, to explore the
feasibility of using TPM for the application with little overhead
effort. If the user decides to further improve the result, the
second layer also supports custom features.
For each event, the 21 basic features are deﬁned as follows:
Statistical features from the time series of frame descriptors
(10 features): two descriptors are calculated from each frame:
sum of all pixels and the number of pixels after thresholding.
From the time series of these two descriptors within the event,
the maximum, minimum, mean, number of peaks and number
of mean-crossing are calculated.
Pressure center shift (4 features): Three frames from each
activity event, the ﬁrst, the last, and the frame with the highest
pixel-sum, are selected. The center of weight [x,y] of these
frames are calculated. The difference of [x,y] between the ﬁrst
and the last frame, and between ﬁrst and the highest pixel-sum
frame, are considered as another 4 features.
Image descriptors the average frame (7 features): Each
pixel in the average frame is the average of the pixel location
within the event period. The 7 Zernike image moments [36]
of this frame are calculated as features.
The third layer performs cross-validation using the features
from the second layer with the Matlab Classiﬁcation Learner.
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

TABLE I. SUMMARY OF THE APPLICATIONS FROM THE 10-PARTICIPANT WORKSHOP
Project
Matrix
Classes
participant ×
Evaluation*
Accuracy
repetitions
SpyOnMe
32 × 8 2cm pitch
6 1
3 × 5
Bagged Trees 8-fold
91%**
Win Your Heart
16 × 16 2cm pitch
6
1 × 10
Random Forest 10-fold
84%
Pressure Password
16 × 16 1cm pitch
5 3
2 × 10
SVM 5-fold
76%
Smart Pillow
16 × 16 2cm - 4cm pitches***
5 4
3 × 10
Bagged Trees 10-fold
87%
* all projects used the 21 basic features provided by the Textile-Sandbox
** the asymmetric pitch is used to accompany the length of the pillow
1 typing, writing, sketching with a pen, internet surﬁng or playing computer games (both mouse and keyboard), idle, and absence.
2 scratching, hugging, holding the toy’s upper part, holding the lower part, beating, pinching and touching with the face (simulating kissing).
3 ﬁve distinct passwords.
4 4 sleep positions (supine position, prone position, lying on the left side, lying on the right side) and 1 kneeing posture
This three layered design allows users with varying levels
of expertise to beneﬁt from the data mining tool. With the ﬁrst
layer the user can quickly get an impression on the process and
check the initial results by running only a few functions plus
a few clicks in the Matlab Classiﬁcation Learner. The user
can then get deeper by checking the output of each step on
the second layer. As he/she gets more insights, the third layer
provides him/her enough freedom to inﬂuence the ﬁnal result
with some small changes in the code. The user can then modify
the modules even on higher levels. By then the users shall have
already gained enough knowledge to develop their own data
mining algorithms. Our data mining tool has thus completed
its mission in supporting application exploration. From that
moment on, it shall serve mainly as a starting point for the user
towards the more comprehensive application development.
D. Documentation
A web documentation is created and can be accessed at
[33]. It is indexed and can be searched upon, containing: (1) An
overview of the application exploration chain; (2) Description
of the hardware and operational instructions; (3) Description
of the labeling tools; (4) Description of the data mining tool,
including detailed description to all the Matlab functions; (5)
Links to all source code, tools, introduction powerpoint slides
(used in the practicum, details in section VI) and one labeled
dataset for an easy start without own data recording and
labeling.
VI.
APPLICATION EXPLORATION USING
TEXTILE-SANDBOX
To evaluate to what degree our Textile-Sandbox can sup-
port new application exploration, and to provide computer
science students the hands-on experience with hardware and
the activity recognition related data processing, we created
a workshop for master students majored in Computer Sci-
ence or System Techniques, where the students develop from
scratch their own application. From 10 participants, only 3
had background knowledge on ubiquitous computing through
some earlier lectures. Four groups were formed voluntarily.
All the groups managed to individually propose and explore
one application within only 40 hours (The applications are
shown in Fig. 6, detailed time distribution is listed in Table II).
All applications are based on general ready-to-use electronics,
which are developed by our lab in [37]. It drives one matrix of
maximum 32×32 channels and transfers the data via Bluetooth
to a mobile phone. The scanning rate is set to 60Hz.
TABLE II. TIME DISTRIBUTION IN APPLICATION EXPLORATION WITH
TEXTILE-SANDBOX.
Task
time spent
Introduction lecture
6 hr
Software practice with existing dataset
4 hr
Propose an application
3 hr
Making matrix
4 hr
Data recording and evaluation
20 hr
with Textile-Sandbox
Presentation on the explored applications
0.5 hr
Sum
37.5 hr
The motivations of the applications are described below,
the physical hardware are shown in Figure 6, and the settings
and results are listed in Table I. Since the educational purpose
of this workshop is our main focus, the level of innovation and
dataset size are limited to only establish a pilot prototype.
(a)SpyOnMe
(b) Win Your Heart
(c) Pressure Password
(d) Smart Pillow
Figure 6. Applications explored using Textile-Sandbox, along with the
representing pressure distribution of one selected activity, (a)SpyOnMe (two
arms lying on the table while tying on keyboard), (b)Win Your Heart
(grabbing with thumb), (c)Pressure Password (pressing with the middle and
the little ﬁngers), (d)Smart Pillow (supine position)
A. SpyOnMe: activity monitoring at workplace
Modern ofﬁce workplace normally has a similar setting:
a work desk, a computer with keyboard and mouse, paper,
etc. Detection of typical activities like typing on keyboard,
browsing web or away from work can give insights into the
person’s role, his/her methods and performance at work place.
SpyOnMe is proposed, as an non-intrusive method to monitor
work space activities based on pressure between forearms and
the desk.
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

TABLE III. FEEDBACK RECEIVED FROM 10 PRACTICUM PARTICIPANTS,
SCALED FROM 1 (LOWEST) TO 5 (HIGHEST)
Criteria
avg score
min score
well documented
4.9
4
intutive to use
4.4
3
applicable to multiple scenario
4.3
3
richness of tools
4.1
3
faster application development
4
2
B. Win Your Heart: a toy for children behavior analysis
Toys have been widely used, for educational, behavioral
training, emotional companion and other purposes. This appli-
cation aims to enable non-obtrusive monitoring of children’s
behaviour and their mental status by identifying their interac-
tions with a pressure sensitive toy.
C. Pressure Password: motionless unlocking
Pattern or numerical locks are fairly common on mobile
devices and keyless entry systems. However, pattern based
locks have been shown to be highly insecure as intruders
can observe movements and easily crack the pattern [38].
Numerical entry systems, such as in ATM machines have been
shown vulnerable to thermal cameras [39]. We explored a
motionless password system based on the born shape of palm
and length of ﬁngers, and the combination of multiple ﬁngers
at different intensity of pressure. All the combinations look the
same, making the password hard to copy by observing.
D. Smart Pillow: sleep position detection
One third of our life is spent sleeping, which has a high
impact also on the other two thirds. A pillow covered with
pressure sensing matrix can help monitor the sleep posture
and enhance sleep quality.
E. Developer feedback
Anonymous questionnaires were given to the ten partici-
pants to collect their feedback to the Textile-Sandbox (see Ta-
ble III). In general, we received a very positive response. Most
of the students agree that the framework is easy and intuitive
to use, allows them to create and develop applications faster.
Eight out of ten students agree that they can independently
develop applications with the support from Textile-Sandbox.
Two students got inspired to create features suiting their
applications. All reported improvement in the understanding
of smart textile and its application after developing their own
application with Textile Sandbox.
It is suggested to combine the data acquisition app and
the online labeling tool into one tool to reduce annotation
effort. It is also suggested that more prior applications shall
be introduced at the beginning. (We will thus accumulate
applications developed within this workshop as example for
future students.)
VII.
CONCLUSION
We present in this paper our open access framework
to explore wearable and ubiquitous applications with textile
pressure mapping matrix (TPM), which includes hardware
resources and the software framework, Textile-Sandbox. We
have explored its application in various activity recognition
related domains. To pave its path towards a wider adoption
in the research community, we developed the framework to
inspire and assist developers new to smart fabric or TPM, but
interested in exploring their own applications using this sensing
modality. We evaluated this framework with computer science
master students, who successfully explored applications pro-
posed by themselves independently within only 40 hours.
In our future work, we plan to keep pushing out hard-
ware and software revisions. A Python port of the software
framework is also in the plan. Also, manual mode will be
added to the online labeling tool, as suggested by students,
so that labels can also be freely generated by the experiment
supervisor during the experiment. To further reduce the ex-
ploration time and lower the barriers to entry, more features
shall be implemented and provided as ready-to-use module.
A graphical user interface shall be created, which shows the
data processing chain and provides “drag and drop” function
for adding and removing modules. We will also look into
packaging the functions for using the TPM into APIs that can
act as a third-party plugin for other smart textile frameworks,
such as Interactex [30]. We are looking forward to further
suggestions from the research communities as well.
We believe the TPM hardware sensing platform and the
Textile-Sandbox framework, shall free the imagination of a
boarder research community, and project another type of light
(the gravity and other forces) onto the secrets hidden in human
activities and behaviors.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Sefar.” [Online]. Available: http://www.sefar.com/
[2]
S.
P.
Consortium,
“Simpleskin
project
ﬁnal
report
-
4.1.3.1
wp1 textile technologies,” Tech. Rep., 2016. [Online]. Available:
http://simpleskin.org/downloads/ﬁnal report.pdf
[3]
B. Zhou, J. Cheng, M. Sundholm, and P. Lukowicz, “From smart
clothing to smart table cloth: Design and implementation of a large
scale, textile pressure matrix sensor,” in ARCS.
Springer, 2014, pp.
159–170.
[4]
A. Mawandia and J. Cheng, “Textile sandbox: source codes, resources
and documentation on-line,” http://wearcomlab.com/wcldocumentation/
sites.google.com/site/resistivesensingdocumentation/resources.html, last
access: Feb. 2017.
[5]
S. Doda, M. S. Singh, B. Zhou, and J. Cheng, “Ethics templates for
experiments with resistive sensing matrix,” http://simpleskin.org/?ethics,
last access: Feb. 2017.
[6]
L. Shu, T. Hua, Y. Wang, Q. Li, D. D. Feng, and X. Tao, “In-shoe
plantar pressure measurement and analysis system based on fabric
pressure sensing array,” Information Technology in Biomedicine, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 14, no. 3, 2010, pp. 767–775.
[7]
W. Xu, M.-C. Huang, N. Amini, J. J. Liu, L. He, and M. Sarrafzadeh,
“Smart insole: a wearable system for gait analysis,” in Proceedings of
the 5th International Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to
Assistive Environments.
ACM, 2012, p. 18.
[8]
J. Meyer, B. Arnrich, J. Schumm, and G. Tr¨oster, “Design and modeling
of a textile pressure sensor for sitting posture classiﬁcation,” Sensors
Journal, IEEE, vol. 10, no. 8, 2010, pp. 1391–1398.
[9]
W. Xu, M.-C. Huang, N. Amini, L. He, and M. Sarrafzadeh, “ecushion:
A textile pressure sensor array design and calibration for sitting posture
analysis,” Sensors Journal, IEEE, vol. 13, no. 10, 2013, pp. 3926–3934.
[10]
X. Xie, B. Zheng, and W. Xue, “Object identiﬁcation on car seat
based on rough sets,” in 2011 IEEE 3rd International Conference on
Communication Software and Networks, 2011, pp. 157–159.
[11]
J.-H. Lim, H. Jang, J. Jang, and S.-J. Park, “Daily activity recognition
system for the elderly using pressure sensors,” in EMBS 2008. 30th
Annual International Conference of the IEEE.
IEEE, 2008, pp. 5188–
5191.
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

[12]
M.-C. Huang, J. J. Liu, W. Xu, N. Alshurafa, X. Zhang, and M. Sar-
rafzadeh, “Using pressure map sequences for recognition of on bed
rehabilitation exercises,” Biomedical and Health Informatics, IEEE
Journal of, vol. 18, no. 2, 2014, pp. 411–418.
[13]
J. J. Liu, W. Xu, M.-C. Huang, N. Alshurafa, M. Sarrafzadeh, N. Raut,
and B. Yadegar, “Sleep posture analysis using a dense pressure sensitive
bedsheet,” Pervasive and Mobile Computing, vol. 10, 2014, pp. 34–50.
[14]
L. Samy, M.-C. Huang, J. J. Liu, W. Xu, and M. Sarrafzadeh, “Unob-
trusive sleep stage identiﬁcation using a pressure-sensitive bed sheet,”
Sensors Journal, IEEE, vol. 14, no. 7, 2014, pp. 2092–2101.
[15]
D. Savio and T. Ludwig, “Smart carpet: A footstep tracking interface,”
in AINAW’07. 21st International Conference on, vol. 2.
IEEE, 2007,
pp. 754–760.
[16]
Y. Kaddoura, J. King, and A. S. Helal, “Cost-precision tradeoffs in
unencumbered ﬂoor-based indoor location tracking,” in 3rd Interna-
tional Conference on Smart Homes and Health Telematics, Sherbrooke,
Qu´ebec, Canada, 2005, pp. 75–82.
[17]
L. Middleton, A. Buss, A. Bazin, M. S. Nixon et al., “A ﬂoor sensor
system for gait recognition,” in Automatic Identiﬁcation Advanced
Technologies, 2005. Fourth IEEE Workshop on. IEEE, 2005, pp. 171–
176.
[18]
R. J. Orr and G. D. Abowd, “The smart ﬂoor: a mechanism for
natural user identiﬁcation and tracking,” in CHI’00 extended abstracts
on Human factors in computing systems.
ACM, 2000, pp. 275–276.
[19]
G. Qian, J. Zhang, and A. Kidan´e, “People identiﬁcation using gait
via ﬂoor pressure sensing and analysis,” in Smart sensing and context.
Springer, 2008, pp. 83–98.
[20]
P. Srinivasan, D. Birchﬁeld, G. Qian, and A. Kidan´e, “A pressure
sensing ﬂoor for interactive media applications,” in Proceedings of the
2005 ACM SIGCHI International Conference on Advances in computer
entertainment technology.
ACM, 2005, pp. 278–281.
[21]
S. Rangarajan, A. Kidan´e, G. Qian, and S. Rajko, Design Optimization
of Pressure Sensing Floor for Multimodal Human-Computer Interaction.
INTECH Open Access Publisher, 2008.
[22]
S. Sensing Tex, “Sensing tex smart textiles,” http://sensingtex.com/
development-kits, last access: Feb. 2017.
[23]
Tekscan, “Pressure mapping, force measurement, & tactile sensors —
tekscan,” https://www.tekscan.com/products-solutions, last access: Feb.
2017.
[24]
T. Company, “Texisense textile pressure sensor: Teximat and teximat-
slt,” http://www.texisense.com/home en, last access: Feb. 2017.
[25]
A. S. Guinea, G. Nain, and Y. Le Traon, “A systematic review on the
engineering of software for ubiquitous systems,” Journal of Systems
and Software, vol. 118, 2016, pp. 251–276.
[26]
R. Ballagas, M. Ringel, M. Stone, and J. Borchers, “istuff: a physical
user interface toolkit for ubiquitous computing environments,” in Pro-
ceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems.
ACM, 2003, pp. 537–544.
[27]
D. Bannach, O. Amft, and P. Lukowicz, “Rapid prototyping of activity
recognition applications,” IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 7, no. 2,
2008.
[28]
N. Aharony, W. Pan, C. Ip, I. Khayal, and A. Pentland, “Social
fmri: Investigating and shaping social mechanisms in the real world,”
Pervasive and Mobile Computing, vol. 7, no. 6, 2011, pp. 643–659.
[29]
L. Buechley, “A construction kit for electronic textiles,” in Wearable
Computers, 2006 10th IEEE International Symposium on. IEEE, 2006,
pp. 83–90.
[30]
J. Haladjian, K. Bredies, and B. Br¨ugge, “Interactex: an integrated
development environment for smart textiles,” in Proceedings of the 2016
ACM International Symposium on Wearable Computers.
ACM, 2016,
pp. 8–15.
[31]
Y. Huang and M. Eisenberg, “Steps toward child-designed interactive
stuffed toys,” in Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on
Interaction Design and Children.
ACM, 2011, pp. 165–168.
[32]
J. Cheng, M. Sundholm, B. Zhou, M. Hirsch, and P. Lukowicz,
“Smart-surface: Large scale textile pressure sensors arrays for activity
recognition,” Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 2016.
[33]
“Textile sandbox.” [Online]. Available: http://goo.gl/hiowPc
[34]
“Textile sandbox online labeling toll.” [Online]. Available: http:
//wearcomlab.de/resources/exptool
[35]
MathWorks,
“Matlab
classiﬁcation
learner
app,”
https:
//www.mathworks.com/products/statistics/classiﬁcation-learner.html,
last access: Feb. 2017.
[36]
A. Khotanzad and Y. H. Hong, “Invariant image recognition by zernike
moments,” IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelli-
gence, vol. 12, no. 5, 1990, pp. 489–497.
[37]
B. Zhou, H. Koerger, M. Wirth, C. Zwick, C. Martindale, H. Cruz,
B. Eskoﬁer, and P. Lukowicz, “Smart soccer shoe: monitoring foot-
ball interaction with shoe integrated textile pressure sensor matrix,” in
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Symposium on Wearable
Computers.
ACM, 2016, pp. 64–71.
[38]
G. Ye, Z. Tang, D. Fang, X. Chen, K. I. Kim, B. Taylor, and Z. Wang,
“Cracking android pattern lock in ﬁve attempts,” 2017.
[39]
K. Mowery, S. Meiklejohn, and S. Savage, “Heat of the moment: char-
acterizing the efﬁcacy of thermal camera-based attacks,” in Proceedings
of the 5th USENIX conference on Offensive technologies.
USENIX
Association, 2011, pp. 6–6.
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

