A Solution for Mobility Protocols Evaluation
Thierry Silva Pereira
Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology of Tocantins (IFTO)
Palmas, Brazil
Email: thierrysilvaee@gmail.com
Abstract—The motivation of the research project proposed in this
article is to show means and results for overcoming the challenges
of maintaining an uninterrupted connection on wireless mobile
networks, which is becoming more and more necessary for users
who increasingly require ubiquity when accessing voice and video
services. These services become a critical case when used together,
since high transmission rates are needed. A possible option in this
scenario is the use of smartphone oriented networks, considering
their recent support for packet-switched services evolution. This
article presents the implementation of an app for mobile devices,
that can be used with the Android or IOS operating systems,
which provides a thorough mobility protocol evaluation.
Keywords–Technology; Mobility; Handover; Latency; Wireless
Networks.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Due to the increasing demand for services that require
strict compliance with network requirements, such as, voice
and video applications, along with the ubiquity of these
services, the issue of always keeping mobile devices
users
well connected when moving among networks with different
administrative domains, has proved to be a challenge. During
the handover period, the user may suffer longer delays than
desired or even data loss. This effect ends up decreasing the
quality of information, and this situation becomes especially
critical
when
one
is
dealing
with
multimedia
data in
communication.
Effectiveness in the delivery of a service or provision
quality assurance in transmission and reception of a flow is
related to some variables that can be crucial in a computer
network application. They are almost always related to the
technology that was used, how the transmission flow was
made and, very often, to the functional requirements of the
application that will benefit from the network architecture.
Analyzing the context of mobility and convergence, the
requirements in the control of the limits of each parameter of
these variables are even more important, since they can be a
determining factor as to whether or not to deliver a particular
package. Thus, network technologies need to work in such a
way that can promote transparency to the users, from the point
of view of utilization of the service, providing full support to
mobility and data continuity.
Beside the need that involves the support of connection and
continuity of data traffic, there is the additional challenge of
integration
among
wireless
services.
Interfaces
without
coupling present additional challenges, because they are very
frequently
found
in
networks
with
many
different
administrative domains. In such situations, it is noted that one
network does not provide a coupling to another, and, as a
result, there is management
of different IPs addresses,
leading to the need for rigorous studies to evaluate the impact
of a migration process among heterogeneous networks, as
presented in Al-Surmi [1] and Fernandes [2].
The Internet was not originally designed to support de-
vice mobility. Considering the existing infrastructure and all
the
main
protocols
used
in
the
Transmission
Control
Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP), layer model, these have
limitations which make it difficult to use them for mobility
scenarios. The Mobile Internet Protocol (MIP), described in
Perkins [3], has been widely disseminated, studied and used as
a solution to the mobility problem in IP networks, leading to
some implementation of this protocol. However, in some
studies, such as Kodaly [4] and Mohamed [5], its application
has become practically unfeasible, since it was based on
providing architectures in extremely controlled and poorly
functional environments.
This study proposes to implement a mobile app that is able
to provide results of certain mobility protocols evaluations.
For the next step in future work, it is proposed to measure
and evaluate the handover latency values using the Specialized
MIP (SMIP) protocol, as presented in Monteiro [6], analyzing
the feasibility of mobility in networks. The efficiency of these
protocols will be experimentally and numerically evaluated in
a given scenario, from the viewpoint of network latency and its
involvement in certain types of traffic or applications. The
results obtained from the evaluation of the mobility protocols
will be available in the created app and disseminated to the
scientific community.
This paper is organized into the following sections: after
the Introduction, in Section II the work listed presents the
research carried out, showing the theoretical references that
were used and a brief description of each one. Section III
provides the proposal of this article, as well as the materials
used for app planning and implementation and the method-
ology applied to carry out the research. Section IV presents the
results obtained with the use of the app. In Section V, we
conclude this paper and suggest directions for future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
Technology is everywhere today. Studies are pursuing
solutions in order to provide ubiquitous information for the
most diverse problems. Mobile devices have a crucial role in
this information dissemination process.
The largest number of studies found about mobility
protocol evaluations show experiences with mobile IP in
complex and specific environments. An example can be seen
in [7], where authors demonstrate the use and performance of
IP protocol in a smart bridge environment. This particular
research proposal is to introduce and characterize a protocol
architecture based on IP to achieve applications in, for
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

example, smart meters and inverters.
In another case, the authors in [8], address and evaluate the
mobile IP in a Pay-TV environment, showing its efficiency in
that specific scenario. Some weaknesses related to maintenance
of user privacy, can be highlighted, such as insider attack and
user traceability attack.
In [9], results are presented for the use of IP protocol in a
Virtual
Private
Network
(VPN)
environment,
allowing
terminal mobility for the user of that VPN. This was based
on aggregation of two or more internet mobile accesses and
is able to provide a higher end-to-end available bandwidth due
to an adaptive load balancing algorithm. This research also
proposes a neural network approach for predicting the main
Key
Performance
Indicators
(KPIs)
values
at
a
given
geographical point.
Thus, with a view to continue pointing in the direction
of using mobile apps for troubleshooting in the context of
mobility, this research presents the implementation of an app
that provides information about the research that will be carried
out during the postgraduate course in Telematics.
III.
PROPOSAL
When thinking about mobility in networks with different
administrative domains, the biggest challenge is the increase in
handover latency. Taking this scenario into account, it is
possible
to
adopt
certain
procedures
that
enable
implementation of mobility under specific circumstances,
provided that certain requirements are established. These
requirements range from defining which layer mobility will be
introduced into, to the most efficient application of the
algorithm
or
protocol
that
will
perform
the
actual
implementation.
The proposal of this research is to create an app that will
provide information about the research. The research has the
purpose of evaluating and measuring handover latency using
specific protocols, seeking solutions that are workable for use
on current mobile devices.
In order to find the best way to seek information and
present it in a practical, easy-to-read and understandable way
for the users, a plan of action was devised for the project.
Figure 1 shows the architecture of the solution, as well as
the steps and sequence of actions that were executed for
implementing the proposal of this research.
Figure 1. Solution architecture
A. Materials
This research was developed during the postgraduate
degree course in Telematics. The research group work was
consolidated in meetings held in the laboratory reserved for
the postgraduate course of the Federal Institute of Education,
Science and Technology of Tocantins (IFTO), and some
meetings were also attended by video conference.
The efforts during the first meetings were concentrated on
solving problems that have been proposed to groups by
professors in the postgraduate course. It involved several
debates with the intention of finding ways of how the various
parts of the project would be executed. After the presentation
of all problems that had been proposed, the other meetings
were focused on the search for practical and highly applicable
solutions for teaching and learning. Current and easily usable
tools such as YouTube [10], Gmail [11], Classroom [12],
WhatsApp [13], Google Drive [14] and Google Docs [15]were
used for the video conference.
In order to develop the app proposed in this research, the
following items that will be described as follows were used:
Computers (Desktop and a Dell notebook) using Linux and
Windows operating systems, respectively, both with Internet
access, a Web platform that enables the creation of mobile
apps, the AppSheet, Google Drive for storing required content
for the application of the implementation, Google Docs for
editing of the files that will be made available in the app and
YouTube for sharing videos. The mobile device for testing was
a Motorola Moto tt5 plus smartphone.
B. Methodology
This subsection will present the steps and methodological
technologies adopted for implementation of the proposed
project in this work. The app was developed for smartphones,
tablets or any device with an Android or IOS operatingsystem,
with a view to providing information about the research that
will be performed.
The first stage of the project was collection of information
that deals with mobility among heterogeneous networks.
Initially, requirements and functionalities were developed for
the system in question: project description, protocol used,
testing
environment,
objectives,
problems,
advantages,
challenges and team work.
Once the requirements were established, part of the
implementation of the app started. For this purpose, we used
a specific tool, AppSheet, a platform Web site that enables
creation of apps for mobile devices without the need forhaving
extensive experience in mobile application development. The
AppSheet was created in 2014 and the tool is employed by
users in more than 220 countries, making it possible to create
apps that meet specific needs from a spreadsheet, simply and
quickly.
A spreadsheet was created to show implementation of the
app containing information that will be available, as well as
images related to the texts, files to help in data interpretation
and videos. In order to enter the platform, it was necessary to
sign in with a Gmail account and allow the tool to have access
to the file saved on the drive. Editing to the app is done in a
very simple and practical way.
The AppSheet platform interface is shown in Figure 2,
where the functionalities provided by the tool have been
displayed. This figure points out the options for app editing,
the tables that were used for app construction, the conditions
established for proper functioning and a presentation of an app
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 2. AppSheet
already in operation, in other words, an app simulation on a
mobile screen.
After the app began to take shape, final adjustments were
made in terms of information presentation and the colors used
to make project more visually attractive.
Research on mobility protocol evaluation will be done later
on during the postgraduate course. For this first stage
the
efforts were concentrated on creating the app. The results
obtained, the methodology and how the test environment was
assembled will be also presented for the app developed in this
research.
IV.
RESULTS
In this section, the results obtained will be presented for
implementation of the app using the AppSheet, which was
described in the previous section.
In order to optimize the dissemination of information
relevant to solutions that address the heterogeneity of wireless
networks, an application was created to provide the results of
the research that will be carried out during the postgraduate
course. The manner in which the information will be provided
will provide a very concise and dynamic understanding.
The initial prototype of the app was built from the
requirements and features surveyed during the course of the
research. A spreadsheet was created in Google Documents and
from this, an application was implemented on the AppSheet
Web platform. Figure 3 illustrates some of the app screens after
it was ready. Figure 3 (a) shows the screen when we press
the button named Project, connecting the path to the Project
Description part and to the Project Motivation that encourages
further research. Figure 3 (b) illustrates the application screen
when the Goals button is clicked; it shows the user the General
Purpose and Specific Objectives buttons.
The overall goal of protocol evaluation shown in Figure 3
(b) is to try to always keep mobile device users well connected
when moving among different administrative domain networks
and provide higher quality and reliability among connections.
The specific objectives are to facilitate the reestablishment of
connections, decrease registry data traffic in a mobility
environment and create mechanisms that reduce the latency
and quantity of packet losses during the handover process.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3. App implementation
The process for installing the app on mobile devices is
easy. The AppSheet must be installed first. The app developed
is called Mobility Protocol and after installation on the
smartphone, the first screen presentation provides a brief
summary of what the app is all about, the motive and reason
for its creation. Figure 4 shows the screen application shortly
after installation on a device mobile with Android or IOS
system.
Figure 4. Home screen
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The main mission of the app in question is to inform and
educate users about a very specific topic, which is the
evaluation of mobility protocol. As a result, the model of
structure plan used will be the index architecture model. For
applications with a specific purpose, this type of structure is
the best option. Figure 5 presents an organized menu for the
app after adoption of the index architecture template. Figure 5
(a) has a print screen showing the top of the app main menu. In
the app, there are several buttons in the main menu, and Figure
5 (b) illustrates the bottom section after scrolling vertically.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5. Home
In a constant effort to optimize the application developed so
that users always have a good experience and proper usability,
the app has a feature for users to leave suggestions, ideas for
possible improvements and/or compliments. The button that
allows this connection between the user and the developer is
called Feedback and is available in the upper left menu of the
app, allowing the user to send the text to the email that the
developer registered during creation of the project. The app
created has not yet been shared with the academic community
and other users who will use it, and we will thus not be able to
provide any feedback from possible users at this stage. Figure
6 illustrates the menu where this resource can be found.
Through the development and usability tests performed,
we have implemented the app that was proposed for this
project. Simple texts were used for better understanding of the
information that is being transmitted, the images illustrated
in each topic are related, whenever possible, to the texts of
each information and the colors have been chosen in order to
achieve harmonization in the app set.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Technology has made a major contribution to education, as
demonstrated by the use of television, multimedia equipment
and computers over the last few decades. However, because
of continuing modernization, the latest mobile technologies
deserve attention and can be applied in education, given that
and a large part of the population already has access to a high-
tech mobile device.
Figure 6. Menu
Although it is not a new topic and has already been dealt
with
by several
academic
researchers,
the
IP
mobility
management problem still deserves attention, especially in
environments where the networks used by the mobile device
do not have coupling and are located in many different
administrative domains. Such scenarios are becoming more
and more common and the quest for solutions is being treated
with a focus on mobile devices.
This research is focused on the development of an app
for mobile devices that will provide pertinent information for
research. It will be carried out during the postgraduate course
in the Telematics laboratory, where tests were performed for
evaluation of mobility protocols, as a requirement for obtaining
a specialist certificate.
The
Mobility
Protocol
Assessment
app
has
proved
promising in its ability to provide a contribution to education,
because it can aid in learning within the classroom, by
providing more dynamics and better presentation of the
information in an enlightening manner.
Therefore, in this context, the app developed meets the
central objective of the research, which is to present useful
information to the user and to show in a simple way how to
apply them. However, the Mobility Protocol Assessment tool
will not solve the mobility problem between heterogeneous
networks by itself, and will always require research on the
mobility issue and sharing of the results on the app.
As a suggestion for future work, this app can be
disseminated throughout the academic community of the
Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology of
Tocantins, in an effort to seek optimized versions. In parallel,
there will be a search for solutions for mobile device mobility
when moving along networks of different administrative
domains, an issue that will always provide room for new
academic research.
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

REFERENCES
[1]
I. Al-Surmi, M. Othman, and B. Mohd Al, “Mobility management
for IP-based next generation mobile networks: Review, challenge and
perspective,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications. Volume
35, Issue: 1, 2012, pp. 295–315, Elsevier.
[2]
S. Fernandes and A. Karmouch, “Vertical Mobility Management
Architectures in Wireless Networks: A Comprehensive Survey and
Future Directions. Communications Surveys Tutorial,” IEEE. Volume:
14, Issue: 1, 2012, pp. 45–63, IEEE.
[3]
C. E. Perkins, “IP Mobility Support,” IETF RFC 3344, August 2002.
[4]
R. Kodaly and C. E. Perkins, “Mobile IPv4 Fast Handover,” Internet
Draft, Mobile IPv4 Working Group, 2006.
[5]
A. Mohamed, A. Irfani, and D. Holton, “Handoff Mechanism in Mobile
IP,” IEEE, 2009.
[6]
C. C. Monteiro, “An Environment to Support the Integration of
Heterogeneous Wireless Networks,” Doctoral thesis. Presented to the
Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Brasilia, 2012.
[7]
S. Rinaldi, F. Bonafini, P. Ferrari, A. Flammini, E. Sisinni, D. Di Cara,
N.
Panzavecchia,
G.
Tine`,
A.
Cataliotti,
V.
Cosentino
et
al.,
“Characterization of ip-based communication for smart grid using
software-defined networking,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation
and Measurement, 2018.
[8]
S. B. Far and M. Alagheband, “Analysis and improvement of a
lightweight anonymous authentication protocol for mobile pay-tv
systems (full text),” arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.09493, 2018.
[9]
F. Beritelli, G. Capizzi, G. L. Sciuto, M. Woz´niak, D. Połap, K. Ksiaz˙ek 
et al., “A smart vpn bonding technique based on rtt analysis and
neural network prediction.” International Journal of Computer Science
& Applications, vol. 15, no. 1, 2018.
[10]
“YouTube,” 2018, URL: http://www.youtube.com/ [accessed: 2018-08-
06].
[11]
“Gmail,” 2018, URL: http://www.gmail.com/ [accessed: 2018-08-06].
[12]
“Classroom,” 2018, URL: http://www.classroom.google.com/ [accessed:
2018-08-06].
[13]
“WhatsApp,” 2018, URL: https://www.web.whatsapp.com/ [accessed:
2018-08-06].
[14]
“Google Drive,” 2018, URL: https://www.drive.google.com/ [accessed:
2018-08-06].
[15]
“Google Docs,” 2018, URL: https://www.docs.google.com/ [accessed:
2018-08-06].
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

