A Solution for Seamless Video Delivery in WLAN/3G Networks  
Claudio de Castro Monteiro 
Computing Department
Federal Institute of Education of Tocantins - IFTO
Palmas, Brazil
ccm.monteiro@ieee.org
Paulo Roberto de Lira Gondim
Department of Electrical Engineering
University of Brasilia
Brasilia, Brazil
pgondim@unb.br
Abstract—In this paper, we introduce a Session Proxy (SP) into 
a scenario in which wireless local network (WLAN)  and 3th 
generation of networks cellular (3G networks) are integrated 
using peer-to-peer architecture, with mobile IP (MIP) as the 
mobility manager. This solution tries to preserve the quality of 
the streaming video upon each handover, recovering the user 
video session damaged by the high delay caused by MIP.
Keywords-Video, 3G, WLAN, Handover, Proxy
I.
 INTRODUCTION
Currently,  the  demand  for  high  performance  services 
offered for mobile 3G connections has increased. In order to 
meet  this  demand,  cellular  providers  have  deployed  3G 
networks using the Universal  Mobile Telecommunication 
System (UMTS) [4] and the Code Division Multiple Access 
2000 (CDMA2000) [7].
However, due to the high cost of deployment and low 
transmission  rates,  cellular  providers  have  not  been 
successful in attracting customers.
Although cellular networks can have high transmission 
rates,  the  cost  for  mounting  or  adapting  the  necessary 
infrastructure  is  very  high.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
infrastructure  of  WLAN  has  been  deployed  in  various 
countries  and  offers  data  rates  much  higher  than  3G 
networks, with lower deployment and maintenance costs.
These two networks, therefore, complement each other 
and, if properly integrated, can provide the user with the 
appropriate conditions to access services regardless of the 
access networks being used.
The integration of these networks has been the subject of 
several studies in recent years. In general, these studies can 
be divided into three main areas, according to their chosen 
solution: those who use systems of engagement, those with 
mobility management and those with direct applications of 
IMS (IP Multimedia Subsystem) standards and MIH (Media 
Independent Handover). 
The focus of this paper is to demonstrate the possibility 
of integration between WLAN and 3G using an architecture 
without coupling, with the peer-to-peer protocol MIP as the 
mobility manager and a proxy session to ensure continuity of 
the connection sessions for the user in order to maintain 
quality when receiving video streams.
The  effectiveness  of  our  proposal  is  shown  through 
experiments conducted in real life with a WLAN network, 
over which we have total managerial  control,  and a 3G 
network from a local carrier in Brazil, over which we have 
no management control. The technical difficulty of access to 
the local cellular operator has motivated us to create this 
solution,  which,  in  principle,  is  not  dependent  on  the 
resource deployment of any hardware or software in the core 
of mobile carriers.
This  environment  has  a  multi-mode  mobile  terminal, 
containing  two  network  interfaces  (WLAN  and  3G).  In 
addition, an access point based on Linux was implemented to 
generate the WLAN coverage. An implemented MIP Home 
Agent (HA) is at the core of a WLAN, while a MIP Foreign 
Agent (FA) is implemented and available on the Internet. 
Thus,  we  show  that  the  measured  delay  during  the 
handover between the mobile WLAN and 3G is reduced by 
40% as compared to results in the literature, and we propose 
that this integration uses MIP.
However, this reduction of delay is not sufficient for 
sessions that are connecting video stream applications to 
have continuity. 
Therefore, we insert a proxy session at the core of a 
WLAN that is able to cache the video frame after receiving 
the unit, signalling the start of a handover and delivering the 
frames to the mobile once the handover is completed, using a 
tunnel  made  between  the  SP  and  the  mobile  and  duly 
recording between the FA and the HA.
The article is divided as follows: In Section II, we present
some related works. In Section III, we present our proposal
including  the  algorithms  used  to  implement  the  SP.  In
Section IV, we present the testbed used to test and validate
the  proposed  solution.  In  Section  V,  we  present  the
conclusions of the work.  
II.
RELATED WORKS
The problem of reduced  video quality caused by the 
handover in WLAN/3G integrated networks has been treated 
to some extent. 
However, this problem has been divided into two parts: 
one part studies ways to integrate WLANs with 3G networks 
in  order  to  reduce  delays  in  the  exchange  of  control 
messages between the two networks, in an attempt to make 
the user feel as though he is working with a single network; 
and  the  other  part  studies  methods  to  maintain  a video 
session when a handover process occurs, by adapting the 
transmission. 
We  analyze  works  that  address  solutions  for  this 
problem, focusing on these two categories.
In  [1],  the  authors  present  a  scheme  for  dynamic 
negotiation of QoS parameters between access points. The 
paper  introduces  a  concept  of  BAG  (Bandwidth 
Aggregation),  which  allows  the  user  to  dynamically 
164
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

negotiate, using the access points involved, the path to be 
used to request a service. 
Thus, users can move between access points, keeping the 
best  service  condition  possible.  Despite  showing  the 
efficiency of the solution, the authors only considered the 
bandwidth  dependence  of  the  QoS  parameters,  without 
emphasizing the reflections in the delay, jitter and packet 
loss  that  the  solution  generates.  However,  the  proposal 
shown for QoS negotiation allocates the resources after the 
handover. 
Nothing  is  reported  about  the  handover  period,  still 
leaving open questions that are very important with regard to 
streaming video.
The work presented in [2] proposes a comparative study 
of video-encoding tools and storage techniques used for the 
delivery of video on demand to users on a next generation 
network. 
The paper analyzes the performance of these tools and 
techniques in a tightly coupled environment using the IP 
Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) connected to a live operator 
network. 
All results are presented at the Quality of Experience 
(QoE)  parameter  level  and  indicate  that  some  of  these 
techniques can be used to help solve the problem treated in 
this paper. 
However, the techniques and tools were evaluated in a 
tightly coupled environment, where it was assumed that the 
cellular operator had control over the technical solution. 
This is not the case with our situation, since we are 
proposing a structure in which the cellular operator does not 
need to have control over the solution and does not have to 
install any hardware or software components in the core.  
In  [3],  the  authors  presented  and  compared  three 
strategies for checking the quality of user experience for the 
reception of video streams. 
Although the authors presented three strategies, the paper 
focused  more on the results of a hybrid strategy,  called 
Pseudo  Subjective  Quality  Assessment  (PSQA),  which, 
according  to  the  authors,  presents  advantages  over  the 
traditional PSNR. 
This work demonstrates the applicability of the objective 
QoE metric, known as PSNR, which does not have temporal 
characteristics of the delays inherent in the transmission of 
video streams over the network, but the excessive loss of 
frames only. 
This has led us to choose PSNR over the PSQA, whereas 
we measure the quality of perception of the user in the 
continuing video session after the vertical handover of the 
mobile.    
Some studies found in the literature present  coupling 
architectures  for  3G-WLAN  interworking.  One  of  these 
studies is shown in [4], where the authors propose a loosely 
coupled architecture called SHARE. 
In this proposal, each AP has a WLAN card to connect to 
a  3G  network,  which  is  used  for  the  AP  and  can  be 
connected simultaneously to the cell WLAN and cellular 3G. 
The result is that 3G base stations can share their control 
channels with the APs, facilitating the detection of available 
APs in the region for mobiles, without, according to the 
authors,  generating  the  characteristic  delay  of  discovery 
networks in the handover process. 
The proposal of the paper is good, and we found that the 
delay caused by network discovery activity in the handover 
process is small enough, considering the cost of inserting a 
3G  connection  hardware  into  each  AP  and  software 
procedures into both APs and 3G base stations. 
Thus, although the solution of the authors has inspired us, 
we consider a scenario in which 3G networks and WLAN 
are overlapping and in which the mobile already has both 3G 
and WLAN interfaces available and is connected to each 
network, so that there is no need to detect the available 
networks. 
In addition, we are concerned with reducing the handover 
latency at the level of reconnection IP, which is mandatory 
after the handover process and is decisive in solving our 
main problem.
In  [5],  a  framework  was  presented  to  assist  with 
admission  control  and  resource  reservation  in  next 
generation mobile networks. 
The proposal presents a distributed call admission control 
with resource reservation, using the position information of 
the mobile to predict the movement of the user, determining 
the acceptance of the connection requests that can be made 
to that cell, which is based on the probability of movement 
of the user and the resources required by the connection. 
However,  this  solution  requires  the  use  of  a  Global 
Position System (GPS) for each base station to find the 
location of the mobile and provide its movement in order to 
determine whether that cell has the resources required by the 
mobile. 
This solution has a high cost and requires hardware and 
software elements to be installed into the 3G network core, 
with  regard  to  admission  control  based  on  resource 
reservation. 
Nothing is needed to maintain continuity of the session of 
the mobile connection  after  the handover,  since  we  can 
predict the movement and allocate resources to be used after 
the handover of the mobile, but if a session is already open, 
the handover latency can be decisive for continuity of the 
session.
In an attempt to maintain multimedia services during a 
vertical handover between WLAN and 3G, we find in [6] an 
assessment of the support mobility mechanisms proposed by 
IEEE 802.21. 
The authors presented the results of application studies of 
these  mechanisms  to  assist  with  the  handover  in  both 
directions, using an implementation of an MIH Link Going 
Down event for IEEE 802.11 networks. 
The  authors  validated  their  results  using  a  simulated 
environment with the NS-2 software. In the proposal, it is 
unclear  how  the  multimedia  session  connection  will  be 
maintained, since the Link Going Down event informs the 
mobile that the link is suffering a fading. 
Thus,  other  actions  should  be  taken  from  this  point 
forward to ensure the sessions, depending on the multimedia 
traffic type. 
In  our  study,  although  MIH  could  have  been 
implemented into the mobile and WLAN core, we chose to 
implement (only in the mobile) software elements that verify 
the operation of the device interfaces. 
If there is any change in the active interface (the one used 
as the standard output), here represented by being powered 
165
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

off, the hard handover process is then characterized, and all 
other procedures related to re-establishing the IP connection 
and caching the video frames are started. 
A framework for interworking between a WLAN and the 
UMTS network is presented in [7]. This proposal uses the IP 
multimedia subsystem suggested by the 3GPP for mediating 
network coupling in order to manage real-time sessions. 
The work uses the IMS in order to provide for a user 
from  a  cellular  network  and  QoS  (Quality  of  Service) 
features  available  in  a  WLAN,  while  also  providing  a 
common  and  unified  platform  for  control  session  user 
connection. 
This architecture provides service control for a mobility 
terminal  in  an  environment  of  heterogeneous  wireless 
networks. The work validates the proposed model to ensure 
continuity  of  services  during  and  after  the  handover  by 
simulation. 
The work ensured that a better continuity of service was 
possible. The model does not explain how to characterize the 
traffic  during  the  simulation  and  focused  only  on  the 
coupling  of  the  WLAN  and  3G  networks  using  IMS, 
assuming that the operation of IMS elements can reduce the 
latency  caused  by  the exchange  of messages  during  the 
handover. 
When proposing an unified architecture with mediation 
by the IMS, the handover is to be transparent to the user with 
the viewpoint of exchanging signalling messages. 
The solution is interesting but requires that significant 
changes be made to the core of the networks involved, which 
may be difficult in a real scenario. 
Our solution uses an architecture without coupling and 
therefore does not require that changes be made to the core 
3G  network,  while  requiring  only  some  simple 
implementations in the core WLAN network.
The authors in [8] proposed a practical design of a proxy 
agent – SPONGE (Stream Pooler Over a Network Graded 
Environment)  -  localized  between  the  wireless  user 
equipment  and  the  streaming  video  to  facilitate  the 
adaptation of delivering video stream service by wireless 
networks. 
The architecture proposes the storage of a video, encoded 
at  different  qualities,  permitting  the  user  equipment  to 
receive  videos  according  to  the  characteristics  of  their 
network. 
The authors focused their contribution to ensuring the 
video delivery, considering the conditions of the network 
QoS and the quality of the streams stored.  The results did 
not lead to a guarantee of video stream delivery during or 
after the handover of the user. 
Our work, despite having a similar direction, presents a 
Session  Proxy  (SP)  without  considering  multiple  video 
qualities with the aim of adapting the delivery. 
The SP is presented as an alternative to associating a 
connection  session  of  a  mobile  with  a  central  element, 
designed to lead the intermediate cache frames  of video 
transmission during the vertical handover of the mobile, in 
an attempt to deliver them in the same sequence after the 
handover. 
The work of a SP is supported by our strategy for MIP 
implementation,  which  contributes  to  the  reduction  of 
handover latency in the re-establishment of IP connections.  
A proposal of a handover study in mobile IP networks 
and  mobile  IP  protocol  extensions  for  handover  latency 
minimization was given in [9], indicating that native mobile 
IP  has  a  very  high  handover  latency,  and  the  proposal 
improved the performance of handover latency by 15%. Our 
proposal reduces this latency by 40%.
In [10], a proxy-based multimedia scheme is proposed 
for control Real Time Streaming Protocol (RTSP) to support 
fast  signalling  in  the  home  network.  The  testbed 
implementation showed that the proposed scheme improved 
performance as compared with the RTSP in terms of the 
latency  time,  but  it  did  not  resolve  the  RTSP  session 
continuity problem. The proposal reduced latency time, but 
the loss rate was large enough that the RTSP session could 
not continue.  
A framework is proposed in [11] for multimedia delivery 
and  adaptation  in  mobile  environments.  This  work 
introduced the concept of a Personal Address (PA), which is 
a network  address  associated  with  the user instead  of a 
network interface. 
The proposed framework works at the network layer, and 
it moves the PA among networks and devices to deliver 
media in a seamless and transparent way. 
The  authors  claim  that  the  location’s  transparency 
sponsored by the PA allows the user to receive multimedia 
data independent of the IP network. 
However, the solution presented used a mobile IP and did 
not  show  how  it  impacted  the  transmission  multimedia 
session continuity, influenced by the implementation of the 
entities that manage the PAs.
All  of  the  related  works  studied  attempt  to  resolve 
problems  in  wireless  network  integration  for  service 
delivery. 
In special cases, solutions have been reported for the 
integration  and  interoperation  between  WLAN  and  3G 
networks in order to ensure the video delivery to users of 
these networks. 
The  problems  discussed  include  the  handover.  Many 
studies have adopted ways to reduce the handover latency 
using MIH, IMS protocols, mobility, coupled architectures, 
algorithms for network discovery, or even an integrated set 
of techniques.
 Our work attempts to solve the problem in two stages. 
First, we suggest an architecture without engagement and the 
implementation of a MIP to manage the mobility of the user, 
considering an architecture in which no change is required in 
the core 3G network. 
In  the  second  stage,  we  suggest  a  session  proxy, 
implemented into this architecture, that is able to provide the 
user with session continuity after the video handover, which 
is granted only with the MIP. 
In general, video stream sessions have a synchronization 
time that does not support the handover latency. The studies 
found  in  the  literature  handle  problems  with  enlace 
retransmission techniques, with different frame types that 
deliver only the necessary or usual application technologies 
of mobile IP. 
Thus, our solution is based on a set that uses a mobile IP 
and a session proxy (SP). The proposal attempts to resolve 
the session continuity problem after handover, ensuring the 
166
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

receiver quality (PSNR – Peak Signal Noise Ratio) of the 
video transmitted.
III.
PROPOSAL
In our proposal, we suggest inserting two components in 
the WLAN core operator: a MIP HA implementation and a 
Session Proxy (SP). 
In addition, a MIP FA implementation is proposed for 
working through the Internet, in order to register the Care of 
Address (CoA) of the mobile.  In Figure 1, these components 
and their links can be seen.
Figure 1. 
 Proposed Architecture 
The main idea is to maintain the continuity of the user 
video session after handover. To accomplish this, we set up a 
testbed containing native Linux MIP implementation only, as 
shown in Figure 2. 
Figure 2. 
Proposed Architecture with MIP implementation 
only
A.
MIP utilization and implementation
We considered 200 unicasts of video highway, requested 
by the mobile. When the video stream reaches frame 400, we 
turn off the WLAN interface of the mobile, make the client 
portion of the Linux MIP native implementation identify the 
fact and change the default route of the mobile to the 3G 
network gateway, telling the FA the new IP and triggering 
the registration process between the FA, the HA and the 
mobile, described in the specification MIP.  
The results, as expected, showed a high delay during 
handover, reaching an average of 5 seconds, whereas this 
implementation  presented  difficulties  in  establishing  the 
tunnel between the HA and the mobile, plus some additional 
delay in the necessary registration between the mobile and 
the FA and between the FA and the HA. For non-real-time 
applications, this result is satisfactory, but not for real-time 
applications.
To try to reduce the delay caused by the MIP handover, 
we decided to implement a HA and a FA, based on raw 
sockets, and to restrict the MIP signalling to recording the 
new IP address in the FA and the registration of the new 
address in the HA, made by the FA. 
After that, the HA adds a new route to reach the mobile, 
using it for the establishment of an IP tunnel, with the help of 
openvpn software.
This  implementation  was  more  efficient  than  that 
available natively on Linux; it reduced the delay by 40%, as 
shown in Figure 3. However, 3 seconds is still a long delay 
for video session connections to be maintained.
 
Figure 3. 
Native MIP vs proposed MIP delay
We  observed  that  the  objective  QoE  (Quality  of 
Experience) metric, known as the PSNR, does not suffer a 
direct influence of the delay in receiving frames, rather an 
excessive loss of frames at the reception of the video, which 
can  cause  a  significant  reduction  in  the  PSNR  values 
obtained, as shown in Figure 4. 
Thus, the loss of the video session during the reception 
generates, from the viewpoint of the player, an excessive loss 
of frames, directly affecting the PSNR of the received video.
167
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

Figure 4. 
PSNR vs Frame Delay and Loss
B.
Session Proxy
To address the problem of a continuous session during 
the transmission of video streams, we included a software 
entity in the proposed architecture, called a Session Proxy 
(SP) [12], as shown in Figure 1.
The SP ensures the continuity of the session even after 
long periods of link discontinuity. Although the SP can use 
the prediction of a handover of the mobile, through the 
thresholds defined after the extensive experiments detailed 
and displayed in Table 1 [12], for simplicity, we assume that 
the handover will be determined by the number of frames 
received from the video, using a setting of 200 frames; a 
hard handover will occur if the active interface of the mobile 
is turned off. 
Before  that,  upon  receiving  frame  150,  the  mobile 
informs the SP that it is about to start the handover and that it 
should start the cache frames.
Thus, the mobile requests an open session RTSP with the 
video  server.  This  request  will  be  received  by  the  SP, 
registered  with the structure shown in Table 1 and then 
forwarded to the video server, according to the algorithm 
shown below.
receive_socket(socket, RTSP_request);
registered_session(session_ID, RTSP, IP_MAC, 0);
open_socket(socket1, IP_server);
send_socket(socket1, RTSP_request);
receive_socket(socket1, RTSP_response);
send_socket(socket, RTSP_response);
while(Session_ID <> 0)
{
receive_socket(socket, RTSP_packets);
receive_socket(socket2, status, MAC_AP);
if(status==1)
{
FrameID=frame_ID;
start_cache(Session_ID);
}
if(status<>1)
{
send_socket(socket1, RTSP_packets);
}
sendcache_socket(socket1, RTSP_packets);
}
The video server then opens an RTSP session with the 
SP, which will begin to receive the frames and transfer them 
to the AP, which delivers it to the mobile node. This process 
will continue until the mobile receives  video frame 100, 
indicating that the SP should start the frame cache. 
At this point, the SP-cached frames are transmitted to the 
mobile, using the data structure shown in Table 2.  When the 
mobile receives frame 150, the hard handover will start.
When the mobile receives video frame 100 and informs 
the SP, it records the identifier of the last frame received in 
the session registration cache and continues with the video 
server session open, receiving frames, inserting in the cache 
and transmitting to the mobile. 
When the active interface of the mobile is switched off, 
the MIP  is  employed  in  order  to  achieve  the necessary 
records for rebuilding the user's IP connection, as described 
in the previous section. 
This informs the SP that it must start the transmission of 
frames in its cache following the last frame that was received 
by the mobile, now using the new path created by our MIP 
implementation.
TABLE I. 
SESSION REGISTRATION CACHE STRUCTURE
Session ID
Service ID
IP association
Frame ID
With the use of a SP, we continue to deliver the video 
after the handover of the mobile, without the loss of frames 
influencing the quality of the video received. The display 
shown to the user stops for 2.23 seconds, with the next frame 
playing after the last frame received.
In Figure 5, can see the PSNR of the video received with 
and without the use of a SP. Note that when we use the SP, 
the  values  do  not  have  variations  that  could  impair  the 
quality of the video received. This is not so when we do not 
use this software component, demonstrating the efficiency of 
the proposed mechanism. 
With a SP, the mobile receives frames after the handover, 
from the last frame received before the handover, without 
affecting the quality of perception of the user. 
Moreover, without the SP after the handover, the mobile 
no longer receives the remaining frames of the video, which, 
after a certain number of frames not received, reduces the 
PSNR of the received video. In practice, the user realizes that 
the session connection has been  interrupted  and that the 
video has stopped being displayed.
Figure 5. 
PSNR video with and without SP
168
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

C.
Mobility Considerations
For  testing  purposes,  we  first  considered  the  user 
mobility  of  WLAN  →  3G.  However,  as  we  are  not 
considering a soft handover, the methodology used to study 
the behaviour of the proposed architecture in the case of the 
user mobility of 3G → WLAN was exactly the same, and the 
results have similar values, since the components that are 
involved are the latency of re-establishing IP connectivity (in 
implementing MIP) and session user continuity  (with a 
session proxy).
IV.
TESTBED SCENARIO
For testing, we mounted a scenario composed of three 
netbooks with the Linux 2.6.31 operating system. 
The first netbook was used as a multi-mode device, with 
a WLAN interface (atheros) and a 3G interface. 
The second netbook was used as a HA and network core 
of WLAN, providing Internet Gateway, NAT and DHCP for 
WLAN users. 
This netbook also employed our implementation of a SP 
and a HA. The third netbook was used as a FA and was 
installed  within  the  IP  network  of  the  Laboratory  of 
Interactive Digital TV, UnB. 
In  this  machine,  our  implementation  of  a  FA  was 
installed as well. Moreover, it also used an access point 
CISCO / LINKSYS, installed in an IFTO IP network, and a 
video  server,  with  VLC  software,  installed  in  the 
LabTVDI/UnB IP network.
Importantly,  our  solution  shows  results  based  on  an 
environment in which nothing needs to be inserted into the 
core  of  the 3G  operators,  signalling  a  possible  offer  of 
transmission services, continuous video streaming, free of 
charge.
V.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
This  study  provided  evidence  supporting  our  two 
hypotheses: i) It is possible to reduce the delay caused by the 
implementation  of  MIP.  This  was  achieved  with  the 
methodology of MIP implementation presented. ii) The use 
of  a  SP  is  also  effective  in  environments  in  which 
heterogeneous wireless networks are integrated.
Our main goal was to reduce the delay caused by a 
vertical handover to minimize its impacts on the receipt of 
videos. 
Using only the techniques of mobility management, some 
studies have proposed solutions that reduce the latency of the 
handover in different layers of the OSI model. 
Although we also attempted (successfully) to reduce the 
latency  in  layer  3,  the  reduction  was  not  sufficient  to 
maintain the continuity of video sessions after a vertical 
handover.
Other studies have presented solutions to work around 
this problem generated by the delay in video connections 
subjected to a handover. These works have tried to adapt the 
application to network conditions, often using techniques of 
video compression and selective transmission.
Our work presents the concept and implementation of a 
proxy session that mediates the process of accessing the 
video, performing an activity together between the network 
and the mobile, which results in effectively maintaining the 
quality of video received at that session connection. 
As a continuation of this work, we are developing a 
mechanism  of  Admission  Control  (CAC),  based  on 
distributed brokers that implement a primitive MIH and that 
can  help  the  mobile  to  identify  and  determine  the  best 
network to perform the handover, in order to control the 
entry of the mobile into networks in accordance with their 
demands for QoS/QoE. We intend to do this by considering 
brokers independently of the networks available.
REFERENCES
[1]
Fernandez,  J.C.,  Taleb,  T.,  Guizani,  M.  and  Kato,  N.  (2009). 
Bandwidth  aggregation-aware dynamic QoS negotiation  for real-
time video streaming in next-generation wireless networks. IEEE 
Transactions on Multimedia, 11(6), 1082-1093.
[2]
[
Kuwadekar, A. and Al-Begain, K. (2009). User Centric Quality of 
Experience  Testing  for  Video  on  Demand  over  IMS.  First 
International  Conference  on  Computational  Intelligence, 
Communication Systems and Networks (pp. 497-504).
[3]
Piamrat, K., Viho, C., Bonnin, J. M. and Ksentini, A. (2009). Quality 
of  Experience  Measurements  for  Video  Streaming  over  Wireless 
Networks.  Sixth  International  Conference  on  Information 
Technology: New Generations. (pp. 1184-1189).
[4]
[
Lim,  C.,  Kim,  D.Y.,  Song,  O.  and  Choi,  C.H..  (2009).  SHARE: 
seamless handover architecture for 3G-WLAN roaming environment. 
Wireless Networks, 15(3), 353-363.
[5]
[
Judith,  F.L.  .(2008).  Approaches  to  resource  reservation  for 
migrating  real-time  sessions  in  future  mobile  wireless  networks, 
Wireless Networks, 13(2), p39-56.
[6]
[
Machan, P., Serwin, S. and Wozniak, J.". ( 2008). Performance of 
mobility support mechanisms in a heterogeneous UMTS and IEEE 
802.11  network  offered  under  the  IEEE  802.21  standard.  1st 
International Conference on Information Technology (pp. 1-4).
[7]
[
Munasinghe, K. and Jamalipour, A. (2008). Interworking of WLAN-
UMTS  Networks :  An  IMS-Based  Platform  for Session  Mobility. 
IEEE Communications Magazine, 46(9),  184-191. 
[8]
Leu, J. S. and Tsai, C. W. (2009). Practical design of a proxy agent to 
facilitate  adaptive  video  streaming  service  across  wired/wireless 
networks. Journal of Systems and Software, 19(5), 1-12.
[9]
Malekian, R. (2008). The Study of Handover in Mobile IP Networks. 
Third  International  Conference  on  Broadband  Communications, 
Information Technology and Biomedical Applications (pp. 181-185).
[10] Lee, J. M., Yu, M., Choi, S. G., Lee, Y. R. and Kang, S. M. (2008). 
Proxy-based multimedia signaling scheme using RTSP for seamless 
service  mobility  in  home  network.  International  Conference  on 
Consumer Electronics  (pp. 1-2).
[11] Bolla,  R.,  Mangialardi,  S.,  Rapuzzi,  R.  and  Repetto,  M.  (2009). 
Streaming  multimedia  contents  to  nomadic  users  in  ubiquitous 
computing  environments.  28th  IEEE  international  conference  on 
Computer Communications Workshops (pp. 218-223).
[12] Monteiro, C. C., Gondim, P. R. L. and Rios, V. M. (2010). Seamless 
Video  Session  Handoff between  WLANs.  HINDAWI  International 
Journal on Computer System and Networking, 2010(2010), 36-46.
169
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

