Dummy-Based Anonymization for Voice-Controlled IoT Devices
Katrin Winkler and Erik Buchmann
Hochschule für Telekommunikation Leipzig, Germany
Email: {s111132|buchmann}@hft-leipzig.de
Abstract—Voice assistants like Amazon Alexa, Google Assistant or
Siri are becoming increasingly popular. Such assistants allow for
complex interactions with smart Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices
that do not have a traditional user interface, such as monitor and
keyboard. However, while voice assistants foster the proliferation
of numerous convenient services from smart homes to connected
cars, they are problematic from the perspective of user privacy. In
many cases, IoT devices are permanently listening for keywords
in sensitive areas such as living rooms or bed rooms. Once such
a word is recognized, voice samples are sent to the voice-assistant
provider into the cloud for further analyses. We explore how the
users of IoT devices can anonymize the voice recordings sent to
the voice-assistant provider. To this end, we identify categories of
information sent to the provider, we describe an anonymization
approach based on dummy voice commands, and we describe a
prototypical anonymization device based on a Raspberry PI. Our
device conﬁrms that it is possible to anonymize some information
sent to Alexa with limited inconveniences for the user.
Keywords–User Privacy; Internet of Things; Voice Control.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A major success factor for the Internet of Things (IoT)
is the availability of reliable, user-friendly voice assistants.
Without assistants like Alexa, Siri, Bixby or Cortana, it would
be difﬁcult to integrate IoT services with everyday appliances
that do not possess graphical user interfaces. Today, a large
number of voice-controlled services exist. Such services man-
age light bulbs, radio and video receivers, heating systems or
alarm equipments, provide access to emails, text messages and
calendar information, and activate vacuum cleaner robots.
A voice-controlled IoT device consists of one or more
microphones, a small voice processor and an Internet link to a
cloud service. The microphone records environmental sounds,
which are locally processed. When the IoT device recognizes a
preconﬁgured wake-up word ("‘Alexa, ..."’, "‘Ok Google, ..."’),
it sends a few seconds of sound records to a cloud service. This
cloud service does a more complex voice processing in order
to extract spoken commands. Finally, the cloud service sends
– depending on the IoT service invoked – control commands
and/or information back to the IoT device (cf. Figure 1).
While this approach works very well from a technical point
of view, and supports a plethora of useful and user-friendly IoT
services, it is problematic from a privacy perspective. Typi-
cally, voice assistants are permanently listening, and placed
in highly private areas, such as living rooms, kitchens or bed
rooms. Experience has shown that the IoT devices react not
only on the owner saying the wake word [15]. Thus, the service
provider might overhear deeply private conversations.
Many voice-controlled IoT devices integrate third-party
services. For example, Amazon Alexa allows to control com-
Figure 1. Ecosystem of voice-controlled IoT devices [26]
ponents of the Philips Hue lighting system. Thus, the process-
ing of voice commands depends on a complex interaction of
services from various parties. In consequence, the privacy poli-
cies of the service providers are also complex. Data breaches
might occur at any place in this service architecture, revealing
deeply sensitive personality proﬁles. Finally, guests of the
device’s owner might not be aware that their conversation can
be transferred to a cloud service for further processing.
The purpose of this paper is to fuel the ongoing discussion
about options on the user’s side to mitigate the impact of voice
assistants on privacy. To this end, we explore technical options
to anonymize IoT devices using voice assistants from the
user perspective. That is, we systematically analyze in which
way a user of an IoT device can control or inﬂuence voice
records sent to an IoT service in order to have certain sensitive
information anonymized. As a prominent example, we focus
on Amazon Echo. We explicitly leave aside legal questions,
and we assume that the IoT service provider handles any user
data as described in it’s privacy policy. We also do not discuss
the responsibility of the users, say, not to use voice assistants
in public spaces [40]. In particular, we make the following
contributions:
• We identify which private information can be potentially
observed by the service provider.
• We analyze options for the user to control the voice
records sent to the provider.
• We explore a dummy-based approach to anonymize the
information sent to the provider.
• Finally, we describe what we have learned from imple-
menting a prototypical anonymization device.
Our anonymization device demonstrates that it is possible
to anonymize a part of the information sent to Amazon Echo,
with little inconvenience for the user. We point out that some
information cannot be anonymized without making the service
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

useless. However, it is challenging to infer what the service
provider might learn from the voice records sent to the cloud.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II
reviews related work. Sections III and IV introduce Ama-
zon Alexa and Amazon Echo. Section V outlines options
to anonymize voice assistants. Section VI describes our
anonymization device. The paper concludes with Section VII.
II.
RELATED WORK
In this section, we review related work on (a) voice
assistants for IoT services, (b) data privacy in IoT and (c)
dummy-based anonymization techniques.
A. Voice Assistants
The IoT is evolving rapidly. The worldwide IoT market
is expected grow to $1.1 trillion in 2021 with a compound
annual growth rate of 14.4% [16]. Similarly, the worldwide
market for virtual personal assistant-enabled wireless speakers
will reach $2.1 billion by 2020 [12]. Currently, the U.S. market
is dominated by Amazon Echo with 73% and Google Home
with 27% [13]. Thus, voice assistants like Amazon Echo,
Google Home or Apple HomePod are popular devices for users
to control their smart home appliances, adjust thermostats,
activate home security systems, purchase items online, initiate
phone calls, and many other tasks in their daily life. Voice
assistants and smart speakers exist in many different types
with varying level of capabilities. Some of them can be
integrated into party products, such as connected cars [46].
For example, BMW customers can enable different vehicle
functions via voice assistants like Google Home or Amazon
Alexa since November 2017 [7]. Other examples are smart
fridges like Samsung Family Hub 3.0, which communicates
with its users via Bixby [14]. There are even voice-controlled
toys for children (Mattels Hello Barbie [39]) or toilets with
integrated voice assistants [9].
B. Privacy in the Internet of Things
As soon as appliances interact with their users in a natural
way, such as per voice, humans tend to see them as partners
instead of machines [30]. Thus, users are tempted to assign
attributes regarding morale, attitude or responsibility to voice
assistants [31]. This is problematic, as voice assistants often
have access to data with a high impact on privacy and secu-
rity [23]. This allows for numerous new threats and attacker
models [27]. A large share of cell phone users face similar
privacy risks as the users of voice-controlled IoT devices.
However, in direct comparison cell phone users adjust their
system settings in much more restrictive way [24] than users
of voice-controlled IoT devices.
Since voice assistants typically do not distinguish different
speakers – a feature that is helpful for anonymization –
adversaries in microphone range might issue commands to the
voice assistant. This has been already demonstrated in multiple
ways [34], e.g., via television, via ultrasonic frequencies that
are too high for the human ear to hear, or through closed
windows. Furthermore, manipulated voice commands can lead
to ﬁnancial losses because the user’s payment data is often
accessed directly [34]. Currently, the best approach for con-
sumer privacy is to unplug any IoT device when not in use. In
addition, the user should frequently review the voice assistants
history for unauthorized actions [34]. Typically, this history is
accessible via the Web page of the service provider.
C. Anonymization Techniques
Anonymization means to protect the privacy of an individ-
ual regarding certain features, e.g., the presence of the individ-
ual in a data set, if the individual shares similar characteristics
with a control group or if the individual can be assigned with
certain attributes. There is a broad variety of anonymization
approaches available (see [21] for an overview). State of the
art is Differential Privacy [29], which ensures that the presence
or absence of an individual record in a database has a very
small impact on the result of a speciﬁc analysis. However,
such privacy measures need data from multiple users as an
input for the anonymization. From the perspective of a single
user who wants to protect himself against a curious service
provider, such approaches cannot be applied.
Dummy-based annonymization [35][36] has been exten-
sively studied in the context of location based systems.
Dummy-based anonymization means that a user does not only
send its real position to a location-based system, but a number
of made-up positions as well. From the set of answers provided
by the system, the user considers only information regarding
his real position. This approach has numerous beneﬁts: (i)
Anonymity can be obtained without the help of a trusted third
party or other users. (ii) Each user can decide individually
which properties to be hidden in the dummy requests. (iii)
Finally, the approach scales linearly with the number of
dummies sent. However, it is difﬁcult to create a realistic set
of dummies where the real information cannot be singled out
by statistical means or other properties [32][33]. Dummy-based
anonymization has been already studied in other contexts, e.g.,
social networks [25] or database tables [22].
III.
AMAZON ALEXA
Without loss of generality, we will use Amazon Alexa as a
prominent example of a voice assistant. Amazon operates the
cloud service that extracts commands from voice records and
provides an adequate reaction to this commands. Devices that
allow to access Alexa are offered either by Amazon (e.g. Echo
Family, Dash Wand, Fire Tablet, Fire TV), or by third-party-
providers that provide devices based on a recent Android, iOS
or Windows operating system. Other assistants operate in a
similar way, e.g., Siri (Apple), Bixby (Samsung) or Cortana
(Microsoft).
In this section, we will brieﬂy describe Alexa’s IT ecosys-
tem. As Figure 2 shows, the cloud service plays the most
prominent role. It allows Alexa to continually adapt to the
speech patterns, vocabulary and personal preferences of the
users [10]. Furthermore, it allows Alexa to integrate new
functionality and to connect to other services by using the
Alexa Skills Kit (ASK) and the Alexa Voice Service (AVS).
A. Alexa Skills Kit (ASK)
The Alexa Skills Kit is a collection of APIs, tools, docu-
mentations and source code samples. Initially, ASK has been
designed for internal Amazon developers to build new features
of Alexa’s Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) and Natural
Language Understanding (NLU) systems. Right now, ASK is
available for any third-party developer [37], and more than
25,000 skills have been built and deployed [1].
Figure 3 shows how ASK processes a request. In a ﬁrst
step, the IoT device waits the wake-up word from the user
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 2. The Alexa Ecosystem [19]
Figure 3. Request and response with the Alexa Skills Kit [19]
and sends a voice recording to the Amazon cloud service that
provides Alexa. Alexa identiﬁes the skill and recognizes the
user’s intent via ASR and NLU. This intent is sent to the
service identiﬁed by the skill. This service responds to the
intent. Depending on the user’s device, the response can be
a textual message, a verbal answer through Alexa’s Text-to-
Speech Synthesis (Figure 4) or a graphical response [19]. Any
information ﬂow is encrypted.
Figure 4. Text-to-Speech Synthesis [4]
B. Alexa Voice Service (AVS)
The Alexa Voice Service allows to connect Alexa skills
with third-party services and -products. Similarly to ASK, the
AVS consists of a set of development tools and resources, e.g.,
technical documentation and development kits. While ASK
is intended to build skills that reside in the Amazon cloud,
AVS allows third-party vendors of IoT devices to connect their
products to Alexa [2]. Typical examples of such devices are
mobile phones, connected cars and smart home appliances.
C. Amazon Web Service (AWS) Lambda
Skill developers are able to use other services from the
Amazon cloud [6]. A prominent example is AWS Lambda,
a scalable, cloud-based data processing service that executes
code in the backend, based on customer-speciﬁed events.
Such events could be calendar entries, conditions in a stream
database, push-services from external sources on the Internet,
etc. To use AWS Lamda with Alexa, a developer creates an
Alexa skill, uploads it to AWS Lambda and connects it with
an event source that triggers its execution. Thus, Alexa is open
to big-data management.
IV.
AMAZON ECHO
One of the most prominent IoT devices accessing Alexa
is the Amazon Echo and its smaller version, the Echo Dot.
These devices are hands-free, voice-controlled speakers which
connect to the Alexa Voice Service to play music, control smart
home devices, make phone calls, etc. In this section, we will
describe the hardware and the user interface of the Echo Dot,
together with the respective privacy policy.
A. Hardware and User Interface
Figures 5 and 6 show the structure and internals of an
Echo Dot. It comes with seven far-ﬁeld microphones with
beamforming technology and noise cancellation. Thus, verbal
commands can be perceived from every direction in a noisy
environment [10]. When the Dot recognizes the wake-up word,
the light ring turns blue. This allows the user to see when
a sound recording is sent into the Amazon cloud. The light
also indicates the direction of the voice received. The mute
button on the upper side allows to deactivate the microphones,
indicated by a red light. Two other buttons adjust the speaker
volume.
Figure 5. Basic structure of the Amazon Echo Dot [30]
To use the Dot, each user must create an Amazon account.
This account is used to conﬁgure the Dot, either via the
Alexa app or website [3]. The conﬁguration includes network
settings, the wake-up word and individual preferences, such
as alarms, music, shopping lists and active skills. If the
user registers multiple Dots, Alexa always responds from the
closest Dot using Echo Spatial Perception (ESP) [20]. Many
conﬁguration options can be accessed via voice interface. For
example, the default wake-up word can be modiﬁed by saying
“Alexa, change the wake-up word to Echo”. Similarly, the user
can instruct Alexa to install a new skill by using the voice
command “Alexa, activate <skill name>”. Few information is
stored locally at the Dot. In particular, this is the network
conﬁguration, and preferences, such as the volume and the
wake-up word. Any other information is sent to and stored at
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 6. Teardown of the Echo Dot [5]
the Amazon cloud and linked with the user’s personal Amazon
account. This is important, as the voice recordings transport
much personal information (cf. Section V).
B. Alexa’s Privacy Policy
To register an account, the user must consent to Amazon’s
privacy policy (In our case, it is the privacy policy of Ama-
zon Europe S.a.r.l., Luxembourg and its subsidiaries). Thus,
Amazon does not provide a separate privacy policy for Alexa
services that is different from the policy of other Amazon
services. Amazon provides a detailed list of personal data, as
follows:
• Any information that is sent directly to Amazon, e.g.,
personal data from the user account, shipping and order
information, etc.
• Any information that is obtained automatically when
interacting with one of the Amazon services, e.g., browser
type, operating systems, time zones or location data of the
device used.
• Information from other sources. For example, when a
logistics service conﬁrms a delivery, this information is
sent back to Amazon.
Furthermore, Amazon’s privacy policy contains a section
that explains the stored information with its purposes in detail.
This section states that modes of usage, voice recordings and
interactions from the past are essential to let Alexa provide
meaningful recommendations and reasonable answers. This
means that Amazon will not delete any information on its own
accord, unless the user issues a request for deletion based on
the EU-General Data Protection Regulation or decides to un-
register and delete the personal Amazon account. Furthermore,
the user might use the Amazon website to delete particular
information, e.g., certain voice recordings or orders from the
online shop that might result in misleading recommendations.
In total, the user has to agree to the following documents [18]:
• Alexa Terms of Use
• Amazon Conditions of Use
• Amazon Privacy Notice
• Cookies & Internet advertising
• Amazon Prime Terms & Conditions
• Amazon Music Terms of Use
• Kindle Store Terms of Use
• Audible Service Conditions of Use
• Amazon Device Terms of Use
V.
PRIVACY AND VOICE CONTROL
In this section, we identify categories of private information
a voice assistant might obtain or infer. Furthermore, we explore
alternatives to anonymize such classes of information for
voice-controlled IoT devices.
A. Categories of Private Information
To the best of our knowledge, there is no survey about the
impact of voice assistants on the privacy of its users. However,
we can learn from the ongoing discussion on the privacy
aspects of smart cellphones [43]. Furthermore, some details
can be inferred from the technical setup of voice assistants.
We have identiﬁed three categories of information that can be
obtained from the service provider in the cloud-based backend
of a voice assistant:
1. Application Data: This category of data refers to any
information a skill must access to perform a certain service.
Application data can be information stored in a database at the
site of the service provider. It can be also external information
fetched via HTTP-request over the Internet. For cell phones,
this kind of information corresponds to content data [45].
Example: Assume a user wants to manage calendar entries
via commands like "‘Alexa, when is my next event?"’ or
"‘Alexa, add an event to my calendar"’. In this case, the
service provider needs access to the user’s personal calendar.
Additional information, such as event priorities or alert times,
emphasize the signiﬁcance of calendar entries.
Privacy Issues: The impact of application data on the privacy
of the user depends heavily on the service and the context the
service is used. With our example, it makes a difference if the
calendar is used personally to manage birthdays of friends, if it
is used in a business environment to organize ofﬁce meetings,
or if it is used in a medical facility to ﬁx patient appointments
in an aseptic way. In general, the service provider learns from
application data:
• The content of an interaction with the voice-controlled
device, i.e., user interests, attitudes and personal data.
• The modes of use of a certain service, e.g., habits like
asking for a certain stock price every day in the morning.
If the service is offered by an external provider, this informa-
tion also goes to third parties.
If the voice assistant is used by individual persons, applica-
tion data is a promising subject for anonymization techniques
that aim forhiding personal interests, attitudes and modes of
use. However, as application data are inherently needed to
provide a service, there is a conﬂict between anonymity and
user experience.
2. Technical Data: Data from this category is necessary to
provide the service or stem from the domain of the service
provider. It is needed or generated automatically when a
service is executed and messages ﬂow between the IoT device
and the service provider. With cellphones, this is known as
call detail record [45].
Example: With our personal calendar, the voice-assistant
provider needs the user login to identify the personal calendar.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

If the calendar is provided by third parties, say, on a Microsoft
Exchange server, external login data is also needed. Further-
more, the service provider learns meta-data, such as date and
time of use, IP addresses, time-zones etc.
Privacy Issues: Technical data allow to infer personal in-
formation that are related to the interaction with the voice
assistant. For example, times of use correspond to the daily
routine of the users. Furthermore, the IP address can be a
user pseudonym and reveals the location of the user. However,
any technical information is routed through the cloud of the
voice-assistant provider. Thus, if the voice assistant accesses a
service provided by a third party, the external provider might
only "‘see"’ that a server from the cloud of the voice-assistant
provider is communicating – the IP address or the time zone
of the user’s IoT device can be hidden by network address
translation.
Privacy-Enhancing Technologies, such as the TOR onion
routing [28], I2P [44] or the JonDo Web Proxy [42] focus on
technical data. Since voice-controlled IoT devices are required
to send login information to the service provider anyway, it
does not make sense to apply such technologies. However,
technical data can be considered for anonymization techniques
that hide usage patterns, habits or activity periods.
3. Adjunct Data: This category contains information that is
neither needed to provide the service nor to communicate
with the IoT device, but it is interwoven with other data.
It corresponds to issues similar to location tracking [41] or
activity recognition [38] of modern cellphones.
Example: The voice recordings sent to the service provider
for speech recognition do not only transfer commands to the
voice assistant. Instead, features like linguistic stress patterns,
regional accents, the number of different speakers using the
voice assistant or environmental sounds are part of the record-
ing. Such information is independent from the service used,
i.e., it is not bound to our ongoing example of using a personal
calendar.
Privacy Issues: It is straightforward to infer sensible personal
details from adjunct data. For example, a provider might be
able to learn from environmental noises (perhaps accompanied
by commands to the voice assistant) that the user performs a
certain action, e.g., watching TV or making breakfast.
Information from this class can be removed without loss
of user experience from the data sent to the service provider.
However, this information comes as a byproduct of the sensory
equipment or the information technology used to provide the
service. Thus, it might be prohibitively expensive in terms
of computational costs to ﬁlter adjunct data. Basically, this
means to perform speech recognition locally instead of using
a powerful cloud service. This calls for other options to
anonymize voice assistants.
B. Options to Anonymize Voice-Controlled IoT Devices
From the perspective of the individual user, only a few
options exist to anonymize a voice-controlled IoT device to
some extent without abandoning the use of the device and
without sacriﬁcing user experience to a large extent. Firstly,
recall that the data ﬂow to and from the IoT device is
encrypted. Thus, it is not an option to manipulate the data
packets. Secondly, the IoT device is bound to a service provider
hosting (a) the voice assistant and (b) the service infrastructure
that allows to access a huge number of convenient services,
such as calendar management, radio stations, etc. As a result,
in many cases it is not an option to simply switch to a more
privacy-friendly voice-assistant provider (if there were any).
Third, for technical reasons it is not an option to do all voice
processing locally at the IoT device and only send commands
to the service provider that have been stripped from adjunct
data.
However, is is possible to use a variant of the dummy-
based anonymization (cf. Section II), i.e., to control what the
IoT device is allowed to hear and to hide sensitive personal
information in a number of dummy requests that are sent
through the IoT device to the voice assistant.
Example: Assume a user wants to anonymize its personal
calendar by using dummy requests. In the ﬁrst step, the user
identiﬁes the information to be obscured. With our example,
assume the user wants to conceal (i) which are the most
sensitive calendar entries, (ii) how many people use the voice
assistant and (iii) what are the typical daily activity times. For
this purpose, the user asks a number of friends to provide voice
samples, such as "‘Alexa, when is my next event?"’, "‘Alexa,
add an event to my calendar."’, "‘Alexa, delete an event from
my calendar"’ together with times and dates. A reasonable set
of dummy requests would order Alexa to read, add and remove
calendar entries at different times, by different voices, without
having an impact on the correctness of the service. Similar
dummy requests can be deﬁned for other services, say, playing
radio stations. We see three different options to realize such
an anonymization:
External anonymization via speakers: This is the most
simple option. An anonymization device with a speaker, e.g.,
a Raspberry Pi, is placed nearby the IoT device. Whenever the
user is in the room, he or she uses the IoT device normally.
When the user leaves the room, the anonymization device starts
to play voice samples from an internal database containing
dummy requests through its speaker to the IoT device. Our
anonymization device implements this approach (cf. Section
VI).
User Experience: Since the user does not have to manipulate
the IoT device, this approach can be easily implemented.
Furthermore, as long as the dummy requests are played only
as long as the user is not in the room, user experience is high.
Anonymity: Assuming a good set of dummy requests for
anonymization, and assuming further that the voice-assistant
provider does the speech recognition automatically, it is possi-
ble to obscure private application data and adjunct data among
dummy requests. Furthermore, it is possible to hide habits and
activity times. However, a suspicious voice-assistant provider
may sort out dummy requests that follow a different data
distribution than the real requests, that are heard always from
the same direction at the same sound volume or that are
issued with the same accentuation. Furthermore, this approach
assumes that the IoT device is listening only when the user
deliberately says the wake-up word.
External anonymization via relay: A second option is to
disassemble the IoT device and to connect the built-in micro-
phones and the speaker to a relay that is controlled by the
anonymization device. Thus, the anonymization device can
protect against cases where the voice assistent is activated
without intention of the user. Furthermore, the input and the
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

output of the IoT device can be muted at any time with
certainty. Thus, it is possible to, say, let the IoT device read
dummy calendar entries or play dummy radio stations while
the user is in the room.
User Experience: In comparison to the ﬁrst variant, the imple-
mentation efforts of this approach are signiﬁcantly increased.
Because the input and the output of the IoT device can be
externally controlled, the user experience is slightly higher.
Anonymity: The fact, that it is possible to mute the output while
the user is in the room, allows for more options to issue dummy
commands to the voice assistant. Ensuring that the IoT device
is only listening when allowed increases the privacy of the user.
This means that the anonymization device also needs to listen
to the wake-up word. However, this can be realized locally,
without having to send voice recordings into the cloud [17].
Re-wiring the IoT device: From the perspective of the IoT
device, the most impacting approach is to re-wire the speakers
and microphones directly to the anonymization device. Thus,
any input or output is supervised. Verbal commands to the
voice assistant are synthesized at the anonymization device and
sent directly, without using speakers and microphones, to the
IoT device. A similar approach would be to install the voice-
assistant application on a standard Windows PC and to re-route
the audio-drivers to a program that handles anonymization.
User Experience: In comparison to the other approaches, it
is possible to control the input and output of the IoT device
in a ﬁne-grained way. However, the implementation effort of
this variant is high. It requires expert knowledge to set up an
anonymization device that sends synthesized voice commands
to the voice assistant without loss of user experience.
Anonymity: This approach ensures that no information is sent
unﬁltered to the voice-assistant provider. It would be possible
even to let the anonymization device synthesize verbal requests
from the user and a database of dummy commands with
the same artiﬁcial voice, i.e., the provider does not have an
option to distinguish various speakers according to certain
verbal characteristics. However, as with the other approaches,
a fraction of the requests sent is still the real interest of the
user. Thus, it remains challenging to create a set of dummy
requests with exactly the same statistical characteristics as the
real requests.
VI.
DUMMMY REQUESTS FOR THE ECHO DOT
In this section, we describe our prototypical anonymization
device. It is based on a Raspberry Pi-based that sends dummy
requests via speaker to Alexa. Furthermore, we discuss what
we have learned during its implementation.
To create a setting that is easily reproducible, we have
decided to play various radio stations. In this setting, we
have to consider only two voice commands: "‘Alexa, play
<radio station> on Tune In"’ and "‘Alexa, stop"’. The skill
"‘Tune in"’ provides 41 different genres of music. Every
genre is associated with multiple radio stations. A typical
voice command is "‘Alexa, play Radio Bob on Tune In"’. Our
objective is to anonymize our (a) taste for music and our (b)
activity times. Thus, we focus on anonymizing information
from our category "‘Application Data"’.
A. Hardware Setup
Our anonymization device is shown in Figure 7. It consists
of three components:
Figure 7. Our anonymization device
1) Amazon Echo Dot 2nd generation: This is the lower
right device in Figure 7. The Echo hardware comple-
ment includes a 64-bit quad-core MEDIATEK ARM
MT8163V 1636-KBCAH CCMKYRHS processor, 512
MB of LPDDR3 SDRAM and 4GB of storage space. It
connects to the Internet via WiFi 802.11a/b/g/n.
2) Raspberry Pi 3 Model B Rev 1.2 with 7 inch touch display:
This is the upper device in Figure 7. The Raspberrys
operating systems is Raspbian GNU/Linux 8 (Jessie).
For this project, we’ve used a Raspberry Pi 3 Model
B, which uses a Broadcom BCM2837 SoC with a 1.2
GHz 64-bit quad-core ARM Cortex-A53 processor, 1 GB
of LPDDR2-SDRAM and can be connected to the WiFi
through 802.11a/b/g/n.
3) Nubwo Wireless Speaker: This is the device in the lower
left position in Figure 7. This is a wireless bluetooth
speaker with integrated microphone. It is compatible with
different devices, such as tablets, laptops or smartphones.
B. Software Setup
The Raspbian Linux already comes with all the tools
needed to play dummy commands that follow a certain distri-
bution: With the scripting language Python and its toolkits, we
have realized a graphical user interface to control the order and
the distribution of the dummy voice commands. Python allows
to start linux commands to play voice samples in various audio
ﬁle formats that have been recorded in advance and stored
on the local SD card of the Raspberry Pi. Alternatively, we
have tested Google’s text-to-speech synthesis "‘Simple Google
TTS"’ to generate voice commands from text, that is, without
having to record voice samples beforehand. This synthesis can
be accessed via Python library "‘gTTS"’.
C. Dummy-based Anonymization
Figure 8 shows our process to generate dummy commands.
We have written a Python script for the Raspberry Pi, which
plays dummy voice commands. When the user is about to leave
the room, he starts this script via command line or a graphical
user interface. Subsequently, the script randomly selects a radio
station, plays "‘Alexa, play <radio station> on Tune In"’ via
speaker to the Dot, waits a random time interval ranging from
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

10 seconds to 60 minutes, and plays "‘Alexa, stop"’. This
procedure recurs, until it is terminated by the user.
Figure 8. Flowchart of the dummy-based anonymization
Switching radio stations after a few seconds corresponds
to a user browsing for a station that ﬁts to his mood at the mo-
ment. Switching stations randomly with a frequency between
some seconds and 60 minutes corresponds to a user having
heard songs he dislikes. After 60 minutes, the user might have
lost interest in listening to the station. We assume, that this
procedure creates realistic dummy commands, which cannot
be distinguished from user commands with the algorithms
currently used by the service provider.
D. Discussion
We have implemented a scenario that is understandable yet
realistic. By anonymizing music taste and activity times when
listening radio stations via Amazon’s Echo Dot, we have made
a number of observations.
It was surprisingly simple to issue dummy voice commands
with a certain frequency and distribution by using off-the-shelf
hardware and software components. With some experience in
Linux, it did not took long to realize our anonymization device.
It was not necessary to open the IoT device. Except for the
touch-sensitive display used for debugging purposes, we have
spent less than 50 EUR for hardware components. However,
it needs a profound technical understanding to conﬁgure the
generation of dummies according to a person’s individual
privacy requirements.
Alexa’s Automatic Speech Recognition technology works
very well, even with voice commands that are synthesized from
text. For our tests, we have used Simple Google TTS, which is
an online service of Google. However, we assume that ofﬂine
text-to-speech engines like Cepstral [8] or eSpeak [11] would
be applicable as well. This way, no external party might learn
which dummy commands are synthesized and sent to Alexa.
We have observed that Amazon’s recommendations for
radio stations follow our dummy commands. This indicates
that our anonymization approach is working as intended at the
moment. On the other hand, a voice assistant that is based on
garbled recommendations might reduce the user experience.
Furthermore, it is impossible for the user to ﬁnd out what
the service provider learns indeed. If the provider implements
machine-learning algorithms that distinguish different voices,
only the rewiring approach from Section V might be able
to provide some degree of privacy. Amazon says that voice
samples are used to improve speech recognition. However, we
did not observe that the the real user’s voice was recognized
less accurately due to learning from a synthesized voice.
In conclusion, at this moment, even a simple dummy-
based anonymization approach allows for some more privacy
regarding application data, than the voice-assistant provider is
offering the user. We have focused on the user’s activity times
and his taste for music. In the same way, many other aspects
and many other services could be anonymized. For example, it
would be possible to anonymize the places of interest that are
sent to a service for local weather reports. Similarly, events
and holidays could be anonymized with calendar services.
However, some services do not allow for this approach. For
example, it would not make sense to turn on and off smart
home components, such as cleaner robots, or to anonymize
the wake-up alarm. Finally, it is impossible for the user to
ﬁnd out or inﬂuence which algorithms are implemented by
the provider. In the worst case, the provider might implement
machine learning to distinguish different personality proﬁles
from voices and statistical properties of the commands, without
telling in the privacy policy. Thus, it is impossible to give
anonymity guarantees like differential privacy [29].
VII.
CONCLUSION
Currently, voice assistants are integrated into a plethora
of different IoT devices and used every day in numerous
situations. Voice assistants on IoT devices make users’ life
more comfortable. On the other hand, such assistants send
voice samples into the cloud, which contain private information
from private places. Even more, the voice samples do not
only transport the verbal commands required, but also adjunct
information, such as verbal stress patterns or background
noises indicating certain activities. Thus, the service provider
is in a position to create deeply impacting personality proﬁles.
We have identiﬁed three categories of information that
can be observed by the service provider. Furthermore, we
have analyzed from the user perspective at which points it
is possible to realize anonymization. We have described a
dummy-based anonymization approach, and we have explored
it’s properties by implementing a prototypical anonymization
device based on a Raspberry Pi that feeds dummy commands
to an Amazon Echo Dot. Our device conﬁrms that it is possible
to anonymize a part of the information sent to Alexa with
limited inconvenience for the user.
REFERENCES
[1]
Alexa Skills Kit. https://developer.amazon.com/de/alexa-skills-kit, re-
trieved: Aug. 2018.
[2]
Alexa Voice Service.
https://developer.amazon.com/de/alexa-voice-
service, retrieved: Aug. 2018.
[3]
Amazon Alexa. https://alexa.amazon.com, retrieved: Aug. 2018.
[4]
Amazon
Alexa
Technologies,
AWS
Stockholm
Summit
2017.
https://de.slideshare.net/AmazonWebServices/amazon-alexa-
technologies, retrieved: Aug. 2018.
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

[5]
Amazon Echo Dot Teardown. https://de.iﬁxit.com/Teardown/Amazon+
Echo+Dot+Teardown/61304, retrieved: Aug. 2018.
[6]
AWS Lambda. https://aws.amazon.com/de/lambda/features/, retrieved:
Aug. 2018.
[7]
BMW
is
now
integrated
with
the
Google
Assistant.
http://www.bmwblog.com/2017/11/07/bmw-now-integrated-google-
assistant/, retrieved: Aug. 2018.
[8]
Cepstral. https://www.cepstral.com, retrieved: Aug. 2018.
[9]
CES 2018: voice-controlled showers, non-compliant robots and smart
toilets. https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/jan/12/ces-2018-
voice-controlled-showers-robots-smart-toilets-ai, retrieved: Aug. 2018.
[10]
Echo
Dot
(2nd
Generation)
-
Smart
speaker
with
Alexa.
https://www.amazon.com/Amazon-Echo-Dot-Portable-Bluetooth-
Speaker-with-Alexa-Black/dp/B01DFKC2SO/ref=sr/_1/_1,
retrieved:
Aug. 2018.
[11]
eSpeak. https://espeak.sourceforge.net, retrieved: Aug. 2018.
[12]
Gartner
Says
Worldwide
Spending
on
VPA-Enabled
Wireless
Speakers
Will
Top
2
Billion
by
2020.
https://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/3464317,
retrieved:
Aug.
2018.
[13]
Home
Automation
Device
Market
Grows
Briskly,
to
27
Mil-
lion.
https://www.voicebot.ai/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/cirp-news-
release-2017-11-06-echo-home.pdf, retrieved: Aug. 2018.
[14]
Home has a new hub. https://www.samsung.com/us/explore/family-hub-
refrigerator/connected-hub/, retrieved: Aug. 2018.
[15]
How to Keep Amazon Echo and Google Home From Responding to
Your TV.
https://www.wired.com/2017/02/keep-amazon-echo-google-
home-responding-tv, retrieved: Aug. 2018.
[16]
IDC
Forecasts
Worldwide
Spending
on
the
In-
ternet
of
Things
to
Reach
772
Billion
in
2018.
https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS43295217, retrieved:
Aug. 2018.
[17]
Jasper. https://jasperproject.github.io, retrieved: Aug. 2018.
[18]
Nutzungsbedingungen für Alexa und Alexa-Geräte.
https://www.
amazon.de/gp/help/customer/display.html?nodeId=201566380,
retrieved: Aug. 2018.
[19]
Please
meet
Amazon
Alexa
and
the
Alexa
Skills
Kit.
https://de.slideshare.net/AmazonWebServices/please-meet-amazon-
alexa-and-the-alexa-skills-kit, retrieved: Aug. 2018.
[20]
Using Multiple Alexa Devices. https://www.amazon.com/gp/help/cus-
tomer/display.html? nodeId=202013740, retrieved: Aug. 2018.
[21]
C. C. Aggarwal and S. Y. Philip.
A General Survey of Privacy-
preserving Data Mining Models and Algorithms. In Privacy-preserving
data mining, pages 11–52. Springer, 2008.
[22]
G. Aggarwal, T. Feder, K. Kenthapadi, R. Motwani, R. Panigrahy,
D. Thomas, and A. Zhu.
Anonymizing Tables.
In International
Conference on Database Theory, pages 246–258. Springer, 2005.
[23]
E. Alepis and C. Patsakis. Monkey Says, Monkey Does: Security and
Privacy on Voice Assistants. IEEE Access, 5:17841–17851, 2017.
[24]
J. L. Boyles, A. Smith, and M. Madden. Privacy and Data Management
on Mobile Devices. Pew Internet & American Life Project, 4, 2012.
[25]
S. Chester, B. Kapron, G. Ramesh, G. Srivastava, A. Thomo, and
S. Venkatesh. Why Waldo befriended the Dummy? k-Anonymization
of Social Networks with Pseudo-Nodes. Social Network Analysis and
Mining, 3(3):381–399, 2013.
[26]
H. Chung, M. Iorga, J. Voas, and S. Lee. Alexa, Can I Trust You?
IEEE COMPUTER SOCIETY, 50(9):100–104, 2017.
[27]
W. Diao, X. Liu, Z. Zhou, and K. Zhang. Your Voice Assistant is Mine:
How to Abuse Speakers to Steal Information and Control Your Phone.
In Proceedings of the 4th ACM Workshop on Security and Privacy in
Smartphones & Mobile Devices, pages 63–74. ACM, 2014.
[28]
R. Dingledine, N. Mathewson, and P. Syverson.
Tor: The Second-
Generation Onion Router. In Usenix Security, 2004.
[29]
C. Dwork. Differential Privacy: A Survey of Results. In International
Conference on Theory and Applications of Models of Computation,
pages 1–19. Springer, 2008.
[30]
M. Ebling.
Can Cognitive Assistants Disappear?
IEEE Pervasive
Computing, 15(3):4–6, 2016.
[31]
L. Gong and C. Nass.
When a Talking-Face Computer Agent is
Half-Human and Half-Humanoid: Human Identity and Consistency
Preference. Human Communication Research, 33(2):163–193, 2007.
[32]
Q. Han, H. Zhao, Z. Ma, K. Zhang, and H. Pan. Protecting Location
Privacy Based on Historical Users over Road Networks. In International
Conference on Wireless Algorithms, Systems, and Applications, pages
347–355. Springer, 2014.
[33]
T. Hara, A. Suzuki, M. Iwata, Y. Arase, and X. Xie. Dummy-based User
Location Anonymization Under Real-world Constraints. IEEE Access,
4:673–687, 2016.
[34]
C. Jackson and A. Orebaugh. A study of Security and Privacy Issues
Associated with the Amazon Echo. International Journal of Internet of
Things and Cyber-Assurance, 1(1), 2018.
[35]
R. Kato, M. Iwata, T. Hara, A. Suzuki, X. Xie, Y. Arase, and S. Nishio.
A dummy-based Anonymization Method Based on User Trajectory
with Pauses. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on
Advances in Geographic Information Systems, pages 249–258. ACM,
2012.
[36]
H. Kido, Y. Yanagisawa, and T. Satoh. An Anonymous Communication
Technique Using Dummies for Location-based Services. In Pervasive
Services, 2005. ICPS’05. Proceedings. International Conference on,
pages 88–97. IEEE, 2005.
[37]
A. Kumar, A. Gupta, J. Chan, S. Tucker, B. Hoffmeister, M. Dreyer,
S. Peshterliev, A. Gandhe, D. Filiminov, A. Rastrow, C. Monson,
and A. Kumar.
Just ASK: Building an Architecture for Extensi-
ble Self-Service Spoken Language Understanding.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.00549, 2017.
[38]
J. Kwapisz, G. Weiss, and S. Moore.
Activity Recognition Using
Cell Phone Accelerometers.
ACM SigKDD Explorations Newsletter,
12(2):74–82, 2011.
[39]
T. Lackorzynski and S. Koepsell.
Hello Barbie - Hacker Toys in a
World of Linked Devices. Broadband Coverage in Germany; 11. ITG-
Symposium, 2017.
[40]
A. E. Moorthy and K. L. Vu.
Voice Activated Personal Assistant:
Acceptability of Use in the Public Space. In International Conference
on Human Interface and the Management of Information, pages 324–
334. Springer, 2014.
[41]
C. Ratti, D. Frenchman, R. M. Pulselli, and S. Williams.
Mobile
Landscapes: Using Location Data from Cell Phones for Urban Analysis.
Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 33(5):727–748,
2006.
[42]
S. Shakila and G. Ganapathy. Privacy for Interactive Web Browsing: A
Study on Anonymous Communication Protocols. International Journal,
2(5), 2014.
[43]
C. Spensky, J. Stewart, A. Yerukhimovich, R. Shay, A. Trachtenberg,
R. Housley, and R. Cunningham.
SoK: Privacy on Mobile Devices
- Its Complicated. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies,
2016(3):96–116, 2016.
[44]
J. P. Timpanaro, T. Cholez, I. Chrisment, and O. Festor. Evaluation of
the Anonymous I2P Network’s Design Choices Against Performance
and Security. In Information Systems Security and Privacy (ICISSP),
2015 International Conference on, pages 1–10. IEEE, 2015.
[45]
H. Wang, F. Calabrese, G. Di Lorenzo, and C. Ratti. Transportation
Mode Inference from Anonymized and Aggregated Mobile Phone Call
Detail Records. In Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), 2010 13th
International IEEE Conference on, pages 318–323. IEEE, 2010.
[46]
C.
Wueest.
A
Guide
to
the
Security
of
Voice-activated
Smart
Speakers
-
An
ISTR
Special
Report
(2017).
https://www.symantec.com/content/dam/symantec/docs/security-
center/white-papers/istr-security-voice-activated-smart-speakers-en.pdf,
retrieved: Aug. 2018.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

