An Aspect-Based Resource Recommendation System for Smart Hotels 
 Aitor Almeida1 , Eduardo Castillejo1, Diego López-de-Ipiña1, Marcos Sacristán2,  Javier Diego3 
 
1 DeustoTech –Deusto Institute of Technology, Universidad de Deusto 
Avenida de las Universidades 24, 48007, Bilbao (Spain) 
{aitor.almeida, eduardo.castillejo, dipina}@deusto.es 
2 Treelogic 
Parque Tecnológico de Asturias, 30, E33428, Llanera (Spain) 
marcos.sacristan@treelogic.com 
3 Logica 
Avda. Manoteras, 32, Madrid 28050 (Spain) 
javier.diego@logica.com 
 
 
Abstract—The number of resources (services, data, multimedia 
content, etc) available in Smart Spaces can ver overwhelming. 
Finding the desired resource can be a tedious and difficult 
task. In order to solve this problem,  Smart Spaces contain 
much information that can be employed to filter these 
resources. Using the user context-data available in Smart 
Spaces can help refining and enhancing the recommendation 
process, providing more relevant results. To help users finding 
the 
most 
suitable 
resource 
we 
have 
developed 
a 
recommendation system that takes into account both user and 
resource features and context data like the location or current 
activity. This recommendation system is flexible enough to be 
applied to different types of resources and domains. In this 
paper we describe the resource aspects identified to be used in 
the recommendation system and how they are combined to 
create a metric that allows us to select the best resource for 
each situation. 
Keywords-Smart environments; resource recommendation; 
context aware; accessibility. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Spain is one of the top 5 tourism destinations along 
France, United States, China and Italy [1]. As a consequence, 
tourism is an important part of the Spanish economy [2]. In 
order to maintain this leading position, the hospitality sector 
must continue evolving and improving, including new 
technologies and enhancing the user experience. The 
objective of the THOFU (http://www.thofu.es/) project is to 
work on the technology that will enable us to create more 
intelligent and reactive hotels. One of the research areas 
within the project is the creation of a recommendation 
system that will enable us to provide the user with the most 
suitable resources for his current needs and context.  In the 
project’s vision resources are anything that a user can 
consume: apps, hotel services (both physical and virtual), 
multimedia content, data, etc. The smart hotel must be 
proactive, helping its users with their needs. In order to do 
this the smart hotel must know the user preferences, tastes 
and limitations. It must be capable of analyzing the different 
aspects that define a resource to offer the most appropriate 
one to the user. To do this, we have developed an aspect 
based resource recommendation system. To be able to do 
this recommendation we have identified the aspects of a 
resource that can be used to describe it in a smart 
environment. These aspects take into account both the 
resource and user features and the current context (as 
formulated in [3]). Our recommendation system approach 
has several advantages: 
 
It is applicable to all the resource types identified in 
the intelligent hotels domain: digital and physical 
services, multimedia content and data.  
 
We evaluate different aspects of the resource taking 
into account the characteristics of the content, the 
needs and capabilities of the user and data from the 
current context. This allows us to create a 
comprehensive picture of the current situation to 
recommend the most suitable resource. 
 
The process can be configured by modifying the 
weight of each individual aspect in the final metric. 
This allows us to adapt the recommendation system 
to specific domains. 
 
Our system not only analyzes the current situation 
of the user, it also takes into account what his next 
actions can be to anticipate future needs. 
 
In this paper, we present the proposed system. In Section 
2, we analyze the current state of the art in recommendation 
systems, in Section 3, we describe the system architecture, in 
Section 4, we describe some use cases of the proposed 
system and finally in Section 5, we discuss the conclusions 
and future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Since the mid-1990s, recommender systems have 
become an important research area attracting the attention of 
e-commerce 
companies. 
Amazon 
[4], 
Netflix 
(http://www.netflixprize.com/)  and Yahoo! Music [5] are 
widespread examples on making recommendations to its 
users based on their tastes and previous purchases. Although 
these systems have evolved becoming more accurate, the 
main problem is still out there: to estimate the rating of an 
item which has not been seen by users. This estimation is 
usually based on the rest of items rated by the current user or 
on the ratings given by others where the rating pattern is 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

similar to the user’s one. Therefore, the problem consists on 
extrapolating somehow the utility function (which measures 
the usefulness of an item to a user) to the whole rating space. 
This utility function is represented by all the ratings made by 
the user. This way, recommendation engines have to be able 
to predict or estimate the ratings of the not yet rated items for 
users.  
The research in this area has, as a result, a different 
classification based on the way item recommendation is 
made [6]: 
 
Content-based: recommendations are made just by 
looking in the history of the already rated items by 
the user. 
 
Collaborative filtering: past recommendations for 
users 
with 
the 
same 
preferences 
generate 
recommendations for the current user. 
 
Hybrid techniques: as a combination of content-
based 
and 
collaborative 
recommendation 
approaches. 
Content-based systems recommend items which are 
similar to those that a user rated positively in the past [7]. 
Shardanand et al. [8] state some of the problems of this 
approach, as the vagueness in the description of an item, 
which clearly affects the whole system. Items need to have 
enough descriptive features to enable the recommendation 
engine to recommend them accurately. The problem is that 
different 
items 
with 
the 
same 
features 
can 
be 
indistinguishable to the system. 
Collaborative filtering techniques deal with the concept 
of similarity between users. The utility of an item is 
predicted by those items which have been rated by similar 
users. Sarwar et al. [9] defend this approach by defining 
collaborative 
filtering 
as 
the 
most 
successful 
recommendation technique to date. In [8] a personalized 
music recommendation system is presented, namely Ringo, 
which is a social information filtering system which purpose 
is to advise users about music albums they might be 
interested in. By building a profile for each user based on 
their ratings, it identifies similar users so that it can predict if 
a not yet rated artist/album may be to user's liking. 
LikeMinds [10] defines a closeness function based on the 
ratings for similar items from different users to estimate the 
rating of these items for a specific user. It considers a user 
which has not already rated the item and a so-called mentor 
who did it. Introducing two new concepts (horting and 
predictability) horting is a graph-based technique in which 
users are represented as nodes and the edges between them 
indicate their similarity (predictability) [11]. The idea is 
similar to nearest neighbor, but it differs from it as it 
explores transitive relationships between users who have 
rated the item in question and those who have not. 
In order to reduce the limitations of previously reviewed 
methods, hybrid approaches combine both of them [12]. 
Others have introduced new concepts to this area, such as 
semantics [13] and context [13]. 
However, one of the most important improvements in the 
recommendation systems field is the definition of measures 
(or aspects) to describe the utility and relevance of the items. 
Aspects play an important role in data mining, regardless of 
the kind of patterns being mined [14]. Users’ ratings are a 
good way to trace the interestingness and the relevance of 
items. Despite of the ratings, there are many measures which 
allow us to go into these items taking into account the use of 
them (their consumption) by the users. In other words, we 
look into the behavior of users for measuring their 
interestingness for these “items” (for now on we will refer 
items as resources). From our point of view a resource could 
be a product, an application or any kind of service (e.g., 
multimedia, news and weather or connectivity infrastructure 
services). We have studied several measures from the 
literature to evaluate those which best fit in our 
recommender system, such as minimality [15, 16], reliability 
[17], novelty [18], horting, predictability and closeness [14], 
and utility [9]. Location is one of the most important 
measures in many context-aware systems. Several authors 
has worked in location based recommendation systems 
[20][21][22]. In these papers, authors use location data 
captured with GPS and mobile devices to create timely and 
targeted recommendations for users. 
III. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
To be able to evaluate the suitability of the resources for 
a given user we have identified a series of aspects that define 
the identified resource types: 
 
Physical services: Those services that are used in 
the real world (e.g the hotel restaurant, pool, 
gymnasium, etc) 
 
Virtual services: Services accessed using a device. 
 
Multimedia content (e.g. video, music, etc) 
 
Information (e.g. maps, news, etc) 
 
These aspects must be generic enough to be able to use 
them to describe all the type of resource and expressive 
enough to capture the different facets of the resources. In the 
current implementation, we have considered four of them, 
but we discuss the other ones in the future work section. The 
four aspects that we currently take into account are the 
following: 
1. Predictability; 
2. Accessibility; 
3. Relevancy; 
4. Offensiveness; 
 
Each one of those aspects is used in the calculation of the 
suitability value (see Formula 1). The weight of each aspect 
on the final value can be modified to better adapt the 
recommendation system to the specific domain of each smart 
environment. The values of the weights will depend on the 
requirements of the specific scenarios.  For example, if a 
smart space has a considerable number of users with 
disabilities, the accessibility of the resources will be 
especially significant. On the other hand, if the scenario is 
composed by a single space, the relevancy will not be as  
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Sensorial
Communicational
Physical
Sight
Hearing
Touch
Smell
Taste
Speech
Touch
Gestures
Movement
Manipulation
 
 
Figure 1. Taxonomy of the user abilities taken into account in the accessibility aspect. Disabilities are classified in this three categories. 
 
 
 
important as the rest of the aspects. The suitability value is 
always personalized to a specific user and can change over 
the time along the preferences of the user. 
          

where: 
 
     is the value of the suitability of each resource. 
 
   is the weight for an aspect. 
 
   is the value of the aspect of a resource. The 
values of the aspects are normalized 
A. Predictability 
The first aspect we evaluate is the predictability. This 
aspect reflects how likely a resource is to be used based on 
the resources consumed previously. This likeliness is 
expressed as a probability value between 0 and 1. We use 
Markov Chains to create the model of the user’s resource 
usage. This model allows us to ascertain patterns in the user 
behavior. E.g. When one user stays on the hotel his morning 
routine consists in using the “Press Digest” to recover the 
headlines of the day, the “Room Service” to order breakfast 
and the “Transport Service” to call a taxi. With the generated 
model, we will able to predict that after using the “Room 
Service” the most probable service to be consumed is the 
“Transport Service” (see  
Figure 2). 
To build the transition matrix for the Markov Chains, we 
use the previous history of the user’s resource consumption 
as the training set. This transition matrix can be retrained 
with the new data recovered from the user with each visit to 
the hotel, adapting itself to the changes in the user 
preferences. As we discuss in the future work section, one of 
the main problems with using Markov Chains is that we only 
take into account the last consumed resource to predict the 
next one due to the Markov Property. 
 
B. Accessibility 
One of the most important aspects is the accessibility 
features of the resource. Users of intelligent environments 
possess a wide variety of abilities (sensorial, cognitive and so 
on) that must be taken into account to assess the suitability of 
the resources. Whatever the resource is, users must be able to 
consume it. We have used the user abilities taxonomy 
proposed in [19]. We have restricted the user abilities to 
three groups (see  
Figure 1): 
 
Sensorial abilities: Those abilities related to the 
user input. 
 
Communicational abilities: Those abilities related 
to the user output. 
 
Physical: Those abilities related with the capability 
of the user to move his extremities. 
Wake Up 
Service
Press 
digest
0.10
0.30
Room 
Service
0.60
0.40
0.30
Transport 
Service
0.70
0.60
 
 
Figure 2. One of the Markov Chains created with the resource consumption 
data for the predictability aspect. Using the created model the recomender 
system can predict the likeness of one resource to be the next to be 
consumed. 
Each resource has two types of abilities associated, the 
required and recommended user abilities. If the user does not 
have one of the required abilities the value of the aspect is 
automatically set to 0. This is done to reflect the fact that the 
user can not consume the resource, thus being completely 
useless for that user. If the user does not have a 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

recommended ability the accessibility value receives a 
penalization (see Formula 2). 
 
 
 
                
where: 
 
    is the accessibility value for the resource. 
 
  is the penalization weight. 
 
         is the number of recommended abilities 
not met by the user. 
C. Relevancy 
This aspect measures the importance of a given resource 
[20] to the user’s current context [3]. For example, a user 
jogging may be interested in the location of parks and 
running routes but a user having breakfast in the hotel may 
be interested instead in the public transports available in the 
city. One of the main problems we encountered evaluating 
this aspect was the selection of the context variables. The 
selected variables must be significant enough to be 
applicable to all the resource types described previously. We 
have identified three context variables that meet these 
requisites. We have analyzed the variables to identify the 
most common values within the Smart Hotel scenario. In this 
scenario the most important values are those that are closely 
related with the hotel, but it also takes into account those 
were the hotel can offer some service to the users: 
1. User location. In the tourism domain, we have 
considered the following locations: client’s room, 
hotel’s lobby, hotel’s restaurant, hotel’s swimming 
pool, hotel’s gymnasium and outside the hotel. 
2. Time of the day. We have divided the day in twelve 
periods of two hours. 
3. Current activity. In the tourism domain we have 
identified seven activities: sleeping, hygiene routine, 
eating, exercising, working, shopping and visiting 
tourist attractions. 
 
 
Figure 3. Distribution of the resource consumption in the different periods 
of time in the used training set for the relevancy aspect. 
The context information is provided by other modules of 
the THOFU project that are out of the scope of this paper. 
Using the usage data recollected from the users we have 
trained a soft classifier that, given those three context 
variables, calculates the relevancy of a resource.  
For the classifier we have used a nearest neighbor search. 
KNN (k-nearest neighbor) is a supervised (the training data 
is labelled), non-parametric (the model does not take a 
predetermined distribution form but it is in inferred from the 
data), lazy learning (there is no specific training phase) 
classification method. KNN assumes that the instances are 
distributed in a feature space. Since the instances exist in a 
multidimensional space, there is a computable distance 
between them. The most commonly used distance is the 
Euclidean distance. The algorithm takes a user-defined k 
constant. The instances are classified taken the k nearest 
training examples in the feature space. 
To implement this classifier we have used the libraries 
included in the Weka framework [29]. We have used 
LinearNNSearch as the nearest neighbor search algorithm, 
with a k value of 3 and the Euclidean distance as the distance 
function.  
D. Offensiveness 
This aspect measures the suitability of a resource based 
on a rating system. We use the age categories (3, 7, 12, 16 
and 18) and the content descriptions (violence, bad language, 
fear, sex, drugs, gambling, discrimination and online) 
developed 
for 
the 
PEGI 
(Pan 
European 
Game 
Information)[31] rating system. To evaluate it we use a 
similar system that the one used in Section 3.1 to calculate 
the accessibility, but taking the age categories as required 
constraints and the content descriptions as the recommended 
ones. 
IV. 
USE CASE 
To better illustrate how the developed system works we 
will explain how the system works taking two different users 
as examples. The first user is a 27 year old male with a 
hearing impairment.  The second one is a 6 year old child. 
The users have five resources available to them in this 
example: The wake up service (R1), the room service (R2), 
the press digest (R3), the multimedia system (R4) and the 
transport service (R5).  For this example, the weights for the 
metric calculation are: 
 
predictability and relevancy have a weight of 1  
 
accessibility and offensiveness have a weigh of 0.5  
 
We assume that both users are in their rooms and that the 
wake up service has just been activated by an alarm. The first 
user uses the Markov Chain model described in  
Figure 2. The wake up service and multimedia system 
both have hearing requirements, but offer alternative means 
to use them. The first user has not stated any content 
restriction. The results are shown in Table I.  
TABLE I.  
RESULTS FOR THE FIRST USER 
 
Predictability 
Accessibility 
Offensiveness 
Relevancy 
R1 
0.10 
0.9 
1 
0.8 
R2 
0.60 
1 
1 
0.7 
R3 
0.30 
1 
1 
0.4 
R4 
0 
0.9 
1 
0.2 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

R5 
0 
1 
1 
0.3 
 
The second user uses the Markov Chain model described 
in  
Figure 4. The user has not any disability, so every 
resource attains the maximum score in accessibility. The 
press digest has a minimum age category of 7 and it receives 
a score of 0 in offensiveness. The results are shown in Table 
II. 
TABLE II.  
RESULTS FOR THE SECOND USER 
 
Predictability 
Accessibility 
Offensiveness 
Relevancy 
R1 
0.45 
1 
1 
0.2 
R2 
0.05 
1 
1 
0.1 
R3 
0 
1 
0 
0.1 
R4 
0.50 
1 
1 
0.9 
R5 
0 
1 
1 
0 
 
Using the Formula 1 the recommended resource for the 
first user will be the room service (R2) in this scenario. 
                            
In the case of the second user, the selected resource will 
be the multimedia system (R4). 
                            
Wake Up 
Service
Multimedia 
System
0.45
0.50
Room 
Service
0.05
1
0.10
0.90
 
 
Figure 4. Markov Chain user for the second user 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In 
this 
paper, 
we 
have 
described 
a 
resource 
recommendation mechanism for smart environments based 
on the evaluation of different aspects of the resources. Our 
approach provides several advantages: 
 
The proposed mechanism is generic enough that it 
can be applied to any type of resource (services, 
multimedia content, etc). To achieve this we have 
identified those aspects that are not specific for a 
given domain or resource. 
 
We take into account several aspects of a resource, 
providing a holistic approach to the problem of the 
resource recommendation. 
 
The importance of each individual aspect can be 
tailored for each domain and specific problem 
modifying their weights in the metric. This allows 
us to adapt the mechanism to the requirements of 
specific smart spaces. 
 One of the problems identified in this approach is the use 
of Markov Chains to evaluate the predictability aspect. With 
the use of Markov Chains we only evaluate the current event 
and not the previous events that preceded it. In order to 
tackle this problem we plan to explore the use of time series 
to improve the forecasting algorithm. 
We are also analyzing a more extensive set of aspects 
that will give us a better picture of the evaluated resources. 
We are currently studying the inclusion of the following 
aspects: 
 
Timeliness [24]: evaluates how up to date is the 
information of a resource. 
 
Satisfaction [25][26]: measures the opinion of the 
users about a resource. 
 
Attention [27][28]: The average number of 
interactions per time unit with a consumed resource. 
 
Closeness [11]: Evaluates what resources are 
consumed by similar users. 
By adding these new aspects we aim to create more 
significant resource recommendations that meet better the 
user’s needs. Finally we would like to include in the context 
data information about the vagueness and uncertainty of the 
model. To do this we plan to use the ambiguity assessing 
techniques we described in [30]. This will allow us to model 
the context more realistically and will improve the overall 
preciseness of the system. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by project grant CEN-
20101019 (THOFU), funded by the Spanish Centro para el 
Desarrollo Tecnológico Industrial (CDTI) and supported by 
the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Interim Update. UNWTO World Tourism Barometer (UNWTO). 
URL: 
http://www.unwto.org 
/facts/eng/pdf/barometer/UNWTO_Barom11_iu_april_excerpt.pdf, 
retrieved: July, 2012.  
[2] Economic 
report. 
Bank 
of 
Spain. 
URL: 
http://www.bde.es/informes/be/boleco/coye.pdf, retrieved: July, 2012. 
[3] Dey, A.K. Understanding and using context. Personal and ubiquitous 
computing, vol 5, no. 1, pp 4-7, 2001. 
[4] G. Linden, B. Smith, and J. York, “Amazon. com recommendations: 
Item-to-item collaborative filtering,” Internet Computing, IEEE, vol. 
7, no. 1, pp. 76–80, 2003. 
[5] P. L. Chen et al., “A Linear Ensemble of Individual and Blended 
Models for Music Rating Prediction.”. KDDCup 2011 Workshop, 
2011. 
[6] G. Adomavicius and A. Tuzhilin, “Toward the next generation of 
recommender systems: A survey of the state-of-the-art and possible 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

extensions,” Knowledge and Data Engineering, IEEE Transactions 
on, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 734–749, 2005. 
[7] D. M. Pennock, E. Horvitz, S. Lawrence, and C. L. Giles, 
“Collaborative filtering by personality diagnosis: A hybrid memory-
and model-based approach,” in Proceedings of the 16th conference on 
uncertainty in artificial intelligence, 2000, pp. 473–480. 
[8] U. Shardanand and P. Maes, “Social Information Filtering: 
Algorithms for Automating ‘Word of Mouth’,” 1995. 
[9] B. Sarwar, G. Karypis, J. Konstan, and J. Reidl, “Item-based 
collaborative filtering recommendation algorithms,” in Proceedings 
of the 10th international conference on World Wide Web, 2001, pp. 
285–295. 
[10] D. Greening, “Building consumer trust with accurate product 
recommendations,” LikeMinds White Paper LMWSWP-210-6966, 
1997. 
[11] C. C. Aggarwal, J. L. Wolf, K. L. Wu, and P. S. Yu, “Horting hatches 
an egg: A new graph-theoretic approach to collaborative filtering,” in 
Proceedings of the fifth ACM SIGKDD international conference on 
Knowledge discovery and data mining, 1999, pp. 201–212. 
[12] M. Claypool, A. Gokhale, T. Miranda, P. Murnikov, D. Netes, and M. 
Sartin, “Combining content-based and collaborative filters in an 
online newspaper,” in Proceedings of ACM SIGIR Workshop on 
Recommender Systems, 1999, p. 60. 
[13] S. Kim and J. Kwon, “Effective context-aware recommendation on 
the semantic web,” International Journal of Computer Science and 
Network Security, vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 154–159, 2007. 
[14] L. Geng and H. J. Hamilton, “Interestingness measures for data 
mining: A survey,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 38, no. 3, 
p. 9, 2006. 
[15] B. Padmanabhan and A. Tuzhilin, “Small is beautiful: discovering the 
minimal set of unexpected patterns,” in Proceedings of the sixth 
ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery 
and data mining, 2000, pp. 54–63. 
[16] Y. Bastide, N. Pasquier, R. Taouil, G. Stumme, and L. Lakhal, 
“Mining minimal non-redundant association rules using frequent 
closed itemsets,” Computational Logic—CL 2000, pp. 972–986, 
2000. 
[17] P. N. Tan, V. Kumar, and J. Srivastava, “Selecting the right 
interestingness measure for association patterns,” in Proceedings of 
the eighth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge 
discovery and data mining, 2002, pp. 32–41. 
[18] S. Sahar, “Interestingness via what is not interesting,” in Proceedings 
of the fifth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge 
discovery and data mining, 1999, pp. 332–336. 
[19] A. Almeida, P. Orduña, E. Castillejo, D. López-de-Ipiña, M. 
Sacristán. Imhotep: an approach to user and device conscious mobile 
applications. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing. vol 15, no. 4, pp 
419–429 January 2011. 
[20] V.W. Zheng. Y .Zheng, X. Xie, Q. Yang. Collaborative location and 
activity recommendations with gps history data. Proceedings of the 
19th international conference on World Wide Web. 2010. 
[21] Y. Zheng, L. Zhang, Z. Ma, X. Xie and W.Y. Ma. Recommending 
friends and locations based on individual location history. ACM 
Transactions on the Web, vol 5, no. 1, pp 5. 2011. 
[22] V.W. Zheng, B. Cao, Y. Zheng, X. Xie and Q. Yang. Collaborative 
filtering meets mobile recommendation: A user-centered approach. 
Proceedings of the 24th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 
2010 
[23] Leo Pipino, Yang Lee, and Richard Wang. Data Quality Assessment. 
Communications of the ACM, 45:211-218, 2002. PLW02 
[24] Ballou, D.P., Wang, R.Y., Pazer, H. and Tayi, G.K. Modeling 
information manufacturing systems to determine information product 
quality.  Management Science 44, 4 (1998),462–484. 
[25] Bo Pang, Lillian Lee. Opinion Mining and Sentiment Analysis. 
Journal of Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval vol 2, no. 
1-2, 2008. 
[26] Beatson, A. and Coote, L.V. and Rudd, J.M. Determining consumer 
satisfaction and commitment through self-service technology and 
personal service usage. Journal of Marketing Management, vol 22, 
no. 7-8, pp 853-882, 2006. 
[27] S. Kim and J. Kwon, “Attention-Based Information Composition for 
Multicontext-Aware Recommendation in Ubiquitous Computing,” 
Smart Sensing and Context, pp. 230–233, 2006. 
[28] T. H. Davenport, “May we have your attention, please?,” Ubiquity, 
vol. 2001, no. June, p. 3, 2001. 
[29] Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard Pfahringer, Peter 
Reutemann, Ian H. Witten. The WEKA Data Mining Software: An 
Update. SIGKDD Explorations, Volume 11, Issue 1. 2009 
[30] A. Almeida and D. López-de-Ipiña. Assessing Ambiguity of Context 
Data in Intelligent Environments: Towards a More Reliable Context 
Managing System. Sensors. vol 12, no. 4, pp 4934-4951. April 2012. 
[31] Pan European Game Information (PEGI). Available online: 
http://www.pegi.info/, retrieved: July, 2012. 
 
 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

