BeAware: A Framework for Residential Services on Energy Awareness 
Christoffer Björkskog12, Giulio Jacucci12, Topi Mikkola3, Massimo Bertoncini4, Luciano Gamberini5,  Carin 
Torstensson6, Tatu Nieminen7, Luigi Briguglio4, Pasquale Andriani4, Giampaolo Fiorentino4 
1Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT, Aalto University, Finland, name.surname@hiit.fi, 2Department of 
Computer Science, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, name.surname@cs.helsinki.fi, 3BaseN, Helsinki, Finland, 
name.surname@basen.net, 4Engineering Ingegneria Informatica, Rome, Italy, name.surname@eng.it, 5HTLab, 
Department of General Psychology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy, name.surname@unipd.it, 6The Interactive 
Institute, Sweden, name.surname@tii, 7Department of Electrical Engineering, Aalto University School of Science and 
Technology, Helsinki, Finland, name.surname@tkk.fi 
 
 
Abstract -  Lately a wide variety of products and services are 
emerging to address energy efficiency in households by 
providing timely information. This area is still relatively young 
in terms of adoption of advanced ICT still exploring what 
functionality and features should be part of such services. Here 
we propose a framework for residential energy awareness 
services that divides technologies in three layers: sensing, 
services and applications. First we review expected features of 
emerging products and services also presenting a service and 
user 
application 
we 
implemented 
to 
exemplify 
the 
functionality. Each layer of the BeAware framework is 
presented by discussing the objective, composition and current 
challenges. 
Keywords- 
Ubiquitous 
services; 
Energy 
Awareness; 
Monitoring sensing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
There are generally three methods available today for a 
homeowner to access his or her energy consumption 
information.  First, consumption data can be obtained from 
their energy bill.  A second method is through reading his or 
her own energy meter installed in the house, and lastly by 
purchasing an external energy meter device. A report 
conducted from the Centre for Sustainable Energy stated that 
most homeowners are only looking at the amount of money 
they owe and ignore the rest of the data presented on their 
energy bill [1].  Although the consumption figures and tariffs 
are stated, they are often ignored so consumers are still 
unaware of their consumption habits. 
The available information to energy consumers in 
household is soon to be expanded by a wide variety of 
products and services. These prove timely consumption 
information that allows consumers to track the energy 
consumption in their household. The services range from 
web-services and sites to hardware and software products. 
The area is still relatively young and is exploring what 
functionalities and features should be part of such services. A 
wide diversity of energy conservation products and services 
exist that in different ways include hardware, methods for 
analysis and interface components. We maintain that it is 
needed to discuss to what extent different functionalities are 
needed 
and 
to 
propose 
frameworks 
that 
aid 
the 
implementation of services. We propose a framework for 
residential services providing energy awareness than is 
divided in three layers: sensing platform, web services, and 
user applications. The framework is based on a concrete 
implementation is already running in 15 sites and with over 
50 users across three countries.  
In the following section, we review expected features of 
emerging products and services. In Section III, we present an 
example user application “Energylife”. In Section IV, we 
present each layer of the BeAware framework discussing 
objectives, composition and current challenges. We end the 
paper with discussion and conclusions. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In this section, we review expected features of emerging 
products and services. First, we examine Web-based 
solutions and home displays, then we take a look at real-
time plug meters and lastly we discuss ambient interfaces. 
A. Web-based solutions and home displays 
 A method to provide consumption feedback to users 
today is via personal websites where users can log in that 
electricity companies provide. The key feature of the web-
based solutions is that they provide aggregated overall data 
on the consumption of the home and this data is visualized 
with a histogram to show when consumption is low or high. 
The most advanced concepts of such systems provide real-
time information on the consumption, user configurable 
alarms, billing information, payment services, details by 
floor, room, appliance, circuit, or utility and they can even 
provide automatic calculation of carbon footprint and have 
trend analysis and historical comparatives. However, these 
advanced visualizations are mostly at conceptual or trial 
stage. An example of a web-based user interface to monitor 
electricity consumption is from Agilewaves or Greenbox [2]: 
a web-based solution that enables households to track, 
understand and manage their home energy usage and 
environmental footprint. Greenbox automatically categorizes 
electricity usage and allows users to compare their own 
usage anonymously with other homes.  Other web-based 
solutions are TREE – Tendril Residential Energy Ecosystem 
[3]. TREE is a solution that connects "smart" consumer 
devices (like thermostats and outlets) to the existing utility 
back office and establishes a dialog between consumers and 
their energy providers. The in-home wireless network allows 
294
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

appliances and electrical outlets communicate to a home 
energy monitor the energy consumption.  
B. Real-time plug meters 
To measure energy used by individual appliances, 
homeowners can purchase plug-in electricity meters. These 
devices are placed between the power inlet and a home 
appliance and provide both real-time readout of the 
electricity consumption (kW) and measures consumption 
over time (kW/h). They can aid the user by identifying major 
energy consuming thieves as well as devices that consume 
much standby electricity. Several studies show that measures 
such as better billing, smart metering and feedback on energy 
consumption can encourage households to save energy, 
about an average of 5-10% [4].  In addition, a recent public 
survey [5] conducted by Future Foundation in the UK found 
that 82% of the respondents would consider changing their 
energy consumption habits if they had a “screen telling the 
homeowner how much energy they are using at any one 
moment”. Therefore, the problem may not be the technology 
but the poorly presented information that limits consumers to 
understand the impact of their behavior and sustain 
awareness of their energy consumption. Some of these 
devices focus on safety since they can prevent fires and 
malfunctioning of appliances besides monitoring their 
consumption. An example is the Innohome Guard [6], which 
shows data also on a mobile phone rather then a dedicated 
screen/device. Innohome is a device that can be attached to 
the socket of an individual appliance. Separate devices can 
send data through the power line to the Innohome Base 
Station device, which can send all the collected data from the 
house through the Internet and show it on the end user’s 
mobile phone. Features also include shut down control action 
for individual appliances as a mean for safety against fires 
originating from faulty usage of electric appliances. 
C. Ambient Interfaces 
Ambient interfaces address the periphery of user 
attention by embedding information into the objects that 
surround us. These interfaces provide the user with 
information in the form of sound, air pressure, motion, light, 
smell, and other media that complement the full range of our 
human sensory modalities. They are designed to work with 
our peripheral senses, where they provide continuous 
information without being distracting or obtrusive. Notable 
examples are Watson and the Ambient Orb. Watson is an 
energy-monitoring device that has been praised for its style 
and simplicity [7]. By clamping an external wireless sensor 
to the home energy supply (mains fuse box), the sleek device 
shows the running total in real-time of the wattage output. 
This is represented in a digital readout on the Wattson 
display or with ambient light. The Ambient Orb [8] is a 
frosted-glass ball that slowly shift between thousands of 
colors to show changes in the weather, stock market trends, 
electricity usage or any other ambient information channel 
(chosen by the user). It can also flash when important 
information is received or if a special threshold has been 
reached.  
TABLE I:    ANALYSIS OF FEATURES OFFERED BY SOME AVAILABLE ENERGY AWARENESS PRODUCTS COMPARED TO OUR RESEARCH 
PROTOTYPE ENERGYLIFE IMPLEMENTED IN THE BEAWARE FRAMEWORK 
See references [2],[3],[6]-[8] and [15]-[24] 
 
Manodo  
Greenbox 
Tendril TREE 
Google Pow. 
Innohome 
Homemanag. 
PowerCost M. 
Ewgeco 
BaseN Beat  
CC Envy  
efergy meter 
The OWL 
Eco-eye 
Wattson 
Energy hub 
Home Joule 
EnergyLife 
 Real time 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
 Consumption  
 Over time 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
 
x 
x 
x 
  
  
  
x 
x 
x 
  
x 
Control 
 
 
 
 
 
 
x 
 
 
 
 
x 
 
 
 
x 
 
x 
 Actual 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
  
x 
 Information can be actual or exemplary 
 Typical 
  
x 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 Device 
x 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
x 
x 
x 
 
x 
x 
  
x 
 Household 
  
x 
x 
x 
x 
 
x 
x 
x  
x 
  
x 
x 
  
 
  
x 
 The information can be about a device 
or whole household, or broken down to 
all devices 
 Breakdown 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
x 
Web/PC 
x 
x 
x 
x 
  
 
  
  
  
  
x 
  
  
x 
  
  
x 
Mobile 
x 
  
  
  
x 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
x 
Display 
x 
  
  
  
  
  
x 
x 
  
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
  
  
 Medium or interface can range between, 
web, dedicated display mobile or 
ambient  
Ambient 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
x 
  
  
x 
W or Wh 
  
x 
x 
  
x 
  
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
  
x 
x 
x 
Monetary € 
  
x 
x 
x 
x 
  
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
  
  
  
  
 Format of the information in power 
measure, monetary or environmental 
impact 
CO2 
  
x 
x 
  
  
  
  
x 
  
  
 
x 
  
  
  
  
  
Tips, quiz 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
x 
Community 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
x 
 Advanced User Applications such as 
awareness features beyond 
consumption data 
Games 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
x 
 
 
295
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

In our work we have used the Table 1 as a starting point 
to identify basic features to be addressed. 
III. 
EXAMPLE OF APPLICATION : ENERGYLIFE  
In this section we present an example application called 
Energylife. Energylife is an engaging informational game-
like application that is designed to raise awareness on energy 
conservation and help users to embrace a sustainable energy 
conservation lifestyle. It makes the users aware of their 
energy consumption and gives information regarding the 
electricity consumed by the whole household and certain 
appliances. It also lets the users understand whether or not 
they are saving energy compared to their normal 
consumption and how much above or under it they are. 
Inside the households the system consists of a base 
station, sensors connected to appliances and main fuse box 
and iPhones that present the application to the household 
members (See Figure 2). The system also includes servers 
that process the measured data and delivers services to the 
phones in order to present and visualize the data. 
Users can track their consumption history and get an 
overview on what appliances are saving electricity and 
which ones are consuming. 
Every day users receive advice on energy saving and 
every third day they are presented with a quiz where they can 
choose what would be the best way of conserving energy in 
different situations. The application behaves as a game 
where users can reach new levels by gaining enough points. 
Saving points are gathered by saving electricity and you can 
get awareness points by answering correct on quiz, reading 
advice and participating in the community. 
IV. 
A LAYERED APPROACH :SENSING, SERVICE AND 
APPLICATION 
Three layers compose the BeAware Framework. A 
sensing layer to collect next-to real-time information on 
detailed consumption of energy; A service layer providing 
web services as general level functionality in managing data 
from consumptions, users, and knowledge database; finally a 
user application layer providing applications and interfaces 
on selected smart phones and newer web browsers (See 
Figure 1).  
A. Application Layer 
The 
Application 
Layer 
provides 
the 
end 
user 
functionality. 
The 
web 
application 
communicates 
asynchronously with the service layer and dynamically 
updates its user interface. 
The ambient interface consists of electronics that connect 
to the existing lighting of a household. It communicates 
wirelessly with the base station in the household. The 
ambient interface gets the required data to function as 
intended from the base station. 
The mobile web application it is built up using JavaScript, 
HTML5 and CSS3 (See Figure 2e). Client side JavaScript 
running in the web browser builds the user interface and 
communicates with the Web services provided by the 
Service Layer. 
1) Interface to Service Layer 
The application retrieves needed data from service layer 
and utilizes the twitter platform for its community part. Data 
from is fetched via XMLHttpRequest calls delivering the 
data in JSON format. Calls fetching the current consumption 
and state of devices a are made in short intervals in order to 
provide a next to real time experience. 
Interaction with the service layer is done by executing 
service methods on a JavaScript object provided by the 
JAX_WS framework. These objects have access to all the 
public methods provided by its web service in the service 
  
 
(a)                                            (b) 
 
 
(d)                                          (e) 
Figure 2. The hardware in the household consist of a sensor measuring 
the main meter in the fuse box (a), sensors that measure appliances; 
either off the shelf sensors (a) or custom made sensors (d), a base 
station (c) that receives the data from the sensors, controls the ambient 
interface and delivers data to the data storage.  Next to real time 
consumption data is visible in the client user interface (e). 
(c) 
 
Figure 1. The overall organization of the layers 
296
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

layer. Access to such an object is obtained by including a 
JavaScript tag in the header of the HTML document that 
points to the web service. 
The application layer needed a way to effectively 
communicate with the services provided by the Service layer 
and the users. It was chosen to build the application as an 
iPhone web app where both the benefits from having a touch 
screen would be taken advantage of and also that it would be 
easy to port to different target devices without having to 
build the application again from scratch.  
The Service Layer exposes their services via Java API for 
XML Web Services (JAX-WS) that you can communicate 
with using different technologies. At first we thought we 
needed to build some kind of server side middleware in order 
to allow easy JavaScript interaction with the services. We 
noticed however that there are JSON bindings for JAX-WS 
that allows you to interact with the web services directly via 
JavaScript. The framework allows you to point a script tag to 
the exposed web service, which outputs a JavaScript object. 
This object provides all the methods exposed by the web 
service. 
Example usage: 
<script src="/consumption-manager- 
ws/ConsumptionManager?js&var=ConsumptionManager"> 
</script> 
 
As an example, the previous code is included in the head 
tag. This script supplies you with a similarly named object 
(consumptionManager) that has all the methods that the web 
service supplies. You can call these methods by supplying an 
object as parameter with attributes named as the variables in 
the web service method, and a callback function to be 
executed once the request is done. 
Some problems were encountered with this approach. We 
found out that the project for developing the JSON extension 
had been discontinued, and some bugs in the framework was 
found. For instance, if the output is defined to be an array, 
but the array only contains a single item, the single item will 
be outputted instead of an array containing one item. To 
remedy this we needed to have client side checks to see if the 
returned element is an array or not. 
2) Scripts and resources  
As the application is web based running in a browser, it 
requires resources from the server in form of documents, 
JavaScript and CSS files and images. To support tailored 
versions for specific devices the file structure on the server 
for each resource type is divided into general resources and 
platform specific (for instance iPhone or desktop). 
JavaScript, CSS and PHP library files are first included from 
the general repository and then from the platform specific 
repository. Due to large amounts of files that were needed, 
each JavaScript and CSS batch are automatically combined 
and minified to speed up loading and reduce the amount of 
HTTP calls. 
B. Service Layer 
The rationale beyond the Service Layer is to build a 
reference web services based middleware for residential 
energy awareness and conservation. It provides an open and 
distributed web service infrastructure (i.e., based on JAX-
WS JSON binding) that can be plugged to any sensing back-
end. The basic feature of the Service Layer is the acquisition 
of raw data from the plugged sensing platform and the 
generation 
of 
energy-related 
information 
in 
an 
understandable format, according to residential household 
consumers. The service layer aims to represent the natural 
bridge between a sensing platform and a consumer 
application built on top of it. For instance, in the BeAware 
projects Service Layer interacts with the sensing layer 
through the data store client using Google Protocol Buffer 
(GPB).  
Hereafter is more detailed description of Service Layer 
components (See Figure 3) where a more comprehensible 
rational is given for each of them. 
A common layer for each offered service has been 
designed. The Consumption knowledge base is a key part of 
the BeAware Service Layer and provides to all the services 
the basic information model and concepts of energy 
consumption (e.g., historical consumption, over consuming 
or saving, power consumption, state of the appliance, etc). 
Device Service offers information about available 
sensors deployed in the household and configuring them as 
household's appliances in a more fashionable way according 
to user preferences. 
Energy Profile Service allows the application layer to set 
and obtain information regarding the household (e.g., 
location, rooms, inhabitants, type of building, etc) and the 
users (accounts, credentials, age, language, etc.). This 
information is useful for characterizing and classifying the 
energy consumption data. 
Monitoring Service provides a set of information 
extracted by the raw data of the sensing layer as far as next-
to-real time power consumption and historical consumption 
(both for the whole household and for the specified 
appliances), state of the appliance, overconsumption or 
saving for a specified period. 
Message Service is a notification system whose objective 
is to improve awareness on energy consumption.  Message 
Service includes delivering of quiz, advice and real time tips 
in order to lead the user towards a more understandable and 
responsible way of using its appliances. Message Service 
supports multiple languages according to the profile of the 
household and its users. The Message Service also calculates 
an Awareness Score that has been modeled in order to offer 
an index of the users’ awareness about their energy behavior.  
Community Service receives notifications when the user 
has posted a message in the community. This is used to 
update the community part of the Awareness Score. In the 
 
Figure 3. Service Layer 
297
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

current version the community itself is built on top of 
Twitter. 
System logging is a background component that is in 
charge of tracking the whole Service Layer behavior. It 
receives a wide range of input going from the specific 
sensor's status to a more detailed feedback on Service Layer 
usage. 
C. Sensing Layer 
The goal of sensing layer is to provide a deployable 
measuring system, which is able to break down the 
consumption of the whole household, monitor it in real time 
and also effecting the ambient interface connected to 
particular lights. The architecture should be able to scale.  
The sensing layer consists of two separate parts, the 
physical sensing infrastructure installed in households, and 
distributed data storage and analysis platform for collecting 
measurements from all sources (See Figure 4). While one 
household installation should be able to handle hundreds of 
discrete measurements per minute (the full BeAware 
installation is 10 sensors, measuring 9 values once per 2 
second, resulting in roughly 400kbit/min uncompressed 
dataflow), the whole system must be able to handle 
thousands to millions of such installations, meaning that the 
whole system must be able to cope with millions of 
measurements 
per 
minute 
even 
in 
moderate 
sized 
installation. Inside the household the system must also be as 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. The BeAware Architecture 
298
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

energy efficient as possible not to impact the household 
power usage. 
The system has been designed as open from the start, 
allowing for easy interfacing with any 3rd party product, 
which has a documented logging interface. Currently pulse 
counters for water, heating and older electricity meters, and 
Plugwise [9] wireless energy sensors are supported as 
prototype examples. The system must also be easily 
updateable to support new sensors - this means that it should 
support both remote updating, and keep the household 
sensing system as simple as possible, while keeping the 
analysis capability in the storage platform. It also allows 
customer to use as much of old sensor equipment as possible, 
as 
quite 
a 
few 
households 
have 
at 
least 
some 
energy/environment measurements available.  
Inside the household the wireless communication is in a 
low level byte coded protocol called BASP (BeAware 
Sensor protocol) while the communication between the base 
station and storage (plus outwards from the storage) is based 
on the Google Protocol Buffers transported over HTTP. 
Compared to normally used XML-based approaches, this 
gives far better signal/overhead -ratio, allows data 
marshalling/ unmarshalling to be much lighter and makes 
3rd party integration easier. Conceptually, each measurement 
type from sensors is modeled as a channel containing time 
series of values. This allows for easier hierarchical grouping 
and modeling of data. 
1) Sensing Infrastructure 
The household sensing infrastructure includes various 
wireless sensors, ambient interfaces and a base station for 
sensor and actuator control. The design goal is to allow user 
to use what sensors they have available while also providing 
a state of the art approach for new installations. 
Any Linux supporting computer can be used as a BeAware 
base station. A dedicated low-power passively cooled 
system is probably the optimal, but the system has been 
demonstrated to work with many types of servers, from 
remote virtual server over Ethernet-USB adapters to local 
GPRS based microcomputers. The base station will cache 
measurements in non-volatile memory and transfer them to 
the data storage in bursts. This allows the system to survive 
network outages with no data loss and reduces the transfer 
overheads. The base station supports both BeAware's own 
433 MHz wireless network and also allows for interfacing 
with commercial ZigBee based networks. A wireless 
connection is provided by radio transceiver over ISM band 
of 433 MHz. Radio chip handles receiving and transmitting 
automatically on microcontroller input and provides 
interrupt signals for message and signal handling. Data is 
sent Manchester coded over air and the radio chip provides 
automatically preamble for radio channel synchronization. 
The chip operates both transmitter and receiver operations. 
The BeAware sensor is meant to be a low-power, low-cost 
wireless energy sensor. The sensor takes its' power from the 
line being measured and needs no external source. It does 
not have any electrical connection to protective earth, so it 
does not affect protective devices and can be installed to 
either normal socket or to main fuse box to read the whole 
household 
consumption. 
Unlike 
normal 
commercial 
solutions, BeAware sensor measures multiple variables1 in 
addition to active power and energy allowing sensor to be 
used to load fingerprinting. 
Initially the household measuring system will consist of 9 
such sensors, while the long term goal is to see, if fine 
enough granularity can be achieved with only 3 BeAware 
sensors monitoring the main phases of household electricity. 
This would need a system to be able to detect individual 
appliances via load fingerprinting but would allow us to 
lower the amount of measurements needed over the whole 
household significantly. 
An Ambient interface combines a normal BeAware 
sensor with the ability to control lights that are connected to 
it. It is used to signal to users whether household is saving 
energy compared to baselines and to tell users if any of the 
alerting conditions they have set have been triggered. It 
provides a non-intrusive interface, which provides necessary 
information to user without need for checking any external 
system and also provides cues for user to check EnergyLife 
for more detailed information. 
Main challenges encountered in the sensing infrastructure 
have been to create a system, which is as easily installable as 
possible – the system should need no configuration to install 
and should be as easily serviced as possible. Also, finding an 
off the rack reliable mini server with suitably low power 
consumption has been harder than initially anticipated. The 
current generation of pico-computers have either had 
problems with overheating, general stability or consume over 
15W. 
2) Data Storage 
The data storage is based on the BaseN [10] Platform 
computation grid, which has been optimized for receiving 
and analyzing large amounts of real time data measurements. 
It currently handles millions of measurements per minute, 
and with BeAware the target is to push the measurement 
interval from once per minute closer to one per second. The 
platform consists of data receiver agents, storage units, and 
real time, on-request analysis services.  Data receiver handles 
communication from households, caching data and feeding it 
to both long-term storage and real time analysis services.  
The real time analysis systems allow a user to receive alerts 
on trigger conditions within one minute of a performed 
measurement. On-request analysis provides historical data 
and visualization services to the user.  The platform is also 
able to provide open interfaces to other measurement 
sources, such as other energy meters, environmental 
monitors, industrial sensors, and general information 
systems. The platform also monitors itself and other parts of 
the BeAware system for service consistency and outages. 
The current storage platform has been tested with a 
steady flow of roughly 5 million measurements per minute 
                                                             
1 These variables are: Root Mean Square (RMS) value of 
current, RMS of voltage, Active power, Apparent power, 
Power factor, Phase shift, Energy, Crest factor, Harmonics 
and Total harmonic distortion 
299
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

load in telecom applications. With the current design the 
data receival can easily be scaled to accept tenfold more, but 
as with any interactive system, load with peak concurrent 
interactive users is more problematic, as much more data 
analysis is needed and most users want to see data from 
several sensors simultaneously. Either systems must keep 
considerable resources on stand by for possible load peaks, 
or accept that performance will momentarily degrade in 
peak usage situations, or the better load handling algorithms 
are needed. 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
 Recently research on ubiquitous computing for energy 
efficiency in the household has received attention.  Some of 
the latest advancements include: 1) visualization of detailed 
data attained through pervasive sensing [11] 2) aesthetic 
displays using novel interfaces [12], 3) theoretically 
informed implementation of feedback that address behavior 
change [13]. 
As we have seen from the review of Table 1, products 
and services exists all addressing partial functionality. 
Generally solutions tend to track only a single device or the 
total consumption of the household. Solutions that 
comprehensively give a breakdown of consumption in the 
household are unaddressed. The user applications are simply 
about displaying consumption in different formats. Most of 
the solutions utilize a dedicated display device.  
As an example recent research work on connecting 
energy meters with mobile phones such as [14] shows that 
research would benefit from a more comprehensive approach 
in detailing requirements and solutions in a framework for 
future services.  
We have presented EnergyLife an energy awareness 
application that addresses more features than current 
available solutions. We then presented a framework to 
deploy EnergyLife services that is composed by three layers. 
This has served to discuss requirements of hardware and 
software in an approach that can help implement services. 
The BeAware framework is being deployed in trials in 15 
sites including 12 households and 3 laboratories, including 
50 users and 120 sensors. While the data collection is 
ongoing preliminary findings and experiences indicate that 
the decomposition is the three layers has been very useful to 
support interoperability and independent development. As an 
example, physical sensors can change leaving the rest of the 
system unchanged. Similarly, new applications can be 
developed without affecting the lower layers. To be able to 
fully take advantage of the layers, each layer has a 
monitoring interface to debug and identify issues. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Roberts, H Humphries, and V. Hyldon “Consumer preferences for 
improving energy consumption feedback”. Report for Ofgem. Centre 
for Sustainable Energy, Bristol, UK. 2004. 
[2] 
Greenbox 
Technologies. 
Retrieved 
July 
19, 
2010, 
from 
http://www.getgreenbox.com/public/contact. 
[3] 
Tree. 
Retrieved 
July 
19, 
2010, 
from 
http://www.tendrilinc.com/utilities/utility-products/ 
[4] 
S. Darby “The Effectiveness of Feedback on Energy Consumption – 
A Review for Defra of the Literature on Metering, Billing and Direct 
Displays”.  Environmental Change Institute, Oxford University. 2006.  
[5] 
Future Foundation “Energy Efficiency – Public attitude, private 
action”, LogicaCMG, 2006, p. 21. 
[6] 
Innohome. Retrieved July 19, 2010, from http://www.innohome.com/ 
[7] 
Diykyoto. Retrieved July 19, 2010, from www.diykyoto.com/ 
[8] 
http://www.ambientdevices.com/products/energyjoule.html 
[9] 
Plugwise. Retrieved July 19, 2010, from http://plugwise.nl 
[10] BaseN. 
Retrieved 
July 
19, 
2010, 
from 
https://www.basen.net/corporate/#Energy 
[11] Y.Kim, T. Schmid, Z. M. Charbiwala, and M. B. Srivastava 
“ViridiScope: design and implementation of a fine grained power 
monitoring system for homes”, Ubicomp '09, ACM Press, 2009, pp. 
245-254. 
[12] A. Gustafsson and M. Gyllenswärd, “The Power Aware cord: energy 
awareness through ambient information display”. In Ext. Abs. CHI 
'05, ACM Press, 2009, pp. 1423-1426. 
[13] T. Ueno, R. Inada, O. Saeki, and K Tsuji, “Effectiveness of an 
energy-consumption information system for residential buildings”. 
Applied Energy, 83, 2006, 868-883. 
[14] M. Weiss, F. Mattern, T. Graml, T. Staake, and E. Fleisch, “Handy 
feedback: Connecting smart meters with mobile phones”. In: 
MUM2009, Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on 
Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia, ACM Press, 2009, pp. 1-4. 
[15] Manodo. Retrieved July 19, 2010, from http://en.manodo.se 
[16] Home 
Manageables. 
Retrieved 
July 
19, 
2010, 
from 
http://www.homemanageables.com 
[17] Google 
Power 
Meter. 
Retrieved 
July 
19, 
2010, 
from 
http://www.google.com/powermeter 
[18] Energy 
Monitor. 
Retrieved 
July 
19, 
2010, 
from 
http://www.bluelineinnovations.com/Products/ 
[19] Ewgeco. Retrieved July 19, 2010, from http://www.ewgeco.com/ 
[20] Current 
Cost. 
Retrieved 
July 
19, 
2010, 
from 
http://www.currentcost.com 
[21] Efergy Meter. Retrieved July 19, 2010, from http://www.efergy.com/ 
[22] Owl. Retrieved July 19, 2010, from http://www.theowl.com/ 
[23] Eco-eye. Retrieved July 19, 2010, from http://www.eco-eye.com/ 
[24] EnergyHub. 
Retrieved 
July 
19, 
2010, 
from 
http://www.energyhub.com/ 
 
 
300
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

