Ubiquitous Computing Market and Companies in Finland 
 
Nina Koivisto 
Aalto University School of Science 
Helsinki, Finland 
nina.koivisto@aalto.fi 
 
 
Abstract—This report tries to clarify the concept of 
ubiquitous computing (UBI) and to examine it in the context 
of the Finnish economy. Defining UBI resulted in three 
different 
viewpoints: 
smart 
environments, 
embedded 
environments, and the internet of things. The criteria found 
from the literature and that interviewees were most satisfied 
with were: the user need not be aware of the computer inside 
the device; devices are networked; the system allows every 
object to connect to every other object, and it influences 
everyday life. The most important industries in Finland, 
according to interviews, are: UBI technology (such as sensors, 
GPS, RFID, and NFC), appliances (such as heart rate 
monitors and mobile phones), UBI services (such as tailored 
location-based services or sensoring), automation (such as 
process automation, real estate automation, or home 
automation), and traffic or logistics. Future research could 
study other than technical aspects of UBI, such as user 
experiences of UBI services or networks of UBI companies in 
Finland. 
 
Keywords – UBI; ubicomp; ubiquitous computing. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
There is no single definition of ubiquitous computing 
(UBI). The concept of UBI is vague and diffuse, so the 
purpose of this report is to clarify the concept of UBI and 
to examine it in the context of the Finnish economy. In 
particular, we examine how many and what kinds of 
companies in Finland are involved with UBI. Therefore, 
we have a need to understand the UBI field.  
The aim of this research is divided into two parts: The 
first is to describe based on the existing literature what 
ubiquitous and ubiquitous computing means. The second 
goal is to develop a classification for ubiquitous computing 
companies in Finland based on national software industry 
survey and digibusiness.fi data in addition with firms that 
are funded by Tekes, Space Firms list (from Vesa 
Hirvisalo), and by examining all the firms that the author 
found and had the letters ‘ubi’ in their name. 
 
According to Weiser [10], “Ubiquitous computing is 
the method of enhancing computer use by making many 
computers available throughout the physical environment, 
but making them effectively invisible to the user”. In 
general, ubiquitous computing can be seen as a post-
desktop model of human-computer interaction. Ubiquitous 
computing has many potential applications in industry, 
transport, and logistics, but also, for example, supporting 
services for older people and people with disabilities in 
independent living. It will affect the daily lives of all 
people in homes and public spaces when the technologies 
begin to reach these areas [6].    
Finland traditionally has strong expertise in the 
software and electronics fields, but the traditional 
electronics industry is faltering in Finland [7; 5]. The 
difficulties of Nokia have been much discussed recently, 
but can be helped greatly by technology that has the 
properties UBI has been suggested to have. But, the 
phenomenon is much broader; a large number of the 
electronics specialists will be left without livelihoods if a 
substitute industry does not arise. The world is undergoing 
the most important technological revolution since the 
appearance of the internet: the everyday physical and 
digital worlds are blending together.  
Information technology is blending into everyday 
objects, facilities, and services. We no longer use the 
computers directly, but they work quietly in the 
background. Sensors monitor the ambient air quality and, 
when needed, more oxygen enters the room. A smart house 
takes care of heating, energy efficiency and safety, and so 
on.  
The aim of this study is to describe the UBI field and 
act as a pre-study for a further study (survey) to identify 
how the business research of network (what kind of partner 
chains Finnish UBI companies have) can help UBI 
companies in Finland to face future challenges and 
opportunities. The research questions are as follows. 
1. What is UBI? 
In this research, an attempt is made to create a 
definition and the instrument for it and a set of criteria 
which can be classified.  
2. What are the criteria for UBI companies? 
Developing an instrument for UBI companies. In the 
future, more and more companies will have some UBI 
elements in their offering; in addition to the ones that are 
producing, if you like, the ingredients to make a sandwich, 
you need the tomato, the cucumber, the meat, the lettuce, 
and the bread. So there are various layers. But then there 
are also the ones that use ubiquitous devices in order to 
make the business more successful. So, with this kind of 
206
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

instrumentation, we could classify how ‘UBI’ a company 
is. 
3. How big is the UBI field in Finland? 
An estimate of the size of the UBI field in Finland. 
What are the Finnish UBI companies? About how many 
UBI companies are there?  
 
II. RELATED WORK 
The literature was searched for criteria for UBI. Other 
studies have defined ubiquitous computing in many 
different ways. In 1991 Weiser [9] said: “The most 
profound technologies are those that disappear.” Walther 
and Burgoon [8] identified two key characteristics of 
ubiquitous computing systems: physical integration and 
spontaneous interoperation. Ten years later Weiss and 
Craiger [11] stated: “the idea behind ubiquitous computing 
is to surround ourselves with computers and software that 
are carefully tuned to offer us unobtrusive assistance as we 
navigate through our work and personal lives. Contrast 
this with the world of computers as we know them now.”  
Kindberg and Fox [4] and Greenfield [3] wrote books 
to attempt to describe the form computing will take in the 
next few years. “It's about a vision of processing power so 
distributed throughout the environment that computers per 
se effectively disappear,” said Kindberg and Fox [4]). 
Greenfield [3] describes the interaction paradigm of 
ubiquitous 
computing 
as 
"information 
processing 
dissolving in behavior." At 2009 Almeida [1] said: “The 
next computing revolution’s objective is to embed every 
street, building, room and object with computational 
power”.  
 
III. EMPIRICAL RESEARCH 
The data for this research were collected in interviews 
in August-December 2010. Since the purpose was to study 
the field/definition/market of UBI, an open-ended 
approach was chosen. Open questions tend to produce a lot 
of non-responses in mail surveys and thus interviews were 
chosen as the data collection method. Before the actual 
interviews, the work of this study was done in three 
working group meetings in which the author of this paper 
took an active part. The purpose of the working groups 
was to identify who should be interviewed, define UBI, and 
identify what the field is like in general.  
The interviews took about half an hour to an hour. 
These data were analysed by coding the responses on 
NVivo(NVivo is a qualitative analysis software tool that 
allows the data for specific topics to be organised, indexed, 
coded, and queried). All the text was coded to identify 
different themes and then these codes were grouped into a 
hierarchy. The process involved sifting through the data, 
filtering   out    the    significant  information,   identifying  
 
 
 
 
 
patterns, and constructing a framework for communicating  
the essence of what is revealed. That whole process was 
assisted by means of the use of NVivo 8. NVivo facilitates 
the storage, coding, retrieval, comparison, and linking of 
data and allowed subject areas (that are typically 
unquantifiable in text documents) to be counted, 
compared, and queried. 
The interviews were with representatives from three 
Finnish universities and three foreign universities. All the 
representatives are experts in the field of UBI, and work as 
professors, researchers, or senior lecturers. The total 
number of research years of the interviewees was 107 
years! When they were asked how confident they were 
about their expertise in UBI on a Likert scale (1-5), they 
gave a mean (4.375) of very confident. 
We sought to target informants from various 
disciplinary backgrounds who were involved in the UBI 
industry. Foreign researchers were picked from UBI 
conferences (12th ACM International Conference on 
Ubiquitous Computing, the Global Internet of Things, 
Internet of Things, and Workshops of the 1st International 
UBI Summer School) and researchers from Finland by 
recommendations and from conferences (Web Squared – 
Embedding the Real with the Digital). The most important 
criteria for the interviewees were that their focus in UBI 
would differ as much from that of the researchers and each 
other as possible. 
To communicate the sampling criteria, a description 
was prepared that included a description of the types of 
informants to be targeted. The document was circulated to 
fellow researchers and Culminatum employees for 
comments, and some changes were made to its content. 
The sampling strategy can be considered as a snowballing 
approach: existing study subjects recruit future subjects 
from among their acquaintances. Because the researcher is 
from Aalto University, there are far more Aalto University 
researchers represented in the sample than there are from 
other universities. 
As a result nine interviews were conducted at six 
universities. The interviewees included professors, a 
docent, an associate professor, assistant professors, 
research group leaders, and a senior research fellow (a 
description can be obtained from the author). The 
universities represented in this research are Aalto 
University School of Science and Technology, Aalto 
University School of Art and Design, the University of 
Jyväskylä, University of Oulu, and in comparison 
University of Madeira/Portugal, Umeå University/Sweden, 
and Queensland University of Technology/Australia. The 
data were collected during October-November 2010 by 
structured face-to-face or telephone interviews and they 
were audio recorded. The interview questions can be 
obtained from the author. 
 
207
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

IV. RESULTS 
A. Definition of UBI 
In autumn 2010, before the actual interviews, we tried 
to define in a small working group what UBI is. Three 
working groups met at the Cuminatum office, and 
involved the researcher and three Culminatum employees. 
The meetings of the working groups typically lasted an 
afternoon. We ended up with three different viewpoints: 
1. service/human-centric: 
SMART 
ENVIRONMENT 
Computers used in an environment (home/nature) 
which enrich the experience in a way that is natural in this 
context. 
2. manufacturing/technology-centric: 
EMBEDDED ENVIRONMENTS 
‘UBI is Tron’ (operating system). UBI is: a physical 
device has an embedded computer that has some software 
that brings some kind of added value. 
3. technology-political, network: INTERNET OF 
THINGS 
A device that is connected to other electronics (like a 
mobile phone that could be a user interface for a coffee 
maker, freezer, etc.). 
According to the interviewees the definition is 
something 
like: 
‘smart 
environment’/’local 
UBI 
environment’/‘UBI 
as 
services’, 
‘UBI 
as 
technology’/‘embedded information technology’ , ‘internet 
of things’/‘new kind of interaction’/‘networks of UBI’ , 
and ‘third place’. Compared to my own definition, the 
Smart Environment got five mentions, Embedded 
Environments got three mentions, and the Internet of 
Things got two mentions. The interviewees liked my 
definition (some even very, very much), so all together it 
seems to be an appropriate definition for UBI. 
Marcus Foth (one of the interviewees) used the term 
‘third place’ as compared to UBI when a physical device 
or a device is connected to other electronics: “the third 
area is kind of to say, well, the technology is now 
pervasive, so it’s not just limited to being in an office or 
being at home. You know, you have set up your computer 
here, with Wi-Fi, so you’re just anywhere, in a cafe. So the 
technology can be everywhere. And I think ubiquitous 
computing is really about how the different opportunities 
that we find in these new places can be matched up with 
design interventions and design solutions. And so, it’s 
really that intersection between what people are doing 
outside home and outside work. It’s like this third, this 
third space, if you like.” 
B. Criteria for UBI companies 
The goal of the criteria is to define what UBI 
companies are. The most acceptable criteria, according to 
the interviews, are: ‘augmenting’, ‘control of breakdowns’, 
‘computational-enabled behaviours’, ‘ease of design’, 
‘usability’   (2),     ‘controllable’,     ‘obvious’,     ‘present’,  
‘invisible’, serves humans’ (3), ‘accessibility’, ‘something 
cool’, ‘adaptability’, and ‘effortless’. In comparison to the 
criteria found from the literature, the most acceptable 
according to the interviews can be seen in Table 1 below. 
The biggest consensus was that the user need not be aware 
of the computer inside the device. Vassilis Kostakos (one 
of the interviewees) said that the most important criterion, 
when measuring what UBI is, is: “to what extent the 
service is either augmenting the environment, or, kind of, 
hiding the technology and complexity from the users, but 
still enabling them to do something cool”. 
TABLE 1. CRITERIA FROM LITERATURE THAT INTERVIEWEES LIKE 
Criteria from the literature 
Amount of 
interviewees 
that chose this 
criteria 
user needs not to be aware of the computer inside the 
device 
5 
devices are networked 
4 
system allows every object to connect to every object 
3 
influences everyday life 
3 
interaction that spontaneously appear/disappear 
2 
does not interrupt user 
2 
information to our context 
2 
ideal 
interaction; 
interaction 
feel 
natural/spontaneous/human 
2 
devices are inexpensive 
2 
system allows every object to sense its surroundings 
2 
connection between virtual/physical world 
2 
system enhances the environment 
1 
computers vanish, embed computers 
1 
user uses several systems simultaneously 
1 
does not bother user 
1 
system allows every object to be located from anywhere 
in the world (mobile) 
1 
information to our location 
1 
information accessible just about anywhere 
1 
user need not to activate functions 
1 
system is self-adjusting 
1 
devices work with batteries  
1 
C. UBI field in Finland 
According to the interviews the number of Finnish UBI 
companies is between less than 20 and thousands. The 
median answer was 300 companies. The variation is 
probably explicable because the interviewees thought of 
either only ‘the core’/narrow meaning of UBI or UBI 
companies in a wide sense.  
In this research the biggest challenge was to find all 
the Finnish UBI companies, because there is no database 
or list that could be the starting point. UBI firms were 
examined one at a time from four sources:  
1. 
From the database of firms that are targets of the 
annual National Software Survey and that had suitable 
descriptions (‘elektr’ as in electronics, ‘sulau’ as in 
embedded, and ‘ubi’);  
2. 
From a list of firms that are funded by Tekes; 
3. 
From a list of “Space firms” from Vesa Hirvisalo; 
4. 
By examining all the firms that the author found 
and had the letters ‘ubi’ in their name. 
208
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

I managed to find 359 firms, so according to the 
interviews I found a pretty comprehensive sample of 
Finnish UBI firms. 
The most important industries, according to the 
interviews, can be seen at Table 2 below. The most 
important industry by far according to the interviews is 
UBI technology; this means all kinds of technology 
supporting UBI services. The second most important is 
appliances and only after these comes UBI services. Maybe 
as the industry grows older the focus will shift to services.  
TABLE 2. THE MOST IMPORTANT INDUSTRIES ACCORDING TO INTERVIEWS 
Industry 
Mentions 
UBI technology: sensors, GPS, RFID, Heating, 
ventilating, and air conditioning/HVAC, Near 
field communication/NFC 
6 
appliances: heart rate monitor, mobile phone 
4 
UBI services: tailored location based services, 
sensoring 
3 
automation: process automation, real estate 
automation, home automation 
3 
traffic/logistics 
3 
health care 
2 
 
The biggest single estimate – and explanation for it – 
came from Mikael Wiberg: “It must be thousands, if you 
include the whole ecology of infrastructure providers, 
device developers, and service design companies, because 
it’s important to think about all the actors in the ecology 
around this. And also, every day, all the people are feeding 
these systems as well. They are not companies, but still, 
they make the ecology tick.” 
When asking about what the most important industries 
are, the most common answers were: UBI technology, 
appliances, UBI services, automation, traffic/logistics, and 
health care. These are all big, existing industries, so no 
surprises arose. Actually, it seemed that every researcher 
mentioned the industry he is more or less studying. Other 
industries mentioned were: ICT, environment/energy, 
clothing, content for UBI services, security (military 
technology), agriculture, and education. It was also 
mentioned that infrastructure is not a priority for Finnish 
UBI companies. Vesa Hirvisalo thinks: “In my opinion a 
Finnish strength could be personal appliances, and from 
the other side of UBI: where to find and gather 
information; the distributed sensor network, and data 
collection base techniques. UBI systems need lots of infra; 
also, personal appliances.” 
When the interviewees were asked where the market or 
money in the UBI field is, there were two mentions of the 
process industry. Other mentions were: user-centric 
services, real estate automation, ubiquitous computing 
devices, applications combining a device and a service 
(such as train tickets), health care, infotainment, and a 
model to help users sell their data and to legitimise 
companies using people’s data (such as location/Facebook 
data etc.), or building a platform or a set of rules on top on 
which UBI services will be popularised. 
When considering where the money in the UBI field in 
Finland is, Ismo Hakala says: “the process industry and 
property automation are quite local and tailored systems. 
They have the ability to pay; there are clear benefits 
gained”. Market-wise, Nokia, with its background, could 
definitely take the whole issue of mobility one step further 
(compared, for instance, to the iPhone). It has a longer 
history of thinking about the mobile user. Nokia is an 
interaction company, but it should be a mobility company 
and an interaction company, demonstrating to a huge 
population what mobile life could be about.  
 
V. DISCUSSION 
In this research, we read the literature and made 
interviews in order to gain a better understanding of what 
UBI is and what it is not. There is no single definition of 
UBI. The concept of UBI is vague and diffuse, so there will 
probably not even be a precise definition. We do not know 
precisely what information technology is or how we could 
then define UBI. UBI should be understood much more as 
a system: a joint social or organisational or human 
collaboration matter, not a device connection. In this 
research we concentrated on three aspects of UBI: smart 
environments, embedded environments, and the internet of 
things. The combination of these characterisations seemed 
to satisfy the researchers who were interviewed. Actually, 
according to this research, it seems just to be a new kind of 
combination of the web, social media, embedded, and 
mobility. 
The shift toward ubiquitous computing leads to 
multiple technical, social, and organisational challenges. It 
is hoped that large corporations are hiring social scientists. 
Nowadays companies are full of engineers and computer 
scientists, but they actually need ethnographers and other 
specialists.  
Additionally, infrastructure providers, together with 
companies, mobile operators, and application developers, 
probably need to start collaborating to achieve good user 
experiences. In the future it would be interesting to study 
other than technical aspects of UBI, such as user 
experiences of UBI services or networks of UBI companies 
in Finland.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Almeida, “Ubiquitous computing and natural interfaces for 
environmental information,". Dissertation Faculdade de Ciências 
e Tecnologia Universidade Nova de Lisboa Departamento de 
Ciências e Engenharia do Ambiente, 2009. 
[2] 
David Gay, Phil Levis, Robert von Behren, Matt Welsh, Eric 
Brewer, and David Culler, “The NesC Language: A Holistic 
Approach to Networked Embedded Systems,” Proceedings of the 
ACM SIGPLAN 2003 Conference on Programming Language 
Design and implementation, 2002. 
[3] 
A. Greenfield, “Everyware: the dawning age of ubiquitous 
computing”. New Riders, p. 12, 2006.  
[4] 
T. Kindberg and A. Fox, “System software for ubiquitous 
computing,” Pervasive Computing, IEEE, 2002. 
209
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

[5] 
NEXT 
conference, 
2010. 
http://www.turkusciencepark.com/spark.asp?viewID=343&news
ID=976&news_offset=0. Retrieved: October, 2011. 
[6] 
Parliament 
seminar, 
 
2009. 
http://www.virtuaaliyliopisto.fi/uutiset/2009/5l0eMFAaX.html. 
Retrieved: October, 2011. 
[7] 
Sitra, 
2010. 
http://www.elinvoimanlahteet.fi/asiasanat/tulevaisuus. Retrieved: 
October, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[8] 
Walther, J. B., and Burgoon, J. K, “Relational communication in 
computer-mediated 
interaction,” 
Human 
Communication 
Research, 19, 50–88, 1992. 
[9] 
M. Weiser, “The computer for the 21 century,” Scientific 
American, 1991. 
[10] M. Weiser, “Some Computer Science Issues in Ubiquitous 
Computing,” CACM, July 1993. 
[11] R. Jason Weiss and J. Philip Craiger, “Ubiquitous computing,” 
The Industrial-Organizational Psychologist, 2002 
 
210
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

