 
 
Analyzing Consumer Loyalty of Mobile Advertising: A View of Involvement, Content, 
and Interactivity and the Mediator of Advertising Value 
 
Wei-Hung Hsiao 
Institute for Information Industry,  
Taipei, Taiwan 
e-mail: miswhhsiao@gmail.com 
Shwu-Ming Wu 
Department of Human Resource Management, National Kaohsiung University of Applied Science 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan 
e-mail:mingwu@cc.kuas.edu.tw 
Ing-Long Wu 
Department of Information Management, National Chung Cheng University 
Chia-Yi, Taiwan 
e-mail: ilwu@mis.ccu.edu.tw 
 
 
 
Abstract—Mobile commerce has been growing popular recently 
and mobile advertising is one of the important aspects in 
marketing.  Advertising value is an important criterion for 
measuring its success. Previous studies have focused on message 
content or technology use. The purpose of mobile advertising is to 
provide personalized information for consumers. Individual 
beliefs thus play an important role in identifying advertising 
value. Three major concerns arise for advertising value, personal 
involvement, message content, and user interactivity. However, 
advertising value may be temporary to define advertising 
effectiveness. Consumer loyalty is defined as the target for rapid 
growth and proliferation of advertisements. Based on these issues, 
this study thus proposes a novel research model for defining the 
relationship structure for the key drivers, advertising value and 
customer loyalty, in a m-commerce. The empirical results show 
important links among these components and advertising value 
acts as a critical mediator in realizing consumer loyalty.  
 
Keywords-Mobile advertising; Consumer loyalty; Advertising 
value; Involvement; Message content; Interactivity. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Mobile advertising has become increasingly important in 
marketing practice. According to Gartner research, mobile 
advertising revenue reached 3.3 billion dollars in 2011, more 
than double the 1.6 billion dollars of revenue in 2010. Existing 
research for exploring its effectiveness has been fragmentally 
focused on two perspectives, technology use and message 
content. The first examines it from a technology use 
perspective according to relevant theories, such as the 
technology acceptance model (TAM) [13], the theory of 
planned behavior (TPB) [1] or their extensions, to investigate 
advertising value of mobile advertising in a national or cross-
cultural context [20]. Other studies investigated it from content 
perspective in terms of identifying message characteristics to 
study advertising value, attitude, or intention toward mobile 
advertising [26]. 
However, to study how consumers process mobile 
advertising/message in their minds, it is necessary to gain an 
understanding of the individual’s involvement state when 
experiencing this type of advertising [4]. For example, different 
people perceive the same product differently and have different 
levels of involvement with the same product. Recently, 
interactivity has been identified as an important concern for 
technology use of mobile devices, such as in the case of the 
Web 2.0 platform, as it is the major feature which differentiates 
new media from traditional ones [14]. However, most 
technology-use based theories have focused more on the 
attributes of IT itself, such as perceived usefulness, computer 
self-efficacy, and other technology related factors [40]. Next, 
previous studies have confined research targets to only 
examining advertising value or initial acceptance of mobile 
advertising, which is just an initial step to defining the success 
of mobile advertising. Bhattacherjee [6] contended that long-
term viability of an IT/IS and its eventual success depends on 
its continued use rather than initial acceptance. There has been 
a lack of the studies of consumer loyalty or continued use in 
relation to mobile advertising [3]. 
In sum, this study first attempts to define the antecedents of 
advertising 
value 
by 
integrating 
three 
perspectives, 
involvement, advertising content, and interactivity in the 
particular context of mobile advertising. Furthermore, this 
study explores customer loyalty in relation to mobile 
advertising, as loyalty issue has been considered as the main 
purpose from effectively realizing advertising value with the 
rapid growth and proliferation in the mobile advertising [18]. 
Accordingly, this study thus proposes a novel research model 
to define a relationship structure for the key drivers, advertising 
value, and customer loyalty, in an m-commerce context. 
Specifically, based on a comprehensive review of the 
literature, we further define five attributes of message 
characteristics, 
entertainment, 
informativeness, 
irritation, 
credibility, and personalization. When it comes to the meaning 
structure of mobile devices, both involvement and interactivity 
are complex factors. We thus define both as a second-order 
construct with three indicators for each. The former includes 
personal, stimulus, and situation indicators and the latter 
contains communication, synchronicity, and user control 
indicators. Finally, the structure of this paper is as below, 
Section II for literature review, Section III with research design, 
Section IV for hypothesis testing, Section V with findings and 
discussions, and Section VI for conclusions and suggestions. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Based on the above discussion, Figure 1 provides a pictorial 
depiction of this research model.  The proposed model is also 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
consistent with the basic relationship structure, including 
stimulus, satisfaction/value, and loyalty/retention, when often 
applied in consumer research [5]. As follows, we discuss the 
relevant literature and the development of the hypotheses. 
 
 
Figure 1. Research model 
Node: Variable, Edge: Link for two variables, Rectangle: First order indicator 
 
A. Mobile Advertising 
Mobile advertising focuses on communication by mobile 
media with the intent to influence consumers’ cognitive and 
emotional states. Mobile advertising employs two basic 
publicization methods: push-based and pull-based. The push-
based strategy signifies that marketers send information 
directly to recipients without the latter’s request. In contrast, 
the pull-based strategy implies that the specific information 
received by consumers is sent as a result of their own request 
[21]. Although the two publicization methods make no 
distinctions in traditional advertising or flyer promotions, 
however, they are different with mobile devices for each user. 
In sum, mobile advertising has some distinctive features, that is, 
interactivity and personalization. 
Advertising value refers to a subjective evaluation of the 
relative worth or the utility of advertising to consumers [27]. 
Advertising value may serve as an index of customer 
satisfaction in the communication with products purchased 
from a vendor; moreover, it also represents a general cognitive 
belief or an attitude toward advertising. Studies of advertising 
value have demonstrated it to be a useful performance criterion 
for evaluating advertising effectiveness and further to help 
advertisers develop their advertising strategy more effectively 
[20]. When mobile advertising does not provide certain values 
for consumers, it may be perceived by consumers as coercive 
and unwelcome and fail to capture the attention of consumers 
[29]. 
B. Involvement 
Involvement generally refers to the mediating role in 
determining if a cognitive experience of external stimuli is 
effectively relevant to the receiver [29]. In the advertising 
domain, 
involvement 
is 
manipulated 
by 
making 
the 
advertisement relevant to the consumers in terms of being 
personally affected and hence motivated to respond to the 
advertisement [26]. This study is mainly concerned with the 
impact of involvement when a consumer experiences mobile 
advertising messages. Although there are no agreements on 
what clusters constitute a good taxonomy of involvement, most 
researchers agree that involvement should include at least three 
dimensions: personal, stimulus, and situational [19]. The 
personal dimension defines a person’s inherent value system 
along with her/his unique experiences, which determines 
whether the person is affected by the advertisement. The 
stimulus dimension relates to the physical characteristic of the 
advertisement. The situational dimension refers to the varying 
situations in presenting advertisement that temporarily affect 
the state of involvement with the advertisement. Involvement is 
conceptualized as a formative construct with the three 
indicators as involvement is clearly a composite of three 
indicators that may be very different [23]. Reflective indicators, 
however, are interchangeable and share a common theme. 
As follows, we develop a hypothetical link. Researchers 
noted that consumers' involvement with online advertising has 
a direct impact on their attitude toward web advertising and 
their perceived value of the advertised products or services [28]. 
As such, involvement has several influences on personal 
perceived value in relation to stimuli in different types of 
advertising messages [28]. Following this argument, we can 
propose the first hypothesis. 
H1: Involvement with mobile advertising positively affects 
advertising value. 
C. Message Content 
Information objects include a storage format (physical or 
digital) and one or more forms of human usable expressions 
(e.g., visual, aural, and tactile) [22]. Mobile advertising is an 
information object in a digital form for human use and the 
information content of advertisement is usually related to 
products or services to be sold to consumers. Several studies 
have proposed similar classifications for indentifying message 
content. Ducoffe [11] defined three major message attributes 
forming personal attitudes toward web advertising, including 
entertainment, informativeness, and irritation.  
Haghirian et al. [15] discussed the advertising value of 
mobile marketing in Austria, and suggested that media 
characteristics, 
including 
entertainment, 
informativeness, 
irritation, and credibility, significantly affect the perceived 
advertising value of consumers. Brackett and Carr [7] 
discussed 
similar 
message 
characteristics, 
including, 
entertainment, informativeness, irritation, and credibility, for 
understanding how college students perceive the advertising 
value of web advertising. 
Personalized mobile advertising aims precisely at target 
customers and accommodates their needs according to their 
preference profiles and shopping experiences. This can further 
ensure that customers find the most appropriate and appealing 
mobile advertising and create positive benefits, ranging from 
improved advertising value or attitude toward the advertising to 
purchasing the advertised products [17]. Taken together, we 
identify five attributes of message content, entertainment, 
informativeness, irritation, credibility, and personalization, 
based on a comprehensive classification discussed above. By 
the same token, the five message attributes are important 
antecedents to determine advertising value. Accordingly, we 
thus propose the following hypotheses. 
H2: Entertainment positively affects the advertising value 
of mobile messages. 
Entertainment
Interactivity
Loyalty
Advertising value
Credibility
Irritation
Informativeness
Personalization
Person
Situation
Stimulus
Communication
User control
Synchronicity
Involvement
H8+
H1+
H3+
H4-
H6+
H7+
H +
2
+
H5
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
H3: Informativeness positively affects advertising value of 
mobile message. 
H4: Irritation negatively affects the advertising value of 
mobile messages. 
H5: Credibility positively affects the advertising value of 
mobile messages. 
H6: Personalization positively affects the advertising value 
of mobile messages. 
D. Interactivity 
Interactivity is the most salient feature of mobile 
communications [5] and is considered as an important factor in 
differentiating between new forms of media and traditional 
ones [23]. Advertisers can get immediate and direct feedback 
from the consumers through the mechanism of mobile 
advertising, which is based on interactivity [15]. In contrast, 
consumers could have the ability to choose and respond to 
particular advertisement of their liking [29].  
Interactivity is generally believed to be a multidimensional 
construct [14]. Most previous studies have agreed that there are 
three major components in the exchange of communication 
between various parties, user control, two-way communication, 
and synchronicity [19]. A user, as a receiver, has more power 
to control the advertisement as mobile devices allow prompt, 
two-way communication online. Accordingly, interactivity was 
conceptualized as a formative construct of the three indicators. 
The reasons are similar to the above arguments. 
In this study, we argue that interactivity is a critical factor 
affecting consumers’ perceptions of advertising value in a 
mobile environment. One study attempted to examine the 
effect of perceived interactivity on attitude toward mobile 
advertising experimentally by manipulating the design of 
various interactive features to customers in order to understand 
their differences; the results indicated that interactivity was a 
strong predictor of attitude toward mobile advertising [14]. 
Moreover, a study of e-tailing investigated the role of 
interactivity, showing that consumers’ interactivity with 
commercial messages plays an important role in creating 
perceived value of these messages and increasing customer 
satisfaction [28]. Based on these arguments, we propose the 
following hypothesis. 
H7: Interactivity offered by mobile devices positively 
affects advertising value. 
E. Consumer Loyalty 
Consumer loyalty has long been recognized as an important 
issue in marketing [12]. Oliver [22] defined loyalty as “a 
deeply held commitment to re-buy or re-patronize a preferred 
product/service consistently in the future, thereby causing 
repetitive same-brand or same brand-set purchasing, despite 
situational influences and marketing efforts having the 
potentials to cause switching behavior.” In particular, with 
rapid growth and proliferation of mobile services, it is 
necessary to know what factors mainly determine consumers’ 
attitudinal commitment and behavioral intention continue using 
these services [18]. This study defines loyalty as consumer’ 
behavioral intention to continuously use mobile advertising, as 
well as their inclinations to recommend mobile advertising to 
other people.   
Advertising value refers to a subjective evaluation of the 
relative value or the usefulness of advertising by consumers 
[12]. It is a form of perceived value regarding mobile 
advertising. Several studies of consumer loyalty have 
suggested that when the perceived value of mobile services is 
low, customers are more inclined to switch to competitors in 
order to increase perceived value, thus contributing to a decline 
in loyalty. Turel et al. [25] looked into the usage of hedonic 
digital artifacts (i.e. mobile phone ringtones) from the 
perceived value perspective. Their results showed that 
consumers’ perceived value can successfully predict behavioral 
usage in the future and leads to positive word-of-month 
intentions. Harris and Goode [16] indicated that perceived 
value of online services is a critical factor affecting customer 
loyalty. Accordingly, this study proposes the following 
hypothesis.   
H8: Advertising value of mobile advertising positively 
affects consumer loyalty. 
III. 
RESEARCH DESIGN 
A survey study was conducted to collect empirical data. 
The research design is describe below. 
A. Instrument 
The instrument includes a three-part questionnaire. The first 
part uses a nominal scale and the rest uses a 7-point Likert 
scale. 
1) Basic Information: We collected basic information 
about respondent characteristics including gender, age, 
education, occupation, type of mobile advertising (push or 
pull-based), and volume of mobile advertising received daily. 
2) Antecedents of advertising value: Here, we measure the 
seven antecedents of advertising value. The items used for 
measuring involvement were adapted from the instruments 
developed by Huang et al. [19]. Involvement consists of three 
sub-constructs, person, stimulus, and situation, each including 
four items.  
3) There are three items used for measuring entertainment, 
informativeness, irritaton, and credibility, adapted from the 
instruments developed by Brackett and Carr [7]. The three 
items used for measuring personalization were adapted from 
the instrument developed by Xu [40]. The three items used for 
measuring interactivity were adapted from the instrument 
developed by Gao et al. [14]. Interactivity is defined as three 
subconstructs, each including three items. 
4) Advertising Value and Loyalty: This part measures the 
perceived value of mobile advertising and consumer loyalty. 
The three items used for measuring advertising value were 
adapted and revised from the instrument developed by [11]. 
The three items used for measuring loyalty were adapted from 
the instrument developed by [10]. 
B. Sample Design 
Consumers qualified for this study require previous 
experience using mobile advertising. An online survey was 
placed in online communities to seek users as potential 
respondents. The online survey was placed in several larger 
online communities simultaneously. Website users (potential 
subjects) can reach the questionnaire with a hyperlink to its 
website when they access these online communities. A wider 
variety of data sources in terms of these different larger 
communities, were covered for the survey, allowing the 
responses to be more representative for the population. This 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
survey was carried out during the period of April-June, 2012. A 
reward system was also provided for the respondents. At least 
30 participants were drawn from the response sample, with a 
reward of 10 USdollars. 
C. Scale Validation 
Initially, a pretest was conducted for the scale. The scale 
was carefully examined by selected practitioners and scholars 
in this area, including translation, wording, structure, and 
content. Their comments were used to modify the scale, in 
order to guarantee acceptable initial reliability and validity. 
When the questionnaire had been finalized, the online survey 
was performed, using the previously mentioned sampling 
procedure. A total of 533 respondents were received with a 
certain level of experience using mobile advertising. After 57 
invalid responses were deleted, including 23 with no 
experience mobile advertising, there was a response sample of 
476. The demographics showed that a high proportion of 
respondents (more than 80%) had the experience of receiving 
push-based mobile advertising and received at least 3 mobile 
messages daily.  
In addition, common method bias was examined with 
Harman’s single factor test [24]. We included all items for a 
factor analysis to determine whether the majority of the 
variance could be accounted for by one general factor. The 
result reported no single factor accounted for the bulk of 
covariance, leading to the conclusion that common method bias 
was not present. 
D. Measurement Model 
Partial Lease Square (PLS) allows latent variables to be 
modeled as either formative or reflective constructs and places 
minimal demands on sample size [8]. In this study, 
involvement and interactivity variables were formulated as a 
second-order 
structure 
with 
formative 
indicators. 
A 
measurement model was conducted for reliability and validity. 
Reliability is assessed by the criterion that Cronbach’s α is 
larger than 0.7. Convergent validity is assessed by three criteria: 
(1) item loading (λ) is larger than 0.70 (2) composite construct 
reliability is larger than 0.80, and (3) the average variance 
extracted (AVE) is larger than 0.50 [13]. Next, discriminant 
validity between constructs is assessed using the criterion that 
the square root of AVE for each construct should be larger than 
its correlations with all other constructs [13]. Item loadings 
range from 0.83 to 0.98, composite construct reliabilities range 
from 0.91 to 0.98, and average variances extracted (AVE) 
range from 0.75 to 0.95. The results indicate that all the 
constructs are highly acceptable for reliability, and convergent 
and discriminant validity. 
IV. 
HYPOTHESIS TESTING 
PLS was used for analyzing the structural model. This 
study uses bootstrapping analysis with 1000 subsamples to 
estimate path coefficients and relevant parameters, including 
means, standard errors, item loadings, and item weights. Next, 
we need to compute the coefficient of determination (
2
R ) for 
endogenous variables to assess the predictive power in the 
structural model. Figure 2 presents the results of the structural 
model. 
 
Entertainment
Interactivity
Loyalty
Advertising value
Credibility
Irritation
Informativeness
Personalization
Person
Situation
Stimulus
Communication
User control
Synchronicity
Involvement
0.41***
R2=0.63
R2=0.66
0.17*
0.70***
0.20**
-0.05
0.19*
0.06
0.28**
0.44***
0.34***
0.47***
0.33***
0.38***
Legend: *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001
0.14*
 
Figure 2. Result of the structure model 
 
Hypotheses testing is reported in Table 1. For the 
psychological state, involvement was found to be a notable 
predictor of advertising value at the level of 0.01 (β=0.28). 
Hypothesis 1 is supported. Among the five message attributes, 
informativeness, 
credibility, 
and 
personalization 
were 
important in affecting advertising value at the level of 0.05 
(β=0.19, 0.14, and 0.17), but entertainment and irritation were 
not important (β=0.06 and -0.05).  Hypothesis 3, 5, and 6 are 
supported.  However, Hypothesis 2 and 4 are not supported. 
For the technology use, interactivity had a significant effect on 
advertising value at the level of 0.01 (β=0.20).  Hypothesis 7 is 
supported. The three issues, involvement, message attributes, 
and interactivity, jointly explain 63% of variance in advertising 
value. In turn, advertising value was critical in determining 
customer loyalty at the level of 0.001 (β=0.70).  Hypothesis 8 
is supported. It further explains a large of proportion of 
variance (
2
R =66%) in loyalty.  
 
Table 1. Hypotheses testing 
Hypotheses 
Testing results 
H1 
Supported 
H2 
Not supported 
H3 
Supported 
H4 
Not Supported 
H5 
Supported 
H6 
Supported 
H7 
Supported 
H8 
Supported 
 
This gives rise to a thinking of an important mediating role 
of advertising value in the realization of loyalty from the initial 
drivers. We based on a comparison between the original model 
and a competing model with extra paths for the antecedents 
directly to loyalty. Accordingly, the
f 2
 statistic is based on the 
difference between the 
2
R  in the two models, was used to 
assess their effect size [9]. This indicates a full mediating role 
of advertising value in realizing loyalty. Moreover, personal, 
stimulus, and situation are three important indicators in 
explaining involvement (W=0.41, 0.38 and 0.33, weight score). 
Interactivity is significantly explained by three key indicators, 
communication, synchronicity, and user control (W=0.47, 0.34, 
and 0.44). 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
V. 
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSIONS 
Involvement with mobile advertising is the underlying basis 
for explaining a consumer’s psychological state during the 
subjective evaluation of advertisement in terms of being 
personally affected by affective and cognitive relevance, such 
as personal, stimulus, and situational attributes. In order to 
understand the effect of involvement, researchers commonly 
manipulated involvement by leading subjects to believe one of 
these stimuli or situations. In their studies, subjects in both high 
and low-involvement groups receive the same communication 
messages. However, high-involvement subjects are led to 
believe the communicated message affects them, while low-
involvement subjects do not believe the communicated 
message has a personally relevant effect. Practitioners therefore 
place their emphasis on the issue of involvement to increase 
advertising value.  
Informativeness, credibility, and personalization remain as 
important predictors of advertising value and in turn, consumer 
loyalty, as in prior studies of mobile advertising [17]. 
Informativeness seems to be the primary predictor among three 
key factors. While mobile-based mechanisms are highly 
penetrable for their users to send or receive timely and 
important information, such as mobile advertising, consumers 
are often find it easy to understand the new products or services 
offered by marketers. Credibility indicates that the content of 
mobile advertising can be trusted or believed by consumers for 
their futures decisions. Marketers should take notice of the 
building of the initial trust of consumers as an important 
precursor for further being able to nurture and recognize the 
effectiveness of advertising in their purchasing decision 
process. Personalized mobile advertising is a major concern of 
consumers in relation to their willingness to read/receive 
messages as it targets the real needs of consumers. For 
marketers, the importance of personalization makes one-to-one 
mobile marketing a better marketing strategy. Marketers could 
take the initiative in sending personalized advertising by means 
of the collection and analysis of consumers' basic information, 
purchase records, or a combination with location-based 
service/awareness, to increase the return on marketing 
investment. 
In contrast, entertainment and irritation show a non-
significant impact on advertising value. The findings should be 
quite interesting to marketers. The reasons behind this can be 
explained as below. First, the most common way forms of 
mobile advertising are short message services (SMS) and 
multimedia messaging services (MMS). These advertisements 
are usually presented with texts, pictures, or together with 
hyperlinks. All of these look similar and monotonous. However, 
many marketers have started using the APPs (Applications) to 
increase the degree of pleasure and enjoyment during 
interaction with mobile advertising. In this study, a high 
proportion of respondents (more than 80%) have received 
pushed-based mobile advertising on a daily basis. Mobile 
advertising offers new opportunities to marketers to deliver 
messages in a personalized manner to meet the needs of 
consumers. It is thus recognized as a friendly type of service in 
terms of both meeting the needs and time restraints of 
individual consumers. As a result, consumers may gradually 
get accustomed to mobile messages and may no longer feel 
irritated about them. 
Interactivity has positive relationship with advertising value, 
which is consistent with some previous studies [14]. In general, 
this study indicates the importance of considering the 
interactivity perspective in the mobile context. Marketers can 
take full advantage of the features of mobile devices (e.g., 
mobility, synchronicity, and two-way communication), and 
design a better form of interactive interface. System interfaces 
should be presented in a user-friendly way to enable good 
communication with consumers. Therefore, marketers can 
quickly get feedback from consumers and further provide them 
with the capability to adjust sale forecasts and marketing 
strategies in real time. In contrast, if consumers have the 
experience of interaction failures when using mobile 
advertising, they may not feel that mobile advertising is 
valuable, thus decreasing advertising value. Finally, advertising 
value is useful in evaluating the effectiveness of mobile 
advertising and is an important mediator for achieving 
customer loyalty when using mobile advertising. Advertising 
value should be considered as an important criterion when 
designing an effective mobile advertising mechanism for 
marketers. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS 
Several important practical implications arise from our 
findings. A high proportion of respondents (83.6%) have the 
experience of receiving push-based mobile advertising. The 
primary work, in general, focuses on improving the value of 
mobile advertising so that consumers do not think mobile 
advertising as equivalent to spam.  
For the involvement, marketers may need to look into 
consumer behavior to understand the decision-making process, 
including personal characteristics and external stimuli. For 
example, personal income and job would be considered by 
marketers concerned with delivering mobile advertising to the 
appropriate person in order to effectively induce purchase. 
External stimuli, such as price, may be sensitive to a variety of 
factors, such as preference for a particular brand, relative 
importance or perceived differences of product attributes, and 
promotions to target consumers. After such considerations, 
mobile marketing could be an important mechanism to 
effectively communicate with consumers and increase their 
level of involvement. 
Next, message content are also important for advertising 
value. Efforts by marketers may focus on the following 
directions. In terms of informativeness and personalization, 
marketers should use a new mobile advertising approach, 
location-based service (LBS), which is pull-based mobile 
advertising. This service could facilitate timely delivery of 
customized marketing information to target consumers. In 
addition, marketers may often need to conduct surveys to 
understand the real requirements of consumers in order to 
reduce the gap between marketers/vendors and consumers. 
Regarding credibility, as building the initial trust belief is 
important for the effectiveness of mobile advertising, marketers 
may initially apply both traditional (print, radio, and TV) and 
mobile advertising approaches for promoting consumer 
recognition of marketers/vendors. Finally, while interactivity 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
implies that the mechanism of mobile advertising needs to be 
further enhanced for improving two-way communication 
channels and consumers’ self-efficacy in using the advertising, 
marketers can create an effective conversation between 
marketers/vendors and consumers through better accessible 
hardware, higher speed networking systems, and user-friendly 
interfaces. 
Some theoretical implications are also noted from the 
findings. We approach this research as an integration of three 
unique features. This will provide a new way of thinking for 
the future research. Based on this study, future research could 
focus on a variety of issues. As cross culture issues may result 
in important effects in the fields of consumer behavior and 
commercial advertising, future research can target consumers 
from different countries, to understand their differences and 
similarities. IT-based features, such as interactivity, are usually 
an important concern of users of mobile advertising.  
Although this research has produced some interesting results, 
it may have a number of limitations. For example, push-based 
advertising occupies a high proportion (more than 80%) in the 
survey as compared to pull-based advertising. However, this is 
a major stream of current mobile advertising. The result does 
properly reflect the regular population distribution of subjects. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
I. Ajzen, “The theory of planned behavior,” Organizational 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, vol. 50, issue 2, 
1991, pp. 179-211. 
[2] 
K. 
Amoako-Gyampah, 
“Perceived 
usefulness, 
user 
involvement and behavioral intention: an empirical study of 
ERP implementation,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 23, 
issue 3, 2007, pp. 1232-1248. 
[3] 
R. E. Anderson and S. S. Srinivasan, “E-satisfaction and e-
loyalty: a contingency framework,” Psychology and Marketing, 
vol. 20, issue 2, 2003, pp. 123-138. 
[4] 
H. Barki and J. Hartwick, “Rethinking the concept of user 
involvement,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 13, issue 1, 1989, pp. 53-63. 
[5] 
S. J. Barnes, “Wireless digital advertising: nature and 
implications,” International Journal of Advertising, vol. 21 
issue 3, 2002, pp. 399-420. 
[6] 
A. 
Bhattacherjee, 
“Understanding 
information 
systems 
continuance: 
an 
expectation-confirmation 
model,” 
MIS 
Quarterly, vol. 25, isssue 3, 2001, pp. 351-370. 
[7] 
L. K. Brackett and B. N. Carr, “Cyberspace advertising vs. 
other media: consumer vs. mature student attitudes,” Journal of 
Advertising Research, vol. 41, issue 5, 2001, pp. 23-32. 
[8] 
W. W. Chin, B. L. Marcolin, and P. R. Newstead, “A partial 
least squares latent variable modeling approach for measuring 
interaction effects: results from a Monte Carlo simulation 
study and an electronic-mail emotion/adoption study,”  
Information Systems Research, vol. 14, issue 2, 2003, pp. 189-
217. 
[9] 
J. Cohen, “Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral 
Sciences,” Lawrence Erlbaum, NJ, 1988. 
[10] Z. Y. Deng, Lu, K. K. Wei, and J. Zhang, “Understanding 
customer satisfaction and loyalty: an empirical study of mobile 
instant messages in China,” International Journal of 
Information Management, vol. 30, issue 4, 2010, pp. 289-300. 
[11] R. H. Ducoffe, “How consumers assess the value of 
advertising,” Journal of Current Issues and Research in 
Advertising,  vol. 17, issue 1, 1995, pp. 1-18. 
[12] R. H. Ducoffe, “Advertising value and advertising on the 
web,” Journal of Advertising Research, vol. 36, issue 5, 1996, 
pp. 21-35. 
[13] C. Fornell and D. F. Larcker, “Structural equation models with 
unobservable variables and measurement error: algebra and 
statistics,” Journal of Marketing Research, vol. 18, issue 3, 
1981, pp. 382-388. 
[14] Q. Gao, P. L. Rau, and G. Salvendy, “Perception of 
interactivity: affects of four key variables in mobile 
advertising,” International Journal of Human-Computer 
Interaction, vol. 25, issue 6, 2009, pp. 479-505. 
[15] P. Haghirian, M. Madlberger, and A. Tanuskova, “Increasing 
advertising value of mobile marketing: an empirical study of 
antecedents,” In: Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, 2005, pp. 1-10. 
[16] L. C. Harris and M. M. H. Goode, “The four levels of loyalty 
and the pivotal role of trust: a study of online service 
dynamics,” Journal of Retailing,  vol. 80, issue 2, 2004, pp. 
139-158. 
[17] G. S. Kim, S. B. Park, and J. Oh, “An examination of factors 
influencing consumer adoption of short message service 
(SMS),” Psychology and Marketing, vol. 25, issue 8, 2008, pp. 
769-786. 
[18] H. H. Lin and Y. S. Wang, “An examination of the 
determinants of customer loyalty in mobile commerce 
contexts,” Information and Management, vol. 43, issue 3, 2006, 
pp.  271-282. 
[19] P. B. Lowry, N. C. J. Romano, J. L. Jenkins, and R. W. 
Guthrie, “The CMC interactivity model: how interactivity 
enhances communication quality and process satisfaction in 
lean-media groups,” Journal of Management Information 
Systems, vol. 26, issue 1, 2009, pp. 155-195. 
[20] Y. A. A. Megdadi and T. T. Nusair, “Factors influencing 
advertising message value by mobile marketing among 
Jordanian users: empirical study,” European Journal of 
Economics, Finance and Administrative Sciences, vol. 31, 
2011, pp. 87-98. 
[21] S. A. Nasco and G. C. Bruner, “Comparing consumer 
responses 
to 
advertising 
and 
non-advertising 
mobile 
communications,” Psychology and Marketing, vol. 25, issue 8, 
2008, pp. 821-837. 
[22] R. L. Oliver, “Whence consumer loyalty?” Journal of 
Marketing, vol. 63, 1999, pp. 33-44. 
[23] S. Petter, D. Straub, and A. Rai, “Specifying formative 
constructs in information systems research,” MIS Quarterly, 
vol. 31, issue 4, 2007, pp. 623-656. 
[24] P. M. Podsakoff, S. B. Mackenzie, J. Y. Lee, and N. P. 
Podsakoff, “Common method biases in behavioral research: a 
critical review of the literature and recommended remedies,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 88, issue 5, 2003, pp. 879-
903. 
[25] O. Turel, A. Serenko, and N. Bontis, “User acceptance of 
hedonic digital artifacts: a theory of consumption values 
perspective,” Information and Management, vol. 47, issue 1, 
2010, pp. 53-59. 
[26] C. S. Wan, S. H. Tsaur, Y. L. Chiu, and W. B. Chiou, “Is the 
advertising effect of virtual experience always better or 
contingent on different travel destinations?” Journal of 
Information Technology and Tourism, vol. 9, issue 1, 2007, pp. 
45-54. 
[27] E. Wang, “Forming positive advertising and product attitude: 
the role of product involvement,” International Journal of 
Technology Marketing, vol. 6, issue 3, 2011, pp. 259-271. 
[28] W. S. Yoo, Y. Lee, and J. Park, “The role of interactivity in e-
tailing: creating value and increasing satisfaction,” Journal of 
Retailing and Consumer Services, vol. 17, issue 2, 2010, pp. 
89-96. 
[29] J. L. Zaichkowsky, “Conceptualizing involvement,” Journal of 
Advertising, vol. 15, issue 2, 1986, pp. 4-34. 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

