QoS Aware Mixed Traffic Packet Scheduling in OFDMA-based LTE-Advanced 
Networks 
Rehana Kausar, Yue Chen, Kok Keong Chai, Laurie Cuthbert and John Schormans 
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science 
Queen Mary University of London 
London E1 4NS, UK 
rehana.kausar,yue.chen,michael.chai,laurie.cuthbert,john.schormans@elec.qmul.ac.uk 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, a packet scheduling framework is 
proposed for LTE-Advanced downlink transmission. The 
proposed framework adds the new functionality of an adaptive 
TD scheduler with built-in congestion control to the existing 
conventional quality of service (QoS) aware packet scheduling 
algorithms. It optimizes multiuser diversity in both the time 
and frequency domains by jointly considering the channel 
condition, queue status and the QoS feedback. The framework 
aims to improve the system spectral efficiency by optimizing 
the use of available resources while maintaining QoS 
requirements of different service classes and a certain degree 
of fairness among users. The results show an improved QoS of 
Real Time traffic and a fair share of radio resources to Non 
Real Time traffic types. 
Keywords- Packet scheduling; OFDMA; QoS; LTE-A. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Long Term Evolution Advanced (LTE-A) is an all-IP 
based future wireless communication network that is aiming 
to support a wide variety of applications and services with 
different quality of service (QoS) requirements. It is 
targeting superior performance in terms of spectral 
efficiency, system throughput, QoS and service satisfaction 
when compared with existing 3GPP wireless networks [1]. 
As one of the core functionalities in radio resource 
management, packet scheduling (PS) plays an important role 
in optimizing the network performance and it has been under 
extensive research in recent years. Different PS algorithms 
have been deployed aiming at utilizing the scare radio 
resource efficiently. The classic PS algorithms exploiting 
multiuser diversity are the MAX C/I and Proportional 
Fairness (PF) algorithms. MAX C/I algorithm allocates a 
physical resource block (PRB) to a user with the highest 
channel gain on that PRB, and can maximize the system 
throughput [2]. The PF algorithm takes fairness among users 
into consideration and allocates resources to users based on 
the ratio of their instantaneous throughput and its acquired 
time averaged throughput [3]. However these algorithms aim 
only at improving resource utilization based on channel 
conditions of users; QoS requirements “e.g.” delay 
requirements of real time (RT) service or minimum 
throughput requirements of non-real time (NRT) service are 
not considered at all. In the next generation networks, apart 
from system throughput and user fairness, the crucial point is 
to fulfill users’ QoS requirements in a multi-service mixed 
traffic environment. This is because different service types 
are competing for radio resources to fulfill their QoS 
requirements. To allocate radio resources efficiently and 
intelligently in such complex environments is challenging. 
Various methods have been proposed aiming to use radio 
resources efficiently to fulfill QoS requirements of different 
traffic types [4][16][17].   
 In [4], a service differentiation scheme is used which 
classify mixed traffic into different service classes and grants 
different scheduling priorities to them. Two types, VoIP and 
BE are considered and the results show an improvement in 
RT QoS at the cost of system spectral efficiency, when the 
RT queue is granted the highest priority. In [5], an urgency 
factor is used to boost the priority of a particular service. 
When any packet from a service flow is about to exceed its 
upper bound of QoS requirement, its priority is increased by 
adding an urgency factor. Although most of the packets are 
sent when they are nearly ready to expire, a lower packet loss 
is achieved thus improving the performance of system by 
guaranteeing QoS requirements to different services. In 
mixed traffic scenarios, queue state information (QSI) 
becomes very important in addition to channel state 
information (CSI) [6] [15]. A time domain multiplexing 
(TDM) system based Modified Largest Waited Delay First 
(M-LWDF) is presented in [6] which takes into account both 
QSI and CSI. This algorithm serves a user with the 
maximum product of Head of Line (HOL) packet delay, 
channel condition and an arbitrary positive constant. This 
constant is used to control the packet delay distribution for 
different users. This algorithm is applied in a frequency 
domain multiplexing (FDM) system in [7] to optimize sub-
carrier allocation in OFDMA based networks.  It shows 
improved performance in terms of QoS but like M-LWDF 
updates the queues state each TTI rather than after each sub-
carrier allocation. In [8], M-LWDF is modified by updating 
the queue status after every sub-carrier allocation. It takes 
into account RT and NRT traffic types and provides better 
QoS for both services. The results show an improvement in 
delay for RT and throughput for NRT service. However this 
idea can be extended to more intelligent scheduling 
framework by adding more traffic types and making resource 
allocation more adaptive based on QoS.  
53
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

In a multi-service environment, the crucial point is to 
clearly define the QoS requirements of different services, 
their demands for radio resources and their channel 
conditions and queue status to support their demands. 
Combined consideration of this information can lead to a 
more efficient PS algorithm, which can be further optimized 
for network level congestion control by giving QoS 
feedback.  
 The work in this paper addresses the scheduling problem 
in a multi-service wireless environment where the 
competition to get radio resources is keen and there are strict 
QoS requirements. A novel PS framework is proposed with 
added functionalities, to achieve better QoS of different 
traffic types, a fair share of throughput among users and 
improved spectral efficiency. The proposed PS framework 
segregates different types of traffic and sorts users in the 
service specific queues based on different queue sorting 
algorithms. A built-in congestion control Adaptive Scheduler 
is introduced in the TD which makes the system more 
adaptive to meet QoS guarantees of RT traffic and prevent 
NRT traffic from starvation. Multiuser diversity in both time 
and frequency domain are exploited by frequent updating of 
queue state information and channel condition which leads to 
a balance prioritizing among users of different traffic types. 
 The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
gives a detailed description of the proposed PS framework. 
Section 3 presents system model and its performance 
metrics. The simulation model and results are described in 
Section 4, and finally, conclusions are presented in Section 5. 
II. 
PROPOSED SCHEDULING FRAMEWORK 
A 
schematic 
diagram 
of 
proposed 
scheduling 
framework is shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. Proposed scheduling framework 
The framework is composed of three main units: a traffic 
differentiator and prioritizing unit, a TD adaptive scheduler 
with built-in congestion control and a frequency domain 
(FD) scheduler where resources are mapped to users 
according to priority order selected in TD. Compared with 
other PS algorithms, the novelty of the proposed framework 
lies mainly in the TD adaptive scheduler. However in the 
traffic differentiator and prioritizing unit, delay-dependent 
queue-sorting algorithms make a difference compared with 
the schemes used in reference paper.  
The detailed description of the functionality of each unit, 
the algorithms and policies used in each unit is presented 
below. 
A. Traffic differentiator and prioritizing  unit 
The need for a differentiator arises when there are 
different traffic types demanding radio resources with 
different QoS requirements. In such an environment it 
becomes very important to classify traffic in service queues 
to enable queue specific prioritizing schemes to be applied 
flexibly. Service classification is in fact the first step 
towards optimizing utilization of available radio resources 
while dealing with mixed traffic. This is because with 
complete knowledge of QoS requirements of each class, just 
enough radio resources can be allocated to these classes. 
The QoS guarantees become more feasible when radio 
resources are allocated according to the well-defined 
demands of traffic types rather than by estimation.  
In the proposed scheduling architecture mixed traffic is 
classified in four queues; Control (control information), RT 
conversational traffic (voice), NRT streaming (video file 
download) and background (email, SMS). These queues are 
chosen for the present study because they cover most of the 
common data types including low latency, high throughput 
and low priority. The Background traffic represents the best 
effort (BE) class of traffic and does not have any QoS 
requirements. The control traffic is the most important 
traffic type so it is put into a dedicated queue and served 
before other traffic types. In the present work control 
information for downlink (DL) scheduling is considered 
only as this study is for downlink transmission of LTE-A 
networks.  
In the proposed PS framework, one user is assumed to 
have one service type and one scheduling unit (SU) carries 
the information about user, service type and buffer status. 
The queues in the differentiator are prioritized from top to 
bottom that is Control, RT, NRT and Background 
respectively. After differentiation, SUs are sorted within the 
queues using different queue sorting algorithms. The 
Control queue SUs are sorted by Round Robin (RR) 
algorithm because all control information has to be equally 
important, meanwhile RT, NRT and Background queue SUs 
are sorted by using  queue specific   priority metrics.  
RT Traffic 
The QoS requirement for RT traffic is defined as 
RT
k
d  DB
 where 
k
d is delay of user k , 
DBRT
is the delay 
budget for RT traffic. The delay budget for RT traffic is 
40ms [8] [17] in OFDMA-based networks. If this condition 
is not met then the SUs will be dropped from the queue. A 
54
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

delay dependent queue sorting algorithm is used for RT 
users and the priority metric is formed by the product of 
normalized Head of Line (HOL) delay and the complex 
channel gain of the users. The Normalized HOL delay is a 
ratio of user’s waiting time and the delay budget for RT 
traffic. The waiting time of a user is equal to number of 
transmission time intervals (TTIs) during which the user has 
not been allocated. The priority of user k at time t, pk (t) is                                                            
                  
 
 
 t
H
t
F
t
p
RT
k
RT
k
k


                             (1) 
where 
RT
k K
H 
is the channel gain of user k and
RT
k K
F 
is 
normalized waiting time of user k at time t given by.  
                   
 
RT
Waiting
RT
k K
DB
T
t
F


  
                
    (2) 
where 
Twaiting
 is the waiting time, 
DBRT
 is upper bound of 
delay for RT traffic.  
In each TTI, the user with the highest priority value is 
sorted at the front of the queue followed by users with 
priority value in descending order. 
NRT Traffic 
  The priority metric for NRT streaming video traffic is 
the product of normalized HOL delay of each user and the 
ratio of its instantaneous throughput and the average 
throughput  over a given time interval. In this queue the 
throughput ratio is used instead of channel gain to provide a 
balance between throughput and fairness. SUs are arranged 
according to the highest value of this priority metric thus not 
only satisfying their QoS requirements but also exploiting 
multiuser diversity in TD. The priority of user k at time t, 
 pk (t) is  
                       
 
 
k
k
NRT
k K
k
R
r
t
F
P t



                               (3) 
where 
RT
k K
F  is normalized waiting time of user k at time t 
and is given by  
                              
NRT
Waiting
NRT
k K
DB
T
t
F


( )
                            (4) 
where 
Twaiting
 is the waiting time, 
DBNRT
 is upper bound 
of delay for NRT streaming video traffic, 
kr is instantaneous 
throughput and 
k
R is average throughput of user k . 
The time average throughput of user k is updated by the 
moving average as below as used in [9] and many other 
papers, 
         


 
 t
r
t
R t
t
t
R
M
m
m
k
c
k
c
k
 






  

1
/
,
1
1
1
1
           (5) 
where 
ct is the length of time window to calculate the 
average data rate, 
ct
1
is called the attenuation co-efficient 
with the widely used value 0.001, 
r m  t
k
/
,
 is the acquired 
data rate of user k  at PRB m  if m is allocated to k else it 
is zero.  
Background Traffic 
Background traffic has no QoS requirements so priority 
is given to BE users based only on channel conditions. 
However to maintain some fairness between users, the 
proportional fairness (PF) algorithm is used as the queue 
sorting algorithm for Background queue. The priority of 
user k at time t, pk (t) is                                                  
                                          
 
k
k
k
R
r
P t

                              (6) 
where 
kr
is instantaneous throughput, 
Rk
is average 
throughput of user k as defined previously.  
After prioritizing users in the queues the TD adaptive 
scheduler picks specific proportion of users from the 
queues.  
B. Time Domain adaptive scheduler  
This unit aims at guaranteeing the QoS of RT traffic and 
at the same time ensuring fairness for NRT traffic. It 
allocates just enough resources to meet the QoS 
requirements of RT and remaining resources are allocated to 
NRT services based on the requirements of service types. 
This scheduler unit enhances the adaptability of the whole 
framework by collecting the QoS feedback, such as SU drop 
rate, as its input to make decisions on the TD adaptive 
scheduling policy selection. The system is said to be in 
congestion when the QoS of the RT service is not met and 
due to system load RT SUs are dropping frequently. The TD 
adaptive scheduling unit is integrated with a built-in policy 
based congestion control that controls congestion of the 
system in the network.  
The TD adaptive scheduling algorithm works as follows. 
Let the total number of available PRBs be denoted 
byC . If   denotes the proportion of PRB assigned to RT 
users and  
)C
1(

is assigned to NRT users then  can be 
adaptively adjusted according to the practical user 
distribution or QoS of RT traffic. The proportion of capacity 
given to the NRT traffic for this paper is further divided in 
different  types of the NRT traffic (control, NRT streaming 
video and Background) such that  first the control queue is 
allocated enough PRBs to deliver  control information of all 
users and then rest of the PRBs are allocated to  the NRT 
and  the Background queue. In this way control queue is at 
the top and is always allocated enough PRBs.  
55
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

In this paper, three built-in congestion control policies 
are chosen to exemplify the adaptive capability of TD 
adaptive scheduler in which the value of  is changed 
according to network conditions. The value of  is changed 
based on a threshold  which is set using the drop rate of 
SUs of RT traffic. When the number of SUs dropped 
exceeds the threshold  , the built-in congestion control 
policy changes accordingly to reduce SUs drop rate.  The 
distribution of the NRT capacity is adjusted according to the 
buffer status and requirements of NRT service types such as 
streaming traffic is more important and more frequently 
requested service than Background traffic and control 
information is always less than actual data to be sent.  
In this paper, the PS algorithm in [4] with fair TD 
scheduling is considered as reference algorithm. The TD 
scheduler in [4] uses conventional channel dependent queue 
sorting algorithms and gives priority to different queues 
from top to bottom based on fair scheduling or by strict 
priority. In fair scheduling one user is picked from each 
queue at a time, starting from top queue and in strict priority 
queues are emptied completely one by one. In FD, resources 
are mapped in priority order to the users selected in TD.  
C. Frquency Domain scheduler 
Resources are actually mapped to SUs in the FD 
scheduler according to the priority selected in TD. Multiuser 
diversity is exploited by using channel dependent 
proportional fair (PF) algorithm in FD. For each SU, the 
best PRB (with highest throughput) is selected out of 
available PRBs and is allocated to this SU. 
III. 
SYSTEM MODEL AND PERFORMANCE METRICS 
In this work, an OFDMA system with minimum 
allocation unit as 1 PRB containing 12 sub-carriers in each 
TTI is considered. The DL channel is a fading channel 
within each scheduling drop. The received symbol 
k,m  t
at the mobile user k on sub channel m  is the sum 
of White Gaussian Noise and the product of actual data and 
channel gain as shown below, 
               
 
 
 t
t
t
k m
k m
k m
k m
,
,
,
,
 

 

               (7) 
where, 
k,m  t
is the complex channel gain of  sub channel 
m for user k , 
k,m  t
is  data symbol from eNB to user k  
at sub channel m  and 
k,m  t
 is complex White Gaussian 
Noise [8]. It is assumed as in [4], [5], [8] and [14] that the 
power allocation is same, 
 
P M
Pm t

on all sub channels. 
Where, P  is the total transmit power, 
Pm  t
is the power 
allocated at sub channel m  and M is total number of sub 
channels. At the start of each scheduling drop, the channel 
state information 
k,m  t
 is known by the eNodeB. 
The channel capacity of user k  on sub channel m  can 
be calculated by using Eq. (8) as   used in [5][8], 
 
            
 
 
 









 
P t
t
H
t
C
m
m
k
m
k
2
2
,
2
,
1
log

          (8) 
 
where B is the bandwidth of each PRB, 
 2
is the noise 
power density and 


.5
1
ln 5
R
  
 is the SNR gap 
determined by bit error rate BER. 
 In the proposed framework, users are served by one of 
the 
differentiated 
queues 
depending 
on 
their 
QoS 
requirements. For example RT users must not exceed their 
delay bounds, NRT users must achieve their minimum data 
rate and there should be fairness among Background users. 
At a given time t, PRBs are allocated to users by the 
following algorithm. 
Step 1: Initialize queues for all traffic types and the 
number of PRBs. 
Step 2: Sort users in these queues according to queue 
sorting algorithms given in equations 1, 3 and 6 for different 
traffic types. 
Step 3: Select a number of users from these queues 
according to built-in policies in TD adaptive scheduler. 
Step 4: Allocate PRB to the user with the highest priority. 
Step 5: Remove the allocated PRB from the PRB list and 
the allocated user from the user list. 
Step 6: Go to step 4 if the PRB list is not empty else go to 
next TTI. 
Resource allocation is completed when all PRBs are 
allocated. The proposed PS framework is analyzed under 
performance metrics of system throughput, user fairness and 
QoS of different traffic types.  
The system average throughput is the sum of average 
throughput across all users. To measure the fairness among 
users, Raj Jain fairness index is adopted that is given as 
below as used in [10][11], 
                           













K
k
k
K
k
k
R
K
R
Fairness
1
2
~
2
1
~
                     (9) 
The value of fairness index is 1 for the highest fairness 
when all users have same throughput. In Equation (9), K  is 
the total number of users and 
~
Rk
is the time average 
throughput of user k . 
The value of SU drop rate and the average delay of RT 
traffic are used to evaluate QoS of RT traffic. SU drop rate 
is calculated by the ratio of number of RT SUs dropped to 
total number of RT SUs. In addition, the average delay for 
56
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

all NRT traffic is also calculated to prevent NRT traffic 
from starvation. 
IV. 
SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
       Simulation model, results and analysis will be presented 
in this section. 
A. Simulation model 
A single cell OFDMA system with total system 
bandwidth of 10 MHz and PRB size of 180 kHz has been 
considered. Total system bandwidth is divided into 55 
PRBs. The simulation parameters used for system level 
simulation are based on [12] and these are typical values 
used in many papers. The wireless environment is typical 
Urban Non Line of Sight (NLOS) and the LTE system 
works with a carrier frequency of 2GHz. The most suitable 
path loss model in this case is the COST 231Walfisch-
Ikegami (WI) [13] as used in many other papers on LTE. 
Users are assumed to have a uniform distribution and the 
total number of RT users is assumed to be equal to total 
number of NRT users as in [8]. Each TTI is 1 ms and the 
delay upper bound for RT traffic is taken 40 ms which is 
equivalent to 40 time slots. Total eNB transmission power is 
46dBm (40w) and BER is 
4
10 for all users. 
B. Simulation results 
The performance of the proposed framework is 
evaluated by comparing it with the stand alone PF and QoS 
aware PS algorithm in [4] referred to as the reference 
algorithm hereafter. All simulations are done in Mat lab. 
Figure 2 shows the average delay of RT users with different 
adaptive TD scheduler policies for 80 active users. 
 
 
Figure 2. Comparison of TD adaptive scheduler policies 
 
The average delay for RT traffic decreases as RT 
capacity proportion is increased and increases as RT 
capacity proportion is decreased. This change in average 
delay of RT traffic is shown by solid line in Figure 2. On the 
other hand, by increasing RT capacity, the average delay of 
NRT traffic does get very high. The average delay of RT 
and NRT traffic is analyzed under a number of TD adaptive 
scheduling policies to find a good trade-off so that RT 
traffic may not exceed its delay upper bound and at the same 
time the QoS of NRT may be satisfied. For this particular 
user distribution, the policy (70%, 30%) shows a balance 
point where both RT and NRT can get reasonable capacity 
proportion and it is adopted as the default policy in the next 
results. The proposed algorithm will start with (70%, 30%) 
policy and will be able to switch to other policies depending 
on network conditions.  
Figure 3 shows the average delay of RT traffic under 
different system load when reference and the proposed 
algorithms are used. The standalone PF algorithm has no 
functionality for QoS of RT traffic that is why it is not 
included in this analysis. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Delay under different system loads 
The RT delay increases with system load for both 
reference and the proposed algorithm. However delay with 
proposed algorithm remains lower than the reference 
algorithm as shown. This is because the adaptive TD 
scheduler in the proposed algorithm adaptively controls the 
delay of RT traffic. In Figure 4 SUs drop rate for RT traffic 
under different system load is shown for the proposed and 
the reference algorithms.  
 
 
Figure 4. Sceduling unit drop rate Vs system load 
57
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

There is no SU drop up to a load of 70 active users with 
proposed algorithm; however after that SU drop rate 
increases at a tolerable rate. The SUs drop rate for reference 
algorithm is zero when total number of users is 50 which is 
lower than the available number of PRBs (55). However 
with the increase in system load, SUs drop rate for reference 
algorithm increases significantly as shown.  
Figure 5 shows throughput and fairness comparison of 
reference, proposed and PF algorithm. These simulations are 
done under the same system load of 110 users. 
0.1955
0.196
0.1965
0.197
0.1975
0.198
0.1985
0.6135
0.614
0.6145
0.615
0.6155
Fairness
Throughput (Gbits/s)
Reference
Proposed
PF
 
Figure 5. Trade-off between fairness and throughput 
The system overall throughput for the proposed 
algorithm is lower than the reference algorithm by only 
0.4%. This is because in the proposed algorithm, a delay-
dependent queue-sorting algorithm is used and users with 
relatively low channel conditions but more waiting time are 
scheduled to guarantee  QoS of RT traffic. This  lowers the 
system overall throughput by a slight amount compared to 
the reference algorithm but  more than PF algorithm.The 
fairness of proposed algorithm is improved as compared to 
the reference algorithm and is slightly less than PF 
algorithm as shown.In the three algorithms  fairness of the 
PF algorithm is the highest with value 0.615213 as PF being 
an algorithm  designed for user fairness and is taken as a 
reference for fairness analysis. The fairness index with the 
proposed algorithm is 0.61452 and with the reference 
algorithm fairness index is 0.61357.  
In this way, the proposed algorithm sacrifices a little 
throughput (compared with reference algorithm) and  
fairness (compared with PF algorithm) but presents an better 
trade-off between throughput and fairness (compared with 
both reference and PF algorithms) as shown.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have presented a QoS aware PS 
framework that is composed of three main units for the 
resource allocation in DL transmission for OFDMA-based 
networks. These units use different queue sorting, TD 
adaptive scheduling and FD scheduling algorithms to 
guarantee better QoS to different traffic types. It is able to 
improve system spectral efficiency by optimizing the use of 
given radio resources and maintains a certain degree of 
fairness among users at the same time. This is achieved by 
adaptively providing just enough resources to RT traffic and 
distributing remaining resources efficiently to NRT services. 
The results show an improved QoS of RT traffic and a better 
trade-off between user fairness and system overall 
throughput. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Harri H. and Antti T.,“LTE for UMTS OFDMA and SC-
FDMA Based Radio Access,”  John Wiley and sons ltd 2009,  
pp.  181-190. 
[2] M. Sauter.(2008,April 23). Wireless Moves, 3GPP Moves on: 
LTE-Advaced.Website: 
http://mobilesociety.typepad.com/mobile_life/2008/04/3gpp-
moves-on-html 29 .05.2010. 
[3] Stefania S., Issam T., and Matthew B., “The UMTS Long 
Term Evolution Forum Theory to Practice,” 2009 John Willey 
& Sons Ltd.ISBN: 978-0-470-69716-0. 
[4] Jani P., Niko K., tero H., Martti M. and Mika R., “Mixed 
Traffic Packet Scheduling in UTRAN Long Term Evaluation 
Downlink,”  IEEE 2008,  pp.  978-982. 
[5] Gutierrez, F.Bader, and J.L.Pijoan, "Prioritization function for 
packet scheduling in OFDMA systems,” Wireless internet 
conference 
2008, 
Nov. 
08, 
Maui, 
USA. 
http://dx.doi.org/ICST.WICON2008.5002. 
[6] M.Andrews et al., “Providing quality of service over a shared 
wireless link,” Communication magazine, IEEE, vol.39, 2001, 
pp. 150-154. 
[7] P.Parag, 
S.Bhashyam, 
and 
R.Aravind, 
“A 
subcarrier 
allocation algorithm for OFDMA using buffer and channel 
state information,” Vehicular Technology Conference. VTC-
2005-Fall.2005 IEEE , pp.  622-625.  
[8] Jun S., Na Yi, An Liu and Haige X., “Opportunistic 
scheduling for eterogeneous services in downlink OFDMA 
system,” School of EECS, Peking University Beijing, 
P.R.China, IEEE computer Society 2009, pp. 260-264. 
[9] G.Song et al, “Joint channel-aware and queue-aware data 
scheduling 
in 
multiple 
shared 
wireless 
channels,” 
Communication Magazine,IEEE, vol.39,2001, pp. 150-154. 
[10] B. Chisung, and C. Dong, “Fairness-Aware Adaptive 
Resource Allocation Scheme in Multihop OFDMA System,” 
Communication letters IEEE, vol.11, pp. 134-136, Feb. 2007.  
[11] Lin X., Laurie C. “Improving fairness in relay-based access 
networks,” in ACM MSWIM, Nov. 2008, pp. 18-22. 
[12] page 3GPP TSG-RAN, “TR25.814: Physical Layer Aspects 
for Evolved Utra,” Version 7.0.0, June, 2006. 
[13] IEEE 
802.16j-06/013r3: 
“Multi-hope 
Rehay 
System 
Evaluation Methodology (Channel Model and Performance 
Metric),” IEEE 802.16 Broadband Wireless Access Working 
Group, 2007-02-19. 
[14] Jiho J. and Kwang Bok L., “Tranmit power adaptation for 
multiuser 
OFDM 
systems,” 
Selected 
Areas 
in 
Communication, IEEE Journal on vol.21, 2003, pp. 171-178. 
[15] Suleiman Y.Yerima and Khalid Al-Begain, “Dynamic buffer 
management for multimedia QoS beyond 3G wireless 
networks,” IAENG International Journal of computer science, 
36:4, IJCS_36_4_14,  Nov.2009. 
[16] Won-Hyoung 
P., 
Sunghyun 
C., 
and 
Saewoong 
B., 
“Scheduling design for multiple traffic classes in OFDMA 
networks,”  IEEE 2006, pp. 790-795. 
[17] T. Janevski, “ Traffic Analysis and Design of Wireless IP 
Networks”,  Artech House, Norwood, MA, 2003. 
58
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

