Security of Blockchain Consensus Protocols
Austine Onwubiko, Sarwar Sayeed, Hector Marco-Gisbert
School of Computing, Engineering and Physical Sciences
University of the West of Scotland
High St, Paisley PA1 2BE, UK
Email: {Austine.Onwubiko, Sarwar.Sayeed, Hector.Marco}@uws.ac.uk
Abstract—The blockchain is a decentralised technology distribut-
ing digital information through peer-to-peer, where the consensus
protocol remains the most signiﬁcant part ensuring the integrity
of the recorded information. The consensus works as an agree-
ment among the network nodes determining the authenticity of
the network peers and also puts forward a set of rules. Nodes
that do not comply with the consensus rules, fail to take part in
the network activities. However, the major consensus protocols
comprise severe weaknesses allowing malicious parties to conduct
activities that are against the network rules. Although blockchain
is based upon a sturdy structure solving many security issues,
the robustness of it is still severely affected by various attack
techniques. Most of the attacks were possible due to the weak-
nesses in the adopted consensus protocol. Many security proposals
evolved to defend against the vulnerability but fully failed to
minimise the attacking possibilities encouraging attackers even
more to conduct such exploitation. In this research, we analyse
19 important consensus protocols that are adopted by major
cryptocurrencies. We also discuss the most dreadful consensus-
based attacks and major defense mechanisms. Our analysis shows
that the weaknesses in the consensus protocol result in signiﬁcant
attacks.
Keywords–Blockchain; Consensus; Cyber Attack.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The blockchain is a supreme technology of the current era
that stores transactional records in a block-like structure [1].
The block storage are databases, often referred to as Dis-
tributed Ledger Technology (DLT), chained to its adjacent
blocks forming a secure chain of blocks. The whole process is
done through a Peer-to-Peer (P2P) network where every node
comprises a copy of the ledger. Blockchain is not concentrated
on a centralised system; therefore, it requires an adversary to
exploit the majority of network nodes to conduct an attack.
The blockchain-primarily relies on three of its main compo-
nents that include the nodes, miners, and the blocks [2]. Every
node in the network contains the same data blocks, where the
miners are responsible for generating and validating new data
blocks. The mining process requires every network participant
to agree on a single state so that a malicious party can not
inﬂuence the integrity of the network. And, the above can only
be accomplished with the help of a consensus [3].
Although the decentralised aspects of blockchain are a
solution to various baneful attack techniques; however, it still
comprises severe weaknesses within the consensus protocol
resulting in many attacks, such as 51% attack, Sybil attack,
etc. [4] [5] [6]. 51% attack is considered to be one of the
most fatal attack techniques as a successful attack can impact
over the entire blockchain network signiﬁcantly.
A majority of the cryptocoins comprise only a limited
number of nodes making them vulnerable to the attacks as the
likelihood of a 51% attack entirely depends on the total hashing
ability of an adversary. Although it requires an extensive
amount to execute a 51% attack, the attack can be executed
as low as $500 on the low hashing coins. Hence, it remains a
tremendous challenge for the cryptocoins with minimal nodes.
In the case of bitcoin, each hash comprises a double Secure
Hash Algorithm 256 (SHA-256) hash calculation. The miners
use their hardware devices to calculate the hashes for solving
the mathematical puzzles. The miners that comprise more
powerful machines have more chance of solving the puzzle
than other miners in the network.
apply different methods to execute successful attacks that may
include exploiting the vulnerability in the P2P network, appli-
cation bugs, malicious activities, or leveraging the weakness
in the consensus protocol. In most recent attacks through the
consensus protocols remain a serious challenge as most of the
adopted security techniques remain vulnerable.
This paper is organised as follows: Section II discusses
some of the most important factors of blockchain technology.
In Section III we present 19 major consensus protocols that are
adopted by various blockchain networks. Section IV reviews
5 major security attacks that occur due to the weaknesses in
the consensus protocol. In Section V, we discuss the available
protection techniques to mitigate blockchain attacks. Finally,
the concluding Section VI discusses the overall research work.
It also indicates the future challenges and future work.
II.
BACKGROUND
In this section, we discuss some of the important features
of blockchain technology. The review of the literature includes
signiﬁcant contexts of blockchain technology.
A.
Blockchain: A Summary
The blockchain is a trustless system where each party holds
a common digital history [2]. It is an immutable ledger tech-
nology where a single modiﬁcation invalidates all the blocks it
is connected with [1]. Bitcoin is the ﬁrst blockchain application
that came into effect in 2009. Many cryptocurrencies follow
a different approach to be produced, whereas the bitcoin and
other major cryptocurrencies comprise a mining process that
requires powerful systems to conduct the mining tasks.
attacking techniques to exploit its vulnerability.  Attackers
Blockchain solves various security challenges that exist in
ingenious technologies of the current time, blockchain is always
one of the prime targets where attackers put into practice unique
the current centralised system. However, being one of the many
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

B.
Asymmetric Key
Asymmetric Key is an advanced level of encryption method
that uses keypairs of a public key and a private key. The public
key is open and can be shared with a third party in the bitcoin
network. However, it is attached to the private key and it is
impossible to retrieve the private key through the public key.
A private key is in place to perform authorization activities.
In a normal scenario, a sender requires to encrypt a message
using the public key of the recipient. Once the message is
sent through a safe medium, the receiver can only obtain it by
decrypting it using his private key. The private key works as a
password; hence, attackers in possession of a private key can
drain all the coins from users’ wallets.
C. Consensus Protocol
A consensus protocol is a common agreement in the
blockchain network about the present state of the distributed
ledger. There is no central authority or a third party involved in
the blockchain network. To verify and validate transactions in
the network, the network must agree that every new block that
is added to the blockchain is veriﬁed and valid. The agreement
establishes a trust among unknown nodes in a distributed
computing environment. This can be achieved by the consensus
protocol, which is the core part of blockchain network.
D. The Signiﬁcance of Network Hashing
The hash rate of a blockchain network is the method
to determine the processing power of the network [7] [8].
The hash rate has signiﬁcant effects on cryptocoins that are
primarily based on Proof of Work (PoW) protocol. In the case
of bitcoin, all the transaction data get hashed to a single hash
data. The miner needs to solve a mathematical puzzle to prove
to the network that his work is valid. The hash rate plays a
signiﬁcant role as the more hashing power a miner comprises
the more attempts he can make to solve the puzzle. Hence, the
chances go higher to solve the next blocks.
E. Blockchain Mining
The mining involves verifying the authenticity of the
network data [9]. It is the core responsibility of the network
miners to get involved with the mining process to validate
the presented data. Different blockchain network comprises
a different approach to perform the veriﬁcation process. In
Bitcoin blockchain, usually, the network miners form a pool,
often referred to as the mining pool to get involved in the
process. The more miners join the group, the more chance
they have in solving the puzzle; thus, more reward for the
miners.
III.
BLOCKCHAIN CONSENSUS PROTOCOLS
In this section, we discuss the most important consensus
protocols that are adopted by various cryptocoins. Figure 1
shows the functionality of PoW protocol. Three miners involve
in solving a mathematical puzzle, where one of the miners has
been able to solve it ﬁrst. The network veriﬁes it and processes
rewards for the winner. The network also sets the difﬁculty
level and sends another new puzzle for the network to solve.
Figure 1. The functionalities of Proof of Work consensus protocol.
A. Proof of Work (PoW)
PoW was an idea to stop junk emails by Dwork and Naor
in the year 1992 according to [10]. The purpose was to prevent
attackers from sending junk emails, as this will require them
to do some difﬁcult work of forwarding junk emails that
will not be beneﬁcial for them. In Blockchain, a distributed
consensus algorithm is applied as a method of protecting the
blockchain. This form of consensus protocol is used by the
cryptocurrency bitcoin and other applications in the blockchain
network, without any central authority, the only way to verify
the transaction in the blockchain network is by mining.
B. Proof of Stake (PoS)
PoS is another form of a consensus protocol that was
implemented in 2012 [11]. This protocol was ﬁrst used by the
cryptocurrency PeerCoin. The PoS protocol was implemented
to solve the huge computational power and expensive hardware
usage in PoW [10]. In this consensus protocol, verifying
transactions is done by validation. Unlike the PoW protocol,
the process requires the validators to stake their economic
share, in the form of cryptocurrency, in order to add the next
block to the blockchain. The block is added to the blockchain
by the node with the highest amount of stake, and the user is
rewarded with a transaction fee.
C. Delegated Proof of Stake (DPoS)
DPoS is a convenient consensus protocol that is similar to
PoS enabling miners to generate the next block according to
their stake. DPoS is representative democratic in nature as the
name implies, while PoS is direct democratic that brings the
major difference between DPoS and PoS [12]. This protocol
utilises the stakeholders to vote for their delegates or witnesses.
The stakeholders vote to elect any number of witnesses to
generate the next block. Once elected and a witness fails
to produce a block, the witness may be voted out in future
elections [11].
D. Leased Proof of Stake (LPoS)
LPoS is another version of PoS consensus protocol that
uses the cryptocurrency WAVE [13]. In a PoS protocol, the
users with the highest amount of stake are eligible to add the
next block to the blockchain network, whereas in LPoS the
users can lease their stake to a full node and earn a percentage
of the payout as a reward. The reward amount is determined
by the amount of stake the user is willing to stake. The higher
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

the amount, the higher chance the full node has to add the next
block in the network.
E. Proof of Burn (PoB)
PoB is proposed as an alternative of PoW and PoS, and
was invented by Lain Stewart. This protocol shows that miners
have done something hard, but with a reduced rate of energy
consumption. PoB allows miners to invest in a mining rig or
virtual mining power. The process of PoB involves burning the
coins or currency and sending it to a public address that can
be veriﬁed and is inaccessible [14].
F. Proof of Capacity (PoC)
PoC is a consensus protocol that is also known as Proof
of Space (PoSP). It was proposed to handle the issue of
expensive mining hardware and computational power of PoW,
and to improve the inefﬁcient mining in the PoW protocol [15].
Miners are expected to invest their disk space to be able to
mine the next block in the network, instead of consuming more
power and expensive hardware. Therefore, the more disk space
a miner comprises, the higher likelihood for the miner to mine
the next block.
G. Proof of Elapsed time (PoET)
PoET is based on a lottery consensus, in which nodes
complete a designated waiting time to be selected. PoET
operates in a protected enclave Trusted Execution Environment
(TEE) [16], where nodes have to wait for a random amount
of time. The node with the least wait time will be able to
add the next block to the network. PoET has three main steps
for adding blocks to the blockchain network. First, the nodes
require to register their pair keys and waiting time. Second,
the waiting time of the nodes is calculated by applying an
equation. Third, other nodes need to verify the nodes generated
block before it can be accepted into the network.
H. Proof of Weight (PoWeight)
PoWeight is an upgrade version of the PoS consensus
protocol [17]. Poweight tries to solve the problem where the
more token a user has in the network, the better chance the user
has to ﬁnd the next block in the PoS. PoWeight uses weight
value as a selection method to assign a weight to users on the
network as part of their contributions. The weight value can
be any value, not just a token, that will be used to determine
the weight of the user. This protocol uses cryptocurrency like
ﬁlecoin [18], which considers the quantity of Interplanetary
File System (IPFS) information that a user has to determine
the weight factor.
I.
Proof of Importance (PoI)
PoI is a type of protocol that uses the concept of accounts
to validate and adds new blocks to the network [15]. PoI does
not make use of expensive hardware for mining rather, it makes
use of the account known as harvesters. These harvesters are
responsible for validating the network and must hold at least
10,000 vested coins to be eligible to participate in the network.
PoI uses cluster as a way of clustering nodes to analyse and
utilise the quantities and balances of the individual nodes that
determines the importance of each node [19].
J. Proof of Activity (PoAc)
PoAc is a consensus protocol that is the combination of
PoW and PoS [18] [20]. The PoAc mining process ﬁrst starts
with the PoW, where the miners mine to produce the next
block. Once the block is found, it follows the PoS process
as the new block only contains the header information and
address of the miner. The PoS process starts by selecting
a group of validators with the highest amount of stake by
random, as these validators are required to sign the new block
found.
K. Proof of Ownership (PoO)
Proof of Ownership (PoO) is an approach that secures in-
formation on the blockchain ensuring proof of the ownership of
that particular information [21]. It leverages the bitcoin ledger
to trace the ownership of signiﬁcant data. PoO can be utilised
for enterprises to validate the integrity and other conﬁdential
information. It comprises enhanced security comparing to the
existing centralised repository as such centralised approaches
are prone to be comprised that may include tampering of data,
removal of data, etc.
L. Proof of Retrievability (PoR)
PoR includes a compact proof enabling a client to rescue
a ﬁle [22]. A ﬁle system is considered as a prover, whereas
the client is a veriﬁer. This method is a proof by the prover
to the client that a particular ﬁle is authentic. PoR comprises
the Byzantine adversarial model. The protocol enables a client
to encode a ﬁle prior to being transferred for archiving. It
then triggers bandwidth-efﬁcient challenge-response protocols
to ensure the availability of the ﬁle to the other end, which is
a remote storage supplier.
M. Proof of eXercise (PoX)
PoX is a consensus approach associated with the cryp-
tocurrency mining [23]. It is mainly focused on bitcoin-
through solving a practical eXercise that involves a scientiﬁc
computation matrix-based issue. In order to overcome the
issues, PoX consists of a down-top presentation approach.
N. Proof of Luck (PoL)
PoL is a consensus protocol that is based on TEE [24]. In
PoL, the nodes request for a random number from the TEE
and the node with the highest luck gets elected to validate
a block. The nodes that are selected to add a new block to
the blockchain network depended on its luck value, which is
generated by the PoL protocol. Nodes that are participating in
this network require to try several numbers until they reach the
lucky number, as this process requires some processing power
that is similar to the current problem of PoW.
O. Proof of Trust (PoT)
PoT is designed for the hybrid blockchain architecture [25].
This protocol operates in four phases. The ﬁrst phase is the
leader election for the ledger management, where the protocol
elects a leader for the consortium ledger management group. In
the second phase, the ledger management leader nominates a
service transaction validation group using a voting mechanism.
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

In the third phase, the transaction validation group members
vote for the transactions that should ﬁll in the next block.
The fourth and last phase is ledger management voting and
bookkeeping, where the validated transactions are put into a
block and linked to the blockchain network.
P. Proof of Vote (PoV)
PoV is an efﬁcient version of PoW that uses the voting
mechanism for the veriﬁcation of new blocks in the net-
work [18]. Different security identities are created for partici-
pating nodes that are the main criteria of this protocol. These
identities are responsible for producing new blocks and these
blocks are submitted to the appropriate entities for veriﬁcation
and voting. There are four roles in the protocol to ensure safety,
efﬁciency, and reliability for the consortium network model.
Q. Proof of Authority (PoAu)
PoAu is a consensus protocol that is suitable for permis-
sioned blockchain [26]. PoAu does not require the use of
miners to validate and authenticate blocks. This helps to reduce
the limit of power usage due to low computational power used
in validating blocks in the network. The PoAu protocol relies
on a set of trusted validators for validation and authentication
instead of the use of miners. The set of validators consists of
a leader with the highest priority for block conﬁrmation than
the other validators.
R. Proof of Reputation (PoR)
PoR has recently been proposed by various researcher and
companies, and it is an extension of the PoAu consensus
protocol [27]. In PoR, validation nodes are selected based on
their reputation and the reputation is established in advance
with accumulated and calculated formula. The validating nodes
are voted into the network as an authoritative node once it
passes veriﬁcation and proves its reputation, then the nodes
act like the PoAu consensus protocol.
S. Tendermint
Tendermint is based on the concept of Practical Byzantine
Fault Tolerance (PBFT) [27]. All the processed transactions
made are broadcast to a group of validators. The validators
are selected through a voting mechanism by the protocol
involving the participants in the network. The validators ensure
that blocks are added to the blockchain in the correct order
and blocks will only be added when 2/3 signatures from the
validator nodes are received. The problem of computational
power in the PoW protocol is solved as this process ensures
that there is less number of nodes that will be acting as
validators.
IV.
ATTACK STRATEGIES
In this section, we discuss various attack techniques that
are executed due to the ﬂaws in the consensus protocol.
A. 51% Attack
The 51 percent attack is also known as the majority hash
rate attack where the attacker is able to defy the rule of the
blockchain. In this attack, an attacker with the mining power
above 50 percent will be able to control more than half of the
network. Such an attack allows the attacker to double-spend
coins, forcing miners to accept fake transactions and adding it
to the network [28]. For example, in PoW an attacker creates
a corrupt version of the blockchain transactions when they
control 51 percent of the network hash. The corrupt version
of the transaction has to be longer than the current version in
order to reverse the transaction and perform a double spend
attack.
B. Selﬁsh Mining Attack
The Selﬁsh Mining Attack is an attack on the consensus
protocol that is similar to the Long Range Attack. The purpose
of this attack is for the attacker to obtain rewards from honest
miners and also waste the computing power of the miner [29].
In this process, the attacker attempts to fork the blockchain
network, to form a private chain from the public chain (original
chain). The attacker continues to mine the newly created chain
and try to maintain a longer chain than the public chain, as
the new chain from the attacker holds new information and
transaction from the old one.
C. Goldﬁnger Attack
The Goldﬁnger Attack is an attack with the goal of
compromising a given cryptocurrency system, as this attack
may not have any direct economic beneﬁt to the attacker [30].
The reason for this type of attack can be for economic interest
where the attacker exploit the short market positions and taking
out other competitors of the cryptocurrency market, and also
it can be for a political or ideological reason. This attack
can be effective by the means of renting, bribing, and buying
computational power from others that are called the hostile
take over attack.
D. Balance Attack
The Balance Attack is a recent theoretical generalisation
of the Delay Attack against PoW blockchain [31]. This Attack
is performed by identifying a network of subgroup miners,
with this subgroups maintaining a balance in mining power
to achieve double spending. This aims to delay network
communications between these subgroups of nodes for the
attacker to issue a transaction in one subgroup and then the
attacker mine as many blocks as possible in another, so that
the sub-tree of another subgroup exceeds the subgroup of the
transaction issued by the attacker. The attacker splits the whole
blockchain network by exploiting the ghost protocol with the
aim of balancing the mining power of the subgroups.
E. Long Range Attack
The Long Range Attack is an attack when an attacker
goes back and fork the genesis block of the blockchain
network [32]. This attack splits the blockchain from the main
chain as shown in Figure 2, and is successful when the new
chain created by the attacker is longer than the main chain. The
attacker’s chain is accepted as the main chain, as this chain is
populated with a completely different transaction and history
than the main chain. Long Range Attack in the PoS protocol
and Selﬁsh mining Attack in the PoW are related in a way, as
the attacker aims to create the fake chain in secret.
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Genesis
Block
Block 
1
Block 
2
Block 
86
Block 
1
Block 
2
Block 
86
Block 
87
Block 
87
Block 
88
Real Miners Blocks
Attackers Blocks
1
2
3
4
Attacker forks from
the Gensis block
Fake transactions
populated
Attackers chain becomes 
the longest chain
The longest chain 
reverts the main chain
Figure 2. A Long Range Attack in a blockchain network.
This attack is unlikely to occur in bitcoin that uses the
PoW protocol, but can be destructive to the PoS and DPoS
protocols since PoS process of operation that does not deﬁne
a limit on the chain; hence, the chain can be extended [33].
V.
PROTECTION TECHNIQUES
In this section, we discuss major protection techniques that
are in place to mitigate blockchain attacks.
A. Historical Weighted Difﬁculty based Proof of Work
Historical Weighted Difﬁculty based Proof of work (HW
D-PoW) protocol is a technique proposed by [34], with the
intentions of setting a 51% defense mechanism against attack.
The supposition is that in a genuine blockchain branch, new
blockchain miners will undoubtedly be the same people who
mined the past blocks and will be reﬂected in the distribution
history. In a malicious blockchain branch, dispersion of miners
of new blocks will probably be constrained by the assailants,
which will be not the same as the ordinary conveyance of
miners in history.
B. Random Mining Group Selection
Random mining group selection technique proposed by
[35] that reduces computing power and defends against 51%
attacks. Here, the essential thought is to distribute the miners
into different gatherings. Note that not all miners are constantly
engaged with the mining cycle, and just miners having a
place with a speciﬁc gathering are allowed to mine future
blocks. Each peer hub decides its mining bunch utilising a
hash function Hg(- ) and its wallet address. Moreover, when a
block is made, its hash esteem is utilised with Hg(- ) to ﬁgure
out which mining bunch should locate the following block. Just
peer hubs having a place with the mining bunch are approved
to mine the following block and rival one another.
C. Indegree and Outdegree
Indegree and Outdegree is a countermeasure against an
Eclipse attack as described by [36]. Indegree implies the
number of direct routes coming into a hub and outdegree
implies the number of direct routes leaving a hub. The plan to
protect against Eclipse assault is to bound both indegree and
outdegree of the assailant hubs. This strategy can be depicted
as follows. To start with, a defensive mechanism is applied to
the Sybil assault. This cycle guarantees there is no chance of
Eclipse assault dependent on a Sybil assault. At that point, the
main focus can be on the most proﬁcient method to manage
the indegree and outdegree of the aggressor hubs.
D. Self-Registration
The countermeasure is an identity registration procedure
called Self-Registration [36] to defend against Sybil Attack.
The registration process of a new node requires the node
to calculate its identiﬁer by hashing its IP address and port,
and then register its identiﬁer at another node that has been
registered already. The new node will then request to join
the P2P network. Other registered nodes on the network can
identify a fake node once a new node joins the network. The
new node will not be accepted by the P2P network if the node
is a fake.
E. Backward-Incompatible Defense
Backward-Incompatible
Defense
is
a
countermeasure
against Selﬁsh Mining [37]. The defense is a fork punishment
rule where competing blocks receive no block reward. The ﬁrst
miner receives half of the forfeited rewards in the blockchain
for adding proof of the block forked. This process; however,
creates another kind of attack, as miners suffer collateral
damage due to the defense. A certain number of signatures and
dummy blocks should be associated with each solved block to
prove the absences of competing block, and that the block is
witnessed by the network to allow miners to work on it. There
is no mechanism provided to evaluate the number of proofs to
know if it is sufﬁcient to continue working.
F. Tie Breaking Defense
Tie Breaking Defense is a countermeasure against Selﬁsh
Mining attack [37]. The defense techniques can also be re-
ferred to as the Uniform tie break, as the name implies.
A miner chooses what chain to be mined on as long as the
chain is uniformly at random in a tie. The proﬁt threshold that
is the minimum mining power share to earn an unfair block
rewards are raised by the defense techniques, and the proﬁt
threshold can rise to 25% within their selﬁsh mining strategy.
G. Dynamic and Auto Responsive Approach
Gupta et al. proposed dynamic and auto responsive ap-
proach for defending against DDoS attack [38]. A wide range
of ﬂooding DDoS attacks have been highlighted with various
design principles and evaluation results to accurately detect
these characterised attacks for the proposed framework. The
low volume-based approach is used to detect these attacks that
observes unexpected changes in the network trafﬁc in the ISP
domain.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Blockchain, the record keeping-technology has brought
vast advancements in various sectors transforming the method
of conventional actions adopted in a centralised system. How-
ever, our research has revealed that there are severe weaknesses
that exist in the blockchain technology and proving to be a
barrier for this technology to be adopted. We have shown that
consensus protocols are the most signiﬁcant factors of this
technology as weaknesses in the protocol results in various
attacks. We have also analysed the most pernicious attack
techniques that can exploit the consensus protocol. Further-
more, our analysis of the protection techniques indicates that
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

the protection techniques are not robust enough to defense;
hence, a strong protection approach required to mitigate the
attacks.
The research has revealed various future research scopes to
ensure a secure blockchain network. For our future work, we
aim to perform a deep analysis of the limitations of the major
consensus protocol to propose a robust security approach to
mitigate the attacks.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Mearian, “What is blockchain? The complete guide,” 2019, URL:
https://www.computerworld.com/article/3191077/what-is-blockchain-
the-complete-guide.html [retrieved: March, 2020].
[2]
CBINSIGHTS,
“What
Is
Blockchain
Technology?”
2020,
URL:
https://www.cbinsights.com/research/what-is-blockchain-technology/
[retrieved: August, 2020].
[3]
Y. Xiao, N. Zhang, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “A survey of distributed
consensus protocols for blockchain networks,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 22, 2020, pp. 1432–1465.
[4]
S. Sayeed and H. Marco-Gisbert, “Assessing blockchain consensus and
security mechanisms against the 51% attack,” Applied Sciences, vol. 9,
04 2019, p. 1788.
[5]
S. Sayeed, H. Marco-Gisbert, and T. Caira, “Smart contract: Attacks
and protections,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, 2020, pp. 24 416–24 427.
[6]
J. Alsayed Kassem, S. Sayeed, H. Marco-Gisbert, Z. Pervez, and
K. Dahal, “Dns-idm: A blockchain identity management system to
secure personal data sharing in a network,” Applied Sciences, vol. 9,
no. 15, 2019, p. 2953.
[7]
D. Chowles, “51% Attacks and Double Spending in Cryptocurrencies,”
2018, URL: https://www.chowles.com/51-percent-attacks-and-double-
spending-in-cryptocurrencies/ [retrieved: March, 2020].
[8]
M. Beedham, “Hash rate is at an all time high, here’s what it’s all about,”
2019,
URL:
https://thenextweb.com/hardfork/2019/08/05/ugh-this-is-
what-bitcoins-hash-rate-means-and-why-it-matters/ [retrieved: March,
2020].
[9]
ITPro,
“What
is
cryptocurrency
mining?”
2020,
URL:
https://www.itpro.co.uk/digital-currency/30249/what-is-cryptocurrency-
mining [retrieved: March, 2020].
[10]
S. S. Panda, B. K. Mohanta, U. Satapathy, D. Jena, D. Gountia, and T. K.
Patra, “Study of blockchain based decentralized consensus algorithms,”
in TENCON 2019-2019 IEEE Region 10 Conference (TENCON).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 908–913.
[11]
L. Bach, B. Mihaljevic, and M. Zagar, “Comparative analysis of
blockchain consensus algorithms,” in 2018 41st International Conven-
tion on Information and Communication Technology, Electronics and
Microelectronics (MIPRO).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1545–1550.
[12]
H. Wang, Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H.-N. Dai, and X. Chen, “Blockchain
challenges and opportunities: a survey,” International Journal of Web
and Grid Services, vol. 14, 10 2018, pp. 352 – 375.
[13]
P. Marchionni, “Distributed ledger technologies consensus mecha-
nisms,” Available at SSRN 3389871, 2018.
[14]
A. Baliga, “The blockchain landscape,” Persistent Systems, vol. 3, no. 5,
2016, pp. 1–21.
[15]
Q. Deng, “Blockchain economical models, delegated proof of economic
value and delegated adaptive byzantine fault tolerance and their im-
plementation in artiﬁcial intelligence blockcloud,” Journal of Risk and
Financial Management, vol. 12, no. 4, 2019, p. 177.
[16]
W. Zhao, S. Yang, and X. Luo, “On consensus in public blockchains,”
in Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Blockchain
Technology, 2019, pp. 1–5.
[17]
D. A. Gol, “An analysis of consensus algorithms for the blockchain
technology,” International Journal for Research in Applied Science &
Engineering Technology, vol. 7, 2019.
[18]
K. Sharma and D. Jain, “Consensus algorithms in blockchain technol-
ogy: A survey,” in 2019 10th International Conference on Computing,
Communication and Networking Technologies (ICCCNT).
IEEE,
2019, pp. 1–7.
[19]
N. Chalaemwongwan and W. Kurutach, “Notice of violation of ieee
publication principles: State of the art and challenges facing consensus
protocols on blockchain,” in 2018 International Conference on Infor-
mation Networking (ICOIN), Jan 2018, pp. 957–962.
[20]
G. Bashar, G. Hill, S. Singha, P. Marella, G. G. Dagher, and J. Xiao,
“Contextualizing consensus protocols in blockchain: A short survey,” in
2019 First IEEE International Conference on Trust, Privacy and Security
in Intelligent Systems and Applications (TPS-ISA), 2019, pp. 190–195.
[21]
Unblock,
“What
does
PoO/Proof
of
Ownership
mean?”
2020,
URL: https://unblock.net/glossary/poo-proof-of-ownership/ [retrieved:
September, 2020].
[22]
K. D. Bowers, A. Juels, and A. Oprea, “Proofs of retrievability: Theory
and implementation,” in Proceedings of the 2009 ACM Workshop
on Cloud Computing Security, ser. CCSW ’09.
New York, NY,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2009, p. 4354. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/1655008.1655015
[23]
A. Shoker, “Sustainable blockchain through proof of exercise,” in
2017 IEEE 16th International Symposium on Network Computing and
Applications (NCA), 2017, pp. 1–9.
[24]
Q. He, N. Guan, M. Lv, and W. Yi, “On the consensus mechanisms of
blockchain/dlt for internet of things,” in 2018 IEEE 13th International
Symposium on Industrial Embedded Systems (SIES), 2018, pp. 1–10.
[25]
J. Zou, B. Ye, L. Qu, Y. Wang, M. A. Orgun, and L. Li, “A proof-of-
trust consensus protocol for enhancing accountability in crowdsourcing
services,” IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, vol. 12, no. 3,
2019, pp. 429–445.
[26]
M. Cash and M. Bassiouni, “Two-tier permission-ed and permission-
less blockchain for secure data sharing,” in 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Smart Cloud (SmartCloud), 2018, pp. 138–144.
[27]
A. Shahaab, B. Lidgey, C. Hewage, and I. Khan, “Applicability and
appropriateness of distributed ledgers consensus protocols in public and
private sectors: A systematic review,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, 2019, pp.
43 622–43 636.
[28]
S. Sayeed and H. Marco-Gisbert, “Proof of adjourn (poaj): A
novel approach to mitigate blockchain attacks,” Applied Sciences,
vol. 10, no. 18, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-
3417/10/18/6607
[29]
X. Li, P. Jiang, T. Chen, X. Luo, and Q. Wen, “A survey on the security
of blockchain systems,” Future Generation Computer Systems, 2017.
[30]
A. Meneghetti, M. Sala, and D. Taufer, “A survey on pow-based
consensus,” Annals of Emerging Technologies in Computing, vol. 4,
01 2020, pp. 8–18.
[31]
P. Ekparinya, V. Gramoli, and G. Jourjon, “Impact of man-in-the-middle
attacks on ethereum,” in 2018 IEEE 37th Symposium on Reliable
Distributed Systems (SRDS).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 11–20.
[32]
E. Deirmentzoglou, G. Papakyriakopoulos, and C. Patsakis, “A survey
on long-range attacks for proof of stake protocols,” IEEE Access, vol. 7,
2019, pp. 28 712–28 725.
[33]
H. M.-G. Sarwar Sayeed, “On the effectiveness of blockchain against
cryptocurrency attacks,” The Twelfth International Conference on Mo-
bile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies, 2018,
pp. 9–14.
[34]
X. Yang, Y. Chen, and X. Chen, “Effective scheme against 51%
attack on proof-of-work blockchain with history weighted information,”
in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain (Blockchain).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 261–265.
[35]
J. Bae and H. Lim, “Random mining group selection to prevent
51% attacks on bitcoin,” in 2018 48th Annual IEEE/IFIP International
Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks Workshops (DSN-
W).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 81–82.
[36]
Y. Yang and L. Yang, “A survey of peer-to-peer attacks and counter
attacks,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Security
and Management (SAM), 2012, p. 1.
[37]
R. Zhang and B. Preneel, “Publish or perish: A backward-compatible
defense against selﬁsh mining in bitcoin,” in Cryptographers Track at
the RSA Conference.
Springer, 2017, pp. 277–292.
[38]
S. Bhatia, S. Behal, and I. Ahmed, “Distributed denial of service attacks
and defense mechanisms: current landscape and future directions,” in
Versatile Cybersecurity.
Springer, 2018, pp. 55–97.
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-811-2
UBICOMM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

