Business Case Evaluation Methodology (BCEM) for Factories Digitalization  
A quantitive approach to digital transformation assessment in industry domains  
Roberto Rocca, Giacomo Tavola, Filippo Boschi, Paola Fantini, Marco Taisch 
Department of Management, Economics and Industrial Engineering 
Politecnico di Milano 
Via R. Lambruschini 4/b, 20156, Milano, Italy 
email:{roberto.rocca, giacomo.tavola, filippo.boschi, paola.fantini, marco.taisch}@polimi.it 
 
 
Abstract— In the last years, the fast evolution towards 
automation and digitalization of production systems is forcing 
companies in re-thinking their business strategies and models. 
To 
overcome 
manufacturers’ 
conservatism, 
migration 
strategies and business case evaluations are required to assess, 
support and guide adoption of the next generation of smart 
production systems. This paper proposes a Business Case 
Evaluation Methodology (BCEM) to support companies that 
aim to migrate from legacy automation systems towards the 
Industry 4.0 paradigm. The aim of the proposed approach is to 
assess the profitability of the investment in advanced 
technologies for the decentralization of industrial automation 
control architectures, evaluating opportunities and mitigating 
the risks of migration from technical, operational, human and 
business perspectives. The methodology implements an 
iterative approach starting from the definition of the current 
business and operational status of the factory and the 
identification of business goals; progressing towards the 
identification and evaluation of possible migration paths; 
ending with the selection of the optimal one according to a 
cost-benefit analysis. The paper presents two exemplary 
applications in real industrial environments, developed in the 
scope of FAR-EDGE European Project.  
Keywords-Industry 4.0; digital factories; migration strategy; 
business case evaluation; investment assessment. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Due to volatile and fast moving markets, increasing 
competition, as well as more complex products and 
production processes, industrial companies are facing 
increasingly intricate challenges [1]. Among these, digital 
transformation represents one of the biggest challenge that a 
company has to face nowadays [2], since it represents not 
only a technical issue, but also a cultural shift. In fact, the 
change does not only affect processes, but they require a 
shift from the present company values toward a continuous 
improvement philosophy. Within the modern industrial 
environment, this transformation refers to the processes that 
lead to the adoption of the Industry 4.0 (I4.0) paradigm. 
Even if the term has existed for some time, only a few 
organizations can claim to have reached a mature 
implementation. I4.0 refers to the industrial exploitation of 
Cyber-Physical 
Systems 
(CPS) 
for 
the 
intelligent 
decentralization in the factory. The result is the so called 
“smart factory” where, Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT), Internet of Things (IoT), Customer-to-
Machine (C2M), Customer-to-Customer (C2C), Machine-to-
Machine (M2M) communications [3]–[5] are integrated with 
distributed sensing, processing and actuating capabilities. 
Altogether these technologies enable a new paradigm for 
production management, driven by a better situation 
awareness, built on collection and analysis of big data. For 
the companies, in order to compete on the market, it is 
crucial to be able to promptly address market challenges with 
leading strategies [6]. That implies the adoption of ﬂexible, 
lean, fast, agile, efficient, systems with prompt and reactive 
decision-making process. In spite of the benefits, the 
important impact of the potential technological and 
organizational changes has prevented many companies from 
adopting a full I4.0 strategy or even systematically investing 
in I4.0 capabilities [1]. Two relevant common barriers are: 
(i) high investment costs due to a lack of I4.0 suitability of 
the existing production infrastructure and (ii) missing 
transparency or quantification of benefits [1]. Moreover, this 
change has to be driven by clear managerial leadership. 
Accordingly, there is a fundamental need for assisting 
companies in the transition to I4.0 technologies/practices, 
and guiding them for improving their capabilities in a 
standardized, objective, and repeatable way [7]. The intent of 
this paper is to present a Business Case Evaluation 
Methodology (BCEM) that gives support to the companies 
that intend to migrate towards factories digitalization, 
considering a holistic approach from the technical, 
operational, human and business perspective.  
 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the BCEM for factories digitalization assessment. 
Section III describes two methodology application cases 
developed within the FAR-EDGE European Project context. 
Finally, Section IV draws some final conclusions.  
II. 
BUSINESS CASE EVALUATION METHODOLOGY FOR 
FACTORIES DIGITALIZATION 
The starting point of a migration path is commonly 
referred to as AS-IS situation, while the ﬁnal goal is named 
TO-BE situation. Figure 1 shows the framework of the 
migration process and BCEM proposed in this paper.  
The figure frames the steps 2-3-4-5 under the concept of 
Blueprint migration [8]. Blueprint refers to an early plan that  
 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-736-8
UBICOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
Figure 1. Business Case Evaluation Methodology framework 
explains how something might be achieved. The comparison 
of the different strategies implies the comparison of several 
features, such as risks, migration design time, migration 
execution time, downtime, costs and eﬀort [9]. 
In addition to the company managers involved in the 
assessment, the methodology requires a collaboration with 
OEMs and solution providers.  
The procedure is described in the next sections, following 
a stepwise order. 
A. Step 1. Competitive differentials in the company value 
chain 
The digital transformation should not be considered as a 
stand alone solution, but rather considered as a powerful 
lever to be integrated within the strategic processes of the 
enterprises. For this reason, the ﬁrst step of the methodology 
aims to open the way toward digital transformation, trying to 
assess the potential benefits for the enterprise value creation 
and business model, taking into account the competitive 
landscape. 
By identifying the relevant Key Performance Indicators 
(KPIs), applying the Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities 
and Threats (SWOT) analyses and an adaptation of the 
Porter’s value chain model, different ways of designing the 
digital transformation can be analyzed. 
In fact, the SWOT analysis [10][11],  is very suitable 
since it guides the identiﬁcation of business changing factors 
through a clear and meaningful way. It can be used 
effectively to build organizational and competitive strategy 
in a migration context. 
KPIs deﬁnition is a fundamental activity in order to 
clarify the desired impact of the project implementation, 
accordingly to the SWOT analysis outcome related to 
internal and external business changing factors 
Porter’s model highlights the main activities (primary 
and secondary) that allow the company to create value and, 
although its original formulation requires to be revised in 
order to overcome the functional segments of the classic 
corporate structure, it is still valid [12][13]. 
Overall this first section set the strategic frame for 
developing the Blueprint Migration and performing the 
economic analysis. 
B. Step 2. Technical, Operational and Human assessment 
The main goal of BCEM Step 2 is to clearly deﬁne the 
AS-IS situation in the technical, operational and human 
dimension. The three-dimensional structure has been adopted 
to offer a holistic perspective on the migration. To assess the 
various issues related to the three dimensions a maturity 
model has been developed and exploited within the context 
of FAR-EDGE EU project [8]. The maturity model rate from 
1 to 5 the digital maturity or readiness of the considered 
aspect: the value 1 indicates a low or non-existent 
development, while 5 refers to a cutting edge implementation 
[14]–[18]. The assessment in Step 2 maps a ﬁrst overview of 
the application context where the company is interested in 
reaching a higher maturity level. The final framework will be 
completed in Step 3 after the consulting of external experts. 
C. Step 3. Migration matrix and scenario definition 
The tool for the holistic representation is the Migration 
Matrix [8] and it allows to map the AS-IS and the TO-BE 
scenarios. It is used as a tool to conceptualize and measure 
the readiness or maturity of the enterprise regarding some 
specific target state. In this way, it is possible to identify the 
AS-IS situation of overall dimension analyzed, enabling the 
possibility to deﬁne the starting point for the digital 
transformation. There could be more than one way to reach 
the desired result and the TO-BE scenario could not be 
unique. In fact, a collaboration with OEMs and solution 
providers is required at this point in order to assess the 
feasibility of the scenarios and provide solutions able to 
improve the KPIs deﬁned in Step 1. It can be referred to a 
mutually exclusive situation when more than one solution is 
considered to solve the same industrial problem (e.g., 
diﬀerent technologies or resources are involved). On the 
other hand, the TO-BE scenarios can be referred to a 
mutually inclusive situation, when more than one solution is 
considered to solve diﬀerent industrial problems. Once the 
scenarios are fully determined, then their description in the 
final Migration Matrix is portrayed. Initially, the rows are 
characterized, then for each one of these, the ﬁve maturity 
levels are speciﬁed. The ﬁnal result implies one Migration 
Matrix for each scenario where it is depicted only one AS-IS 
status and one specific TO-BE status. The selected 
alternatives are then evaluated according to the business 
strategy, considering also outcome of BCEM Step 1. 
D. Step 4. Gap analysis 
Gap analysis between AS-IS and TO-BE scenarios 
represents an outcome of the collaboration with solution 
providers. Required components, possible integrations and 
steps for application are the three main steps to carry on. 
Required components represent a detailed list of the 
additional components, operations, and new professional 
skills required for each scenario migration. Possible 
integration to the deﬁned architectures has to be taken into 
account since they enable system ﬂexibility and easier future 
updates: a non-quantitative data which should be considered 
when deciding which migration to choose. Then, the steps 
required for the implementation of each scenario include 
costs and time evaluation for the overall migration 
completion which are very relevant in the economic analysis. 
Steps for application provides general instructions for the 
implementation of the technology starting from the AS-IS 
status. 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-736-8
UBICOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

E. Step 5. Value added identification 
The value added section aims to justify the efforts spent 
by the company on the use case implementation. The 
complete deﬁnition of the scenarios allows to foresee the 
quantitative and qualitative improvement of the system. 
Value added has a double meaning: 
 
KPI improvement. A quantitative and measurable 
increase of system performance with respect to the 
AS-IS situation.  
 
Unmeasurable advantage. A beneﬁt derived from the 
new system which has a positive impact on one of 
the three migration dimensions (e.g., flexibility of a 
specific process). The unmeasurable advantages of 
the scenario have to be coherent with the value 
added relative to the technological enablers selected 
in the scenario. 
Every scenario can count on diﬀerent features and 
peculiarities, hence the KPIs improvement and the 
unmeasurable advantages could diﬀer from one another. For 
this reason, the metrics needed for the KPIs improvement 
calculation are case specific.  
F. Step 6. Economic analysis 
A cost-beneﬁt analysis to justify the investment in digital 
transformation is the last step of the methodology. This 
analysis is performed comparing the TO-BE situation with 
respect to the AS-IS situation and it deals with quantitative 
results. The unmeasurable advantages and disadvantages 
which cannot be translated in economic value are not part of 
Step 6. First, the KPIs improvement is translated into money 
and the results are addressed as Economic KPIs or Beneﬁts. 
The 
Economic 
KPIs 
estimation 
is 
not 
always 
straightforward. Being the beneﬁts computation use case 
dependent, it is impossible to provide a complete framework. 
Nevertheless, we can identify a common tool to be used as 
reference framework: the Total Cost of Ownership (TCO), 
that could be adopted for cost evaluation [19]. It is 
recognized as an industry-standard method for the economic 
analysis for IT and other enterprise issues due to its holistic 
view of costs across enterprise boundaries over time. A 
subdivision is made between upfront implementation costs 
and recurring costs.  
The investment is evaluated on a fixed time interval with 
a Discounted Cash Flow approach and the specific case 
assumptions for the economic analysis have to be declared. 
The Net Present Value (NPV) is an economic index which 
measures the value acquired by the company associated with 
the investment. The Cash Flow (CF) of year t is computed 
taking into consideration the diﬀerential analysis between the 
TO-BE and the AS-IS scenario. Moreover, the Proﬁtability 
Index (PI) is considered. It is a relative index of proﬁtability 
and it is deﬁned as the discounted cash ﬂow divided by the 
discounted investments. The Internal Rate of Return (IRR) is 
also considered in Step 6, since it represents the maximum 
risk for which the investment can be considered viable. The 
Discounted Payback Period (DPP) represents the number of 
years necessary to break even from undertaking the initial 
expenditure recognizing the time value of money. Of course, 
the best case is veriﬁed when the DPP is as short as possible. 
NPV, PI, IRR and DPP are indexes which deﬁnes the 
economic success of a project, and they are also a measure to 
compare more than one solution, as in the case of multiple 
scenario evaluations. The ﬁnal decision to implement or not 
one or more of the deﬁned project is the final point of the 
methodology. The migration process deﬁnes qualitative and 
quantitative reasons to guide decision-making activity. 
III. 
BCEM APPLICATION: TWO USE CASES WITHIN THE 
H2020 FAR-EDGE CONTEXT 
The entire methodology has been developed and tested 
within the Horizon2020 FAR-EDGE European Project 
context, with the scope to perform an economic and 
technical analysis of the digital transformation process 
toward I4.0 technologies. The main goal of the project is to 
create a novel Reference Architecture (RA) for industrial 
automation, which leverages the beneﬁts of edge computing, 
while using blockchain technologies for ﬂexible, scalable 
and reliable conﬁguration and orchestration of automation 
workﬂows and distributed data analytics [20]. The two 
BCEM application cases are represented by (i) a world’s top 
white appliances manufacturer company and (ii) a leader 
company in the automotive sector. A summary of the two 
use cases applications, following the stepwise order that 
characterizes the methodology, are reported below. 
A. Use case 1. Durable goods company 
1) 
Step 1. Competitive differentials in the company 
value chain.  
The business objectives of this company, which interest 
in re-shoring will allow the consolidation of production 
volumes in Europe, are on (i) improving quality, (ii) time to 
market, (iii) costs, as well as (iv) system architecture. Better 
and more eﬃcient utilization of data generated at the 
shopﬂoor level can enhance both the capability of ﬁltering 
defective parts and products and increase the productivity. 
The achievement of these objectives starts from the 
manufacturing ﬁeld, where the investment in improving 
technologies can decrease the number of factory defects at 
the lowest cost. The FAR-EDGE technologies in this sense 
impact on automation, simulation and analytics, both on the 
technological process and on the company’s organizational 
processes. As a starting point it has been applied a SWOT 
analysis in order to comprehend the strengths, weaknesses, 
opportunities and threats of the FAR-EDGE Architecture 
implementation within the company plant. FAR-EDGE 
projects with its innovative decentralized structure could 
enhance system ﬂexibility, adaptability and reliability. The 
SWOT analysis and Porter’s value chain analysis underlined 
how the sorting system of the plant represents an issue which 
could be solved and improved by FAR-EDGE. The support 
activities involved are the ﬁrm infrastructure which should 
lead the change. The technology development which should 
implement and maintain the new architecture enables the 
improved 
data 
management. 
The 
human 
resource 
management which is responsible for employees training and 
hiring digital skilled people. The primary activities, where 
the smooth and lean migration is focusing on, are out-bound 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-736-8
UBICOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

logistics and services, nonetheless, production data should be 
collected from the operations in order to optimize the 
products dispatching. At this point, the KPIs were identiﬁed 
after having got a clear idea about the potential application 
ﬁeld of the project: (i) sorter OEE, which improvement is 
computed as the ratio between the fully productive time and 
the planned production time; and (ii) sorter reconﬁgurability.  
 
2) 
Step 
2. 
Technical, 
Operational 
and 
Human 
assessment.  
The AS-IS matrix has been developed on multiple levels, 
describing the technical, operational, and human aspects 
where the company should increase its readiness or digital 
maturity to reach a satisfactory solution leveraging on the 
FAR-EDGE platform. The use case described is almost a 
green ﬁeld scenario: all or most of the technological content 
of the AS-IS system was not present. In this case, the starting 
maturity levels of the migration matrix are very low and the 
solution is built from the beginning.  
 
3) 
Step 3. Migration matrix and scenario definition.  
In the TO-BE system architecture, each smart object is 
managed by an independent Edge Node. Edge Nodes are of 
fundamental importance, since the information from the ﬁeld 
can be managed and processed in each smart object in order 
to modify the dispatching policy accordingly. All the nodes 
communicate within a Distributed Ledger smart contract 
called Collaborative Sorting.  
 
4) 
Step 4. Gap analysis.  
It was possible to identify in this use case a unique 
migration scenario because of the speciﬁcity of the industrial 
problem and two main areas can be identiﬁed among the 
FAR-EDGE components utilized for the accomplishment of 
such a result: (i) Cyber Physical System: all the smart objects 
are represented and conﬁgured on the Distributed Ledger; 
and (ii) Simulation Services: its goal is to suggest an 
optimized sorting policy exploiting real-time data from the 
ﬁeld. Simulation services include local monitoring and 
control of the real-time situation through the Edge Nodes. 
Collaborative Sorting recognizes the change in the state of 
the system and adapts the dispatching rule accordingly.  
The gap analysis has also highlighted additional tasks 
and competences required for managing and maintaining the 
systems. 
 
5) 
Step 5. Value added identification.  
The ﬁnal consultation with the experts estimates a 
possible growth of the KPIs identiﬁed in Step 1. The Sorter 
OEE will increase by 5% and the sorter reconﬁgurability will 
improve signiﬁcantly. A situation dependent analysis is part 
of the next section of the methodology. For what concerns 
unmeasurable advantages, it is possible to list: (i) a 
synchronization between ﬁeld and simulation that could be 
further used for other purposes; (ii) an innovative machine 
autonomy which creates M2M collaboration in the 
operational dimension. For the human dimension, the 
number of stressful emergency breakdown situations is 
reduced and the reconﬁguration of the system is not manual 
any more. On the other hand, the IT system becomes more 
complex and requires that different groups of employees are 
trained to acquire new technical skills. 
 
6) 
Step 6. Economic analysis.  
Accordingly to the last step of BCEM, the economic 
appraisal is then performed. First of all, the upfront costs and 
the recurring costs have to be computed. As a second phase, 
the improvement KPIs are transformed into economic 
beneﬁts: 
• 
An OEE improvement has a direct eﬀect on the 
throughput of the system. It has been veriﬁed that an 
additional 5% of the sorter OEE implies an additional 5% of 
the system throughput.  
• 
The improvement of the system reconﬁgurability 
has been considered exploiting a situation analysis: the 
ﬂexibility acquired will impact on the Total Cost of Change 
(TCC) of the system.  
Finally, the Discounted Cash Flow appraisal is 
calculated. In this case, the TO-BE scenario implies a 
favorable economic perspective. Alongside a consistent 
initial investment, the NPV is signiﬁcantly positive after 10 
years. The DPP occurs slightly after the third year. In the 
end, the IRR has been computed, with a value of 34,9%. 
Since IRR is greater than the discount rate has been utilized 
(10%), also this index conﬁrms the proﬁtability of the 
investment in the TO-BE scenario. The results cannot be 
evaluated without considering the FAR-EDGE context and 
all the specific hypothesis has been considered.  
B. Use case 2. Automotive sector company 
1) 
Step 1. Competitive differentials in the company 
value chain.  
The second project use case is represented by a leader 
company in the automotive sector. This use case exploits 
ERP, MES and SCADA to collect data from the sensors on 
the ﬁeld. The digital knowledge is widespread and is part of 
the group strategy, in fact, they already participated to 
research projects related to I4.0. The mass customization 
causes a high complexity of the assembly systems, it 
provides a strategic advantage to target niche markets and 
meeting diverse customer needs in a timely fashion. In such 
a system operations standardization, production scheduling 
optimization, as well as scrap reduction are of fundamental 
importance. It is adapting to the new environment by a 
changed organizational structure, larger involvement of the 
end customer, smaller and less complex development 
projects and closer partner collaboration.  
The qualitative analysis underlined the possibility to 
implement two main target KPIs for the project: 
• 
Tools adaptation time: automatic reconﬁguration of 
the nutrunners could decrease the setup time.  
• 
Rework rate: a second eﬀect would be the 
facilitation of the operators’ job by relieving the stress of the 
repetitive operation of setting the right tool’s parameters. 
This would imply an overall reduction of the rework rate due 
to human errors. 
 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-736-8
UBICOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

2) 
Step 
2. 
Technical, 
Operational 
and 
Human 
assessment.  
Thanks to the collaboration with company experts and 
technical solution providers, AS-IS scenario has been 
mapped. In particular, the assessment highlighted that the 
scheduling activities are not supported by simulation services 
and the products are chosen from the large buﬀer upstream 
the ﬁnishing lines in a "ﬁrst in ﬁrst out" order. This provokes 
delayed deliveries due to non-optimized sequencing. The 
high number of degree of freedom of the assembly line has 
to be tackled with ﬂexible interchangeability of the 
operations through the station. Currently, the tools along the 
lines are set up manually and for this reason, could lead to 
erroneous parameters imposition. In this case an automatic 
tool able to auto reconﬁgure according to the activity that has 
to perform could dramatically reduce setup time required by 
the operator to tune the parameters and at the same time 
guarantee a standardized replicability of the single operation 
excluding the human error factor.  
From a human competencies point of view, it can be 
underlined a lack of competences in the Edge computing and 
distributed Ledger technologies. This gap is justiﬁed by the 
fact that such technologies are very advanced and in some 
cases never used in the manufacturing world. FAR-EDGE 
project will have to ﬁll this gap and guide the use cases until 
the achieved result.  
The AS-IS matrix identiﬁes the usual characterization of 
the current situation from the technical, operational and 
human perspectives. The migration starting point is a 
brownﬁeld scenario [8]: smart objects and sensor, as well as 
data 
management 
already 
exist 
in 
the 
shopﬂoor. 
Summarizing, the MES is in charge of automating and 
distributing the order processing throughout all the shopﬂoor. 
Work performance and production performance are 
monitored exploiting the Factory Control System (FCS) and 
ERP. A CAD system is present and it is fed manually with 
production data but it is not able to optimize the buﬀer 
policy. The tools reconﬁguration is made manually by the 
operator to which is not required any digital knowledge, 
while the skills for I4.0 belong mainly to IT department 
experts. 
 
3) 
Step 3. Migration matrix and scenario definition.  
The FAR-EDGE project can provide three powerful tools 
for several improvements in this mass customization use 
cases: 
• 
Simulation services embedded in the platform could 
partially solve the tardy delivery problem by suggesting 
improved truck sequencing.  
• 
Data Analytics could measure the assembly time of 
each product and produce statistics for improved decision 
making based on simulation.  
• 
Automation could enable tools with Plug’n’Produce 
technology able to auto reconﬁgure the parameters avoiding 
assembly time losses and products unable to pass the ﬁnal 
quality check.  
The greatest change made with respect to the AS-IS 
architecture is the introduction of the Cloud and the Ledger 
infrastructure. These new items are able to enhance 
automation 
services 
control, 
namely 
Plug’n’Produce 
technology. At Cloud level cohabits the ERP and FCS 
technology, in this way it is possible to exploit all their 
functionality in a coexistence of the legacy ISA95 and FAR-
EDGE architecture. The Distributed Ledger technology is 
exploited to create the so-called “intelligent product”: every 
product is registered in the distributed ledger, after every 
activity, the ledger is updated in the nearest peer node, and 
then in all the other peer nodes of the network. In this way, 
the product carries along the assembly line the information 
regarding operations performed and equipment installed.  
 
4) 
Step 4. Gap analysis.  
A FAR-EDGE Gateway is required in order for the 
Handheld scanner, the One Spindle Nutrunner and the Edge 
Display to communicate with the Distributed Ledger. A 
FAR-EDGE adapter has two connectors and is developed 
using the edge automation services. It adds Plug’n’Produce 
support to the nutrunner by attaching the nutrunner to one 
port and the work cell gateway to the other. The purpose is to 
encapsulate the open protocol and translate to and from the 
FAR-EDGE interface and thus, simplify conﬁguration. 
From a practical perspective, few physical activities will 
change with respect to the AS-IS situation. The operator is 
no more in charge of setting the parameters of the tool, he 
would just have to scan the product on the assembly line, 
plug-in the nutrunner and perform the activities in the order 
provided on the display. The complex IT system serves the 
purpose of a remarkable simpliﬁcation of the production 
operations and quality. The human dimension requires a little 
step forward in the comprehension and mastery of the I4.0 
tools. Maintenance and IT department have to develop an 
expertise to be able to sustain and provide assistance for the 
new architecture components. Furthermore, the operators 
along the assembly line have to possess basic knowledge of 
digital technology to fully exploit the potential of the tools 
automatic reconﬁguration.  
 
5) 
Step 5. Value added identification.  
Once deﬁned clearly the technology that could be 
implemented in the project, a ﬁnal impact on the measurable 
and unmeasurable advantages and disadvantages has been 
considered. The tools adaptation time will decrease by 98%. 
This high percentage is justiﬁed by the transition from a 
manual operator activity, to an automatic conﬁguration that 
would just require the time to plug in the tool and scan the 
product. It has been estimated that the rework rate will 
decrease by an uncertain quantity. The reduction is due to the 
decrease in human error in setting the tools parameter in any 
reconﬁguration. Due to the high level of uncertainty related 
to this KPI, it has been decided to exclude it from the 
analysis, in order to maintain as consistent as possible 
hypothesis. The unmeasurable eﬀects on the system are a 
dramatic increase in ﬂexibility and replicability of the 
processes in the exact same way. The price of this impact is a 
complication of the IT architecture and a slight increase in 
energy consumption. 
 
6) 
Step 6. Economic analysis.  
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-736-8
UBICOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The tool adaptation time imply a cost which will be 
critically reduced in case of implementation. A 98% 
reduction on the initial value is foreseen. This operation is 
performed in non-planned production time, thus it does not 
aﬀect the throughput of the system. The DPP of the 
investment occurs in the eighth year and the IRR value was 
computed, with a result of 14,2%. Being the IRR greater than 
the discount rate has been used (10%), it can be stated that 
both PI and IRR indexes conﬁrm a positive investment 
analysis for the project.  
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The paper presents a holistic methodology for business 
case evaluation related to digital transformation. Even if the 
smart technologies implementation is becoming a main trend 
in the manufacturing world, the path toward I4.0 is not 
smooth. The ﬁnal objective was to provide factories 
struggling for the achievement of a digital transformation 
with a useful guide tool to define, select, monitor and reach a 
successful scenario. The entire methodology has been 
applied to FAR-EDGE project use cases. The analysis has to 
consider a holistic approach from the technical, operational 
and human perspective. The migration has been analyzed 
under these three dimensions, assessing how to implement 
the new technologies and how does they impact on revenues, 
KPI and business models. Nevertheless, the revolution that 
the new computing paradigms are introducing involves the 
employees firstly and their way to adapt to this kind of 
changes in operations. The jobs are changing thanks to the 
digital transformation, the people and the operations have to 
be harmonized to the technical renewal so to reach a perfect 
and deep evolution. In general, the more ﬂexible and open to 
future innovation a company is, the more it will be probable 
that they will lead, instead of following, in the market 
challenge. A very challenging task is to clearly identify the 
impact of the most recent technologies to a speciﬁc 
application, so to adapt and bend their functionalities for the 
purpose suggested by the ﬁrm’s goal. In this light, the future 
work could be the utilization of the method presented to 
build a wide database. The more migration matrices related 
to value added there will be, the more the methodology 
would be usable and precise in foreseeing the ﬁnal 
transformation results. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme 
under grant agreement No 723094. In any case, the present 
work cannot be considered as an official position of the 
supporting organization, but it reports just the point of view 
of the authors.  
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Pessl, S. R. Sorko, and B. Mayer, “Roadmap Industry 4.0 – 
Implementation Guideline for Enterprises,” Int. J. Sci. 
Technol. Soc., vol. 5, no. 6, p. 193, 2018. 
[2] C. Aboud et al., “The Digital Culture Challenge: Closing the 
Employee-Leadership 
Gap,” 
Capgemini 
Digital 
Transformation Institute Survey, 2017. 
[3] M. Brettel, N. Friederichsen, M. Keller, and M. Rosenberg, 
“How Virtualization, Decentralization and Network Building 
Change the Manufacturing Landscape: An Industry 4.0 
Perspective,” Int. J. Mech. Aerospace, Ind. Mechatron. 
Manuf. Eng., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 37–44, 2014. 
[4] McKinsey&Company, “IIoT platforms: The technology stack 
as value driver in industrial equipment and machinery,” 2018. 
[5] R. Burke, A. Mussomeli, S. Laaper, M. Hartigan, and B. 
Sniderman, “The smart factory” Deloitte Insights, 2017. 
[6] G. Schuh, R. Anderl, J. Gausemeier, M. ten Hompel, and W. 
(Hrsg) Wahlster, “Industrie 4.0 Maturity Index,” Acatech 
Study, p. 62, 2017. 
[7] E. Gökalp, Ş. Umut, and E. P.Erhan, “Development of an 
Assessment Model for Industry 4.0: Industry 4.0-MM,” in 
International Conference on Software Process Improvement 
and Capability Determination, 2017, pp. 128–142. 
[8] A. Calà, A. Luder, F. Boschi, G. Tavola, and M. Taisch, 
“Migration towards digital manufacturing automation - An 
assessment approach,” in Proceedings - 2018 IEEE Industrial 
Cyber-Physical Systems, ICPS 2018, 2018, pp. 714–719. 
[9] A. Calà et al., “Migration from Traditional towards Cyber-
Physical 
Production 
Systems,” 
in 
2017 
IEEE 
15th 
International Conference on Industrial Informatics (INDIN), 
2017, pp. 1147–152. 
[10] E. Gürel, “Swot analysis: A theoretical review,” J. Int. Soc. 
Res., vol. 10, no. 51, pp. 6–11, 2017. 
[11] M. Helms and J. Nixon, “Exploring swot analysis – where are 
we now? : A review of academic research from the last 
decade,” J. Strateg. Manag., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 215–251, 2010. 
[12] M. Hergert and D. Morris, “Accounting data for value chain 
analysis,” Strateg. Manag. J., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 175–188, 
1989. 
[13] G. Azzone and U. Bertelè, “L´impresa - sistemi di governo, 
valutazione e controllo” (only italian version available), 2017. 
[14] M. Macchi and L. Fumagalli, “A maintenance maturity 
assessment method for the manufacturing industry” J. Qual. 
Maint. Eng., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 295–315, 2013. 
[15] M. Fiasche, M. Pinzone, P. Fantini, A. Alexandru, and M. 
Taisch, “Human-centric factories 4.0: A mathematical model 
for job allocation,” in IEEE 2nd International Forum on 
Research and Technologies for Society and Industry 
Leveraging a Better Tomorrow (RTSI), 2016, pp. 1–4. 
[16] M. Peruzzini and M. Pellicciari, “A framework to design a 
humancentred adaptive manufacturing system for aging 
workers.” Advanced Engineering Informatics, 2017. 
[17] SEI, “CMMI for Development, Version 1.3.” 2010. 
[18] A. De Carolis, M. Macchi, E. Negri, and S. Terzi, “A maturity 
model for assessing the digital readiness of manufacturing 
companies,” in IFIP International Conference on Advances in 
Production Management Systems, 2017, pp. 13–20. 
[19] M. S. Grobelny, “Evaluating the Total Cost of Ownership for 
an On-Premise Application System,” 2017. 
[20] M. Isaja, J. Soldatos, and V. Gezer, “Combining Edge 
Computing and Blockchains for Flexibility and Performance 
in Industrial Automation,” Int. Conf. Mob. Ubiquitous 
Comput. Syst. Serv. Technol., no. c, pp. 159–164, 2017. 
 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-736-8
UBICOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

