Interference Control Technology for Heterogeneous Networks 
Junsik Kim 
Mobile Communications Technology Research Dept. 
Electronics and Communications Research Institute 
Daejeon, Korea 
junsik@etri.re.kr 
Kyongtak Cho 
Mobile Communications Technology Research Dept. 
Electronics and Communications Research Institute 
Daejeon, Korea 
ktcho@etri.re.kr 
 
 
 Byunghan Ryu 
Mobile Communications Technology Research Dept. 
Electronics and Communications Research Institute 
Daejeon, Korea 
rubh@etri.re.kr 
Namhoon Park 
Mobile Communications Technology Research Dept. 
Electronics and Communications Research Institute 
Daejeon, Korea 
nhpark@etri.re.kr 
  
 
Abstract—To eliminate dead spots like home or office and let 
multiple users efficiently use limited frequency resources by 
providing a better mobile communication environment that 
enables high-capacity data transmission service, the demand 
for a small base station is increasing. Accordingly, the research 
for automatically minimizing the interference and increasing 
the capacity of the base station by optimizing the cell coverage 
has become necessary. For this purpose, extremely reducing 
the cell radius and providing a mobile communication 
environment for small business are needed. The femtocell 
services actively respond to the user’s needs for a better mobile 
communication 
environment, 
and 
expanding 
business 
opportunities for the operators. The most important aspect to 
consider 
is 
the 
qualitative 
and 
quantitative 
service 
improvement of the technology. In this paper, we study the 
main technical issues, technological trends currently in 
progress related to femtocell, and femtocell interference 
management with access mode control on LTE-Advanced 
system for heterogeneous network. 
Keywords-SON; Femtocell; LTE-Advanced 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Femtocell means a small cell with around 10-20m radius. 
This concept is different from a macrocell which is a 
common cell. Typically, a femtocell supports a small space 
such as home or business offices. Thus, the femtocell base 
station is installed at home or office, coexisting with the 
existing network to ensure the mobility and mass transfer, 
mobile communication service area expansion, increasing 
the service performance and capacity of the base stations, 
and offering various telecommunication services.[1] 
These kinds of femtocell features in home or office 
environment, supporting the user’s requirements, minimize 
the operator CAPEX (Capital Expenditure, services and 
facilities for investment cost) / OPEX (Operational Expense, 
operating costs) by reducing the additional time for 
installation and the operation cost. It provides a new mobile 
communication environment that improves the quality of 
service [2][3]. 
In the ongoing standardization technology development 
by 3GPP (3rd Generation Partnership Project), HeNB (Home 
evolved Node B) is the terminology for a femtocell to 
support the compact base station. Customer-premises 
equipment, UE(User Equipment) is connected over an E-
UTRAN(Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access 
Network) wireless air interface to a mobile operator’s 
network using a broadband IP backhaul   [2]. 
 
Figure 1. LTE -Advanced system Network Architecture 
 
Figure 1 shows a 3GPP LTE (Long Term Evolution)-
Advanced system Network Architecture [4]. The E-UTRAN 
consists of eNBs. The eNBs are interconnected with each 
other by means of the X2 interface. The eNBs are also 
connected by means of the S1 interface to the EPC (Evolved 
Packet Core), more specifically to the MME (Mobility 
Management Entity) by means of the S1-MME interface and 
to the Serving Gateway (S-GW) by means of the S1-U 
interface. The S1 interface supports a many-to-many relation 
between MMEs / Serving Gateways and eNBs [4][5]. 
Detailed SON(Self Organizing Network) technology is 
composed of automatically configuring information for the 
base 
station 
(Self 
Configuration) 
technology 
and 
290
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

automatically optimizing the base station’s operating 
information (Self Optimization) [6][7]. Femtocell core 
technology is comprised of efficient mobility control 
technology, interface technology, and interference control 
technology. 
HeNB cannot transmit the radio signals until the HeNB 
installation is completed. After the installation, if the HeNB 
causes a serious spectral interference to the nearby 
environment, then the service interruption can occur.  New 
installation of a HeNB should not affect the operator's 
network planning, and the HeNB users should not feel the 
differences compared with the existing use of the base 
station in terms of user experience. The registration overhead 
and burden of paging should be minimized. And, the existing 
base stations should not be affected in terms of range and 
capacity. In addition, HeNB offers the CSG (Closed 
Subscriber Group) concept that only authorizes a given user 
group for access to the network entry [2]. 
II. 
SON CORE TECHNOLOGY 
In the fields of mobile communication systems, there 
exists an increasing interest in SON technology which is an 
automated operation approach for the network to be more 
reliable and efficient, and also configured extensively to 
perform a given function. A femtocell is installed without 
pre-installation process by the user. So, it detects and collects 
the information from the nearby environment, and it 
performs the optimization by itself rather than being it done 
by the service operators. Therefore, SON technology should 
lead to an installation and self-setup of indoor or outdoor 
base stations such as femtocell through the configuration of 
mobile communication environment appropriate to the 
surrounding 
cells, 
by 
performing 
optimization, 
and 
improving the management capabilities. 
For these functions, SON element technique (Figure 2) 
comprises of configuration information automatic setting 
functions and management information automatic setting 
functions [8]. In order to reduce OPEX for this large number 
of nodes from more than one vendor, the concept of SON is 
introduced. Automation of network planning, configuration 
and optimization processes by using  SON functions can help 
the network operator reduce OPEX by reducing manual 
involvement in such tasks.  
SON technology includes coverage and capacity 
optimization, 
energy 
savings, 
interference 
reduction, 
automated configuration of PCI (Physical Cell Identity), 
mobility robustness optimization, mobility load balancing 
optimization, 
RACH 
(Random 
Access 
Channel) 
optimization, ANR (Automatic Neighbor Relation) function, 
and inter-cell interference coordination for each use case [3]. 
If the solution for a particular SON-related use case is 
best provided at the network level, the associated SON 
algorithm(s) will reside in one or more network elements. 
This is an example of a distributed SON architecture. 
If the solution is best provided in the existing network 
management system or in an additional standalone SON 
function or server, then the SON algorithm(s) will most 
likely reside either at the DM (Domain Manager) or the NM 
(Network Manager) level. This is an example of a 
centralized SON architecture. 
It is possible that the solution could require SON 
functionality partly at the network level and partly in the 
management system. This is an example of hybrid SON 
architecture. 
• 
Centralized SON: SON solutions where SON 
algorithms are executed in the OAM (Operations, 
Administration, and Management) system. In such 
solutions SON functionality resides in a small 
number of locations, at a high level in the 
architecture.  
• 
Distributed SON: SON solutions where SON 
algorithms are executed at the network element 
level. In such solutions SON functionality resides in 
many locations at a relatively low level in the 
architecture. 
• 
Hybrid SON: SON solutions where some of the 
SON algorithms are executed in the OAM system, 
while others are executed at the NE level. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Ramifications of Self-Configuration /Self-Optimization 
functionality 
 
A.  Self Configuration  
Self-configuration process is defined as the process 
where newly deployed nodes are configured by automatic 
installation 
procedures 
to 
get 
the 
necessary 
basic 
configuration information for system operation [8]. 
This process works in a pre-operational state. Pre-
operational state is understood as the state from when the 
HeNB is powered up and has the backbone connectivity until 
the RF transmitter is switched on [9][10]. 
291
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

As depicted in Figure 2, functions handled in the pre-
operational state like: 
• 
Basic Setup and 
• 
Initial Radio Configuration 
are covered by the Self Configuration process. 
Depending on the finally chosen functional distribution, 
the feasibility of the following items should be studied e.g.: 
• 
To obtain the necessary interface configuration; 
• 
Automatic registration of nodes in the system can be 
provided by the network;  
• 
Alternative possibilities for nodes to obtain a valid 
configuration; 
• 
The required standardization scope. 
B. Self Optimization  
Self-optimization process is defined as the process where 
UE and eNB measurements, and performance measurements 
are used to auto-tune the network [10]. 
This process works in the operational state. Operational 
state is understood as the state where the RF interface is 
additionally switched on. 
As depicted in Figure 2, functions handled in the 
operational state like: 
• 
Optimization / Adaptation 
are covered by the Self Optimization process. 
Depending on the finally chosen functional distribution, 
the feasibility of the following items should be studied e.g.: 
• 
The distribution of data and measurements over 
interfaces; 
• 
Functions/entities/nodes 
in 
charge 
of 
data 
aggregation for optimization purpose; 
• 
Dependencies with O&M and O&M interfaces, in 
the self optimization process; 
• 
The required standardization scope. 
III. 
HETEROGENEOUS NETWORK 
Heterogeneous networks (HetNets) are an attractive 
means 
of 
expanding 
mobile 
network 
capacity. 
A 
heterogeneous network (HetNet) is typically composed of 
multiple 
radio 
access 
technologies, 
architectures, 
transmission solutions, and base stations of varying 
transmission power. Mobile-broadband traffic is increasing. 
In parallel, new applications are raising expectations for 
higher data rates in both the uplink and the downlink. 
Creating a heterogeneous network by introducing low power 
nodes is an attractive approach to meeting these traffic 
demands and performance expectations. By combining low 
power nodes with an improved and densified macro layer, 
very high traffic volumes and data rates can be supported. 
The nature of the existing network, as well as technical and 
economic considerations, will dictate which approach – 
improving the macro layer; densifying the macro layer; or 
adding pico nodes – or combination of approaches best 
meets volume and data-rate targets [8]. 
This traffic growth, driven by new services and terminal 
capabilities, is paralleled by user expectations for data rates 
similar to those of fixed broadband. Actual figures per 
subscriber can vary greatly depending on geographical 
market, terminal type and subscription type; some users with 
mobile devices are already creating traffic in the order of 
gigabytes and predictions are estimated to be several GB per 
month for some devices and certain user behavior. The 
mobile industry is, therefore, preparing for data rates in the 
order of tens of Mbps for indoor use as well as outside and 
gigabyte traffic volumes. 
Complementing the macro networks with low power 
nodes, such as micro and pico base stations, has been 
considered a way to increase capacity for mobile data 
communication systems for some time now. This approach 
offers very high capacity and data rates in areas covered by 
the low power nodes. Performance for users in the macro 
network improves if low power nodes can serve a significant 
number of hotspots and coverage holes. Deploying low 
power nodes can be challenging, as performance depends on 
close proximity to where traffic is generated. In addition, due 
to the reduced range of low power nodes, more of them are 
required. Overcoming these challenges requires proper 
design and integration of the low power nodes [10][11]. 
A. Interference Control 
Mobile communication system such as LTE-Advanced 
system requires hundreds of Mbps high-speed data transfer 
rates at mobile and stationary. To meet this requirement, 
various techniques have been proposed and OFDMA 
(Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiple Access) is one of 
the most critical transmission technologies among them. 
OFDMA 
technology 
compared 
with 
single-carrier 
technology has superior spectral efficiency with ease of 
implementation at broadband, but it has some problems like 
the reduction in performance in the cell boundaries due to 
interference, because all cells can use the same frequency. 
Resolution for these issues can be identified into interference 
randomization, 
interference 
cancellation, 
interference 
coordination, antenna technique, etc. And it was discussed 
that solving the problem through interference coordination is 
most efficient.  
In macrocells and femtocells collocated environment, co-
channel interference can occur due to the link direction, 
femtocell location, access method, and the channel usage. 
Channel usage can be classified as follows [12]. 
• 
Co-Channel: the macro sharing the entire frequency 
band with femto (macro-femto interference is fatal) 
• 
Partial Co-Channel: Use a macro full band, some 
band shared by femto (macro-femto interference is 
fatal) 
• 
Dedicate Channel: macro and femto using different 
frequency bands (macro-femto no interference,  
femto-femto major interference) 
When we define the interference environment factor as 
the critical factor affecting the interference, different kinds of 
interference, when the macrocell and femtocell coexist, 
depend on how these factors apply to each different kind of 
interference 
occasions. 
Therefore, 
each 
appropriate 
interference mitigation techniques should be applied in order 
to avoid possible interference scenarios following different 
kinds of interference. 
292
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

In Figure 4, 1 through 6 shows critical interference 
scenarios depending on the environment, and situation is 
represented on the position of the terminal based on 3GPP 
TR 25.820 [13]. 
Interference 
scenarios 
consist 
of 
macro-femto 
(interference scenarios 1-4), and femto-femto interference 
(scenarios 5 and 6). Interference is classified by the link 
direction and femtocell position. 
Figure 3. Interference Scenario 
 
Base station uses various scheduling methods for 
frequency reallocation to minimize the neighbor cell 
interference. The frequency distribution methods are 
classified as FFR (Fractional Frequency Reuse), SFR (Soft 
Frequency Reuse), and PFR (Partial Frequency Reuse). 
Frequency reuse means that same frequency can be used 
in different cells for improving the system capacity greatly. 
OFDMA systems supporting FFR for interference mitigation 
divides frequency and time resources into several resource 
sets.  Typically, each resource set is reserved for a certain 
reuse factor and is associated with a particular transmission 
power profile. 
Basic principle for FFR is that the total available 
bandwidths are divided by 3 groups. Every cell/sector selects 
one group as its major bands, and others as its minor bands. 
Upper limit of the transmit power for major bands is higher 
than the minor bands, where the major bands can be used in 
the whole cell area. Minor bands are used only in the inner 
zone of the cell with limited transmit power. 
The idea of PFR is to partition the whole frequency band 
into two parts, with reuse factor 1 on one part and reuse 
factor 3 on the others. The parts using the reuse factor 3 of 
the frequency band are called the cell edge bands, and the 
other parts are called as the cell center bands. The 
restrictions of frequency access for the cell center/edge users 
are the same as in SFR, that the cell edge users are only 
allowed to use the cell edge band, while the cell center users 
are allowed to access both the cell center and edge band, but 
with lower priority than the edge users [14]. 
Adjustment of the inter-cell interference in the 3GPP 
LTE base stations across the embedded load information of 
pre-defined indicators is done by exchanging messages via 
the X2 interface and the surrounding state of the cell to 
determine the frequency range to cause interference. Load 
information transmitted via the message indicator is defined 
in 3GPP TS 36.423 specification, which includes IOI 
(Interference Overload Indicator), HII (High Interference 
Indicator), and RNTP (Relative Narrowband Tx Power) [15]. 
B. Access Mode Classification 
There are three fundamentally different Femtocell access 
classes, also known as cell access modes, envisioned to 
match requirements from different use cased: 
• 
Closed Subscriber Group (CSG) Femtocell: This is 
meant for the business or home application, where 
the customer of the Femtocell service wants to 
restrict its usage to own demands, e.g., the cell is not 
part of the public coverage for the operator. The cell 
in closed access mode is accessible in normal service 
state only for the members of the CSG of that cell. 
• 
Hybrid mode Femtocell: In this case, part of the 
capacity is ‘reserved’ for the UE belonging to the 
configured CSG, but a part of the capacity is left 
open for more public usage. This is solution benefits 
the operator as part of the interference problem is 
alleviated and this may in return lead to a lower 
Femtocell operation cost for the end user(or even 
revenue generated from sharing backhaul and radio 
capacity). The CSG membership can be also used to 
differentiate in the service offer between the 
subscribers. 
• 
Open mode Femtocell: The last category is fully 
open to all subscribers and its use is thus envisioned 
for hot-spot applications as part of the managed wide 
area network. From the UE’s perspective, the open 
Femtocell is like a normal macrocell.[1] 
IV. 
INTERFERENCE AVOIDANCE 
A. Victim UE Problem  
The interference problem for the downlink case is shown 
in Figure 4, where the signal received by macro UE from the 
macrocell  eNB  has low power due to the high path loss 
[16][17]. Therefore, macro UE may experience large 
interference from the CSG HeNB if both HeNB and eNB use 
non-orthogonal radio resources to serve femto UE and macro 
UE. There will also be potential interference at the femto UE 
from the eNB. Serious UE outage occurred at victim macro 
UE near the HeNB. 
Similarly, in the uplink case, macro UE may have to 
transmit at high power, due to the high path loss to the 
macrocell eNB. As a result, the CSG HeNB will suffer from 
high interference from macro UE, if both macro UE and 
Femto UE are assigned non-orthogonal radio resources. 
There will also be potential interference at the eNB from the 
Femto UE. In femtocell deployment, interference has to be 
controlled under certain level to guarantee the system 
performance and efficiency. Therefore, there is a tradeoff 
between sharing radio resources and system efficiency. For 
closed access HeNBs, protection of the downlinks of other 
cells is an important consideration and can be done on the 
basis of managing the usage of power and/or resource 
blocks. This may restrict the operation of the HeNB such that 
the HeNB performance may be degraded. To avoid 
restricting the HeNBs unnecessarily, it could be useful to 
detect whether there are victim UEs in the vicinity of the 
HeNB. If so then full protection could be provided. If not 
293
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

then a reduced level of protection can be provided. So, 
victim UE problem is that

this paper we presented the SON and femtocell definitions 
for the LTE-Advanced system, technology trends, and 
analyzed the current SON and femtocell technologies. And 
also, we discussed the reason for access mode modification 
of CSG cell during operation. The reconfiguration of access 
mode on-line may bring out some complication, but we 
propose this method that access mode of CSG cell can be 
modified during operation for the above usecases. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the IT R&D program of 
MKE/KEIT. [KI002129, Development of SON and 
Femtocell Technologies for LTE-Advanced System] 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Kim, N. Park, and Y. Kim, "Femtocell Technical Trend," 
Electronics and Telecommunications Trend , Vol. 24, Jun. 2009. 
[2] Holger Claussen, Lester T. W. Ho, and Louis G. Samuel, “An 
Overview of the Femtocell Concept,” Bell Labs Technical Journal, 
pp. 221-245, May 2008. 
[3] Vikram Chandrasekhar, Jeffrey G. Andrews, and Alan Gatherer, 
“Femtocell networks: a survey,” IEEE Communication Magazine, pp. 
59 - 67, September 2008. 
[4] 3GPP TS 36.300 V9.0.0,”Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access 
(E-UTRA) and Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network 
(E-UTRAN); Overall description; Stage 2(Release 9)” 
[5] 3GPP TS 22.220 V9.1.1,”Service Requirements for Home NodeBs 
and Home eNodeBs” 
[6] 3GPP TR 36.902 V1.2.0,”Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio 
Access Network (E-UTRAN); Self-configuring and self-optimizing 
network use cases and solutions (Release 9)” 
[7] G. De La Roche, A. Ladanyi, D. Lopez-Perez, C.-C. Chong, and J. 
Zhang, “Self-organization for LTE enterprise femtocells,” IEEE 
Globecom 2010 Workshop on Femtocell Networks (FemNet), Miami, 
USA, December 2010. 
[8] 3GPP TS 32.511 V8.1.0,”Technical Specification Group Services and 
System Aspects; Telecommunication Management; Automatic 
Neighbour 
Relation 
(ANR) 
management; 
Concepts 
and 
requirements(Release 8)” 
[9] 3GPP TS 32.500 V8.0.0,”Technical Specification Group Services and 
System Aspects; Telecommunication Management; Self-Organizing 
Networks (SON); Concepts and requirements(Release 8)” 
[10] 3GPP TS 32.501 V8.0.0,”Technical Specification Group Services and 
System 
Aspects; 
Telecommunication 
Management; 
Self 
Configuration 
of 
Network 
Elements; 
Concepts 
and 
requirements(Release 8)” 
[11] D. N. Knisely, F. Favichia, ”Standardization of Femtocells in 
3GPP2,” IEEE Communications Magazine, September 2009. 
[12] 3GPP TR 25.967 V9.0.0,”Home Node B Radio Frequency(RF) 
Requirements(FDD) (Release 9)” 
[13] 3GPP TR 25.820 V8.2.0,”3G Home NodeB Study Item Technical 
Report (Release 8)” 
[14] D. Kim, J. Y. Ahn, and H. Kim, “Downlink transmit power allocation 
in soft fractional frequency reuse systems,” ETRI Journal, vol. 33, no. 
1, pp. 1-5, Feb. 2011. 
[15] 3GPP TS 36.423 V9.0.0,”Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access 
Network (E-UTRAN); X2 Application Protocol (X2AP)” 
[16] Mostafa Zaman Chowdhury, Yeong Min Jang, and Zygmunt J. Haas, 
“Network 
Evolution 
and 
QoS 
Provisioning 
for 
Integrated 
Femtocell/Macrocell Networks, ” International Journal of Wireless & 
Mobile Networks (IJWMN), pp 1-16, August 2010. 
[17] Y. Xiang et al., ” Inter-Cell Interference Mitigation through Flexible 
Resource 
Reuse 
OFDMA 
based 
Communication networks,” 
European Wireless 2007, Paris, France, April 2007. 
[18] V. Capdevielle et al., ” Enhanced Resource Sharing Strategies for 
LTE Picocells with Heterogeneous Traffic Loads,” IEEE Vehicular 
Technology Conference, Budapest, Hungary, May 2011. 
 
 
295
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

