System Architecture for Mobile-phone-readable RF Memory Tags 
Iiro Jantunen, Jyri Hämäläinen, Timo Korhonen 
Department of Communications and Networking 
Aalto University 
Espoo, Finland 
{iiro.jantunen, jyri.hamalainen, timo.korhonen}@tkk.fi 
Harald Kaaja, Joni Jantunen, Sergey Boldyrev 
Nokia Research Center 
Helsinki, Finland 
{harald.kaaja, joni.jantunen, 
sergey.boldyrev}@nokia.com
 
Abstract — We have developed an open architecture platform 
for implementing passive 
radio-frequency identification 
(RFID) tags with a mass memory. Purposes for such mass 
memory tags are, e.g., multimedia files embedded in 
advertisements or logged sensor data on a low-power sensor 
node. In the proposed architecture, a mobile phone acts as the 
reader that can read or write the memory of these RFID tags. 
The architecture is designed so that development path to a full 
Network on Terminal Architecture (NoTA) is feasible. The 
wireless reading speed of the mass memory tags, demonstrated 
to be 112 Mbit/s, is in range that a 3-minute VGA size video 
can be loaded from the tag to the phone in less than 10 s. 
Keywords — Memory architecture; Multimedia systems; 
RFID; telephone sets; RF memory tags 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
RFID tags are increasingly a part of our life; transport, 
traceability, and secure access are some of the main uses of 
this technology today. Conventional machine-readable 
wireless tags, e.g., Near Field Communication (NFC) tags, 
normally have a very small memory in range of hundreds of 
bytes or kilobytes. Some RFID standards include an option 
to have a flexible-use memory, but the capacity is low 
compared to factory-set fixed-content memory. Tag selection 
is based on reading the content in a selected tag memory 
address (e.g., tag or manufacturer ID). As the memory 
capacity of these tags is small, the amount of data to be 
transferred is also small and power consumption of RF 
communication is, thus, not a critical issue. 
To overcome the storage capacity limitation of passive 
tags, Wu et al. increase effective tag storage sizes with 
proposed distributed RFID tag storage infrastructure (D-
RFID stores) [1]. Ahmed et al. focus on RFID system 
unreliability and improvements in middleware for object 
tracking and object location with moving readers or tags 
[2][3]. Ying described a verification platform for RFID 
reader that utilized Ultra High Frequency (UHF) frequency 
[4]. Pillin et al. have developed a passive far-field RFID tag 
using the 2.45 GHz Industrial, Scientific and Medical (ISM) 
band, with a data rate of 4 Mbit/s on the range of 5.5 cm [5]. 
As an example of a proprietary solution, HP’s Memory Spot 
RFID tag also works on the 2.45 GHz band and has 
demonstrated 4 MB memory and 10 Mbit/s data rate [6]. 
Today’s mobile phones provide music and video players, 
which make it possible for consumers to enjoy entertainment 
while on the move. Acquiring new multimedia content by 
downloading or streaming, however, is hampered by the high 
cost and slow speed of Internet connections, as well as by the 
fact that commonly used physical multimedia formats, such 
as optical disks, cannot be read with a mobile phone. Thus, 
to make acquiring new content easier, cheaper and less 
power-consuming, we propose a new technology based on 
RF memory tags readable and writable by mobile phones. 
The problems of low data reading rate and small memory 
size provided by contemporary RFID tags become 
emphasized if one considers mobile users reading 
multimedia files from tags embedded on, e.g., paper media. 
The attention span of a mobile user is about 10 seconds [7]. 
Within this period, the user could get a single multimedia 
content file from a memory tag. Considering a movie trailer, 
the file size for a 2-minute 640×320-pixel 30-fps (3 Mbit/s), 
encoded with H.264, would be in range of 50 MB [8]. The 
required minimum data transfer rate from the user point-of-
view is thus 50 Mbit/s. This exceeds the maximum data rate 
available by 13.56 MHz NFC technology, 848 kbit/s, by a 
factor of 60. Even the maximum data rate for NFC 
demonstrated on a laboratory set-up, 6.78 Mbit/s [9], is not 
enough. Thus, there is a need for a new high-speed touch-
range RFID radio interface. 
The aim of our research has been to develop a high-
capacity memory tag, which is wirelessly readable with a 
mobile phone and suitable for consumer markets in ubimedia 
applications [10][11]. The mobile phone acts as the user 
interface for reading and writing passive RF memory tags 
that contain a high-capacity memory (0.1–1 GB). The 
reasoning for the proposed technology was justified by 
modern trends in non-volatile memory technologies, 
according to which the power consumption, physical size, 
and price of memory are continuously decreasing.  
In this paper we describe and specify a network 
architecture, which enables mobile phones to read and write 
passive RF memory tags. The architecture has been 
developed and demonstrated in the EU's 6th Framework 
Programme (FP) “Micro-Nano integrated platform for 
transverse Ambient Intelligence applications” (MINAmI) 
project [12], and thus the architecture is referred to as 
MINAmI Architecture. Important architecture requirements 
include openness, modularity, scalability, and energy 
efficiency. Openness and modularity are needed to support 
creation of novel applications and services by 3rd parties. 
Scalability of data rate is needed to enable evolution of the 
technology along with evolution of multimedia services. 
Energy efficiency is essential to enable passive operation of 
the tags as well as to save the phone’s battery. 
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we 
introduce the system architecture, along with a key 
component of the architecture, RF memory tags. In Section 
310
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

III we introduce a novel dual-band radio subsystem and its 
hardware and software implementation. In 
present the current status of implementation of the 
architecture and discuss possibilities for future deve
Section V concludes the paper. 
II. 
MINAMI ARCHITECTURE
The proposed MINAmI architecture makes use of the 
mobile phone’s capability of running software and providing 
several radio interfaces (Figure 1 [11]). The archite
modular, enabling simpler and faster development of new 
technical 
extensions 
(e.g., 
RF 
memory 
tags). 
Our 
architecture focuses on utilization of modularity on 
component level (e.g., where to plug memory tag 
functionality) and on communication level
available memory tags are utilized). At short proximity 
domain (range < 1 m), different tags are communicating 
locally with a mobile phone. In the present work we have 
concentrated on the RF memory tags. The sensor parts of the 
architecture (RFID sensor tags and Bluetooth sensor devices) 
have been studied in an earlier project [13]
The main RF memory tag architectural design challenges 
include target platform performance obstacles, such as 
available bus operations (R/W) and power requirements, 
especially when drawing the line for autonomous operations 
in described MINAmI architecture. The other challenge is 
minimizing changes to the existing system communication 
layering, only to the external memory stack block.  The 
choices in the MINAmI system architecture were able to 
support both existing standard radios for low
and the high-rate high-capacity memory tags.
A. Network-on-Terminal Architecture (NoTA)
NoTA is modular service-based system architecture for 
mobile and embedded devices offering services and 
applications to each other. The concept is 
open initiative, in NoTA World [15]. NoTA is also known as 
an open device distributed architecture, which allows direct 
connections between different nodes, within subsystem or 
between subsystems. This architecture supports bot
messaging and streaming services. The beauty in the 
architecture 
resides 
in 
modularity 
and 
transport 
independency. Direct connection between subsystems 
improves the efficiency as they do not necessarily require 
any processor involvement, when subsystems 
needed functionalities available for their independent 
operations. Transport-specific portion is hidden underneath 
NoTA communication layering. 
Figure 1.  MINAmI Architecture
band radio subsystem and its 
hardware and software implementation. In Section IV, we 
present the current status of implementation of the 
discuss possibilities for future development. 
RCHITECTURE 
The proposed MINAmI architecture makes use of the 
mobile phone’s capability of running software and providing 
). The architecture is 
modular, enabling simpler and faster development of new 
RF 
memory 
tags). 
Our 
architecture focuses on utilization of modularity on 
where to plug memory tag 
functionality) and on communication level (e.g., how the 
). At short proximity 
domain (range < 1 m), different tags are communicating 
locally with a mobile phone. In the present work we have 
concentrated on the RF memory tags. The sensor parts of the 
(RFID sensor tags and Bluetooth sensor devices) 
[13][14]. 
The main RF memory tag architectural design challenges 
include target platform performance obstacles, such as 
power requirements, 
especially when drawing the line for autonomous operations 
escribed MINAmI architecture. The other challenge is 
minimizing changes to the existing system communication 
layering, only to the external memory stack block.  The 
choices in the MINAmI system architecture were able to 
s for low-rate sensors, 
capacity memory tags. 
Terminal Architecture (NoTA) 
based system architecture for 
mobile and embedded devices offering services and 
applications to each other. The concept is being defined in an 
. NoTA is also known as 
an open device distributed architecture, which allows direct 
connections between different nodes, within subsystem or 
between subsystems. This architecture supports both 
messaging and streaming services. The beauty in the 
architecture 
resides 
in 
modularity 
and 
transport 
Direct connection between subsystems 
t necessarily require 
processor involvement, when subsystems have all the 
needed functionalities available for their independent 
specific portion is hidden underneath 
NoTA communication layering is built around
independent parts and interfacing towards tra
parts (Figure 2). Device Interconnect Protocol (DIP) 
provides logical links between a requesting subsystem and 
other subsystems or within 
device-level 
communication 
protocol 
that 
can 
be 
implemented for various physical interfaces ranging from 
MIPI (Mobile Industry Processor Interface) high speed serial 
interfaces and Universal Serial Bus (
interfaces, such as Bluetooth 
NoTA host subsystem and neighboring subsystems are
connected via the high speed physical interface. DIP adapts 
physical interfaces to the upper layers. It is the lowest layer 
that is common for all subsystems (i.e., also for MINAmI 
subsystem) and hides the physical dependencies underneath. 
Above DIP there is a common service interface used for 
resource management, file systems, and system boot
Middleware frameworks, e.g., for multimedia, USB, and 
other applications, use a common service interface or 
extension Application Programming Interface (API). T
architecture also takes into account vertical solutions, which 
may require an optimized protocol design for certain 
requirements that are tied to HW
NoTA subsystem structure takes into account possibility 
to add different types of independent (service/application) 
subsystems to the architecture, and MINAmI architecture 
forms one high data rate high capacity subsystem
MINAmI  subsystem offers 
storage and local connectivity
within mobile device, and its architecture is compatible with 
NoTA 
communication 
layering
includes both the mobile phone (Mobile Reader/Writer) and 
the tag and all the relating hardware and software resources. 
Mobile Reader/Writer sees the conte
passive RF memory tag only when there is an established 
connection, i.e., power field and data connection exists.
B. RF Memory Tags 
The focus of our research has been on mobile
operable memory tags suitable for consumer markets and 
ubimedia applications. The tag is developed as a part of 
mobile-phone-centric 
architecture. 
Our 
memory 
tag 
MINAmI Architecture 
Figure 2.  NoTA extension architecture for MINAmI subsystem, where 
HSI - High Speed Serial Interface; HS
MultiMediaCard: SPI - Serial Peripheral Interface bus.
NoTA communication layering is built around transport-
and interfacing towards transport-specific 
). Device Interconnect Protocol (DIP) 
provides logical links between a requesting subsystem and 
other subsystems or within a subsystem.[15]. DIP is a 
level 
communication 
protocol 
that 
can 
be 
implemented for various physical interfaces ranging from 
MIPI (Mobile Industry Processor Interface) high speed serial 
Universal Serial Bus (USB) to wireless 
 [16][17]. 
NoTA host subsystem and neighboring subsystems are 
connected via the high speed physical interface. DIP adapts 
physical interfaces to the upper layers. It is the lowest layer 
that is common for all subsystems (i.e., also for MINAmI 
subsystem) and hides the physical dependencies underneath. 
is a common service interface used for 
resource management, file systems, and system boot-ups. 
Middleware frameworks, e.g., for multimedia, USB, and 
other applications, use a common service interface or 
extension Application Programming Interface (API). The 
architecture also takes into account vertical solutions, which 
may require an optimized protocol design for certain 
requirements that are tied to HW-specific applications. 
NoTA subsystem structure takes into account possibility 
independent (service/application) 
subsystems to the architecture, and MINAmI architecture 
gh capacity subsystem. 
subsystem offers memory tag read/write, 
storage and local connectivity services to other subsystems 
, and its architecture is compatible with 
NoTA 
communication 
layering. 
MINAmI 
subsystem 
includes both the mobile phone (Mobile Reader/Writer) and 
the tag and all the relating hardware and software resources. 
Mobile Reader/Writer sees the contents of the memory of a 
passive RF memory tag only when there is an established 
power field and data connection exists. 
The focus of our research has been on mobile-phone-
operable memory tags suitable for consumer markets and 
ubimedia applications. The tag is developed as a part of our 
centric 
architecture. 
Our 
memory 
tag 
NoTA extension architecture for MINAmI subsystem, where 
High Speed Serial Interface; HS-MMC - High Speed 
Serial Peripheral Interface bus. 
311
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

development targets improving both tran
storage capacity. These improvements give direct benefit for 
ubimedia users.  
The target memory capacity of our memory tag has been 
in the range of gigabits and mobile reader/writer transfer 
speed to and from memory tag in excess of 10 Mbit/
same design platform is usable for both ends, for mobile 
phone platform reader/writer and for tag implementation. 
When designing the platform, various important design 
parameters, such as the selection of the used radio 
technology, were considered to provide an efficient and low
power solution for mobile reader/writer and tags. 
It was important to make sure that connectivity 
technology is simple enough for the user, e.g., it should 
facilitate easy content selection (see Section
tag content selections should be based on metadata (e.g., 
filenames, file content types, file content keywords). Due to 
the large memory size, power consumption for memory 
access is a critical design issue, both for reading and writing 
the memory tag. To be successful on the market, RF memory 
tags for ubimedia must be passive to make them as small 
(size) and cheap as possible, and to achieve autonomous 
usage with minimum maintenance (e.g.
charging of battery). This severely limits the power budget. 
On the other hand, a short communication range (even 
touch) is sometimes preferable to make it easier for the user 
to physically select the tag. An RF memory tag will be read 
many times by different users, but written more rarely 
some cases, only once. The memory unit must work reliably 
even with several consecutive read cycles. A limited write 
throughput due to power constraint is not an issue, as data is 
rarely written by the users. 
III. 
UWB LOW END EXTENSION
As memory tags have high data storage capacity, a high
speed radio is needed for communication to enable reading 
even all the contents of the tag in an acceptable time. 
Currently available mobile phones contain several radio 
transceivers, such as cellular, Bluetooth, and Wi
Figure 3.  MINAmI Architecture on phone
POWER
MANAGEMENT
HSI
development targets improving both transfer speed and 
storage capacity. These improvements give direct benefit for 
The target memory capacity of our memory tag has been 
in the range of gigabits and mobile reader/writer transfer 
speed to and from memory tag in excess of 10 Mbit/s.  The 
same design platform is usable for both ends, for mobile 
phone platform reader/writer and for tag implementation. 
When designing the platform, various important design 
parameters, such as the selection of the used radio 
to provide an efficient and low-
power solution for mobile reader/writer and tags.  
It was important to make sure that connectivity 
technology is simple enough for the user, e.g., it should 
Section III.D). Memory 
tag content selections should be based on metadata (e.g., 
filenames, file content types, file content keywords). Due to 
rge memory size, power consumption for memory 
access is a critical design issue, both for reading and writing 
the memory tag. To be successful on the market, RF memory 
tags for ubimedia must be passive to make them as small 
d to achieve autonomous 
usage with minimum maintenance (e.g., usage without 
charging of battery). This severely limits the power budget. 
On the other hand, a short communication range (even 
touch) is sometimes preferable to make it easier for the user 
hysically select the tag. An RF memory tag will be read 
many times by different users, but written more rarely – in 
some cases, only once. The memory unit must work reliably 
even with several consecutive read cycles. A limited write 
constraint is not an issue, as data is 
EXTENSION 
As memory tags have high data storage capacity, a high-
speed radio is needed for communication to enable reading 
l the contents of the tag in an acceptable time. 
Currently available mobile phones contain several radio 
transceivers, such as cellular, Bluetooth, and Wi-Fi, along 
with NFC. Most of the technologies are made for well
established 
communication 
between 
acti
consuming a relatively large amount of power. These 
technologies are also not inherently designed for ad
possibly one-time, connections between devices that have 
not communicated with each other before, resulting in long 
latency in establishing the communications. For example, in 
an environment with many unknown Bluetooth devices, the 
Bluetooth connection setup latency can be over 10 seconds
[18]. NFC enables communications between an active and a 
passive battery-less device and is physically more selective; 
its communication range is almost in touch. However, it has 
severe limitations in data transfer speed. 
To provide higher data rates, a wider fre
available on higher frequencies needs to be used. On the 
other hand, the efficiency of wireless power transfer (WPT) 
decreases as a function of center frequency. To solve the 
problem of providing high
frequency needed) while simultaneously providing power 
wirelessly to the tag, a dual
proposed [19]. One narrowband signal on RFID frequencies 
(e.g., RFID frequency bands globally available between 
860–960 MHz) is used to power the tag and to provide a 
mutual clock reference for both ends of the communication 
link, whereas the communication link itself is based on 
impulse UWB technique to provide 
bandwidth and scalability for even higher data rates.
As the selected RFID frequencies are approximately in 
the same frequency range as GSM/WCDMA 900 MHz, in 
the reader there is a possibility of integrating the WPT 
function to the existing Ph
presented in Figure 3. In that case, Phone Radio Subsystem 
is designed so that the WPT 
may request a direct access to control the activation of the 
narrowband 
transmitter. 
Especially, 
the 
time
interleaving of different functions is important to support co
existence of GSM/WCDMA and WPT signaling. 
The architecture of the RF memory 
similar to the MINAmI subsystem on the mobile phone. For 
simple RF memory tags, no network layer implementation is 
needed to take care of the point
between the reader and the tag, and therefore is handled on 
Medium Access Control (MAC) 
As an option for use-cases like data
devices, the memory control layer provides a sensor 
interface. During the sensing, the sensor data is stored to the 
 
MINAmI Architecture on phone 
Figure 4.  MINAmI Architecture on a RF memory tag 
with NFC. Most of the technologies are made for well-
established 
communication 
between 
active 
devices, 
consuming a relatively large amount of power. These 
technologies are also not inherently designed for ad-hoc, 
time, connections between devices that have 
not communicated with each other before, resulting in long 
shing the communications. For example, in 
an environment with many unknown Bluetooth devices, the 
Bluetooth connection setup latency can be over 10 seconds 
C enables communications between an active and a 
less device and is physically more selective; 
its communication range is almost in touch. However, it has 
severe limitations in data transfer speed.  
To provide higher data rates, a wider frequency band 
available on higher frequencies needs to be used. On the 
other hand, the efficiency of wireless power transfer (WPT) 
decreases as a function of center frequency. To solve the 
problem of providing high-speed communication (high 
while simultaneously providing power 
wirelessly to the tag, a dual-band radio interface has been 
. One narrowband signal on RFID frequencies 
FID frequency bands globally available between 
960 MHz) is used to power the tag and to provide a 
mutual clock reference for both ends of the communication 
link, whereas the communication link itself is based on 
impulse UWB technique to provide a high communication 
bandwidth and scalability for even higher data rates. 
RFID frequencies are approximately in 
the same frequency range as GSM/WCDMA 900 MHz, in 
the reader there is a possibility of integrating the WPT 
function to the existing Phone Radio Subsystem, as 
. In that case, Phone Radio Subsystem 
is designed so that the WPT Physical (PHY) Layer  function 
may request a direct access to control the activation of the 
narrowband 
transmitter. 
Especially, 
the 
time-domain 
interleaving of different functions is important to support co-
existence of GSM/WCDMA and WPT signaling.  
The architecture of the RF memory tag (Figure 4) is 
similar to the MINAmI subsystem on the mobile phone. For 
simple RF memory tags, no network layer implementation is 
needed to take care of the point-to-point communication 
between the reader and the tag, and therefore is handled on 
Access Control (MAC)  layer. 
cases like data-logging sensor 
devices, the memory control layer provides a sensor 
interface. During the sensing, the sensor data is stored to the 
 
MINAmI Architecture on a RF memory tag  
312
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

Phase-Change Memory (PCM) block and the low data-rate 
data capturing is powered from a battery or with energy 
harvested from the environment. For fast downloading of the 
logged data, the reader powers the sensor tag wirelessly. 
A. Hardware architecture 
This subsection describes the enabling technologies. 
1) Radio Front-end 
As presented in [19], very simple super-regenerative 
transceiver architecture can be used in impulse UWB 
communication to achieve required data-rates over short 
distances. In contrast to conventional impulse UWB 
transceivers [20] there is no need for multipath recovery over 
the distances below 30 cm. This decreases the requirements 
set for the UWB transceivers. This is used to minimize 
complexity and power consumption of the transceivers. In 
the aforementioned super-regenerative transceiver one super-
regenerative oscillator is used alternately both to generate 
transmitted pulses and to amplify received pulses, and no 
linear amplifiers are needed. Thus, the architecture utilizes 
the inherently low duty cycle of the transmitted impulse 
UWB signal also in reception the receiver being fully active 
only exactly during the detection of incoming pulses.  
Synchronization is often problematic in impulse UWB 
systems because of the low duty cycle and pseudo-random 
timing of pulsed signal, and due to frequency drift and 
differences of reference clocks between the transceivers. In 
the proposed system the frequency synchronization between 
the reader and tag is achieved thanks to the mutual 
narrowband WPT signal, which is also used as the reference 
clock. The phase synchronization of impulse UWB 
transceivers is also easier to achieve due to decreased need 
for pseudo-random time-coding of pulse patterns. 
The transceiver structure supports simple On-Off-Keying 
(OOK) modulation. The data-rate and power consumption is 
also scalable depending on the power level available for the 
wirelessly powered tag. Due to the simplified transceiver 
structure, targeted ultra-low power consumption and partial 
exploitation (500 MHz) of full UWB band (3.1–10.6 GHz) 
authorized by Federal Communications Commission (FCC) 
for unlicensed use, the impulse UWB system referred here is 
called UWBLEE (UWB Low End Extension). 
Altogether, the optimized transceiver architecture makes 
it possible to achieve required high data-rates with a low 
power consumption performance (a few mW) suitable for 
WPT. As a proof-of-concept a complete wirelessly powered 
RF front-end implementation of the super-regenerative 
transceiver is presented in [21] by using a single super-
regenerative oscillator for transmission and reception. The 
front-end implementation supports data-rates up to 112 Mb/s 
with the energy consumption of 48 pJ/bit in reception and  
58 pJ/bit in transmission. The feasibility of the ultra low 
power 
consumption 
in 
high 
data-rate 
two-way 
communication is verified with an integrated RF front-end 
implementation based on the symmetrical transceiver 
architecture proposed earlier [19]. A 900 MHz WPT signal is 
used as a mutual clock reference and the communication is 
done over an impulse UWB link at 7.9 GHz center 
frequency. The scalable data-rate of UWB link up to 112 
Mbit/s has been demonstrated as well as robustness against 
narrowband interference.  
2) Non-Volatile Memory (NVM) technology 
The main reason to pick up PCM in favor of any other 
memory technology [22] were the benefits of PCM 
technology, e.g., the estimated high number of read/write 
cycles as 1×10^6, which consequently results in need of no 
or just a lightweight wear leveling algorithm, and the bit 
alterability – lack of need of block erase cycles (as with flash 
memory) when data should be stored. From the perspective 
of technology lifecycle PCM stands now between a pure 
innovative technology and early adopters’ stage. There are 
several 90 nm products [23] on the market already and more 
to come.  
Aggregating main memory characteristics in comparison 
with NAND/NOR flash technology and DRAM execution 
memory, PCM stands between those two in terms of cost per 
die. It is characterized as 5.5 F^2 factor in cell size having 
the same wafer complexity as DRAM technology. Currently 
only Single Level Cell (SLC) PCM is available, though 
Multi-Level Cell (MLC) PCM is on the way out, which can 
substantially extend the density and, justify the cost 
structure. Thus, the application range can be quite wide from 
external usage (cards, keys) and wireless applications (RF 
memory tags) to high performance computing applications 
(caches, 
code 
execution, 
data 
storage). 
Considering 
reliability characteristics it is important to note that PCM 
technology gives more than 10 years retention ratio that can 
be extended even further, if necessary, by proper bit error 
management. 
PCM has performance characteristics such as read & 
write latency and read & write endurance almost as good as 
DRAM, while giving clear benefits through the non-volatile 
nature of PCM technology. PCM has a low system-wise 
energy consumption (~0.2 mW/pF read, <1.25 mW write) 
~<1 mW/GB of idle power, access time comparable to 
DRAM (~85 ns), with read latency 50–100 ns, write 
bandwidth from 10 to 100+ Mbit/s/die, write latency 500 ns 
– 1 µs, various packaging and die stacking solutions, high-
speed low-pin-count low-power interface solutions, and 
maturity of the technology as such. 
The PCM technology highlights provide clear reasoning 
for the selection of such technology for the RF memory tag 
application, preserving the opportunity to justify it even 
further when some other application should be designed. 
B. Software Architecture (protocol stack) 
The MINAmI software architecture (protocol stack) is 
designed to be modular and scalable. The protocol stack is 
based on three layers: Network Layer, MAC Layer, and PHY 
Layer. The application programming interfaces (API) of the 
layers are open for 3rd parties. These layers will be presented 
in the following sections. The protocol stack has been 
developed taking into account future compatibility with 
NoTA architecture. Care should be taken to have a clear 
implementation path towards the final architectural (NoTA) 
solution. 
313
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

1) Network Layer 
Network Layer will first only provide point-to-point 
connections regardless of state. In future, also applications 
using multiple targets could become feasible when MINAmI 
Subsystem is in active mode. If a point-to-multipoint 
network protocol is needed, nanoIP is easily implementable 
[13][24]. However, to get full internet support classical IP 
protocol may be valid, and more common in networking 
devices. In the final architecture (NoTA) solution, the 
network layer will consist of Device Interconnect Protocol 
(DIP), as a middleware, which guarantees the compatibility 
with NoTA. In DIP protocol, it is possible to select, which 
transport mode and network is used. For example DIP TCP 
L_IN (transport selected) is ready to be used within one 
device and between several devices in a sub-network as 
such. Multicasting must be enabled in IP interface in order 
for device discovery to work. Nodes, which are in different 
sub-network, cannot be detected [15].  
Packet size is an important parameter and depends on 
what is feasible for MAC and PHY layers. Upper layer 
packets are segmented and reassembled and this is dependent 
on what kind of packet sizes the system supports. 
2) MAC Layer 
The MAC of the novel dual-band radio interface has 
three different operational modes: the passive mode, where 
no internal power source is available or used; and the active 
and semi-passive modes, where internal power source is 
available. Tags on battery-less objects without power wire 
connection (e.g., implanted on paper) are passive. 
In the active mode, the mobile phone actively searches 
and selects the target tags, sends the targets the WPT signal 
for powering and for frequency synchronization of the 
communication link, reads/writes data on the tags, and closes 
the connection to the target when active connection is no 
longer required. This operation can be an automatic feature, 
or enabled by the user (initiating the application for reading 
and writing the tag). In the semi-passive mode the phone 
receives data sent by an outside device, but powers itself, 
allowing a longer communication range, which would 
otherwise be limited by the WPT link. In semi-passive mode, 
however, 
the 
initiator 
device 
takes 
care 
of 
the 
synchronization of the I-UWB communication link. 
Active mode states are used by battery-powered mobile 
devices, whereas passive mode states are applied for passive 
devices and tags. In passive mode, possible connections are 
powered by an outside device with WPT. In the passive 
operating mode the default state (when powered by an 
outside device) is P-IDLE, i.e., ready to receive any data, 
after the boot-up sequence. 
The main operational states of UWBLEE MAC are 
shown in Figures 5 and 6. In addition to the shown directions 
of movement from state to state, there need to be possibility 
of built-in error recovery operation from any operational 
state to the corresponding idle state (A-IDLE or P-IDLE). 
For the applications requiring higher security, a protocol 
based on NFC is applied for the ongoing data transmission. 
3) Physical Layer 
UWBLEE PHY layer controls both the I-UWB 
communications and Wireless Power Transfer (WPT) 
transmission. Depending on the operational mode (active or 
passive) WPT link is used to send (or receive) power and/or 
to provide the clock reference signal. 
UWBLEE PHY is divided to two sub-blocks: I-UWB 
PHY and WPT PHY. I-UWB PHY controls the Impulse-
UWB radio interface and WPT PHY controls the Wireless 
Power Transfer interface. I-UWB PHY and WPT PHY are 
coordinated by UWBLEE PHY so that I-UWB transmission 
is synchronized with the WPT transmission. 
The function performed by UWBLEE PHY is defined by 
UWBLEE MAC, as shown in Table 1. 
C. Packet-level Communication 
The MINAmI subsystem communication between active 
mobile reader/writer and passive RF memory tag consists of 
periods shown in Figure 7. In the beginning there are no tags 
within the mobile reader/writer local connectivity coverage. 
If the mobile reader/writer detects a tag during the powering 
period, it tries to scan all tags available (in the polling 
period) and – based on the current selection criteria – choose 
one with whom to communicate (in the activation period). 
The right tag is found by scanning the coverage area, 
synchronizing communications with the tags, and selecting 
the right tag. After this selection, connection and device 
configuration is executed in the initialization period to set 
communication 
parameters, 
to 
specify 
packet 
level 
parameters (e.g., length, memory allocation). The connection 
period is initiated when connection between mobile 
reader/writer and selected tag is established. This is followed 
by the data transmission period, reading and/or writing 
 
Figure 5. Active (and semi-passive) UWBLEE MAC states on a mobile 
phone. Active states denoted with A, semi-passive with S. 
 
Figure 6.  Passive UWBLEE MAC states on a RF memory tag. 
TABLE I.  
UWBLEE PHY IN DIFFERENT MAC STATES 
 
MAC mode 
Passive 
Semi-passive 
Active 
I-UWB 
Transmit / receive 
WPT synch 
Receive 
Receive 
Transmit 
WPT power 
Receive 
 
Transmit 
Power source 
WPT 
reception 
Battery 
Battery 
Remarks 
Being read / written 
Reading / writing 
other devices 
 
PASSIVE MODE
OFF
P-IDLE
P-CONNECT
P-CONNECTED
PASSIVE MEMORY TAG
314
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

selected content from/to tag. After successfu
transmissions, in the termination period, connection is closed 
or continued with another read/write operation to the tag.
Basic connection procedure between a mobile reader and 
a tag is described in Figure 8, which also 
Figure 7.  Mobile reader/writer to RF memory tag communication 
sequence 
Figure 8.  Basic MINAmI subsystem communication setup sequence
Figure 9.  Our UWBLEE implementation
Memory Tag
“touch the tag”
Polling period
Activation period
Powering period
Initialization period
Connection period
Data Transfer period
Termination period
Scan
Select
Wakeup
Active/Passive tag
Configuration
Connection establishment
Read from tag / write to tag
Close / Exit / Malfunction
Memory Tag
Memory Tag
Memory
MAC 
SW 
Reader/Writer
PHY
Request the 
service
Configuration
PHY cmds
Read tag 
memory content
Data 
transfer 
(R/W)
PHY cmds
Transfer 
completed
PHY cmds
Retransmission 
over the air
Retransmission 
from buffer
buffer
buffer
Release the memory
MINAmI
Server
GUI 
Reader
PHY
Close the tag 
connection
Close the connection
Scan & select 
(tag 1, tag X)
selected content from/to tag. After successful data 
transmissions, in the termination period, connection is closed 
or continued with another read/write operation to the tag. 
Basic connection procedure between a mobile reader and 
lso identifies affected 
internal entities, e.g., MINAmI server, memory management, 
and communication entity (MAC and PHY layers). For the 
air interface, the data from/to 
memory (PCM) is buffered into a DPRAM buffer memory 
equal to the maximum packet
D. File System Design 
The mobile phone can read tags and with writeable tags 
the phone can also write all or parts of their contents. The 
communication capacity between the mobile terminal and 
the RF memory tag is targeted to exceed 50 Mbit/s
discussed in Section I). Plug
stack in Figure 1) is required to facilitate seamless use of the 
tag memory for mobile phone applications.
The memory tag can be used as an extension to th
file system of the reader (e.g., mobile phone). The memory 
tag can be either a passive and cheap one or an active one, 
including an own power source and thus being more 
expensive [11].  Plug-in software in the file system of the 
reading device handles the connection to the memory tag. 
Storage space on the memory is mounted on the local file 
system in the same way as any detachable storage. The 
volatile nature of the connection causes overhead in 
maintaining the file system view in the reader/writer device.
Adding a processing element to the memory simplifies 
the connection. An ultra low
process the access requests independently an
some more advanced services like metadata
service proxy relays the service interface of the memory 
directly to the applications running on the accessing device. 
The volatile nature of the connection is not a problem if the 
server is made stateless and transactions atomic.
Device internal modules need to support NoTA to get full 
benefit of subsystem independency and still giv
connection 
between 
subsystems. 
This 
interconnect 
architecture allows future extensions for mod
device. 
IV. 
D
The RF memory tag (i.e.
solution was developed and tested in the MINAmI project.
Implementation is shown in 
RF memory tag sub-system of MINAmI project is based
a flexible, FPGA-based hardware platform. The sub
takes benefit from the ultra
transceiver architecture, which
required in RF memory tag applications. 
results are promising and useful for
phone-readable RF memory tags. The 
Mbit/s has been achieved over the novel radio interface 
technical demonstrations [21]
50% protocol and memory access 
to 50 Mb/s end-to-end communication
MAC layers short target distance and 
communication efficiently minimize
on packet level. However, efficient pipelining in buffering 
of the data is in crucial role in optimization of the end
end system. The third important factor is
Mobile reader/writer to RF memory tag communication 
Basic MINAmI subsystem communication setup sequence 
 
WBLEE implementation 
Tag
Wakeup
Active/Passive tag
Configuration
Connection establishment
Read from tag / write to tag
Close / Exit / Malfunction
buffer
buffer
PHY
MAC 
SW
Memory
Response to 
polling and activate 
the tag
Read / Write Tag 
memory content
Start closing the 
connection
Release the memory
Retransmission 
from buffer
MINAmI server, memory management, 
and communication entity (MAC and PHY layers). For the 
interface, the data from/to the non-volatile storage 
memory (PCM) is buffered into a DPRAM buffer memory 
equal to the maximum packet size transferred over the air. 
The mobile phone can read tags and with writeable tags 
o write all or parts of their contents. The 
communication capacity between the mobile terminal and 
the RF memory tag is targeted to exceed 50 Mbit/s (as 
. Plug-in software (External memory 
) is required to facilitate seamless use of the 
tag memory for mobile phone applications. 
The memory tag can be used as an extension to the local 
file system of the reader (e.g., mobile phone). The memory 
tag can be either a passive and cheap one or an active one, 
including an own power source and thus being more 
in software in the file system of the 
reading device handles the connection to the memory tag. 
Storage space on the memory is mounted on the local file 
system in the same way as any detachable storage. The 
e of the connection causes overhead in 
maintaining the file system view in the reader/writer device. 
Adding a processing element to the memory simplifies 
the connection. An ultra low-power processing element can 
process the access requests independently and even provide 
some more advanced services like metadata-based queries. A 
service proxy relays the service interface of the memory 
directly to the applications running on the accessing device. 
The volatile nature of the connection is not a problem if the 
erver is made stateless and transactions atomic. 
Device internal modules need to support NoTA to get full 
benefit of subsystem independency and still give a fast 
between 
subsystems. 
This 
interconnect 
architecture allows future extensions for modules within one 
DISCUSSION 
The RF memory tag (i.e., mobile reader/writer and tag) 
solution was developed and tested in the MINAmI project. 
Implementation is shown in Figure 9. The development of a 
system of MINAmI project is based on 
based hardware platform. The sub-system 
takes benefit from the ultra-low power UWBLEE 
, which is suitable for data rates 
required in RF memory tag applications. The technical 
results are promising and useful for the concept of mobile-
readable RF memory tags. The data-rate of 112 
over the novel radio interface in 
[21]. This leaves room for up to 
and memory access overhead when targeting 
end communication. On the PHY and 
short target distance and point-to-point 
munication efficiently minimize the protocol overhead 
However, efficient pipelining in buffering 
of the data is in crucial role in optimization of the end-to-
important factor is the memory access 
315
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

speed. This is relevant when reading data from the source 
memory and when writing the data to the target storage 
memory. As shown in Section III A.2 the continuous 
development of NVM memories is will provide power-
efficient and fast solutions for the target applications.   
Altogether, the listed factors and the results achieved with 
the demonstration platform show that mobile reader/writer 
and the high capacity memory tag is implementable. 
A. Future development 
The UWBLEE wireless connection technology presented 
in this paper provides data rates significantly exceeding the 
existing NFC technology already in the market. From 
technology ecosystem point-of-view there is little sense in 
developing UWBLEE as an independent technology. 
UWBLEE can thus be seen as a possible future high-speed 
extension to existing RFID or NFC technologies. 
In a multi-device environment one device can work as a 
proxy for the memory tag and provide other devices with 
access to its services [11]. There are also possibilities to have 
memory tags with their own power sources, which eliminate 
the need of wireless powering. In that case, the reading range 
can be extended or power use within the mobile phone can 
be reduced. The phone can also communicate directly with 
other similarly equipped phones. 
Our RF memory tag solution supports Nokia’s Explore 
and Share concept, a new way of transferring content (e.g., 
multimedia, maps, and applications) to a mobile phone [25]. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The evolution of non-volatile memory technologies gives 
the basis for the vision about RF memory tags. However, the 
large memory creates a need for a high-speed data 
connection that can be used to transfer the contents of the 
tags in a timeframe acceptable for the user. The dual-band 
radio interface, UWBLEE introduced in this paper provides 
the required data rate and possibility for future scalability as 
memory sizes become larger. 
Modular architecture is mandatory in the RF memory tag 
system to optimize performance. For example, latencies 
common in memory access of centralized systems are not 
acceptable. Power consumption of the mobile reader/writer 
is efficiently minimized with an independent sub-system 
keeping the involvement of the main processor at the 
minimum. In contrast to conventional radio systems, the 
main processor only triggers the communication and the 
independent sub-system handles the transfer and storage of 
the data. Thus, the main processor does not have to be 
involved in the low level communication processes. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank all the partners of MINAmI project, who have 
contributed to development of this technology. This study is 
a part of MINAmI project under EU FP6 contract IST-
034690. This research was also supported by the Finnish 
Academy under grant no 129446. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Wu, M. Montanari, N. Vaidya, and R. Campbell, “Distributed 
RFID tag storage infrastructure”. University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, IL, USA. Tech. Rep. 2009. 
[2] N. Ahmed, R. Kumar, R.S. French, and U. Ramachandran, ”RF2ID: a 
reliable middleware framework for RFID deployment”, Proc. IPDPS 
2007. IEEE, 2007, pp 1–10. 
[3] N. Ahmed, and U. Ramachandran, “Reliable framework for RFID 
devices”. Proc. MDS'08. ACM, 2008, pp. 1–6. 
[4] C. Ying, “A verification development platform for UHF RFID 
reader”, Proc. CMC'09. IEEE, 2009, pp. 358–361. 
[5] N. Pillin, N. Joehl, C. Dehollain, and M.J. Declercq, “High data rate 
RFID tag/reader architecture using wireless voltage regulation”. Proc. 
RFID 2008. IEEE, 2008, pp. 141–149. 
[6]  “HP unveils revolutionary wireless chip that links the digital and 
physical worlds”. HP, Palo Alto, CA, USA, 2006. 
[7] J. Nielsen, “Usability engineering”. Morgan Kaufmann, 1993. 
[8] W. Cui, P. Ranta, T.A. Brown, and C. Reed, “Wireless video 
streaming over UWB”. Proc. ICUWB 2007. IEEE, 2007, pp.933–936. 
[9] H. Witschnig, C. Patauner, A. Maier, E. Leitgeb, and D. Rinner, 
“High speed RFID lab-scaled prototype at the frequency of 13.56 
MHz”. Elektrotechnik & Informationstechnik, vol. 124, 2007, pp. 
376–383. 
[10] J. Jantunen, I. Oliver, S. Boldyrev, and J. Honkola, ”Agent/space-
based computing and RF memory tag interaction”. Proc. IWRT 2009. 
[11] E. Kaasinen, M. Niemelä, T. Tuomisto, P. Välkkynen, I. Jantunen, J. 
Sierra, M. Santiago, and H. Kaaja, “Ubimedia based on readable and 
writable memory tags”. Multimedia Systems, vol. 16, no. 1, 2010, pp. 
57–74. 
[12] MINAmI website. www.fp6-minami.org, accessed 6 July 2010. 
[13] I. Jantunen, H. Laine, P. Huuskonen, D. Trossen, and V. Ermolov, 
“Smart sensor architecture for mobile-terminal-centric ambient 
intelligence”, Sens. Actuators A, vol. 142, 2008, pp. 352–360. 
[14] Y. Têtu, I. Jantunen, B. Gomez, and S. Robinet, “Mobile-phone-
readable 2.45GHz passive digital sensor tag”, Proc. RFID 2009. 
IEEE, 2009, pp. 88–94. 
[15] NoTA World. www.notaworld.org, accessed 6 July 2010. 
[16] K. Keinänen, J. Leino, and J. Suomalainen, “Developing keyboard 
service for NoTA”. VTT, Espoo, Finland. Tech. Rep. 2008. 
[17] MIPI website. www.mipi.org, accessed 6 July 2010. 
[18] S. Asthana, and D.N. Kalofonos, “The problem of Bluetooth pollution 
and accelerating connectivity in Bluetooth ad-hoc networks”. Proc. 
PerCom 2005. IEEE, 2005, pp. 200–207. 
[19] J. Jantunen, A. Lappeteläinen, J. Arponen, A. Pärssinen, M. Pelissier, 
B. Gomez, and J.A. Keignart, “New symmetric transceiver 
architecture 
for 
pulsed 
short-range 
communication”. 
Proc. 
GLOBECOM 2008. IEEE, 2008, pp. 1–5. 
[20] S.R. Aedudodla, S. Vijayakumaran, and T.F. Wong, “Timing 
acquisition in ultra-wideband communication systems”. IEEE Trans. 
Veh. Technol., vol. 54, no. 5, 2005, pp. 1570–1583. 
[21] M. Pelissier, B. Gomez, G. Masson, S. Dia, M. Gary, J. Jantunen, J. 
Arponen, and J. Varteva, “112Mb/s full duplex remotely-powered 
impulse-UWB 
RFID 
transceiver 
for 
wireless 
NV-memory 
applications”. Proc. 2010 Symposium of VLSI Circuits. 
[22] G.W. Burr, B.N. Kurdi, J.C. Scott, C.H. Lam, K. Gopalakrishnan, and 
R.S. Shenoy, “Overview of candidate device technologies for storage-
class memory”. IBM J. Res. Dev., vol. 52, no. 4, 2008, pp. 449–464. 
[23] “Intel, STMicroelectronics deliver industry's first phase change 
memory prototypes”. Physorg.com, 6 Feb 2008. 
[24] Z. Shelby, P. Mahonen, J. Riihijärvi, O. Raivio, and P. Huuskonen, 
“NanoIP: the zen of embedded networking”, Proc. ICC 2003. IEEE, 
2003, vol. 2, pp. 1218–1222. 
[25] M. Cooper, “Explore and Share – Nokia shows ultra-fast wireless 
data transfer concept”. Nokia Conversations, 23 Feb 2010.
316
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

