A Location Management System for Destination Prediction 
from Smartphone Sensors 
Sun-You Kim, Sung-Bae Cho 
Dept. of Computer Science  
Yonsei University 
Seoul, Korea 
{sykim@sclab.yonsei.ac.kr, sbcho@yonsei.ac.kr} 
Abstract— Several applications based on smartphones have 
been developed for user’s requirements. Among them, the 
location based services (LBS) are demanding to many people. 
As a result, location management systems become more 
important to manage the locations and acquire new information 
in places because location information can be obtained in 
diverse sensors. This paper proposes a location management 
system which manages the information of location and predicts 
a future location and moving path from the current sensor 
values. The proposed system consists of five modules. Three 
modules perform to manage the information of location and 
user’s context, and two modules predict future information 
about the locations. In order to show the feasibility of the 
proposed system, we conducted the evaluation on each module 
with a real dataset collected from mobile devices. 
Keywords-Location management; location-based service; 
destination prediction; hidden Markov model 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As many people use smartphones, such as Android phones, 
the smartphone market grows rapidly [1]. Smartphone is easy 
to develop the applications using device sensors because 
various mobile OSs provide open platform. It enables 
developers to access easily user’s locations and sensor data. 
In many cases, the applications of smartphones such as 
Location-Based Service (LBS) use location information in 
mobile device [2][3][4]. With the increase of LBS, many 
researchers investigate on the locations using smartphone. As 
a result, it is necessary to manage the data of locations and 
forecast user’s future locations based on the sensor 
information. 
In a mobile phone, the system which manages location 
information and predicts future places should include the 
following functions. Each function is classified into two 
categories. First category is management of location 
information. It manages user’s Point Of Interests (POI) and 
finds new locations which are meaningful for user. Second 
category is a service using location information. It provides 
new information such as user’s current location, moving time 
and destination. This system, which includes two categories, 
is composed of the following functions. 
1) Data collection: It collects sensor data and user’s 
information. Using data collection, the system generates new 
information. 
2) Location extraction: It extacts location, which is a 
frequently visited place or meaningful place for user. By 
extracting meaningful location, location management system 
can recommend to register symbolic location for user. 
3) Location recognition: It means to classify where 
user’s current location is. The system is able to offer a 
suitable service by finding user’s location exactly. 
4) Prediction of departure time: It forecasts when user 
departs. The new information required for future can be 
allowed to the user at the appropriate time by using it. 
5) Prediction of destination: It predicts the user’s place 
and path of desitination not yet reached. Destination 
prediction should use all information of location manager 
system because it requires many data. 
In location management system for destination prediction, 
user’s mobile phone gathers data using sensors. And it extracts 
the POI, which is meaningful for user, using collected data. 
Extracted locations are managed by this system. Also, it 
classifies user’s current location and predicts user’s departure 
time in present location. Based on this information, this 
system predicts user’s future location. 
Some researchers have studied on the prediction of 
destination using various smartphone sensors. Do et al. 
proposed a location prediction method using linear regression, 
logistic regression and random forest [5]. It uses the 
information of mobile device, such as GPS, Bluetooth, call log, 
application history and proximity. Lu et al. developed a 
forecasting method based on Support Vector Machine (SVM) 
using GPS, acceleration, Bluetooth, Wi-Fi and call log in 
mobile device [6]. Kim et al. used the Bayesian network for 
destination prediction [7]. Its input values are location 
information, visiting time, staying time and user’s gender. 
Gambs et al. proposed a method for prediction of 
destination using mobility Markov chains with Point Of 
Interest (POI) sequence [8]. Liao et al. developed a destination 
forecasting system based on hierarchical dynamic Bayesian 
network with GPS [9]. Simmons et al. proposed a destination 
prediction framework to use hidden Markov model using GPS 
sensor and map database in mobile environment [10]. 
However, previous studies did not build a system to manage 
the whole information related with locations. This paper 
proposes a system to manage several sensor data related with 
location and predict the future location.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes each module that constructs the proposed system, 
which aims at the management and service. Section III 
addresses the result of experiments on each component. 
233
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Section IV summarizes the location management system for 
the destination prediction and draws a conclusion. 
II. 
THE PROPOSED SYSTEM 
 The proposed system consists of two functions, which are 
the management of location and the service with location.  The 
location management is conducted by data collection and 
location extraction. The location service is provided by 
transportation recognition, location recognition, moving time 
prediction and destination prediction.  
To manage locations in this system, first, this system 
collects sensor data and user’s input information in data 
collection module. Then, it identifies user’s meaningful 
locations using location extraction module. Extracted 
locations are managed in symbolic locations. 
Figure 1.  System overview 
This system provides three service functions. It offers 
user’s present location using location recognition module, and 
predicts departure time in future with moving time prediction 
module. Finally, it gives information about user’s future 
location and moving trajectory using destination prediction 
module. Figure 1 illustrates an overview of the system. 
A. Sensor data collection 
We collected raw data such as acceleration, orientation, 
magnetic field, GPS information and Wi-Fi information by 
using Android phone API. GPS information includes latitude, 
longitude, accuracy, number of satellites, and SNR (Signal to 
Noise Ratio). Wi-Fi information contains SSID (Service Set 
Identifier), mac address, and RSSI (Received Signal Strength 
Indication). Most of data are collected twice per one second. 
GPS information is collected whenever the state of GPS 
sensor is changed. When user registers a location, Wi-Fi 
information is obtained. 
Also, we collected weather information using Yahoo 
weather API. The weather data express temperature and 
weather state of 47 types. We transform the weather state into 
7 types. The data specification and frequencies are 
summarized in Table I.  
TABLE I.  
SENSOR DATA FOR DESTINATION PREDICTION 
Sensor Type 
Frequency 
Description 
Acceleration 
Two times for one 
minute 
3 axis acceleration 
(-2g~2g) 
Orientation 
Two times for one 
minute 
Orientation, pitch, roll 
Magnetic field 
Two times for one 
minute 
3 axis magnetic field 
(uT) 
GPS 
When GPS state is 
changed 
Latitude, longitude, 
accuracy, SNR, number 
of satellites 
Wi-Fi 
When user registers a 
location 
SSID, mac address,  
RSSI 
Weather 
Once for five minutes 
Temperature (℃), 
Weather state (7 types) 
Time 
Two times for one 
minute 
Current time 
 
Acceleration, orientation and magnetic field can be used 
to check user’s transportation mode. GPS is the information 
necessary to perform the location extraction and the location 
recognition. Wi-Fi is used to recognize indoor location, and 
weather is input of prediction of moving time. 
This system stores the names of symbolic location, which 
are entered by user. Each location name is connected with Wi-
Fi information and GPS information such as latitude and 
longitude. 
B. Location extraction 
For inducing to register user’s meaningful locations, this 
system extracts candidate locations, which can be meaningful. 
Because it is impossible to use all GPS data, which are very 
big size in mobile device, the locations extracted are 
transformed into symbolic locations. 
Previous studies about location extraction used k-means 
clustering, which is density-based algorithm [11]. However, 
k-means clustering should determine the number of ‘k’. In the 
location extraction, ‘k’ means the number of locations. We do 
not know the number of locations extracted in advance. User’s 
meaningful locations follow a Gaussian distribution [12][13]. 
However, because the criteria of density in k-means clustering 
are ambiguous, k-means clustering is not suitable in the 
location extraction problem. 
Instead of it, we use G-means clustering method [14]. This 
is a clustering method to test each cluster in Gaussian 
distribution through statistical verification and repeat the k-
means clustering until all clusters follow the Gaussian 
distribution. The statistical verification is performed by 
Anderson-Daring test, which is represented by the following 
equation:  
𝐴2(𝑍) =
−1
𝑛 ∑
(2𝑖 − 1)[log(𝑧𝑖) + log(1 − 𝑧𝑛+𝑙−𝑖)] − 𝑛
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
Here, 𝑥𝑖 is transformed into a value of average 0 and variance 
1. When 𝑥(𝑖) is the 𝑖-th value, we define 𝑍𝑖 = 𝐹(𝑥(𝑖)). In this 
equation, F is 𝑁(0,1)  Cumulative Distribution Function 
(CDF). Using the latitudes and longitudes, which are obtained 
from GPS sensor, this system performs G-means clustering. 
234
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

After the clustering, user’s key locations are extracted. The 
extracted locations contain the information of latitude and 
longitude. Figure 2 is an example of the result of location 
extraction.  
Extracted locations is used by two objects. Extracted 
locaitons of stop state are user’s meaningful locations, and all 
the extracted locations are used for constructing a path. A path 
has many points of location. Therefore, it is nessesary to 
reduce locations, which express a path. We use the extracted 
locations to make a path. 
 
 
Figure 2.  An example of location extraction 
C. Transportation type recognition 
The transportation recognition needs to judge whether to 
perform the location recognition. It is necessary as an input 
for the destination prediction. To classify the moving state, we 
transformed sensor data such as acceleration, orientation, and 
magnetic field using decision tree algorithm. In some cases, 
decision tree shows better performance than alternative 
algorithms to process time series data such as acceleration 
[15]. 
For using sensor data in mobile device for decision tree, 
we extract some features such as the difference between 
previous and current sensor values, average sensor value for a 
specific period, and standard deviation of the sensor value for 
a specific period. Following (2)~(4) are the equations for pre-
processing in decision tree. 
 
𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑋 = ∑
√(𝑥𝑖 − 𝑥𝑖−1)2
𝑁
𝑖=1


 
𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛𝑋 = (∑
√(𝑥𝑖 − 𝑥𝑖−1)2
𝑁
𝑖=1
) 𝑁
⁄ 

 
𝑠𝑡𝑑𝑋 = √∑ √((𝑥𝑖 − 𝑥𝑖−1)2 − 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛𝑥)2

In the equations, X means specific sensor, and 𝑥𝑖 
represents the i-th sensor value. Equation (2) is the summation 
of the difference between previous value 𝑥𝑖−1  and current 
value 𝑥𝑖 from a sensor X. Equation (3) represents the mean of 
the difference value which is calculated by equation (2). 
Equation (4) denotes the standard deviation of the difference 
between previous and current sensor data. Acceleration, 
orientation and magnetic field exist in 3-axis. This method 
uses average and standard deviation as the feature of decision 
tree. Each sensor is calculated by three averages and three 
standard deviations [16]. 
Using these features, decision tree is generated, which 
classifies the transportation types about input values, which 
are 
acceleration, 
orientation 
and 
magnetic 
field. 
Transportation types are staying, walking, running, and in 
vehicle. 
D. Location recognition  
In the location management system, it is an important 
problem to identify user’s location. In order to know user’s 
place, this system includes the location recognition module. 
For recognizing an outdoor place, it is easy to identify user’s 
current location by using GPS value of latitude and longitude. 
However, in an indoor location, the signals of GPS satellite 
cannot pass wall of the buildings. Therefore, we should use a 
different method for an indoor location. Recently, in the field 
of the location recognition, many researchers use Wi-Fi AP 
(Access Point) [17][18]. Thanks to the ubiquitous Internet, it 
does not need additional configuration, so that we use Wi-Fi 
AP information to identify user’s current location in indoor. 
The process of the location recognition is shown in Figure 3.  
For accurate recognition of user’s current location, this 
system distinguishes between indoor and outdoor. Next, if the 
result is outdoor, it performs outdoor location recognition 
using the k-nearest neighbor. Otherwise, it executes the 
algorithm for indoor location recognition using decision tree.  
1) Classification of indoor/outdoor: To discriminate 
indoor and outdoor, we use the naïve Bayes classifier, which 
Figure 3. Process of location recognition 
Figure 4. Model of naïve Bayes classifier for distinction of 
indoor / outdoor 
235
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

is a fast and simple inference method. Naïve Bayes is a 
probabilistic model, which is based on Bayes rule under the 
strong conditional independence assumption. In the proposed 
method, the input of naïve Bayes includes GPS information 
such as number of statellite, SNR, and GPS accuracy. The 
number of statellite converts to 2 discrete values, which are 
seperated by a threshold of 11. SNR is made by 3 values, and 
GPS accuracy is transformed into 4 values. The 
preprocessing values are entered by inputs of naïve Bayes 
model. The naïve Bayes model used is shown in Figure 4. 
2) Outdoor location recognition: k-NN method is used to 
identify outdoor place. k-NN classifies the data by 
performing majority vote with the k neighbors closest to the 
input data. In the stored symbolic locations, after selecting k 
GPS points closest to the current position, it selects a location, 
which is the largest number in k-point locations. 
3) Indoor location recognition: For indoor place, 
recogintion method cannot use the GPS sensor because of  the 
unavailable GPS signals. So, we adopt the Wi-Fi finger print 
method based on the decision tree. Decision tree is generated 
by Wi-Fi information such as RSSI and MAC address, which 
is from the previously stored symbolic location. It makes a 
result, which is symbolic location to use decision tree with 
the new input of Wi-Fi information.  
E. Prediction of moving time 
If the system predicts the departure time, it can offer 
information, which is necessary for user in advance. To 
predict user’s departure time based on context has the 
disadvantage, which is high error rate because it should 
determine a specific time in 24 hours. So, our system 
calculates user’s staying time and predicts departure time after 
inferring how long the user stays at the current place. 
The system uses Bayesian network for the prediction of 
user’s moving time. Bayesian network is a stochastic model, 
which has a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) structure and 
Conditional Probability Tables (CPTs). Bayesian network is 
used to handle the uncertainty with probability. It supports the 
efficient probability calculation based on conditional 
independence assumption. The Bayesian network modeled in 
this system is as shown in Figure 5. 
This network is a structure, which has root nodes, 
intermediate nodes, and observation nodes.  Observation 
nodes are for input of system time, current location and 
weather information. Intermediate nodes calculate the 
probability values based on evidence values of observation 
node. The root nodes are computed by intermediate nodes. 
Each root node means at least 1 hour, 1~2 hours, 2~4 hours, 
and 4~8 hours, which are the result values in this module. 
F. Destination prediction 
The destination forecasting informs the location that user 
has reached at the last time and calculates the probability of 
visiting location, which is intermediate location of the path. 
Destination prediction uses Hidden Markov Model (HMM) 
[19]. HMM is a statistical model characterized by a Markov 
process with unknown parameters, modeling observations to 
determine these hidden parameters. HMM is a widely used 
technique that stochastically models sequence data of the time 
series. It is mainly composed of the state transition 
probabilities, which select the observation value at each state. 
HMM composed by state transition probability 𝐴, probability 
distribution of observed value 𝐵, and probability distribution 
of initial state 𝛱. One HMM, λ, is represented as (5).  

λ = {𝐴, 𝐵, 𝛱}

In the proposed system, destination prediction uses 
extracted locations, transportation type and time. This module 
consists of the three parts. 
1) Building path model: The HMM of path has 
information about the start and end points of a path. HMM is 
built by number of pairs of source and destination locations. 
Path information is made up by sequence, which contains the 
extracted location, the transportation type and the time that is 
quantized. The HMM included the path information is 
learned by Baum-Welch algorithm [20], which is a learning 
method typical to represent probabilistic information of 
multiple sequences.  
2) Predicting destination: About the new input, which is 
information of departure or sub-path, this method evaluates 
all HMMs for finding the path of the highest similarity. 
Evaluation is conducted by the forward algorithm, which is 
basic method to check the similarity between a sequence and 
an HMM. 
3) Calculating visiting probability: Based on destination. 
which is determined by optimal path, the probabilities of 
visiting destination and intermediate locations are calculated. 
First, we find out an optimal path sequence, which is the same 
as a departure and a destination of optimal HMM and 
includes current path, from the path repository. By 
determining a sequence of future movements of the location, 
it finds out  the optimal state sequence from the HMM and 
calculates the probability of visiting locations based on the 
optimal state sequence. The calculation of the optimal state 
Figure 5. Model of Bayesian network to predict moving time 
236
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

sequence is conducted by Viterbi algorithm [21]. It can 
determine the most probable sequence of states in optimal 
state sequence.   
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
In order to evaluate the proposed system, we applied it to 
a SAMSUNG Galaxy S4 Android phone and conducted 
experiments. Data set is gathered for four months from ten 
people. The specification of data set is shown in Table II.  
We implement this system using Android API. In order to 
speed up the operation, all core modules are implemented by 
using Android NDK API. The NDK is a toolset that allows to 
implement parts of App using native-code languages such as 
C and C++ [22].  
TABLE II.  
DESCRIPTION OF DATASET 
 
#Location 
#Path 
Size of storage 
User 1 
16 
193 
2.44GB 
User 2 
20 
268 
2.62GB 
User 3 
32 
149 
1.46GB 
User 4 
50 
288 
3.41GB 
User 5 
42 
309 
3.66GB 
User 6 
32 
233 
1.34GB 
User 7 
28 
236 
1.48GB 
User 8 
24 
294 
3.21GB 
User 9 
36 
237 
2.37GB 
User 10 
14 
189 
2.08GB 
 
The interfaces for each component are illustrated in Figure 
6. Screen of (a) is an interface, which shows the result of the 
location extraction. The interface for entering the symbolic 
location in the system is shown in (b). When user stays for a 
certain period of time, this system notifies a place where it is 
now for user, such as (c). After the location-awareness, in 
current location, the screen predicted when the user might 
depart in (d). When it comes to the predicted starting point for 
the user, predicting a destination and a path to reach the 
destination are shown as in (e). 
A. Location recognition 
In this system, location recognition module uses the 
methods of classifying indoor or outdoor, outdoor location 
recognition and indoor location recognition. To evaluate this 
module, the performance of each method is measured. 
Figure 7 illustrates the performance of discriminating 
indoor or outdoor for the ten users. This experiment is 
evaluated by using naïve Bayes classifier with 10-fold cross-
validation. In the experiment, accuracy shows 96.6% in 
average. 
Figures 8 and 9 show the accuracy of outdoor and indoor 
location recognitions, respectively. These experiments are 
conducted by 10-fold cross-validation. Outdoor location 
recognition result of the k-NN method shows average 
accuracy of 98.96%. However, in case of indoor location 
recognition, we obtain 95.36% of average accuracy, which is 
relatively low. 
B. Prediction of departure time 
To identify the prediction of departure time can offer new 
input at appropriate time for user. In this system, we evaluate 
Figure 7. Performance evaluation of classifying indoor/outdoor 
Figure 6. Interface of the proposed system 
237
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

the accuracy for the ten users. The average accuracy results in 
80.6% as shown in Figure 10. This system has high usability 
by customizing user’s own moving time. 
C. Prediction of desitinaion 
 In order to evaluate the accuracy of the proposed 
detination prediction method, we measured accuracy 
according to the path of progress. Prediction result of the 
advancement of the path is illustrated in Figure 11. It is a result 
that is preformed by 10-fold cross-validation. We trained the 
path models using 90% paths and measured accuraccy using 
10% paths. Looking at the prediction accuracy in accordance 
with the progress of the path, as the path is largely moves, it 
can be seen that the prediction accuracy becomes higher 
because the information of the location movement is increased. 
For 0% progression of the path, which is capable of predicting 
only location information from the starting place, HMM 
showed accuracy of 57.96% in average only with the 
information of departure. 
IV. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
In this paper, we have proposed a system to manage 
location information and predict user’s destination with 
outputs of modules using smartphone sensors such as GPS, 
Wi-Fi, acceleration, orientation, and magnetic field. The 
proposed system consists of location extraction, transportation 
type recognition, location recognition, prediction of moving 
time and prediction of destination. Destination prediction 
preforms calculating the similarity between new path and 
probabilistic model which contains information of the path 
with different modules, and finds a user’s destination. 
Experimental results with real data collected from ten people 
show the usefulness of the proposed system. 
ACKNOWLEDGENMENTS 
This work was supported by Samsung Electronics, Inc. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Butler, “Android: Changing the Mobile Landscape,” IEEE 
Pervasive Computing, vol. 10, no. 1, 2011, pp. 4-7. 
[2] Y. Chon and H. Cha, “LifeMap: A Smartphone based context 
provider for Location-based Services,” IEEE Pervasive 
Computing, vol. 10, no. 2, 2011, pp. 58-67. 
[3] S. Bell, W. R. Jung, and V. Krishnakumar, "WiFi-based 
enhanced positioning systems: Accuracy through mapping, 
calibration, and classification," Proc. of the 2nd ACM 
SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on Indoor Spatial 
Awareness, 2010, pp. 3-9.  
[4] N. Brouwers and M. Woehrle, "Dwelling in the canyons: 
Dwelling detection in urban environments using GPS, Wi-Fi, 
and jeolocation," Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 2012, pp. 
1-16.  
[5] T. M. T. Do and D. Gatica-Perez, "Contextual conditional 
models for smartphone-based human mobility prediction," 
Figure 8. Performance evaluation of outdoor location recognition 
Figure 9. Performance evaluation of indoor location recognition 
Figure 10. Performance evaluation of departure time prediction 
Figure 11. Performance evaluation of destination prediction 
238
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous 
Computing, 2012, pp. 163-172. 
[6] Z. Lu, Y. Zhu, V. W. Zheng, and Q. Yang, , “Next Place 
Prediction by Learning with Multiple Models,” In Proceedings 
of the Mobile Data Challenge Workshop, 2012. 
[7] B. Kim, J. Y. Ha, S. Lee, S. Kang, and Y. Lee, “AdNext: A 
Visit-Pattern-Aware Mobile Advertising System for Urban 
Commercial Complexes,” In Proceedings of the 12th 
Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, 
2011, pp. 7-12. 
[8] S. Gambs, M. O. Killijian, and M. N. del Prado Cortez, “Next 
place prediction using mobility Markov chains,” In 
Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Measurement, Privacy, 
and Mobility, 2012, pp. 1-6. 
[9] L. Liao, D. Fox, and H. Kautz, “Learning and Inferring 
Transportation Routines,” In Proceedings of the National 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 348-353, 2004. 
[10] R. Simmons, B. Browning, Y. Zhang, and V. Sadekar, 
“Learning to Predict Driver Route and Destination Intent,” In 
Proceedings of the IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems 
Conference, 2006, pp. 127-132. 
[11] A. J. Dou et al, "Data clustering on a network of mobile 
smartphones," IEEE/IPSJ Symposium on Applications and the 
Internet , 2011, pp. 118-127. 
[12] M. Kim, D. Kotz, and S. Kim, "Extracting a mobility model 
from real user traces," in Proc. IEEE Infocom, 2006, pp. 1-13,. 
[13] S. Scellato, M. Musolesi, C. Mascolo, V. Latora, and A. 
Campbell, 
"Nextplace: 
A 
spatio-temporal 
prediction 
framework for pervasive systems," Pervasive Computing, 2011, 
pp. 152-169.  
[14] G. Hamerly and C. Elkan, “Learning the k in k means,” 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 16, 
2004, pp. 281. 
[15] J.-K. Min and S.-B. Cho, “Mobile Human Network 
Management and Recommendation by Probabilistic Social 
Mining,” IEEE Trans. on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part 
B: Cybernetics, vol. 41, no. 3, 2011, pp. 761-771. 
[16] Y.-S. Lee and S.-B. Cho, "An Efficient Energy Management 
System for Android Phone Using Bayesian Networks," 
Distributed Computing Systems Workshops (ICDCS), 2012, 
pp. 102-107. 
[17] I. Bisio, F. Lavagetto, M. Marchese, and A. Sciarrone, 
"GPS/HPS-and Wi-Fi Fingerprint-Based Location Recognition 
for Check-In Applications Over Smartphones in Cloud-Based 
LBSs," IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 15, no. 4, 2013, 
pp. 858-869. 
[18] D. H. Kim, J. Hightower, R. Govindan, and D. Estrin, 
“Discovering semantically meaningful places from pervasive 
RF-Beacons, ” Proc. of Int. Conf. on Ubiquitous computing, 
2009, pp. 21-30. 
[19] Y. J. Kim and S.-B. Cho, “A HMM-based location prediction 
framework with location recognizer combining k-nearest 
neighbor and multiple decision trees,” 8th International 
Conference on Hybrid Artificial Intelligent Systems, 2013, pp. 
618-628. 
[20] L. E. Baum, "A maximization technique occurring in the 
statistical analysis of probabilistic functions of Markov 
chains," Ann. Math. Statist, vol. 41, 1970, pp.164 –171. 
[21] L. R. Rabiner, "A tutorial on hidden Markov models and 
selected applications in speech recognition," Proc. IEEE, vol. 
77, 1989, pp. 257–286. 
[22] http://developer.android.com/tools/sdk/ndk/index.html: July, 
2014.
 
239
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

