A Tool Rental Service Scenario 
IoT technologies enabling a circular economy business model  
Johanna Kallio, Maria Antikainen, Outi Kettunen 
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd. 
Finland 
Email: johanna.kallio@vtt.fi, maria.antikainen@vtt.fi, outi.kettunen@vtt.fi 
 
Abstract—Internet of Things (IoT), sensors, wireless networks, 
cloud computing and big data analytics are technological 
innovations that have the power to transform traditional 
businesses. These technologies can enable and accelerate a 
circular economy on a broader scale. We aim at providing 
information on how to disrupt current prevailing linear 
business models by employing digital data and IoT 
technologies. We give the reader a short overview of IoT 
technologies affecting the incumbents of industry. We present 
the current deployment of a tool rental service experiment and 
develop a scenario anticipating the possible future of the tool 
rental service. The envisioned tool rental scenario provides 
understanding on the effects of digital technologies and helps 
companies in identifying more sustainable and circular 
business models. 
Keywords-circular economy; IoT; scenario; tool rental 
service; sensors; networking; cloud computing; data analytics. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The concept of a circular economy describes an economy 
with closed material loops. The circular economy focuses on 
reusing materials, and creating added value in products 
through services and technology-enabled smart solutions. 
This implies that the concept of the circular economy is a 
continuous development cycle that aims to keep products, 
components and materials at their highest utility and value at 
all times, distinguishing between technical and biological 
cycles [1]. If EU manufacturing sector would adopt a circular 
economy business model, net material costs savings could 
worth up to 570 billion euros per year and growth 
opportunities 320 billion euros by 2025 [1][2]. The circular 
concept fosters also wealth and employment generation 
against the backdrop of resource constraints [3][4]. This 
transformation from linear “take-make-dispose” economy to 
circular one requires disruptive innovation in business 
models and technologies. 
The Internet of Things (IoT) is considered as being one 
of the key enablers for enhancing the circular economy at 
large [2]. We define IoT as a computing concept where 
internet enabled physical objects (e.g., sensors, actuators, 
tags, smart machines) can network and communicate with 
each other to achieve greater value and services by 
exchanging data and producing new information [5][6]. IoT 
relies on the three pillars related to the ability of smart 
objects: i) to be identifiable, ii) to communicate and iii) to 
interact. When object can sense the environment and 
communicate, they 
become 
tools 
for 
understanding 
complexity and responding to it [5]. 
Advancement in IoT technologies is making the current 
linear take-make-dispose economy more and more efficient, 
but still fails to address resource and natural capital issues. 
However, 
this 
new 
connectivity 
between 
emerging 
technologies and economy also offers the opportunity to re-
think the underlying system and support the development of 
a circular economy.  By combining the principles of circular 
economy with IoT technologies, there may be greater 
opportunity to scale new business models more effectively 
[7]. 
In this paper, we will present a circular economy based 
tool rental service scenario. First, we take a look at the main 
principles of circular economy in Section II. Then, in Section 
III, we present an overview of potential IoT technologies 
enabling the circular economy business. In Section IV, we 
describe the current deployment of the tool rental service, as 
well as develop the scenario for the future developments. 
Finally, Section V concludes the paper and provides some 
indicators for future work. 
II. 
CIRCULAR ECONOMY 
A circular economy is commonly defined as an 
industrial system that is restorative or regenerative by 
intention and design [8][9]. In the circular economy, new 
business models are developed to reduce the need for virgin 
raw materials and to generate sustainable growth. The basic 
approach of the circular economy is to eliminate waste by 
designing out of waste. Products are designed and optimized 
for a cycle of disassembly, reuse and refurbishment, or 
recycling, with the understanding that economic growth is 
based on reuse of material reclaimed from end-of-life 
products rather than extraction of resources. Circular design 
makes products easier to disassemble in preparation for their 
next round trip. Reuse means the use of a product again for 
the same purpose in its original form or with little 
enhancement or change. Refurbishment means a process of 
returning a product to good working condition by replacing 
or repairing major components that are faulty or close to 
failure, and making ‘cosmetic’ changes to update the 
appearance of a product, such as cleaning, changing fabric, 
painting or refinishing. Any subsequent warranty is 
generally less than issued for a new or a remanufactured 
product, but the warranty is likely to cover the whole 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

product (unlike repair). Accordingly, the performance may 
be less than as-new. [1]. 
In a circular economy, the concept of user replaces that 
of consumer. Unlike today, when a consumer buys, owns 
and disposes of a product, in the circular economy, durable 
products are leased, rented or shared whenever possible [1]. 
If goods are sold, new models and incentives motivate 
consumers (users) to return or reuse the products or their 
components and materials at the end of their primary use. 
New performance-based business models are instrumental in 
translating products designed for reuse into attractive value 
proposals. IoT technologies and digitalization in general 
have potential to disrupt current prevailing linear business 
models [10]. For example, the incumbents of the media and 
music industries have bitterly experienced the enormous 
forces of start-ups’ new business models based on digital 
data and IoT technologies. 
III. 
ENABLING IOT TECHNOLOGIES 
The concept of combining computers, sensors and 
networks to monitor and control devices has existed for 
decades [11]. The recent advances in digital technologies are 
not only limited to embedded technologies, wireless 
communication protocols and small devices, but also huge 
amounts of data are being generated and can be utilized to 
improve businesses. In this section, we give a short overview 
of the potential IoT technologies affecting the circular 
economy.  
A. Sensors  
Recent advances in wireless technologies and electronics 
have enabled the development of low-cost, low power and 
multifunctional sensors that are small in size and can 
communicate in short distances. Typically, these sensors 
consist of sensing, data processing and communication 
components. The deployment of sensors is mainly driven by 
three factors; decreasing price, improving computational 
power and smaller size, which enables their integration into 
smartphones and other small devices [12]. 
Sensors are often categorized based on their power 
sources, i.e., active or passive. Active sensors emit energy in 
environment, while passive sensors passively receive energy 
that is produced externally to the device.  Passive sensors 
require less energy, but active sensors can be used in harsh 
environmental conditions. Sensors can measure for example 
a position, motion, pressure, temperature or humidity of a 
device or surroundings [13].  
B. Networking 
Data collected with sensors need to be communicated to 
other locations for integration and analytics. Internet 
Protocol (IP) is an open protocol that provides unique 
addresses 
to 
various 
Internet-connected 
devices. 
IP 
networking represents a scalable and platform-independent 
technology having interoperability as the most essential 
objective.  There are two IP versions, IP version 4 (IPv4) and 
IP version 6 (IPv6), which is the next generation protocol 
designed to provide several advantages over IPv4 [14].  
Network technologies can be classified as wired or 
wireless. The main advantage of a wireless network is that 
users and devices can move around freely within the area of 
the network and get an internet connection, while wired 
connections are still useful for relatively more reliable, 
secured and high-volume network routes. The choice of 
technology depends mostly on the geographic range to be 
covered [15]. 
The most common short-range wireless network 
technologies are Bluetooth [16], Near Field Communication 
(NFC) [17], Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) [18], 
Wi-Fi [19] and ZigBee [20]. Respectively, the most 
commonly 
employed 
wide 
range 
wireless 
network 
technologies are cellular technology, such as 3G or 4G, and 
Low Power Wide Area Network (LoRaWAN) [21].  
C. Cloud-based platforms 
An IoT platform enables interaction between devices and 
users. With cloud technology, platform’s computation and 
storage resources can be made available on a need basis, 
without requiring major investment in new hardware or 
programming.   
Many vendors, such as Microsoft, HP, IBM and Oracle, 
provide 
commercial 
cloud-based 
IoT 
platforms 
for 
connecting sensors and actuators to the Internet. In addition, 
several open-source IoT platforms are available and often 
propose their own communication or middleware solutions. 
Reference [22] gives an evaluation of a number of available 
proprietary, as well as open-source, IoT platforms. 
D. Data integration 
Data communication includes a set of protocols that have 
been built for high volumes and large networks of assets. 
The most of IoT platforms are implemented with the 
Representational State Transfer (REST) API, which also 
enables an easy integration with other web services [23]. 
Constrained processing capabilities and limited battery 
resources restrict communication in sensor systems. Typical 
sensor application and data communication protocols 
considering processing capability and energy consumption 
are REST-based Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP)  
[24], Message Queue Telemetry Transport (MQTT) [25], 
and Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP)  
[26]. 
Data processing methods can be divided in two 
categories. Batch processing starts with data acquisition and 
storing and continues with processing of already stored 
information. Apache Flume [27] focuses on a flexible 
architecture, enabling the use of a variety of data sources and 
sinks. Another example of getting the data and sending it 
somewhere else at very large scale is Kafka [28]. 
Especially new IoT applications require real-time 
processing of information, where data items are processed as 
soon as they become available. This is called stream 
processing and it facilitates real-time action on the data, as 
well as filtering and aggregating it for efficient storage. 
Some new frameworks, such as the Apache tools Samza 
[29], Storm [30] or Flink [31], have been created for tackling 
the real-time processing of streams of information. 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Performance and scalability requirements shift the choice 
of data storage towards column-oriented NoSQL databases. 
Apache HBase [32] is one of the most popular columnar 
databases offering rea-time access to very large tables with 
time-series support available via KairosDB [33]. In addition, 
Apache Cassandra [34] can be augmented with time-series 
operation. In fact, time-series databases, like InfluxDB [35], 
are yet another interesting storage technology.  
E. Data analytics 
Data analytics is driven by cognitive technologies, which 
are able to perform tasks that formerly only humans used to 
be able to do. Typically, the field of data analytics is divided 
into three different categories: a) descriptive analytics 
describing what the data looks like, b) predictive analytics 
predicting what is going to happen, and c) prescriptive 
analytics describing what should happen to reach the goal 
[36]. 
Some of the cognitive technologies that are increasingly 
adopted and can be deployed in predictive and prescriptive 
analytics are shortly described below: 
 
Machine learning refers to compute systems’ 
ability to learn without being explicitly programmed. 
Machine learning explores the development of 
algorithms that can learn from and make predictions 
on data.  Machine learning algorithms are often 
categorized as being supervised or unsupervised. 
Supervised algorithms can apply what has been 
learned in the past to new data, e.g., parametric/non-
parametric algorithms, support vector machines, 
kernels, neural networks. Unsupervised algorithms 
can draw inferences from datasets, e.g., clustering, 
dimensionality reduction, recommender systems and  
deep learning [37]. 
 
Computer vision refers to the ability of computers 
to identify objects, scenes and activities in images. 
Computer vision includes methods for acquiring, 
processing, analyzing and understanding digital 
images. Certain techniques, for example, allow for 
detecting the edges and textures of objects in an 
image [38]. The application of computer vision 
includes for example robotics, remote sensing and 
process control. 
 
Robotics refers to the interdisciplinary engineering 
and science that involves the design, manufacture 
and operations of robots, as well as software for their 
control and data processing. Recent advances in 
artificial intelligence, communications and sensors 
have produced more intelligent, capable and sensing 
robots.  In practice, these developments enable 
robots to replace human labor in manufacturing task, 
as well as in a growing number of service jobs, such 
as maintenance [39]. For example, recent research 
[40] shows that robotics and automation of 
manufacturing processes translates into optimizing 
processes in the material and energy consumptions, 
which are important targets of the circular economy. 
IV. 
TOOL RENTAL SERVICE 
In this section, we describe how the previously presented 
digital technologies, namely sensors, networking, cloud-
based platforms, data integration and data analytics, can be 
applied to a tool rental service to promote the circular 
economy. We present a rapid experiment of the tool rental 
service and develop a scenario anticipating the possible 
future of the tool rental service. Our aim is to afford 
understanding on the possibilities of digital technologies 
enabling more sustainable and circular business models. 
A. Approach 
Our AARRE project (Capitalising on Invisible Value - 
User-driven Business Models in the Emerging Circular 
Economy) explored user-driven circular business models and 
collaborated with multiple Finnish companies, Finnish 
organizations and Finnish decision makers in the circular 
economy field. The idea of a tool rental service is to offer an 
alternative for purchasing of tools, such as electric tools and 
cleaning equipment, which are used infrequently in urban 
economy. This kind of sharing economy can be an ecological 
option in certain conditions and on the other hand facilitates 
the storage problem of goods in urban housing [41]. 
The planning and rapid experimenting of the tool rental 
scenario is based on several discussions with eight AARRE 
project researchers, one start-up entrepreneur and various 
companies. The goal of our empirical study is to provide 
input for the discussion on how to disrupt current prevailing 
linear business models by employing digital data and IoT 
technologies. 
B. Current deployment of the tool rental service 
Our AARRE project conducted a rapid experimental tool 
rental service called Liiteri [42] in collaboration with Finnish 
IT-startup CoReorient [43] and hardware store K-Rauta. The 
other 
co-operation 
partners 
were 
Helsinki 
Region 
Environmental 
Services 
Authority 
HSY, 
Technology 
Industries of Finland, SER-kierrätys, City of Espoo, 
Purjebägit 
Oy, 
Kierrätysverkko 
Oy, 
Metrosuutarit.fi, 
Pyörähuoltoovelle.fi and Kauppahalli24.fi. 
Liiteri is an online platform, where consumers can rent 
electric tools and house cleaning equipment. By registering 
as a Liiteri user, the consumer can choose the desired 
product and renting date via online platform. In addition, the 
payment is made via the online service at the same time. 
When the payment has been processed, the consumer gets an 
access code to the 24/7 Liiteri self-service point, which is an 
intelligent container in the city centre of Helsinki. The 
consumers can pick up the rented gear any time from the 
Liiteri self-service point, where there are good public 
transport connections. Alternatively, the consumer can 
choose a crowdsourced PiggyBaggy home delivery service 
[44]. An initial experiment to examine the utility of the 
Liiteri tool rental service was conducted and reported in 
another study [41]. 
C. IoT-enabled scenario for the tool rental service 
In this section, we present an IoT platform based future 
scenario for the Liiteri tool rental service by employing 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
Figure 1.  The IoT-enabled tool rental service business scenario. 
digital data and IoT technologies. Figure 1 presents the 
developed scenario, which aims to provide understanding of 
the anticipated possibilities of sensors, networking, cloud-
based platforms, data integration and data analytics.  
A beacon is a node aware of its location (e.g., equipped 
with Bluetooth) [45] and it can send signals to smartphones 
or other mobile devices. For example, the consumer’s 
smartphone can interact with beacons placed in the Liiteri 
self-service point via a Liiteri mobile application (later 
referred to as the Liiteri app). Bluetooth-based beacons can 
be used for mobile door opening when entering the 24/7 
Liiteri self-service point [46]. Furthermore, the beacons can 
enable consumers to be recognized when entering the 24/7 
Liiteri self-service point and help them easily to find the 
selected tool or other rented gear with nearby notifications 
feature. A payment for the selected product can be 
discharged using a beacon-based mobile payment or a more 
conventional online payment service provided by the Liiteri 
app. 
The rental profile including demographic data and 
browsing history from the Liiteri app can be stored in the 
cloud-based Liiteri database and analysed for personalized 
recommendations. The Liiteri app can also allow the 
consumers to access product information and reviews to help 
them make their decision. At home, the consumers can be 
provided with a guided usage service by scanning the tool 
(equipped with beacon) with their phone. The Liiteri app 
makes it easier for the consumers to get useful information 
and even a guided replacement service in case of a broken 
part  can be possible. 
Sensors 
can 
measure 
for 
example 
acceleration, 
temperature, vibration and humidity of tools or parts of the 
tools. The sensor data can be exploited in business 
intelligence in many ways, such as in condition-based 
maintenance (CBM). CBM is a maintenance procedure 
based on the information collected through conditions 
monitoring and can be used for diagnostics and prognostics 
[47].  Prognostics based maintenance is often called as 
predictive maintenance. CBM of the tools can employ 
multiple sensor data fusion and analytics platform (either on-
premise 
or cloud-based) to assess 
current 
failures 
(diagnostics) and possible future failures (prognostics). In 
our Liiteri scenario, the tools can be equipped with budget 
sensors connected to the cloud-based analytics platform. The 
sensor data can be stored in the Liiteri database and further 
analysed in batches with different data analytics techniques, 
such as machine learning, for diagnostics and prognostics 
purposes. The sensor data, especially concerning usage and 
failures, can be utilized in refurbishment activities and turn 
refurbishment into a potential and accessible option. The 
predictive maintenance service can ‘maintain the tools 
before they break’ in order to increase the lifetime of tools, 
and improve safety and usage experience of the tool rental 
service. A trivial consequence from refurbishment and 
increasing the lifetime of tools is decreasing the use of 
natural resources and waste. 
A prognostics model employing machine learning can be 
developed for calculating a Remaining Useful Lifetime 
(RUL) and considering sustainability aspects in decision-
making, i.e., deciding when maintenance is economically 
viable, environmentally bearable and equitable compared to 
reuse, remanufacture or recycle [48]. The tool usage data 
collected with sensors and the consumer feedback can be 
analysed to improve future product design and performance. 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

In addition, the collected data can be analysed to specify the 
recycling or disassembly activities in order to maintain both 
economic and environmental value of the parts as high as 
possible. 
The cloud-based Liiteri platform can also collect data 
about the location of the tool and provide a connection with 
next user.  This promotes collaboration among consumers 
and facilitates crowdsourced delivery from user to user. 
During the delivery process, communication can be handled 
via the Liiteri app. The deliverer can earn points, which she 
or he can spend for the tool rental or redeem for cash. Home 
delivery service of the tools, in turn, can utilize the real-time 
navigation information and the customer’s location 
information for route planning and optimization of delivery 
routes to reduce driving time, fuel consumption and exhaust 
gases.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
IoT technologies and digitalization in general enable 
novel business models based on the circular economy. As a 
result, they offer a great potential to disrupt current 
prevailing linear business models [49]. This study 
contributes to the discussion on circular economy by 
providing a future IoT-enabled scenario for future 
development paths. The tool rental service scenario uses 
sensors, networking, cloud computing and data analysis 
technologies for selling services instead of goods, for 
designing products for regeneration and for creating added 
value through services. Generally, offering services instead 
of selling goods reduces the environmental footprint of 
product manufacturing and the private ownership of goods. 
At its best, this study awakes discussion among companies 
on how to create circular economy business by employing 
digital data and IoT technologies.  
The scenario planning of this study has been qualitative 
and it includes researchers’ own subjective interpretation. 
The previous study [41] examined the utility of the Liiteri 
tool rental service and the results indicated that renting could 
be an attractive choice to consumers if crucial consumer 
expectations are identified and met. This attitudinal change is 
partly attributable to technological improvements, such as 
widespread digital cloud platforms, which make sharing of 
goods easier. On the other hand, especially young people 
prefer services to ownership of goods. 
In order to proceed towards commercial utilization of the 
presented concept, further work on the IoT-enabled tool 
rental service scenario includes addressing multiple 
technical, usability, and profitability aspects, in addition to 
the environmental viewpoint. The main technological 
challenges include the overall cost-efficient logistics on large 
scale, data security, interoperability of IoT sub-systems, and 
interface with the consumers. The usability of the service 
must meet or exceed the level of current modern competing 
e-commerce platforms. Overall, the business challenges are 
the same as for e-commerce services in general. To be 
commercially viable, the service must maximize the user 
satisfaction and minimize the costs through intelligent use of 
IoT technologies. Future work needs to evaluate which parts 
of the system are efficient as automated, and which parts 
should be managed by human operators, resulting in an 
optimal profitability. Full examination is needed on the types 
of products that provide most benefit from the circular 
economy service concept in terms of environmental benefit. 
Moreover, next steps of future research endeavours could 
focus on implementation of a next generation IoT-enabled 
circular economy service for a larger group of people, with 
the systematic collection of consumer experiences for further 
service improvement.  
Despite the various remaining challenges, there is a 
growing amount of consumers that see the environmental 
friendliness as an added value factor. This could facilitate the 
accumulation of consumers in the early phases of 
development, 
towards 
ultimately 
better 
collaboration 
between the human use of technology and the environment.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been conducted as a part of the 
AARRE (Capitalising on Invisible Value – User-Driven 
Business Models in the Emerging Circular Economy) 
project. The authors would like to express their gratitude to 
the Green Growth Programme of the Finnish Funding 
Agency for Innovation (Tekes), the Technical Research 
Centre of Finland (VTT), the case companies and other 
parties involved in the AARRE project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Ellen Mac Arthur foundation. “Towards the Circular 
Economy vol 1: Economic and business rationale for an 
accelerated transition”, 2012. 
[2] J. Manyika, M. Chui, J. Bughin, R. Dobbs, P. Bisson, P. and 
A. Marrs. “Disruptive technologies: Advances will transform 
life, business, and the global economy”, McKinsey Global 
Institute, 2016. 
[3] P. Ghisellini, C. Cialani and S. Ulgiati (2015). "A review on 
circular economy: the expected transition to a balanced 
interplay of environmental and economic systems." Journal of 
Cleaner 
Production 
114, 
2016, 
pp. 
11-32.  
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.09.007 
[4] A. Wijkman and S. Kristian. “The circular economy and 
benefits for society." Jobs and Climate Clear Winners in an 
Economy Based on Renewable Energy and resource 
Efficiency, 2015. 
[5] D. Miorandi, S. Sicari, F. De Pellegrini and I. Chlamtac. 
“Internet of things: Vision, applications and research 
challenges." Ad Hoc Networks 10(7), 2012, pp. 1497-1516. 
[6] J. Buckley. “From RFID to the Internet of things: pervasive 
networked systems”, Final Report on the Conference 
organised by DG Information Society and Media, Networks 
and Communication Technologies Directorate, March 2006. 
[7] A. Morlet et al. “Intelligent assets: Unlocking the circular 
economy”, Ellen Mac Arthur foundation, 2016. 
[8] J. Butterworth et al. “Towards the Circular Economy vol 3: 
accelerating the scale-up across global supply chains”, Ellen 
MacArthur Foundation, 2014. 
[9] D. A. R. George, B. C. Lin, and Y. Chen, "A circular 
economy model of economic growth". Environmental 
Modelling 
& 
Software 
73, 
2015, 
pp. 
60-63. 
doi:10.1016/j.envsoft.2015.06.014 
[10] M. E. Porter and J. E. Heppelmann. “How smart, connected 
products are transforming competition”. Harvard Business 
Review, 92(11), 2014, pp. 64-88. 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

[11] M. Weiser, M. (1991). “The computer for the 21st century”. 
IEEE pervasive computing, 1(1), 2002, pp. 19-25. 
[12] J. Greenough. “The Internet of everything 2016”, BI 
Intelligence, 2016. 
[13] J. Fraden. Handbook of modern sensors: physics, designs, and 
applications. Springer Science & Business Media, 2015. 
[14] The IPv6 Forum n.d. http://www.ipv6forum.com/ (Accessed 
Jul 14, 2017) 
[15] N. Kaur and S. Monga. “Comparisons of wired and wireless 
networks: A review”. International Journal of Advanced 
Engineering Technology, V(II), 2014, pp. 34-35. 
[16] Bluetooth. “A look at the basics of Bluetooth technology” n.d. 
http://www.bluetooth.com/Pages/Basics.aspx (Accessed Jun 
20, 2017). 
[17] NearFieldCommunication.org n.d.  
http://nearfieldcommunication.org/  (Accessed Jun 20, 2017). 
[18] R. Want. “An introduction to RFID technology”. IEEE 
Pervasive Computing, 5(1), 2006, pp.  25-33. 
[19] Wi-Fi Alliance n.d. http://www.wi-fi.org/ (Accessed Jun 20, 
2017). 
[20] ZigBee website n.d. www.zigbee.org/ (Accessed Jun 20, 
2017). 
[21] LoRa 
Alliance 
www-pages 
n.d. 
https://www.lora-
alliance.org/what-is-lora/technology (Accessed Jun 20, 2017). 
[22] J. Mineraud, O. Mazhelis, X, Su and S. Tarkoma. “A gap 
analysis 
of 
Internet-of-Things 
platforms”. 
Computer 
Communications, 89, 2016, pp.  5-16. 
[23] M. Kovatsch, S. Mayer and B. Ostermaier. “Moving 
application logic from the firmware to the cloud: Towards the 
thin server architecture for the internet of things”. In: 
Innovative Mobile and Internet Services in Ubiquitous 
Computing (IMIS), 2012 Sixth International Conference on. 
IEEE, 2012. pp. 751-756. 
[24] Z. Shelby, K. Hartke and C. Bormann. The Constrained 
Application 
Protocol 
(CoAP) 
n.d. 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc725 (Accessed Jun 20, 2017). 
[25] MQ 
Telemetry 
Transport 
(MQTT) 
V3.1 
Protocol 
Specification 
(2010) 
n.d.http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/library/ws-mqtt/ 
(Accessed Jun 20, 2017). 
[26] A. Iivari, T. Väisänen, M. Ben Alaya, T. Riipinen and T. 
Monteil. 
”Harnessing 
XMPP 
for 
Machine-to-Machine 
Communications & Pervasive Applications”. Journal of 
Communications Software & Systems, 10(3), 2014, pp. 163-
178. 
[27] Apache Flume 1.5.2 User Guide — Apache Flume n.d. 
http://flume.apache.org/FlumeUserGuide.html (Accessed Jun 
20, 2017). 
[28] Apache Kafka n.d. https://kafka.apache.org/ (Accessed Jun 
20, 2016). 
[29] Apache Samza n.d. http://samza.apache.org/ (Accessed Jun 
20, 2017). 
[30] Apache Storm n.d. https://storm.apache.org/ (Accessed Jun 
20, 2017). 
[31] Apache Flink: Scalable batch and stream processing n.d. 
https://flink.apache.org/ (Accessed Jun 20, 2017). 
[32] HBase 
– 
Apache 
HBaseTM 
Home 
n.d. 
http://hbase.apache.org/  (Accessed Jun 20, 2017). 
[33] KairosDB n.d. https://kairosdb.github.io/  (Accessed Jun 20, 
2017). 
[34] The 
Apache 
Cassandra 
Project 
n.d. 
http://cassandra.apache.org/ (Accessed Jun 20, 2017). 
[35] InfluxDB - Open Source Time Series, Metrics, and Analytics 
Database n.d. http://influxdb.com/ (Accessed Jun 20, 2017). 
[36] T. H. Davenport. “Competing on Analytics”. Harward 
Business review, 84(1), 2016, p. 98. 
[37] S. Boyd, N. Parikh, E. Chu, B. Peleato and J. Eckstein, J. 
“Distributed optimization and statistical learning via the 
alternating direction method of multipliers”. Foundations and 
Trends® in Machine Learning, 3(1), 2011, pp. 1-122. 
[38] S. Russell and P. Norvig, P. “Artificial intelligence: a modern 
approach”. Prentice-Hall, Egnlewood Cliffs, 1995. 
[39] M. Chui, J. Manyika and M. Miremadi. “Where machines 
could replace humans – and where they can’t (yet)”. 
McKinsey Quarterly, July 2017. 
[40] V. F. Soporan, M. Crișan, T. Lehene and A. L. Pop. (2016, 
June). “Methodology for appreciation the manufacturing 
castings from perspective of circular economy”. In IOP 
Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, 
133(1), June 2016, p. 012063. 
[41] M. Antikainen, M. Lammi and H. Paloheimo. “Creating value 
for consumers in CE - Tools as a service”. In: ISPIM 
Innovation Symposium. The International Society for 
Professional Innovation Management (ISPIM), June 2017, p. 
1. 
[42] Liiteri n.d. www.liiteri.net (Accessed Sep 26, 2017) 
[43] CoReorient n.d. www.coreorient.com (Accessed Sep 26, 
2017) 
[44] Piggy Paggy Beta n.d. www.piggybaggy.com (Accessed Sep 
26, 2017) 
[45] M. L. Sichitiu and V. Ramadurai. “Localization of wireless 
sensor networks with a mobile beacon”. In: Mobile Ad-hoc 
and Sensor Systems, 2004 IEEE International Conference on.  
IEEE, 2004. p. 174-183. 
[46] J. Potts  and S. Sukittanon. “Exploiting Bluetooth on Android 
mobile 
devices 
for 
home 
security 
application”. 
In: 
Southeastcon, 2012 Proceedings of IEEE. IEEE, 2012. p. 1-4. 
[47] A. K. Jardine, D. Lin and D. Banjevic. “A review on 
machinery 
diagnostics 
and 
prognostics 
implementing 
condition-based maintenance”. Mechanical systems and 
signal processing, 20(7), 2006, pp. 1483-1510. 
[48] B. Iung and E. Levrat, E. “Advanced maintenance services for 
promoting sustainability”. Procedia CIRP, 22, 2014, pp. 15-
22. 
[49] M. Antikainen, M. Lammi and T. Hakanen. ”Consumer 
service innovation in a circular economy – the customer value 
perspective”. In: Proceedings of ICServ2016 Conference. The 
4th International Conference on Serviceology (ICServ2016), 
September 2016. 
 
 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

