An Approach to Enhance the Timeliness
of Wireless Communications
Jeferson L. R. Souza and Jos´e Ruﬁno
University of Lisboa - Faculty of Sciences
LaSIGE - Navigators Research Team
Email(s): jsouza@lasige.di.fc.ul.pt, ruf@di.fc.ul.pt
Abstract—Wireless technologies are the present and the future
of network communications. However, the support of real-
time data transmission in wireless communications — providing
support for execution of well-timed networked operations —
is still an open issue, not fully addressed by current wireless
network standards and technologies. Thus, this paper proposes
a solution to enhance the timeliness of wireless communications
without a need for fundamental modiﬁcations to the standard
speciﬁcations. The IEEE 802.15.4 wireless network is used as a
relevant case study. Our main contributions in this paper are: (a)
a proposal to enhance the timeliness of wireless communications;
(b) the extension of the data frame transmission service in
order to control the effects of temporary partitions caused by
disturbances in the medium and medium access control protocols;
(c) a strategy to reduce the negative effects caused by the
aforementioned disturbances.
Index Terms—medium access control, inaccessibility, wireless
communication, real-time systems.
I. INTRODUCTION
The provision of temporal guarantees on wireless com-
munications is still an open issue. Several approaches [1]–
[4] to the problem of enhancing the timeliness of wireless
communications assume that the network always operates
normally, disregarding the occurrence of disturbances in the
medium and medium access control (MAC) protocols.
However, wireless networks are extremely sensitive to ex-
ternal disturbances such as those resulting from electromag-
netic interference, or application scenarios requiring intense
mobility. These disturbances may lead to the occurrence of
temporary partitions, also called periods of inaccessibility,
where there may be sets of nodes which cannot communicate
with each other [5]. Standard MAC protocols, including those
used in wireless communications, can recover from these
situations. However, this recovery process takes time and in
the meanwhile the network is partitioned. The duration of a
period of inaccessibility is dependent on each MAC layer, and
must be analyzed for each network, such as the one deﬁned
in the IEEE 802.15.4 standard [6].
The occurrence of periods of inaccessibility leads to dis-
ruptions in the provision of MAC layer services. Furthermore,
This work was partially motivated by our work within the scope of
the ESA (European Space Agency) Innovation Triangle Initiative program,
through ESTEC Project AIR-II (ARINC 653 in Space — Industrial Initiative),
URL: http://air.di.fc.ul.pt. This work was partially supported by EC, through
project IST-STREP-288195 (KARYON) and by FCT through the Multiannual
Funding and CMU-Portugal Programs and the Individual Doctoral Grant
SFRH/BD/45270/2008.
the analysis of the wireless protocol stack with a bottom-
up approach shows that these disturbances may affect the
entire stack, implying that service disruption may propagate
upwards, and therefore interfere with the execution of higher
layer protocols and applications. Thus, this paper proposes a
new component layer executing on top of the MAC exposed
interface to control the timeliness of wireless communications
and reduce the impact of MAC layer service disruptions on the
execution of the entire wireless protocol stack. This component
layer improves the MAC layer functionality, mediating and
isolating its interaction with higher layers, and allowing the
conﬁguration of the MAC layer parameters face to application
requirements and environment restrictions.
The IEEE 802.15.4 wireless sensor and actuator network
is used as a case study to present the main features of our
proposal. A strategy is also presented to control the negative
effects induced by the occurrence of periods of inaccessi-
bility in network operation. Our approach does not require
fundamental modiﬁcations of wireless network standards and
therefore is in compliance with existing Commercial Off-the-
Shelf (COTS) network components.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents a
brief description of the system model used in our analysis.
Section III presents an overview of the IEEE 802.15.4 stan-
dard. Section IV presents our proposal, describing its main
components, the advantages of its use, and the improvements
introduced at the data link layer service interface. Section V
describes our results, extending the characterization of the data
frame transmission service, and the strategy to control the
periods of inaccessibility on wireless communications, using
the IEEE 802.15.4 as a case study. Finally, Section VI draws
some conclusions and future directions of this work.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
Our system model is formed by a set of communicating en-
tities (processes/nodes) described by P = {p1, p2, p3, ..., pN}.
Each entity, pn, represents a process/node within a wireless
network segment with n varying from 1 to N.
In an arbitrary geographic region we assume that all wireless
nodes either communicate with each other at only one hop of
distance or are out of reach. This means, all communicating
wireless nodes are within the region of inﬂuence of one
another and therefore each node can sense all transmissions of
any other node. Hence, we assume the given wireless network
277
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

segment being composed of N nodes interconnected by a
channel. Each communicating node pn ∈ P connects to the
channel by a transmitter and a receiver. Network components
either behave correctly or crash upon exceeding a given
number of consecutive omissions, the omission degree bound,
k. An omission is an error that destroys a data or control frame.
Wireless communication channels are especially susceptible to
omission errors, which may be due to a number of causes:
electromagnetic interference in the medium; disturbances in
a node transmitter/receiver circuitry; collisions derived from
transmissions performed by different nodes on the same time;
glitches in the network protocol operation; or even effects
resulting from node mobility.
Despite its importance, the presence of channel malicious
attacks [7], [8] is not considered in this paper, in order to
simplify the system model and our analysis. Malicious attacks
will be thoroughly addressed in a future work.
The omission of control frames (e.g., a token or a beacon)
may generate temporary network partitions, logical rather than
physical, called periods of inaccessibility [5]. A period of
inaccessibility is a time interval where the network does not
provide service although it cannot be considered failed. The
characterization of IEEE 802.15.4 inaccessibility with respect
to non-malicious disturbances is addressed in [6]. In addition,
we assume that the wireless network is, at most, inaccessible
i times, during a time interval relevant for protocol execution.
III. IEEE 802.15.4 OVERVIEW
The IEEE 802.15.4 standard speciﬁes that each network
must contain a coordinator, which deﬁnes the characteristics
of the network such as addressing, supported radio channels,
and operation mode. Normally, the coordinator is the node
with the highest power and energy capabilities to support the
execution of management operations required to maintain the
network active throughout two operation modes: NonBeacon-
enabled and Beacon-enabled. The case study addressed in this
work (Section V) assumes a Beacon-enabled operation.
In the Beacon-enabled mode, the access to the wireless
medium is controlled by information carried in a special frame
sent by the coordinator. This special frame is called beacon
and bounds a special structure called superframe, illustrated
in Fig. 1. The information inside the beacon helps the nodes
to know the entire duration of the superframe, allowing the
synchronization and the control of the medium access.
The superframe organization of Fig. 1 identiﬁes two main
parts: the active and inactive periods. The active period is
mandatory and it is, in turn, constituted by the Contention
Access Period (CAP) and the Contention Free Period (CFP).
CAP is also mandatory and allows all nodes to compete for
the utilization of the shared physical medium. CFP is optional,
being designed for bandwidth reservation, and therefore a
node may previously allocate a slot, called Guarantee Time
Slot (GTS), for exclusive medium access. The slotted ver-
sion of Carrier Sense Multiple Access/Collision Avoidance
(CSMA/CA) protocol [9] is used in node competition for
medium access during the CAP portion of the superframe.
Fig. 1: Superframe structure
Since GTS slots are reserved to a single node, no contention
occurs and, within its allocated slot, the node can freely access
the medium.
Completing the superframe structure the inactive period is
optional and designed to optimize energy consumption. Thus,
during this period all nodes in the network may turn off their
transceivers to accomplish this goal [10].
IV. AN APPROACH TO ENHANCE THE TIMELINESS OF
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
Our approach to enhance the timeliness of wireless com-
munications consists of an extensible component layer build
around a standard MAC layer, dubbed Mediator Layer. This
extensible component layer intermediates the communication
and provides error isolation between the MAC and higher
layers, minimizing the negative effects caused by disturbances
in the medium and medium access protocols. The Mediator
Layer is a standard-compliant solution which extends the
MAC layer services with additional features and guarantees,
enhancing the timeliness of wireless communications.
As drawn in Fig. 2 the Real-Time Protocol Suite, the
Timeliness and Partition Control, and the Conﬁguration and
Management Control are fundamental components handling
and managing the actions required to secure reliability and
timeliness in data communications, thus enhancing the prop-
erties of the native MAC service.
The Real-Time Protocol Suite is responsible for handling
data transmissions. This component enhances the frame trans-
mission service provided by the MAC layer, establishing
a foundation to offer a set of different service guarantees,
with respect to reliability and timeliness, such as message
transmission time bounds. Different protocols, serving requests
with different types of requisites, can be incorporated in this
component, augmenting the applicability of standard MAC
layers on different areas with different requirements, namely
on those with strict real-time demands, such real-time control
and monitoring.
The Timeliness and Partition Control component deals with
the temporal aspects related to the data transmission service,
controlling and monitoring the timing of the actions within
the Mediator Layer, and helping to provide resilience against
all the occurrences of temporary network partitions. This
component monitors the MAC layer to detect the occurrence
and to be aware of any partitioning incidents, providing
services to the Real-Time Protocol Suite. For example, a
278
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Fig. 2: An approach to enhance the timeliness of wireless
communications
timer service controls the temporal execution of protocols, and
integrated with the partition control functionality, allows the
use of optimal timeout values even in the presence of periods
of inaccessibility. Timeout values are automatically extended
in this case, thus avoiding a premature and equivocal error
propagation to other components and to higher layers.
The Conﬁguration and Management Control component
manages and controls the conﬁguration of all parameters of
the standard MAC layer and the internal parameters of the
Mediator Layer, respecting realistic application requirements,
resource limitations, and environment restrictions. This com-
ponent makes the Mediator Layer (self-)adaptive, and (self-
)managed, allowing the possibility to perform some changes
in its internal state, and on its conﬁguration proﬁle, thus
improving the timeliness of wireless communications.
A. Improving the control of data transmission services
The Mediator Layer implements the data layer program-
ming interface. This implementation is represented by MI:
MI = {request, confirm, indication} .
(1)
where the MI set deﬁnes the primitives in the Mediator
Layer service interface. As usual in this kind of interfaces,
the primitives are in compliance with the service speciﬁcation
interface described in the IEEE 802.2 standard [11]. Thus, a
data transmission service provides three different primitives
utilized to request and conﬁrm a data transmission, and to
indicate the reception of data.
The services provided by the Mediator Layer interface are
build on top of MAC level primitives, which description is
presented in Table I.
Without the Mediator Layer, higher layers shall implement
mechanisms to control a frame transmission, ensuring that the
frame arrives at its destination. In other words, higher layer
protocols shall be: (a) aware of the occurrence of disturbances
in the medium and MAC protocols, including periods of
inaccessibility; (b) capable to conﬁgure parameters of the
Primitives
Description
MAC.data.request
It provides a way to request a data transmission
to the MAC layer. Unreliable transmissions
only.
MAC.data.conﬁrm
It provides a local conﬁrmation that a frame has
been sent to the medium. Does not provide any
guarantee of delivery at the destination.
MAC.data.indication
It provides notiﬁcation about an arrived data
frame.
TABLE I: Standard MAC layer primitives for data transmis-
sion
MAC layer to adapt to different conditions. However, the
incorporation of these characteristics increases the complexity
of higher layer protocols, forcing each of these protocols to
have the capability to cope with low level problems outside
the scope of their domains. The introduction of the Mediator
Layer avoids these design complexities.
The Mediator Layer and its components handle all as-
pects related to a data frame transmission service and its
conﬁguration, implying the reduction of the complexity of
higher layer protocols. Additionally, with the capability to
extend the internal components, our approach also enables
the introduction of different types of control mechanisms,
transmission protocols, (self-)management and (self-)adaptive
strategies, providing an extremely useful service layer. The
extension of the MAC data frame transmission service and the
control of partition incidents (addressed in Section V-C) are
examples of mechanisms implemented in the Mediator Layer
that improve the services provided to higher layers.
Thus, the Mediator Layer is an innovative solution to
enhance dependability and timeliness of wireless communi-
cations, as low as possible at the protocol stack. Its beneﬁts
are ﬂexibly offered at the service interface, being transparently
propagated throughout the entire stack, up to highest layer
communication protocols and to the applications.
V. PRELIMINARY RESULTS: A CASE STUDY ON THE IEEE
802.15.4 STANDARD
A. General characterization of the MAC frame transmission
service
Based on a user perspective of a MAC frame transmission
service we represent in general the time interval required to
access the wireless medium as TW −access. The effective time
consumed by the node to access the medium is directly related
to the medium access protocol in use.
After medium access protocol grants permission to access
the medium, a frame is transmitted in the time interval rep-
resented by TMAC−type. Hence, equations 2 and 3 represent
the best (bc) and worst (wc) cases of MAC frame transmission
times.
T bc
τ−MAC(type) = T bc
W −access + T bc
MAC−type
(2)
T wc
τ−MAC(type) = T wc
W −access + T wc
MAC−type
(3)
279
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

These equations contribute to specify a general timeliness
representation of a MAC level, presenting simple and easy-to-
use formulas to calculate the time bounds of a MAC frame
transmission service.
B. The IEEE 802.15.4 Characterization
As we use the IEEE 802.15.4 as a case study to present our
results, we calculate the speciﬁc bounds of the IEEE 802.15.4
MAC frame transmission service considering a beacon enabled
network. All data frame transmissions, with the exception of
those performed in the GTS portion of the superframe, need
to use of the slotted version of the CSMA/CA protocol [12],
[13], analyzed as part of the MAC frame transmission service.
The CSMA/CA is a non-deterministic protocol, and the
effective wait value is characterized by a random function,
which execution may spam throughout several iterations. In
each iteration, the wait time a node uses up is deﬁned by a
backoff exponent, as represented by the following equation:
Taccess(m) = Tbackoff . (2BE(m) − 1)
(4)
where, Tbackoff is the base value deﬁning the minimum
duration of a backoff period. Observing that the variability
of the backoff exponent is dependent on the iteration number,
m, the value of BE(m) for each iteration is given by the
following equation:
BE(m) =
(
minBE
if m = 0
min(minBE + m, maxBE)
if m > 0
(5)
The lower and upper bounds of BE(m) are given by
minBE and maxBE, respectively. The value assigned to
BE(m) in the ﬁrst iteration is equal to BE(0) = minBE.
For each additional iteration of the CSMA/CA protocol a new
value is calculated for BE(m).
The time needed for medium access under normal IEEE
802.15.4 network operation can thus be characterized, in the
best and worst cases, by the following equations:
T bc
W −access = Taccess(0)
(6)
T wc
W −access =
maxBackoff−1
X
m = 0
Taccess(m)
(7)
where, maxBackoff is the maximum number of iterations.
For the evaluation of absolute access time durations, we
assume the use of the 2.4 GHz IEEE 802.15.4 frequency
operation, with a 62.5k symbols/s symbol rate and with four
bits being coded into a single symbol. The default values of
Table II are used. Under these conditions, the access to the
shared medium may require in the worst case a delay as long
as 2563 symbols, i.e., T wc
W −access ∼= 41ms.
For the maximum frame length of 1016 bits, including
headers, the corresponding worst case data frame transmission
delay is T wc
τ−MAC(data) = 57ms, assuming no errors during
the entire process of a data frame transmission. However,
Parameter
Range
Default
Unit
maxBackoff
0-5
4
Integer
minBE
0-maxBE
3
Integer
maxBE
3-8
5
Integer
Tbackoff
—
20
Symbols
TABLE II: Relevant network parameters deﬁned in the IEEE
802.15.4 standard
disturbances on the medium and medium access protocols
may cause the occurrence of periods of inaccessibility which
may induce the occurrence of errors during a data frame
transmission.
C. Dependability and Timeliness of Wireless Communications
Our proposal to control the dependability and timeliness of
a frame transmission is divided on two issues: (a) the classical
omission error handling present on reliable transmission proto-
cols; (b) and the effective control of periods of inaccessibility.
1) Handling omission errors: Let us consider that the Real-
Time Protocol Suite component uses a reliable unicast trans-
mission service as an extension of the unreliable transmission
service traditionally provided by MAC level standards. This
reliable service is a rather classic transmit with acknowledge-
ment (ACK) protocol required to enforce the reliability of
a data communication service. To start a reliable transmis-
sion some higher level entity shall request a unicast data
transmission with delivery guarantee through the Mediator
Layer programming interface. During protocol execution, the
transmitted frame or its associated ACK may be corrupted
by disturbances which lead to omission errors. In this case,
the destination node does not receive a correct frame, or the
sender node does not receive the ACK associated with this
frame. As frame corruptions are transformed into omission
errors, detected when the time interval needed to transmit
and receive the corresponding ACK frame ends, the sender
node protocol activates a retransmission mechanism and tries
to send the frame again, until a maximum number of attempts
limited by the bounded omission degree, k, is reached.
However, the occurrence of temporary partitions during a
frame transmission may cause a violation of the omission
degree limited by k, and therefore the failure of the protocol in
delivering the frame to its destination. This happens because
the value of k is speciﬁed without contemplate the occurrence
of periods of inaccessibility, and the standard MAC layer does
not provide the additional control provided by our approach.
2) Controlling periods of inaccessibility: Our strategy to
handle the occurrence of periods of inaccessibility during a
frame transmission also transforms inaccessibility incidents
into omission errors. A bounded inaccessibility degree, i, is
introduced to (self)-adapt and conﬁgure the reliable unicast
transmission service, and therefore the Mediator Layer as
well. The combination of i and k (line 8 in Algorithm 1)
makes the retransmission mechanism more dynamic, main-
taining the timeout used to control reception of the ACK
280
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Fig. 3: The Effective Inaccessibility Control Mechanism
(TACK−timeout) with its original and optimized value, and
allowing the adaptation of this mechanism to the different
durations of each type of inaccessibility scenario (see Ta-
ble III). The utilization of the same control mechanism for
temporary partitions is only possible by the causal relation
that exists among the frame transmission request and conﬁrm
primitives. Fig. 3 presents a frame transmission mediated by
our proposed solution, evidencing that the local conﬁrmation
is only provided to the Mediator Layer after the actual
transmission of the frame on the wireless medium.
Algorithm 1 presents the reliable unicast algorithm with
simple, yet fundamental, mechanisms to handle the occurrence
of periods of inaccessibility. In Algorithm 1, lines 8 speciﬁes
the incorporation of the bounded inaccessibility degree control
mechanism in protocol operation, and line 11 the usage of
the MAC level conﬁrmation to start the timer which controls
the retransmission process (in line 12). The value assigned
to the inaccessibility degree bound depends on each network
type and its parameters. However, it is reasonable to assume
that only one period of inaccessibility would occur during a
data transmission, i.e., it is reasonable to assume i = 1. The
main advantage of such control mechanism is the temporal
adaptation of timeout values to the duration of each period of
inaccessibility, which may occur at most i times. Although a
pure reliability enforcement algorithm only uses k to control
the number of retransmissions, the transformation of inacces-
sibility events into omissions adds i to k and increases the
maximum number of retransmissions to k + i. That means,
the protocol is given a consolidated omission degree bound,
K, being K = k + i.
In practical terms, this is equivalent to redeﬁning the value
assigned to the omission degree bound. This is very important
because our control mechanism and the Mediator Layer, can
be incorporated in any off-the-shelf equipment. In other words,
is possible to improve the functionality traditionally offer by
the MAC level without change the hardware devices operating
in an existent wireless network, being totally transparent to the
Algorithm 1 Controlling Inaccessibility (Trapping)
1: Initialization phase.
2: k ← omission degree bound;
3: i ← inaccessibility degree bound;
4: round ← 0; accounts for the number of omissions
5: ack rcv ← 0;
6: Begin.
7: RUcast.data.request(pckt)
8: while round ≤ k+i AND ack rcv = 0 do
9:
frame ← pckt;
10:
MAC.data.request(frame);
11:
when MAC.data.confirm() do
12:
RUcast.restartTimer(TACK−timeout);
13:
when MAC.indication(ACK) received do
14:
ack rcv ← 1;
15:
end when
16:
when RUcast.timer(timeout expired) do
17:
count ← count + 1;
18:
end when
19:
end when
20: end while
21: if ack rcv = 1 then
22:
RUcast.data.confirm(Success);
23: else
24:
RUcast.data.confirm(Failure);
25: end if
26: End.
higher levels.
The value of the consolidated omission degree bound shall
be dimensioned to consider the speciﬁc behavior of each MAC
level standard. The related transmission technologies shall also
be considered to accomplish the maximum efﬁciency against
environment conditions during the provision of a reliable
and timely service. Temporary partitions which may occur
and disturb a frame transmission during the operation of the
network are handled by the activation of the Timeliness and
Partition Control component, improving the capabilities of the
reliable transmission service provided by the Mediator Layer.
281
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Scenario
Designation
Periods of Inaccessibility
best case
worst case
(ms)
(ms)
Single Beacon Frame Loss - No Tracking
tina←sbfl
——
3947.71
Multiple Beacon Frame Loss - Tracking
tina←mbfl
3947.71
15790.08
Synchronization Loss
tina←nosync
15790.08
15790.08
Orphan Node
tina←orphan
15794.15
18421.70
Coordinator Realignment
tina←realign
2.24
43.30
Coordinator Conﬂict Detection
tina←C Conflict
1.14
42.40
Coordinator Conﬂict Resolution
tina←C Resolution
63171.54
63822.54
GTS request
tina←GT S
0.66
41.47
TABLE III: IEEE 802.15.4 best and worst periods of inaccessibility for the 2.4GHz frequency band [6]
D. Extending the general characterization of a MAC frame
transmission service
Traditionally, a MAC frame transmission service is not
aware of the occurrence of periods of inaccessibility during
the network operation. Thus, we shall extend the general
characterization of a MAC frame transmission service to
incorporate the duration of these periods. This extension is
presented in the following equations:
T bc
τ−MAC(type) = T bc
W −access + T bc
MAC−type + Tina
(8)
T wc
τ−MAC(type) = T wc
W −access + T wc
MAC−type + Tina
(9)
where Tina represents the duration of a given period of
inaccessibility. Tina is a general term which supports the adap-
tation of this transmission service to the different durations of
each inaccessibility scenario (see Table III). In case of non
occurrence of a period of inaccessibility, Tina = 0.
Additionally, to evidence the importance of our proposal
and of this control strategy we present in Table III a summary
of relevant set of periods of inaccessibility, which if were com-
pared to a data transmission with 1016 bits and transmission
time around 57ms, are extremely higher. These values were
obtained with an exhaustive analysis of the IEEE 802.15.4
made in [6]. Using the results presented in this paper, the
occurrence of a timing fault is detected by the Mediator Layer,
and its propagation to higher layers is avoided.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The potential of wireless networks to support communi-
cations on different kinds of environments and applications,
with strict timing restrictions, is still an open issue. In this
paper we presented our approach to enhance the timeliness of
wireless communications, introducing a new component layer
with an effective control strategy, avoiding time faults even
in the presence of errors in the medium and medium access
protocols. Our approach presented a (self-)adaptive and (self-
)managed solution, which being in compliance with standards
can be used with the existent COTS components.
Future directions involve: reducing the duration of the
inaccessibility scenarios based on mechanisms present in the
IEEE 802.15.4 standard; improving the support to periodic
trafﬁc and applications with hard temporal restrictions; and
deﬁning relevant real-time metrics to evaluate the wireless
communications with regard to application requirements and
environment restrictions.
REFERENCES
[1] I. Aad, P. Hofmann, L. Loyola, F. Riaz, and J. Widmer, “E-MAC: Self-
organizing 802.11-compatible MAC with elastic real-time scheduling,”
in IEEE Internatonal Conference on Mobile Ad hoc and Sensor Systems
(MASS), October 2007, pp. 1 –10.
[2] M. Hameed, H. Trsek, O. Graeser, and J. Jasperneite, “Performance
investigation and optimization of IEEE 802.15.4 for industrial wireless
sensor networks,” in IEEE International Conference on Emerging Tech-
nologies and Factory Automation (ETFA), Sept 2008, pp. 1016 –1022.
[3] E. Egea-L´opez, J. Vales-Alonso, A. S. Mart´ınez-Sala, J. Garc´ıa-Haro,
P. Pav´on-Mari˜no, and M. V. Bueno Delgado, “A wireless sensor net-
works MAC protocol for real-time applications,” Personal Ubiquitous
Computing, vol. 12, pp. 111–122, January 2008.
[4] X.-Y. Shuai and Z.-C. Zhang, “Research of real-time wireless networks
control system MAC protocol,” Journal of Networks, vol. 5, no. 4, pp.
419–426, April 2010.
[5] P. Ver´ıssimo, J. Ruﬁno, and L. Rodrigues, “Enforcing Real-Time Be-
haviour on LAN-Based Protocols,” in 10th IFAC Workshop on Dis-
tributed Computer Control Systems, Sept. 1991.
[6] J. L. R. Souza and J. Ruﬁno, “Characterization of inaccessibility in
wireless networks-a case study on IEEE 802.15.4 standard,” in 3th IFIP
International Embedded Systems Symposium(IESS), ser. IFIP Advances
in Information and Communication Technology, vol. 310, Langenargen,
Germany, September 2009.
[7] R. Sokullu, I. Korkmaz, O. Dagdeviren, A. Mitseva, and N. R. Prasad,
“An investigation on IEEE 802.15.4 MAC layer attacks,” in 10th Int.
Symposium on Wireless Personal Multimedia Communications, 2007.
[8] P. Radmand, A. Talevski, S. Petersen, and S. Carlsen, “Taxonomy of
wireless sensor network cyber security attacks in the oil and gas indus-
tries,” in 24th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Information
Networking and Applications (AINA).
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE
Computer Society, 2010, pp. 949–957.
[9] L. Kleinrock and F. Tobagi, “Packet switching in radio channels:
Part i–carrier sense multiple-access modes and their throughput-delay
characteristics,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 23, no. 12,
pp. 1400 – 1416, December 1975.
[10] IEEE 802.15.4, “Part 15.4: Wireless medium access control (MAC) and
physical layer (PHY) speciﬁcations for low-rate wireless personal area
networks (WPANs) - IEEE standard 802.15.4,” IEEE P802.15 Working
Group, 2006, Revision of IEEE Standard 802.15.4-2003.
[11] ISO IEC 8802-2:1998, Logical Link Control, IEEE, 1998.
[12] C. Jung, H. Hwang, D. Sung, and G. Hwang, “Enhanced markov chain
model and throughput analysis of the slotted CSMA/CA for IEEE
802.15.4 under unsaturated trafﬁc conditions,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 58, no. 1, January 2009.
[13] J. He, Z. Tang, H.-H. Chen, and Q. Zhang, “An accurate and scalable
analytical model for IEEE 802.15.4 slotted CSMA/CA networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 440–448,
January 2009.
282
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

