Wearable Sensor System Prototype for SIDS Prevention 
 
Gustavo López 
Research Center on Information and  
Communication Technologies  
University of Costa Rica 
San José, Costa Rica 
gustavo.lopez_h@ucr.ac.cr 
Mariana López, Luis A. Guerrero 
School of Computer Science and Informatics  
University of Costa Rica 
San José, Costa Rica 
{mariana.lopez, luis.guerrero}@ecci.ucr.ac.cr
 
 
Abstract— Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS) causes 
unexpected death of infants; a variety of risk factors for SIDS 
have been detected through the years. A significant number of 
deaths occur when the children are being cared by non 
parental caregivers. We found that, using wearable systems 
some of those risk factors can be constantly monitored and the 
gathered information can be sent to the parents through a 
mobile application. In this paper, we present and evaluate a 
prototype of an augmented object and a mobile application 
that could help the prevention of SIDS. A wizard of Oz 
validation helped us determine the feasibility of developing and 
implementing the prototype. Testing results of the prototype 
showed positive parent reception to wide range monitoring and 
acceptable performance of the application.  
Keywords- Wearable system; health monitoring; HCI;  
augmented objects 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS) is an unknown 
phenomenon that causes the death of infant from birth up to 
the first year of age [1]. The American Academy of 
Pediatrics issued in 1992 a series of recommendations to 
prevent SIDS. Although the mortality rate has decreased, 
there are still SIDS cases reported worldwide [2][3][4]. 
According to the Institute for Clinical Systems 
Improvement, stomach or side sleeping are major risks for 
SIDS [5].  Therefore, they advise that children should sleep 
on their backs. Side sleeping was an alternative position, 
however this position is no longer recommended. 
Besides SIDS, there have been reports that show a rise in 
the number of children deaths by accidentally suffocation or 
strangulation in bed [6]. 
Tintinalli et al. [7] stated that SIDS main risks can be 
categorized into two types of factors extrinsic and intrinsic. 
On one hand extrinsic factors include: prone or side sleeping, 
bedclothes overhead, sleeping on sofa or soft furniture, high 
ambient temperature, soft bedding, bed sharing, postnatal 
smoke exposure and prenatal smoke, alcohol or drug 
exposure. On the other hand, intrinsic factors include, but are 
not limited to: prematurity, family history of SIDS, gender, 
race and poverty.  
In the United States, approximately 20% of SIDS deaths 
occur while the infants are in the care of a non-parental 
caregiver [1]. This may be due to a change on the sleeping 
position.  
Nannies or other caregivers could place the baby in the 
stomach sleeping position and the babies are not accustomed 
to being placed in that position [7]. To address this issue, we 
develop an application that allows wide range remote 
monitoring using Wi-Fi. Common approaches of baby 
monitoring mainly use short range communication. 
The main recommendations of the American Academy of 
Pediatrics to prevent SIDS are [1][3][4]: 
 
Supine sleeping position 
 
Firm sleeping surface 
 
No loose objects on the crib 
 
Sleep close but separate of the baby 
 
Avoid overheating 
 
Do not use home monitors as a strategy to reduce the 
risk of SIDS. 
Even though authors explicitly say that parents should 
not focus on a single risk factor [1][3], technology nowadays 
allows us to verify the position of the baby and the 
environment’s temperature very easily using wearable 
sensors. 
Some wearable systems are based on augmented objects. 
Augmented Objects are basically everyday objects provided 
with additional characteristics through hardware and 
software in order to allow users to interact with computation 
systems through those objects [8]. 
Our contribution in this paper is to provide a description 
of the state of the art in wearable systems for child security 
on SIDS. We studied academic and industry efforts to create 
devices to help prevent SIDS. Also, we took into account the 
reported recommendations of experts in medicine and 
pediatrics. 
We present the description and evaluation of an 
augmented object that is able to extract the baby´s 
information. The information is send to a computational 
device that analyzes it and sends it to the parent’s phone 
through a mobile application. We used Wi-Fi as our wireless 
technology to enable constant wide range monitoring. 
Also, we provide some data on the time frames required 
to provide assured information to parents when monitoring 
their babies. Performance testing was conducted to assert the 
possibility of managing multiple monitoring and notification 
devices concurrently. We present the benefits of product 
validation techniques used in the development process of 
ubiquitous computing applications. 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

In the following, Section II of this paper shows related 
work to this research, some different approaches in SIDS 
prevention. Then, Section III describes the design and 
implementation of the augmented object, the mobile 
application and all the configurations required. Section IV 
presents the results of the evaluation carried with the object. 
Finally, Section V presents conclusions and further work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Over the past decades there has been an extensive 
research on bio-monitoring techniques. In 2003, Budinger 
[9] stated that the first success on remote monitoring systems 
for babies was the use of wireless breathing monitor using 
radio signal. Author also presented additional research 
however results produced up to 50% false positive signals. 
In 2006, Linti, Horter, Österreicher and Planck [10] 
developed a sensory baby vest used to continuously monitor 
respiration, temperature and humidity. Authors used a 
personal computer to run the monitoring software which also 
alerts when parameters exceed the threshold established. The 
main drawback of this research was the lack of remote 
communication in order to allow monitoring of gathered 
data. 
In 2007, Cao and Hsu [11][12] presented a non-invasive 
and remote infant monitoring system using CO2 sensors that 
uses exhaled air from an infant to reduce the potential risks 
for SIDS. The proposed system uses sensors placed on the 
crib´s edge. The main advantage of Cao and Hsu proposal is 
that it incorporates wireless communication capabilities. 
Other large advantage is that the system is non invasive. 
However, several sensors are required to approach the 
problem and even though authors mention the possibility of 
risky sleeping positions they do not addresses the 
recommendations given by the American Academy of 
Pediatrics (AAP). 
Rimet et al. [13] presented a surveillance system for 
infants using a specially designed infant shoe to carry on a 
pulse oximetry in order to determine the CO2 saturation. The 
designed shoe also has an integrated 3-axes accelerometer. 
Other examples of systems used to monitor children are 
Sensory Baby Vest, baby suit, baby glove and the already 
mentioned BBA bootee all these systems are wearable. There 
have been of course, efforts in the development of non-
wearable systems such as augmented cribs, instrumented 
toys and others. However, toys or other loose objects in the 
crib go against the recommendations to help prevent SIDS 
[14]. 
Another interesting work was presented by Ziganshin, 
Numerov and Vygolov [15]. The authors present an ultra-
wide band baby monitoring system that unlike the common 
sound or video baby monitor, constantly monitors the babies. 
This system is a peer to peer system with a sensing unit and a 
parent unit. 
Most of the mentioned prototypes were developed on 
academic environments and laboratories and never reached 
the industry or were massively sold. 
Besides academic prototypes, there are some instruments 
offered in the industry, such as Snuza Breathing 
Monitor[16], which is a small device that can be clipped to a 
baby´s diaper and vibrates or sounds when it does not detect 
breathing. It also has visual indicators. 
Babysense V Hisense is a monitor that detects the baby´s 
movement using pads that are placed under the mattress. It 
incorporates communication to mobile phones however the 
information that it sends is a breathing graphic [17]. 
TiltMon Baby Sleeping Posture Monitor [18] is another 
peer to peer sensing monitor that alerts parents when the 
baby´s tilt is dangerous. WeMo [19] by Belkin is a monitor 
that helps to analize sleeping and crying patterns and notifies 
parents through a mobile application; however, it notifies 
only through audio as a common monitoring system.  
Also, some non-technological efforts have been made 
including: Baby Sleeps Safe that is a two piece sleep system 
that replaces loose bedding and prevents the baby from 
turning around [20]. 
The last product that we would like to address is Sensible 
Baby. This product was first globally seen at the 
International 
Consumer 
Electronics 
and 
Consumer 
Technology tradeshow, CES 2014. Sensible Baby monitors 
position, temperature and movement or breathing sending 
alerts when a risk is detected [21]. 
Some issues with the actual approaches in industry are: 
 
They use loose objects to monitor the baby´s status. 
 
Communication is peer to peer: one monitoring 
device and one notification device. 
 
Communications are short range: communication 
protocol normally allows only a few meters between 
the monitor and the notification devices. 
Our prototype addresses all the presented issues. By 
being an augmented object rather than a loose object it 
addresses the recommendations of the American Academy of 
Pediatrics. The used wireless technology (Wi-Fi) and 
architecture allow multiple notification devices to monitor 
one sensing device. Moreover, Wi-Fi allows large range 
communication and monitoring as well as short range. This 
feature provides more functionality to our proposal and 
addresses the fact that 20% of SIDS deaths occur while the 
infants are in the care of a non-parental caregiver. 
III. 
PROTOTYPE DEVELOPMENT 
This section presents the design and development of an 
augmented object that senses motion, position and 
temperature to prevent SIDS.  
The augmented object presented is complemented with a 
mobile-Web application that displays the information 
gathered by the augmented object. 
The augmented object prototype was developed 
following an Augmented Object Development Process 
(AODeP) [22][23].  This method ensures that all the stages 
in the development are focused on the problem to solve and 
from an engineering perspective. 
AODeP proposes six main stages: (1) problem definition; 
(2) context of use definition; (3) requirement definition; (4) 
selection of the object; (5) development; and (6) testing with 
users. We will explain the development through these six 
steps. 
Through studying the reality that parents live and the 
commercial systems we observed that, the problem we must 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

address is the continuous monitoring of babies, providing 
nonstop feedback to the parents when possible or at least 
locally in order to prevent some of the risk factors of SIDS. 
The system usage context actually depends on the user. 
We addressed the context of a particular baby and at least 
one person monitoring the baby´s condition.  
The requirements of the system -defined by the authors 
by studying the users- are the following: 
 
The system must be able to detect the baby´s 
position and send the gathered data to the mobile 
application. 
 
As it is been confirmed by medical pediatric 
institutions the back sleeping position is the best one 
to prevent SIDS. So, the system must be able to 
detect any other position and trigger an alarm on all 
monitoring artifacts. 
 
The system must be able to detect ambient 
temperature and trigger alarms if thresholds are 
violated. 
 
The systems must be configurable. 
The sensing device (augmented object) needs to be 
selected. Following the proposed methodology presented by 
Guerrero, Ochoa and Horta [23] a set of candidate objects 
were identified and we selected a clothing patch. Table 1 
shows all the possible candidates for monitoring and 
notification. The notification message would be through a 
mobile application and the local notifications will be 
addressed through future analysis. 
TABLE I.  
CANDITATE OBJECTS TO BE AUGMENTED 
Objects 
Monitoring Object 
Notification Object 
Blanket 
Tank top 
Baby monitor 
Crib 
Clothes patch 
Phone Application 
Pijama 
Belt 
Alarm clock 
 
A. System´s Architecture 
Architectures have been presented by several authors 
through the years to approach wearable health monitoring 
systems [24]. Normally raw data is not processed locally at 
the smart device but at the “cloud” [24]. We decided to 
follow that approach. 
The system is composed by: (1) the sensing device that 
would be attached to the baby´s clothes, (2) the notification 
system that displays the main information gathered on the 
parent’s phone and (3) a central Information Management 
Unit that processes and manages the information and 
displays the information in a Web site. Figure 1 shows the 
main modules of the system. 
The communication technology between the sensing 
patch and the information management unit is Wi-Fi using a 
local area network. We assume that the parent’s phone has 
access to Internet, either using mobile network or wireless 
network. 
The main application flow consists of the monitoring 
objects sampling the data gathered by the sensors, sending it 
to the information management unit that process and stores 
the information gathered, and publishes it on a Web site.  
 
Figure 1.  System´s Architecture. 
The Web site uses Google’s Open Id as the way to login. 
This information can be accessed through any web browser 
in case you do not have your phone but the main flow will 
use a phone so that if an alert is triggered the phone 
capabilities are used to alert the parent. 
B. System´s Configuration 
The application configuration is quite simple. It requires 
the user to configure the web site URL, when the 
information management unit is configured. This process is 
carried using a wizard approach on the server side. This 
wizard guides the process to set up the monitoring device 
and provides the URL that must be set on the parents or 
caregivers phone. 
When the information management unit is configured an 
emergency phone number is required. This number is 
accessible through a panic button on the application 
interface. Usually this number would be the one of the 
caregiver or house where the child is located. 
The next configuration is temperature. This is required in 
order to allow the correct functioning of the application in 
different latitudes and altitudes. The parent is required to set 
the “normal” range of temperature and the threshold 
acceptable depending on the variations. 
Finally, the tilt acceptable for the application is 
configurable because some doctors indicate that the crib 
mattress should be tilted to about a 30° to 45° angle. If there 
is no tilting this parameter is not required but it is available 
to counteract the surface tilting. 
C. Monitoring Device Design 
We built the prototype of the sensing object using 
Phidgets sensors [25]. The sensors used in the system are the 
temperature sensor and a gyroscope with accelerometer. 
We set all the parts inside a cloth patch (shaped as a bear) 
adhered to the child’s clothes and that can be removed when 
needed. However, in order to remove it caregiver interaction 
is required. 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
Figure 2.  Doll with attached sensors used for lab testing 
The sensors used were a temperature sensor and a 3-axis 
accelerometer. Figure 2 shows both sensors on a doll to 
demonstrate size. Using Phidgets to create the prototype did 
not allow us to construct a smaller sensing device but did 
allow us to test the product. In order to incorporate in the 
industrial setting more specific and smaller sensors must be 
used. 
The incorporation of complex processing algorithms in 
wearable systems is very limited because of autonomy and 
capability of the components. Therefore we decided to use a 
centralized approach. The components only read and send 
the data and the Information Management Unit process it. 
The Information Management Unit is a computer that 
process the information gathered by the sensors and 
publishes it on a web page that can be accessed through the 
internet. 
Temperature sensor included in the prototype allows 
measurement rated at -30°C to +80°C with and error 
threshold of ± 2°C with a current consumption of 1 
miliAmperes. The error threshold is taken in count when 
monitoring since ± 2°C are subtracted and added to the 
reported data and compared with the configured parameters. 
The 3-axis accelerometer allows a measurement of 
acceleration up to ± 8 g. The gyroscope information allows a 
speed of ± 2000°/s (degrees per second). 0.07°/s is the 
minimum required speed that can be detected. The compass 
allows a 5.5 Gauss as the maximum magnetic field 
measured. 
The maximum speed of sampling is 4 s/s (samples per 
second). However, to avoid server saturation we use one 
sample 
per 
second 
on 
our 
prototype. 
Wireless 
communication depends on the routers and server speed. 
D. Mobile Web Application Design 
The mobile Web application was built using a WebView 
to embed the web page displaying the information into the 
phone, instead of using mobile web browser because 
browsers has already known vulnerabilities that attackers are 
targeting [24].  
  
 
Figure 3.  Mobile application screenshot 
Other important aspects that lead us to develop the 
system using a mobile-web application was the access that 
these applications get to the main components of the phone 
as the Ringtone Manager, Internet access, vibration, and the 
ability to bring to foreground the application when the alarm 
is triggered. 
The mobile-web approach provides the parents with the 
possibility of accessing the system via Internet browser; of 
course, this approach limits the capabilities of the system. 
Figure 3 shows screenshots of the application. The 
application was developed in Spanish. However, it allows 
multiple languages. 
The left part of Figure 3 is the application on a normal 
state, which provides the position and temperature 
information and the connection status. It also allows a 
manual refresh of the information for a confidence boost, 
however the data is updated automatically every few 
seconds, this parameter can be configured. 
When the alarm is triggered the image on the right is 
displayed. The alarm states: “The position of the baby is not 
optimal. Attention needed immediately”. This second screen 
has two buttons the one on the left is used to call the 
emergency number previously configured, the concept 
behind this emergency call number is that it will contact the 
person in charge of the baby at the moment; the one on the 
right “Detener Alerta” stops the alarm. 
We considered using a Trusted Execution Environment 
for this application to increase the security of the application 
and the information.  
The authentication on the application (actually the Web 
application) is done by Oauth2with Google credentials. 
IV. 
PROTOTYPE EVALUATION 
This section presents the evaluations performed to out 
prototype, starting with a concept validation through a 
Wizard of Oz approach [26]. Afterwards, we performed 
functional testing and performance testing. We measure the 
response time of the application on a load demand setting 
and on stressed settings with up to a 1000 connections. 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

A. Concept Validation 
The first part of the evaluation process was a concept 
validation. We interviewed 5 users in their actual context 
who were related to care giving for children. During these 
interviews, some interrogations emerged: What is the safest 
position for a baby? Which exact tilt degree is dangerous? Is 
the phone app important for the notification or are 
notifications only necessary near the baby’s location? Are 
users going to be looking at the monitoring app frequently 
enough? What is the correct size for the object given that it 
will be adhered to a baby? Where is the correct place to put 
the patch in the body? What would happen if the baby moves 
a lot? 
To answer these questions we decided to conduct a 
Wizard of Oz validation. Wizard of Oz is a technique for 
validating new ideas and evaluating prototypes. It is a 
simulation in which participants are given the impression 
that they are interacting with an actual system. However, 
participants are actually interacting with humans, which 
pretend to be the system [26]. 
The Wizard of Oz validation consisted of 5 different 
people that were given the task of monitoring a “baby” 
through a mobile application. We had people in charge of 
trigger the alarm on the phones to simulate a threshold 
violation. From this validation we decided to reduce 
information on the application interface to improve 
readability and make it easier to use. 
This was done to verify the ability to detect movements 
of the baby, to validate the connection with the notification 
system. Our Wizards were given the task to tilt the dolls 
position at random times and our participants were tasked 
with keeping their babies alive, calling to check if they 
noticed that something was wrong in the babies’ 
environment.  
Each session consisted of a timeframe where the 
caregiver was away from the baby and had to monitor the 
environment remotely with the mobile device, which as we 
previously stated is used as an interface for the information 
the augmented object is sending. We would validate after 
each session that the prototype for sensing was working 
correctly, and the response from the user was appropriate.  
In the post-session interviews, we verified if the 
information appeared to be timely and enough, and validated 
the information displayed times by performance testing. To 
allow quick response the application was designed to update 
the data periodically although the page only requires 1.9 KB 
of data per update. 
These validations helped us to determine the acceptance 
of wide range monitoring from the parents, and that they are 
able to react to an alert from our prototype. 
B. Functional Testing 
In parallel to our study about our user’s confidence and 
information needs, we also had to test some physical 
characteristics about our prototype. We developed a 
clothpatch. We tested the prototype on a real baby, who was 
monitored at all times. The purpose of this experiment was to 
determinate the best position for the augmented object and to 
evaluate if it was comfortable for the baby, despite is 
prototype limitations. We conclude that the baby is not able 
to take the object off or turn it off, and that they are able to 
sleep comfortably without the object interfering. 
We tested the sensing device on few people in order to 
make sure that the position was comfortable when sleeping 
in the correct position and that the babies could not take off 
the device. However, at our university and country there is a 
real challenge getting official permission to run clinical tests. 
Therefore, we conducted the tests with people related to the 
project and volunteers. 
C. Performance Testing 
We conducted a series of test using both online and 
offline tools to check our application’s performance. The 
first test was carried using a website performance monitoring 
tool: CA APM Cloud Monitor. Our information management 
unit was a Quad-Core AMD Opteron™ Processor 2382 at 
2.59GHz with 1.00 GB of installed RAM and Windows 
Server 2008 R2 Enterprise 64-bit.  
We designed the mobile-web application so that it would 
perform as fast as possible. Table 2 and Figure 4 show the 
results of an evaluation using CA APM Cloud Monitor [27]. 
The main results show that the average result is 180ms on 
the download time. An interesting assessment that can be 
viewed in Figure 4 is that all the countries in Europe have a 
difference of 36 ms and Asia has the biggest download time. 
These results were expected due to the communication 
latency. 
All this data shows a normal behavior considering the 
geolocation. It is obvious that, if the system was to be 
launched at an industry  level  many servers would be placed 
all over the world in order to provide reliability and stability 
therefore reducing the times to probably a similar rate of the 
one showed by U.S.A of  92 ms. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Graphical represention of data gathered with CA APM Cloud 
Monitor  
The main defects found, that if fixed would help speed 
the process for download is: 
 
Some issues with JavaScript could be fixed by 
eliminating render-blocking and CSS. 
 
It could be also helpful to compact the JavaScript 
code. 
 
Sizing need to be improved depending on the 
displaying device 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

TABLE II.  
CA APM CLOUD MONITOR RESULTS 
Test Perform from 
Measured Parameters 
Connect 
Time (ms) 
Download 
time (ms) 
Download 
Size (Bytes) 
Costa Rica 
0.0032 
0.0036 
2059 
U.S.A. 
92 
96 
2065 
United Kingdom 
152 
155 
2066 
Germany 
169 
172 
2068 
Sweden 
170 
173 
2065 
Switzerland 
176 
180 
2069 
Germany 
181 
180 
2068 
Italy 
183 
185 
2071 
Poland 
188 
191 
2076 
China 
283 
287 
2075 
 
Figure 4 shows that the farther the parent is from the 
baby the higher the time to get feedback, however this time 
could be reduced by improving communications depending 
on the location of usage.  
We propose a content delivery network approach to 
achieve high performance on our system, although this could 
increase the costs of operation. However, this approach could 
not be tested. 
We test the systems performance through stress testing 
using two different configurations. The first configuration 
was: Users Count (40-600), user increase rate (10), network 
configurations (LAN and 3G). Table 3 shows the results of 
this configuration. 
TABLE III.  
RESULTS OF PERFORMANCE TEST USERS 40-600 
Counter 
Min 
Max 
Average 
User Load 
40 
600 
320 
Pages/Sec 
14 
291 
153 
Response time 
0.019 
0.30 
0.048 
 
The second configuration was: users count (1-1000), user 
increase rate (100), network configurations (LAN and 3G). 
Table 4 shows the results of this configuration. 
TABLE IV.  
RESULTS OF PERFORMANCE TEST USERS 40-600 
Counter 
Min 
Max 
Average 
User Load 
1 
1000 
634 
Pages/Sec 
1 
424 
271 
Response time 
0.0046 
1.1 
0.36 
 
The main results of the performance evaluation are that 
average response time is lower than 0.36 seconds either with 
1 or 1000 users accessing the server. The inputs ranged from 
one to 357 sensing devices. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
SIDS is a cause for concern amongst parents of infants, 
however there are risk indicators that given the proper 
technology could notify parents in time that their baby’s 
environment is not optimal.  
In this paper, we have presented the development of an 
augmented object prototype using a combination of the 
AODeP and HCI methodologies that can successfully notify 
caregivers of changes in the baby’s environment.  
The prototype here presented focuses mainly on sensor-
based interfaces due to the requirements of the case study 
and is successful in monitoring the environment. It is 
important to note that the development of this augmented 
object required sensitivity due to the fact that this object will 
reside in the baby’s clothes and that the study conducted to 
test the viability of this object being present when a baby 
was sleeping was extremely important.  
Future 
work 
for 
this 
prototype 
could 
include 
incorporating the feedback received during the Wizard of Oz 
study to improve the accuracy and confidence level of the 
device in the eyes of the baby’s primary caregivers.  
We also need to perform more tests in order to evaluate 
reliability of the data.  
One of the main improvements identified would be to 
select another object to augment in the local environment to 
address short range communications. This object would be 
used to notify the care-giver in the house, having a redundant 
system of notifications with hopes that either the parents 
outside of the house or the care-giver in the house will take 
immediate action upon the alert. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by CITIC (Centro de 
Investigaciones en Tecnologías de la Información y 
Comunicación) at Universidad de Costa Rica, grand No. 
834-B2-228 and 834-B4-159 and by the School of Computer 
Science and Informatics at Universidad de Costa Rica. 
REFERENCES 
[1] American academy of pediatrics, Task Force on Sudden Infant Death 
Syndrome, “The Changing Concept of Sudden Infant Death 
Syndrome: Diagnostic Coding Shifts, Controversies Regarding the 
Sleeping Environment, and New Variables to Consider in Reducing 
Risk”, Pediatrics, Nov. 2005, pp. 1245-1255, doi: 10.1542/peds.2005-
1499. 
[2] American Academy of Pediatrics, “SIDS and Other SleepRelated 
Infant Deaths: Expansion of Recommendations for a Safe Infant 
Sleeping Environment”, Pediatrics, Nov. 2011, pp. 1030-1039, doi: 
10.1542/peds.2011-2284. 
[3] American SIDS Institute, http://www.sids.org, [retrieved: June, 
2014]. 
[4] National 
SIDS/Infant 
Death 
Resource 
Center, 
http://www.sidscenter.org, [retrieved: June, 2014]. 
[5] Institute for Clinical Systems Improvement, https://www.icsi.org/,  
[retrieved: June, 2014].  
[6] J. Wilkinson, C. Bass, S. Diem, A. Gravley, L. Harvey, R. Hayes, K. 
Johnson, M. Maciosek, K. McKeon, L. Milteer, J. Morgan, P. Rothe, 
L. Snellman, L. Solberg, C. Storlie, and P. Vincent, “Preventive 
Services for Children and Adolescents”, Ninteenth Edition, Institute 
for Clinical Systems Improvement, 2013. 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

[7] J. Tintinalli, J. Stapczynski, O. John Ma, D. Cline, R.. Cydulka, and 
G. Meckler, “Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive 
Study Guide”, Seventh Edition, McGrawHill Medical, 2011. 
[8] H. Ishii and B. Ullmer, “Tangible bits: towards seamless interfaces 
between people, bits and atoms”, ACM Conference on Human factors 
in 
computing 
systems, 
April. 
1997, 
pp. 
234-241, 
doi: 
10.1145/258549.258715. 
[9] T. F. Budinger, “Biomonitoring with wireless Communications”, 
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 2003. 
[10] C. Linti, H. Horter, P. Österreicher, and H. Planck, “Sensory baby 
vest for the monitoring of infants”, International Workshop on 
Wearable and Implantable Body Sensor Networks, Jan. 2007, pp. 
135-137, doi: 10.1109/BSN.2006.49 
[11] H. Cao, L. C. Hsu, T. Ativanichayaphong, J. Sin, and J. C.Chiao, “A 
non-invasive and remote infant monitoring system using CO2 
sensors”, 
IEEE 
Sensors, 
Oct. 
2007, 
pp. 
989-992, 
doi: 
10.1109/ICSENS.2007.4388570. 
[12] H. Cao, L. C. Hsu, T. Ativanichayaphong, J. Sin, H. E. Stephanou, 
and J. C. Chiao, “An Infant Monitoring System Using CO2Sensors”, 
IEEE International Conference on RFID, March. 2007, pp. 134 – 140, 
doi: 10.1109/RFID.2007.346161. 
[13] Y. Rimet, Y. Brusquet, D. Ronayette, C. Dageville, M. Lubrano, E. 
Mallet, C. Rambaud, C. Terlaud, J. Silve, O. Lerda, L.I. 
Netchiporouk, and J. Weber, “Surveillance of infants at risk of 
apparent life threatening events (ALTE) with the BBA bootee: a 
wearable multiparameter monitor”, IEEE International Conference on 
Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society, 2007, pp. 4997-5000, 
doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2007.4353462. 
[14] L. Zhang, L. Lao, K. Wu, Q. Liu, and X. Wu, Research in 
Development on Wireless Health Care of Infants, AsianPacific 
Conference on Medical and Biological, Springer, April. 2008, pp. 
580-583, doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-79039-6_146. 
[15] E. G. Ziganshin, M. A. Numerov, and S. A. Vygolov, “UWB Baby 
Monitor”, IEEE Ultrawideband and Ultrashort Impulse Signals, Sept. 
2010, pp. 159-161, doi: 10.1109/UWBUSIS.2010.5609156 
[16] Snuza, mobile baby monitors, http://www.snuza.com/, [retrieved: 
June, 2014]. 
[17] Hisense, Health Monitoring Techniques, http://www.hisense.co.il, 
[retrieved: June, 2014]. 
[18] TiltMon Baby Sleeping Posture Monitor, http://www.digio2.com/, 
[retrieved: June, 2014]. 
[19] WeMo baby monitor, http://www.belkin.com/us/, [retrieved: April, 
2014]. 
[20] Baby Sleeps Safe, Infant Sleep Safety System, [retrieved: June, 
2014]. 
[21] Sensible Baby, http://mysensiblebaby.com, [retrieved: June, 2014]. 
[22] G. López, M. López, and L. A. Guerrero, “Improving the Process for 
Developing Augmented Objects: An HCI Perspective”, Ubiquitous 
Computing and Ambient Intelligence. ContextAwareness and 
Context-Driven Interaction, Springer International Publishing, Dec. 
2013, pp. 111-118, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-03176-7_15. 
[23] L. A. Guerrero, S. Ochoa, and H. Horta, “Developing Augmented 
Objects: A Process Perspective”. Journal of Universal Computer 
Science, 
Jun. 
2010, 
pp. 
1612 
– 
1632, 
doi:  
10.3217/jucs-016-12-1612. 
[24] V. Custodio, F. J. Herrera, G. López, and J. I. Moreno, “A Review on 
Architectures and Communications Technologies for Wearable 
Health-Monitoring Systems”, Sensors, Oct. 2012, pp. 13907 – 13946, 
doi:10.3390/s121013907. 
[25] Phidgets, http://www.phidgets.com, [retrieved: June, 2014]. 
[26] J. F. Kelley, “An iterative design methodology for user-friendly 
natural language office information applications”, ACM Transactions 
on Office Information Systems, Jan. 1984, pp. 26-41, doi: 
10.1145/357417.357420. 
[27] APM 
Cloud 
Monitoring, 
Website 
Performance 
Monitoring, 
http://cloudmonitor.ca.com/en/, [retrieved: June, 2014]. 
 
 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-353-7
UBICOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

