Towards a Reliable and Personalized Disaster Warning System 
Sungmin Hwang, Hiep Tuan Nguyen Tri, Kyungbaek Kim 
Department of Electronics and Computer Engineering 
Chonnam National University 
Gwangju, South Korea 
e-mail: hsmvirus@gmail.com, tuanhiep1232@gmail.com, kyungbaekkim@jnu.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract—The main goal of a disaster warning system is 
preventing loss of properties by providing suitable information 
to people who can be affected by disaster events. The 
challenges of a disaster warning system are geographically 
correlated characteristics of disaster events and user 
movements, multimodal communication channels of social 
connectivity, and unexpected large scale failures caused by 
disasters. To deal with the challenges, in this paper we propose 
a new design of a reliable and personalized disaster warning 
system to support city-wide mobile users. The proposed 
disaster warning system has three main components, namely, 
personality-aware location prediction, geo-social connectivity 
aware message generation, and failure-resilient geo-aware 
dissemination. Through the preliminary evaluation of each 
component, we show that the viability of the proposed disaster 
warning system. 
Keywords-Disaster Warning System; Mobile Users; Geo-
Social Information; Geographical Failure; Personality; Location 
Prediction 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The main goal of a disaster warning system is preventing 
loss of properties by providing suitable information to people 
who can be affected by disaster events [2][7]. To achieve this 
goal, the system should analyze the impact of disaster events 
in detail, pick up all relevant people to the disaster, prepare 
proper messages and send the messages reliably in timely 
manner.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. A conceptual view of a Disaster Warning System 
Figure 1 illustrates a conceptual view of a disaster 
warning system. There are three basic components: sensing, 
analysis 
and 
notification. 
The 
sensing 
component 
continuously gathers information related to events, as well as 
users. The information related to events can be gathered by 
reading various sensors which are deployed on interesting 
locations [1][2] or getting the reports of events provided by 
local or government organizations. The information related 
users can be gathered through an interactive disaster portal or 
disaster warning notification applications. The interesting 
locations of users keep changing along with their current 
locations and the change of social connectivity. For example, 
if a user makes a new friend, the location of the new friend 
may be his new interesting location. Also, the information 
related to disaster event needs to be managed continuously. 
For example, the utility of hospitals, the traffic situation and 
failures of utility services need to be observed seamlessly in 
prior an event, and the system uses the information at the 
moment of the event.  
The continuous observation, which is gathered by the 
sensing component, is used as an input of the analysis 
component. The role of analysis component is sorting out the 
most relevant users to the corresponding event and 
generating proper messages for each user. Because a disaster 
event is usually tightly coupled to geography, the location 
information of users and the interested location information 
of users are essentially required at this component [7]. If the 
system can predict the further location of a user based on the 
continuous observation, the analysis component also uses 
this location prediction for sorting out the relevant users. 
Beside the location information, the social connectivity is 
also very important for finding relevant users. For example, 
parents of elementary students desire to get the messages 
whenever their children can be affected by a disaster event. 
Another role of analysis component is proper message 
generation. One of eventual goals of a disaster warning 
system is maximizing the coverage of warning message 
propagation. To achieve this, the warning system should pick 
better seeds of message propagation. Though the disaster 
warning system only uses the internet connection or SMS 
(Short Message Service), the message channel between end 
users are very diverse from phone call to human contact [6]. 
This 
multi-modal 
channel 
characteristic 
should 
be 
considered during selecting message seeds. In the aspect of 
effectiveness of the message, the message should have rich 
information for each user. By using the continuous 
observation, the system generates the proper message for 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

each group of user to react in proper way. For example, in 
the case of a building fire event, if the warning system 
observes damages of the building and generates messages 
which hold the clear evacuation plan, the users can 
immediately react to the disaster without any hesitation.  
The output of analysis component is the list of relevant 
users and the proper messages for each of them. The 
notification component uses this output as an input, and 
disseminates the messages to the target users. At the time of 
the disaster event, some part of the network may be broken 
or end user host may not be reachable [8]. That is, 
unexpected failures happen in large scale, as well as in 
geography correlated manner. The goal of the notification 
component is how to keep the network more resilient to the 
unexpected geo-correlated large scale network failures. The 
action of notification component is considered as feedback 
and react of users. 
In this paper, we propose a new design of a disaster 
warning system architecture which is mainly focus on 
considering personalized message generation (Analysis) and 
geo-correlated failure resilient message dissemination 
(Notification). The architecture of the proposed reliable and 
personalized disaster warning system has three main 
modules; personality aware location prediction module, geo-
social connectivity aware message generation module, and 
failure-resilient geo-aware dissemination module. The 
personality aware location prediction module filters out 
targeted users who may be affected by the event, even 
though the users are not interesting in the event location. The 
geo-social connectivity aware message generation module 
generates messages for each set of users in order to provide 
personalized information of events to each individual user, as 
well as to maximize the coverage of message propagation 
through multi-modal communication channels on social 
connections. The failure-resilient geo-aware dissemination 
module manages the connectivity to users such as an overlay 
network of warning notification clients and supports the 
dissemination protocols which are highly resilient to 
unexpected geo-correlated severe failures caused by disaster 
events. 
The rest of paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, 
the main idea of each module of the proposed system is 
described in detail. Also, the results of preliminary 
evaluations for each module are presented with the 
discussion of the viability of the proposed modules and 
system. Finally, Section 3 provides the conclusion of this 
paper. 
 
II. 
DESIGN OF ARELIABLE AND PERSONALIZED 
WARNING SYSTEM 
In this section, we describe each module of the proposed 
disaster warning system in detail. Figure 2 illustrates the 
overall architecture of the proposed disaster warning system. 
The observation, the user interface module and the database 
module are related to sensing component of a disaster 
warning system. The personality aware location prediction 
module and the geo-social connectivity aware message 
generation module are related to the analysis component of a 
disaster warning system. Finally, the failure-resilient geo-
aware dissemination module is related to the dissemination 
component of a disaster warning system. 
 
 
Figure 2. The architecture of the proposed disaster warnding system 
A. Observation, Database and User Interface 
The proposed disaster warning system manages 
interesting locations and social connectivity of users, as well 
as geography and other environmental information related to 
disaster events. To manage user information such as location 
subscriptions and social connectivity, a disaster warning 
system needs an interactive user interface. Recently we 
implemented a web-based interactive user interface for 
gathering and managing user information, as well as event 
information [3]. Beside the user information, other 
environmental information, such as geography and sensor 
readings can be gathered by using any IoT(Internet of 
Things)-based sensor network techniques [1][2] and using 
open API (Application Programming Interface) to other 
disaster portals such as USGS (United State Geological 
Survey).  The gathered information is archived into the 
database module for further uses such as generating warning 
messages for target users. 
 
B. Personality-aware Location Prediction 
In the disaster warning system, the subscriptions of users 
are basically event type and interesting location, because a 
disaster event is highly coupled with geography. Also, the 
current location of a user and some locations where the user 
most likely visits are natural interesting locations of the user. 
To get the current location of a user, the system can gather 
the location of a user periodically by contacting warning 
notification clients which are running on machines of users.  
With these user subscriptions and interesting locations, 
the disaster warning system filters out the relevant users to a 
disaster event. This process can be easily done by conducting 
a series of database queries. But, there is room for 
improvement of the filtering process. That is, even though 
the user does not have any subscription related to the event, 
the system can predict the relevant users to an event and 
improve the utility of the warning system. This prediction of 
interesting location of a user can be done by applying various 
machine learning techniques to user location history [4]. 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
Figure 3. Performance of predicting user attitute (E: Extraverstion and I: 
Introversion) in MBTI (Myer-Briggs Type Indicator). SVM (Support 
Vector Machine) is used as a classifier and each location clustering 
technique is used to extract classification features.  
As a novel feature of prediction of interesting locations 
of a user, we considered the personality of a user and its 
relationship to the movement pattern of the user. Recently, 
we researched on the relationship between user personality 
and their movement patterns, and we found the possibility of 
estimating user behavior based on the location clustering [5]. 
Figure 3 shows the performance of predicting user attitude 
personality of MBTI (Myer-Briggs Type Indicator) with 
different location clustering methods such as DBSCAN 
(Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with 
Noise) and K-means clustering. With DBSCAN, we 
achieved over 90% of F-measure which is the harmonic 
mean of precision and recall of prediction.  
As results, we found that a user with outgoing personality 
travels more distance and visits more places. With this 
finding, the personality aware location prediction module 
leverages the personality information to improve the 
effectiveness of location prediction based on user location 
histories. 
 
C. Geo-Social Connectivity-aware Message Generation 
A warning under a disaster event requires not only 
sending a message to users in the event area but also letting 
people close to the users informed. In an ideal case, users of 
the warning system immediately get a message and try to 
evacuate from the disaster area. But, in real cases, users may 
not be able to check the message, or may not be able to 
evacuate within time limit. For example, let us imagine that a 
building is on fire and fire alarms start to ring. But there may 
be some disabled people, old people who cannot react fast, or 
young children who may not react properly. In this case, it is 
better to let others, who are physically close to them or who 
are family members of those improperly reacting users in the 
disaster area, and let them know about their detail condition. 
Then, informed people can help or let someone nearby help 
the users. 
In this case, we should consider that the message for the 
target users inside the disaster region is different to the 
message for the other users who may help them. That is, 
message generation module should refer the user information 
with its current location, as well as the social connectivity in 
order to make proper warning messages for different type of 
users.  
Additionally, we can imagine the information of warning 
messages spread out through social connections. For 
example, the well made personalized warning message also 
increases the possibility that the recipient carefully reads the 
message, and it improves the coverage of message 
propagation.  
When the message propagation is considered, we can 
consider the multi-modal channels for the message 
propagation, because users usually use various channels to 
propagate messages through social connections [6]. In an 
emergency situation, the message propagation may enhance 
the possibility that a message reaches to the target user 
within a given time limit. 
 
 
Figure 4. Propagation process with different channel preferences 
Recently, we have researched on the relationship 
between channel preferences and the coverage of message 
propagation. To evaluate the relationship, the users are 
grouped in different five groups, and each group has 
different channel preferences. Figure 4 shows the coverage 
and the speed of message propagation under different 
distribution of user groups. In this figure, the portion of the 
fifth group, whose members prefer long delayed channel 
such as phone call, varies. As the portion of the fifth group 
increases, the speed of early stage of propagation becomes 
slow, but the eventual coverage of message propagation 
increases. That is, it is shown that the different channel 
preferences affect the eventual coverage of the message 
propagation and the speed of the propagation.  
According to these consideration of message generation 
and propagation, the geo-social connectivity aware message 
generation module leverages location of users, social-
connectivity of users, the multi-modal channel preferences, 
and possible time limits in order to maximize the 
performance of message propagation and the utility of a 
message. 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

D. Failure-Resilient Geo-aware Dissemination 
In a disaster warning system, quickly and reliably 
sending warning messages to all of relevant users is the 
upmost important job. The users who are in the range of a 
disaster usually have to make a quick decision under the lack 
of information. For example, a man who is inside a building 
on fire need to quickly chooses an exit. A wrong choice at 
this time can be irredeemable. Therefore, giving them quick 
information to help them making decision is very important.  
In a disaster event, there is a high probability that the 
network devices are ruined. In this situation, how to provide 
a reliable sending method is also important. For example, a 
mobile phone is a reliable method to send the message to 
user in the normal case. But in a disaster, the mobile phone 
can be ruined or the user cannot get the message. In this case, 
we need to choose another way to send the message to the 
user. Also, it is possible that the network devices such as 
switches or routers are destroyed. To send message to the 
user, we might have to reroute the message to another router.  
 
 
Figure 5. Reliability of message dissemination under large failures 
Recently, we have researched on reliable overlay 
network construction which is resilient to geographical 
failures [7][8]. The constructed overlay network can be used 
as a communication mean for disseminating warning 
messages. Figure 5 shows the reliability of message 
dissemination under various scales of geo-correlated failures 
with different overlay networks. The reliability is measured 
by calculating the rate of successful message delivery to the 
total number of message receivers. The “Random-T” means 
the random multiple tree overlays and the “Proximity-M” 
and the “Proximity-T” mean the mesh network and tree 
network with proximity aware technique to mitigate the 
impact of geo-correlated large scale failure [8]. As a result, 
the proximity aware technique improves reliability of 
message 
dissemination 
substantially. 
However, 
this 
proximity aware technique requires the router information 
and it is hard to realize in the current internet. 
In these days, SDN (Software Defined Networking) is 
promised as future of internet. SDN provides centralized 
network management, and SDN controller can provide detail 
information of underlay routers and make decision based on 
the global view of the current network condition. With help 
of the SDN technology, the failure-resilient geo-aware 
dissemination module manages a highly reliable overlay 
network, which quickly and reliably disseminates a warning 
message to all the target users. To do that, we need a system 
that can analyze the network condition and adapt the sending 
method based on the network condition.  
 
III. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
The main goal of a disaster warning system is preventing 
loss of life or properties by providing detail information to 
all relevant users to a disaster event in timely manner. To 
achieve this ideal disaster warning system, we propose a new 
architecture of a disaster warning system with three 
important components: personality aware location prediction, 
geo-social connectivity aware message generation, and 
failure-resilient geo-aware dissemination. 
Currently, we have primitive versions of each module 
with convincible initial findings. The natural future work is 
improving all the modules and combining them properly. 
After we build a complete system, we expand this system by 
applying big data sensing and analyzing techniques. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
This work was supported by the National Research 
Foundation of Korea Grant funded by the Korean 
Government (NRF-2014R1A1A1007734). 
REFERENCES  
[1] Z. Qin, G. Denker, C. Giannelli, P. Bellavista, and N. 
Venkatasubramanian “A Software Defined Networking 
Architecture for the Internet-of-Things,” Proc. IEEE/IFIP 
Network Operations and Management Symposium (NOMS), 
May 2014, pp. 1-9. 
[2] K. Benson and N. Venkatasubramanian, “Improving sensor 
data delivery during disaster scenarios with resilient overlay 
networks,” Proc. IEEE International conference on Pervasive 
Computing and Communications Workshops (PERCOM), 
March 2013, pp. 547-552. 
[3] K. Jung, S. Kim, H. Ki, and K. Kim, “Implementation of User 
Interface for Location-based Social Messaging System,” Proc. 
2014 KIPS fall conference, November 2014, pp. 1064-1067. 
[4] Y. Yoon and K. Kim, “Collection and Analysis of Location 
Data for Recognizing User Movement Methods,” Proc. 2013 
KIPS fall conference, November 2013, pp. 509-512. 
[5] R. Sokasane and K. Kim, “Towards User Personality 
Identification by Using Location Clustering,” Proc. 2014 
KDBS conference, July 2014, pp. 54-59. 
[6] S. Hwang and K. Kim, “Message Spreading Model over 
Online Social Network with Multiple Channels and Multiple 
Groups,” Proc. the Ninth International Conference on Internet 
and Web Applications and Services (ICIW 2014), July 2014, 
pp. 124-129. 
[7] K. Kim, Y. Zhao, and N. Venkatasubramanian, “GSFord: 
Towards a Reliable Geo-Social Notification System,” Proc. 
the 31st IEEE International Symposium on Reliable 
Distributed Systems (SRDS),  October 2012, pp. 267-272. 
[8] K. Kim and N. Venkatasubramanian, “Assessing the impact 
of geographically correlated failures on overlay-based data 
dissemination,” Proc. IEEE Globecom, December 2010, pp. 
1-5. 
 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

