SIREN: Mediated Informal Communication for
Serendipity
Nikolaos Batalas, Hester Bruikman, Dominika Turzynska, Vanesa Vakili, Natalia Voynarovskaya, Panos Markopoulos
Department of Industrial Design,
Eindhoven University of Technology
Den Dolech 2, 5612AZ Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Email: {n.batalas, h.s.d.bruikman, d.turzynska, v.vakili, n.voynarovskaya, p.markopoulos}@tue.nl
Abstract—The process of education and innovation often in-
volves individuals, whose expertise lies in diverse ﬁelds. Informal
communication amongst them can prove to be invaluable towards
their collaboration, but rarely does it extend beyond one’s already
established social circle. This paper proposes SIREN, a system,
which makes use of sensor nodes to detect encounters between
colleagues in their workplace, as they undertake their daily tasks
and spreads information virally from one to another. The aim
is to introduce a channel of informal communication that is not
disruptive to their routine. We developed a system prototype
and conducted a ﬁeld test to detemine whether the premise
of encounter-based information sharing offers any added value
over information sharing without discrimenation, amongst users
in the same work setting. The results indicate that SIREN
can help break down barriers and promote subsequent direct
communication between users.
Keywords-human-centered computing; wireless sensor net-
works; serendipity
I. INTRODUCTION
Large organizations operating in campus settings, such as
universities, tend to bring together people from a variety of
backgrounds, to contribute their expertise to the challenges
that education and innovation present. Characteristic of the
affordances allowed by this environment is Humboldt’s vision
of teachers and students, not merely engaging in the tutoring
and learning processes, but also taking initiatives in the investi-
gation of their own research interests. In his ‘Theory of Human
Education’, Humboldt stresses the importance of the links
established between the individual and his/her surroundings
for the fulﬁllment of such a purpose [20].
There is strong support for the importance of informal
communication in the establishment of such links. Informality
here, refers to the attributes of spontaneity and richness,
beyond the impositions of rules and hierarchies and the lack of
pre-speciﬁcation [27]. It is also strongly associated with face-
to-face communication. This kind of communication has been
found to often constitute the beginnings of scientiﬁc collab-
orations, as reviewed in [24][28]. Additionally, the feeling of
community and familiarity that is often implicit in informal
communication plays a decisive role in how gratifying the
working environment can be, and is considered a necessity for
innovation [14]. Kraut, Egido, and Galegher [26] found that
through informal communication, collaborative relationships
between scientiﬁc workers were established.
Corridors and collection points such as elevator lobbies and
support services (e.g., printers, water coolers, coffee stations)
have been found to be instrumental in promoting informal
communication. However, factors such as the dispersion of
workers behind physical barriers (doors, stairs, corridors), the
lack of acquaintance with others, unaligned schedules and
the need to observe hierarchy, tend to discourage informal
encounters, or take away from their potential, when they take
place. As pointed out by Serrato and Wineman [33], Allen
[1] advocates placing support facilities so that they are shared
by workers, whose physical separation might otherwise inhibit
communication.
Given the importance of informal communication between
colleagues, a vast array of technologies are available, which
can help distributed coworkers overcome physical barriers
and can also facilitate contact and foster collaboration. These
range from landlines and mobile phones to video and audio
teleconferencing, from voicemail to email and mailing lists,
and from instant messaging to wikis and personal blogs. A
recent survey [12] indicates a massive dominance of tools that
actively transmit data to recipients found in a list of contacts
(email, instant messaging) over media that passively allow for
potential public access, such as wikis or blogs. Eventually,
dissemination of information through a network of contacts,
is bounded by the extent of one’s contact list. Moreover,
these tools operate under the assumption that people work
solely at their desks, completely disregarding a user’s physical
environment.
To address these shortcomings, we examine in this work the
numerous chance encounters that take place in the physical
setting of an organization, in this case a University. We
consider chance encounters to be the unintended meetings
of people, who are either familiar or unfamiliar with each
other. They take place not only between established col-
laborators or socially involved colleagues, but also between
plain acquaintances, non-strangers or even total strangers.
Chance encounters are valuable in themselves when they cause
people to strike conversations, but this happens only rarely.
Still, due to their episodic nature and the fact that they are
397
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

situated within the physical space, they carry high potential
for allowing an individual to attain both an implicit awareness
and an explicit knowledge of what activities, questions and
ﬁndings their co-workers are concerned with. Furthermore,
they can become the basis for the establishment of channels
of informal communication.
To this end, we introduce a platform that attempts to embed
the individual into an informal, ad hoc social network where
information is shared virally amongst peers, who physically
encounter each other in the same work setting, speciﬁcally
that of a university, with the purpose of inducing serendipity
in information exchange for its users. Viral sharing, in the
context of physical encounters, refers to the ability of a user
to transmit, upon an encounter with another user, information,
which has previously been picked up from a different person
not involved in the current encounter. Serendipity refers to the
happy accident. or otherwise, the beneﬁcial outcome that is
potentially latent in these accidental encounters.
In the text that follows we ﬁrst look at related work that has
been conducted in the past. We then lay out our concept and
present the platform, an application for it and a ﬁeld evaluation
of the system, juxtaposed with a similar application lacking
the premise of physical encounters and the viral dimension.
II. RELATED WORK
A multitude of systems for information sharing or creating
awareness have been proposed, with the intention to support
informal communication amongst physically dispersed co-
workers. Here we choose to discuss those, which we consider
to be representative of the tendencies in development. They
fall into two main categories :
a media spaces that make use of video and audio to
compensate for distance, by creating a virtual shared
space, either through videoconferencing or virtual en-
vironments. Such applications encourage serendipity by
attempting to facilitate informal, accidental encounters
between people who would not have that chance in the
physical space (tele-proximity).
b applications that have actual physical proximity at the
basis of their operation. Given that individuals ﬁnd
themselves within close range of each other, they try
to detect these events and provide awareness.
The systems in the ﬁrst category, when compared against
actual physical proximity, allow for some of the latter’s most
inherent properties to surface. They help illustrate, both by
their shortcomings in relation to physical proximity, and their
successful substitutions of it, the desirable properties that are
inherent in physical interaction and indicate how some could
be substituted. In a similar manner, systems in the second
category also carry lessons to learn.
Cruiser [30], in 1988 and VideoWindow [16], in 1990,
attempted to create artiﬁcial proximity in order to support
informal communication. Citing co-presence, low personal
cost and the concentration of a population of suitable partners
as some of the characteristics of physical proximity, the
systems tried to leverage audio and video in a unique system.
The resulting virtual workplace was supposed to recreate
those characteristics and increase the number of potential
interactions between coworkers at different locations. It was
found that it could not fully account for the merits of actual
physical co-presence.
EuroPARC’s RAVE system [17] also aimed to support both
synchronous collaboration and semi-synchronous awareness
amongst physically separated colleagues, by means of audio
and video. RAVE considers the general awareness it facilitates
to be the underlying foundation that can lead to serendipitous
communication and even to focused collaboration.
The Forum Contact Space [23] was another such system,
which intended to provide colleagues with a Collaborative
Virtual Environment, where chance encounters could take
place. To produce these, the concept of Symbolic Acting
is employed, where real activity on a desktop computer is
mapped onto a state in a virtual world. The authors indicate
that online unintended interactions helped lead to real world
interactions and develop a feeling of community.
On creating awareness when physical proximity occurs, one
of the ﬁrst studies, in 1992, involved the ActiveBadge [36],
a technology ﬁrst developed for the purpose of providing a
central service with information about the location of indi-
viduals within a building. The badges could be detected by
special sensors placed in areas of interest and inferences could
be made not only about a person’s whereabouts and how to
accurately reach them at that point in time, but also about the
people they were with at that given moment.
As early as 1996, Bly and Belloti describe a change of focus
in research and design of Computer Supported Collaborative
Work (CSCW), from substituting for mobility in informal
communication, to supporting its role [2]. However, their
proposals were limited to allowing users to be away from their
desks without experiencing the negative aspects of wandering
around the corridor (e.g., missing important messages and
phonecalls). Although their proposals acknowledge the impor-
tance of informal communication in corridors and common
areas, their systems only at a rudimentary level allowed this
and did not facilitate these activities. In a later paper the
authors also provide an extensive overview of difﬁculties in
media space designs [11].
MemeTags [5], in 1998, based on ThinkingTags [6] and
GroupWear [4], looked into offering conference attendees a
tool to promote interaction between them through the ex-
change of preselected short messages (memes). The exchange
would happen by means of electronic badges with an LCD
display and infrared communications. Upon facing each other,
they would exchange memes and prompt the user to indi-
cate agreement or disagreement. Thus, conference participants
could build a shared understanding and lay the ground for
future collaboration. Large displays (community mirrors) dis-
persed through the conference would also let people have
an overview of the most agreeable memes and the general
activities within the system.
HummingBird [21] introduced the term ‘Interpersonal
Awareness Devices (IPADS)’. It describes those devices,
398
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

which aim to help people initiate contact, rather than sustain
the actual communication, and do not rely on any additional
infrastructure besides their own kind. HummingBird alerts
people by aural and visual means when they are in the vicinity
of each other. HummingBird showed more potential when used
in unfamiliar situations, such as trips and conferences, and was
mostly ignored in the ofﬁce setting.
ProxyLady [9] uses PDAs equipped with radio transceivers,
with the objective of fostering face-to-face communication.
The user associates information items with people (candidates
for interaction). When a candidate is near, the PDA notiﬁes
the user and brings up the associated information item. The
implications of this association is that exchanges only happen
between users who have already been in some form of contact
with each other. Contrary to Hummingbird, which seeks to
maintain general awareness in (mobile) groups, ProxyLady
aims to increase the frequency and quality of opportunistic,
informal communication.
Hocman [15], in 2004, focused on the particular case of mo-
torcyclists. It offered users own control over what they shared
in the system, a feature that GroupWear and Hummingbird
were lacking. It provided motorcyclists equipped with PDAs
while driving, the capability of sharing html pages, audio ﬁles
and images with other bikers who were also in possession
of a PDA and had been in their vicinity. A sound clip was
played when another rider was close. A ﬁeld test found that the
bikers appreciated hearing the sound clip, inspecting logs, and
browsing contact information. However, they did not believe
that Hocman would rationalize biking. The prototype was also
found to support the possibilities for further contact.
Social Serendipity[13], in 2005, used proﬁle matching to
alert users that possibly interesting people have been found
in their proximity. It relied on bluetooth devices to detect
encounters and in later iterations also allows users to share
their proﬁles.
All of the above systems have had positive results to report
in certain respects, which justiﬁes the notion that there are
desirable properties to the sharing of information on the basis
of physical proximity. They are quite different from systems
aiming to support co-workers in remote locations. The concept
we present, which we call SIREN, combines aspects found in
the former systems with unique characteristics, for a particular
cast of users. In particular :
• SIREN, much like some of the systems discussed, uses
the basic concept of information exchange based on
proximity.
• It is different from similar systems in that it makes no
effort to alert or interrupt users in any way, at the time
when the encounters are sensed.
• It also, for the ﬁrst time, introduces the concept of
transmitting received information to others according to
a viral model, without the user’s initiative.
• SIREN targets members of a university community,
where sharing and combining knowledge from different
ﬁelds is always desirable.
The following paragraphs outline SIREN and detail the
design, implementation and evaluation of a prototype that puts
the concept into effect.
III. THE SIREN CONCEPT
SIREN stands for Serendipitous Information-Relaying EN-
counters. Encounters between users are the key premise of the
system’s operation, and serendipity best illustrates the desired
effect for the system.
Our concept builds upon three central notions :
A. Physical encounters
Information is exchanged between two users when they ﬁnd
themselves in each other’s close vicinity. Users become the
routers of the information they carry around. The network
paths, which information is routed along, are woven into
the physical space users move around in. These encounters
happen naturally and accidentally as people move about in
their workplace. They can be however unsuspected or brief
and the exchange does not require that they become actual
interactions or conversations.
From a Human-Computer Interaction perspective, most of
these encounters are not meant to interact with the system.
Nonetheless, they are sensed and understood by it as input
and make up the fragments of situational context for implicit
human-computer interaction, as deﬁned in [32]. The implica-
tions of looking at physical encounters in terms of implicit
input become apparent later, as we separate the concept into
two distinct levels, the platform that acquires this information
and the application that makes use of it.
Additionally, a signiﬁcant number of these encounters are
part of an individual’s episodic personal history [35]. The
pieces of information received through them, compared with
the features that deﬁne the sharing incident (spatial setting,
temporal data or data about the origin of the information piece)
can lead to semantic encoding of those encounters [35](p.
398).
B. Viral transmission
A single piece of information can be transmitted from
carrier to host, rendering the latter into an infectious agent
as well, mimicking the way a virus spreads over a population.
Traditionally, information ﬂows selectively, passed on by
its host only to contacts that the host thinks it would be of
interest to. In addition to this, the principle of homophily tells
us that people with similar characteristics tend to network with
each other [37]. McPherson, Smith-Lovin and Cook state that
‘Homophily limits people’s social worlds in a way that has
powerful implications for the information they receive, the
attitudes they form and the interactions they experience’. [29].
In contrast to this, the viral transmission model promotes the
far-reaching capabilities of sharing information with SIREN.
It engages unrelated users, who do not encounter each other,
into transitive relations amongst them and their common in-
termediate contacts(Fig. 1). It also helps provide a by-product
awareness of the state of interactions within the system and the
399
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

A
B
C
Fig. 1.
With viral sharing, A and C enter into a relationship of exchange
because of their individual connections to B.
workplace, one which, as described in [34] is not purposefully
declared, but unintentionally arises from the plain fact that the
history and current state of the system are such.
C. Seeding and viewing of information
User interaction with the system and the information that
is transmitted through it need not take place at the level of
encounters. The use of an application to load information onto
the system and to view information that has been received is
still necessary, but only at the user’s choosing. The technology
itself is not meant to be disruptive to the user’s routine and
need not demand their attention.
D. Mode of operation and the intended effect
To further elaborate, in our proposed system, users are cast
in the role of information carriers and the system attempts
to distribute this information from one to another, when they
encounter each other as they move around. Once two users are
found to be within close range of one another, an encounter is
registered and pieces of information they carry are exchanged
between them. The exchange takes place effortlessly, not
requiring the user’s intent or attention. The role of carrier
need not be limited to human agents, but can also be assigned
to speciﬁc objects or locations, such as coffee machines
and common rooms, thereby rendering them collectors and
hotspots of information. A single piece of information, once
picked up by a carrier, joins the pool of pieces of information,
which that carrier can transmit, and can be then retransmitted
to another one, following a model of viral transmission.
Consequently, a particular piece of information can reach a
far greater number of users than traditional personal exchange
or contact-list based communication tools (email, instant mes-
saging) could allow for [37]. Moreover, a very diverse network
of information ﬂow can be formed, taking advantage not only
of the ties between users (strong and weak [19]), but also of
elements in their mutual physical surroundings. It is out of the
concept’s scope to dictate the nature of that information.
The effect that we desire the system to have, in its setting
of use, is best illustrated by the concept of serendipity.
Serendipity already holds a prominent place in the discussion
for creativity and innovation and numerous ﬁndings have been
attributed to it in science and technology [31]. Nowadays
[18] it describes the unsought-for ﬁnding that has value. It
is also associated with the human faculty of making the
ﬁnding, or seeing the value or beneﬁt in the fortuitous event.
Serendipity is thus the beneﬁcial or happy accident and while
we cannot account for the human ability to draw insight
from incongruousness, we aspire in providing our users with
the accidental ﬁndings that they can potentially beneﬁt from.
Those ﬁndings can either be the information that is shared, or
come from the knowledge of the (potentially viral) path that
it took to reach the user and the assumptions that might be
made about its carriers.
IV. PROTOTYPING SIREN
In designing a prototype of the SIREN concept, we set out to
target the workers of the Main Building of our University . We
deﬁne the goal of the prototype to be to ‘Support education and
innovation using serendipity, for users in the Main Building’.
The Main Building is one of the largest buildings on campus
and home to two different departments. Administrative staff,
students (undergraduates and graduates) and professors share
the building and its neighbouring cafeteria.
A. Problem domain analysis
A gathering of requirements took place at the beginning,
which consisted of 3 steps: a focus group, interviews, and an
online questionnaire.
1) Focus Group: The focus group was put together for the
purpose of testing the concept’s validity with the intended
users and also to identify concerns they might face when using
the system. It consisted of 7 students from mixed educational
backgrounds, who were shown a video prototype outlining
the core concepts of information sharing based on physical
proximity and viral spreading of that information. They were
then asked to individually consider a list of aspects that
had not been addressed by the video prototype and possible
implementation opportunities.
Results of their individual reﬂections were addressed in
a consequent group discussion. Afterwards, they were tran-
scribed to a hierarchy, by concept and by aspects that we asked
them to think about. This gave us an overview of current issues
and concerns, detailed in Table 1.
Notably, the focus group identiﬁed the social potential of
informal knowledge sharing. More particularly, it was reported
that hinting at information can be more powerful than its
exhaustive provision, in the way that it stimulates curiosity
and discussion.
2) Interviews: A set of interviews were conducted with
students, postgraduates and professors from two different
faculties, both placed in the Main Building. The purpose was
to ﬁnd out how informal communication takes place amongst
our potential users and what their attitudes towards information
and knowledge sharing are.
The total interviewees were 15. They were all asked 6
questions in a semi-structured way and the answers were an-
alyzed using open coding. Besides gathering qualitative data,
400
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

TABLE I
FOCUS GROUP RESULTS
Current Issues
Desk proximity determines degree of communication.
Not enough information sharing in current practice.
People are protective of information regarding their activities or
concerns.
Application concerns
Too much unﬁltered information may lead to ignoring everything.
Reyling on a device in order to share information could make you less
social.
Other Comments
Different sharing intent for different colleagues.
Incompleteness of information might make people curious and lead to
further communication.
the interviews were aimed at identifying common answers that
could be used in the larger-scale survey that was to follow.
The interviews indicated that informal communication is
both desirable and sought after, through a variety of means.
Besides face-to-face communication, posters placed in corri-
dors are used to communicate what people are working on.
Additionally, a person’s social network also plays a role in
conveying information about people that do not necessarily
belong to that network.
Another noteworthy ﬁnding was the interchangeable role
of knowledge sharing as both an objective in itself and a
pretext for communication. People do communicate with the
purpose of sharing knowledge with each other on a particular
topic. However, they also structure wider aspects of socializing
around the sharing of knowledge and sometimes this exchange
is the guise under which broader social communication takes
place.
3) Online Survey: An online questionnaire was ﬁlled out
by 31 respondents, all academic personnel with the exception
of one. While they belonged to the same faculty, they were
afﬁliated with different sub-departments. The survey focused
on issues of information sharing, namely what the need and
motivation for it could be, what kind of information is shared,
in which ways, and how physical barriers affect the process.
The information that respondents mostly seek out about
others is what they are working on, especially if it might be
relative to their own ﬁeld of research. Their methods of gather-
ing information run from informal to formal, becoming more
formal as physical distance increases between them. They also
reported lower awareness about what others are working on,
as physical distance of their respective workplaces increases.
Although their desire to know decreases with distance, half
of the respondents reported that they would still like to know
what colleagues who are situated at a distance are working on.
The resulting prototype was implemented in two separate
components :
1) A platform that allows the encounters to be detected and
recorded
2) An application that puts the information about the en-
counters to use, in order to make inferences about the
viral sharing of information. It also enables the users to
author information, view information that they receive
and further the exchange with contacts that have already
been sensed.
The prototype was evaluated in a ﬁeld study and was
compared to an automatic way of sharing using only the web
application. Both quantitative (log-ﬁles of the systems, survey)
and qualitative (open-ended items from the survey and a brief
interview) data was collected and analyzed.
B. Encounter sensing platform
In the current implementation of our concept, we used
sensor node devices, also known as motes, and put them into
service as smart badges. We used the Crossbow Mica2dot
model [8], which employs an Atmel ATmega128L micro-
controller and the CC1000 RF Transceiver [7], packed in
the form factor of a 25mm in diameter disk. The device
also features an antenna of 8.12cm and a holster for its 3V
button cell battery. It is small enough for the user to carry
around on their person, and meant to be used in this way.
It should be noted that wireless connections implemented
with these devices are very unstable. Jea and Srivastava [22]
investigate some of the characterics of packet transmission
with the Mica2Dot motes.
Due to device limitations no actual information, which users
might choose to share, is stored on the mote itself. Instead,
each mote acts as a beacon, regularly transmitting an id
number (every second). Also, each mote samples an internal
stack of received ids at a constant rate, checking if reception
of beacon messages from other motes has taken place within
a predeﬁned time period (every 5 seconds). If that is the case,
it registers an encounter along with a timestamp from its own
clock. The motes are set to broadcast in low power, thus having
a limited range of 3-7 meters. Consequently, the reception of
a mote’s id by another is considered to be indicative of the
fact that their respective carriers have found themselves in the
close vicinity of each other and have had an encounter.
Since these beacons cannot communicate with any other
networking infrastructure (e.g., wiﬁ nodes), a second class
of motes act as intermediates and along with PCs they are
connected to, form gateways to a database server. Upon
encounter with the user-motes, these gateways retrieve the list
of encounters from the users device and upload it to the server.
The server stores each encounter, converts the timestamps that
where local to each mote into the actual time and makes these
data available for use by any application. Applications should
then be able to deduce which information shared by one person
should be made available to another.
C. Messaging application
The application implemented on top of this platform, was
a messaging application. In its simplest form, it is straightfor-
ward to implement and users can readily understand how to
use it. We chose the application to be web-based rather than
run on each desktop. This allowed it to be multi-platform,
lessened the weight of technical support requests from the
users and allowed easy and central monitoring of each user’s
401
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

status. The application design also takes Kortuem & Segall’s
design principles for wearable communities [25] into account.
Users post textual messages, which are kept in a database.
Once an encounter has been reported, the messages posted by
one user become available for viewing to the user encountered.
Additionally, the messages that each of these users have
previously ‘picked up’ in the same way from other users,
become available to their current encounter. In this way the
viral transmission takes place.
The overview of what exchanges have taken place is avail-
able to the users from the web application, with the emphasis
on the display of the text messages themselves, rather than
visualization of data. Users are able to:
• Set up a proﬁle and upload a picture.
• Write an initial message, that is a message that is being
distributed by the device. The messages can be replied to
and constitute starting points for discussion threads.
• Reply to a message, which no longer needs the device
in order to be spread. This creates a thread based on the
initial message. Replies are visible both to the author of
the initial message, and to persons that have also reacted
to that message.
• Follow a message, which makes the thread initiated by
that message available to the users, without requiring their
participation.
• Post invitations to other users to meet for a coffee.
Along with each message, information is also provided
to the reader about the author of the message, the time of
its posting, and in the case of initial messages, the time of
reception through the wireless device.
V. FIELD TEST
The purpose of the study was to perform an exploratory,
formative evaluation and to collect ecologically valid data.
Speciﬁcally, we aimed to:
• Evaluate the experience of using the system.
• Investigate whether physical encounters provide value
as the premise for serendipity, over the exchange of
messages between randomly selected individuals.
• Test the assumption that the viral spreading of messages
effectively increases exposure to unexpected information.
A between-subjects design was used. Users situated in the
Main Building where invited to participate both through a
recruitment campaign, involving posters and mass-mail invi-
tations, and through our social network.
The ﬁnal sample of subjects was comprised of bachelor’s,
master’s, and PhD students, as well as academic and manage-
rial staff. The fact that individuals from 2 different departments
were chosen, their workplaces positioned in different rooms
and ﬂoors, further ensured the diversity and dispersion of the
participant population. Finally, the participants were assigned
to one of two conditions.
1) Using a system where sharing was based on physical co-
location (encounter based sharing) with the participation
of 15 users.
2) Using a very similar system that lacked any premise
for information exchange other than users posting that
information. Every exchange would take place between
individuals selected randomly from the user population
(random sharing). This group consisted of 11 users.
To isolate the effect of encounter-based sharing on the
experience of the system’s usage, the number of messages that
would be received by users in the random sharing group was
regulated to match the number of messages that were actually
being received by users in the encounter-based sharing group.
It could therefore be ensured that the level of usage, a well-
known factor in the success of any type of social media, would
not be a confounding element in the comparisons made.
After a short brieﬁng and consent process all participants
received training, where all the functions of the web applica-
tion were explained. The encounter-based group received addi-
tional instructions on how to handle the motes. Participants in
the random-sharing were asked to use the web application, and
those in the encounter-based group to use the web application
in combination with a mote. The ﬁeld test lasted 5 days. At
the beginning of each day participants in the encounter-based
group were expected to use a fresh battery for their wireless
sensor. They were also expected to carry it with them if they
left their ofﬁce, and make use of the web application at least
once a day. Participants in the random sharing group were also
asked to use the web application at least once a day.
Because the number of gateways installed was not yet suf-
ﬁcient for the regular retrieval of content from the motes, we
frequently toured the corridors with a mote gateway connected
to a laptop and sent commands to motes found within range, to
upload their data to the laptop. The laptop would then upload
the information to the server. This took away from the realtime
aspect of interaction between motes, as an encounter that had
already happened when a subject would visit the messaging
application, would not appear to have been registered, until a
collection round had taken place.
At the end of the study, the participants were handed a
questionnaire to measure their experience. They were also
asked to provide comments in an open interview. Finally, a
debrieﬁng followed and participants were given a reward for
their assistance.
VI. RESULTS
The prototype was evaluated following the principle of
triangulation on the level of multi-measures. Measures that
were used are:
• Content of posts and proﬁles.
• Log-ﬁles of interaction with the web application.
• Scores on a post-usage survey and a brief open interview
following this.
The evaluation sought to:
• See if the design objectives and purpose were fulﬁlled.
• Justify the approach of serendipity and encounter-based
sharing by showing that the latter related to positive
results.
• Seek reasons for why the approach was effective or not.
402
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

TABLE II
MEAN SCORES FOR ENCOUNTER-BASED AND RANDOM SHARING
GROUPS. BOLD INDICATES SIGNIFICANCE IN DIFFERENCE.
scale
¯E
¯R
p − value
Perceived Usefulness [10]
4.38
3.33
0.031
Perceived Ease of use [10]
2.8
5.27
0.228
Perceived Innovation
4.71
3.55
0.032
Perceived Education
4.37
3.45
0.036
Professional Communication
5.47
5.27
0.330
Personal Communication
5.8
4.36
0.004
Perceived Self Worth [3]
5
4.3
0.036
Potential for Connecting to others
4.19
3.15
0.008
A. Scales Measured
Table II lists the scales measured and the scores obtained
from the post-test questionnaire. In addition to the well known
scales referenced, the following scales were measured:
• Perceived Innovation
– I believe that possible meetings following an invite
facilitate innovation.
– I feel the posts exchanged facilitate innovation and
idea generation.
– Using the system helps me innovate.
• Perceived Education
– I believe that possible meetings following an invite
facilitate education.
– I feel the posts exchanged enhance education.
– Using the system enhances my education.
• Personal Communication
– I feel it is useful to communicate on a personal level
with people I normally wouldn’t communicate with.
• Professional Communication
– I feel it is useful to communicate on a professional
level with people I normally wouldn’t communicate
with.
Additionally, we measured the following on a dichotomous
scale :
• Attitude toward adoption of system :
– Consider that you have been using a prototype.
Would you like this concept to be implemented in
the Main Building, assuming that it would be used
by most people?
• Experienced Serendipity
– I experienced something random or accidental that
I am happy about or beneﬁted from because of my
participation in this study.
Scores from the two groups, in Table II, were compared
using a one-tail Mann-Whitney U test, to test the hypothesis
that the encounter-based system would perform better than
the random-sharing one. The encounter-based sharing group
reported signiﬁcantly higher perceptions on almost all counts.
The only exception was on Perceived Ease of Use. Addition-
ally, Professional vs Personal Communication indicates that
encounter-based sharing provides added value for informal
communication over random sharing.
On whether they had experienced serendipity, 6/15 (40%)
reported yes in the encounter-based group, and only 1/11 (9%)
had a positive response in the random sharing group. However,
a Fischer-exact test showed this difference to not be signiﬁcant,
with p = 0.093.
On their attitude toward adoption of the system, in both
groups, most subjects said that they would use the system,
with 60% of subjects in the random sharing group and 92%
in the encounter-based group.
B. Qualitative assessments
The open-ended questions in the questionnaire and the
interview that followed, as well as the content of the messages
that had been exchanged, helped provide a set of observa-
tions about the use of encounter-based sharing as opposed to
random sharing. Answers to the questions were qualitatively
analyzed by means of clustering key descriptions of individual
responses. A similar approach was used for the qualitative
analysis of the messages that had been exchanged. The fol-
lowing observations were made :
• Messages that had been shared in both conditions were
of an informal nature.
• The messages that participants in the encounter-based
group wrote seemed to be less elaborate. Users mostly
posted short sentences of greeting or small information
about current tasks. In this respect, the system was used
more like a micro-blogging tool. Replies to these mes-
sages were also short and not promoting the perpetuation
of the conversation.
• People in the random sharing group appeared to be more
social, posting more meaningful messages. However, dis-
cussions in the random-sharing group had been sustained
between people who already knew each other, and there
were points were the discourse did resemble a forum.
• Users in the encounter-based sharing group sent out
invitations to meet with others, some for the purpose of
testing the feature. However, most of those invitations did
lead to some form of direct communication. Users in the
random sharing group barely did so.
• Users that had received information because of an en-
counter reported that they were more eager to view it.
They also trusted the information to be relevant to them.
• Viral transmission allowed users in the encounter-based
sharing group to view information from people they did
not cross paths with.
VII. DISCUSSION
SIREN performed expectedly better than the random shar-
ing condition: Towards the goal of supporting innovation and
education in its deployment environment, participants in the
ﬁeld test reported signiﬁcantly better potential in SIREN than
in random sharing (as seen on table II). They also perceived the
system as positively useful, in contrast to the random sharing
option: Their perception of the latter’s usefulness was rated at
3.3, just below neutral on the 7-point Likert scale.
403
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

However, users of both systems were favourably inclined
towards their adoption, at 60% for random sharing and at 90%
for SIREN. It should be noted here that the speciﬁc workplace
does not offer a forum or other communication media that
might allow the personnel to informally exchange messages.
There is a possibility that these results reﬂect the lack of such
a system, especially since the random sharing system seemed
to be appropriated more like a forum/BBS than the encounter-
based system. A reason for this could be that recipients in the
random sharing condition, as is the case in a forum, could not
attribute the fact that they had received a message to any other
meaningful event, other than their participation in the system.
On the contrary, in the case of SIREN, it could be argued
that users were much more conscious of their role in the
process of the delivery of a message to someone. Also,
communication did take place between people who weren’t
acquainted with each other. This could explain the caution
they applied in composing the messages they wrote. However,
the fact that the initial information exchanged follows an
encounter that did occur, can help people feel more con-
nected and experience fewer barriers towards direct commu-
nication. Hence, subsequent physical proximity and face-to-
face communication can be promoted. As we have discussed
before, physical proximity builds a foundation for informal
communication, a positive perception amongst co-workers and
collaboration.
Despite the shorter conversations, people in the encounter-
based sharing group felt eventually more open to personal
communication with people they would not normally com-
municate with. In addition to this, they reported signiﬁcantly
better potential for connecting to others. Also, self worth, a
moderator of intention to share knowledge [3], was also found
to be signiﬁcantly higher with SIREN.
Another thing to note was that users in the random sharing
group perceived their system as easier to use. This can be
attributed to the fact that SIREN users were given the onus of
carrying around their wireless device and making sure it was
operational.
Contrary to our expectations, serendipity was not signiﬁ-
cantly different between the two groups. Our explanation for
this is the short timeframe that the ﬁeld test took place in,
so that not enough serendipitous event did take place for the
SIREN group. On the other hand, given enough time, every
member of both test groups will report serendipity. We expect
a follow up study that will last longer and investigate the rate,
rather than the simple occurence of serendipitous events, to
show better results in this area.
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We presented a system called SIREN, which uses the
premise of encounters between colleagues in the workplace
to facilitate the non-disruptive exchange of information. The
non-disruptive exchange is one respect in which it is different
from many of similar systems already proposed. The other new
element that it introduces, is that it allows for information
to virally spread over the population of coworkers as they
encounter each other, for the purpose of promoting its distribu-
tion. The underlying assumption is that the inherent properties
of routine movement in the workplace can be taken advantage
of, in order to achieve both a form of implicit input, and to
also provide meaningful context to the recipient of a piece of
information for the reason why it reached them. Eventually it
could promote the formulation of a mental model of the ﬁelds
of interest of remotely distributed colleagues and the network
connections amongst them and prove supportive of informal
communication.
To test the assumption that physical encounters provided
added value to the exchange of information, a prototype was
developed and a ﬁeld test was performed to explore how
SIREN might be received by its potential user population.
The ﬁeld test tried to isolate the effect of information ex-
change based on proximity, by conducting a comparison to
the condition of exchange in a random fashion, without the
requirement that encounters take place. The comparison also
focused on aspects of usage that are relevant to the setting of a
university as a place of innovation and education. Additionally,
it investigated serendipity as the effect of the unsought-for
discovery that could be brought about, given that the reception
of information because of use of the system, could be the
unsought-for event.
Despite limitations in the prototype and the short duration
of the ﬁeld test, overall results were positive. Encounter-based
information exchange was deemed to be more supportive of
informal communication and was also perceived as better for
education and innovation. It should be taken into account
that the ﬁeld test proved not sensitive enough to evaluate
the difference between the two systems in their facilitation
of serendipity. Participating in the study could have resulted
in serendipity by itself.
However, the study reafﬁrms the consensus that informal
communication is desired and perceived as useful. This ap-
pears to be particularly true in the setting of an educational
institution. The evaluation performed indicates that there is
unharnessed potential, to explore in future work, in the way
people make use of their physical settings and the chance
encounters that happen within the workplace, as a means for
the transitive mediation of informal communication. Future
work in this area, with the use of more elaborate and reliable
prototypes, could include investigations of how such a system
could be integrated with current social networking applica-
tions, as well as the development of new applications that
make use of the encounter-sensing platform.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Allen. Managing the ﬂow of technology. MIT press Cambridge, MA,
1977.
[2] S. Bly, S. B. Consulting, and V. Bellotti.
Walking Away from the
Desktop Computer: Distributed Collaboration and Mobility in a Product
Design Team. Computer, pages 209–218, 1996.
[3] J. Bock, G.W. And Zmud, R.W. And Kim, Y.G. And Lee. Behavioral
intention formation in knowledge sharing: Examining the roles of extrin-
sic motivators, social-psychological forces, and organizational climate.
Mis Quarterly, 29(1):87–111, 2005.
404
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

[4] R. Borovoy, F. Martin, M. Resnick, and B. Silverman.
GroupWear
: Nametags that Tell about Relationships.
In Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, number April, pages 329–330. ACM
New York, NY, USA, 1998.
[5] R. Borovoy, F. Martin, S. Vemuri, M. Resnick, B. Silverman, and
C. Hancock. Meme Tags and Community Mirrors: Moving from Con-
ferences to Collaboration. In Proceedings of the 1998 ACM conference
on Computer supported cooperative work, pages 159–168. ACM, 1998.
[6] R. Borovoy, M. McDonald, F. Martin, and M. Resnick.
Things that
blink: Computationally augmented name tags. IBM Systems Journal,
35(3):488–495, 1996.
[7] CHIPCON. SmartRF CC1000.
[8] Crossbow Technologies. Mica2dot Wireless Sensor Mote.
[9] P. Dahlberg, F. Ljungberg, and J. Sanneblad.
Proxy Lady-Mobile
Support for Opportunistic Communication.
Scandinavian Journal of
Information Systems, 14:3–18, 2002.
[10] F. Davis.
Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use and User
Acceptance of Information Technology. MIS quarterly, 13(3):319–340,
1989.
[11] P. Dourish, A. Adler, V. Bellotti, and A. Henderson. Your place or mine?
Learning from long-term use of Audio-Video communication. Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), 5(1):33–62, 1996.
[12] S. D’Urso and K. Pierce. Connected to the Organization: A Survey of
Communication Technologies in the Modern Organizational Landscape.
Communication Research Reports, 26(1):75–81, 2009.
[13] N. Eagle and a. Pentland.
Social Serendipity: Mobilizing Social
Software. IEEE Pervasive Computing, 4(2):28–34, Apr. 2005.
[14] H. a. Earle. Building a workplace of choice: Using the work environment
to attract and retain top talent.
Journal of Facilities Management,
2(3):244–257, 2003.
[15] M. Esbjrnsson, O. Juhlin, and M. Stergren.
Trafﬁc encounters and
Hocman: Associating motorcycle ethnography with design.
Personal
and Ubiquitous Computing, 8(2):92–99, 2004.
[16] R. Fish, R. Kraut, and B. Chalfonte.
The VideoWindow system in
informal communication. In Proceedings of the 1990 ACM conference
on Computer-supported cooperative work, number October, pages 1–11.
ACM New York, NY, USA, 1990.
[17] W. Gaver, T. Moran, A. MacLean, L. L¨ovstrand, P. Dourish, K. Carter,
and W. Buxton. Realizing a video environment: EuroPARC’s RAVE
system. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in
computing systems, pages 27–35. ACM New York, NY, USA, 1992.
[18] L. Goodman. Notes on the Etymology of Serendipity and Some Related
Philogical Observations. Modern Language Notes, 76(5):454–457, 1961.
[19] M. Granovetter.
The strength of weak ties.
American journal of
sociology, 78(6):1360, 1973.
[20] G. Hohendorf.
Wilhelm von humboldt (1767-1835).
Prospects: the
quarterly review of comparative education, XXIII(3/4):613–23, 1993.
[21] L. E. Holmquist, J. Falk, and J. Wigstrm. Supporting group collaboration
with interpersonal awareness devices. Personal Technologies, 3(1-2):13–
21, Mar. 1999.
[22] D. Jea and M. Srivastava.
Channels Characteristics for On-Body
Mica2Dot Wireless Sensor Networks. In IEEE International Conference
on Mobile and Ubiquitous Systems (MobiQuitous), 2005.
[23] P. Jeffrey and A. McGrath.
Sharing serendipity in the workplace.
Proceedings of the third international conference on Collaborative
virtual environments - CVE ’00, pages 173–179, 2000.
[24] J. S. Katz. Geographical proximity and scientiﬁc collaboration. Scien-
tometrics, 31(1):31–43, Sept. 1994.
[25] G. Kortuem and Z. Segall.
Wearable communities: augmenting so-
cial networks with wearable computers.
IEEE Pervasive Computing,
2(1):71–78, Jan. 2003.
[26] R. Kraut, C. Egido, and J. Galegher. Patterns of Contact and Communi-
cation in Scientiﬁc Research Collaboration. In Proceedings of the 1988
ACM conference on Computer-supported cooperative work, page 12.
ACM, 1988.
[27] R. Kraut, R. Fish, R. Root, and B. Chalfonte. Informal Communication
in Organizations: Form, Function and Technology.
Baecker (1993):
Readings in Groupware and computer-supported Cooperative Work.
Morgan Kaufman, pages 145–199, 1990.
[28] R. Kraut, S. Fussell, S. Brennan, and J. Siegel. Understanding Effects of
Proximity on Collaboration : Implications for Technologies to Support
Remote Collaborative Work. Distributed Work, pages 137–162, 2002.
[29] M. McPherson, L. Smith-Lovin, and J. Cook.
Birds of a feather:
Homophily in social networks. Annual review of sociology, 27(1):415–
444, 2001.
[30] R. W. Root.
Design of a multi-media vehicle for social browsing.
Proceedings of the 1988 ACM conference on Computer-supported co-
operative work - CSCW ’88, pages 25–38, 1988.
[31] M. Rosenman. Serendipity and Scientiﬁc Discovery. Journal of Creative
Behaviour, 22:132–138, 1988.
[32] A. Schmidt.
Implicit human computer interaction through context.
Personal Technologies, 4(2-3):191–199, June 2000.
[33] M. Serrato and J. Wineman. Enhancing communication in lab based
organizations. In Space Syntax Symposium, 1997.
[34] C. Simone and S. Bandini. Integrating awareness in cooperative applica-
tions through the reaction-diffusion. Computer Supported Cooperative
Work (CSCW), pages 495–530, 2002.
[35] E. Tulving. Episodic and Semantic Memory, chapter 10, pages 382–402.
Academic Press, Inc, New York, 1972.
[36] R. Want, A. Hopper, V. Falc˜ao, and J. Gibbons.
The active badge
location system. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 10(1):91–
102, Jan. 1992.
[37] F. Wu, B. Huberman, L. Adamic, and J. Tyler. Information ﬂow in social
groups. Physica A: Statistical and Theoretical Physics, 337(1-2):327–
335, 2004.
405
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

