Development of a 3D Stereo Comic Creation Tool  
and a Display System for the 3D Android Smartphone 
 
Shigeru Sasaki, Masafmi Furuta 
Department of Human Information Systems 
Teikyo University 
Utsunomiya, Japan 
e-mail: sasaki@ics.teikyo-u.ac.jp 
11M107@uccl.teikyo-u.ac.jp 
Seiichi Tanaka, Marika Kishi, Yui Takifuji 
Department of Art 
Bunsei University of Art 
Utsunomiya, Japan 
e-mail: seiichi-tnk@jcom.home.ne.jp 
kishi.m.ggc@gmail.com 
takifuji.yui.1217@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—In recent years, three-dimensional (3D) stereo 
content has become familiar, and portable information devices 
equipped with a naked-eye 3D liquid-crystal display, such as 
smartphones, have appeared on the market. In addition, 
images created by conventional hand drawing, such as comics, 
are being created more frequently using a computer. In this 
study, we developed a 3D stereo comic creation tool in which a 
stereo image is created from pictures drawn on layers. We also 
developed a 3D stereo comic viewer application program that 
displays 3D pictures on a smartphone. This 3D stereo comic 
content creation technique is not intended to replace 
techniques based on 3D computer graphics, but is a useful, 
additional technique for the creation of 3D stereo comic 
content. 
Keywords-3D stereo comics; smartphone; naked-eye 3D 
liquid-crystal display; Android application; Java3D. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, three-dimensional (3D) stereo content 
has become familiar, and portable information devices 
equipped with a naked-eye 3D liquid-crystal display, such as 
smartphones, have appeared on the market. Many of the 3D 
stereoscopic images for these devices are created using 3D 
computer graphics (CG). However, special technology and 
knowledge are needed for the creation of 3DCG, and it takes 
considerable time and effort.  
In addition, images conventionally created by hand 
drawing, such as comics, also are being created more 
frequently using a computer. When creating a hand-drawn 
picture on a computer, a part of the picture is drawn on a 
transparent sheet called a layer, and the technique of stacking 
them to create one picture is used. Usually, even if a lot of 
comic creators have the skills to hand draw pictures on layers, 
they rarely have the skills to create 3DCG. The authors have 
succeeded in creating 3D stereo comics by adding depth to 
individual layers. Although this technique differs from the 
conventional manner of creating 3D stereo images using 
3DCG, it is expected that 3D stereo pictures that incorporate 
the benefits of hand drawing will be created using our 
method.  
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In 
Section II, we describe the state-of-the-art in 3D stereo 
comic creation. Section III describes the aim of our research. 
Section IV describes outline of the system. Section V 
describes creation procedure for 3D stereo images. In 
Section VI we describe questionnaire survey we conducted. 
Section VII provides discussions. Finally we summarize our 
result in Section VIII.  
II. 
STEATA-OF-THE-ART IN 3D STEREO COMIC 
CREATION 
Stereoscopic 3D images from a work in a comic book are 
created by the method using 3DCG. Creation of these works 
is mainly carried out as animation [1]. There are also many 
works that contain 3D images that were created from hand-
drawn pictures, and hand-drawn animations have been 
converted into stereoscopic 3D images by adding depth to 
individual pixels [2][3].  
While the creation of an animated movie is a large-scale 
project carried out by a lot of people, the work of creating 
comics is on a small scale and is usually performed by one 
person or a small group of people.  
In Japan, many comic magazines are published every day. 
These techniques are unsuitable for converting a lot of hand-
drawn comics into stereoscopic images immediately. 
Moreover, it is desirable that you can read numbers of newly 
released stereo comics on a ubiquitous portable device.  
In this research, although it was not a precise but a simple 
stereo effect, we propose an easy technique of creating 
stereoscopic images. And we also create a viewer program 
for displaying those stereo comic contents. Such a tool has 
not been developed until now and it is useful for the comic 
creators who are going to make stereoscopic contents 
personally or in a small group of people.  
III. 
AIM OF RESEARCH 
The aims of this study are to provide a technique by 
which comic creators can easily develop 3D comics and an 
application through which people can easily enjoy 3D 
comics—like a digital book—on a smartphone equipped 
with a 3D liquid-crystal display. To this end, we developed a 
3D stereo comic creation tool, in which stereo images are 
created from pictures drawn on layers. In addition, we 
developed a 3D stereo comic viewer application program 
210
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

that displays 3D pictures on a smartphone with various 
effects. Using these tools, we converted comic content into 
3D stereo images and displayed these images on a 
smartphone.  
IV. 
OUTLINE OF SYSTEM 
A. 3D stereo image creation tool 
In our 3D stereo image creation tool, a graphics file (in 
Photoshop format) that contains layers is read, and depth is 
added to each layer. With this tool, depth can be set for a 
layer in three ways: by setting a fixed depth to a layer, by 
setting different depths for the four corners of a layer, and by 
making the color of each pixel of a grayscale image 
correspond to depth. When depth is added to four corners of 
a layer, the depth of each pixel of an image is given by 
bilinear interpolation.  
After setting the depth, the spatial relation of a layer can 
be previewed.  
Finally, the tool creates a 3D stereo image using the 
depth information and saves the image file in jpeg format. 
The stereo image files were output in side-by-side-half 
format, because the smartphone used in this research could 
handle only stereo images in this format. However, the tool 
can also save stereo images in a standard side-by-side format 
for other applications. The 3D stereo-image creation tool was 
made as a Java application. The spatial arrangement of layers 
can be previewed by 3DCG. In this program, a PSD parser 
[4] is used for reading files saved in Photoshop format (PSD), 
and Java3D is used for the 3D preview.  
B. Viewer application program 
The viewer application program is intended for 
displaying the 3D stereo images created with the 3D stereo 
image creation tool on a smartphone equipped with a naked-
eye 3D liquid-crystal display. This application can apply a 
number of effects to comics. The first effect is to place a 2D 
image on a 3D stereo image, in which process parallax can 
be added to the 2D image. The second effect is to animate 
the 2D image displayed on the 3D image. The third effect is 
to play a sound file when images are displayed. Operations 
are performed by tapping and flicking. A page is turned over 
by flicking, and another image—such as a word balloon—is 
displayed or a sound file is played by tapping. The comic 
image files are saved in a folder for each work on a microSD 
card. The viewer program was created as an Android 
application. In this program, the SHARP SDK AddOn [5] 
distributed by SHARP was used.  
V. 
CREATION OF 3D STEREO IMAGES 
The procedure for the creation of 3D stereo images is 
shown below.  
A. Save image data in Photoshop format 
Pictures with different depths are drawn on different 
layers. However, even if the order of depth and layer is not in 
agreement, 3D stereo-image creation can still be performed. 
When adding depth by using a grayscale image, the 
grayscale image layer should be placed immediately before 
(above) the target layer. An example of a grayscale layer for 
adding depth is shown in Fig. 1. A 3D preview of depth 
given by a grayscale image is shown in Fig. 2.  
The image data are then saved in PSD format.  
B. Read a PSD file into the 3D stereo comic creation tool 
A PSD file is read into the 3D stereo comic creation tool. 
C. Set depth for each layer 
There are input columns for setting the depth for each 
layer. A fixed depth or different depths for each of the four 
corners can be input. If a check box is unchecked, the layer 
will not appear on the 3D stereo image. When using a 
grayscale image for setting depth, the value of the grayscale 
color to the amplitude of depth is set. The main window of a 
3D stereo comic creation tool is shown in Fig. 3.  
D. Check spatial arrangement of a layer in 3D view 
After setting the depth, the spatial arrangement of a layer 
can be checked by a 3DCG preview, as shown in Fig. 4. 
E. Save 3D stereo-image data in side-by-side-half format 
Finally, image data is saved in a side-by-side-half format. 
A sample of a stereo image is shown in Fig. 5. The image 
files should be saved in a separate folder for each work. A 
numbering system (such as 1.jpg, 2.jpg …) is used for 
naming the image files.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Example of a grayscale layer that adds depth 
211
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VI. 
QUESTINAIRE SURVEY 
After we created 3D comic content using the tool 
developed in this research, we asked people to view the 
contents on a smartphone and answer a questionnaire survey. 
Responses were received from 57 persons, most of whom 
were under 20 years. In answer to the question whether they 
found the 3D stereo comic interesting, 91% replied 
“interesting” or “interesting to some extent.” In answer to the 
question on whether they would like to continue to read 3D 
stereo comics, 78% said “yes.” From these responses, we can 
say 3D stereo comics made by adding depth for individual 
layers of a Photoshop file are accepted in a friendly, positive 
manner.  
 
 
Figure 5.   Main window of the 3D stereo image creation tool 
 
 
 
Figure 4.   Preview of an entire image in the preview window 
 
Figure 3.   Main window of the 3D stereo image creation tool 
 
 
Figure 2.  Depth added by grayscale image 
212
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

VII. DISCUSSION 
The 3D stereo comics created by the tool developed in 
this research offer the advantage of allowing 3D comic 
content to be created using conventional comic-drawing 
techniques. 
 For comic creators who are already using computers in 
their work, it would be very easy for them to create 3D 
stereo comics from their existing digital image data. Two 
undergraduate students at the University of Art, who are co-
authors of this paper, created two 3D comic works by 
converting 2D images into 3D images using our tool. 
Although they set the depth numerically, they did not set the 
depth using grayscale images. We need to add a function that 
helps the generation of grayscale-depth image easily.  
Using this tool, 3D stereo comics can be created without 
losing the merit of a hand-drawn picture. This 3D stereo 
comic content creation technique is not intended to replace 
techniques based on 3DCG computer graphics, but be a 
useful, additional technique for the creation of 3D stereo 
comic content.  
VIII. CONCLUSION 
In this study, we developed a tool to create a 3D stereo-
image from pictures hand drawn on separate layers. We also 
developed an Android application that displays images 
created using this tool on a smartphone with a 3D stereo 
liquid-crystal display. From responses to a questionnaire 
survey, it seems that our 3D stereo comic content creation 
method will prove useful as a technique for creating 3D 
stereo images.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Enago [6] for the 
English language review.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Gaudiosi, “3D wow!,” Computer Graphics World, Volume 
32, Issue 9, 2009, pp.31-34 
[2] K. Tucker-Fico, E. Goldberg, K. Koneval, D. Mayeda, R. 
Neuman, Riley, and M. Schnittker, “Design and realization of 
stereoscopic 3D for disney classics,” ACM SIGGRAPH 2011 
Talks, art. no. 12, 2011, pp.12 
[3] M. Salvati, M. Kinoshita, Y. Katsura, K. Anjyo, T. Yotsukura, 
and H. Uchibori, “Developing tools for 2D/3D conversion of 
Japanese animations,” ACM SIGGRAPH 2011 Talks, art. no. 
14, 2011, pp.14 
[4] PSD-parser download page, http://blog.alternativaplatform. 
com/en/2007/07/09/parser-psd-formata/ (last access July 10 
2012) 
[5] SHDevelopersSquare3D, https://sh-dev.sharp.co.jp/ android/ 
modules/download/?/api_stereo3dlcd (last access July 10 
2012) 
[6] Enago, www.enago.jp (last access July 10 2012) 
 
 
213
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

