Smart Spaces Approach to Development of Recommendation Services
for Historical e-Tourism
Aleksey G. Varfolomeyev
Faculty of Mathematics
Petrozavodsk State University
Petrozavodsk, Russia
e-mail: avarf@petrsu.ru
Aleksandrs Ivanovs
Department of History
Daugavpils University
Daugavpils, Latvia
e-mail: aleksandrs.ivanovs@du.lv
Research Institute for Regional Studies (REGI)
Rezekne University
Rezekne, Latvia
Dmitry G. Korzun
Department of Computer Science
Petrozavodsk State University
Petrozavodsk, Russia
e-mail: dkorzun@cs.karelia.ru
Oksana B. Petrina
Faculty of Mathematics
Petrozavodsk State University
Petrozavodsk, Russia
e-mail: petrina@cs.karelia.ru
Abstract—Recommender systems support advanced services in
many domains. In this paper, we study personalized recom-
mendation services for historical e-Tourism. The considered
recommendation-making is based on a corpus of historical data
distributed over multiple sources and requires taking into account
various semantic relations between historical objects. We adopt
a multi-agent architecture to develop services using the smart
spaces approach. In contrast to the existing web-based solutions
and mobile standalone applications, we propose to provide a
tourist with a smart space. It integrates and self-generates histor-
ical and other relevant information. Based on this information,
personalized recommendations with quantitative and qualitative
estimates are constructed and then visualized to assist the tourist
in history-aware analysis of points of interests.
Keywords–Historical e-Tourism; Recommender Systems; Point
of Interest; Smart Spaces; Personalized Services.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Currently, the role of e-Tourism recommender systems is
growing. A lot of research has been done, especially in the
direction of making services of such systems mobile and intel-
ligent [1][2]. A topical subdomain is historical tourism [3][4],
which we distinguish from a more general cultural heritage
tourism. In particular, the historical tourism focuses on visiting
historical Points of Interest (POI) and on studying their relation
with other historical objects (POIs, events, persons, etc.).
For a historian tourist, a POI is recommended not only if it
is nearby and within the user’s interests. Such a tourist would
like to see a spectrum of historically related POIs; some are
closely located and some can be faraway. Clustering important
POIs for recommendation needs semantic analysis of their
relation with historical objects and can be performed by means
of ontologies [5]. The content for reasoning about, however,
must be extracted from some historical databases or archives.
Moreover, some historical relations are subjective, e.g., depend
on context or personal vision of historical facts.
The study represented in this paper is motivated by lack
of “smart” assistants for historian tourists, although there is
a lot of them for mobile e-Tourism in general [1]. Based on
our previous work [6], we expect that practical development
of recommendation services with built-in semantic analysis
of historical data can be implemented using ontology-based
technologies of Semantic Web. Furthermore, traditional web-
based architectures and mobile standalone applications seem
insufﬁcient for this development. We focus on the emerging
approach of smart spaces [7][8]. A ubiquitous computing
environment is created where mobile users, multisource data,
and various services constructed over these data are intelli-
gently connected based on ontology-driven information sharing
and self-generation. Services can be personalized by means
of augmentation of personal data to the shared content and
customization of required reasoning about the content.
We continue our research [6] on the historical POI recom-
mendation problem. The scope of this paper is limited with
such important parts of the service development as concept
deﬁnition and design. We provide a reference scenario of
recommendation services for historical e-Tourism. We present
a smart space based architectural design solution for the stud-
ied class of recommender systems. The contribution consists
of the concept deﬁnition and system design for creating a
personalized smart space to assist the historian tourist by
means of recommendations.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
discusses the related work motivating development of recom-
mendation services for historical tourism. Section III intro-
duces our reference scenario for historical e-Tourism services.
Section IV describes our system design based on the smart
spaces approach. Section V analyses our proposal contrasting
it with the previous work. Section VI concludes the paper.
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

II.
MOTIVATION AND RELATED WORK
Historical tourism has distinctive features [3] compared
with a more general application domain of cultural heritage
tourism. The latter embraces both historical and present-day
cultural phenomena. Its main focus is not on historical events
and persons, but on artifacts (e.g., artworks, architectural
monuments) and cultural traditions (e.g., festivals, cuisine).
According to Nora [4], historical tourism addresses the so-
called “sites of memory”. They present any material traces
of historical events, which sometimes coincide with cultural
heritage artifacts. For instance, an architectural monument
is directly “involved” in historical developments related to
its construction. The other example is any place or a spot
associated with a historical event. Traces of historical facts
are presented in the multitude of historical sources, including
open sources in the Internet.
In general, a point of interest (or attraction) is an actual
spot with precise localization on the geographical map (e.g.,
geo-position coordinates or postal address). Nowadays, POI
recommender systems form an important services class in
e-Tourism [1]. In addition to POIs, historical tourism takes
into consideration a lot of other historical-valued objects such
as persons, events, and data sources (written records and
narratives, alternative information sources, data and knowledge
bases available on the Web). Relations between historical
objects contain important semantics [9], localized in space and
time. For instance, an event might be conditionally deﬁned as
a semantic relation between several historical objects [10].
Ontologies become of high application interest for knowl-
edge representation and reasoning in historical research [5]
and e-Tourism [2]. In historical tourism, we expect that the
introduced semantic relations can be effectively represented
and manipulated using technologies of the Semantic Web. To
the best of our knowledge, no specialized knowledge base that
comprise semantically enriched information about historical
objects has been created yet, e.g., see [11]. To a certain extent,
a corpus of historical information is represented in ontological
form in such knowledge bases as DBpedia, Freebase, or
YAGO. Additional information can be extracted from web
publications of historical sources [6][12]. In these settings,
the methods of web-based systems, mobile programming, and
multi-agent systems provide means for implementation of data
search, access, and reasoning [1][2].
There are mobile services for cultural heritage e-Tourism
developed using semantic technologies, see survey [13]. For
instance, an intelligent tourist guide [14] utilizes cultural her-
itage information. Nevertheless, the present-day developments
do not take into account the principal peculiarity of historical
tourism—semantic relations among historical data.
Methods of ubiquitous computing and, in particular, the
recent progress in communication technologies of the Internet
of Things make possible creating environments where diverse
devices and computer systems cooperatively construct services
surrounding the user [8][15]. New programming paradigms
emerge, such as smart spaces [7]. A smart space supports
cooperation by establishing a shared view of resources in
the environment. The shared view is ontology-based, applying
the technologies of Semantic Web. For e-Tourism services, a
smart space is mobile and personalized, i.e., created around a
traveling tourist, attracting appropriate web services and other
data sources from the Internet [6][16][17].
The discussion above motivates our research focus on POI
recommendation services for historical tourism. First, semantic
relations between historical objects cannot be bypassed in
recommendation making. Second, there is no single source of
needed information. The latter is distributed within multiple
sources, each represents the information either in ontological
form or requires an extraction procedure. Third, a historian
tourist needs personalized services, i.e., source information and
the result are subject to her/his preferences and context. Last
but not least, a recommendation service is “ubiquitous”, i.e.,
the service intelligently accompanies its mobile tourist.
III.
RECOMMENDATION SCENARIO
Consider a historical POI recommender service that pro-
vides personal assistance for a tourist during her/his journey.
Table I summarizes our formal symbol notation for the refer-
ence recommendation scenario.
Let P consist of POIs the service accesses from multiple
sources. Typical examples of historical POIs are buildings,
monuments, fountains, bridges, squares, etc. Spacious objects,
such as streets or rivers, are not POIs. As a rule, a historical
POI has a particular name. There may be several names associ-
ated with a given p ∈ P, e.g., due to historical developments or
due to the use of different languages. Each POI has distinctive
properties: coordinates and/or address, date, architect, etc. In
the service, POIs and other historical objects form the set H.
Historical POI recommendation is essentially based on
relations between the elements of H. First, “direct” links exist
between historical objects. For instance, a person x is the
architect of a building y. Second, links can appear between
objects due to similarity. For instance, two buildings have
been constructed by the same architect or they are located on
the same street. Third, links are a result of involving diverse
objects and POIs in a common historical event. Therefore, a
semantic network G with nodes H can be constructed.
The historical relation semantics can be personiﬁed: some
relations are treated differently by different historians or de-
pendently on a context. For instance, there can be several
visions of the role of a person for a certain POI. An impor-
tant context correpsonds to an initial POI; a tourist selects
p ∈ P to consider semantic graph Gp. The ﬁrst type of links
mentioned above typically represents some stable and widely
accepted historical relations. The last two types of links are
the result of inference, and can be clear subject to context and
personalization.
TABLE I. SYMBOL NOTATION
Symbol
Description
H
The set of all historical objects H = H1 ∪ . . . ∪ Hn derived for
the consideration from n data sources. Overlapping Hi ∩ Hj ̸= ∅ is
possible.
P ⊂ H
The set of all POIs P = P1 ∪ . . . ∪ Pn, where Pi ⊂ Hi for any
data source i.
G, Gp
Semantic network G where nodes are from H and links are historical
relations. In Gp, an initial POI p ∈ P is ﬁxed.
O
Ontology O describes the historical domain: possible classes and
properties of historical objects as well as relations and restrictions for
them.
Rp
Star graph Rp is a POI recommendation, where the internal node is the
initial POI p ∈ P and leaves are recommended POIs q ∈ P .
rq > 0
Real-valued rank rq shows the recommendation degree of q ∈ P in
respect to the initial POI p.
tq
Annotation tq summarizes (in a human-readable form) the reason of
recommending q if the initial POI is p.
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 1. Sample semantic network: historical relations built around Hotel
Negresco.
Figure 2. Hotel Negresco: information extraction from different sources
Figure 1 shows a sample semantic network that is built
around Hotel Negresco, one of the most famous buildings of
Nice. Small circles are POIs, triangles denote historical per-
sons, text rectangles describe POI properties, and rhombuses
represent historical events. The initial POI—Hotel Negresco—
is linked with seven other POIs (ﬁve of them are located in
Nice). The links are based on different properties: one and
the same architect, close location, involvement in common
historical events, etc.
Hotel information is extracted from different sources such
as DBpedia, Freebase, or YAGO. Figure 2 shows an example
of extracting facts from such sources. The search for POIs is
usually performed by their coordinates. In DBpedia, historical
description of each POI and categories the POI has can
be found. Freebase provides formal attributes, such as POI
address, the date of opening of the hotel, and architects. This
information allows relating a POI with other entities.
Based on Gp, a tourist would like to understand which POIs
are interesting for her/his personal consideration from histor-
ical perspective. An important context for this understanding
is that she/he starts from p (e.g., being actually or virtually in
this POI). The recommendation result can be represented as a
Figure 3. Star graph example: Hotel Negresco and recommendations on its
historical surrounding.
star graph Rp. Its internal node is p and leaves represent all
recommended POIs q ∈ P. Ranks rq > 0 can be associated
with the POIs to describe the recommendation degree of
q (the higher rank the more recommendable). In a visual
representation of Gp the length of edge (p, q) is proportional
to the rank. Additional annotations tq, which describe the
reason of recommendation (in an aggregative form), can be
also associated. Visual layout of Rp can also take into account
the geographical position of q in respect to p (e.g., when q is
on the North-East of p).
An example of recommendation is shown in Figure 3. The
star graph is derived from the semantic network of Figure 1.
POI geographical positions are not reﬂected.
Our reference scenario of a recommendation service con-
sists of the following steps.
Step 1: Initial POI selection. It can be made either manually
(e.g., pointing out coordinates, a spot on the map, or POI’s
name) or automatically (e.g., within a deﬁnite area pointing
out the nearest POI). The area can be either set by a tourist
(for instance, on the map), or determined automatically taking
into consideration the current tourist’s location.
Step 2: Semantic network around the initial POI. The sets
H and P ⊂ H as well as semantic relations among them are
searched and retrieved from available knowledge bases and
other data sources. Since the network Gp is potentially inﬁnite,
the process is limited. For instance, if the construction reaches
another POI q from p, then the search for additional historical
objects interconnected with q is terminated. Note that the path
from p to q is subject to analysis in order to derive the reason
of recommending q (construction of an annotation tq). This
example of limiting the construction process straightforwardly
leads to a star graph Rp.
Step 3: POI ranking. Differentiation of recommended POIs
can be based on ranks rq. They are computed based on tourist
preferences. For instance, he/she wants to ﬁnd a building
constructed by the same architect, an ediﬁce built in the same
architectural style, or another historical building located on
the same street. Such preferences can be deﬁned in the user’s
proﬁle. They can be manually deﬁned for the initial POI
(before the implementation of the second step of this scenario).
A signiﬁcant component of the user’s proﬁle is the history of
the choices of previous initial POIs (e.g., history of visits).
For instance, the previously chosen POIs acquire lower ranks,
since these POIs should not be repeatedly recommended.
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Step 4: Visualization. The recommendation results achieved
on Steps 2 and 3 are visually presented in a user friendly way,
i.e., by means of a star graph possibly augmented with a map
and textual/visual descriptions. For instance, annotations tq
show the reasons of the provided POI recommendations.
Step 5: Feedback. The recommendation process is iterative.
Based on the presented results (the star graph with ranks
and annotations), the tourist supplements this information by
expanding the semantic network G (additional data retrieved
from historical sources). The process—supplementing and
expanding network—is represented in G: new historical events
appear in which both the user and the objects are involved. The
user becomes a historical person—a network node in G.
IV.
SMART SPACE BASED DESIGN
The smart spaces paradigm considers computing networked
environments equipped with a variety of devices and with
access to the Internet [7][8][15]. Software agents—knowledge
processors (KPs)—run on the devices and interact via informa-
tion sharing. A semantic information broker (SIB) is a media-
tor for information collection and exchange. Each KP produces
its share of information and makes it available to others via the
SIB. Similarly via the SIB, a KP consumes information of its
own interest. The information storage employs RDF (Resource
Description Framework) [18]. Agents can apply such advanced
Semantic Web technologies as SPARQL Protocol and RDF
Query Language or Web Ontology Language (OWL) for
shared information maintenance, search, and reasoning [19].
This programming paradigm suits well for the development
of e-Tourism services, as recent works [6][16][17] indicated.
Figure 4 shows a high-level architecture that we adopted
from [6] for the case of historical recommendation services.
The recommendation service is constructed by cooperative
work of multiple KPs on historical data and other information.
Consider properties of the proposed architecture to analyze
the advantages that the smart spaces approach provides to
the development of recommendation services for historical
tourism. Some advantages are valid for the more general e-
Tourism case.
Popular architectural styles for e-Tourism recommender
systems are web-based, agent-based, and mobile [1][2]. Smart
Figure 4. Multi-agent architecture: historical data from various sources and
other information are semantically related and analyzed in the smart space.
spaces support them to be applied in a composition. SIB is
deployed on a host machine in the Internet, similarly as it
happens with web services now. Each user (tourist) is mobile,
acts using her/his client KP (e.g., on smartphone or tablet),
and consumes the service anywhere and anytime. Other KPs
produce the information collecting it in the smart space for the
use by the service. They can be hosted on the same machine
with SIB (web-like solution) or on other computers (agent-
based solution). The latter property leads to higher ﬂexibility
for system deployment. For instance, some KPs are provided
by a travel agency and some KPs are from the user side in
order to augment the system for personalized operation.
The recommendation service becomes not attached to a
ﬁxed source of historical information. A wide pool of available
sources is used, where a data source KP is assigned per source
(DBpedia, Freebase, YAGO, etc.). Conﬁguration of the pool
is ﬂexible and subject to dynamic inclusion/exclusion. Some
data source KPs are set up by system administrators. Some
KPs can be attached by the users if the appropriate rights are
delegated. Each data source KP has to implement its source-
speciﬁc interface to access and search for information. Note
that a client KP can also provide historical information to the
smart space, in addition to her/his preferences, context, and
control. The information is further used for personalization.
The function of data source KPs is to extract historical
information from two key types of data sources. The ﬁrst type
is tourism-oriented or universal knowledge bases (e.g., DBpe-
dia). They store many POIs and associated information. POI
search is primarily based on coordinates, similar to popular
location-based systems. The other type is historical publica-
tions (as a rule, in HTML—HyperText Markup Language or in
PDF—Resource Description Framework) or archival databases
records (e.g., in XML—eXtensible Markup Language). XML-
ﬁles can be mapped into OWL [6]. HTML sources can be
processed by means of NLP (Natural Language Processing)
tools. In treating data sources of the second type, the main
difﬁculty is that historical objects are usually identiﬁed by their
names only (e.g., by means of record linking techniques).
As a result, the smart space contains a representation of
the semantic network G, integrating the information extracted
from multiple data sources. Their parallel activity is coordi-
nated by combining KPs. The common ontology O is used
to represent G in the smart space. The ontology provides a
system of classes, relations, and restrictions that collected his-
torical information must conﬁrm. As a result, they constitute a
historical semantic network for the reference recommendation
scenario. A combining KP reasons over the extracted histor-
ical information and establishes semantic relations between
historical objects. There can be several combining KPs, and
the consistency of G is ensured by O. A combining KP may
represent interests of a given tourist, act on behalf of a group
of tourists, or perform generic context-aware construction.
Based on semantic network G in the smart space, a rank-
ing KP constructs recommendations. Each recommendation
is represented as star graph Rp for a given tourist, initial
POI p, and context. Visualization on the client KP can utilize
additional information such as ranks rq and annotations tq for
all recommended POIs from Rp. Importantly that there can be
many ranking KPs, each employs own computational method
of POI selection for the recommendation. For instance, in POI
selection method [6], values of rq reﬂect the closeness of q’s
categories to the categories the initial POI p has. Then an
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 5. Many KPs interact in a smart space to construct a service.
annotation tq can describe the common categories of p and q.
The proposed architecture reduces the service construction
to interactions of KPs. It follows the principle that a smart
space service is knowledge reasoning over the shared content
and delivering the result to the users [20]. In our case of histor-
ical recommendation, the proposed model of KPs interaction
is presented in Figure 5.
Smart space content is shared forming a subject to self-
generation. That is, the steps in Figure 5 are performed simulta-
neously, with event-driven synchronization. An important event
to activate data extraction is specifying the initial POI of tourist
(step 1). Content self-generation also supports the service
personalization. New historical objects can be found and new
semantic relations can be associated with this given POI (the
iteration in steps 2a and 2b). Request for additional information
about historical objects (step 2b) occur until semantic network
around tourist is being formed. The POI recommendation
and ranking are further personalized (the iteration in steps 4a
and 4b) when personal information is directly integrated into
the rank computation, e.g., the POIs the tourist has already vis-
ited. Updating the user’s personal information or preferences
(step 4a) requires the rank conversion. This conversion may
occur until the user likes the recommended POIs (step 4b).
Table II illustrates this content self-generation model show-
ing the construction of the semantic network from Figure 1 and
consequently the star graph from Figure 3. Note that in this
paper we do not focus on particular ranking criteria. Intuitively,
the closer and richer relations the higher rank. For instance,
Apartment house receives the highest rank since the POI is
a) located on the same street and b) designed by the same
architect.
V.
COMPARISON AND APPLICABILITY ANALYSIS
The proposed service scenario differs from other proposals.
The most close to our work is [14]. The authors explore
the use of location aware mobile devices for searching for
and browsing a large number of general and cultural heritage
information repositories. The application—Mobile Cultural
Heritage Guide— searches for POIs in the current tourist’s
physical location and constructs a “mental map” of nearby
POIs within a circular shape. Next semantic crawling is applied
TABLE II. EXAMPLE OF CONTENT GENERATION
Step
Interaction
Generated content
1
Initial POI
Hotel Negresco
2
Data source KPs retrieve
facts about the initial POI
from different data sources.
Hotel Negresco is located at Promenade des
Anglais, 37. The architect of Hotel Negresco
is E.-J. Niermans. The ﬁrst owner of Hotel
Negresco is H. Negrescu.
3
Combining KP advance the
information description on
POIs to create a semantic
network.
POIs on the same street: Apartment house,
Palais de la M´editerran´ee. POIs by the same
architect: Place Mass´ena, Villa le Colombier,
Apartment house. POIs related with H. Ne-
grescu: Place Mass´ena.
4
Ranking KPs differentiate
the POIs in the semantic
network, selecting the most
attracting for the user.
Rank-sorted
list:
Apartment
house,
Place
Mass´ena, Palais de la M´editerran´ee, Villa le
Colombier.
to resemble the process of a human using the Web to ﬁnd other
information relevant to these POIs. Finally, augmented reality
is used in combination with facet selection to present this
POI-related information to an active tourist on her/his mobile
device. Similarly to our scenario, this application aims at dy-
namic provision of semantically-enriched information in favor
of a classical travel guide. In contrast, our scenario introduces
both nearby and faraway POIs, which are semantically related
within a variety of historical objects, including common histor-
ical persons and events. Our scenario supports automation of
semantic crawling with POI ranking; the ranks are then used
for visual representation of POI recommendations to the user.
Paper [21] considers a prototype application with POI
ranking. It supports content-based recommendations for gen-
erating personalized routes along cultural heritage assets in
outdoor environments (e.g., city tours). The case of indoor
environments, such as museums, is studied in recent work [22].
The mobile application helps the visitors to access informa-
tion concerning exhibits that are of primary interest to them
during pre-visit planning, to provide the visitors with relevant
information during the visit, and to follow up with post visit
memories and reﬂections. In contrast, our scenario resembles
the process of a historian studying historical facts.
Based on recent studies of the Smart-M3 performance,
we expect the proposed system design is applicable in real-
life setting and has advantages over the other approaches to
recommender system development. The applicability of the
smart space based architecture, similar to the one shown in
Figure 4, is discussed in [7]. A realistic case is a smart
space [16][23] where the number of large data sources, such
as web-based databases and repositories, is of the 10-order
magnitude and the number of mobile users is of the 103-order
magnitude.
In contrast to mobile standalone applications, the work-
load is delegated from a personal mobile device to smart
space infrastructure deployed on powerful hosts. Experiments
in [24] conﬁrm that this design solution additionally improves
reliability and fault tolerance, essentially in wireless network
settings. In our scenario, the delegated workload includes
the construction of semantic networks for many users and
POI ranking over these networks. A personal mobile device
visualizes aggregated fragments (e.g., a star graph) of the
whole semantic network enriched with derived ranks.
In comparison with web-based recommender system, the
proposed smart space based system design provides ﬂexibility
in selection of 1) data sources, 2) semantic network construc-
tion, 3) POI ranking, and 4) personalization. Although the cost
is performance, Semantic Web technologies are now capable
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

to create and maintain relatively large RDF triple stores [18],
where the number of RDF triples is of the 105-order magnitude
and more. In particular, Smart-M3 SIB employs the Redland
library for RDF triple store and SPARQL support [8][15].
VI.
CONCLUSION
This paper addressed recommendation services develop-
ment for historical e-Tourism. We studied the problem of
historical POI recommendation, the necessity of using seman-
tic relations between historical objects, and the personalized
(subjective, contextual) aspect of services. We proposed the
smart space based system design for implementing such a rec-
ommender system. The proposal provides a concept deﬁnition
and design solutions for creating a smart space to accompany
a historian tourist. Multiple external sources of historical data
can be attached to the smart space and used for provision
of information relevant to the situation and user’s interests.
The information is integrated using Semantic Web technologies
and analyzed to produce personalized recommendations. The
result is visually presented with quantitative (POI ranks) and
qualitative (reason annotations) estimates.
Our study makes a step towards concept development for
historical e-Tourism. Feasibility study of the proposed concept,
including ontology engineering for integrated representation
of historical objects, analysis of POI ranking methods over
a semantic network of historical objects, and experimental
evaluation, is subject to our further research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is ﬁnancially supported by the Ministry of
Education and Science of the Russian Federation within project
# 2.2336.2014/K from the project part of state research assign-
ment and project # 14.574.21.0060 (RFMEFI57414X0060) of
Federal Target Program “Research and development on priority
directions of scientiﬁc-technological complex of Russia for
2014–2020”. The presented results are part of the research
carried out within project # 14-07-00252 of the Russian
Foundation for Basic Research.
REFERENCES
[1]
D. Gavalas, C. Konstantopoulos, K. Mastakas, and G. Pantziou, “Mobile
recommender systems in tourism,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 39,
Mar. 2014, pp. 319–333.
[2]
J. Borr´as, A. Moreno, and A. Valls, “Intelligent tourism recommender
systems: A survey,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 41, no. 16, Nov. 2014, pp.
7370–7389.
[3]
V. L. Smith, Hosts and Guests: The Anthropology of Tourism.
Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania Press, 1989.
[4]
P. Nora, “Between memory and history: Les lieux de m´emoire,”
Representations, no. 26, 1989, pp. 7–24, Special Issue: Memory and
Counter-Memory.
[5]
N. Ide and D. Woolner, “Historical ontologies,” in Words and Intel-
ligence II: Essays in Honor of Yorick Wilks, ser. Text, Speech and
Language Technology, K. Ahmad, C. Brewster, and M. Stevenson, Eds.
Springer, 2007, vol. 36, pp. 137–152.
[6]
A. Varfolomeyev, D. Korzun, A. Ivanovs, and O. Petrina, “Smart
personal assistant for historical tourism,” in Recent Advances in En-
vironmental Sciences and Financial Development. Proc. 2nd Int’l Conf.
on Environment, Energy, Ecosystems and Development (EEEAD 2014),
C. Arapatsakos, M. Razeghi, and V. Gekas, Eds., Nov. 2014, pp. 9–15.
[7]
D. Korzun, S. Balandin, and A. Gurtov, “Deployment of Smart Spaces
in Internet of Things: Overview of the design challenges,” in Proc.
13th Int’l Conf. Next Generation Wired/Wireless Networking and 6th
Conf. on Internet of Things and Smart Spaces (NEW2AN/ruSMART
2013), LNCS 8121, S. Balandin, S. Andreev, and Y. Koucheryavy, Eds.
Springer, Aug. 2013, pp. 48–59.
[8]
J. Kiljander, A. D’Elia, F. Morandi, P. Hyttinen, J. Takalo-Mattila,
A. Ylisaukko-oja, J.-P. Soininen, and T. S. Cinotti, “Semantic interop-
erability architecture for pervasive computing and Internet of Things,”
IEEE Access, vol. 2, Aug. 2014, pp. 856–874.
[9]
M. Kalus, “Semantic networks and historical knowledge management:
Introducing new methods of computer-based research,” The Journal
of the Association for History and Computing, vol. 10, Dec. 2007,
Retrieved: May, 2015. [Online]. Available: http://hdl.handle.net/2027/
spo.3310410.0010.301
[10]
A. Ivanovs and A. Varfolomeyev, “Computer technologies in local
history studies: Towards a new model of region research,” Acta Hu-
manitarica Universitatis Saulensis, vol. 19, 2014, pp. 97–107.
[11]
A. Mero˜no-Pe˜nuela, A. Ashkpour, M. van Erp, K. Mandemakers,
L. Breure, A. Scharnhorst, S. Schlobach, and F. van Harmelen, “Se-
mantic technologies for historical research: A survey,” Semantic Web
journal, 2015, to appear.
[12]
E. Ahonen and E. Hyvonen, “Publishing historical texts on the semantic
web - a case study,” in Proc. 2009 IEEE Int’l Conf. on Semantic
Computing (ICSC ’09).
IEEE Computer Society, 2009, pp. 167–173.
[13]
L. Ardissono, T. Kuﬂik, and D. Petrelli, “Personalization in cultural
heritage: The road travelled and the one ahead,” User Modeling and
User-Adapted Interaction, vol. 22, no. 1-2, Apr. 2012, pp. 73–99.
[14]
C. van Aart, B. Wielinga, and W. R. van Hage, “Mobile cultural heritage
guide: Location-aware semantic search,” in Proc. 17th Int’l Conf. on
Knowledge Engineering and Management by the Masses (EKAW’10),
LNCS 6317, P. Cimiano and H. S. Pinto, Eds.
Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer, 2010, pp. 257–271.
[15]
I. Galov and D. Korzun, “Design of semantic information broker for
localized computing environments in the Internet of Things,” in Proc.
17th Conf. of Open Innovations Association FRUCT. ITMO Univeristy,
Apr. 2015, pp. 36–43.
[16]
A. Smirnov, A. Kashevnik, A. Ponomarev, N. Teslya, M. Shcheko-
tov, and S. Balandin, “Smart space-based tourist recommendation
system,” in Proc. 14th Int’l Conf. Next Generation Wired/Wireless
Networking and 7th Conf. on Internet of Things and Smart Spaces
(NEW2AN/ruSMART 2014), LNCS 8638, S. Balandin, S. Andreev,
and Y. Koucheryavy, Eds.
Springer, Aug. 2014, pp. 40–51.
[17]
K. Kulakov and A. Shabaev, “An approach to creation of smart space-
based trip planning service,” in Proc. 16th Conf. of Open Innovations
Association FRUCT.
ITMO Univeristy, Oct. 2014, pp. 38–44.
[18]
C. Gutierrez, C. A. Hurtado, A. O. Mendelzon, and J. P´erez, “Founda-
tions of semantic web databases,” J. Comput. Syst. Sci., vol. 77, no. 3,
May 2011, pp. 520–541.
[19]
D. G. Korzun, A. A. Lomov, P. I. Vanag, J. Honkola, and S. I. Balandin,
“Multilingual ontology library generator for Smart-M3 information
sharing platform,” International Journal on Advances in Intelligent
Systems, vol. 4, no. 3&4, 2011, pp. 68–81.
[20]
D. Korzun and S. Balandin, “A peer-to-peer model for virtualization
and knowledge sharing in smart spaces,” in Proc. 8th Int’l Conf. on
Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
(UBICOMM 2014).
IARIA XPS Press, Aug. 2014, pp. 87–92.
[21]
N. Stash, L. Veldpaus, P. D. Bra, and A. P. Rodeirs, “Creating
personalized city tours using the CHIP prototype,” in Late-Breaking
Results, Project Papers and Workshop Proceedings of the 21st Conf. on
User Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization (UMAP 2013): Proc.
Workshop on Personal Access to Cultural Heritage (PATCH 2013), ser.
CEUR Workshop Proceedings, S. Berkovsky, E. Herder, P. Lops, and
O. C. Santos, Eds., vol. 997, Jun. 2013, pp. 68–79.
[22]
T. Kuﬂik, A. Wecker, J. Lanir, and O. Stock, “An integrative framework
for extending the boundaries of the museum visit experience: linking the
pre, during and post visit phases,” Information Technology & Tourism,
vol. 15, no. 1, 2015, pp. 17–47.
[23]
P. Vanag and D. Korzun, “SmartSlog knowledge patterns: Initial
experimental performance evaluation,” in Proc. 11th Conf. of Open
Innovations Association FRUCT and Seminar on e-Tourism, S. Balandin
and A. Ovchinnikov, Eds.
SUAI, Apr. 2012, pp. 176–180.
[24]
I. Galov and D. Korzun, “Fault tolerance support of Smart-M3 applica-
tion on the software infrastructure level,” in Proc. 16th Conf. of Open
Innovations Association FRUCT.
ITMO Univeristy, Oct. 2014, pp.
16–23.
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-418-3
UBICOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

