Voice Activated Interactive Ambient Information Display
Angelina A. Tzacheva, Keith J. Bell, and Hillary B. Miller
Department of Informatics
University of South Carolina Upstate
800 University Way, Spartanburg, SC 29303 U.S.A.
Emails: atzacheva@uscupstate.edu, bellkj@email.uscupstate.edu, millerh8@email.uscupstate.edu
Abstract—Normally the primary purpose of an information
display is to convey information. If it can be aesthetically in-
teresting, that is an added bonus. Recent research experiments
with reversing this imperative. An information display, which
is ﬁrst - aesthetically pleasing and second - is able to display
information, is designed and implemented. The display presents
an e-mail title in a visual form as a collage of images - each
image corresponding to one or more words. It next ﬁlters the
collage through aesthetic properties speciﬁed by an artist, such
as colors, texture, and shape. This ﬁlter renders the original
collage as a pleasing art. We propose an extension of this work
by: adding a voice activation module; displaying information
of user’s request (versus displaying e-mail titles only); and
presenting the display in a form of a decorative digital painting
hanging on the wall. The advantages of this approach are:
being ambient - in a sense of: entering person’s attention
when needed, and largely disappearing into the environment
when not needed; and being interactive - as in providing
information per user’s interest through speech recognition.
This produces new interactive, ambient system for aesthetic
information display on user’s demand.
Keywords-ubiquitous computing, speech recognition, image
collage, aesthetic display, human-machine interface.
I. INTRODUCTION
As computer use has shifted into wider aspects of life, the
requirements that it has faced have shifted as well. The value
of computing technology was traditionally measured by its
results - largely its usefulness in solving problems of interest.
As computational technology moves beyond the conﬁnes
of the work environment and into the rest of our lives,
we have begun to see an additional requirement emerge:
desirability. Products such as Apple iMac and iPhone have
shown that selling computer technology is starting to be
about ”nice”, and ”interesting” and even ”beautiful”, as well
as ”understandable” and ”easy to use”. Our proposed system
addresses this trendy desirability requirement by its easy to
use voice activated information request; and by displaying
information in an understandable, pleasing manner, where
we use images versus text, and we present them in a form
of beautiful art.
Traditionally, we used to think of computers as a glass
box, a workstation with keyboard, mouse and monitor sitting
on a desk that we seek out when we want to do some work. A
shift in thinking, together with technological advances, led to
a new generation of user-computer environments including
virtual reality; multimedia; as well as pen, eye-movement,
and agent-based interfaces; tangible interfaces; and ubiqui-
tous computing. A turn to the ”social”, ”emotional”, and
”environmental” began shaping the new designs. The trend
is towards a ubiquitous computing experience, in which
computing devices become so commonplace that we do not
distinguish them from the ’normal’ physical surroundings.
The idea is that a ubiquitous computing device would enter
a person’s attention when needed, and move to the periphery
when not needed, enabling the person to switch calmly and
effortlessly between activities without having to ﬁgure out
how to use a computer to perform a task [1]. In essence, the
technology would be unobtrusive and largely disappear into
the background.
Weiser [2] marks the birth of ubiquitous computing idea;
where, computers would be designed to be part of the
environment, embedded in everyday objects, devices, and
displays. Today this theme is seen by its research community
as the future of computing. Our proposed system taps into
this future computing idea, by its design to blend into the the
’normal’ physical surroundings, i.e., into the environment.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: section II.
reviews related work, section III. describes our proposed
system, and section IV. concludes and discusses directions
for the future.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Aesthetic visual displays
Unlike traditional information visualization, ambient in-
formation visualizations reside in the environment of the
user rather than on the screen of a desktop computer.
Currently, most dynamic information that is displayed in
public places consists of text and numbers. Skog et al.
[3] argue that information visualization can be employed
to make such dynamic data more useful and appealing.
However, visualizations intended for non-desktop spaces
will have to both provide valuable information and present
an attractive addition to the environment they must strike a
balance between aesthetical appeal and usefulness. Authors
implement this idea, with aesthetic ﬁlter inspired by the
Dutch artist Piet Mondrian, for real-time visualization of
bus departure times. The information display is deployed it
in a public space.
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Lau A. and Vande Moere [4] propose a model, which
reveals information aesthetics as the conceptual link between
information visualization and visualization art, and includes
the ﬁelds of social and ambient visualization. Authors model
focuses on visualizing large datasets. While information vi-
sualization predominantly focuses on effectiveness and func-
tional considerations, it may be neglecting the potentially
positive inﬂuence of aesthetics on task-oriented measures.
Aesthetics has been identiﬁed as one of the key problems to
be solved in information visualization research [5].
In previous work, Redstrm et al. [6], Holmquist and
Skog [7] have been drawing inspiration from famous artists
when designing information visualization, creating so-called
informative art. By basing visualizations on well-known
artistic styles, the hope is to create ambient information
visualizations that literally look good enough to hang on
the wall, while still providing useful information [3].
In our proposed system, we adopt the information visual-
ization aesthetic ﬁlter from Fogarty et al. [8], which is based
on the well known Kandinsky [9] artist style.
B. Ambient information displays
Using the physical environment to present information
has been explored previously, in particular in ambient media
[10]. In ambient media, information displays are designed to
present information in the periphery of the users attention.
For example, Ishii and Ullmer [10] introduced a lamp
that uses different intensity to indicate variations in an
information source. Closely related to this is the term calm
technology, which was coined to deﬁne technology that
moves between the periphery and the centre of the users
attention [11]. When correctly designed, calm technology
should become a natural part of the users everyday sur-
roundings. An example of calm technology was the dangling
string, an installation where a hanging piece of wire would
shake more or less depending on the trafﬁc in the local net-
work. Many ambient displays have been based on physical
constructions, but this puts limitations on the ﬂexibility of
the display and the complexity of the information that can be
shown. A natural choice would therefore be to use computer
graphics for ambient displays. In the past, the cost, size and
capabilities of computer screens has been a hindering factor.
However, with the rapid advancing of display technologies,
they have become more affordable, and therefore it is now
possible to hang a high-resolution display on a wall as if it
was a poster or a painting. In the future, technologies such
as electronic ink and color-changing textiles may make it
possible to display computer graphics on almost any surface,
even wallpapers or curtains [12]. Several peripheral displays
using computer graphics have been presented recently. A
common approach seems to be to take information from
traditional wall-hung art to inform the design and use of
such displays. InfoCanvas are specialized computer displays
that provide awareness of some source of information using
images, creating a form of virtual paintings [13].
Information collages are automatically generated, aes-
thetic collection of images in the style of certain artists
that reﬂect dynamic information [8]. Normally the primary
purpose of an information display is to convey information.
If it can be aesthetically interesting, that is an added bonus.
Research by Fogarty [8] experiments with reversing this
imperative. An information display, which is ﬁrst - aesthet-
ically pleasing and second - is able to display information,
is designed and implemented. The display presents an e-
mail title in a visual form as a collage of images - each
image corresponding to one or more words. It next ﬁlters the
collage through aesthetic properties speciﬁed by an artist,
such as colors, texture, and shape. This ﬁlter renders the
original collage as a pleasing art.
C. Voice activated displays
Welch and Bergman [14] propose a voice-operated, inter-
active message display system designed for inter-vehicle and
extra-vehicle communications. The system includes one or
more display units having a matrix of light-emitting elements
to transmit a message to other vehicles either to the front,
rear, side, or combination.
Anderson [15] presents a multifunction in dorm automa-
tion system (MIDAS). It is an elaborate automation system
featuring web control, voice activation, a security system,
with large continuously running information displays. The
system was implemented and it functions providing voice
activated control for lights, electric blinds, music server,
and LED displays. The information on the LED displays
is presented in the form of scrolling text.
We are unaware of any previous work on voice activated
ambient information display using images, or aesthetic col-
lages.
III. VOICE ACTIVATED AMBIENT INFORMATION
DISPLAY
Our proposed system is presented to user as an organic
LED display, which blends into the environment. It produces
the equivalent of a painting or a poster hanging on the wall
in a home or ofﬁce setting.
The user is then able to walk to it, and say a word or
a sentence that he/she would like information about. In
the background, the system connects to a search engine,
retrieves the titles of the top results, and converts them into
images.
It next ﬁlters this collage through Kandinsky [9] artist
inspired system to represent the images as decorative objects
[8]. The user is presented with the requested information in
a visual form of beautiful art.
Our proposed method is an extension of the aesthetic
information collages system, which we adopt from Fogarty
et.al. [8]. We enhance the system by adding a speech
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 1.
System diagram of the proposed method.
recognition module, a search engine capability for displaying
information of user’s interest, and we make this system
ambient by presenting it in the form of a virtual painting
hanging on the wall. It, therefore, blends with the intended
environment to be used in.
Our proposed method is illustrated on Figure 1.
A. Speech recognition and search engine connectivity
Our proposed system utilizes the Sphinx speech recogni-
tion engines [16] from Carnegie Mellon University, USA.
User’s speech is transcribed into text.
The text is fed through an XML ﬁle into a Google search
engine API. We use the Google AJAX Search API, a free
web service available through Google Code, which allows
us to programmatically search for keywords, and retrieve
results. The top search results are retrieved. Each result is
saved as a string of words.
B. Image collages and aesthetic ﬁlter
A string of textual words is fed to the image collage
system. It queries a database of indexed images. The related
images are retrieved as a result. This collage of images is
likely to reﬂect the semantic content of the inputted string
of words. Example collages are illustrated on Figure 2. The
database used is from PhotoDisc Inc. [17] and contains
approximately 24,000 royalty-free photos.
Finally, the produced image collage is run through an
aesthetic ﬁlter based on the well known Kandinsky [9]
artist style. Aesthetic templates are the central mechanism
for expressing the aesthetic properties. Properties of interest
include: color, texture, edges and lines, direction, shape, and
Figure 2.
Example image collages.
Figure 3.
Example image collages.
relative contrast. An aesthetic template is composed from
a layered set of regions [8]. Example image collage, an
aesthetic template, and the result are shown on Figure 3.
IV. CONCLUSION AND DIRECTIONS FOR THE FUTURE
We produce a novel information display system. It is
voice activated through interaction with the user, displays
information per user’s request, and it blends into the environ-
ment. The proposed approach presents an improvement over
a previous aesthetic information collage system by creating
an interactive ambient information display.
We are unaware of any previous work on voice activated
ambient information display using images, or aesthetic col-
lages.
Our proposed system addresses the trendy desirability
requirement of today’s computing. It is easy to use, and it
displays information in an understandable, pleasing manner.
Our technology is unobtrusive and largely disappears into
the background.
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

To better blend into the environment, this work can be
extended by adding a context aware element. An embedded
mini camera or a small sensor can be added to the virtual
painting, which takes a photo of the surroundings. From the
photo context information can be inferred such as: colors
of the room walls, of the sunlight, of the person’s clothes,
and the furnitures. These colors can be used in the aesthetic
ﬁlter to match the colors shown on the display. Additional
information inferred could be the amount of surrounding
light - used to adjust the display’s brightness; also the shape
of the furnitures can be used to match shape of aesthetic
elements on the display.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Rogers, J. Preece, and H. Sharp, Interaction design: beyond
human-computer interaction, 2nd Edition, Wiley, 2007.
[2] M. Weiser, Some computer science issues in ubiquitous com-
puting, In Special Issue, Computer-Augmented Environments,
Communications of the ACM Journal, 1993, Vol. 36 No. 7,
pp. 74-83.
[3] T. Skog,S. Ljungblad,L. E. Holmquist,Between Aesthetics and
Utility: Designing Ambient Information Visualizations,In Pro-
ceedings of the Ninth annual IEEE conference on Information
visualization (INFOVIS’2003), 2003, pp. 233–240.
[4] A. Lau and A. Vande Moere, Towards a Model of Information
Aesthetic Visualization, IEEE International Conference on In-
formation Visualisation (IV’07), IEEE, Zurich , Switzerland,
2007, pp. 87-92.
[5] C. Chen, Top 10 Unsolved Information Visualization Prob-
lems, IEEE Computer Graphics abd Applications, 2005, Vol.
25, No. 4, pp. 12–16.
[6] J. Redstrm, T. Skog, and L. HallnŁs, Informative Art: Using
Ampliﬁed Artworks as Information Displays, In: Proceedings
of DARE 2000, Designing Augmented Reality Environments,
ACM Press, New York, 2000, pp. 103–114.
[7] L.E. Holmquist and T. Skog, Informative Art: Information
Visualization in Everyday Environments, In: Proceedings of
GRAPHITE 2003, ACM SIGGRAPH, 2003, pp. 229–235.
[8] J. Fogarty, J. Forlizzi, and S. Hudson, Aesthetic information
collages: generating decorative displays that contain informa-
tion, In In Proceedings of the 14th Annual ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST 2001),
Orlando, Florida, ACM, 2001, pp. 141-150.
[9] V. E. Barnett and P. H. Barnett, The originality of kandinskys
compositions, The Visual Computer Journal, Springer-Verlag,
1989, Vol. 5, No. 4 pp. 203-213.
[10] H. Ishii and B. Ullmer, Tangible Bits: Towards Seamless
Interfaces between People, Bits and Atoms, In: Proceedings
of ACM SIGHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
systems, Addison Wesley / ACM Press, New York, 1997, pp.
234–241.
[11] M. Weiser and J.S. Brown, Designing Calm Technology,
Xerox PARC, 1995.
[12] L.E. Holmquist and L. Melin, Using Color-Changing Textiles
as a Computer Graphics Display, In: Conference Abstracts
and Applications of SIGGRAPH 2001 (technical sketch),
ACM Press / ACM SIGGRAPH, New York, 2001, pp. 272.
[13] T. Miller and J. Stasko, Artistically Conveying Peripheral
Information with the InfoCanvas, In: Proceedings of the
Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces (AVI
2002), 2002, pp. 43-50.
[14] H. L. Welch and R. C. Bergman (inventors), Voice operated
interactive message display system for vehicles, US Patent
number: 6243685, 2001.
[15] Z. Anderson, MIDAs: a multifunction in dorm automation
system, http://web.mit.edu/zacka/www/midas.html, 2009, link
veriﬁed Jun. 15, 2011.
[16] K. Kumar, C. Kim, and R. M. Stern, Delta-spectral cepstral
coefﬁcients for robust speech recognition, IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing,
May 2011, Prague, Czech Republic.
[17] J. Ojala, M, Pietikainen, and A. Harwood A Comparative
Study of Texture Measures with Classiﬁcation Based on
Feature Distributions, Pattern Recognition, 1996, Vol. 29, pp.
51–50.
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

