Integrated E-Learning Web Services  
 
Alina Andreica, Florina Covaci, Daniel Stuparu, Árpád Imre, Gabriel Pop 
IT Department and Chemistry Department  
Babes-Bolyai University   
Cluj-Napoca, Romania  
{alina, florina.covaci, dstuparu}@staff.ubbcluj.ro,  aimre@chem.ubbcluj.ro, gabrielp@staff.ubbcluj.ro  
 
 
 
Abstract— The present paper focuses on means of creating 
integrated web e-learning services by providing learning and 
dedicated information systems facilities within a web portal. 
The information system facilities are obtained by integrating 
into a global web portal the dedicated services and 
synchronizing databases based on various technologies (php / 
postgresql, asp / MS sql). The portal is based on MS technology 
and provides, as learning services, management content and e-
learning facilities for various user categories, together with 
dedicated information system facilities. 
Keywords: web services; system integration; database 
synchronization; e-learning services.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION AND WORKING FRAMEWORK  
In the framework of the knowledge based society, 
information technologies strongly impact on the learning 
processes [16] and organizational management by means of 
dedicated 
information 
systems. 
Information 
system 
integration has been tackled in the literature especially for 
business 
and 
organizational 
processes 
[11]. 
System 
interoperability has also been dealt from a semantic point of 
view [12] . 
This paper presents a framework for integrating an e-
learning system with dedicated information systems for 
managing organizational processes for a higher education 
institution. The proposed framework enables data and 
service integration that may be further exchanged within 
federated web services [10], [19].  
The paper aims at describing a system integration 
framework for providing web services into a global portal, 
including 
web-based 
facilities 
offered 
by 
dedicated 
information systems. The portal we describe has mainly 
learning purposes (but they may be adapted to various 
information sharing & communication needs), is based on  
Microsoft - MS technology and provides means of 
integrating various information systems, using different 
technologies (php / postgresql, asp / MS sql). In this respect, 
we describe an integrated architecture using a ILM - Identity 
Lifecycle Management [25] server, and additional interface 
modules, used in order to integrate the dedicated information 
systems into a web portal that also provides e-learning 
facilities, based on SharePoint Portal functionalities*. Based 
on the principles regarding the way in which data types are 
structured in organizations’ databases and used by different 
components of integrated software systems, ILM can 
synchronize and optimize data access and delegate 
processing means to the appropriate dedicated software 
components.  
Section 2 describes integration principles that we have 
designed and are in train of being implemented. In Section 3, 
we present the web services that are provided within the 
portal: learning facilities, virtual labs and dedicated 
information facilities, while Section 4 focuses on the web 
portal and its assessment from the administrating and 
maintenance points of view, in order to prove its flexibility 
and adaptability advantages. 
II. 
SYSTEM INTEGRATION ARCHITECTURE  
The web-services that we deal with have mainly 
educational purposes and are made available within the 
integrated e-learning portal that we are in train of 
implementing. In order to ensure the integration of our e-
learning portal with the dedicated information systems 
(AcademicInfo, 
ManageAsist, 
Research 
Management 
System – see 3), we have designed an advanced system 
integration framework that we further describe.  
Integration principles are based on an integrated 
authentication solution, which maps facilities from the 
dedicated information systems into the portal, for each user 
category [6]. The authentication server associates, to each 
user group, the facilities that correspond to their permissions 
in each of the dedicated information systems AcademicInfo, 
ManageAsist, Research Management System, in order to 
make them available within the portal – see figure 1.  
                                           
* The present work is supported by the EU funded grant, 
within the European Fund for Regional Development,  
“CCE 124/323/31.08.2009 SMIS 4424 - Sistem electronic 
aplicativ integrat de educaţie al Universităţii Babes-Bolyai” 
– Integrated applied electronic system for education of 
Babes-Bolyai University - BBU, contracted by BBU with 
the Romanian Ministry of Communication and Information 
Society, Organismul Intermediar pentru Promovarea 
Societăţii Informaţionale (the Intermediary Structure for 
Promoting the Information Society), during 31-08-2009 – 
31-08-2011  
361
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

The MS architecture managed by an ILM type server is 
used in order to ensure single sign-on capabilities and 
uniform interface to the dedicated information systems. In 
this respect, we are in train of designing interface modules in 
order to map the portal authentication into each dedicated 
system.  
A global synchronized database is in train of being 
created, the most important common information being the 
human resource & organization chart ones, retained in the 
dedicated tables [6]:  
User[userid, account, password, unitid] 
Unit[unitid, unitname, …] 
Organization_chart[unitid, superior_id, horiz_id] 
This common database, used by the ILM server, will also 
contain user and group authentication information, together 
with dedicated permissions in each of the information 
systems, in order to ensure access to corresponding 
permissions in AcademicInfo, ManageAsist, Research 
Management Systems.  
 
Figure 1: Framework for advanced system integration 
 
The integration solution is also designed to ensure 
database 
synchronization 
among 
AcademicInfo, 
ManageAsist, Research Management System and Portal 
databases based on matching the following data [6]:  
◊ 
portal – AcademicInfo: users (all categories), curricula, 
study contracts, grades, fees  
◊ 
portal – AcademicInfo – ManageAsist: organization 
chart, human resources, managers, financial information   
◊ 
portal – AcademicInfo – Research Management System: 
research activities, PhD Students  
◊ 
portal – ManageAsist – Research Management System: 
organization chart, units, human resources, grants & 
corresponding financial information  
A major issue in the implementation of the global 
database synchronization is that the applications use 2 
database 
management 
systems 
(PostgreSQL 
for 
ManageAsist and Research Management System and MS 
SQL Server for AcademicInfo), while the synchronization 
scheme is a multi-master one, each of the databases requiring 
bi-directional synchronization with the master database – see 
figure 2. 
On the other hand, this solution ensures significant 
autonomy functional advantages for information systems, 
compared to a direct Active Directory integration & 
mapping.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
The MS SQL - PostgreSQL synchronization has been 
tackled in literature [18]. Although a certified multi-master 
synchronization is fairly complex, in our case, the 
information that has to be synchronized / replicated between 
all databases is reduced to a few tables (see the description 
above for details): users, organization chart, units, people, 
with a fairly low modification rate, and therefore inducing a 
moderate network load. 
We are currently implementing a synchronous database 
replication, in order to obtain real time synchronization. 
Since such a process is quite resource demanding, we also  
intend to explore some asynchronous mixed solutions if the 
run time of the global synchronizing & monitoring system 
tends to increase over a reasonable limit. The asynchronous 
solution transfers the whole database, having a larger data 
load, but the moment in time will be chosen in respect with 
the applications’ low workload or even stand-by state.  
In order to implement the authentication server we use 
MS Identity Lifecycle Management server, which has 
advanced integration facilities with our e-learning portal, and 
we are in train of configuring the necessary permission 
mappings from the dedicated information systems into the 
authentication server in order to complete the integration 
facilities.  
III. 
THE WEB SERVICES  
We further describe the web services provided by the e-
learning portal. A prior portal version is already available at 
[23]  
A. E-learning functionalities  
E-learning systems [14] may be viewed as advanced 
tools which assist teachers in creating a cooperative, 
multidisciplinary and explorative learning environment and 
students in accessing these learning facilities and developing 
learning 
interactions 
within 
this 
environment. 
The 
implementation of e-learning facilities strongly contributed 
to the development of the student and goal centered learning 
model [1]. E-learning facilities are usually provided by 
means of web services.  
The web-based e-learning facilities provided by the 
described portal are the SharePoint (see [17]) built in ones, 
adapted to our specific needs, and include:  
◊ 
content management (see Figure 3) and sharing,  
◊ 
schedule management and sharing,  
Figure 2: Synchronization scheme 
ILM DB  
(SQL Server)
AcademicInfo 
(SQL Server) 
ManageAsist 
(PostgreSQL) 
Research MS 
(PostgreSQL) 
362
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

◊ 
communication 
facilities 
(e-mail 
– 
OWA 
type, 
discussion lists, etc.) ,  
◊ 
evaluation tools and feed-back facilities;  
◊ 
task management, blog and RSS tools,  
◊ 
survey tools, as well as other functionalities.   
The system is also open to adding new web-parts, 
services or components (for example, the evaluation ones are 
in train of being developed).  
 
Figure 3: Managing an educational resource (in design permissions) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Example of simulation process 
 
 
B. Virtual lab facilities  
Virtual lab services enable modelling of processes that 
may be tedious to be accessed in real conditions, or are 
required to be accessed remotely. We decided to include 
such facilities in our e-learning portal in order to support 
learning in experimental sciences and sharing of such 
(typical) experimental knowledge by electronic means. 
Application fields are related to: process engineering, 
environmental engineering, physics, chemistry, biology, etc.  
The virtual labs facilities are in train of being 
implemented on the portal and include:  
◊ 
On-line virtual experiments and on-line labs;  
◊ 
Case studies based on mathematical modelling and 
simulation;  
◊ 
Recorded video sequences and on-line video streaming; 
◊ 
Material posting, to be further processed with dedicated 
clients  
An example of simulation process is presented in figure 5  
C. Dedicated services provided by the information systems 
AcademicInfo [20] is an integrated information system 
dedicated to managing educational information, with 
dedicated processing facilities for secretariats, specific 
access facilities for students and teachers and relevant 
synthesis regarding the educational process. The system 
models educational processes at BBU level, ensuring course 
selection from all faculties’ curricula in study agreements, 
models in a flexible manner various types of  educational 
activities at all study levels (BA, MA, PhD, continuous 
363
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

education, specific curricula), ensures multilingual support in 
processing and reporting. 
The dedicated web services that are provided include: 
◊ 
For students: student curricula and grade access, fee 
management, student documents and requests, on-line 
course evaluation; 
◊ 
For teachers: curricula and grade management (for the 
activities that are conducted), access to results of student 
evaluations;  
◊ 
For academic management: specific syntheses, access to 
results of student evaluations at faculty or university 
levels  
ManageAsist system is the integrated software system 
for administrative management that has been developed for 
our university. The system can be viewed as an ERP system; 
within its design and implementation, we integrated 
systematic efficiency principles in software design – see [6]. 
ManageAsist’s principles and facilities are adapted for 
high education institutions; the system contains the following 
modules: Document management, Assets, Warehouse, 
Cashier, Finance, Accountancy, Grants, Human Resources 
and Acquisitions, and decision assistance facilities. Their 
implementation has pursued systematic and efficient 
principles [2]. Each module contains management reports for 
the corresponding compartment. Relevant synthesis from 
each compartment will be integrated, together with global 
management tools into a decision support module.  
In [4] we address the advantages of pursuing advanced 
design principles in the implementation stages of the system, 
and in designing a flexible framework for efficiently 
integrating the system’s modules. We also deal with means 
of managing hierarchical data structures, together with 
efficiency issues in respect with processing them. Each 
module includes levels [6] for specific document processing, 
operational facilities and reporting, level that provides 
management assistance information for the corresponding 
compartment.  
The web services [21] include access to grant financial 
information and management of acquisition request, 
including specific reporting facilities for management levels.  
Our Research Management System [22] is a web based 
system that we have developed and implemented within 
Babes-Bolyai University’s (BBU) in order to manage 
research activities. The system offers – via web interfaces – 
accessible and user-friendly means of collecting specific 
information, and automatically performing quantitative 
analyses, syntheses and evaluations based on the collected 
information. The system may be viewed as a tool for 
quantitative research evaluation, its more general aim being 
to ensure proficient management of the research activity 
within BBU and supporting the design of competitive 
strategies in the field by means of this dedicated software 
system.  
The system provides specific web-based facilities for:  
◊ 
Academic and research staff: activity collection and 
reporting;  
◊ 
Unit / department management: specific syntheses  
◊ 
Faculty / university management: specific syntheses  
The design and implementation principles of the 
Research Management software system, its architecture 
features and its impact in research activity management for 
the members of the academic & research staff, but especially 
for 
research 
management 
levels: 
chairs, 
institutes, 
departments, faculties, university are described in [3]. 
IV. 
WEB PORTAL EVALUATION   
The web portal that we have implemented in order to 
provide e-learning and web integration facilities is based on 
a SharePoint solution, which has proven to be very 
convenient in flexible administration and integration 
purposes.  
A. Evaluating E-learning Portal Functionalities 
Regarding the system feed-back, we developed dedicated 
questionnaires for administrators, students and teachers [6], 
in order to obtain a general evaluation regarding existing 
facilities, platform functionalities and to ensure future 
developments. 
The questionnaire has been created and interpreted using 
the survey functionality built-un in the platform (Share Point 
Portal); we underline in this respect the flexibility of the 
platform’s tools.  
We further discuss the results obtained consequent to 
monitoring 
the 
administrators’ 
survey 
[8], 
since 
administration facilities are relevant for the portal 
capabilities.  
Administrators were requested to evaluate, on a 1 – 5 
scale (1=very weak, 2=weak, 3=moderate, 4=good, 5=very 
good), the following platform characteristics [6]: 
◊ 
administration functionalities - the average weighted 
grade was 4.14;  
◊ 
communication functionalities - the average weighted 
grade was 3.86;  
◊ 
functionalities for administering educational content - 
the average weighted grade was 4;  
◊ 
functionalities for developing educational content - the 
average weighted grade was 3.43; 
◊ 
functionalities for platform development - the average 
weighted grade was 4.43;  
◊ 
platform adaptability / flexibility characteristics - the 
average weighted grade was 3.57;  
◊ 
reporting facilities - the average weighted grade was 4.  
We can notice that all characteristics are positively rated, 
most of them being qualified above ‘good’ (weighted grades 
>=4).  
We further discuss some of the most relevant responses 
in respect with the platform characteristics: administration 
functionalities and functionalities for developing educational 
content are well rated: 29% very good, 57% good, 14% 
moderate – see figure 5, 6; functionalities for platform 
development are very well rated: 43% very good, 57% good 
– see figure 7. 
364
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

Administration functionalities
0%
57%
14%
0%
29%
very weak
weak
moderate
good 
very good
 
Figure 5: Administration functionalities 
 
Functionalities for administering 
educational content
0%
0%
29%
42%
29%
very weak
weak
moderate
good 
very good
 
Figure 6: Administering the educational content 
Functionalities for platform development
0%
0%
0%
57%
43%
very weak
weak
moderate
good 
very good
 
Figure 7: Functionalities for platform development 
We may conclude that the adaptability and flexibility 
characteristics of the platform that were mainly aimed are 
actually implemented and we have a very good feed-back in 
this respect.  
We shall continue monitoring the system in order to 
ensure its most appropriate use and development; in this 
respect, we are confident that our prerequisites regarding 
adaptability specifications in system upgrades will also prove 
to be very useful in the future. 
B. Authentication Characteristics  
Our system provides single sign-on [28] facilities using a 
MS ILM - Identity Lifecycle Management Server [25] and 
ISA Server; the authentication is based on Active Directory 
facilities.  
While OpenAuth protocol [26] grants access whithout 
sharing passwords, the architecture we describe uses the ILM 
facilities for synchronizing authentication information (User, 
password), according to [25]. This credential exchange is 
similar to the one used by OpenID protocol [27], but is 
performed by means of the ILM built in facilities [25]. The 
authentication mechanism also implements the MS Domain 
Trust policy [24].  
We consider that the architecture based on ILM server 
[25] has good implementation advantages, since it already 
provides built-in web authentication facilities.  
C. System Overview and Perspectives 
E-learning implementations should pursue the same 
principles and stages as for other dedicated software systems 
[2] - the user involvement within the stages of system 
requirements, verification and implementation are of outmost 
importance for a successful implementation. Though e-
learning facilities are fairly standardized, it is important to 
take into account future upgrades of the implemented 
system.  
The implementation of the present e-learning system and 
the undergoing integrated portal within “Babes-Bolyai” 
University of Cluj-Napoca [5], [6], Romania systematically 
applied the above described principles. The flexibility system 
requirements and de-centralized system administration that 
were pursued are expected to prove their efficiency in the 
future developments. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK  
The paper focuses on web service integration and tools 
for system integration as advanced tools for providing such 
integrated services. Our case study is performed on an 
academic institution, the universities’ case being quite 
complex, since their activity covers a wide range of areas: 
education and learning, research, administration. 
We describe an efficient integration solution for 
providing web services into a global portal, including web-
based facilities offered by dedicated information systems. 
The solution is based on MS technology and provides means 
of integrating various information systems by implementing 
a single authentication server and mapping specific facilities 
from the dedicated information systems, using different 
database management systems, into the portal, for each user 
category. This architecture is based on a global integrated 
database and a permission mapping scheme for ensuring 
appropriate access into the dedicated information systems. 
We are in train of defining the necessary permission 
mappings in order to fulfill the implementation.  
The system framework integrates various web services 
that are provided within the portal: learning facilities, virtual 
labs and dedicated information facilities.  
The advantages of the proposed solution rely in 
providing a uniform web framework for: database 
synchronization of various information systems databases 
and web access to e-learning and information collaboration 
& sharing tools and dedicated system facilities. The 
proposed framework enables data and service integration that 
may be further exchanged within federated web services.  
This web service integration solution has a good 
extensibility degree and may be applied in various cases. 
365
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The present work is supported by the EU funded grant, 
within the European Fund for Regional Development,  “CCE 
124/323/31.08.2009 SMIS 4424 - Sistem electronic aplicativ 
integrat de educaţie al Universităţii Babes-Bolyai” – 
Integrated applied electronic system for education of Babes-
Bolyai University - BBU, contracted by BBU with the 
Romanian Ministry of Communication and Information 
Society, 
Organismul 
Intermediar 
pentru 
Promovarea 
Societăţii Informaţionale (the Intermediary Structure for 
Promoting the Information Society), during 31-08-2009 – 
31-08-2011 
We thank to the whole development team in our IT 
department 
for 
their 
contribution 
to 
developing 
ManageAsist, 
AcademicInfo, 
Research 
management 
information systems and to administering the e-learning 
portal: Florentina Tufiş, Călin Miu, Simona Nemeş, Dan 
Pop, Monica Bojan, Carmen Pavel, Ana Iuhos, Ana Bara. 
We are in train of registering the intellectual property rights 
of the information systems for the whole implementation 
team. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Allen, Guide to e-Learning. Wiley, 2002 
[2] A. Andreica, IT Strategies In Increasing Business Competitiveness, 
Studia Europaea, LI, 3, pp.139-148, 2006 
[3] A. B. Andreica and P. S. Agachi, “Design and Implementation of An 
Integrated Software System for Managing Research Activities in 
Universities”, 7th RoEduNet International Conference - Networking 
for Research and Education, UT Press, Ed: E. Cebuc, pp. 90-95, 2008 
[4] A. B. Andreica, D. Stuparu, and F. Ghetie, “Design and 
Implementation of an Erp System for Universities”, Proceedings of 
IADIS Information Systems 2009, IADIS Press, Eds: M. Nunes, P. 
Isaias, P. Powell, pp. 315-322, 2009 
[5] A. B. Andreica, “Design and Architecture of an Integrated E-learning 
Environment. Case Study on Babes-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca, 
Romania”, Research, Reflections and Innovations in Integrating ICT 
in Education, vol 1, Formatex, Badajoz, Spain, Editor: A. Mendez 
Vilas, A. Solano Martin, J. Mesa Gonzalez, J. A. Mesa Gonzalez, pp. 
507-514, 2009 
[6] A. B. Andreica, F. Covaci, D Stuparu, and G. Pop, “An E-Learning 
Web Portal with System Integration Facilities”, Web Information 
Systems and Technologies 2010, Valencia, Spain , Proceedings of 6th 
International Conference WEBIST , vol 1, INSTICC, Editor: 
Joachuim Filipe, Jose Cordeiro , pp. 131-136, 2010 
[7] M.Berry and G.Linoff, Mastering Data Mining, John Wiley & Sons, 
2000 
[8] Client/Server and the N-Tier Model of Distributed Computing, 
Micromax Information Services Ltd.,  1999 
[9] E. Gamma, R. Helm, R. Johnson, and J. Vlissides, Design Patterns,  
Teora, 2002 
[10] M. T. Goodrich, R. Tamassia, and D. Yao, “Notarized Federated 
Identity 
Management 
for 
Web 
Services” 
http://www. 
cs.brown.edu/cgc/stms/papers/notarizedFIM.pdf , accessed July 2010 
[11] Hasselbring, W.  ”Information System Integration”. Communications 
of the ACM, 43 (6). pp. 32-36, 2000 
[12] Hasselbring, Wilhelm and Pedersen, Susanne, “Metamodelling of 
Domain-Specific Standards for Semantic Interoperability”. Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, 3782, pp. 557 – 559, 2005 
[13] K. Hoganson and M. Guimaraes, “N-Tier Client/Server Course”, 
Consortium for Computing Sciences in College Conference, 
Dunwoody, Georgia, 2003 
[14] W. Horton and K. Horton, E-learning Tools and Technologies: A 
consumer's guide for trainers, teachers, educators, and instructional 
designers, Wiley, 2003 
[15] D. Stuparu, A Andreica, and I. Mantu, “Comparing Access 
Techniques on Databases in Distributed Application Frameworks”, 
Proc. of Collaborative Support Systems in Business and Education, 
BBU, Cluj-Napoca, pp. 1-10, 2005 
[16] R. Webster and F. Sudweeks (2006) Teaching for e-Learning in the 
Knowledge Society: Promoting Conceptual Change, in Academics’ 
Approaches to Teaching. Current Developments in Technology-
Assisted 
Education 
http://www.formatex.org/micte2006/pdf/631-
635.pdf , accessed June 2010  
[17] MS Learning Gateway and SharePoint Portal 
http://www.microsoft.com/education/solutions/higheredportals.aspx , 
accessed June 2010  
[18] PostgreSQL Team , “High Availability, Load Balancing, and 
Replication” http://www.postgresql.org/docs/8.3/static/high-
availability.html  , accessed June 2010  
[19] Business Explorer for Web Services, 
http://www.alphaworks.ibm.com/tech/be4ws , accessed July 2010  
[20] BBU AcademicInfo System http://academicinfo.ubbcluj.ro/Info , 
accessed July 2010  
[21] BBU ManageAsist System http://manageasist.ubbcluj.ro , accessed 
July 2010  
[22] BBU Research Management System http://infocercetare.ubbcluj.ro , 
accessed July 2010  
[23] BBU E-learning portal https://portal.portalid.ubbcluj.ro , accessed 
July 2010  
[24] Federated Identity Patterns in a Service-Oriented World 
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/architecture/cc836393.aspx , 
accessed July 2010  
[25] Identity Lifecycle Management Server 
http://www.microsoft.com/windowsserver2003/technologies/idm/ilm.
mspx , accessed July 2010  
[26] OAuth protocol - http://oauth.net/ , accessed July 2010  
[27] OpenID protocol - http://openid.net/ , accessed July 2010 
[28] SingleSignOn http://www.authenticationworld.com/ , accessed July 
2010  
[29] WS-Federation -  Web Services Federation Language, Dec 2006, 
BEA Systems, IBM Corporation, Layer 7 Technologies, 
http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/library/specification/ws-fed/ 
accesses July 2010  
 
 
 
366
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

