Experience and Vision of Open Innovations in 
Russia and Baltic Region: the FRUCT Program 
 
Sergey Balandin 
Nokia Research Center, Helsinki, Finland, Sergey.Balandin@nokia.com 
 
 
Abstract — This paper discusses our vision and experience 
of developing Open Innovations framework program, how it 
was implemented and why. The Open Innovations paradigm 
is a new trend for performing research and development 
that was proposed only a few years ago in 2003. The main 
emphasis of this approach is on setting cooperation in form 
of direct industry-to-academia joint R&D project and de-
velopment of the corresponding competence incubators 
around the most relevant technologies. As an example this 
paper presents the open innovations framework program 
FRUCT that is targeted in development of telecommunica-
tions R&D ecosystem in Russia and Baltic region. The need 
for such cooperation is already recognized by the local in-
dustry, academic community and government authorities. 
In particular, Nokia and Nokia Siemens Networks expressed 
readiness and interest to invest into this project by contri-
buting competences and providing some financial support. 
Keywords: Open Innovations; FRUCT; Industry-to-
Academia; R&D cooperation; new trends in innovations; Rus-
sia-Finland partnering; Russia-Baltic cooperation. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The paper presents a project targeted in developing mo-
bile R&D ecosystem of Russia and Baltic region, with the 
main emphasis on setting up industry-to-academia compe-
tence incubator operating in the format of open innova-
tions. Continues development of the strategic partnership 
between industrial and academic research is a key success 
factor of the modern innovation ecosystem. There are a 
few success stories of such strategic partnership frame-
works functioning in different parts of the world. These 
programs bring significant benefits to the involved parties 
and fueling their further R&D units. As we know the fun-
damental science driven by the universities and other aca-
demic organizations should not be directly attached to the 
existing industries, but industrial research would benefit 
by early access to the results and information about main 
trends and weak signals. At the same time many universi-
ties also active in the applied research, but to be efficient 
they need feedback channel from the industry. Another 
key driver for setting stronger connection between acade-
mia and industry is that the time between a moment of 
innovation and its adoption by the industry is getting 
shorter and shorter. An interesting new trend for address-
ing this need is by building open innovation frameworks 
targeted in developing strategic partnership between in-
dustrial and academic research. Such framework programs 
help to find right research partners and jointly incubate 
new competences.  
Nowadays the USA universities are the recognized 
leaders in adaptation of the academic research and educa-
tion to the existing industrial needs, just look to the densi-
ty of industrial presence in Silicon Valley. This situation 
creates a strong demand for quick and adequate actions 
from universities in Russia and Europe. A number of co-
operation frameworks have been built inside the EU, e.g., 
Framework Program 7 [1]. However, the cooperation be-
tween Europe and Russia is still leaves a lot to be desired. 
This creates a historical chance for Finnish universities to 
use geographical proximity and traditionally good rela-
tions with Russian colleagues to strengthen Finnish 
science. Such cooperation is in clear mutual benefit, as 
among other advantages it will give to Finnish academia a 
priority path for accessing the huge pool of highly quali-
fied talents and new innovative competences and help 
Russian universities to better integrate into the EU aca-
demic institutions and consequently will contribute in 
development of the bridge between academic and R&D 
worlds of EU and Russia. 
There is a number of well known and hidden thresholds 
on the road to long-term collaboration and partnering. The 
most critical are need of mutual trust, lack of awareness 
about partners’ capabilities, need for significant initial 
investments, and so on. As a result many good collabora-
tion opportunities die at the very initial phase. This is es-
pecially true when thinking of R&D cooperation in coun-
tries that do not have long history of cooperation with 
global industry players. At the same time these regions 
have large undiscovered R&D potential, e.g., "non-
traditional" solutions, new bright ideas that are not well 
known outside of a particular team and so on. Industrial 
research can benefit by getting early access to this “box of 
secrets” and the first players that manage to achieve it will 
win the most. 
This paper describes our experience of building, man-
aging and developing Finnish-Russian University Cooper-
ation in Telecommunications (FRUCT) Open Innovations 
Framework program [2]. The FRUCT program was estab-
lished in 2007 by a group of enthusiasts supported by No-
kia and two universities. By now the program unites teams 
from 18 universities, Russian Academy of Science and is 
supported by Nokia and Nokia Siemens Networks, the 
companies that are recognized long-standing leaders and 
drivers in their segments of the ICT industry. 
In particular, the paper focuses on two key aspects of 
the FRUCT program, which are less understood by the 
440
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

outside observers, but are the key factors contributing to 
the success of program: 
• 
Main elements and principles of FRUCT frame-
work as a whole and our approach to the program 
management and technological steering; 
• 
Principles of organizing, managing and sharing 
results of the joint R&D project between FRUCT 
member teams. 
The experience of presenting FRUCT principles to ex-
ternals and followers shows that the solutions for these 
two points are the most complicated for understanding of 
FRUCT and Open Innovation paradigm. So this was an 
original motivation to prepare the paper and put these top-
ics to the open discussion in R&D community. 
The paper is organized as follows. The next section 
gives an overview of FRUCT mission, motivation for the 
member organizations, general principles of operation, 
expected deliverables and achievements. The third section 
specifically addresses core principles of FRUCT man-
agement on the level of whole program and each particu-
lar project. The main points of this paper are summarized 
in conclusion section, which is followed by acknowled-
gements and the list of references used in the study. 
II. GENERAL OVERVIEW OF THE FRUCT PROGRAM 
This chapter gives an overview of FRUCT program, its 
mission and main principles of operation. The theoretical 
basement of the program is the principle of open innova-
tions proposed by Prof. Henry Chesbrough from UC 
Berkley [3]. Open Innovations is a paradigm that assumes 
that firms can and should use external ideas as well as 
internal ideas, and internal and external paths to market, as 
the firms look to advance their technology [4]. The boun-
daries between a firm and its environment have become 
more permeable; innovations can easily transfer inward 
and outward. The central idea behind open innovations is 
that in a world of widely distributed knowledge, compa-
nies cannot afford to rely entirely on their own research, 
but should instead buy or license processes or inventions 
from other companies. In addition, internal inventions not 
being used in firm's business can still give benefits outside 
the company, e.g., through licensing, joint ventures, spin-
offs [5]. However, implementation of the open innova-
tions principle requires significant ecosystem preparation 
work and framework that provides trust and other compo-
nents that fuel open innovations. 
Nowadays we can claim that the FRUCT program im-
plements main principles of open innovations plus we 
done further theoretical and practical development of the 
basic principles in the part related to the ecosystem prepa-
ration to open innovations. The program aims in increas-
ing level of competences and visibility of the member 
organizations, especially awareness about Russian re-
search in Europe and wise versa. Russian universities have 
good reputation and traditions in fundamental science. 
However, visibility and presence of young Russian scien-
tist in the international scientific community is a clear area 
for further improvement. Historically the first area of the 
corresponding development selected by FRUCT was de-
velopment of competences and infrastructure that allows 
young talents to participate and publishing papers at the 
top international conferences. At the same time European, 
e.g., Finnish universities gets this way the great opportuni-
ty to access the largest pool of talents and resources in 
Europe. 
The FRUCT program was established in 2007 by the 
group of individuals, Nokia Research Center, Saint-
Petersburg University of Airspace Instrumentation and 
University of Turku. Originally the program was targeted 
in facilitating cross-boarder R&D cooperation between 
industrial and academic organizations of Finland and Rus-
sia. By now FRUCT become the most significant and ac-
tively growing cooperation framework between leaders of 
ICT industry and universities in the Baltic region. At the 
moment the FRUCT community consists of representa-
tives of 18 universities from Russia, Finland and Den-
mark, three industrial companies represented by their 
R&D units, and R&D institute of Russian Academy of 
Science. The main FRUCT principle is in removing coop-
eration entering thresholds by setting R&D projects run by 
students under direct joint supervision and tutoring of in-
dustrial and academic experts. The FRUCT principle of 
building cooperation through the joint student-driven 
R&D projects has been proven to be very efficient for 
identifying and incubating the demanded competencies. 
The big advantage is that initially all cooperating sides 
take minimal obligations, with low financial and image 
risks. As a result a number of cooperation activities have 
been started and successfully developing. Care of the per-
sonal development of involved people and teams is the 
key priority of the program. The FRUCT students have 
successful represented the program in a series of interna-
tional contests, including Symbian Student Essay contests, 
Widsets coding contests, and so on. Also a number of 
good international publications have been done within the 
FRUCT scope and we scale of activities is growing fast. 
Generally FRUCT program promotes mobile device 
oriented research, telecommunication and information 
technologies. The directions of research within the 
FRUCT program include (but are not limited to) open 
source solutions and MeeGo/MAEMO mobile OS, smart 
spaces, physical air interface, embedded networks, mobile 
device software and service solutions, energy management 
and green technologies, security, and so on.  
FRUCT program is based on two modes of coopera-
tion: cooperation of R&D team in joint projects and regu-
lar face-to-face meeting (i.e., conferences, seminars, train-
ings, etc.) for gathering together all members of the 
FRUCT community. The R&D projects cooperation helps 
to the involved teams to learn about the capabilities of 
each other, building thus basic trust and understanding. 
The fact that projects are done by students is important as 
it minimize the involved costs and risks. Our approach 
focused on creating international groups of students su-
pervised by industrial and university experts, which help 
directing the R&D work of the students in the most inter-
esting and challenging areas of ICT R&D. In other words, 
441
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

the program implements the project-based training, where 
students are oriented towards real creativity and contribut-
ing to the final concrete deliverables. Generally it is hard 
for industry and academy people to find the right partner 
for cooperation, but such small joint R&D projects pro-
vide the required basic interface and topic for setting di-
rect contacts and find ground for commercial projects.  
The key enabler factor of success in development of the 
strategic cooperation is to identify solid and well estab-
lished niche where partners have unique and supplement-
ing competences. The FRUCT program creates an envi-
ronment to highlight the existing relevant R&D niches and 
what even creates new R&D niches around recently 
emerging technologies, which can be generated as a prod-
uct of open innovation cooperation between industrial and 
university experts. The FRUCT also helps universities to 
incubate new competences demand for which is emerging 
on the industry side. The main goals of FRUCT program 
include: 
• 
Identifying world-class R&D teams that are 
looking for partners and interested in open in-
novation cooperation; 
• 
Creating the new competences and corres-
ponding niches for R&D cooperation; 
• 
Developing long-term strategic partnership be-
tween industry and universities; 
• 
Providing chance for more students to realize 
scientific, R&D and career ambitions at the 
university through direct academia-to-industry 
cooperation; 
• 
Promoting idea of Europe without borders and 
corporate social responsibility. 
It is also well known problem that universities expe-
rience difficulties in keeping the best students, but close 
partnering with industry provides association with the 
strong brands, challenging and very concrete research 
tasks and additional resources, which attract students and 
help to solve the resource problem. On the other hand, the 
industry companies are interested to have long-term and 
high-risk research done by the universities, and benefit 
from getting closer to the edge of science, so that adoption 
of new key finding could be done even faster. Also the 
early industrial feedback is in mutual benefit as it allows 
right tuning and presentation of the new technologies. So 
driving into a stronger cooperation between the academic 
and industrial research, being more open and involved in 
joint activities, getting stronger visibility by making joint 
publications and so on, these all are also in the strong mu-
tual benefit. 
One of the most interesting questions is how this rather 
informal structure exists, how to define and control vector 
of development, what are the main management principles 
of FRUCT program. 
III. MANAGEMENT OF THE FRUCT PROGRAM 
The chapter presents two key aspects of FRUCT 
framework 
management 
solution: 
management 
of 
FRUCT program and management of R&D projects in-
side FRUCT. When looking from the program delive-
rables point of view, these two areas looks like one big 
task, but in fact in order to achieve efficient management 
and build robust and scalable solution we shall clearly 
separate these areas. The main focus of framework man-
agement is on maintaining and developing efficient and 
cozy environment that attracts best talents and creates 
motivation for people to actively contribute within scope 
of the open innovations principle. For that the framework 
must guaranty reliable and equal access to a set of bene-
fits on both individual and group levels. The short sum-
mary of the FRUCT member benefits is as follows: 
• 
access to new competences and professional 
growth opportunities for the involved individ-
uals and teams; 
• 
professional network, trust building and direct 
contacts with relevant top experts from aca-
demia and industry; 
• 
contribution to the positive business and 
scientific visibility of the member teams and 
individuals. 
Cooperation in the joint projects is the crystallization 
point that allows providing the above listed benefits, but 
in order to make it work a proper infrastructure and re-
source allocation has to be provided. The main FRUCT 
engine is a group of highly motivated enthusiasts of the 
open innovations paradigm, who believes that this kind of 
framework in future will result in incubation of innova-
tive and highly-competitive businesses. Also FRUCT 
receives some financial support from the industrial mem-
bers that are interested to develop the overall ecosystem 
of the region and also care of having image of the good 
corporate citizen. Together these two factors provides 
strong enough basis for delivery of the above stated bene-
fits to the program members. It is important to mention 
that for academic members the program is free of charge 
and even industrial members have no direct financial ob-
ligation, but by default certain level of support is ex-
pected. FRUCT makes a lot of investment into develop-
ment of the efficient environment to support the open 
innovation principles so that all FRUCT members can for 
free enjoy the following open innovations project enab-
lers: 
• 
FRUCT conferences (200+ attendees) are or-
ganized every half a year, plus FRUCT semi-
nars, topical conferences, workshops and ses-
sions are regularly organized as independent 
events or within scope of other well respected 
events in the field of communications; 
• 
technological trainings, exchange lectures and 
courses, winter and summer schools, open re-
positories with various materials; 
• 
support of the active FRUCT teams with the 
research enabling things, such as books, dif-
442
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

ferent kinds of devices, measurement tools, 
software licenses, project management tools, 
office equipment, and so on; 
• 
travel 
grants 
and 
free 
registra-
tion/accommodation packages for presenting 
FRUCT project papers at the recognized con-
ferences and exhibitions; 
• 
R&D contests with good prizes and opportu-
nity to gain high recognition and good publici-
ty of the project results; 
• 
R&D grants for students and in certain cases 
special student stipendiums. 
In addition the members get a lot of other supporting 
benefits that keeps them attached to the program, e.g., 
discounts on different industrial, academic and scientific 
events, FRUCT facilitates PhD and MSc exchange be-
tween member universities, help students to find good 
academic and industrial consultants, team of co-authors 
for publications and thesis opponents, help forming con-
sortia for participation in EU and national grants, etc. So 
let’s now discuss in details how does it work. 
A. Management of the FRUCT framework 
Let’s first define what is the FRUCT framework nowa-
days. FRUCT unites R&D teams from 22 organizations, 
located in 3 countries and 4 time zones, with at least 4 
major cultural backgrounds. The number of people ac-
tively working in FRUCT exceeds 70 persons plus over 
200 active followers. Five FRUCT laboratories are lo-
cated at four Russian universities, in three different cities. 
The core FRUCT management team is 8 persons. The 
program is active for more than 3 years and over this time 
12 projects were successfully completed and went to fur-
ther collaboration phase. Over 70 publications were pro-
duced as a result of FRUCT activities and over 40 
projects currently are under development. FRUCT is 
leading R&D activities of Russian MAEMO community 
and represents interests of Symbian Foundation commu-
nity in Russia. Internet visibility is supported by the 
group of FRUCT sites, which includes the main web site, 
FRUCT forum, five fully operational sites of the second 
level and three more sites of the second level are under 
development. Only the main FRUCT site recently gets 
over 700 views per day. FRUCT follows EU and local 
calls for project grants, identify the most relevant topics 
and facilitates formation of the consortia. Also FRUCT 
carefully follows all new trends and weak signals in ICT 
industry, which is used for steering technological devel-
opment of the community. At the same time FRUCT is 
quite unofficial organization that follows principles of the 
new Internet era, e.g., it does not have permanent staff 
100% allocated for FRUCT bureaucracy, as all manage-
ment positions are occupied by people working in the 
member organizations and having other duties beside the 
FRUCT activity. At the same time the core management 
team has significant work load in FRUCT, which create a 
number of personal and organizational challenges. This is 
the FRUCT scope. As you can see it is quite broad, chal-
lenging and non-trivial solution, so how it is managed? 
Formally FRUCT framework is built on the principle 
of eManagement in matrix organizational structure. The 
key tools that support FRUCT management are: the exist-
ing group of web site and other Internet tools, well de-
fined structure of on-site representation in the member 
organizations and procedure for internal communications, 
and regular face-to-face meetings, including social events 
plus joint free-time activities of FRUCT activists.  
The regional representation of FRUCT is based on a 
network of FRUCT laboratories and teams that are 
created in the most active partner organizations. The de-
cision to setup FRUCT laboratory should be seen primary 
as recognition of the existence of strong local FRUCT 
team and its ability to identify R&D niche with competi-
tive level of expertise. The lab creation starts from selec-
tion of the future lab leader. There are two ways how the 
lab leader and correspondingly the lab organization can 
be formed. The lab leader can be recommended and sup-
ported by the official authorities of the member organiza-
tion. Then FRUCT can either accept lab with the pro-
posed leader or refuse it, or start negotiation about other 
potential candidates. The lab structure in this case is 
formed by the member organization according inline with 
the internal guidelines and traditions. 
Another approach is used when initiative comes from 
the department level. Then the laboratory leader is se-
lected via the “natural competition” when at the begin-
ning all key members of the partner team get equal level 
of recognition and attention from the FRUCT board. This 
helps to identify natural leader of the team. If the team 
does not have natural leader, then such case is put on ice 
till the moment when the leader will appear. If team has 
more than one natural leader this approach helps us to 
identify the strongest leader. In certain cases FRUCT 
might even have two independent FRUCT laboratories in 
the same university. 
Selection of the right person to the laboratory leader 
position is a key task for any organization, which is abso-
lutely viable requirement for the open innovations type of 
organization, which by definition are connected by the 
weak ties and have small and weak bureaucracy structure 
that definitely cannot handle additional management 
overhead created due to lack of initiative at the laboratory 
level. 
FRUCT labs get certain amount of money as a budget 
for internal needs. The money can be used for general 
expenses of the lab (e.g., traveling, small office expenses, 
etc.), for organizing lab-level events and support ex-
change activities, and so on. This gives to the lab and 
university people some level of financial independency, 
so that it internally can decide who deserve additional 
recognition, what additional equipment they need to buy, 
etc. The lab leaders regularly report the status and devel-
443
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

opment to the FRUCT board and budget stakeholders. 
The lab leaders together with the FRUCT general chair 
(and optionally other core team members assigned by the 
chair) define the lab development plans with horizon of 
half a year and two years. These plans are reviewed, re-
evaluated and updated every half a year. Also every half a 
year the general chair organizes personal development 
discussion with the leader of each team, which is often 
held at the time of the main FRUCT conferences. The 
purpose of this discussion is to understand personal de-
velopment priorities of the lab leader and team members. 
The lab lead is responsible for organizing similar discus-
sions with all members of the team. As a result FRUCT 
cares about interests of the involved people, gets efficient 
mechanism for getting feedback and minimize probability 
of unwanted surprises due to loss of people that do not 
see for themselves benefits in maintaining FRUCT mem-
bership in their future. The lab leaders form a sub-team of 
local leaders; it is recommended that one person is re-
sponsible for each area of the strategic development of 
the laboratory. The package leaders are responsible for 
running package management tasks, defining and main-
taining the work breakdown structures for the projects in 
their packages and be the main interface for the people 
involved in the package project work. 
Another important aspect is how to handle cross-
cultural management, defining common language and 
communication principles. We selected English to be the 
official language of FRUCT, even despite dominance of 
Russian participants. However to once again lower the 
entering barrier, recently FRUCT introduced couple of 
satellite resources (e.g., maemo.fruct.org) in Russian. But 
all official email exchange is in English. English is used 
on all main pages of FRUCT program and in the official 
news line.  
Synchronization of the framework activities is 
achieved by setting regular telcos in Skype for the mem-
bers of the core team. In addition, every day the general 
chair reserves open timeslot for telcos that is convenient 
for participants in all time-zones. This time is reserved 
specially for ad-hoc telcos so that any FRUCT member 
can call to the chair and provide direct feedback, ideas 
and recommendations. Also every month FRUCT pub-
lishes newsletters and sends major announcements via the 
community email distribution. 
The above listed tasks are facilitated by use of Web 2.0 
solutions at www.fruct.org, e.g., professional social net-
work engine, blogs, event pages, project pages, lab pages, 
forum, wiki, inline commenting of news, etc. 
The risk management is handled at both framework 
and project level. At the project level FRUCT use stan-
dard risk management planning, plus the lab risk man-
agement plan and budget provide the second line of de-
fense against major risks. The third line is provided at the 
framework level, when all teams operating in cooperation 
project should have a plan what to do if peer’s deliverable 
will not be available in time. 
B. Management of R&D projects in FRUCT 
As it was said in introduction, the main task of all 
FRUCT projects is creation of new competences and co-
operation contacts between the involved parties. The ac-
tual R&D challenge should be mainly seen as the crystal-
lization point around which the competences and cooper-
ation activity is built. 
According to FRUCT rules any representative of the 
full-member organization can propose a new topic for 
R&D project. Every FRUCT project should involve rep-
resentatives from two or more member organizations. In 
the simplest case the project work group consists of stu-
dents from one university, which are supervised by local 
professor and assigned industrial tutor. In more advanced 
cases the team might consist of the members from a 
number of FRUCT universities, industrial experts can 
directly participate in the research work and more than 
one supervisor and/or tutor from different universities and 
companies can assist to the team. 
The key idea for such organization of the project teams 
is to lower the commitment threshold on the way to start 
real cooperation. It is obvious that before entering into a 
serious cooperation it would be comfortable for the in-
volved parties to get know each other without any com-
mitments. FRUCT projects provide such “sandbox” 
framework and additional time to learn about strong and 
weak sides of the partner. It also helps to get the required 
knowledge for fine tuning of the cooperation proposals. 
As a result the proposal can be presented in the format 
and under conditions that are most favorable for setting 
the full-scale long-term cooperation. 
Another idea behind FRUCT projects is to promote 
project-based training to help young specialist be more 
creative and understand how to balance high-risk research 
with a need to deliver results within the agreed timeline. 
The eventual results of the project are not just classical 
deliverables like novel algorithms, signal structures, arc-
hitectural solutions, software code, etc., but creation of 
the "competence incubation" infrastructure and a set of 
well-prepared teams capable of continuing challenging 
research and design work on their own. 
The new FRUCT projects can be initiated by a profes-
sor, industry expert or even by a student. Of course, de-
pending on the initiating party there are some differences 
in the procedure: when a professor initiates project, 
he/she has to take an obligation to be a supervisor of the 
project team, when the project proposal comes from the 
industry expert, the expert takes obligation to be team’s 
tutor. In both these cases FRUCT performs lite-analysis 
of the project proposal, as the main responsibility for the 
quality of project proposal is on the initiating expert. 
When a student comes with the idea of a new project 
he/she should ask for a supervisor and tutor from the 
444
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

FRUCT board. Such project proposals are evaluated by 
FRUCT Advisory Board members and invited experts. If 
the selected domain and problem definition look reasona-
ble and challenging, the proposal is called accepted and 
FRUCT board helps student to find supervisor and tutor. 
The main expected deliverables of FRUCT projects 
are: article in a good journal or/and conference, and/or 
code contribution to one of the open source initiatives. 
However depending on the project scope some other de-
liverables could be also possible. 
As was discussed in the previous section, FRUCT does 
not provide direct financial support of the projects, but all 
projects can get support in expertise, books and device 
donations, tools for developing and managing projects, 
travel grants and free-participation packages for present-
ing project results at the approved conferences (with rea-
sonable quality and visibility) and in certain cases even 
student stipendiums. The project results belong to the 
developer team, so FRUCT does not pretend to the results 
ownership, only to the parts the FRUCT leadership team 
contributed to. 
In order to be accepted in FRUCT the project must 
pass standard project definition and evaluation procedure. 
Taking into account specifics of FRUCT principles and 
targets we developed own procedure for entering to 
FRUCT and special form that must be filled in by all 
candidate projects. The form and procedure steps are 
available at FRUCT web [1] and in fact represent the first 
tool that we give to the news teams to correctly and effi-
ciently formulate the project proposal. 
Each project must openly report main results and over-
all progress comparing it to the original targets every half 
a year at the FRUCT conferences. Plus the status progress 
reports are regularly sent to the corresponding lab and/or 
team leaders. 
The project steering is performed by the FRUCT advi-
sory board under personal control and responsibility of 
the selected tutor. For controlling project progress we 
recommend to the project teams prepare the timeline plan 
using Gantt chart [6], with clear specification of the main 
project phases and dates, names of responsible persons, 
summary of involved resources, plus also reflect major 
milestones in the status section of the project web page. 
In addition we introduced web-based Concurrent Ver-
sions System (CVS) solution as a part of the new FRUCT 
project management framework that is currently in pilot 
use. The web solution is also combined with the com-
menting, brainstorming, project and individual calendar 
tool and ideas aquarium tools. 
The above listed tasks are facilitated by use of Web 2.0 
solutions provided at fruct.org and the laboratory sites: 
project pages, professional social network engine, event 
pages, forum, wiki, CVS, calendar, ideas aquarium, 
brainstorming, feedback tool, whiteboard, etc. 
IV. CONCLUSIONS  
The paper gives an overview of the FRUCT framework, 
its scope and targets, with special attention to the approach 
for addressing the framework and project management 
tasks and what tools and solutions are used for that. As 
FRUCT was one of the first attempts to implement the 
open innovation principles in Baltic region. In this project 
we have faced a lot of challenges and had to implement a 
lot of program components without having reference ex-
amples for adoption of the best practices. Development of 
the proper management framework was the key element 
of the performed investigation and this study is not fi-
nished. FRUCT has working solution in hands, but still a 
number of questions are open for further study and discus-
sion (e.g., degree of the solution scalability). The de-
scribed management framework is under development and 
even some practices and solutions mentioned in the paper 
are still in piloting and not yet applied not to the whole 
FRUCT framework and all projects, but only to the se-
lected subset. FRUCT is a “living” organizational struc-
ture and we all time try new things and approaches. Un-
fortunately due to the space restriction it was not possible 
to describe many other aspects of FRUCT program. Many 
management activities, such as management of the profes-
sional developer communities (maemo.fruct.org), organi-
zation of scientific and educational events (conferences, 
training, courses, PhD and MSc exchange, etc.), formation 
of consortia for applying to public funding and many other 
aspects were just mentioned in the paper. We believe that 
the paper provides strong enough arguments in favor of 
the open innovations paradigm, which are further sup-
ported by the reference to successful implementation. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Author thanks all active members of the open innova-
tion framework program FRUCT, and especially Alexey 
Dudkov, Veronika Prokhorova and members of the 
FRUCT Advisory Board for their contribution to the over-
all success of the program. The special thanks also go to 
Nokia and Nokia Siemens Networks for donations pro-
vided to FRUCT program and all FRUCT experts who 
contribute their time and expertise to support development 
of open innovation principle in Russia and Baltic region. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Official web site of European Commission. Research: Framework 
Program 7: the future of European Union research policy, 2010. 
http://ec.europa.eu/research/fp7. Retrieved: 16.7.2010. 
[2] Official web site of Finnish-Russian University Cooperation in 
Telecommunications (FRUCT) Open Innovation Framework pro-
gram, 2010. http://www.fruct.org. Retrieved: 16.7.2010. 
[3] H.W. Chesbrough, Open Innovation: The new imperative for 
creating and profiting from technology. Boston: Harvard Business 
School Press, 2003. 
[4] H.W. Chesbrough, Open Innovation: The new imperative for 
creating and profiting from technology. Boston: Harvard Business 
School Press, p. xxiv, 2003. 
[5] H.W. Chesbrough, The era of open innovation. MIT Sloan Man-
agement Review, Vol. 44 (3), pp. 35-41, 2003. 
[6] KIDASA 
software. 
Gantt 
Charts, 
2010. 
http://www.ganttchart.com. Retrieved: 16.7.2010. 
445
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

