Dynamic Object Binding for Opportunistic
Localisation
Isabelle De Cock
Willy Loockx
Dept. of Applied Engineering
Artesis University College of Antwerp
Antwerp, Belgium
isabelle.decock@student.artesis.be
willy.loockx@artesis.be
Martin Klepal
Centre for Adaptive Wireless Systems
Cork Institute of Technology
Cork, Ireland
martin.klepal@cit.ie
Maarten Weyn
Dept. of Applied Engineering
Artesis University College of Antwerp
Antwerp, Belgium
maarten.weyn@artesis.be
Abstract—In this paper, dynamic object binding is proposed
to improve the opportunistic localisation system. Object binding
will be realised using Bluetooth. Many different techniques are
already fused in the opportunistic localisation system, since Blue-
tooth is integrated in almost all mobile devices, this sensor will be
incorporated in the opportunistic localisation fusion algorithm.
In order to correctly use Bluetooth for object binding, some
important features like operating range, inﬂuence of obstacles
and scan time are analysed. A new measurement model is added
to the particle ﬁlter engine to process incoming Bluetooth data.
The client devices are continually scanning for other adjacent
Bluetooth devices, this information is sent to the server where
the client device position is estimated, based on the other adjacent
Bluetooth devices, which are located through other means. This
way object binding is realised.
Index Terms—object binding; opportunistic localisation; Blue-
tooth
I. INTRODUCTION
Today, localisation techniques are widely spread and already
integrated in many applications such as GPS car systems,
Google Earth, etc. Outdoor localisation is mostly accom-
plished by means of GPS, but usually GPS does not work
indoor because there has to be a minimum of four satellites in
line of sight, which is usually not the case indoor. There we
can use WiFi [1] or GSM [2] or even other techniques such
as Bluetooth [3], Zigbee [4], Ultra Wide Band (UWB) [5].
One big challenge is fusing these techniques into a single
system. Acquire the sensor data of multiple sensors can be
realised because most mobile devices such as Personal Digital
Assistants (PDAs) and smart phones are very often equipped
with GSM, GPS, WiFi or a combination of these. A sys-
tem which combines this technologies is called Opportunistic
Seamless Localisation System (OLS) [1].
This solution combines the above mentioned technologies
together with the information of accelerometers, compass and
camera . All these approaches are seamlessly fused by using
an adaptive observation model for the particle ﬁlter, taking the
availability of every technique into account. A particle ﬁlter [6]
is a sequential Monte Carlo based technique used for position
estimation. Since we are working with a real-time system, it
is even harder to estimate the correct position therefore heavy
and numerous calculations are not recommended. Limiting
the number of particle ﬁlters is recommended in order to
avoid numerous time-consuming calculations. For example,
when this system is implemented at an airport where many
devices are present, the system might be delayed due to these
calculations for all those devices. Obviously, some devices
will travel together such as people by bus, so that it is not
necessary to calculate all their positions with different particle
ﬁlters. Instead, we could combine all these objects and bind
them in one group, in which case we only have to calculate
one position for this group. This is one of the reasons why
Bluetooth may be useful.
Bluetooth is a useful technique to detect other adjacent
Bluetooth devices. Which would enable the possibility to
detect whether people are moving together. Another interesting
reason to use Bluetooth may be the possibility to locate
unknown people. This could be useful to determine the amount
of people in every area.
This paper is structured as follows: at ﬁrst the scanning
method is analysed followed by some real experiments to de-
termine the operational range of Bluetooth devices. Thereafter,
Bluetooth signal strength values are discussed. This is then
followed by a short introduction about opportunistic seamless
localisation and the explanation of the Bluetooth measurement
model. Finally, the results are showed and the last section gives
the conclusion of this paper.
II. METHODS
In this section the use of Bluetooth and the localisation
algorithm will be explained.
A. Bluetooth
Bluetooth [7] is a technique developed by Ericsson. This
universal radio interface in the 2.45 GHz band makes it
possible to connect portable wireless devices with each other.
Bluetooth uses frequency hopping to avoid interference with
other devices, which also use the license-free 2.45 GHz band.
406
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

1) Discovering: There are two ways of discovering [8]
devices when using Bluetooth. The ﬁrst and mostly used
method is inquiry-based tracking. In case of inquiry-based
tracking, the base station needs to scan for devices and to page
all present devices in order to ﬁnd them. All devices need to
be detectable but they need not to be identiﬁed in advance.
Scanning for devices absorbs a relatively large amount of time
because primarily every base station sends a search-packet on
all 32 radio channels. Every detectable device that receives
this packet will answer. To avoid collision, every device will
send his packet with a random delay. This is the reason why
an inquiry has to run for at least 10.24 s to be reliable. Many
devices are undiscoverable in order to increase the security
and privacy of the owner. This is another technical problem
that could occur and consequently it is not possible to ﬁnd
these devices by scanning the area.
A second method of tracking is the connection-based track-
ing. With connection-based tracking, devices are considered
to be in a close range when one device has the possibility to
connect with another device. All devices have to be paired
with each other and this is a major problem when using
the Radio Frequency Communications (RFCOMM) layer [9]
connections with connection-based tracking. Practically, this
requires human input which is time-consuming. Although,
some communication services do not require this, it is still
necessary that one of both devices knows the other one exists.
In practice, the creation of an Asynchronous Connectionless
Link (ACL) [9] and a basic Logical Link Control and Adap-
tation Protocol (L2CAP) layer [9] connection is universal and
authorisation-free. These connections are limited but they are
in compliance with the requirements for tracking usage. It is
only necessary to know whether a connection is possible and
if this is the case, these 2 devices are in the same range. This
connection also supports some low-level tasks such as RSSI
measurements and L2CAP echo requests.
Both tracking techniques have their own advantages and
disadvantages and they are both not ideal. Choosing the correct
technique will depend on the situation. When using inquiry-
based tracking, it is possible to ﬁnd every detectable device
without the need of knowing the devices in advance. The major
disadvantage will be the relatively long scan time. When we
choose the other option, connection-based tracking, the time to
ﬁnd the devices will be shorter and there is also the possibility
to ﬁnd undiscoverable devices. The major disadvantage here
is the requirement that at least one party knows about the
existence of the other one.
Another option could be a combination of both techniques.
Combining these two techniques will not decrease the rela-
tively long scan time because we always need to take the
longest scan time in account. The advantage of combining both
techniques is the possibility to ﬁnd known ’undiscoverable’
devices as well as unknown discoverable devices.
For this project, the ﬁrst option is chosen because inquiry-
based tracking has the possibility to track unknown devices,
which will be useful for this project.
2) Range:
Bluetooth devices can be divided in three
different classes. Generally, class 1 and class 2 are used
instead of class 3, which is due to the very short operating
range of class 3.
Class
Maximum Power
Operating Range
1
100 mW (20 dBm)
Up to 100 m
2
2.5 mW (4 dBm)
Up to 10 m
3
1 mW (0 dBm)
Up to 1 m
These operating ranges are frequently used to estimate a
position since signal strength is not always a good parameter
due to effects like reﬂection, multi-path propagation, ... [10]
The operating range of a Bluetooth device can be deﬁned
by the maximum allowable path loss which can be calculated
with Equation 1:
Ltotal = 20 ∗ log10(f) + N ∗ log10(d) + Lf(n) − 28
(1)
Ltotal = 40 + 20 ∗ log10(d)
(2)
where N is the Distance Power Loss Coefﬁcient, f is the
Frequency (Mhz), d is the distance (meters) between the
nodes , Lf is the Floor Penetration Loss Factor (dB) and n is
the number of ﬂoors penetrated.
When working in an open-air environment, Equation 2
which is the simpliﬁed version of Equation 1, can be used
[11].
As operating ranges will be used to estimate a position,
some tests were done in order to decide which maximum
range will be utilized. A Dell XPS M1530 laptop has been
set up as a base station. The two test devices were a Samsung
E250 mobile phone (test device 1) and a Samsung F450
mobile phone (test device 2). All devices, including the
base station are devices of class 2. Measurements were
started at a distance of one meter away from the base
station and afterwards extended by steps of one meter. Every
measurement was repeated ﬁve times in order to have reliable
results.
Fig. 1.
Experiment 1
The ﬁrst experiment, see Figure 1, was done in open space
in which the two test devices are in line-of-sight of the base
station.
Both test devices could easily bridge a distance of 9 m.
Once the distance was increased, test device 1 was not longer
detectable. Test device 2 was detectable until we reached a
distance of 12 m.
In the next experiment, the inﬂuence of obstacles between the
407
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

Fig. 2.
Experiment 2
base station and the test devices was tested. This test was
ﬁrstly done with a window between the base station and the
test devices. Secondly this test was repeated with a 14 cm
thick brick wall instead of a window, see Figure 2.
Theoretically, obstacles comparable to a wall should sig-
niﬁcantly decrease the Bluetooth signal or even make it
impossible to connect with devices behind such obstacles. It
is very hard to predict the attenuation caused by an obstacle
because every Radio Frequency (RF) signal has multiple ways
to reach the other device. Our test with a window started
showing problems with detecting test device 1 at a distance
of 4 m. Test device 2 remained detectable up to 7 m and at
larger distances it started to show some discontinuities.
The following test with a wall instead of a windowpane
showed these results: at a distance of 4 m, test device 1 started
to disappear and at larger distances, test device 1 was rarely
detected. Test device 2 on the other hand, was much longer
visible. In a range up to 7 m, test device 2 was still detectable.
Fig. 3.
Results
These results, see Figure 3, showed a general range of 10 m
when the base station and test device reside in the same area
hence we are working in an open space. Obstacles like walls
obviously have some inﬂuence on this range. Generally we
can decrease the range down to 5 m.
Consequently, when a Bluetooth device detects another Blue-
tooth device, this estimation will be located in a circular area
with a radius up to 10 m in open space. Walls will limit the
radius up to 5 m.
3) Signal Strength: RSSI values are often used in order to
estimate the proper distance between 2 devices because Blue-
tooth does not offer an interface to extract the real received
signal strength directly [12]. Theoretically, RSSI values should
vary exponentially with the real distance but in practice this
is not always the case [13].
Although there is no deterministic relationship between
Fig. 4.
Range
distance and RSSI, due to fading, reﬂection etc. ,there is a
correlation: when the RSSI value decreases, we know the
distance becomes longer and conversely; when the RSSI value
increases, the distance diminishes. This information can be
used to discover whether devices move away from each other,
towards each other or together.
[14] shows that using RSSI values for calculating the
distance between 2 devices is not reliable. Nevertheless, RSSI
values could be useful to implement object binding. Object
binding should only be realised when 2 or more objects are
very close. At this point, the RSSI values will be higher.
Nonetheless, these values will ﬂuctuate. In this way, it is
necessary to use a range of RSSI values in order to decide
whether objects should be bound or not.
In this thesis, RSSI values are not used because they bring
up another disadvantage: a device needs to set up a connection
with the other device and this will increase the scanning time.
Considering the fact that we are working with a real-time
system, the scanning time should be as short as possible.
B. Opportunistic Seamless Localisation (OSL)
The opportunistic seamless localisation system combines
all location related information readily available from multiple
technologies such as WiFi, GSM, GPS, accelerometers [15]
etc. In this paper we propose a novel method, which allows
taking into account also mobile device connectivity via
Bluetooth link to other devices as an additional source of
location related information which may be successfully
utilized by the OSL system for further improvement on
location estimation reliability and accuracy. As authors
presented in [3] the Bluetooth link connectivity on its own
does not provide sufﬁciently accurate location information for
most of the mobile applications. Therefore, to successfully
fuse the Bluetooth connectivity information for localising
Bluetooth enabled devices, a speciﬁc method described in
this chapter had to be developed for efﬁcient incorporation
into the OSL system fusion location data engine. The OSL
fusion engine is based on the recursive Bayesian estimation
implemented as a particles ﬁlter, therefore, also a likelihood
observation function used for the particles weighting was
developed.
408
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

1) Communication: Firstly, the client scans for all nearby
devices. The MAC address of every found Bluetooth device is
sent to the server. In the mean time, the client keeps scanning
for devices and will regularly send an update.
At the server side, every incoming MAC address will be
compared to a list of known MAC addresses. In this list all
primarily known Bluetooth devices are saved. Every Bluetooth
device has 4 arguments, at ﬁrst the MAC address, secondly
a boolean to indicate whether the device is ﬁxed or mobile,
thirdly the coordinates when the device has a ﬁxed place and
at last every mobile device has an ID.
When a match between incoming MAC address and a
MAC address in the list is found, these MAC addresses are
saved in a list.
2) Measurement
Model:
The
Bluetooth
measurement
model is designed to deal with different situations. A complete
overview of this measurement model can be found in Figure
5.
Fig. 5.
Flowchart
There are 3 possible options when one or more Bluetooth
devices are found. The ﬁrst option happens when the found
devices are unknown. These devices can not be used to
localise the client device. Though, these devices can give
some interesting information, such as how many devices were
present at a certain time in a certain place. This is already
implemented at some places such as Brussels Airport [16].
Every Bluetooth device that is discoverable will be detected
by ﬁxed antennas. In this way it is possible to measure the time
necessary to move from one point to another and consequently
it will be possible to calculate the waiting time to pass for
example through the safety zone. When the found device is
known, there are 2 options left: this device can be a ﬁxed
device, this is the second option, or a mobile device which is
the third option.
Dealing with the second option, returns a ﬁxed place with
the exact coordinates of the ﬁxed device. With the knowledge
that a Bluetooth device is only visible within a certain area
around that device, the weight of all particles from the client
can be adapted.
Calculating the euclidean distance between every particle and
the ﬁxed device is the ﬁrst step. After having calculated the
distance between one particle and the ﬁxed device, there will
be a wall check. A wall has a big inﬂuence on the signal
strength and for that reason it is important to know whether
there is a wall between the ﬁxed device and the particle. The
choice to work with a larger or smaller range depends on the
absence or presence of a wall. Based on this range, the new
particle weight will be calculated.
If the third option occurs, a known mobile device is
found. This device does not show exact coordinates since the
location of every mobile device is predicted with a particle
cloud. Depending on the situation, a particle cloud can consist
out of 100 particles up to 1000 particles. Comparing every
particle of the found device with every particle of the client
device would be too heavy for a real-time system. For this
reason, 10 percent of random particles from the found device
are compared to all particles of the client device. Choosing
10 percent still gives us a reliable amount of particles. The
coordinates of these particles are loaded and the distance
between these particles and the client device particles is
calculated. Again, we need to check if there is no wall
between the particles. Based on this information, the particle
weight can be calculated.
Obviously, it is possible that more than one device is found.
For all those devices, previously mentioned options will be
looked at and for every device, the correct option will be
chosen. Working with multiple found devices, all calculated
particle weights are multiplied for every client particle. In
this way all found devices are brought into the calculation
and the result becomes more accurate.
3) Particle Weight: According to the test results in the
section ’Range’, a range of 10 m will be used in open space
and there will be a range of 5 m when there is an intersection
of a wall. It would be inaccurate to assume that discovered
devices are always in a range of 10 m with equal chances
to be everywhere in that circle. For this reason, using the
sigmoid function gives a more realistic image. In this case,
the following functions have been used:
y =
1
1 + ex−10
(3)
y =
1
1 + ex−5
(4)
Equation (3) is used for open space. This function gradually
decreases and the particle weight will be based on this
409
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

function, see Figure 6. Equation (4) is used when a wall
between the 2 devices is detected. This function will decrease
earlier because the obstacle has a big inﬂuence on the signal
strength which consequently will decrease quickly.
Fig. 6.
Sigmoid function
This sigmoid function is S-shaped and by using this function,
the use of more complex functions is avoided. Still this
function gives a realistic view, due to the smooth curve.
4) Privacy issues: Localising people, often comes with
privacy issues and consequently, privacy is a very important
subject. Adding the Bluetooth technique does not come with
any privacy issues. When scanning for Bluetooth devices, only
the unique ID of the device is sent to the server. It is not
possible to discover the identity of the owner of the Bluetooth
device. There is no connection between the unique Bluetooth
ID and the identity of the owner. A connection between those
2 can only arise when this connection is in the system made
manually with authorisation of the owner.
Moreover, every person with a Bluetooth device has the
opportunity to shut down his/her device and thus not sending
any Bluetooth signals. Most of the time, devices do not need
to be shut down. In order to stop sending Bluetooth signals,
it is also possible to turn off Bluetooth.
III. RESULTS
For these experiments, indoor localisation is accomplished
by using WiFi and Bluetooth. In these tests, the client is
only located by using Bluetooth. Multiple tests with ﬁxed and
mobile Bluetooth devices were done. The ﬁrst test was done
with one ﬁxed and known device, see Figure 7(a).
The estimated position is located at the center of the circle,
the real position is represented by a square and the position
of the found and known Bluetooth devices is represented by
dots. It shows good room level accuracy, although still some
particles -representing different hypothesises- are in adjacent
room
Repeating this test, but now with 4 known and ﬁxed devices
gives us a better result, see Figure 7(b). You see that all
hypothesises, represented by the particles, are now inside
the correct room. Using more found and known devices
results logically in a more accurate estimation. This is due to
(a) Test with 1 ﬁxed de-
vice
(b) Test with 4 ﬁxed de-
vices
Fig. 7.
Comparison between test with 1 or 4 ﬁxed devices
trilateration. The location of every ﬁxed device will also have
an inﬂuence on the accuracy, as shown in Figure 8(c) and 8(d).
8(c) shows a good location of ﬁxed devices, the area where
the client can be located is very small and consequently more
accurate. In 8(d), all ﬁxed devices are close to each other and
therefore, the area where the client can be located is still large.
Fig. 8.
Trilateration
Obviously the area where the client can be located is a lot
smaller when more devices are found. This illustrates why the
error rate decreases when the amount of found and known
devices increases. Because we are using ﬁxed devices only,
it is possible to compare the clients particles with one exact
position. Every ﬁxed device has a known position which does
normally not change. Therefore the estimated position can be
easily calculated with a 100 percent certainty of the location
of the ﬁxed Bluetooth device.
Of course this is a kind of localisation which is previously
already developed in other research such as [3]. But Bluetooth
can be used stronger as a sensor when combined with other
technologies to perform object binding.
In dynamic object binding, instead of static devices, other
mobile devices will be used as references. Mobile devices do
not have one exact and correct position. The likelihood of their
position is estimated with a particle cloud. In order to calculate
the position of the client, all particles will be compared with
10 percent of the particles from a found and known Bluetooth
device. It is possible to increase the threshold of 10 percent,
but using more particles will result in heavy calculations, using
less particles will make the ﬁnal result inaccurate.
In this test, the client location, shown in 9(a), is calculated
based on the particles of another mobile device, shown in 9(b).
Due to the fact that we do not have an exact position of the
mobile device, we have to estimate the client position based on
another estimation. Consequently, the error rate is increased,
410
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

Fig. 9.
Test with 1 mobile device
compared to the test with ﬁxed devices. The error depends
largely on the correctness and distribution of the likelihood of
the dynamic reference device.
Dynamic object binding makes it possible to locate any
found Bluetooth device without the necessity to have any other
technology embedded in the device itself. Localisation infor-
mation from all found devices will be used to correctly locate
the client device. Merging different technologies improves the
ﬁnal result but within this structure, the position estimation of
each device has always been created independent from other
devices.
Of course we can combine dynamic reference devices and
ﬁxed devices when they are both discovered by the device.
This increases the reliability of the estimation.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, a method to realise dynamic object binding is
presented. We choose Bluetooth to accomplish object binding
because of its appearance in many mobile devices. For this
project, the Bluetooth technology is fused with multiple other
technologies in order to get an accurate localisation system.
Some real experiments were done to test the Bluetooth mea-
surement model. These results showed room accuracy when
only Bluetooth was used. Obstacles like walls have a big
inﬂuence on the signal strength which will make it easier to
achieve room-level accuracy. This information is incorporated
in the Bluetooth measurement model.
Dynamic object biding is used to locate devices which
cannot be located by any other technology but can discover
other devices which are located by other means. Dynamic
object binding can increase the likelihood of the position of
these devices.
Further research about acquiring reliable signal strength
values can improve the object binding algorithm, since the
error rate could be decreased by decreasing the operating
range. Object biding can also be used to detect people traveling
together to limit the calculations to only 1 object instead of
estimating the likelihood of two distinct objects.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The research was conducted in the context of the EC FP7
LocON research project.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Weyn, M. Klepal, and Widyawan, “Adaptive Motion Model for a
Smart Phone Based Opportunistic Localization System,” 2nd Interna-
tional Workshop on Mobile Entity Localization and Tracking in GPSless
Environments (MELT 2009), pp. 50–65, 2009.
[2] A. Varshavsky, E. de Lara, J. Hightower, A. LaMarca, and V. Otsason,
“Gsm indoor localization,” Pervasive and Mobile Computing, vol. 3,
no. 6, pp. 698–720, 2007.
[3] J. Hallberg, M. Nilsson, and K. Synnes, “Positioning with bluetooth,”
in Telecommunications, 2003. ICT 2003. 10th International Conference
on, vol. 2, 2003.
[4] A. Nasipuri and K. Li, “A directionality based location discovery
scheme for wireless sensor networks,” in Proceedings of the First ACM
International Workshop on Wireless Sensor Networks and Applications,
2002.
[5] S. Gezici, Z. Tian, G. V. Giannakis, H. Kobaysahi, A. F. Molisch,
H. V. Poor, and Z. Sahinoglu, “Localization via ultra-wideband radios:
A look at positioning aspects for future sensor networks,” IEEE Signal
Processing Magazine, vol. 22, pp. 70–84, 2005.
[6] F. Gustafsson, F. Gunnarsson, N. Bergman, U. Forssell, J. Jansson,
R. Karlsson, and P. Nordlund, “Particle ﬁlters for positioning, navigation,
and tracking,” IEEE Transactions on signal processing, vol. 50, no. 2,
pp. 425–437, 2002.
[7] J. Haartsen, “Bluetooth-The universal radio interface for ad hoc, wireless
connectivity,” Ericsson review, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 110–117, 1998.
[8] S. Hay and R. Harle, “Bluetooth Tracking without Discoverability,” in
Location and Context Awareness: 4th International Symposium, LoCA
2009 Tokyo, Japan, May 7-8, 2009 Proceedings.
Springer-Verlag New
York Inc, 2009, pp. 120–137.
[9] J. Bray and C. Sturman, Connect without cables.
Prentice Hall PTR
Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 2000.
[10] A. Huang, “The use of Bluetooth in Linux and location aware comput-
ing,” Ph.D. dissertation, Citeseer, 2005.
[11] Weidler, “Technical brief: Rugged bluetooth scanners,” Motorola, Tech.
Rep., 2010.
[12] S. Feldmann, K. Kyamakya, A. Zapater, and Z. Lue, “An indoor
Bluetooth-based positioning system: concept, implementation and exper-
imental evaluation,” in International Conference on Wireless Networks,
2003, pp. 109–113.
[13] U. Bandara, M. Hasegawa, M. Inoue, H. Morikawa, and T. Aoyama,
“Design and implementation of a bluetooth signal strength based lo-
cation sensing system,” in 2004 IEEE Radio and Wireless Conference,
2004, pp. 319–322.
[14] J. Hallberg and M. Nilsson, “Positioning with bluetooth, irda and
rﬁd,” Computer Science and Engineering, Lule˚a University of technol-
ogy/2002, vol. 125, 2002.
[15] I. Bylemans, M. Weyn, and M. Klepal, “Mobile Phone-Based Displace-
ment Estimation for Opportunistic Localisation Systems,” in The Third
International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems,
Services and Technologies (UBICOMM 2009).
IEEE, 2009, pp. 113–
118.
[16] B.
A.
Company,
“Accurate
real-time
informa-
tion
on
waiting
times,”
2010.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.brusselsairport.be/en/news/newsItems/361700
411
UBICOMM 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-100-7

