Security Adaptation Based on Autonomic and Trust Systems for Ubiquitous mobile 
network and Green IT 
 
Tewfiq El-Maliki 
HEPIA Geneva 
University of Applied Sciences Western Switzerland  
tewfiq.elmaliki@hesge.ch 
 
Jean-Marc Seigneur 
University of Geneva 
Advanced Systems Group 
Jean-Marc.Seigneur@trustcomp.org 
 
 
Abstract— Security in Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) or 
Internet of Things has become a hot research topic due to their 
wide deployment and the increasing new runtime attacks they 
are facing. Thereby, applications are unaware of what security 
mechanisms are as well as dynamic changing attacks. 
Accordingly, the concept that must cope with this new security 
challenge has to satisfy an overall performance such as power 
consumption, being actually a key issue for internet of things. 
This objective is completely compatible with green computing 
(Green 1.0). This research investigates methods mainly based 
on autonomic computing and adaption security to build a 
framework capable of determining appropriate security means 
for a highly dynamic wireless network with respect to context-
aware, self-management, self-optimization and self-protection 
paradigms of autonomic system. Trust computing was the 
means used to mitigate the influence of attackers. Extensive 
simulations using agent based approach have been also 
conducted for a case study of pollution detection in Geneva city 
in concordance with Green 2.0. We have proved the 
performance of the framework in the case of mobile sensor 
network in the presence of different mobile attacks. The results 
clearly show that SARM is efficient in terms of survivability, 
overall network utilization and power consumption. 
Keywords-Security adaptation; Autonomic; Trust; Green IT 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Ubiquitous computing is becoming more popular than 
ever, mainly by Internet of Things highlighted by large-scale 
embedded sensor devices. Indeed, trends are best observed 
by sensors and Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) in 
everyday life such as cars, refrigerators or even animals to 
track some useful information about them. This overflow of 
information coming from sensing and communication is 
fitting squarely within complex system and autonomic 
computing [1]. Furthermore, mobility of these devices 
exposes them to different security vulnerabilities.  
However, there will be no acceptance of these new 
paradigms without security methods, which are main 
concerns of industry and consumers.  
The increasing complexity of communication system and 
also of attacks makes the conventional static security almost 
obsolete. Whereby, it is resources consuming to maintain 
required security level. The overhead cost reaches high rate. 
Thus, new mechanisms need to be set up to achieve principle 
of adaptation security based on autonomic system in the field 
of security of Internet of Thing. 
On the other hand, sustainable development has 
propelled the efficiency in using resources, which is one of 
the fundamental principles of green computing (Green 1.0). 
Indeed, it studies practices of efficient use of computing 
resources, motivated by reducing the use of materials 
harmful to nature, maximizing energy efficiency and life 
product [2]. In addition, Green IT (2.0) [3] initiative is also a 
good mean to contribute indirectly to catalyze economy of 
energy by using smart protocols and communications to 
reduce emission of other technologies and business sectors. 
In short, we would like to minimize the overall energy 
consumption when using security mechanisms (Green 1.0) as 
well as using ICT to contribute indirectly in reducing gas 
emission (Green 2.0). 
In this paper, we introduce our security autonomic 
framework based on the concept of adaptation security, 
Green IT and explain its components and functionalities. In 
addition, we have evaluated the framework in the case study 
of pollution detection in Geneva based on mobile WSN to 
manage transport traffic and thus energy. In Section 2, the 
related work is reviewed. Section 3 gives the problem 
statement, highlighting the motivation of our work. Section 4 
shows our proposed framework and Section 5 explains our 
Green-SARM, experiments and simulation implementation 
to validate our Framework for the case study. Our simulation 
results and performance analysis are presented in Section 6 
and our conclusion is to be found in Section 7. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Security in sensor networks is complicated by the 
constrained capabilities of sensor node hardware and the 
properties of the deployment [4]. Individual sensor nodes in 
a WSN have the inherent limitations in resources, which 
make the design of security procedures more complicated. 
Each of these limitations is due in part to the two greatest 
constraints: limited energy and physical size [5]. 
Other security issues include security-energy assessment, 
data assurance, survivability, Trust, end to end security, 
Security Support for data centric sensor networks and node 
compromise distribution [5]. It is very important to study 
these areas due to a sensor network’s special character, such 
as battery limitation, high failure probability nodes, easier 
compromised nodes, unreliable transmission media, etc. 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Mobility greatly exacerbates the problem. Until now, there 
have been only a few approaches available, and more studies 
are needed in these areas. Furthermore, Trust [6] is a good 
path to explore because it gives in some cases better results. 
That’s why we have carried out extreme simulation based on 
Trust to assess security requirements of our case study. 
The best way to overcome this constraint is to implement 
the Framework capable of adapting security to the context 
based on the ideas similar to those described in [7] and 
consequently having an overall security control. We have 
been inspired by the concept of autonomic computing that 
was develop by IBM [1] to propose a new Security 
Adaptation security Frameworks based on autonomic 
computing and “Green IT” [2,3]. 
III. 
MOTIVATION 
A. General Motivation 
IT systems are resource consuming especially battery 
power [8]. This is because a lot of smart and useful mobile 
applications need significant power consumption, such ones 
using geo-localization. However, all actors avoid using or 
arming security means in attempt to reduce power and 
resource consumption. Accordingly, they put users’ security 
at risk and thus facilitating also distributed attacks to be 
successful. In addition, in the smart 2020 report [3], it is 
illustrated the scale of the opportunity for IT to drive 
efficiency across the economy and deliver emission savings 
of 15% of global emissions in 2020. One of the biggest 
challenges is overcoming the lack of information about the 
emissions impacts of products and services, especially in the 
context of complex configurations and integration.  
Furthermore, conventional security mechanisms such as 
cryptography are unable to protect against new attacks such 
as jamming mainly in WSN. Ref. [9] talk about hard security 
for conventional security mechanisms such as authentication 
versus soft security measures for trust and reputation 
systems. 
Investigation of new techniques to deal with the trade-off 
between the use of security mechanisms and performance are 
highlighted as essential to computing [10, 11]. 
We also argue in this article that the spare processing and 
transmission resources are wasted in mobile environments if 
security is over-provisioned. Hence, the trade-off between 
security and performance is essential in the choice of 
security services. Adaptive security mechanisms are also 
found in flexible protocol stacks for wireless networks [12], 
context-aware access control systems [13] and security 
architectures [14]. This prompted us for the implementation 
of a completely reconfigurable architecture [15], which is 
fundamental to adapt the architecture to the terminal and 
network variability of the context and particularly in the 
security field [16]. J-M Seigneur [6] has introduced 
autonomic security pattern in his security design but only at 
the authentication level. 
In [17], the author listed the main and typical problems 
for the security in complex system.  
a) Inefficient and inadequate usage of available 
security methods and tools 
b) Scattering of resources when trying to solve a lot of 
special security problems at the same time 
These problems need efficient solutions, which lead to 
high demand for adaptive security methods. 
We propose a generic framework called Security 
Adaptation Reference Monitor (SARM) as a compelling 
solution for this problem, because it uses autonomic 
paradigm and is developed especially for highly dynamic 
wireless network. 
IV. 
FRAMEWORK DESCRIPTION 
We would like with SARM to fine-tune security means 
as best as possible taking into account the risk of the current 
environment and the performance of the system especially 
regarding the optimization of its energy consumption. All 
these are under policies and user real time intervention 
constraints. Thereby, our system differs from others by its 
[10]: 
a) autonomic computing security feedback control 
system, 
b) dynamic and evolving security mechanisms related 
to context-monitoring, 
c) explicit energy consumption management, 
d) dealing with mobility of attackers 
The concept of isolating various functions and restricting 
their access to specific system can also be applied to security 
in wireless environment integrated in the operating system 
itself. The best way to overcome the nonrealistic constraint 
of implementing the framework in each communication 
program is to integrate it in the kernel and consequently 
having an overall security control. Thus, all communication 
programs go through SARM at some stage in order to gain 
access to communication resources. 
Our framework could work as a cross-layers program and 
thus it is not related to any layer. However, the best place to 
implement is in the kernel to avoid any compromising 
overall security.  
To reduce the system complexity and to make the system 
incremental, we propose a feedback loop framework as 
introduced in [18] at the authentication level, that is, the 
system automatically tunes to its best configuration based on 
the current monitored context, thus avoiding any static 
decision making. Hence, we split SARM into two units with 
feedback loop. One unit called management or monitor unit 
is for monitoring the context by evaluating and analyzing 
risks, performances, and energy consumption, which are 
significant for detecting attacks and tuning the adequate 
security means using the second module called functional 
unit. 
Security means are defined as any algorithm or 
mechanism that could ensure security. We have carried out a 
good synthesis survey on identity management security 
initiative used as means in [19]. 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

We have depicted in Fig. 1 the different components of 
SARM and their interconnections. 
 
Figure 1.  SARM.High level view 
Security means can be application dependent such as a 
localized trust [20] or a distributed trust [21]. In [10], we 
have explicit all the details about SARM. 
V. 
GREEN-SARM 
We have used an adapted version of SARM called 
Green-SARM to the application domain of wireless sensor 
network applied to a case study of pollution detection in the 
city of Geneva, which is an application for both Green 1.0 
and 2.0 initiatives.  
A. Sensors Energy Consumption 
A typical sensor node processor is of 4 MHz at 916 MHz 
frequency [5]. Table I shows that receiving costs almost half 
the energy of sending, which are almost 5 to 25 time average 
computing energy. That is why, our computing energy for 
trust and detection is really insignificant compared to 
transmission. 
TABLE I.  
CHARACTERISTIC DATA FOR THE MICA2DOT SENSOR(  
Field  
Value  
Effective data rate 
12.4 kbps 
Energy to transmit (5dBm) 
59.2 μJ/byte 
Energy to receive 
28.6 μJ/byte 
A. The Main Problem : use case 
Geneva is an international financial city, and worldwide 
centre for diplomacy and for UN agency. It is the most 
popular and the second most populous city in Switzerland. 
During summer, traffic jam is making the city 
unfortunately polluted. To apply Green IT 1.0 and 2.0 
objectives, we would like to minimize this pollution by 
implementing:  
a) A sensor network will be deployed based on a cheap 
Zigbee transmitter to monitor the level of pollution (CO2).  
b) Every transmitter is placed in a car or a pedestrian 
c) There are many fixed base stations that collect 
information about CO2 from sensors 
d) Some information is exchanged within a fixed range 
and an evaluation of data consistency is rated as a trust 
e) Obtained data will be aggregated by weighted 
average according to the trust on collected information 
f) Therefore, recommendations will be overspread to 
conductor and walker to avoid the places where the 
pollution overpasses a certain level and simultaneously a 
trust about every transmitter will be send to the participant. 
g) Finally, the traffic is managed in real time to initiate 
action plans crescendo capable of reducing the emission 
and thus avoiding in advance pollution peaks. 
B. Implementatin of Green-SARM 
 
 
 
Context : 
Sensing 
R
i
s
k 
Rejected 
 
Performance: 
Network 
Survivability
 
Vulnerability 
Send an action 
to security 
Functional Unit 
User 
Preferences
If energy is low stop 
transmission or 
adapt it
 
Analysis
 
Monitoring 
Tune 
Policies
 
Logs : 
Sinkhole
Jammer
 
Applications 
App dep. 
Encryption
 
Security Means 
Trust 
fonction
 
 
Received 
info from 
BS
 
Management Unit 
 
Figure 2.  Adapted SARM.: Green-SARM 
The control system of SARM Framework is ideal for a 
collaborative environment where the decision making trust 
function for the security must interact with other users to find 
the adequate decision. In Fig. 2, we describe module by 
module, how SARM is applied to the application domain of 
our validation, becoming the Green-SARM version. First of 
all, the security means are tuned efficiently by SARM. 
However, the application could use or not authentication and 
encryption with all rejected sensors. The application 
preference is to maximize the usage time whilst keeping 
enough security. The gathering context module is used to 
collect and distribute trust values between the Base Station 
(BS) and Nodes (sensors). These values represent the trust of 
a sensor about its neighbors (summarized in Table II) 
TABLE II.  
BEHAVIOR AND RECOMMENDED VALUE SENT BY BASE 
STATION TO SENSOR UNDER SINKHOLE AND JAMMER ATTACKS 
Sensor Behavior over neighbors 
According to a scenario 
Recommended value to Sensor  
Normal   
Good (1) = Pos 
Sinkhole 
or 
Jamming 
to 
neighbors “Who are you” 
Bad (-1) = Neg 
Unkwon 
Neutral (0.5)= Neu 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Attackers are detected when they are within a given 
range to the BS. The network is configured with messages 
following a given communication protocol to establish a 
connection as describe in Fig 3. In fact according to it, only 
the BSs and the attackers send messages "Who Are You?" 
As the BSs are too far from each others, if a message of this 
type is received it means that it is send necessarily by an 
attacker. In this case, the base sends a "Bad" message to 
everyone to indicate an intruder is present and BS updates its 
trust in a centralized database.  
 
Figure 3.  Communication protocol based on soft security 
The values are sent to the management unit for analysis 
using a Trust Function (TF) that will assert the fact which 
algorithm has to be used or not. In addition, the performance 
is fixed as energy saving in accordance with Application 
Preference, which is lifespan maximizing. 
One of our used TF is explained in “(1)”: 
 
TFj = (2*Pos-2*Neg)/ (2*Pos+2*Neg+ Neu)
 
For all j sensors 
if (TFj > threshold ) 
Accept connection 
else{ TFj =< threshold}  
then 
{rejected 
and 
use 
encryption 
and 
authentication if required} 
End for 
The TF will be used to calculate the weighted average of 
pollution values gathered from sensors and it will be also 
used to minimize overall energy consumption.  
The implementation and the system analysis are difficult 
and complex. This comes from the fact that every sensor acts 
independently from others. Therefore, our model will be 
studied using simulation tools in order to compare it with 
reference cases. Indeed, each Sensor sends data packets to a 
number of Sensors within a defined range according to 
threshold used as policy. Thanks to its context gathering 
module the TF has all information to evaluate the trust.  
B. Attackers 
The behavior of a node is fixed in the starting of the 
simulation based on a uniform distribution, which has an 
average equal to rate of attackers .There are many attacks but 
we will consider only two attacks: 
 
Jamming attack: given the sensitivity of the wireless 
medium to noise, a node can cause a denial of 
service by transmitting signals at a certain frequency. 
It is implemented just by sending packet repeatedly.   
 
Sinkhole attack: the node tries to attract to it the 
most possible path like a concentrator to have 
control over most of the data through the network. 
To do this, the attacker must appear to others as 
being very attractive, presenting optimal routes. It is 
implemented by imitating any BS or any good node. 
Note that we do not treat Sybil attacks. 
C. Metrics 
Due to the characteristics of WSN, their major objective 
is to fulfill their mission even though some nodes are out of 
use due to attackers. Indeed, this means to ensure 
survivability of WSN, which can be defined as: “the 
capability to fulfill its mission, in a timely manner, in the 
presence of intrusions, attacks, accidents and failures” [22]  
Gain of survivability is the ratio between: Duration time 
when 75% of nodes are out of battery using our framework 
and same case but without using our framework 
VI. 
IMPLEMENTATION AND VALIDATION METHODOLOGY 
We have implemented Green-SARM and validated it in a 
mobile Sensor wireless network simulation developed with 
AnyLogic, which is a simulation tool that supports all 
different simulation methodologies. It is based on Real-time 
UML, Java object-oriented language and agent based model. 
A. Model Set-up 
 
Figure 4.  Statechart of sensors 
Each Sensor is associated to a given agent matching with 
its location and behavior.  
Setting up our security model using Table II, we can take 
advantage of state chart by monitoring the behavior of 
agents. The state of our agents is controlled by state-charts, 
which represents the exact behavior of sensors, as shown in 
 
Base 
Sensor 
Send a msg 
send « Hello » 
If msg equals 
« Hello » 
send « Who Are You? » 
If msg equals 
« Who Are 
You? » 
 
send « I’m a sensor » 
If msg equals 
« I’m a sensor », 
updating data 
base 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Fig. 4. Using AnyLogic as implementation platform agents 
and state-charts can be programmed very conveniently. 
Particular modifications and/or extensions of the final model 
can be handled in a simple way. 
In Fig. 4, each Agent (Sensor) starts at state Init. The 
Agents are switched to their relative state (Sinkhole, 
Jamming, Base Station, Sensors) according to percentage of 
attackers, BS and Sensors. They are then added to a list of 
the sensor whenever they are within his range. 
We used Agents having one of the following behaviors: 
a) Normal state and 
b) Sinkhole and Jamming as attakers  
Each Agent is then processed depending on the decision 
of the monitor unit to choose a security means or not. When 
arriving at a minimum defined level of Energy according to 
the real consumption of Sensor (see table [1]), the Agent 
transits to Sensor_low; and then transit to Sensor_off when 
the Agent has not enough energy to transmit data. The Agent 
transits to Rejected state when its TF is lower than a 
Threshold. The state-chart Trust updates the trust each time 
the Base Station received information about a sensor. The 
BS is not limited in energy and has also access to trust 
database to spread it over its range. 
In order to have a deep study of the model, we have 
introduced factors : 
a) ImmunityRate: when TF of a Sensor reaches this 
value it has double influence on its values “Good”. It is a 
catalyst to accelerate convergence. 
b) Limit: it is the Threshold of TF to reject sensors. 
c) JudgementError: it defines an error rate among the 
large number of messages received and helps to study the 
robustness of the model. It is useful in our case where errors 
are very frequent due to the media. 
B. Validation Methodology 
 
Figure 5.  Simualtion interface for Geneva pollution use case 
Fig. 5 depicts the context of the simulation interface. In 
this respect, we have carried out simulations under 0%, 20%, 
40%, 60% and 80% half-half sinkhole and jammer attackers. 
Furthermore, the network topology was set to random 
spreading of sensors. We have taken a uniform packet 
distribution over the neighbors.  
The BSs are randomly spread over the network. In our 
experiments, we have validated our proposed solution and 
analyzed the extended performance under a range of various 
scenarii, where we have fixed to ten BSs. All sensors are 
spread over a square topology and operating over 35 days of 
simulation time. The Base Station coverage a large circle but 
it has no contact over the coverage of other BSs. We 
deployed the Sensors in an incremental mode, from S1 to Sn. 
As the device is not static, we have modeled his mobility 
using random variables model. The movement pattern of 
mobile clients was totally randomized, in order to comply 
with a real application. To achieve this, we used the Random 
WayPoint (RWP) mobility model [23]. All nodes are mobile 
and their pause time is a randomly uniform variable. The 
time is in minutes and is in a range [0; 50’000] adapted to the 
battery of sensors.  
C. Scenarii 
We have used three scenarii to validate our model. In our 
scenarii, sensors (agents) were divided in four categories.  
A normal behavior, they are composed of N sensors set in 
the range of [100; 1000]. The trust threshold is optimized 
after many series of simulation to 0.3. 
Sinkhole and jammer attackers are composed of the same 
amount of sensors. In the first scenario, we fixed the 
percentage as: N of normal behavior and 10 % of sinkhole 
and 10% jammer attackers. In the second scenario, we fixed 
the percentages as: N of normal behavior and 20 % of 
sinkhole and 20% jammer attackers. In the third scenario, we 
fixed the percentages as: N of normal behavior and 40 % of 
sinkhole and 40% jammer attackers 
VII. RESULTS ANALYSIS 
During our analysis, we firstly studied the performance 
of Green-SARM in the three defined scenarii where sensors 
were arranged at random. Secondly, we studied the 
scalability of the model. Thirdly, we studied robustness of 
the model based on the factor Error. 
For comparison purpose, we plotted the Green-SARM 
for 1000 sensors in Fig. 6 and without trust in Fig. 7 for the 
same first scenario. We can easily conclude that SARM is 
largely better than normal case without security trust; a ratio 
of 6.5 is reached and we can see that in short time 1000min 
compared to the maximum time 50’000min. Indeed, we have 
obtained the desired effect of the feedback mechanism of the 
SARM. An example of 500 sensors without Green-SARM 
security is plotted in Fig. 8. We see clearly that the attackers 
diminish quickly the survivability of the network. 
0
1 0 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 0
3 0 0 0 0
4 0 0 0 0
5 0 0 0 0
0
2 0 0
4 0 0
6 0 0
8 0 0
1 0 0 0
T im e
(m in )
N u m b e r o f S e n s o rs
S e n so rs  O n
S e n so rs L o w
S e n s o rs  O ff
S in kh o le s
J a m m in g
R e je cte d
 
Figure 6.  1000 sensors for the first scenario (Green-SARM) 
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

0
1 0 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 0
3 0 0 0 0
4 0 0 0 0
5 0 0 0 0
0
2 0 0
4 0 0
6 0 0
8 0 0
1 0 0 0
1 2 0 0
T im e
(m in )
N u m b e r o f S e n s o rs
S e n so rs  O n
S e n so rs L o w
S e n s o rs  O ff
S in kh o le s
J a m m in g
R e je cte d
 
Figure 7.  Network of 1000 Sensors for the first scenario (without SARM) 
 
Figure 8.  500 sensors for the first scenario (without SARM)  
In Fig. 9, we plotted the scalability of the model in 
function of number of sensors using Green-SARM for the 
first scenario. This graph shows clearly that our model is 
scalable. The number of sensors goes higher as the network 
survivability goes higher.  
Figure 9.  Gain of survivability for 20 % of attackers for number of 
sensors from 100 to 1000 
For comparison purpose, we plotted the Green-SARM 
under 20% of sinkhole attackers (the second scenario) using 
our TF in Fig. 10 and also without trust in Fig. 11. The 
results clearly demonstrate that the survivability is boosted. 
0
1 0 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 0
3 0 0 0 0
4 0 0 0 0
5 0 0 0 0
0
2 0
4 0
6 0
8 0
1 0 0
T im e
(m in )
N u m b e r o f S e n s o rs
S e n so rs  O n
S e n so rs L o w
S e n s o rs  O ff
S in kh o le s
J a m m in g
R e je cte d
 
Figure 10.  Number of 100 sensors for the 2nd scenario using Green-SARM 
Figure 11.  100 sensors for the 2nd scenario (without Green-SARM) 
Figure 12.  Survivability of 100 sensors for different scenarii 
In Fig. 12, we plotted the gain of survivability of the 
model in function of the percentage of attackers using Green-
SARM. Therefore, we have the proof that Green-SARM is 
0
1 0 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 0
3 0 0 0 0
4 0 0 0 0
5 0 0 0 0
0
2 0
4 0
6 0
8 0
1 0 0
T im e
(m in )
N u m b e r o f S e n s o rs
S e n so rs  O n
S e n so rs L o w
S e n s o rs  O ff
S in kh o le s
J a m m in g
R e je cte d
0
1 0 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 0
3 0 0 0 0
4 0 0 0 0
5 0 0 0 0
0
1 0 0
2 0 0
3 0 0
4 0 0
5 0 0
T im e
(m in )
N u m b e r o f S e n s o rs
S e n so rs  O n
S e n so rs L o w
S e n s o rs  O ff
S in kh o le s
J a m m in g
R e je cte d
0
2 0 0
4 0 0
6 0 0
8 0 0
1 0 0 0
0
2
4
6
8
N u m b e r o f S e n s o rs
G a in  o f n e tw o rk  s u rv iv a b ility
0
2 0
4 0
6 0
8 0
1 0 0
1 .2
1 .4
1 .6
1 .8
2 .0
A tta k e rs  in  %  o f S e n s o rs
G a in  ra te  o f s u v iv a b ility  o f n e tw o rk
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

ameliorating the survivability to up a rate of about 2 when 
the network is under more attackers compared to a passive 
security network.  
The JudgmentError factor, which designs errors on TF, 
was set to 10% but the variation of results was less than 1%. 
This shows clearly the robustness of the Green-SARM. 
All the results show clear advantages of Green-SARM 
even at 80% of sinkhole and jammer attackers. We can 
conclude that our security monitor helps the WSN to operate 
even under 80 % of attackers thanks to the looping system 
connected to the context gathering monitor and the TF.  
VIII. CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK 
We have proposed a Security Adaptation Reference 
Monitor based on security adaptation and the Autonomic 
Computing Security pattern to support both context monitor 
and behavior control. This paper also presents the validation 
of SARM in WSN applied to support Green IT concepts. The 
results clearly show that Green-SARM copes with 
survivability and network Energy loss under sinkhole and 
jamming attacks even at 80% of attackers. Indeed, Green-
SARM constitutes a good Platform within the Base Station 
to detect any sinkhole and eliminate it from its connections 
and put it into log file, thanks to the context gathering 
monitor and the feedback control and regulation system. 
Therefore, we show that our Framework is efficient in this 
context and is tuning to achieve the best trade-off between 
security 
and 
performance 
according 
to 
application 
preferences. In addition, the network is well energy 
balanced. These results encourage us to implement the model 
in a tamper-resistant security module based on a Secure 
Digital card. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I would like to thank my students O. Oudom and M. De 
Azevedo 
who 
have 
worked 
in 
computer 
model 
implementation. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Parashar and S. Hariri, “Autonomic Computing : An 
overview”, Spring-2005 
[2] L. Wilbanks, “Green, My Favorite Color”, IT Pro v.10, n.6., 
2008, pp.63-64. IEEE Comp Soc. Press 
[3] SMART 2020, “Enabling the low carbon economy in the 
information age”, Global e-Sustainability Initiative, 2008  
[4] H. K. D. Sarma and A. Kar, “Security Threats in Wireless 
Sensor Networks”, In proceeding of: Carnahan Conferences 
Security Technology, Oct. 2006, pp. 243-251, Proceedings 
40th Annual IEEE International, 2006 
[5] X. Chen, K. Makki, K. Yen, and N. Pissinou, “Sensor 
Network Security: A Survey”, IEEE Communications 
Surveys & Tutorials, Vol. 11, No. 2, Second Quarter 2009, 
pp. 52–73, 2009. 
[6] J.-M. Seigneur, “Trust, Security and Privacy in Global 
Computing”, PhD Thesis, 2005. 
[7] B. Badrinath,. A. Fox, L Kleonrock, G. Popek, and M. 
Satyanarayanan, “A conceptual Framework for Network and 
Client Adaptation”, Mobile Networks and applications, v.5 
n.4, Dec. 2000, pp. 221-231, 2000. 
[8] A. S. Wander, N. Gura, H. Eberle, V. Gupta, and S. C. 
Shantz, “Energy Analysis of Public-Key Cryptography for 
Wireless Sensor Networks”, Proceedings of the Third IEEE 
International Conference on Pervasive Computing and 
Communications, March 2005, pp. 324-328, 2005 
[9] A. Josang, R. Ismail, and C. Boyd, “A Survey of Trust and 
Reputation Systems for Online Service Provision”, Decision 
Support Systems, 43(2) 2007, pp. 618-644, 2007 
[10] T. El-Maliki and J.-M. Seigneur, “A Security Adaptation 
Reference Monitor (SARM) for Highly Dynamic Wireless 
Environments”, The International Conference on Emerging 
Security 
Information, 
Systems, 
and 
Technologies 
SECURWARE, Jul. 2010, pp. 63-68 
[11] A.V. Taddeo, “Gradual Adaptation of Security for Sensor 
Networks”, IEEE International Symposium on a World of 
Wireless Mobile and Multimedia Networks, June. 2010, pp. 
1-9 
[12] C. Hager, “Context Aware and Adaptive Security for Wireless 
Networks”, PhD thesis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University, 2004 
[13] M. Lacoste, G. Privat, and F. Ramparany, “Evaluating 
Confidence in Context for Context-Aware Security”, 
European Conference on Ambient Intelligence (AmI'07), 
Nov. 2007, pp. 211-229. 
[14] J. Al-Muhtadi, D. Mickunas, and R. Campbell, “A 
Lightweight Reconfigurable Security Mechanism for 3G/4G 
Mobile Devices”, IEEE Wireless Communications, 9(2), 
April. 2002, pp. 60–65 
[15] E2R Deliverable D2.2, “Equipment Management Framework 
for Reconfiguration: Architecture, Interfaces, and Functions”, 
Technical Report, Dec. 2005. 
[16] M. Lacoste, T. Jarboui, and R. He, “A Component-Based 
Policy-Neutral 
Architecture 
for 
Kernel-Level 
Access 
Control,” Annals of Telecommunications, vol. 64, no. 1-2, 
Feb. 2009, pp. 121–146 
[17] A. Shnitko, “Practical and Theoretical Issues on Adaptive 
Security”, WOLFASI, Turku, Finland, 2004. 
[18] D. M. Chess, “Security in Autonomic Computing”, IBM 
Thomas J. Watson Research Center, 2005. 
[19] T. El-Maliki, J.-M. Seigneur, “A survey of user-centric 
identity management technologies”, Emerging Security 
Information, Jul. 2007, pp. 12-17, ieeexplore.ieee.org, 2007. 
[20] L. Eschenauer, V. Gligor, and J. Baras, “On Trust 
Establishment in Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks”, Proc. 10th 
International Workshop of Security Protocols, Springer 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS), Apr. 2002, pp. 
44-66.  
[21] A. Rahman and A. Hailes, “A Distributed Trust Model”, New 
Security Paradigms Workshop, 1997, pp. 48-60, ACM, 1997. 
[22] R. Ellison, D. Ficher, R. Linger, H. Lipson, T. Longstaff, and 
N. Mead, “Survivable Network System: An Emerging 
Discipline”, CMU/SEI-97-TR-013, 1997  
[23] C. Bettstetter, “Stochastic Properties of the Random 
Waypoint Mobility Model”, 2004. 
 
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

