Research Challenges for Cooperating Objects
Pedro Jos´e Marr´on, Daniel Minder, Marco Z´u˜niga
Networked Embedded Systems Group
University of Duisburg-Essen
Bismarckstr. 90, 47057 Duisburg, Germany
{pjmarron,daniel.minder,marco.zuniga}@uni-due.de
Abstract—Cooperating Objects are, in the most general case,
small computing devices equipped with wireless communication
capabilities that are able to cooperate and organize themselves
autonomously into networks of sensors, actuators and process-
ing units to achieve a common task. Several areas could greatly
beneﬁt with the introduction of Cooperating Object technolo-
gies, ranging from automation (home, industrial, building) to
healthcare and energy management. To exploit this potential
the research community has to tackle various problems in
various areas including hardware, algorithms and systems. In
this paper we describe these research areas and their different
challenges. Based on a survey, predominant work areas are
selected that should receive the most attention.
Keywords-cooperating objects; research roadmap
I. INTRODUCTION
The ﬁeld of Cooperating Objects envisions vast numbers
of embedded devices, such as networks of sensors and actua-
tors, industrial production lines and machines, and household
appliances that are interconnected and cooperate with each
other in order to provide advance services. The functionality
that these devices will offer, are often referred as real-world
services because they are provided by embedded devices,
which are part of the physical world.
By 2020, the number of connected devices, that form the
Internet of Things, is estimated to be between 20 and 50
billions. This number provides a rough estimate on the num-
ber of Cooperating Objects. The main focus of Cooperating
Objects is the coupling of the physical and virtual worlds,
i.e., monitoring and control activities. By 2020, the global
market for monitoring and control is expected to reach e 500
billion and for Europe e 143 billion [1]. Over time, hardware
will become less important but software and services will
have a larger share.
The business opportunities for real-world services are
huge [2]. As mass market penetration of networked em-
bedded devices is realized, services taking advantage of
the novel functionality of devices will give birth to new
innovative applications and provide both revenue generating
and cost saving business advantages. From a technological
point of view, the key challenge is how to discover, assess,
and efﬁciently integrate the new data points into business
applications.
This paper describes the nascent ﬁled of Cooperating
Objects and it is based on the book “The emerging domain
of cooperating objects”[3]. We will ﬁrst deﬁne Cooperating
Objects in Section II. Section III presents the state of the
art in the most important research areas, and Section IV
describes the key research challenges. In Section V, we
present our main conclusions.
II. DEFINITION OF COOPERATING OBJECTS
A number of different system concepts have become ap-
parent in the broader context of embedded systems over the
past couple of years. First, there is the classic concept of em-
bedded systems as mainly a control system for some phys-
ical process (machinery, automobiles, etc.). More recently,
the notion of pervasive and ubiquitous computing started
to evolve, where objects of everyday use can be endowed
with some form of computational capacity, and perhaps with
some simple sensing and communication facilities. More
recently, the idea of wireless sensor networks has started
to appear, where entities that sense their environment not
only operate individually, but collaborate together using ad-
hoc network technologies to achieve a well-deﬁned purpose
of supervision/monitoring of some area, some particular
process, etc.
We claim that these three types of systems that act
and react on their environment are actually quite diverse,
novel systems that, on the one hand, share some principal
commonalities and, on the other hand, have some different
aspects that complement each other to form a coherent group
of objects that cooperate with each other to interact with
their environment. In particular, important notions such as
control, heterogeneity, wireless communication, dynamic ad-
hoc nature, and cost are present to various degrees in each
of these types of systems.
A system that encompasses these three areas would have
to combine the strong points of all three concepts in at least
the following functional aspects:
• Support the control of physical processes as embedded
systems are able to do nowadays.
• Support device heterogeneity and spontaneity of usage
as pervasive and ubiquitous computing do today.
• Be as cost efﬁcient and versatile in terms of the use of
wireless technology as Wireless Sensor Networks are.
We called this new system “Cooperating Object”, and we
deﬁned it as follows:
327
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

“Cooperating Objects (COs) consist of embedded
computing devices equipped with communication
as well as sensing or actuation capabilities that
are able to cooperate and organize themselves
autonomously into networks to achieve a common
task. The vision of COs is to tackle the emerging
complexity by cooperation and modularity. To-
wards this vision, the ability to communicate and
interact with other objects and/or the environment
is a major prerequisite. While in many cases coop-
eration is application speciﬁc, cooperation among
heterogeneous devices can be supported by shared
abstractions.”
III. STATE OF THE ART IN COOPERATING OBJECTS
RESEARCH
In this section, we present topics relevant to Cooperating
Object. The topics are structured into hardware, algorithms,
non-functional properties and others. We focus on research
areas that, from the point of view of industrial research
and the academic community, are still relevant and not
considered solved. Due to space restrictions, we can only
touch each research area and give a few keywords. More
detailed explanations and all references can be found in [3].
A. Hardware
Regarding hardware, low energy processors and con-
trollers have been designed and used. However, energy
efﬁcient hardware is still expensive, and cost is a major
constraint in the are of Cooperating Object. Nowadays,
the typical sensor node price lies between $50 and $200.
Applications requiring more than 100 sensor nodes increase
dramatically the investment costs. Therefore, there is still
a need for low-cost, power-efﬁcient hardware. The ultimate
target is to produce sensor nodes with a price of under $1.
Calibration is another important issue. Actual calibration
solutions are often ad-hoc and require a large amount of
application-speciﬁc engineering. In many cases, the cali-
bration infrastructure is at least as complex as the sensor
network itself. There is still signiﬁcant work required to
arrive to low-cost systematic methods.
The design of long network lifetime requires efﬁcient
power management of Cooperating Objects. Therefore, the
issues of hardware power management scheme for the opti-
mal selection of transmit power and radio channels are topics
that are gaining a lot of attention in the research community.
Finally, as another solution of increasing network lifetime,
research in the ﬁeld of energy harvesting tries to combine
existing techniques to create more efﬁcient power sources.
New materials, such as electro-active polymers, are being
examined since they promise a higher energy conversion
coefﬁcient.
B. Algorithms
Time synchonization aims at establishing a common time
scale among Cooperating Objects and important for several
other algorithms. The design space is quite large as has been
well explored: adjusting clocks vs. timescale transformation,
proactive vs. on-demand synchronization, time representa-
tion as points vs. intervals. In general, two approaches are
used: sender-receiver or receiver-receiver sychnronization.
Current protocols achieve an average accuracy of few micro
seconds in multi-hop networks with a diameter of ten hops.
Regarding localization, the state of the art shows that
this ﬁeld has been very proliﬁc in the past years, providing
solutions that are both range-free and range-based. Current
trends try to combine individual localization techniques such
as sensor nodes, RSSI, camera information, etc. into a
system that provides better results as the individual parts
alone. Most of the research nowadays concentrates in in-
door scenarios, where most of the problems are still not
solved with the appropriate level of accuracy.
Regarding Medium Access Control techniques, the liter-
ature is vast and contains protocols that have very different
goals. In general, Cooperating Objects research beneﬁts
more clearly from TDMA-based algorithms that avoid col-
lisions by design, although this implies the existence of
synchronized clocks throughout the network. The trend is
towards providing efﬁcient mechanisms to schedule the
access to the medium while avoiding the latencies normally
incurred by this type of protocols.
While routing in the robotics area is usually based on IP
protocols it has received signiﬁcant attention in the ﬁelds of
Wireless Sensor Networks due to their resource restrictions
and data-centric nature. Many approaches observe their
neighborhood and assess the suitability of a neighbor in the
routing process using different metrics that can include the
forwarding cost. When the position of the nodes is known
geographic routing can be used.
Querying is perhaps the area that has concentrated most
of the interest on Wireless Sensor Network research, and
as a result, a number of papers have been published on
this topic. Current trends in querying look at mechanisms to
efﬁciently distribute the query to all sensors in the network
without using techniques such as ﬂooding. For this reason,
techniques based on random walks are starting to gain more
interest nowadays.
C. Non-functional Properties
Non-functional Properties (NFPs) are deﬁned as the prop-
erties of a system that do not affect its functionality, but its
quality. We consider NFPs as the Quality-of-Service (QoS)
characteristics of a system.
Regarding scalability, although a very large number of
processors and sensors can operate in parallel, the com-
munication capability does not increase linearly with the
328
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

number of sensor nodes. Several research works and com-
mercial products propose hierarchical architectural solutions
for Wireless Sensor Networks. The concept of multiple-
tiered network architectures has been employed since a long
time ago in other networking domains. However scalability
and, on a related note, large-scale deployments still remain
a line of research without a clear solution.
Regarding timeliness, the general principle of real-time
systems design is to ensure temporal predictability of the
tasks involved in the application. Hard real-time systems
require a strict worst-case execution time (WCET) analysis
of the tasks, while soft real-time systems can use statistical
analysis based on code proﬁling, simulation or real experi-
ments. A fundamental difﬁculty in designing Cooperating
Object systems with real-time requirements results from
design principles that are usually antagonist to “traditional”
real-time systems.
Given the interactive and pervasive nature of Cooperating
Objects, security is one of the key points for their acceptance
outside the research community. Security in Cooperating
Objects is a more difﬁcult long-term problem than is today
in desktop and enterprise computing. In the normal case,
there is no central, trusted authority that mediates interaction
among nodes. Furthermore, Cooperating Objects often use
wireless communication in order to simplify deployment and
increase reconﬁgurability. So, unlike a traditional network,
an adversary with a simple radio receiver/transmitter can
easily eavesdrop as well as inject/modify packets in a
wireless network. Current research topics in the area of
security include the problem of bootstrapping security, key
distribution and revocation, secure conﬁguration of devices,
efﬁcient intrusion detection and secure routing.
D. Systems
We consider system software at three levels: operating
systems, programming abstractions and middleware, and
diagnosis and debugging tools.
The trend in operating system research is towards the
creation of more complex systems able to deal with the
resource limitations of Cooperating Objects while at the
same time offering a wide range of functionality (even
threading and real-time scheduling). The main constraints
are at the device level where operating systems like TinyOS
or Contiki have to be used as opposed to bigger systems
(such as robots) where embedded Linux variants are feasible.
Programming abstractions and middleware extend the
capabilities of the operating system by offering higher-level
abstractions and services that can be used by a wide variety
of applications. Although existing programming abstractions
have typically been classiﬁed as either macroprogramming
solutions or node-level approaches, there is increasing recog-
nition that this classiﬁcation only partially captures the
nature of available solutions. More comprehensive classi-
ﬁcation frameworks are thus needed.
Regarding debugging and inspection tools, there are three
different types of solutions: active inspection, passive inspec-
tion and self-inspection solutions. The ﬁeld of non-intrusive
debugging is receiving a lot of attention in the past years
and has been the major topic of important conferences in
the areas of Wireless Sensor Networks.
E. Others
Other topics relevant from the point of view of research
are modeling and planning of static and mobile networks
and topologies, as well as testbed and simulation platforms.
Regarding planning, there are a series of solutions that
deal with the pre-deployment of networks by using either
analytical methods, simulation tools or small testbed de-
ployments. For all analytical and simulation methods, good
models for various parts of Cooperating Object scenarios
are necessary, such as radio links, interference, batteries, or
mobility to name only a few.
Simulation and testbeds are indispensable tools to support
the development and testing of Cooperating Objects. Sim-
ulations are commonly used for rapid prototyping, which
is otherwise very difﬁcult due the restricted interaction
possibilities with this type of embedded systems. Simula-
tions enable repeatability and non-intrusive debugging at the
desired level of detail.
There are three types of simulators that can be used
for the development of Cooperating Objects technologies:
generic simulators such as NS-2, specialized simulators that
deal with a speciﬁc part of the technology such as MAC
protocols, and emulators of hardware devices. The type
of simulator/emulator that should be used depends on the
task at hand. Current trends deal with the combination and
integration of simulators based on their individual character-
istics in order to create better and more effective simulation
results.
On the testbeds arena, a successful testbed architecture
needs to accommodate the speciﬁcs of Cooperating Objects
in a scalable and cost-efﬁcient way. Currently there are sev-
eral dozens of testbeds deployed world-wide with different
levels of software abstractions, capabilities, etc., and these
numbers are increasing rapidly.
IV. RESEARCH ROADMAP
The research roadmap is based on the analysis of the
state of the art in order to identify the trends and gaps
in each research area. Additionally, we discuss the results
of a survey conducted among selected experts that indicate
the approximate time where these gaps are expected to be
solved.
The predominant areas are selected based both on impor-
tance and time horizon. These areas should receive the most
attention in the following years in order to advance the area
of Cooperating Objects in the most effective way.
329
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Hardware Platforms
Sensors
Energy Efficiency
Energy Harvesting
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
<5 years
5−10 years
>10 years
Figure 1.
Survey: Timeline of Hardware area
A. Hardware
The following “Hardware” gaps have been identiﬁed:
• Development of integrated hardware platforms that
provide support for various Cooperating Objects func-
tionality such as collaboration and storage to achieve a
mixed hardware/software design.
• Coherent development and end-product platforms that
exhibit the same capabilities and restrictions to shorten
the time-to-market time.
• Miniaturization of hardware, possibly single-chip solu-
tions, to open up new application ﬁelds.
• Investigation of multi-antenna hardware and algorithms
that have the potential to improve reception of concur-
rent signals from uncorrelated senders.
• Development of energy efﬁcient and adaptive hardware
to increase the lifetime of a sensor node, even in
unpredicted situtations.
• Light and cheap sensors for object detection and po-
sition estimation since existing solutions like laser
scanners or GPS receivers are too expensive or consume
too much power.
• Research on battery lifetime and energy storage to
increase the capacity of the batteries and/or decrease
their size, while also taking into consideration the need
of Wireless Sensor Networks for low power over a long
time.
• Energy harvesting techniques need to be improved and
combined to create more efﬁcient and more general
power generators.
• Environmental considerations, i.e., the recovery of de-
ployed sensors and their recycling in the waste treate-
ment process or bio-degradable sensor components.
Hardware Platforms and Sensors is expected to be solved
relatively soon (see Figure 1) in comparison to other gaps
because unless these issues are solved in a satisfactory
way, it is hard that Cooperating Objects can be used in
environments where size and costs play a major role, such
as in the Home and Ofﬁce domain. A similar argumentation
as for hardware platforms can be used with the Power
Efﬁciency gap. We expect a major breakthrough in a short
to medium term, because of the importance of this issue for
the adoption of technology. Energy Harvesting, on the other
hand, is a very hard problem that will require more time to
ﬁnd solutions that could be used on a more widely basis.
The Predominant Work Areas concerning hardware are:
• Power Efﬁciency
• Energy Harvesting
• Hardware Platforms
B. Algorithms
In this research area, the following gaps should be closed:
• Time-synchronization that takes into account the hop
distance of nodes, provides deterministic error bounds,
exploits signals in the environment and not (wireless)
communication, and is secured to hinder attacks.
• Localization mechanisms that use multiple sensing
modalities (including new technologies like UWB)
and/or sensing systems to provide better accuracy,
which also includes the transition between sensing sys-
tems; localization mechanisms that use autocalibration
to ease their installation, especially when they are based
on ﬁnger-printing methods; mechanisms to share the
position information, e.g., between static and mobile
nodes.
• Intelligent low-power listening techniques for packet
based radio chips where the control of the transmission
parameters is limited and for complex receiver circuits
where the traditional ratio between sending and receiv-
ing energy does not hold.
• Detailed assessment of existing MAC protocols, their
combination to merge their advantages, and the cou-
pling with routing protocols using cross-layer optimiza-
tions to improve network performance and make more
energy-aware decisions.
• Efﬁcient and distributed bandwidth estimation tech-
niques for admission control policies to support high-
bandwidth delay-sensitive content in Cooperating Ob-
jects.
• Reliability and performance of querying algorithms
and data-processing techniques in real, large-scale (i.e.,
more than 1000 nodes) and heterogeneous networks.
• Cross-layer optimizations for data processing and query
planning to achieve a greater beneﬁt when taking
into account the MAC, Cooperating Object and inter-
Cooperating Object level at the same time.
• Scalable algorithms for coordination, sensing, percep-
tion and routing for mobile objects since optimal coor-
diation is an NP hard optimization problem.
• Development of good and cost-effective channel quality
indicators (e.g., interference, fading and packet loss) to
enable reliable and fast wireless communication in the
network.
• Development of efﬁcient and cheap cognitive radios for
resource constrained systems to mitigate the interfer-
ence problem in wireless communication.
Most algorithmic areas have received signiﬁcant attention
in the last years. Hence, the areas MAC, Routing, Clustering,
Synchronization, Localization and Querying are expected to
develop fully in the near future (see Figure 2). For Radio
330
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Synchronization
Localization
MAC
Routing
Bandwidth Estimation
Clustering
Querying
Data Processing
Data Storage
Cooperation of Mobile Objects
Radio Resource Management
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
<5 years
5−10 years
>10 years
Figure 2.
Survey: Timeline of Algorithms area
Resource Management, Bandwidth Estimation, Data Storage
and Data Processing, we see solutions in short to medium
term, the latter mainly due to new applications that require
new storage and processing techniques.
As algorithmic Predominant Work Areas we have identi-
ﬁed:
• Localization
• Radio Resource Management
C. Non-functional Properties
The following gaps regarding Non-functional Properties
have been found:
• Scalability: Efﬁcient MAC, routing and data processing
algorithms for deployments of hundreds of thousands
of nodes. Hierarchical (multiple-tiered, clustered) ar-
chitectures lead to more complex solutions, but are a
promising principle.
• Timeliness: Real-time features for Cooperating Objects,
starting from hardware desgin and Operating System to
the network protocol level, investigating MAC mech-
anisms, resource allocation schemes, and cross-layer
optimizations, especially under mobile conditions.
• Reliability / Robustness: Generic fault management
techniques that take into account the diverse needs
and failure sources of different applications and trade-
offs with other QoS requirements; fault-tolerant mecha-
nisms that spread across different layers of the network
stack; informative quality metrics for applications.
• Mobility: Time and energy-efﬁcient mobility support,
especially for Wireless Sensor Networksand cluster-
based architectures; coordination of mobile nodes.
• Security: Low-cost and low-power hardware support for
cryptographic primitives; architectural support for se-
curing data and program; light remote program integrity
veriﬁcation.
• Heterogeneity: Support of heterogeneity across all lev-
els of hardware and software layers, for example con-
cerning sensor readings, the interoperability between
Scalability
Timeliness (throughput, delay, real−time)
Reliability and Robustness
Mobility
Security and Privacy
Heterogeneity
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
<5 years
5−10 years
>10 years
Figure 3.
Survey: Timeline of Non-functional Properties area
networks of different bandwidth and robustness, the
operating system and middleware supporting different
applications and services with various requirements.
Research on non-functional properties such as improving
the timeliness, security and reliability/robustness of Co-
operating Object systems are still at a very early stage,
particularly for the latter (see Figure 3). Scalability is being
considered by researchers (e.g., algorithms, methodologies,
protocols), but results are still either incomplete, immature
and/or yet to be validated in real-world applications. Almost
no work exists on supporting mobility (nodes, node clusters)
in Cooperating Object systems. While successful results
are not obtained using homogeneous Cooperating Object
systems, it will be hard (almost impossible) to support high
levels of heterogeneity, such as the coexistence and inter-
operability between different hardware platforms, network
protocols, operating systems, middleware and applications.
The whole research area “Non-functional Properties” is
nominated as Predominant Work Area.
D. System
In the “System” area, the following gaps have been
identiﬁed:
• Operating systems available and suitable for all sizes
of Cooperating Objects, especially supporting real-time
and efﬁcient deployment and debugging.
• Mechanisms to combine different middleware solutions
that are currently aimed at different application sce-
narios, thus leading to a Cooperating Objects software
“construction kit”.
• Adaptive systems with cross-layer support that cope
with changing requirements and dynamic environments
of applications.
• Programming support for fault tolerance, e.g., to han-
dle power failures or erroneous sensor readings, and
mobility, e.g., to provide neighborhood discovery and
store-and-forward mechanisms.
• Common functionalities and interfaces for the integra-
tion of Cooperating Objects into other systems, both at
the network and middleware layer to be able to push
control logic and actuation to the network.
• Integration of diagnosis and healing mechanisms so that
fault detection triggers repairing actions automatically,
331
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Operating Systems
Programming Abstractions and Middleware
System Integration
Debugging and Management Tools
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
<5 years
5−10 years
>10 years
Figure 4.
Survey: Timeline of Systems area
ﬁnally leading to self-optimizing, self-monitoring and
self-healing systems.
• Better integration of diagnosis with programming tools,
especially when using programming abstractions like
macroprogramming.
As for systems, Operating Systems will be solved soon
(see Figure 4) since they are the basis for all Cooperating
Objects software. On the other hand, middleware solutions,
programming models and adaptive systems will be relevant
in the medium and long term. The same holds for diagnosis
and healing capabilities of these networks.
Almost all ﬁelds of the System research area are consid-
ered as Predominant Work Areas, namely:
• Programming Abstractions and Middleware
• System Integration
• Debugging and Management Tools
E. Other
Finally, the following gaps were detected in other research
ﬁelds:
• Synthetical and experimental RF interference and radio
link quality models that consider time-variance and
the environment to support mobile Cooperating Objects
encountering other devices or passing interferers.
• Estimation of the lifetime of deployments taking into
account non-linear battery effects and non-constant
power usage.
• Accurate mobility models for simulation and emulation,
using, e.g., real-world traces for various scenarios.
• Planning tools for the deployment of Wireless Sensor
Networks that support various application-speciﬁc com-
munication and sensing irregularities.
• Integrated simulators that support a common descrip-
tion of the simulation setup and allow for a combination
and comparison of test results in an easy way.
• Integration of testbed and their capabilities for the inter-
change of code and setups to allow for both running the
same test on different testbeds and combining several
testbeds to a larger virtual testbed.
• Combination of simulation and testbeds, for example by
using testbed results to control the simulation models
or by transfering complete state between both worlds.
• Open implementation missing for many standards that
can also run on small devices, e.g., ZigBee.
Modeling and Planning
Testbed and Simulation Platforms
Standardization
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
<5 years
5−10 years
>10 years
Figure 5.
Survey: Timeline of Others area
We expect short- to medium-term solutions for Testbeds
and Simulation Platforms (see Figure 5) since the existing
ones have to be adapted to the larger range of Cooper-
ating Objects. Modeling and Planing is more considered
as medium-term problem since the used models are quite
diverse. Standardization is a long and difﬁcult process since
all players have to agree on a common technology and
algorithms. Therefore, we see this as a medium to long term
issue.
All ﬁelds presented in this section are considered as
Predominant Work Areas.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In all domains of Cooperating Objects research areas
have been identiﬁed that need to be reinforced since their
solution is vital for the adoption of Cooperating Objects.
Many proposed predominant work areas do not only cover
a single topic but present different and interdependent do-
mains. Strong collaboration between different researchers in
different domains is, therefore, necessary to tackle these
complex tasks. To support this process, we are planning
several follow-up publications with an in-depth analysis of
each research area.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has been partially supported by CONET, the
Cooperating Objects Network of Excellence, funded by the
European Commission under FP7 with contract number FP7-
2007-2-224053.
REFERENCES
[1] European Commission DG Information Society & Media,
“Monitoring and control: today’s market, its evolution till 2020
and the impact of ICT on these,” Workshop presentation,
Oct. 2008, http://www.decision.eu/smart/SMART 9Oct v2.pdf
22.09.2011.
[2] P. Spiess and S. Karnouskos, “Maximizing the business value
of networked embedded systems through process-level inte-
gration into enterprise software,” in Proc. 2nd International
Conference on Pervasive Computing and Applications ICPCA
2007, 26–27 Jul. 2007, pp. 536–541.
[3] P. Marron, S. Karnouskos, D. Minder, and A. Ollero, The
emerging domain of cooperating objects.
Springer Verlag,
2010.
332
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

