MyVigi : An Android Application to Detect Fall and Wandering
Bruno Stanislas Beauvais
UFRIMAG
Joseph Fourrier University
Grenoble, France
e-mail: bruno.beauvais@e.ujf-grenoble.fr
Vincent Rialle and Juliette Sablier 
AGIM laboratory 
FRE 3405 CNRS-UJF-UPMF-EPHE
Grenoble, France
e-mail: juliette.sablier@agim.eu
vincent.rialle@agim.eu
Abstract—According to the World Health Organization, nearly 
35.6 million people live with dementia through out the world. 
These people, who often live at home, are exposed to the risk of 
wandering and falling. The use of a discreet monitoring device 
such  as  a  smart-phone  could  assist  them,  increase  their 
mobility and decrease the stress level of the caregivers. The 
objective is to implement  a mobile wearable tool aimed at 
detecting the wanderings and falls of people with dementia or 
mild cognitive impairment living at home. The tool must be 
easy-to-use, cost effective and ethically acceptable by patients 
at risk and their caregivers. The selected supportive hardware 
is  an  Android  based  smart  phone  selected  for  its  high 
performance and durability, worldwide availability, and low 
cost. The software design method is based on a participative 
design approach involving disabled persons, family caregivers, 
and health professionals. The client application uses a three-
axial accelerometer embedded in the smart phone to detect 
falls. The smart phone is also able to detect wandering using a 
global  positioning  system.  In  case  of  alert,  caregivers  are 
automatically contacted by phone call, SMS and mail.  A web 
site also provides them with a map of the localization in real-
time. This work-in-progress paper presents the method and the 
technological implementation of the MyVigi application. 
Keywords-Alzheimer’s
 
disease;
 
fall;
 
wandering;
telemedecine; cellular phone.
I.
 INTRODUCTION 
Alzheimer’s  disease  is  the  most  common  form  of 
dementia.  It  is  characterized  by  memory  loss,  slow 
disintegration of the personality and physical control, with 
manifestation   of aggressiveness, wandering, incontinence, 
disinhibition,  binge-eating,  hallucination,  delusion  an 
depression[1][2]. This disease leads to an almost complete 
loss of independence. 
Nearly 35.6 million people live with dementia through 
out the world[3].  According the results of the PAQUID 
cohort study, 61.5 % of this population is living at home in 
France[4]. Considering the increase of the life expectancy, 
the number of affected people will double in 2020 and triple 
in 2050. 
According  the  France  Alzheimer's  Association, 
wandering concerns 11% of independent people and 28% of 
people who need occasional help[5]. They lose their way on 
well-known routes[6]. Falling is also particularly dangerous 
for them, especially because of the risk of femoral neck 
fracture[7]. In both risk situations, a rapid rescue is essential 
for a better prognostic. After disappearing, half die or get 
serious injuries if they are not rescued within 24 hours[8]. 
These facts show that the risks are important and arrive early 
in  the  disease,  which  is  why  they  are  a  source  of 
considerable anxiety for the caregiver.
The natural caregiver is harshly affected by this disease. 
In France, they spend 6 hours per day watching over their 
relative  and  the  cost  is  570€  per  month[9].  They  are 
threatened  by  exhaustion,  half  of  them  suffer  from 
depression and spouses in particular have an excess death 
rate of 63 %[10].
Gerontechnology  is  more  and  more  useful  and 
appreciated for caregivers and the professionals[11]. Current 
tele-alarm systems provide assistance for the caregiver, in 
particular for wandering. The devices use a global position 
system (GPS) to locate the user and detect the way out of a 
specific area. However, these devices are costly and not 
much accepted because of their stigmatizing appearance[12]. 
Recently, work has been done to transfer this function to 
mobile phones. The applications Tweri[13], Ifall[14] and 
Iwander[15] are remarkable examples.
This technology breaches the privacy of the users. Its 
usage  under  medical  control  is  recommended  to  avoid 
misuse[16]. The ethical dilemma is the following[17]:

It  is unacceptable to track somebody without his 
knowing about it.

It is unacceptable to let somebody wander without 
aid.

It is unacceptable to confine somebody to their home 
during months or years when he could go out with 
technical aid.
Although this technology is available, it is rarely used[16]
[18]. The reasons are :

Lack  of  knowledge  of  the  technology  by  the 
potential user and prescribing doctor 

Ignorance of the true needs of the users

Inadequacy between the financial cost for the users 
and their budget
Thanks  to  a  user-centered  approach,  our  goal  is  to 
provide truly beneficial results for the user with a tool that is 
easy-to-use, cost effective and ethically acceptable. Section 
II describes the 3 main phases of the project: Requirements 
Analysis,  Implementation  and   Experiment.  Section  III 
describes the technology used and the methods chosen to 
detect  falls  and  wandering.  Section  IV  describes  related 
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

benefits of our technological choices. During the time of 
writing, the prototype is still developing, and therefore, the 
paper is being submitted as a work-in-progress.
II.
METHOD
We use a design framework[19] named TEMSED, which 
stand  for  ‘Technology,  Ergonomics,  Medicine,  Society, 
Economics, Deontology’. This framework is described as a 
base  of  health  informatics[20]  and  models  a  holistic 
approach featuring a set of 6 consistent areas of human 
values to investigate: 

'Technology' focuses on the purely technical values 
such as functioning and robustness.

'Ergonomics'  puts  in  relation  the  user  and  the 
technical devices.

'Medicine' concerns the impact in terms of medical 
practice.

'Society'  concerns  the  impact  in  terms  of  social 
practice.

'Economics' refers to the dissemination capacities of 
the device and relies essentially on its economical 
viability.

'Deontology' conforms to the respect of rights and 
duties of the stakeholders.
TEMSED  is  a  general  framework  that  provides  the 
values  we  take  into  account  during  the  design  and  the 
assessment.  Concretely,  human  values  described  are 
investigated using interviews and literature analysis.
A.
Requirements Analysis
The  requirements  analysis  consists  in  two 
complementary activities:  the scientific literature  analysis 
and the interviews of stakeholders[21][22][23]. The people 
interviewed are persons with dementia and mild cognitive 
impairment, family  caregivers,  and  health  professionals. 
Interviews are semi directive and a comprehensive approach 
is  used[24].  It  divided  into  two  parts:  first,  potential 
functionalities are described in order to be criticized by the 
interviewees.  Then,  prototypes  of  the  user  interface  are 
presented and the interviewed people are asked to test it. The 
results  of  this  phase  are  scenarios  of  use  prioritized 
according their importance.
B.
Implementation
The  implementation  consists  in  developing  client 
applications  for  an  embed  device,  as  well  as  server 
applications  to  centralize  data  and  make  it  permanently 
accessible  to the family caregivers and rescue team. The 
development  is  iterative  and  scenario-based[21].  Fig.  1 
describes architecture and details are given in the chapter III.
One of the major issues for the dissemination of the 
gerontechnology is their prohibitive rates for the users[18]. 
In  order to reduce the production costs and to facilitate 
technology transfer, we choose an open source approach. 
The source produced is under CeCCIL-C license[25]. This 
license similar to the LesserGPL allows to include the source 
as component in proprietary software.  Then, the share of 
production cost of these components is possible between 
industrial companies.
C.
Experiment
The  experiment  consists  in  testing  the  system  for  3 
weeks. The tester population is composed of people affected 
by Alzheimer’s  disease  and  their  natural  or professional 
caregivers.  After  the  experiment,  people  would  be 
interviewed.  The  objective  is  to  get  feedback  about  the 
material to make a sociological  analysis  of its use. The 
interviews are semi directive and conducted thanks to the 
interview's guide used in  ESTIMA[26].
III.
TECHNOLOGICAL IMPLEMENTATION
A.
Hardware
The prototyped application is designed for the Samsung 
Galaxy SII. The device has a dual-core  Cortex-A9 processor 
running at 1.2 GHz and 1 Go of RAM. Its dimensions are 
125.3 mm × 66.1 mm × 8.5 mm and it weighs 116 grams.
The device is equipped with the SiRF Star IV chipset for 
navigation  with  Global  Positioning  System  (GPS).  The 
device also is equipped with nine-axis MPU-9150 as motion 
tracking sensor. It associates compass, three-axis gyroscope 
and three-axis accelerometer. The range of the accelerometer 
is set  on 4G,  this resolution 0.1 m/s² and this rate  of 
response 100Hz.
Figure 1.  Architecture
B.
 Software
This device is built for Android, a Linux-based operating 
system designed for mobile devices such as smart phones 
and tablet computers. It also packages middleware and key 
applications[27]. Applications are written in Java and run on 
the  Dalvik  virtual  machine.  The  Android  service 
development kit provides libraries to interface with hardware 
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

as communication capabilities and sensors.  This operating 
system is also the most widespread[28] and is supported by a 
large community of developers. 
Data concerning localisations and configuration of the 
client is synchronised with a server application. The server is 
written in PHP, run on Apache server and uses a MySQL 
database  to  store  persistent  data. The  GSM  or  WIFI 
connection is used following their availability.
C.
Fall detection
In case of a fall, a simple button to press is not enough, 
30% of people don't use it and stay lying on the floor[29]. 
Further,  a  rapid  response  increases  the  functional 
prognosis[30][31].  Therefore,  an  automatic  system  of 
detection is essential, and in particular for people suffering 
from dementia. The fall differs from the Activities of Daily 
Living (ADL) by the acceleration applied on the body and by 
the change of the position. These differences can be detected 
by an accelerometer in condition that the sensor is hanged 
close to the trunk[32]. 
The implemented algorithm uses android API to get the 
orientation and the acceleration exerted on the device. The 
data is given according to three orthogonal axes (X,Y,Z). 
The  absolute  acceleration  (AT) is  obtained  from  the 
computation  of  the  root  sum  of  the  square  of  the 
accelerometer’s three axes (Ax,, Ay,  Az).
AT=√( Ax
2+ Ay
2+Az
2)
The algorithm uses thresholds and timers to detect three 
successive states: free fall, impact and lying position (Fig. 2):

Free fall (T0 < t < T1):  the fall starts with a free fall 
phase where the acceleration is under 1 G[33]. The 
laps of time is between  300ms and  500ms.

Impact (T1 < t < T2): the body stroke the floor with 
an acceleration superior at 3 G[34].

Lying position (T2 < t): the body stays lying with an 
orientation close to 90° when compared with the 
beginning of the free fall (T0).  
Time
Figure 2.  Fall modelling
In order to assess the sensibility of the algorithm we 
constitute a set of 10 scenarios summing up most of the 
fall[35]. 
The parameters taken under consideration are:

The different sides: forward, backward and lateral.

The end position: lying, sitting and on the knee.

The possible quarter turning of the trunk.
 The slow fall is not currently taken under consideration 
but will be included in the future using pressure sensors. The 
challenge of  automatic detection is also to differentiate falls 
from  ADL.  The  false  positive  detection  is an  important 
inconvenience that leads the user frequently to give up the 
system[26]. In order to decrease false positive, we set up 
scenarios that could provoke them. We take into account the 
nature of the sensors (gyroscope and accelerometer) to build 
these scenarios:

Sitting down on a chair and get up.

Lying on a bed and get up.

Squat down and get up.

Picking something on the floor and get up.

Fall on the floor, lying and get up.
D.
Wander detection
Wandering  is  a  vital  risk  that  is  stressful  for  the 
caregiver. In  a  study  of  caregivers'  wishes  regarding 
technology[36], 53.3% of respondents reply “very much” to 
“would this technology be helpful to you ?”. According to a 
sociological survey[26], this technology is above all a tool to 
assist their vigilance. It's also essential that the system is easy 
to use and the detection algorithm is easy to understand by 
the caregiver. 
The implemented algorithm to detect wandering. is based 
on the elapsed time when the user is outside its usual living 
areas.  The algorithm handles :

The living areas such home or shops.

The time slot when these areas are  possibly visited.

The route duration from an area to an other.
This information is supplied by the caregiver from  client 
or server applications. A timer is started when the user leaves 
a living zone. Wandering is detected when the timer goes 
past the longest duration to go to another area. If the areas 
take into account are the ones with a time slot matching the 
time of the day.
The life zones are bounded by a circle and located by 
latitude and longitude. The algorithm uses the Android API 
to track the device and check its inclusion in one of the living 
areas. The location with GPS consume highly the battery. 
Nevertheless, the challenge is to provide a system able to 
work as less over all day. Android offers the interesting 
possibility to localise  the device  using the  identifiers  of 
surrounding networks such cellular radio systems and wifi's. 
Android provides also a margin of error with Circular Error 
Probality (CEP) of 5%[37].  However, the accuracy is low 
and  internet connection is required to associate network 
identifiers with locations. 
Acceleration 
Orientation 
Threesholds
Acceleration (G)
Orientation (°)
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

The implemented algorithm uses preferentially networks. 
The GPS chipset is used only if the accuracy is too low. The 
required accuracy to establish inclusion in the area depends 
on (figure 3): 

X: distance between the location and the centre of 
the closest living area.

φ: radius of the current living zone.

ME: margin of error (CEP < 5%).
 The tracking is stopped when the accuracy is sufficient 
to establish the device in the area (1) or out the area (2).
C <  - ME (1)
φ
C >  + ME (2)
φ
Figure 3.  Detection of leaving or entering areas
E.
Alert
The alert is activated automatically when a risky situation 
is detected (wandering or a fall). The user can also call for 
help using physical or tactile buttons. Another way to call for 
help manually,  is to shake the phone. Once the alert is 
activated, the device tries to contact a list of caregivers in 
several ways until the alert is canceled. SMS and mails are 
sent every 5 minutes with the address of the last known 
position.  At  the  same  time,  the  smart-phone  calls  one 
caregiver after the other until someone responds. A map with 
the localization in real-time is also available on a website. 
The entire alert process is configurable online.
F.
Privacy protection
The transport and the availability of personal information 
online such location involve risks for the privacy violation. 
We have followed European directives and tried to limit the 
risks as far as possible[38]:

The  access  of  personal  information  is  password 
protected and can be deleted.

The  locations  are  encrypted  with  the  advanced 
encryption  standard  algorithm[39]  with  the  user 
password as the key.

The locations are uploaded on the server only in case 
of alert. Then they are deleted.
IV.
DISCUSSION
The smart phone's different communication capabilities 
offer  several   interesting  possibilities.  First,  the  internet 
connection allows the client application to upload data such 
as localization and alerts onto a single centralized database. 
In  this  way,  it  is  possible  to  know  more  about  user 
behaviour, and also to check whether the system is running 
the way it is supposed to. 
The use of open format-based data and standard protocol 
favorises interoperability and permits the client application 
to  add  other  telemedecine  application.  The  internet 
connection  allows  it  to  use  web  services  to  enrich  the 
detection  of  risky  situations  with  the  local  weather  for 
example. The bluetooth and wifi allow it to integrate into the 
system additional sensors such as a cardio frequency meter. 
The  choice  of  the  smart  phone  as  device  has  the 
advantage to not be stigmatising. However, phones are often 
forgotten[26].  Watch-phones  are  an  inadequate  option, 
because the fall detector has to hang  close the waist to be 
effective[32]. An alternative is to use an accessory to hang 
the device  on a belt, decreasing the chance  of it  being 
forgotten. In this way, it is always accessible, less bulky and 
less likely to get lost or stolen.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We  ensure  to  match  the  user's  need  thanks  to  a 
participative  design  approach  involving disabled  persons, 
family caregivers, and health professionals. We also choose 
to support the TEMSED framework to make certain all the 
domain concerned by the use of the MyVigi application are 
investigated. The final result would be a mobile wearable 
tool aimed at detecting the wanderings and falls of people 
with dementia or mild cognitive impairment living at home. 
This tool would be easy-to-use, cost effective and ethically 
acceptable by patients at risk and their caregivers.
VI.
REFERENCES
[1]
N.  Nagaratnam,  M.  Lewis-Jones,  D.  Scott,  and  L.  Palazzi, 
“Behavioral and psykjchiatric manifestations in dementia patients in a 
community: caregiver burden and outcome”, Alzheimer Dis Assoc 
Disord, 1998.
[2]
Alzheimer’s Association, “Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures”, 
Alzheimer’s and Dementia, March 2010.
[3]
Alzheimer’s  Disease  International,  “World  Alzheimer  Report”, 
http://www.alz.co.uk/research/world-report, 2009.
[4]
H. Ramaroson,, C. Helmer, P. Barberger-Gateau, L. Letenneur, and J. 
F. Dartigues, “Prevalence of dementia and Alzheimer's disease among 
subjects aged 75 years or  over:  updated results of  the PAQUID 
cohort”, Rev Neurol (Paris),  2003.
[5]
J.  Prévot,  “les  résidents  des  établissements  d’hébergement  pour 
personnes  âgées  en  2007”,  DRESS,  Etudes  et  Résultats,  n°699, 
August  2009. 
[6]
A.  Nelson,  and   L.  A.  Donna,  “Evidence-based  protocols  for 
managing wandering behaviors”, New York, NY: Springer Pub. Co, 
2007.
[7]
S. M. Friedman,  I. B. Menzies, S. V. Bukata, D. A. Mendelson, and 
S.  L.  Kates,  “Dementia  and  Hip  Fractures  Development  of  a 
Pathogenic  Framework  for  Understanding  and  Studying 
Risk“,Geriatric Orthopaedic Surgery & Rehabilitation, vol. 1 no. 2 
52-62, November 2010.
[8]
R. J. Koester, and D. E. Stooksbury, “Behavioral profile of possible 
Alzheimer's disease patients in Virginia search and rescue incidents 
Wilderness and Environmental Medicine, 6,34-43 (1995)
Living area
X
φ
Location
ME
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

[9]
France Alzheimer, “Etude socio-économique - Prendre en soin les 
personnes atteintes de la maladie d’Alzheimer : le reste à charge - 
Principaux résultats”, 2010. 
[10] R.  Schulz,  and  S.  R.  Beach,  “Caregiving  as  a  risk  factor  for 
mortality : the Caregiver Health Effects Study”, JAMA, December 
1999.
[11] V. Rialle, "Technology and Alzheimer's disease", Soins Gerontol, 
2008.
[12] V. Faucounau, M. Riguet, G. Orvoen, A. Lacombe, V. Rialle, J. 
Extra, and A.-S. Rigaud, “Electronic tracking system and wandering 
in  Alzheimer's  disease:  A  case  study  Annals  of  Physical  and 
Rehabilitation Medicine, Volume 52, Issue 7, Pages 579-587.
[13] “Tweri : Alzheimer cargiver”, www.tweri.com.
[14] F. Sposaro, and G. Tyson, "iFall: An android application for fall 
monitoring and response," in Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc, 
2009.
[15] F.  Sposaro,  J. Danielson,  and G. Tyson,  “iWander:  An Android 
Application for Dementia Patients” In: 32nd Annual International 
Conference of the IEEE EMBS Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2010.
[16] M. Laila, V. Rialle, C. Brissonneau, D. Princiaux, C. Sécheresse, D. 
Boukhalfa,  O.  Magnilliat,  and  A.  Franco,  “The  utility  and  the 
feasibility of electronic tracking for the prevention of wandering in 
demented  elderly  patients  living  in  an  institution”,  6th  conf 
International  Society  for  Gerontechnology.  Pisa,  Italy,  June  4-6, 
2008.
[17] V. Rialle, “La géolocalisation de malades de type Alzheimer : entre 
urgence  sociosanitaire  et  dilemme  sociétal”,  NPG  Neurologie 
Psychiatrie-Gériatrie. 2009.
[18] A. Franco, "Living at home: autonomy, inclusion and life planning" 
(Vivre chez soi : autonomie, inclusion et projet de vie), report to the 
Secretary of State responsible for Senior Citizens, France,  juin 2010.
[19] V.  Rialle,  N.  Vuillerme,  and  A.  Franco,  "Outline  of  a  general 
framework for assessing e-health and gerontechnology applications: 
Axiological and diachronic dimensions" Gerontechnology 9(2): 245, 
2010. 
[20] C. Quantin, F.A. Allaert, B.A. Auverlot, and V. Rialle, “Security, 
legal and ethical aspects of computerised health data” In: Venot A, 
editor, Medical Informatics - Foundations and applications: Springer-
Verlag; 2012 (in press). 
[21] B. Rosson, and C. M. John, “Usability Engineering: scenario-based 
development of human-computer interaction”, Academic Press, 2002.
[22] J. M. Carrol  “Hci Models, Theories, and Frameworks: Toward a 
Multidisciplinary Science”, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2003.
[23] P. Topo, and B. Östlund, “Dementia, Design and Technology. Time 
to Get Involved”, Volume 24, Assistive Technology Research Series, 
IOS Press, 2009.
[24] J. C. Kaufmann, “L’entretien compréhensif”, Nathan, Paris, 1996.
[25] CEA, CNRS, INRIA, “CeCILL-C free software license agreement”, 
http://www.cecill.info.
[26] V. Rialle , C. Ollivet, C. Brissonneau, F. Leard, I. Barth, J. Extra, 
and J. Sablier, “Alzheimer's disease and geolocation: initial results of 
the Estima study”, Soins Gerontol, 2012. 
[27] Google Inc., “What is Android ?”, developer.android.com. 
[28] W3Techs: http://w3techs.com, retrieved May 2012. 
[29] J. Flemin, and C. Brayne. “Inability to get up after falling, subsequent 
time  on floor,  and summoning help: prospective  cohort  study in 
people over 90”, BMJ, 2008.
[30] R.E. Roush, T.A. Teasdale, J.N. Murphy, and M.S. Kirk, “Impact of a 
personal  emergency  response  system  on  hospital  utilization  by 
community-residing elders”, South Med J., 1995. 
[31] R. J. Gurley, N. Lum, M. Sande, B. Lo, and M. H. Katz, “Persons 
found in their homes helpless or dead”, N Engl J Med., 1996.
[32] M.  Kangas,  “Development  of  accelerometry-based  fall  detection. 
From laboratory environment to life.”, Doctoral Thesis, University of 
Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
[33] A.K.  Bourke,  J.V.  O’Brien,  and  G.M  Lyons,  ”Evaluation  of  a 
thresholdbased  tri-axial accelerometer”, Gait & posture, September 
2006.
[34] J. Chen, K. Kwong, D. Chang, J. Luk, and R. Bajcsy, “Wearable 
sensors for reliable fall detection”, Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE 
Engineering  in  Medicine  and  Biology  27th  Annual  Conference, 
September 2005.
[35] N. Noury, P. Rumeau, A.K. Bourke, G. Ólaighi, and J.E. Lundy, ”A 
proposal  for  the  classification  and  evaluation  of  fall  detectors”, 
IRBM, 2008.
[36] V. Rialle, C. Ollivet, C. Guigui, and C. Herve, "What do family 
caregivers  of  Alzheimer's  disease  patients  desire  in  smart  home 
technologies? Contrasted results of a wide survey", Methods Inf Med 
47(1): 63-69, 2008. 
[37] Google,  “Geolocation  API  Specification”,  W3C  Proposed 
Recommendation, 10 May 2012.
[38] The european  parliament  and the council of the european union, 
“Directive 2009/136/EC”, 25  November 2009.
[39] J. Nechvatal, E. Barker, L. Bassham, W. Burr, M. Dworkin, J. Foti, 
and  E.  Roback,  “Report  on  the  Development  of  the  Advanced 
Encryption Standard (AES)”, surcsrc.nist.gov, National Institute of 
Standards and Technology, 2 Octobre 2000. 
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-236-3
UBICOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

