Wearable Spirometry: Using Integrated Environment Sensor for Breath Measurement
Alejandro Baucells Costa, Bo Zhou, Orkhan Amiraslanov and Paul Lukowicz
German Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DFKI), Kaiserslautern, Germany
Technical University of Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany
{Alejandro.Baucells_Costa, Bo.Zhou, Orkhan.Amiraslanov, Paul.Lukowicz}@dfki.de
Abstract—In this work, we present and evaluate a concept for
using an integrated environment sensor as a wearable spirometer.
Unlike a standard spirometer that by design is fairly bulky, our
device can be unobtrusively integrated into various conﬁgurations
suitable for long-term use in everyday settings (open headset,
regular face mask, and professional sports mask). The sensor
measures the transient change in air pressure, humidity and
temperature in front of wearers’ mouth and nostrils. We present
our hardware design and signal analysis methods needed to
extract breathing rate information. We compare the results
with a standard spirometer. Moreover, a calibration between
the BME280 sensor and the spirometer is performed, having
both working in parallel. We show that our approach is able to
distinguish between normal breaths and deep breaths, as well as
to capture the period and magnitude of the breath cycles, with a
wearable device that can be used in everyday scenarios, as well as
sport activities. The classiﬁcation accuracy is 96% in face mask
settings and 82% in an open headset setting. We also show that
the sensor is able to approximate air volume by comparing the
sensor’s pressure channel to the spirometer’s ﬂow rate results.
Keywords–Wearable
technology;
Head-mounted
sensing;
Spirometry; Respiration detection.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, wearable devices have a wide range of capabil-
ities to monitor users’ vitals and physical activities, such as
heart rate and the number of steps taken; however, there has
been a lack of emphasis on breathing detection during everyday
scenarios.
Spirometry is an important established medical procedure
to determine lung capacity and oxygen intake [1]. Studies
have shown oxygen intake has a direct correlation with
body composition and physical conditioning, such as cardio-
respiratory performance [2][3]. Spirometry is important not
only in physical ﬁtness related activities but also in one’s daily
professional life.
Figure 1. A common Pneumotachometer type spirometer requires all the
airway directed to the sensing element.
Sigh rate is a clear indication of mental stress [4], and
sufﬁcient deep breathing can also effectively reduce stress
and anxiety [5][6]. Lung capacity is also an indicator of
development or stage of recovery of various illness [7][8].
However, all of the spirometry is carried out under a testing
environment such as in a lab or clinic. As mentioned in
various studies, such an environment cannot fully reﬂect every
aspect of the participants’ daily life [9]. The traditional digital
pneumotachometer spirometer requires a ﬁne mesh of typically
7 cm in diameter as the sensing element, as well as a mouthpiece
that directs all the airﬂow into the sensing element, as illustrated
in Figure 1. This is because the standardization of spirometry
requires a laminar airﬂow passage that has a total resistance
to the airﬂow at 14L · s−1 smaller than 1.5cmH2O · L−1 · s−1,
considering any mechanical structure between the person and
the sensing element including tubing, valves, ﬁlters, etc., as well
as water vapor condensation [1]. Therefore, it is not practical
to transform the traditional spirometer into a wearable device.
Figure 2. (a) (b) prototype as an open-air headset. (c) prototype ﬁtted into a
professional training mask (TRAINING MASK 3.0). (d) prototype ﬁtted into
a regular dust respirator (3M 8710E) [10].
The contribution of this work is three-fold:
• We have developed a wearable system to continuously
monitor respiration using a small atmosphere monitoring
Integrated-Circuit (IC) sensor.
• We compare our system with an off-the-shelf hand-
held spirometer. The result proves there is a consistent
relationship between the two different sensors during
breathing.
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 3. Proposed conﬁguration for simultaneous data collection.
• We demonstrate that our system alone is capable of
detecting breathing instances, and recognizing between
normal and deep breaths.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: In Section II,
the state-of-the-art is reviewed. In Section III, the form factors
of this work are described. In Section IV, the hardware and
the conﬁguration of the system are described. In Section V,
we explain the ﬁrst of the performed studies regarding the
calibration of the system: experiments, data processing, and
results. In Section VI, we expose and explain a use case study:
experiments, data processing, and results. Finally, in Section
VII, we conclude our work and mention new ideas to further
evaluate the system.
II.
RELATED WORK
A wide range of wearable technologies is being developed in
respiratory monitoring [11]. Some examples are belt transducers
that measure the change of chest perimeter such as the
commercially available Pneumotrace II by AD Instruments;
sternum or belly positioned smartphones recording the accelero-
metric signals [12]; sound based wheeze detection [13] and
breathing rate detection [14]; and deriving breathing rate from
pulse oximetry [15]. However, as the sensors are not directly
positioned in the air ﬂow passage, most of the modalities focus
on breathing rate and not on air volume during the respiration
act, and are prone to noise and motion caused inﬂuences, thus
most of the studies conducted require the wearers to remain
still.
III.
FORM FACTORS
In this work, we measure the parameters of a fraction from
the airﬂow including pressure, temperature, and humidity. These
physical parameters can be measured by miniature integrated
sensors, such as the Bosch BME280 with the dimension of 2.5
mm-by-2.5 mm (Figure 2(d)).
There are already several form factors where the sensors
can be integrated. In many professional workplaces, there are
slim headsets that position a small microphone in front of the
mouth. Particularly in Asia, respiratory masks are commonly
used to fend off pollen, epidemic, and pollution. While the
acceptance of such surgical masks may be a matter of debate
in other cultures, fashionable designs are already emerging to
Figure 4. A difference of length cycle before vs. after thresholding
improve the acceptance, such as Vogmask and Airinum. In
sports, there are also training masks that restricts the air intake
to increase the training intensity, such as Training Mask [16]
in Figure 2(c).
IV.
PROTOTYPE
We integrate the small BME280 sensor (Bosch) in each
of these form factors to examine the output as the wearers
do normal and deep breathing. The different settings (headset,
training mask and cotton mask) are shown in Figure 2. In the
headset case, the airﬂow out of the mouth and nostril are not
directed to be focused on the sensor; for both of the masks, the
sensor is in a closed chamber. The cotton mask has a ﬁltering
effect on both the inﬂow and outﬂow of air. The training mask
does not have a ﬁlter, but an adjustable valve.
The system consists of a BME280 sensor measuring
pressure (units in Pascal); temperature (units in Celsius) and
relative humidity (units in percent) (Figure 2(d)). In our pilot
study prototype, we use an Adafruit BME280 module. But
the actual sensor measures only 2.5 mm, which can be easily
integrated into any headpiece/mouthpiece form factors. The
sensor readout is controlled by an ATMEL microcontroller
through an I2C bus. The microcontroller then communicates
with an RN42 module via UART, forwarding the data to an
Android application for visualization and recording sensor data.
V.
SYSTEM CALIBRATION
A. Experiment
Our goal is to investigate how the sensor data relates to an
off-the-shelf spirometer in estimating the volume of air. For
that reason, we are interested in capturing the actual breathed
volume from both sensing systems running in parallel. In Figure
3, the proposed conﬁguration is depicted, which consists of
the spirometer and the training mask connected to each other
using a plastic cone sealed on both extremes by a black tape.
To evaluate this setup, 5 participants are asked to perform the
following 4 experiments:
1) 3 seconds inhale, 3 seconds exhale,
2) 3 seconds inhale, 3 seconds retaining the breath, 3 seconds
exhale and 3 more seconds sustaining. The whole sequence
is considered a cycle,
3) monitoring breathing while watching a video,
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 5. Magnitude relation between spirometry and BME sensor for participant 1
4) monitoring breathing while walking outdoors.
The height range of the participants is between 160 cm and
190 cm, and the weight ranges from 52.3 kg and 100 kg.
TABLE I. MAGNITUDE RELATION PARAMETERS FOR
ALL PARTICIPANTS AND EXPERIMENTS
Participant
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
Experiment 4
1
std=0.328
std=0.442
std=0.310
std=0.278
slope=0.931
slope=0.897
slope=0.806
slope=0.951
mar=0.234
mar=0.307
mar=0.222
mar=0.1970
2
std=0.380
std=0.553
std=0.235
std=0.292
slope=0.896
slope=0.933
slope=0.954
slope=0.923
mar=0.260
mar=0.438
mar=0.1503
mar=0.192
3
std=0.166
std=0.260
std=0.174
std=0.254
slope=0.976
slope=0.937
slope=0.958
slope=0.943
mar=0.128
mar=0.176
mar=0.118
mar=0.166
4
std=0.6478
std=0.524
std=0.470
std=0.390
slope=0.751
slope=0.793
slope=0.772
slope=0.900
mar=0.437
mar=0.432
mar=0.345
mar=0.2711
5
std=0.531
std=0.344
-
std=0.245
slope=0.822
slope=1.10
-
slope=0.941
mar=0.328
mar=0.244
-
mar=0.181
For a more precise measure of the breathed volume, we
let the users perform these 4 experiments using the mask with
the sensor on it and the spirometer in parallel so that the two
sensors can simultaneously capture the sequences of breathing
cycles. All the experiments are recorded for 7 minutes. The
Experiment 1 and 2 are performed with help of an Android
application, which is intended to guide the users throughout
a series of breathing routines for calming, relaxing or helping
against stress. It is necessary to mention that the application
has been only used to provide a visual guide to the participants,
but the sequences described in there have not been followed
accordingly. The third experiment is recorded while watching
a video and the latest, walking outdoors. The latter two do
not follow any determined cycle, only normal breath events
are captured. The participants are asked to perform three fast
initial exhalations as a synchronization point to facilitate the
posterior analysis of the signals.
B. Calibration Data Processing
Since the study involves multiple units, every experiment
recording is normalized so that the average value is 0 and the
standard deviation is 1.
The fact that the BME280 sensor and spirometer are placed
at different locations in the airway passage may cause the
signals from the two instruments to differ from each other.
Especially the BME280 may be facing the nostrils and the
mouth of the user in a different location and angle, because the
facial structure of everyone is different. This may also contribute
to deviations of the signal quality across participants.
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 6. Effective volume relation between spirometry and BME sensor for participant 1
We chose the pressure sensor channel because it measures
a similar physical parameter to the spirometer. Due to de-
synchronization between the two sensors, a previous processing
of the signals is necessary in order to compare the two
sensors regarding matching breathing cycles. The spirometer
and BME280 sensor signals are normalized and interpolated,
matching their different time steps. We apply simple average
ﬁltering to remove small ﬂuctuations in the signal samples.
Then, the signals are segmented by peak detection: positive and
negative peaks are located based on a prominence threshold
of 20% of the signal’s standard deviation. From the detected
peaks, we calculate the length between each negative peak
location corresponding to a breath cycle. An example is shown
in Figure 4 (top). Due to interpolation, the cycles might not
be perfectly aligned so a subtraction of this delay is needed,
making the length of cycles from both sensors match better.
Then, we want to match the cycles that have similar length
in both sensors. But there may be missing or false positive
cycles in either sensor, therefore the solution is to ﬁnd similar
patterns in the change of cycles in both sensors. Thus Dynamic
Time Warping (DTW) is used to match the patterns in the
change of cycle lengths by ﬁnding the best matches. The result
is also shown in Figure 4 (bottom). From the DTW result, it
is obvious that while some cycles match exactly, some have
greater differences. Except for the cases where the two cycles
are actual different events, this may also be caused by the fact
that from one sensor, one cycle is repeated by the DTW to
’stretch’ this point so that later patterns can match the other
sensor. An empirical threshold is set to eliminate those cycles
whose distance is not reasonable. In Figure 4, the green marks
on the plot indicate the cycles accepted by the threshold, and
those at zero are rejected.
After this data processing, most of the accepted cycles are
matching each other. Figure 7 illustrates 10 cycles of both
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

sensors cycles after processing.
C. Results
Once subtraction for alignment and threshold for outlier
elimination have been set, we extract each of those acceptable
cycles to perform a deeper analysis. Those selected ones are
once again interpolated and plotted. For a clearer picture of
their correlation, we plot the magnitude of the pressure channel
(BME280) against the magnitude of the ﬂow rate (spirometer),
resulting in Figure 5. Every point corresponds to a sensor
sample. A clear positive relation is noticeable for all 4 cases.
Around 0 there is a vertical belt area, where a large dispersion
caused by airﬂow delay from the BME280 sensor’s location
to the spirometer, and misalignment between the two sensors,
making the variance around that area larger than in the regions
located on the extremes. It is especially visible in the retain
experiment. Thus this vertical belt is removed in the following
evaluations.
We use linear ﬁtting within each experiment’s BME280
sensor’ pressure channel and spirometer’s ﬂow rate scatter plot.
The vertical distance from a sensor sample point to the ﬁtting
line is the residual, which tells us how far the ﬂow rate value of
this point is away from the ﬁtting line with the same pressure
value. We use the mean value of the absolute residuals (mar)
as a measure of how dispersed the data is away from the ﬁtting
line.
In Table I, the values for all 5 participants and the 4
experiments are depicted. Due to faulty hardware, experiment
3 for participant 5 failed.
Figure 7. 10 overlapped cycles after matching
Figure 8. Valid breath cycle vs. outlier breath cycle
Even though it depends on the subject and experiment, it
is possible to observe that often the mar values of Experiment
2 are the largest. This can be contributed to the retaining and
sustaining parts of the breathing cycles described as part of
Experiment 2. These assumptions could explain such values in
Table I.
Later on, we calculate the 6th feature, the Effective Volume
(explained in Section VI-B), on both training mask and
spirometer data because this feature has a positive correlation
with the amount of air breathed. In Figure 6, every point
corresponds to a detected breathing cycle showing a linear
dependency between the Effective Volume of pressure channel
and the Effective Volume of the spirometer’s ﬂow rate. This
means that the estimation of air volume of BME sensor and
the spirometer are positively correlated. In the subplot up left
of Figure 6, there are a few breathing cycles which are not
close to the ﬁtting line.
To illustrate these outlier cycles, we plot in Figure 8 one
valid detected cycle against one of these such outliers so the
difference between them can be observed. These outliers may
not exactly be the same breathing event because the peak-
to-peak distances of the two instruments do not match each
other.
VI.
USE CASE STUDY
A. Experiment
For the headset, training mask and cotton mask cases, we
invited 4, 7 and 4 people to perform experiments according to
the following sequences:
1) 5 deep breaths, apnea for 5-8 seconds, and 5 more deep
breaths,
2) a continuous series of 5 normal breaths, 5 deep breaths,
5 normal breaths, and 5 deep breaths,
3) a continuous series of 5 deep breaths, 5 normal breaths,
and 5 deep breaths
For the training mask, the participants performed all of
the 3 sequences once while seated in a room, and once
walking in a hallway.
For the cotton mask and headset, only seated data is
recorded. When people wear a headset, the piece pointing at
the mouth may have varying distances to the mouth. Therefore,
in the headset case, we let the participants adjust the piece
with 2 cm, 4 cm, and 6 cm distance to the lips, and recorded
the 3 sequences once in each distance.
The height range of the participants is between 160 cm
and 190 cm, and the weight ranges from 52.3 kg and 100 kg.
An example of the resultant signals from the second sequence
in each of the cases can be observed in Figure 9. We use a
spirometer SPR-BTA Inlet Vernier for reference, letting the 7
participants from the training mask perform the same sequences
with the spirometer while seated. The spirometer airﬂow signal
of the same participant from Figure 9 is shown in Figure 10.
From Figure 9, it is obvious that pressure, temperature, and
humidity behave differently in the three settings. In the open-air
headset setting, the air pressure is greatly inﬂuenced by the
environment and only gives visible peak under a deep breath.
Temperature and humidity offer a distinguishable signal, but
have a drifting effect: both values increase with continuous
deep breath and decrease with a normal breathing. The average
values of all three channels are also lower than the other two
settings which are in a closed chamber.
In the cotton mask setting, the humidity is always saturated
to 100% due to the ﬁltering material blocks humidity from
dissipating. Pressure and temperature show clear distinguishable
signals for normal and deep breathing. The temperature still
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 9. Signal examples from the BME280 sensor in different form factors of the participant performing alternating sequences of normal and deep breaths, the
sampling rate is 50Hz
Figure 10. Signal example from the spirometer of the participant performing
alternating sequences of normal and deep breaths, the sampling rate is 50Hz
Figure 11. Confusion matrix of three cases
shows slight drifting, which is possibly contributed by the heat
isolation property of the material.
In the training mask setting, the pressure and temperature
showed a similar response with the cotton mask. The difference
of the training mask is that the air ﬂow in and out of the mask
is an open, unﬁltered airway. This contributes to less shifting
in the temperature value, and the humidity is also no longer
always saturated.
B. Machine Learning Data Processing
First, the same normalization method is applied to the
signal for every experiment recording in its entirety. We apply
simple average ﬁltering with a kernel size of 1-by-15 to remove
small ﬂuctuations in the signal sample. The signal is then
segmented by peak detection: positive and negative peaks are
located based on a prominence threshold of 20% of the signal’s
standard deviation, as shown in Figure 9. Since the experiment
only included normal breathing paces, if there are multiple
negative peaks within 2 seconds, only the deepest peak is kept.
A negative peak between two positive peaks is marked as a
segment point, the signal between two of these points is taken
as one breathing instance or one window. Every instance is
manually annotated as ground truth by assigning normal and
deep breath labels. The precision and recall of detecting a
breath through said peak detection are 95.6% and 99.1%.
For every breathing instance D(t), we calculate the follow-
ing features to represent the signal:
1) average value of D(t),
2) absolute range: max(D(t))−min(D(t)),
3) standard deviation of D(t),
4) kurtosis of D(t),
5) length of the window (negative peak-to-peak distance),
6) effective volume: ﬁrst Base(D(t)) is calculated as the
linear function that connects D( first) and D(last), then
the sum value of D(t)−Base(D(t)) is taken as the effective
volume.
C. Recognizing Breath Types
From visual inspection of the data, we selected the optimal
sensor channel for every case: headset - temperature, training
mask - pressure, cotton mask - pressure. Although other
channels may also be possible for a candidate, such as the
humidity in the headset case and the temperature in both mask
cases, how to combine different sensor channels will be part
of the future work.
For each participant, we evaluate how well the normal and
deep breaths can be separated by cross-validation using a cubic
Support Vector Machine (SVM) classiﬁer with the six features.
Figure 11 shows the result as confusion matrices. The value
in every cell is the summary of the individual results and
normalized to the total amount of ground truth samples. The
accuracy is above 96% in training mask and cotton mask cases,
while 82.4% in the open-air headset case. This also agrees with
the signal examples in Figure 9 and suggests that the sensors
perform better in a restricted airﬂow for detecting normal and
deep breaths.
Next, we use the Neighborhood Component Analysis (NCA)
[17] to decide which features play more important roles in
separating the two different breathing types. NCA takes the
prediction accuracy as a goal function of additionally assigned
weights to the features for every observation as variables. The
goal function is continuously differentiable, thus the local
maxima point can be found with optimization algorithms, where
a combination of the feature weights results in a maximum
prediction accuracy.
We use the fscnca method implemented in the Matlab
Machine Learning Toolbox with default settings to perform
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

Figure 12. Feature weight after neighborhood component analysis.
NCA on a per-person basis, and then calculate the average
weight for each feature within every form factor. The resulting
featherweights are shown in Figure. 12. A higher value means
the corresponding feature is more relevant for recognition. From
the result, the 5th feature (window length) and the 6th feature
(effective volume) are more relevant in all three form factors.
For the cotton mask and training mask form factors, the 2nd
feature (absolute range) is also relevant. The remaining features
have close to zero weight. This result can be used to further
optimize the feature calculation process.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
From our pilot study, it is clear that the integrated atmo-
sphere sensor, which measures air pressure, temperature and
humidity, can be used to detect breathing events and distinguish
normal and deep breaths in different form factors including face
masks and an open-air headset, thanks to the small footprint
of the sensor. The algorithm consists of simple ﬁltering, peak
detection, and 6 features are calculated. The sensor is also
shown to be able to estimate the air volume by comparing with
a spirometer.
In our future work, we will work on improving the accuracy
of detecting deep and normal breaths for the reasons that this
form factor is more acceptable and can be integrated with other
head-mounted wearable devices, such as headphones or smart
glasses. In particular, we will investigate utilizing more than
one channel instead of selecting a single optimal channel, or
using two opposite-facing sensors as a differential setting to
reduce the inﬂuence of the environment.
We will also conduct experiments in outdoor or more active
scenarios, and use case studies especially in sport and ﬁtness,
including user feedback and assisted training.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Miller and J. Hankinson, “Standardisation of spirometry,” European
respiratory journal, vol. 26, no. 2, 2005, pp. 319–338.
[2]
E. Buskirk and H. Taylor, “Maximal oxygen intake and its relation to
body composition, with special reference to chronic physical activity
and obesity,” Journal of applied physiology, vol. 11, no. 1, 1957, pp.
72–78.
[3]
H. Taylor, E. Buskirk, and A. Henschel, “Maximal oxygen intake as an
objective measure of cardio-respiratory performance,” Journal of applied
physiology, vol. 8, no. 1, 1955, pp. 73–80.
[4]
E. Vlemincx, J. Taelman, S. De Peuter, I. Van Diest, and O. Van
Den Bergh, “Sigh rate and respiratory variability during mental load
and sustained attention,” Psychophysiology, vol. 48, no. 1, 2011, pp.
117–120.
[5]
E. Vlemincx, J. Taelman, I. Van Diest, and O. Van den Bergh, “Take
a deep breath: the relief effect of spontaneous and instructed sighs,”
Physiology & Behavior, vol. 101, no. 1, 2010, pp. 67–73.
[6]
R. Brown and P. Gerbarg, “Sudarshan kriya yogic breathing in the
treatment of stress, anxiety, and depression,” Journal of Alternative &
Complementary Medicine, vol. 11, no. 4, 2005, pp. 711–717.
[7]
T. Kavanagh et al., “Peak oxygen intake and cardiac mortality in women
referred for cardiac rehabilitation,” Journal of the American College of
Cardiology, vol. 42, no. 12, 2003, pp. 2139–2143.
[8]
J. Stocks and P. H. Quanjer, “Reference values for residual volume, func-
tional residual capacity and total lung capacity,” European Respiratory
Journal, vol. 8, no. 3, 1995, pp. 492–506.
[9]
F. Swart, M. M. Schuurmans, J. C. Heydenreich, C. H. Pieper, and C. T.
Bolliger, “Comparison of a new desktop spirometer (spirospec) with a
laboratory spirometer in a respiratory out-patient clinic,” Respiratory
care, vol. 48, no. 6, 2003, pp. 591–595.
[10]
“Chinadaily.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.ChinaDaily.com.cn
[retrieved October 2018]
[11]
A. Aliverti, “Wearable technology: role in respiratory health and disease,”
Breathe, vol. 13, no. 2, 2017, p. e27.
[12]
F. Landreani and A. Martin-Yebra, “Respiratory frequency estimation
from accelerometric signals acquired by mobile phone in a controlled
breathing protocol,” in Computing in Cardiology, 2018, pp. 1–4.
[13]
S. Li, B. Lin, C. Tsai, C. Yang, and B. Lin, “Design of wearable
breathing sound monitoring system for real-time wheeze detection,”
Sensors, vol. 17, no. 1, 2017, p. 171.
[14]
A. Martin and J. Voix, “In-ear audio wearable: Measurement of heart
and breathing rates for health and safety monitoring,” IEEE Transactions
on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 65, no. 6, 2018, pp. 1256–1263.
[15]
A. Fusco, D. Locatelli, F. Onorati, G. Durelli, and M. Santambrogio, “On
how to extract breathing rate from ppg signal using wearable devices,”
in Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference (BioCAS), 2015 IEEE.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–4.
[16]
“Training mask l.l.c.” [Online]. Available: https://www.trainingmask.com
[retrieved October 2018]
[17]
W. Yang, K. Wang, and W. Zuo, “Neighborhood component feature
selection for high-dimensional data.” JCP, vol. 7, no. 1, 2012, pp. 161–
168.
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-676-7
UBICOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

