 
VANET Route Selection in Urban/Rural Areas using Metric Base Traffic Analysis  
 
Syed Fakhar Abbas 
Communication Network Research Center (CNRC) 
Department of Computer Science, COMSATS Institute of 
Information Technology 
Defense Road, Jinnah Campus, Lahore, Pakistan 
syedfakhar15@gmail.com 
 
S. R. Chaudhry 
Communication Network Research Center (CNRC) 
Department of Computer Science, COMSATS Institute of 
Information Technology 
Defense Road, Jinnah Campus, Lahore, Pakistan 
saqib.chaudhry@ieee.org
Ghulam Yasin 
Division of Science and Technology 
University of Education 
Lahore Pakistan 
ghulam_yaseen@hotmail.com 
 
 
Abstract— Vehicular Ad hoc Network (VANET) is a 
subordinate of Mobile Ad hoc Network (MANET). It helps for 
the provision of wireless communication between the vehicles 
in the road side equipment and the vehicle. Nowadays, 
Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) has a major impact on 
improving the quality and efficiency of the transportation 
system. When we talk about luxury and secure implementation 
of VANET,   vehicle will query data from any other vehicle 
through multi hop infrastructure. While data is moving in 
VANET it will suffers from recurrent interruptions due to 
frequent mobility and sporadically linked network system. In 
this paper, studies and comparison of the following three 
routing protocols AODV, DSR and DSDV have been done. The 
analysis has been measured and evaluated in both urban and 
rural environments. Contrary to the pessimistic conclusion of 
previous works, by incorporating the classification accuracy is 
improved in the routing algorithms used. The proposed system 
analyzes the vehicles density, data drop, and throughput and 
end-to-end delay. It was observed from the results that in form 
of high through put and low packet drop DSR shows better 
performance compared to DSDV and AODV in rural 
environment and urban high density area, while AODV shows 
better performance in comparison to DSR in a VANET 
environment that is of low density. 
Keywords- ITS; VANET; AODV; DSR; DSDV 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Wireless technology in the field of has been growing fast 
previous more than two decades. Developments have played 
a vital role to explore new horizons doors for researchers to 
dig out unique cost-effective solutions for different 
applications. Cellular networks, Ad hoc networks, ,wireless 
sensor networks, Visible Light Communication, Wi-Fi, Wi-
Max are some of the  illustrations of new wireless network 
technologies 
that 
have 
been 
used 
in 
security, 
telecommunication, engineering, location tracking, network 
monitoring, remote sensing,  medical, education, and 
tracking systems. 
 
Figure 1.  Communication architecture of VANET. 
Fig. 1 shows the architecture of VANET in which 
different components are shown. This is a generic 
architecture in which data is transferred among different On-
Board Units (OBU). Intelligent Transportation Systems 
(ITS) is a wide-ranging   technology system applicable to 
transportation to make system safer, more effective, and 
more reliable and more environment friendly, without 
altering the existing infrastructure.  Technologies ranges 
include 
sensor 
network, 
control 
technologies, 
communications 
system, 
computer 
informatics, 
transportation, engineering, telecommunications, computer 
science, finance, electronic commerce and automobile 
manufacturing. 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
 
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) have been 
developed to improve the safety, security and efficacy of the 
transportation systems. The field of Inter Vehicular 
Communications (IVC), including both Vehicle-to-Vehicle 
communication 
(V2V) 
and 
Vehicle-to-Roadside 
communication (V2R), also known as VANET, is recognize 
as an important component of ITS in various national plans 
[1]. 
Figure 2.  Inter Vehicular Communications (IVC). 
Figure 3.  Vehicle to Infrastructre Communication (V2I). 
 
Figure 4.  Vehicle to Vehicle Communication (V2V). 
 
Vehicular Ad-Hoc Network (VANET) communication 
has become a progressively important research topic in the 
area of wireless networking as well as the automotive 
industries. The goal of VANET research is to develop a 
vehicular communication system to enable cost-effective and 
fastest communication of data for the benefit of passengers’ 
safety [2] and comfort. 
A vehicular ad hoc network (VANET) is an emerging 
research area for the communications industry and 
academician. Researchers proposed an entirely new wireless 
networking concept, i.e., vehicular ad hoc network which 
can increase passenger safety and reduces vehicle collisions 
on the road. Wireless communication among moving 
vehicles is unique and innovative research era in the 
academics and in the corporate sector, driven by the vision to 
communicate information among vehicles to ensure the 
safety and comfort of the users [3–4]. 
Nowadays, automobile industry have equipped their new 
vehicles with Global Positioning Systems (GPS), digital 
maps and even wireless interfaces, e.g., Honda-ASV3.The 
network architecture of VANET can be classified into three 
categories: Cellular network/WLAN, ad hoc network, and 
hybrid network [5]. 
This paper summarizes the impact of topology-based 
routing protocols in urban and rural area scenarios. The 
remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 is 
about description of problem statement. Section 3 describes 
the wireless access methods for VANET. Section 4 discusses 
the different routing protocols in VANET. Section 5 presents 
the experimental and model scenarios. Section 6 analyzes the 
results of urban and rural area scenarios. We conclude in 
Section 7. 
II. 
PROBLEM STATEMENT 
 
With the emergence of vigorous wireless network 
technologies and wireless applications intensive research 
have been conducted in VANET. Vehicles are needed to 
equip with Global Positioning System (GPS) and IEEE 
802.11 wireless adaptors to create ad-hoc network for data 
sharing. Path is pre-established for data transfer and network 
configuration changes frequently. 
 
Challenges faced by ad hoc network include security, 
bandwidth limitation, energy utilization, scalability, network 
performance etc. while measuring different parameters 
mentioned above we use different protocols to show the 
network performance and quality of service. The proposed 
system classifies the changing vehicular density, data drop, 
and throughput and end-to-end delay of vehicles in the 
network. 
 
To guarantee the performance of network multiple 
protocols have been analyzed in the simulation scenario like 
AODV [13], DSR [13] and DSDV. Performance has been 
measured in rural and urban areas using following 
parameters: changing vehicular density, data drop, and 
throughput and end-to-end delay of vehicles in the network. 
 
 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

III. 
WIRELESS ACCESS STANDARDS FOR VEHICULAR 
TECHNOLOGY 
Dedicated 
Short 
Range 
Communications 
(DSRC)/Wireless Access in a Vehicular Environment 
(WAVE) refer to a set of developing standards for mobile 
wireless communications. DSRC/WAVE is part of the 
Federal 
Highway 
Authority’s 
Vehicle 
Infrastructure 
Integration (VII) initiative and supports Vehicle-to-Vehicle 
(V2V) and Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I) communications 
for emerging Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS).  
DSRC/WAVE systems fill a role in the wireless 
infrastructure 
by 
facilitating 
low 
delay, 
expansion 
geographical area, high data rate, and high mobility 
communications. 
 
A. DSRC Dedicated Short Range Communications 
 
5.9 GHz DSRC (Dedicated Short Range Communications) is 
communications service which ranges between short to 
medium to supports vehicle and vehicle to vehicle 
communication environments. DSRC is meant to be an 
accompaniment to mobile communications by providing   
fast data transfer rates in surrounding environment where 
less delay during the communication and separating   small 
communication zones are important [7]. DSRC modes of 
operations are Ad hoc mode characterized by distributed 
multi-hop networking (vehicle–vehicle), and Infrastructure 
mode characterized by a centralized mobile single hop 
network (vehicle-gateway). 
 
B. IEEE 802.11P/WAVE SYSTEM 
 
    The IEEE has accomplished the standards IEEE P1609.1, 
P1609.2, and P1609.4 for vehicular networks and just 
released them for experimental use to the network users [7]. 
A fourth standard, P1609.3 is still under further 
development. P1609.1 is the standard for Wireless Access 
for Vehicular Environments (WAVE) Resource Manager. It 
describes the services and interfaces of the WAVE resource 
manager application as well as the message data format. It 
delivers instant access for different applications to the other 
network architecture. The WAVE stack usages is an altered 
version of the IEEE 802.11a, known as IEEE 802.11p [8], 
for its Medium Access Control (MAC) layer protocol. It 
uses (Carrier Sense Multiple Access/Collision Avoidance) 
CSMA/CA as the basic medium access protocol for link 
sharing and usages one control channel to set up 
transmissions, which then should be done over some 
transmission channels. By using the OFDM  (Orthogonal 
Frequency Division Multiplexing) system, it delivers both 
(Vehicle to Vehicle) V2V and V2R (Vehicle to Road-Side) 
unit wireless communications over long distances up to 
1000m,while taking into account the environment, that is, 
high absolute and relative velocities (up to 200 km/h), fast 
multipath fading and dissimilar scenarios (rural, highway, 
and city). 
IV. 
VANET ROUTING PROTOCOLS 
 
In VANET, the routing protocols are classified into five major 
categories: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  VANET routing protocols Categories 
 
VANETs consist of vehicles which have to follow the 
traffic rules of movement unlike MANETs in which nodes 
move randomly without any movement restrictions. 
VANETs have very flexible and complex topology due to 
multiple routes on which drivers move at different speeds, 
with different driving behavior, whereas in MANET’s 
topology changes are less frequent. Due to these 
distinguished differences between MANETs and VANETs,   
MANETs routing protocols have to be studied first and 
verified for their compatibility in VANET environments. 
The routing protocols, which are selected for this study, 
belongs to a special branch of MANET routing protocols 
namely Topology Based Routing Protocols. The main reason 
for such a selection is the dynamic topology aspect of 
VANETs, which has a straight implication on routing 
protocol analysis. 
 
A. Topology Based Routing Protocols 
 
In this paper, we have considered proactive and reactive 
protocols. Topology based routing protocols use link’s 
information, which exists in the network and use as packet 
forwarding. These protocols can be categorized into: 
 
 
Proactive (Table-Driven) routing protocols. 
 
 
Reactive (On-Demand) routing protocols. 
 
 
Hybrid routing protocols. 
VANET Routing Protocols 
Topology Based [8] 
Position Based [9] 
 
Geo-Cast Routing [10] 
 
 
Broad Cast Routing [11] 
 
 
Cluster Based [12] 
 
 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

B. Proactive-Routing Protocols 
 
Proactive routing protocol is also named as "table-
driven" routing protocol. In proactive routing protocol, nodes 
in a mobile ad-hoc network incessantly assess routes to all 
accessible nodes and try to uphold reliable, up-to-the-minute 
routing information in their routing tables. FSLS, DSDV, 
OLSR etc. are examples of proactive-routing protocols [14]. 
 
 
1) Destination Sequenced Distance Vector (DSDV) 
 
It is Table Driven routing protocol which is used in 
VANET; is grounded on classical Bellman-Ford algorithm 
[15]. Primarily every vehicle broadcasts its own route 
information tables to its neighbor vehicles. The neighbor 
vehicles keep up-to-date routing table by two type of 
packets- Full Dump Packet and Incremental Packet. Full 
Dump 
Packet 
comprises 
information 
about 
every 
contributing vehicle in the VANET. These packets are 
communicated intermittently after a long time intermission. 
Incremental Packet covers latest change in vehicle position 
since last Full Dump Packet. Routes are nominated with the 
up-to-date entry in the table. DSDV is better option for 
networks where location of nodes is less changeable. 
 
C. Reactive Routing Protocols 
 
Reactive routing protocols for mobile ad hoc networks 
are similarly known as “on-demand" routing protocols. In a 
reactive destination node but no route is accessible, it 
initiates a route detection process. It is initiated with RREQ 
(route request) packet, response is with route reply (RREP) 
and while link is not available it is received route error 
(RERR) packet. Reactive routing protocols has less 
overhead, a unique feature, while reactive routing protocols 
scalable than proactive routing protocols. But while using 
reactive routing protocols, source nodes may undergo 
routing protocol, routing paths are look for only while it is 
desirable. Henceforth these protocols are not appropriate for 
real–time applications. The Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) 
[13] and Ad hoc On-demand Distance Vector routing 
(AODV) [13] are examples for reactive routing protocols. 
 
 
1) Ad Hoc on-Demand Distance Vector Routing 
(AODV) 
 
It is a Source Initiated on Demand routing protocols 
used in VANET. In this protocol, every vehicle retains its 
route information of every vehicle. Sequence number is 
used to accept an acknowledgment of update for table entry. 
If a table entry is not used within a certain time limit, it will 
be erased from table and if there is any route is disconnected 
from  vehicle to another vehicle, route error (RERR) packet 
is generated  so that vehicle route is efficiently updated in its  
routing table. 
2) Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) 
 
It is Source Initiated on Demand routing protocol used in 
VANET and is grounded on link state routing algorithm. 
When a vehicle needs to transfer data to another vehicle, 
first it initiates route discoveries request up to that vehicle. 
For route finding, source vehicle recruits a route request 
(RREQ) packet in the network and other nodes forward the 
RREQ by changing their name as sender. Lastly when 
RREQ packet spreads to the destination vehicle or to a 
vehicle having path to the destination vehicle, a route reply 
(RREP) packet is unicasted to the sender node. If the reply 
packet is not received, the source vehicle resumes violent 
discovery of route up to the destination vehicle. 
 
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SCENARIOS 
 
In the vehicular networks, basically, two different types 
of simulator are required; first, is network simulators, and 
second, is traffic simulator. But, in proposed solution, a 
hybrid simulator is used which offers a mixing services of 
both network and traffic simulator. The hybrid simulator 
EstiNet 7.0 is the commercial version of NCTUns network 
simulator and emulator. EstiNet 7.0 is a world-renowned tool 
and has been used by more than 20,000 listed users from 144 
countries all over the world.  EstiNet 7.0 is latest version and 
whose central technology is based on the novel kernel re-
entering methodology invented by Prof. S.Y. Wang [10]. 
The various features of VANET supported by EstiNet 7.0 
make it a clear choice for proposed research work. 
 
A. Simulation Model and Parameters 
 
TABLE I.  
GENERIC SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Routing Protocols in both scenarios 
AODV, DSR and DSDV 
Channel type 
Wireless channel 
MAC protocol 
802.11p 
Mobility model 
Random Way Point(RWP) 
Theoretical Channel Model 
Two Ray Ground 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
B. Urban Area Scenario 
 
Fig. 6 shows the urban area grid scenario where 80 
vehicles devices identified as On-Board Units (OBUs) 
communicate with each other as well as with RSU (Road 
Side Unit) .Vehicles show the network behavior as the OBUs 
move within the network to analyze the performance of each 
protocol. While assessing the performance of a given 
scenario in the Vehicle-to-Vehicle communication (V2V) 
and Vehicle-to-Roadside communication (V2R) vehicles 
move within network and establish VANET. In this mobility 
model we used Random waypoint.  By using this mobility 
model, vehicles are free to move to reach at random 
destination. Movement of the vehicles is calculated by the 
algorithm. 
 
Figure 6.  Urban Area Grid Scenario. 
Table II describes the simulation parameter used in the urban 
area scenario. 
TABLE II.  
URBAN AREA SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
No. of Vehicles 
80 
Simulation area 
2X2Km 
Simulatio Time 
90 minutes 
Vehicle Speed 
10 m/sec 
Channel bandwidth 
6 Mbps 
Transport protocol 
UDP 
Transmitted power 
28.8dbm 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Rural Area Scenario 
Figure 7.  Rural Area Scenario. 
Fig. 7 shows rural area grid scenario where 15 On-Board 
Units (OBUs) communicate with each other as well as with 
RSU (Road Side Unit) .Vehicles show the network behavior 
as the OBUs move within the network to analyze the 
performance of each protocol. 
 
Table III describes the simulation parameter used in the rural 
area scenario. 
 
TABLE III.  
URBAN AREA SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
No. of Vehicles 
80 
Simulation area 
2X2Km 
Simulatio Time 
50 minutes 
Vehicle Speed 
10 m/sec to 18 m/sec 
Channel bandwidth 
6 Mbps 
Transport protocol 
UDP 
Transmitted power 
28.8dbm 
 
 
VI. 
PERFORMANCE RESULTS OF AODV, DSR, DSDV 
 
The following graph shows the performance of the 
routing protocol using different metric considered above. 
The x axis represents the time in seconds and y axis 
represents the metric considered. 
 
A. Throughput 
 
From Fig. 8, it can be realized that in urban area scenario 
throughput with DSR protocol is better than with AODV and 
DSDV with throughput peak reaching up to 300 kB/s. It is 
also observed that, when speed is increased and more 
vehicles connected to the RSU than AODV performance 
suddenly degrades from about 270 KB/s to 40 KB/s, while 
DSDV performance slightly decrease remains moderately 
the same. 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Throughput Performance in Urban Scenario. 
 
Fig. 9 shows the Throughput in rural scenario. Clear 
implication from graph DSR Throughput is uppermost. 
AODV Throughput remains in between other two and 
DSDV Throughput is lowest among all three. 
 
Figure 9.  Throughput in Rural Scenario. 
 
B. Packet Dropped 
 
The packet drop performance of DSR protocol is much 
better than AODV and DSDV in urban and rural scenarios, 
as is seen from Fig. 10. About 10 to 20 packets dropped in 
urban area while less than 50 packets drop in rural scenario 
while this drop of packets better as time passes for the DSR 
protocol. As the speed is increased the packet drop rate for 
AODV protocol increases from 200 to 1100 drop packets in 
urban area whereas in rural area packet drop for AODV 
remain between 100 to 140 packets. In terms of dropped 
packets for DSDV’s performance is the worst in both 
scenarios. The performance degrades with the increase in the 
number of nodes and speed. The performance degrades with 
the increase in the number of nodes and speed. 
Figure 10.  Packets Dropped in Urban Scenario. 
Fig. 11 shows the drop packet performance of DSR protocol 
is better than for both AODV and DSDV in urban scenario. 
As the number of vehicles increased, data dropped ratio of 
DSDV suddenly increased from 29 to 480 packets that much 
worst in entire simulation. 
Figure 11.  Dropped Packets in rural Scenario. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
 
In this research, analysis the simulations are performed to 
compare the performance of On-Demand (DSR and AODV) 
and Table-Driven (DSDV) routing protocols by using the 
two different scenarios. Also measured the metrics like data 
collide, data dropped, etc. The results presented in Table 5 
for different traffic scenario and for three VANET routing 
protocols, performance of DSR has been found to be better 
than that of AODV and DSDV. From the parameter values 
characterizing the two traffic scenarios, DSR is found 
suitable for both rural and urban traffics scenarios. Thus it 
can be concluded that DSR outperforms from other routing 
protocols AODV and DSDV in both urban and rural area 
scenarios.  
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

TABLE IV.  
COMPARISION OF ROUTING PROTCOLS 
Parameters 
Scenario 
Routing Protocols 
 
 
AODV 
DSDV 
DSR 
Throughput 
Urban 
L 
M 
H 
Throughput 
Rural 
M 
L 
H 
Data Dropped 
Urban 
H 
M 
L 
Data Dropped 
Rural 
M 
H 
L 
Data Collide 
Urban 
H 
M 
L 
Data Collide 
Rural 
M 
H 
L 
H = High, L=Low, M = Medium 
 
VIII. REFERENCES 
 
[1] U.S. Department of Transportation, Intelligent Transportation 
Systems (ITS) Home [July, 2013] http://www.its.dot.gov/index.htm . 
[2] Rylander, D.Volvo Constr. Equip., Eskilstuna, and Sweden Axelsson, 
“Using wireless communication to improve road safety and quality of 
service at road construction work sites (Poster)” Vehicular 
Networking Conference (VNC)  IEEE Nov. 2012, pp. 14-16. 
[3] Jedrzej Rybicki, Björn Scheuermann, Wolfgang Kiess, Christian 
Lochert, Pezhman Fallahi, and Martin Mauve. “Challenge: peers on 
wheels - a road to new traffic information systems” in Proceedings of 
the 13th Annual ACM International Conference on Mobile 
Computing and Networking 2007, pp. 215–221. 
[4] Jakob Eriksson, HariBalakrishnan, and Samuel Madden, “Cabernet: 
Vehicular contentdelivery using WiFi” in Proceedings of the 14th 
ACM 
International Conference on 
Mobile Computing and 
Networking 2008, pp. 199–210. 
[5] Kevin C. Lee, Uichin Lee, and Mario Gerla, "Survey of Routing 
Protocols in Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks," advances in Vehicular Ad-
Hoc Networks: Developments and Challenges, IGI Global, Oct, 2009. 
[6] DSRC 
(Dedicated 
Short-Range 
Communications), 
http://www.standards.its.dot.gov/Documents/advisories/dsrc_advisory
.htm. 
[7] Claudia Campolo and Antonella Molinaro, “On vehicle-to-roadside 
communications 
in 
802.11p/WAVE 
VANETs” 
in 
Wireless 
Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC) IEEE, March 
2011, Cancun, Mexico, pp. 28-31. 
[8] Rani, P.,Sharma, N, Singh, and P.K.  . “Performance Comparison of 
VANET 
Routing 
Protocols” 
in 
Wireless 
Communications, 
Networking and Mobile Computing (WiCOM), 7th International 
Conference Wuhan 23-25 Sept. 2011, pp .1 - 4. 
[9] Daxin Tian,Kaveh Shafiee, and Victor C. M. Leung “Position-based 
directional vehicular routing” in proceeding GLOBECOM'09 of the 
28th IEEE conference on Global telecommunications 2009 USA, pp. 
3255-3260. 
[10] Guoqing Zhang, Wu Chen, Zhong Xu, Hong Liang, Dejun Mu, and 
Li Gao “Geocast Routing in Urban Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks” in 
Computational Intelligence springer link , 2009, Volume 208/2009. 
[11] Ahmed Soua, Walid Ben-Ameur, and Hossam Afifi “Broadcast-based 
Directional Routing in Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks” in Networking 
and Internet Architecture (cs.NI) arXiv:1206.1358v1 [cs.NI] Wed, 6 
Jun 2012. 
[12] Yuyi Luo,Wei Zhang, and Yangqing Hu “A cluster-based directional 
routing protocol in VANET” in Networks Security Wireless 
Communications and Trusted Computing (NSWCTC), 2010 Second 
International Conference on , 24-25 April 2010. 
[13] Hadi Sargolzaey, Ayyoub Akbari Moghanjoughi, and Sabira Khatun, 
“A Review and Comparison of Reliable Unicast Routing Protocols 
for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks”, in IJCSNS International Journal of 
Computer Science and Network Security, vol .9, no.1, pp. 186-196, 
January 2009. 
[14] Ramandeep Kaur and Chandan Sharma, “Review paper on 
performance analysis of AODV, DSDV, OLSR on the basis of packet 
delivery” in  IOSR Journal of Computer Engineering (IOSR-JCE) 
vol. 11, Issue 1 (May. - Jun. 2013), pp. 51-55. 
[15] Baruch Awerbuch, Amotz Bar-Noy, and Madan Gopal, "Approximate 
distributed Bellman-Ford algorithms" in Communications, IEEE 
Transactions on vol. 42 , Issue: 8, pp. 2515 – 2517,  published year 
1994. 
 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

