 
 
Focus and Exploration in Contextual Relevance 
Mamdouh Eljueidi1, Chiara Rossitto2, Ilaria Canova Calori1 
 
 
 
1Department of Computer and Information Science 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology 
Trondheim, Norway 
{mamdouh, canovaca}@idi.ntnu.no 
2Department of Computer and Systems Sciences 
Stockholm University 
Stockhom, Sweden 
chiara@dsv.su.se
 
 
Abstract—The ubiquity of learning resources can be both 
empowering and challenging for mobile learners. The 
development in context-aware computing presents promising 
tools that support learning activities and offer learning 
opportunities, through providing the learners with relevant 
resources. By drawing on an existing model of contextual 
relevance, this article provides empirical examples of how 
contextual relevance can emerge and unfold throughout a 
mobile learning activity. It draws attention to how learning 
outside the classroom can facilitate engagement with the 
physical environment and its exploration, thus determining a 
thin balance between being on track, and triggering new 
discussions. The findings show that interaction between the 
ongoing activity and the environment assists focus, whereas 
exploration 
is 
promoted 
by 
interaction 
between 
the 
background and past experiences of the learner and the 
environment. 
Finally, 
ontological, 
interpretational 
and 
presentational issues are presented as design challenges. 
Keywords-contextual relevance; mobile learning; ubiquitous 
learning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Development 
in 
ubiquitous 
computing 
facilitates 
enhanced learning experiences. It envisions technology-rich 
environments that along with personalized handheld devices 
can offer learners different forms of contextualized and 
situated learning activities. However, context-aware services 
and applications for mobile learning have to cope with 
various challenges. First, learners are overloaded with 
information that demands significant efforts in managing it 
and selecting the relevant. It is a task that mobile learning 
technology has to do effectively [1], otherwise could 
increases the cognitive load of the learner and consequently 
obstruct the learning process. Secondly, learning objectives 
develop through the course of interaction with the 
environment [2]. Finally, people do not pursue fixed goals 
[3]. On the contrary, they might change and define them in 
the course of a certain activity in response to sensory 
information. On a technological level, this represents the 
challenge of designing mobile learning applications that 
enable exploration while reflecting relevant pedagogical 
objectives. This means that context-aware services and 
applications have to support ongoing activities, while 
allowing learners the possibility to engage in serendipitous 
encounters. Context-awareness is not to be seen merely as 
tool for adaptation to changing context, but as a resource for 
the learning activity. Similarly, change in context is not to be 
seen as a problem to overcome, but as an emerging 
opportunity to seize. 
In an earlier work [4], we have approached the question 
of context by adopting the interactional view of context by 
Dourish [5] and by drawing on the theory of relevance by 
Sperber and Wilson [3]. A model of contextual relevance 
was developed where relevance is the distinct factor of what 
is context and what is not. It takes into account the past of 
the learner and the dynamics of the present to handle context 
as it unfolds. This paper elaborates on the model by applying 
it to an exploratory field study. In so doing, we seek to 
provide concrete examples of what aspects of a mobile 
learning activity determine a change in relevance, that is to 
say, a change in the relevant context.  
The work presented is concerned with the concept of 
City-wide Collaborative Learning (CwCL), where learning is 
conceived as emerging from exploring authentic settings, 
interacting with peers and experts, and from serendipitous 
encounters providing opportunities for exploration and 
interaction [6]. 
The following section presents different perspectives on 
using context for content provision. It shows examples of 
research efforts that use context for content delivery and 
others that see context itself as the knowledge or a type of 
knowledge. The third section introduces the model of 
contextual relevance developed within previous research [4]. 
The fourth section introduces two field trips that are later 
used in section five to elaborate our understanding of change 
in relevance. Section six introduces a number of design 
challenges emerging from the framework suggested. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In a survey on context-aware pervasive learning 
environments, Laine and Joy [7]  observe three possible roles 
that the physical environment can play in pervasive learning: 
(i) context for learning if the system uses features in the 
environment to adapt accordingly; (ii) content for learning 
when information from the environment are used as learning 
resources; (iii) system resources  as triggers for system 
events. 
The combined use of technology in the environment and 
in the personal handheld devices of the learner extends the 
capabilities of these devices and gives learners access to both 
physical and virtual local resources, whether these resources 
are used as content for the learning activity itself or 
303
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
supporting the process of learning. A main concern in 
technology-enhanced learning is providing learners with 
these learning resources they need from the overwhelming 
resources that surround them in prospective technology-rich 
environments. 
Context-awareness sub-system (CAS) [8] is a module in 
the MOBIlearn project that aims to provide individuals with 
learning resources and services. CAS presents users with a 
filtered set of relevant learning content that they can choose 
from. They do that by intelligent matching between content 
metadata and context metadata. Bomsdorf [9] approaches 
this by introducing the notion of Plasticity of digital learning 
spaces that goes beyond UI adaptation into the selection 
and/or adaptation of learning material (content), services and 
tools, by evaluating adaption rules against the learner’s 
profile and resource meta-data. Wolpers [10] attempts to 
solve a similar problem and his approach is to individualize 
and personalize learning based on Contextualized Attention 
Metadata (CAM) that facilitates the learning process, and 
provide learners with the tools they need, rather than those 
presumed by designers. CAM information is a second order 
profile represented in a user model that provides a holistic 
view on the user and his activities, which is used in 
observing attention in order to filter and prioritize incoming 
information. This is based on the assumption that 
information provision is a main mechanism of learning, in 
parallel with the learning process. Cooltown project [11] on 
the other hand, proposes integrating virtual reality and 
physical locality by dynamically generating web places. A 
web place is a representation of a physical place based on the 
context of the user; location, time, user ID, and the capability 
of the device being used, people physically in the place. This 
web place will present users with a list of available services 
for the environment as they move through it, and they can 
select and execute services. 
These are some examples of research efforts that explore 
the problem of providing relevant content and services to the 
learner based on context, often by meta-data matching. There 
is an underlying assumption in these attempts that delineates 
context elements, and learning objects and services. This 
brings about the question of what context is. In connection 
with this, there is the issue of relevance, which turns out to 
be meta-data matching in many cases, in consequence of the 
aforementioned assumption. 
Context and relevance has been widely explored in 
artificial intelligence (AI) and decision-support systems. It is 
a perspective on context that should not be simply 
overlooked. One example of this research is the efforts by 
Öztürk and Aamodt [12] to exploit context for case-based 
reasoning 
in 
medical 
diagnosis. 
They 
adopt 
an 
epistemological view of context as a knowledge type. They 
distinguish between two types of context, external context 
and internal context. The former represents the situation, 
represented by the environment and the target case, which 
they see as static. The latter represents the state of the mind 
that captures goals, interest, expectations, and other 
information needed by the reasoner and that emerges as it is 
solves the problem. Together they form contextual 
knowledge, which they separate from the core domain 
knowledge. The authors see relevance as an indicator of the 
quality of the solution produced, while focus as relating to 
the efficiency of problem solving. Focus of attention is 
promoted by the internal context to subsets of domain 
knowledge, case base, and external knowledge. 
Ekbia and Maguitman [13] criticizes this tradition of 
logic as it fails to account for context and relevance. In 
formal logic, explicit representation of knowledge is needed. 
Consequently, the result will be to either codify too many or 
tool little facts as the spectrum of relevant facts is 
unrestrained. The authors refer to the theory of relevance by 
Sperber and Wilson [3] as the one that successfully account 
for context and relevance in the domain of speech 
communication. They see pragmatic relevance as the 
alternative, and that is more concerned with selecting the 
search space, which is taken for granted in AI, rather than the 
search process itself. The authors of another research efforts 
develop a knowledge-intensive model of context for ambient 
intelligence using a socio-technical perspective. They use 
activity theory to develop a context model with personal 
perspective; a subjective view on context, and propose 
taxonomy of context as personal, task, social, spatio-
temporal, and environmental contexts [14]. They agree that 
whether knowledge is contextual or not is determined by 
context, and thus they do not see context as a distinct type of 
knowledge. The authors in [15] differentiate, however, 
between relevant and irrelevant contextual knowledge. Based 
on the current focus of task, a part of the knowledge is 
proceduralized for use in decision-making, while the other 
part of knowledge is external. 
As mentioned earlier, we adopt the interactional view of 
context by Dourish [5]; it is not whether something is context 
or not, rather if it is contextually relevant or not. Hence, 
contextuality is a relational property. Thus, we do not 
distinguish between the subject matter and context. Context 
is what proves to be relevant to the learner right here and 
right now, whether a feature of the environment, learning 
object, learning service, or other peer learners. 
III. 
MODEL OF CONTEXTUAL RELEVANCE 
A proper conceptualization of context is required in order 
to understand how technology accounts for context and to 
guide the design of context-aware mobile systems. Attempts 
to conceptualize context and understand its role in CwCL 
requires an understanding of the human process of learning 
and acquiring knowledge, an understanding of how humans 
sets their learning goals, and when and why they change 
them, and accordingly an understanding of context can 
develop. We addressed this problem of context in CwCL by 
developing a model [4] that attempts to support ongoing 
learning 
activities 
while 
allowing 
seizing 
emerging 
opportunities. It adopts Dourish’s view of context as an 
interactional problem where context is a relational property. 
Objects and information are contextual only if relevant to the 
activity or interaction. It also draws on the relevance theory 
[3] of how people communicate and understand each other in 
context to assess relevance. Relevance is dynamic and varies 
continuously as user needs, goals, and intentions vary over 
time. The model defines two roles of context in CwCL: 
304
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
1) Supporting ongoing activities: enhancing the activity 
by providing resources that help learners to better complete 
the task. Opportunities could emerge while interacting with 
the social and physical space that can serve the ongoing 
activity. The learner has then to either ignore this encounter 
and pursues the task, or interrupt the task and pursue the 
encounter. A third option can be valid in some cases where 
learners can hold the encounter or revisit it some other time.  
2) Supporting opportunistic interaction: exploiting 
serendipitous encounters to provide the learner with 
opportunities for interaction that are relevant to an ongoing 
activity, history of interaction, the learner profile and 
interests, or such. There is a need to consider an interaction 
level that can hold a view of the learner’s ongoing activity, 
history, profile, interests, etc. to provide the learner with 
resources that match their needs at the right time. There is a 
tension between keeping the focus and exploiting emerging 
opportunities that maximizes the benefit of being in a 
specific place at a particular time. 
The model also defines three interconnected constructs of 
context: 1) long-term memory that includes the learner’s 
profile, interaction history, previous experiences, learning 
ontologies, etc. It is by taking this existing knowledge of the 
individual learner that proper information provision can 
occur to support a proper cognitive process of learning, 
something that is often overlooked [10]. Long-term memory 
evolves through time as the learner gains more knowledge 
and undertake new experiences. It reflects the development 
of the learner. 2) Short-term memory: related to the current 
ongoing task, which represent attention in human cognition. 
It includes the information about the participants of the 
activity, the topic and different encounters of the ongoing 
activity. Short-term memory provides conditions to filter the 
relevant from the incoming information. It reflects the 
dynamicity of the learning activity. 3) Perception (the 
world): information that can be captured by the sensory of 
the user, or a software agent in the handheld device on behalf 
of the user. Perception reflects the uncertainty that is present 
in new environments, where resources are not pre-defined 
and are not stable throughout the activity. It also reflects the 
here and now. 
IV. 
USER STUDY 
The empirical material we draw on was collected during 
a qualitative study carried out at an international school in 
Norway. In order to understand what contextual elements 
become relevant during mobile learning activities, we 
decided to approach the school setting without intervening. 
This means that, before providing the class with any mobile 
technology to be used in the context of their daily activities, 
we sought to understand how such activities naturally unfold.  
 During the study we followed a fourth grade class to two 
different field trips: one to an open-air folk museum, and the 
other to a cathedral and its museum. Children were between 
9 and 10 years old; 20 pupils were present during both trips. 
Data were collected mainly through qualitative methods: 
observations, audio-recordings and note-takings, as well as a 
follow-up interview with the teacher. Both excursions lasted 
about four hours from the moment we arrived at the school, 
to when we departed after the visits were over. We focused 
on understanding what contextual elements are relevant 
during a field trip, and how they facilitate learning, besides 
other research question: (i) how a learning experience 
unfolds before, during and after a field trip; (ii) the 
connections between class and outdoors activities and two 
subsequent visits; (iii) resources and artifacts used. 
Understanding the field trips in the context of the other 
educational activities was instrumental to our goal to develop 
mobile devices and services to enhance learning outside the 
classroom.  
When the study was carried out, the class was working 
on a six-week unit of inquiry about Norway. The first trip 
was concerned with the relationships between Norway’s 
climate and its culture, and the class visited the local open-
air folk museum, where traditional buildings (e.g., farms, 
churches and houses from different periods) have been 
moved from all over the country. The second trip focused 
instead on the cultural influence of religion in the Norwegian 
society. This excursion included two separate visits: one to 
the museum where original sculptures from the cathedral and 
archaeological exhibitions are displayed, and the other to the 
cathedral itself. Each visit was led by a different guide. The 
two trips offered two interesting settings to understand the 
situatedness of a learning experience, and to begin exploring 
what contextual aspects contribute to a meaningful 
engagement with the physical environment. In this paper we 
focus on two scenarios extracted from the field trips. 
A. Scenarios 
The first scenario draws on data collected during the visit 
to the open-air museum, when the guide took the class on a 
tour through different types of houses that had been built in 
Norway throughout the centuries [16]. As mentioned above, 
the main goal of this visit was to help pupils gain a direct 
experience of how climate had shaped the way houses were 
constructed and used. Nevertheless, being inside one of the 
farmhouses, and discussing the objects available in there (i.e. 
a loom, pottery and other utensils) was also an occasion to 
contextualize societal and cultural aspects. For instance, a 
pupil’s question about a pendulum watch present in the 
room, opened up a whole discussion about Norwegian 
immigration to the US in the beginning of the 1920s and 
1930s. The fact that the pendulum had been brought from the 
US was, thus, an occasion to tackle economical issues on 
Norwegian society, and to concretely explain why famine 
had forced people to migrate to another country. This was 
also an occasion to compare different types of economies, 
and how Norway evolved from an agriculture-based 
economy to an industrial one.  
The second scenario draws on data collected during the 
visit to the cathedral and its museum. The experience of this 
field trip was very different from the previous one. While 
narratives about physical artifacts and different parts of a 
farm enabled the guide and the teacher to anchor historical 
and cultural aspects, the visit at the cathedral was 
characterized by the use of various abstract and technical 
concepts (e.g., a typical gothic arch, comparisons between 
Greek and Northern mythology, etc.) the children had 
305
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
difficulties to understand. A significant episode was the visit 
to the area of the museum that used to be the mint. In 
similarity with the previous field trip, the exploration of the 
physical place shifted the discussion towards economical and 
societal issues. This time, however, the children had 
problems understanding the relationships between coining 
money and inflation. These difficulties were determined by 
the lack of a background knowledge the kids could relate to 
in order to understand what was being said. 
V. 
CHANGE IN RELEVANCE 
According to the interactional view of context, 
contextuality is dynamic and constantly in renegotiation. 
A. Contextualizing a Learning Activity 
The field trips we observed had been prepared in 
advance, as a part of a broader educational unit about 
Norway. In this sense, the trips were complementary to more 
traditional lessons that took place in the classroom. Although 
these indoors and outdoors learning moments are generally 
regarded as formal and informal respectively, the trips were 
perceived by the pupils as part of traditional schoolwork. 
They were aware of the role of the teachers, and that the trips 
constituted a moment for listening and understanding.  
While the guides at both field trips were aware of the 
themes the class was working on (climate and Christianity 
in Norway), no specific topics had been negotiated with the 
teacher. The pupils contributed in shaping the discussions 
with their questions that were triggered by a combination of 
the encounters in the surroundings, the dialogue with the 
guide, their previous experiences and knowledge. For 
instance, inside one of the farms at the folk museum, the 
guide showed the children an old, wooden piece, and she 
explained it was carved as a proposal gift as a way to 
manifest serious intentions of getting married to a woman.  
Observing other artifacts, such as spoons and porridge balls 
gave the opportunity to anchor food habits, how food was 
produced and stored, and nutritional problems people might 
have. These moments were also important as they allowed 
the children to reflect on their current situation, and to 
understand the past by means of comparing it to their daily 
lives. While objects played a major role in situating the 
learning 
experience, 
they 
also 
triggered 
interesting 
discussions that had not been planned by the guide or the 
teacher. While inside the farmhouse, one of the pupils asked 
about a pendulum clock, and since it had been brought from 
US, the question raised a discussion about famine and 
Norwegian immigration to US in the beginning of the 1920s 
and 1930s. 
These examples show that physical artifacts present in 
the physical environment contributed to the development of 
the ongoing learning activity, as well as triggering 
serendipitous exploration. Thus, the main activity, which is 
exploring historical aspects of Norway, is an umbrella for 
many trajectories of learning. Serendipitous interactions with 
the environment triggered questions that, in turn, contributed 
to further develop the discussions.  
Another focus of analysis that presents a bridge towards 
design is the constructs of context in CwCL. Interaction of 
the pupils and the physical and social surroundings is 
contextualized in one of three interconnected constructs of 
context (see Figure 1): 
 
 
Figure 1.  The constructs of context and their interaction –the environment pro-actively offers resources that support the ongoing activity (focus), and 
that promotes exploration based on the background of the learner, or reversely, requested by learner or by his agent on his behalf.  
 
 
 
 
306
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
Long-term memory: the pupils have a base of 
assumptions about field trips. They are used to them as a part 
of their schoolwork, and they also have previous experiences 
with the rules in museums. They are aware of the roles of the 
teacher and the guide. Each individual pupil has his own 
background, interests and experiences. 
Short-term memory: the kids are aware of the topic of the 
field trip; they prepared in class, and they were instructed at 
the museum. They keep track of the different events within 
the activity, where they started and how they progressed. 
This includes the main objective and the one that the teacher 
tries to keep focus on. It is however selective, unlike the 
background of pupils. This construct includes also the 
teacher, guide, and other classmates. 
Perception: the different artifacts and ambience that 
situate the learning experience and offers sensory 
information that promotes physical exploration. 
It is interaction amongst the three constructs that enable 
and drive the ongoing activity, which is represented by the 
second construct and supported by the other two constructs. 
Additionally, these three constructs play other roles, as 
conflicting states of mind in a dialectical interaction, where 
each attempts to occupy the attention of the learner. The 
long-term memory construct represents life-long learning, 
and the perception construct represents the tendency to 
exploit serendipitous encounters. The main activity (as 
represented by short-term memory) is what the teacher and 
the guide attempt to draw its boundaries. They make use of 
artifacts in the surroundings to teach pupils about pieces of 
history. This ongoing activity was supported by the 
perception (the local environment) and the assumed previous 
knowledge and interests of the pupils. Pupils on the other 
hand, with the main activity in mind, they set different 
boundaries of the activity based on their real previous 
knowledge and their own perception of the environment, 
which sometimes crossed the boundary that is intended by 
the guide or the teacher. 
B. Understanding Relevance and Change 
From the discussion above and drawing on concepts 
presented in the related work section, there are two notions 
that can be associated with contextual relevance (see Figure 
1): 
1) Focus: focus of attention on the ongoing activity is 
promoted by interaction between the ongoing activity 
(short-term memory) and the environment (the perception). 
2) Exploration: exploration 
is 
triggered 
by 
the 
interaction between the background (long-term memory) 
and environment. Exploration is relevance through time and 
ensembles, and it promotes capturing emergent, unplanned 
events. 
A third interaction that can be acquired from the data is 
the externalization and internalization processes that take 
place between the long- and short-term memories, in case of 
a conceptual gap where the intellectual level of an individual 
is not met. All these interactions can be both ways, i.e. 
initiated by any of the two constructs. 
Note that the three constructs of context are being 
augmented and changed as the interaction progresses. The 
long-term memory will have the long-lasting effect. This 
includes updated interest for example that can be taken as a 
retrospective trigger for a future visit.  
Change in relevance can be triggered by change in the 
individual constructs. For example by change in the physical 
and social environment that takes place through action or 
new phenomena in the environment, availability of new 
objects, change of the user location, or change in the 
accessibility of peers, etc. Change can also be triggered by 
development through change in the user intentions and goals 
or through changes in the conception of knowledge, foci of 
attention, interests, etc. 
VI. 
TOWARDS DESIGN 
Provision of contextual features to learners as they are 
needed is met with several design challenges. First, an 
ontological representation challenge: how and to what extent 
to represent entities in the world. Three constructs of context 
handles different perspectives of context and represent 
different aspects of the interaction; the individual, the 
activity, and the environment. This can require different 
heterogeneous solutions to model each of them. Secondly, an 
interpretational challenges for inferring relevance and 
reasoning on contextual features. All opportunities are 
possible distractions, and proper processing of information is 
essential. Also, it can be important here to take into 
consideration the recommendation of Greenberg [17] of 
being conservative in taking action based on context. 
Although pupils were triggering new topics, the teacher and 
the guide had tendency to stick to the pre-defined topic. This 
proposes an important question, which is how groups of 
learners are going to behave in the absence of a teacher and 
guide. Who will decide what path to go, what is relevant and 
what is not. This is of significant importance as there is no 
central unit to represent shared activities. This is a question 
that does not pop up in case of individual tasks. The intention 
is not replace teachers with technology. The teacher played 
an important role in keeping the kids focused. However one 
might think of scenarios when pupils are left alone for a 
limited time to attend to some assignment. The third 
 
Figure 2.  Short-term memory: represented by an activity model and 
reflects the dynamicity of the ongoing interaction in pursuing a 
specific 
objective 
and 
promotes 
focus. 
Long-term 
memory: 
represented by a user model and reflects the background of the user, 
his strategic goals, and development, and triggers exploration. 
 
 
307
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

 
 
challenge is presentational: how to present context to the 
learner. In a user study with technology in the project 
Ambient Wood [18], researchers found out that notifications 
by the environment to the handheld devices were sometimes 
going unnoticed. This is either because learners were too 
busy to respond or because they did not observe the 
incoming notification. We propose that the level of 
intrusivity should vary based on the role that the notification 
serves. In other words, opportunistic encounters should be 
less intrusive than those meant to enhance the ongoing 
interaction (focus versus exploration), and based on the 
direction 
of 
trigger 
initiation 
(environment 
versus 
individual). Modals of communication could also differ 
based on that. 
Figure 2 shows a conceptual architecture of a context-
aware system that promotes focus and exploration. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper discussed provision of learning resources to 
learners as the interaction unfolds in view of a user study that 
elaborated on the model of contextual relevance. It pointed 
out the different sources of interaction across the different 
constructs of context, where the environment offers an 
opportunity space that claims the attention of the learner and 
promotes exploration, while the goal-orientedness of the 
ongoing activity promotes the focus of attention. Both 
exploration and focus are for the purpose of maximizing the 
benefit of being here and now. It introduced then some 
design 
challenges: 
ontological, 
interpretational, 
and 
presentational. 
Developing a selection mechanism that infers relevance 
is the main concern and the task at hand for further progress 
in this research effort.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research presented in this paper is part of the 
FABULA project, funded by the Research Council of 
Norway under the VERDIKT program. More information 
about the project is available at http://fabula.idi.ntnu.no. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Koole, "A Model for Framing Mobile Learning," in 
Mobile Learning: Transforming the Delivery of Education 
and Training, M. Ally, Ed.: Athabasca University Press, 2009, 
pp. 25-47. 
[2] G. Vavoula and M. Sharples, "Challenges in evaluating 
mobile learning," in The 7th World Conference on m-
Learning 2008, pp. 1-8. 
[3] D. Sperber and D. Wilson, Relevance: communication and 
cognition. Oxford: Blackwell, 1995. 
[4] M. 
Eljueidi, 
"Contextual 
Relevance 
in 
City-wide 
Collaborative Learning," in IADIS International Conference 
Mobile Learning 2011 Avila, Spain: IADIS Press, 2011, pp. 
119-126. 
[5] P. Dourish, "What we talk about when we talk about context," 
Personal Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 8, pp. 19-30, 2004. 
[6] I. Canova Calori and M. Divitini, "Reflections on the role of 
technology in city-wide collaborative learning," International 
Journal of Interactive Mobile Technologies (iJIM), vol. 3, pp. 
33-39, 2009. 
[7] T. H. Laine and M. Joy, "Survey on Context-Aware Pervasive 
Learning Environments," International Journal of Interactive 
Mobile Technologies (iJIM), vol. 3, pp. 192-199, 2009. 
[8] P. Lonsdale, C. Baber, M. Sharples, and T. N. Arvanitis, "A 
context awareness architecture for facilitating mobile 
learning," in Learning with Mobile Devices: Research and 
Development, J. Attewell and C. Savill-Smith, Eds. London, 
UK: Learning and Skills Development Agency, 2004, pp. 79-
85. 
[9] B. Bomsdorf, "Adaptation of Learning Spaces: Supporting 
Ubiquitous Learning in Higher Distance Education," in 
Mobile Computing and Ambient Intelligence: The Challenge 
of Multimedia: Dagstuhl Seminar Proceedings, 2005, pp. 1-
13. 
[10] M. Wolpers, "Contextualized attention metadata in learning 
environments," UPGRADE: The European Journal for the 
Informatics Professional, vol. 9, pp. 57-61, 2008. 
[11] D. Caswell and P. Debaty, "Creating Web Representations for 
Places," in Proceedings of the 2nd international symposium 
on Handheld and Ubiquitous Computing Bristol, UK: 
Springer-Verlag, 2000, pp. 114-126. 
[12] P. Öztürk and A. Aamodt, "A context model for knowledge-
intensive case-based reasoning," Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud., 
vol. 48, pp. 331-355, 1998. 
[13] H. R. Ekbia and A. G. Maguitman, "Context and Relevance: 
A Pragmatic Approach," in Third International and 
Interdisciplinary Conference on Modeling and Using Context 
Dundee, UK: Springer-Verlag, 2001, pp. 156-169. 
[14] A. Kofod-Petersen and J. Cassens, "Using Activity Theory to 
model context awareness," in Modeling and Retrieval of 
Context. vol. 3946 of LNCS, T. Roth-Berghofer, S. Schulz, 
and D. Leake, Eds. Edinburgh: Springer Verlag, 2006, pp. 1-
17. 
[15] P. Brézillon and J.-C. Pomerol, "Contextual knowledge 
sharing and cooperation in intelligent assistant systems," Le 
Travail Humain, pp. 223-246, 1999. 
[16] C. Rossitto, I. C. Calori, and M. Divitini, "Exploring a City: 
Understanding Situated Learning Experiences," in IADIS 
International Conference Mobile Learning 2011 Avila, Spain: 
IADIS Press, 2011, pp. 227-232. 
[17] S. Greenberg, "Context as a dynamic construct," Hum.-
Comput. Interact., vol. 16, pp. 257-268, 2001. 
[18] Y. Rogers, S. Price, G. Fitzpatrick, R. Fleck, E. Harris, H. 
Smith, C. Randell, H. Muller, C. O'Malley, D. Stanton, M. 
Thompson, and M. Weal, "Ambient wood: designing new 
forms of digital augmentation for learning outdoors," in 
Proceedings of the 2004 conference on Interaction design and 
children: building a community Maryland: ACM, 2004, pp. 3-
10. 
 
308
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-171-7
UBICOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

