Planning for Ubiquitous Learning in PLAN 
 
Timothy Arndt 
Department of Information Systems and Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science 
Cleveland State University 
Cleveland, OH, USA 
t.arndt@csuohio.edu 
 
Abstract— The rise of e-Learning as a primary platform for 
higher education promises to open up higher education to a 
wider range of learners than ever before. In order to best cater 
to this ever more diverse group of students, a personal learning 
system, which reflects the individual student’s learning style 
and needs, would be valuable. Such a system would 
successfully integrate a user’s learner profile, as well as his or 
her social networks, and big data sources, as well as time and 
location information in order to support ubiquitous learning. 
In this paper, we review PLAN (Personal Learning AssistaNt), 
our model for personal recommendation systems for students 
of higher learning and explore how ubiquitous learning fits in 
with our system. 
Keywords-  ubiquitous learning; e-learning; personalized 
learning; recommendation systems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In [1] we presented a formalism for our personal learning 
assistant called PLAN (Personal Learning AssitaNt). The 
formalism integrates Big Data (learning and social network) 
analytics, a finite state transducer which acts as a 
recommender system for the learner, the learner’s calendars, 
location, a learner profile, etc. into a complete system for 
assisting the student to achieve his or her personalized goals. 
The aggressiveness of the recommendations can be 
controlled by the user. We laid out several scenarios of the 
system in action which help to explain how it will be used in 
practice. The cloud-based architecture of the system with a 
mobile app user interface was also described. The formalism 
is currently being implemented as a prototype system for 
experimentation purposes. 
Previously, we reported the results of a survey of 
university students on their attitude towards ubiquitous e-
learning [2]. The attitudes reported were quite positive. This 
confirms the impressions one has that today’s generation of 
students is not only open to, but desirous of ubiquitous 
learning platforms to help them reach their learning goals. 
Therefore, we have begun to consider adding support for 
ubiquitous learning to the prototype system currently being 
developed based on our PLAN formalism. This paper reports 
our initial reflections on this subject. The next section is a 
brief survey of some previous research in the area of 
ubiquitous learning. Section 3 gives our reflections on how 
ubiquitous learning can be integrated into the prototype 
learning recommendation system currently being developed 
based on our prototype. Section 4 gives some further 
discussion and sketches future research. 
II. 
RELATED RESEARCH 
Much research has been done in recent years on 
ubiquitous learning. In this section, we will briefly review a 
small portion of that work.  
A review of research trends in mobile and ubiquitous 
learning as reported in selected journals between 2001 and 
2010 is given in [3]. The authors use the definition of 
ubiquitous learning as ‘learning anywhere and at anytime’. 
Ubiquitous learning experiments have been carried out in 
classrooms, museums, labs, as well as outdoors, for example 
observing nature in a natural science class.  
The authors chose six major technology-based learning 
journals and looked for studies in the given area published 
between 2001 and 2010. They found 154 total articles which 
met their criteria and noted that the number of publications 
increased greatly starting in 2008. One expects that this trend 
has continued. They also found that while the US authors 
contributed the most publications in the first four years of the 
study, Taiwanese authors had a very large number of 
contributions in the later years, and other countries were well 
represented as well. 
A very influential system for ubiquitous language 
learning is reported in [4]. Two different systems are actually 
described. The first, JAPELAS (JApanese Polite languagE 
Learning Assisting System) is a context-aware language-
learning support system for learning Japanese polite 
expressions. JAPELAS provides the learner with the correct 
polite Japanese language expressions based on the learner’s 
situational context and personal information. This is 
especially appropriate, since Japanese polite expressions are 
very context-sensitive.  
The second system, TANGO (Tag Added learNinG 
Objects), uses RFID (Radio-frequency identification) tags to 
detect objects near the learner and to provide him with 
educational information concerning those objects. This was 
an early example of the importance of RFID technology in 
ubiquitous learning. 
The basic criteria, strategies, and research issues of 
context-aware ubiquitous learning are given in [5], which 
also identifies the check items for the development of such 
learning environments.  
Technology which enables context-aware learning via 
ubiquitous computing includes sensors and actuators, RFID 
tags and cards, wireless communication, smartphones, PDAs 
(Personal Digital Assistants), and wearable computers. A 
ubiquitous system interoperates spontaneously with changing 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

environments incorporating these and other technologies. A 
ubiquitous system must seek out new devices as they come 
into range, and interact with those devices. These devices 
form part of the user’s context, and must be incorporated by 
a ubiquitous learning system in order to support a form of the 
pedagogical theory of constructivism.  
The authors define their context-aware ubiquitous 
learning as learning with mobile devices, wireless 
communications and sensor technology. Such learning 
systems are more specialized than the broader mobile-
learning systems since they focus much more closely on the 
users’ contexts (e.g. location and body temperature). 
Contexts include: personal contexts sensed by the system; 
environmental contexts sensed by the system; feedback from 
learner via the mobile learning device; personal data 
retrieved from databases; environmental data retrieved from 
databases. These are called situation parameters by the 
authors, and based on them, twelve models for conducting 
context-aware ubiquitous-learning activities are defined. 
The notion of context-aware ubiquitous learning 
environments for peer-to-peer collaborative learning is the 
topic of [6]. The author sees the ubiquitous learning 
environment as providing an interoperable, pervasive, and 
seamless learning architecture to integrate three major 
dimensions of learning resources – learning collaborators; 
learning contexts; and learning resources.  
Ubiquitous learning must provide innovative and 
effective ways to identify and utilize learning collaborators, 
learning contexts and learning resources. In other words, the 
context of the learner is key to this type of learning. Virtual 
learning 
communities, 
which 
provide 
geographically 
dispersed users a means to collaboratively learn, have been 
described, without being precisely defined. It is recognized, 
though, that the collaboration is an important element of such 
communities.  
Collaborative efforts of users to manage knowledge, 
enhance the reservoir of knowledge, and to help each other 
accumulate and build knowledge in a given domain is a key 
component of virtual learning communities. The author uses 
a peer-to-peer approach to building a system for ubiquitous 
learning environments for collaborative learning.  
An ontology based context model is used to describe the 
context of learners and services. The Protégé system [8] is 
used to build the learner ontology and service ontology. 
Three context acquisition methods are then used: form filled, 
context detection and context extraction in order to obtain 
context information. In order to define the functionality of 
the peer-to-peer collaborative learning system, a study which 
identifies the most wanted learning services in such a system 
is used. The services are: who is currently online; instant 
message; learning content search; personal annotation; and 
recording of personal learning portfolio. The system 
developed supports these services, as well as multimedia real 
time group discussion. A scenario for the usage of the peer-
to-peer system is given. 
The question of how effective and meaningful learning is 
in a ubiquitous learning context is considered in [7]. While 
ubiquitous learning seems to be a great idea, and is certainly 
exciting for researchers and teachers, we need to be sure that 
the techniques that we are using are providing meaningful 
learning experiences to learners and are not inefficient or do 
not lead to reduced learning experiences, especially for low-
achieving learners.  
The authors investigate the impact of a meaningful 
learning-based evaluation on ubiquitous learning, in order to 
enhance the system being evaluated. A quasi-experiment is 
described in which both post-evaluation and refined 
ubiquitous 
learning 
activities 
are 
adopted 
for 
the 
experimental group, while a control group works without the 
proposed evaluation method. The results show that the 
evaluation technique can be used to greatly enhance the 
outcomes and learning effectiveness, especially in the case of 
low-achieving learners. High-achieving learners did not have 
such dramatic results. In sum, a meaningful learning-based 
evaluation method is an effective way to find out how the 
ubiquitous learning environment needs to be improved. 
III. 
PLAN 
In this section we will describe our personal learning 
assistant PLAN (Personal Learning AssistaNt) [1].  
A personal learning assistant supports a user in achieving 
desired learning goals. The formal definition of a personal 
learning assistant is described in this section. 
A personal learning assistant uses multiple sources of 
information to provide appropriate recommendations and 
alerts when active. Some data are collected through the direct 
interaction with the user, while other data are mined by 
searching across available data sources. The first source of 
information used by the personal learning assistant comes 
from the user’s learning profile. An additional source of 
information is provided by the user’s social network from 
which desired data are extracted. Finally, additional data are 
mined from the multiple data sources available across the 
networks.  
Mining significant data from data sources means to be 
able to identify data that can be of interest to the user. So, 
while an event can be considered interesting for achieving a 
learning goal, that event could be irrelevant if the user is 
unable to participate in it. This means that there are 
constraints that should be taken into account in order to 
select significant data and provide useful recommendations.  
The two primary constraints come from the spatial and 
temporal information associated with the user. The temporal 
information is derived from a calendar. The spatial 
information is derived from the user’s geolocation which, 
from the implementation point of view, is associated with the 
GPS (Global Positioning System) coordinates extracted from 
the sensor of the device where the personal assistant has been 
launched from. The amount of information produced by the 
personal learning assistant could be very large and 
overwhelm the user. A level of aggressiveness must be used 
to customize the personal learning assistant to a user-desired 
level. An aggressiveness level of 0.0 will result in no 
recommendations being generated by the personal learning 
assistant, while 1.0 will result in a maximum number of 
recommendations being generated.  
The activity of the personal learning assistant PLAN is 
formally described by a learning finite state transducer 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

(LFST). The LFST moves from state to state in order to 
reach the desired learning goals and in each transition 
produces zero or more outputs. 
When the system is initialized for a user, the PLAN 
generates the user’s learner profile based on an interactive 
process with the user, as well as on the basis of a default 
profile. The learner profile may be refined as the learning 
process advances. The system also interrogates the user to 
determine the user’s set of learning goals. The learner profile 
and learning goals are then used by the system to generate 
the LFST.  
Data is mined from key-value data stores, as well as from 
the user’s social networks, using traditional data mining 
processes. This results in knowledge items being discovered 
as data mining proceeds. Each time a knowledge item is 
discovered, the state transition function may result in a 
transition to a new state in the LFST. Calendar events from 
the user’s calendar set may also be generated as time passes. 
These calendar events are treated as knowledge items by the 
LFST.  
A state transition generally results in zero or more 
recommendations (i.e. the output function of the LFST) 
being made to the learner (e.g. to take a section of a 
particular source). On the other hand, some action of the 
learner may result in a state transition (e.g. the user 
successfully completing a course).  
The architecture of the system is structured as a mobile 
app which communicates with a cloud service which 
performs the main share of the computation. The PLAN 
Cloud Service interacts with standard data mining processes 
which run in the cloud and which work on two categories of 
data: the key-value data stores and the user’s social 
networks. The key-value data stores represent the raw matter 
used for learning analytics. Sources of the data which can be 
analyzed include institutional data about students, courses, 
applicants, as well as a particularly rich field to mine for data 
- that are associated with online courses and Course 
Management Systems (CMS) [9].  
In addition, the data mining processes interact with the 
student’s social networks – both online social networks such 
as Facebook and Twitter, as well as more informal social 
networks such as those identified by email and text message 
communication as well as those which are deduced by 
examining the course rosters of the courses the students are 
enrolled in. These social networks form another important 
asset in the student’s learning process, being sources of 
expertise in course topics, various university processes, job 
markets and so on. The data mining processes can interact 
with online social networks through the APIs (Application 
Programming Interface) that they provide and through the 
more informal social networks through custom processes 
which may be developed. 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
In this section, we discuss how ubiquitous learning can 
be added to the PLAN model discussed in section 3. 
A number of issues related to ubiquitous learning can be 
identified from the related research as surveyed in section 2, 
including the following. 
 
• 
Context-aware 
• 
Sensor networks and RFID 
• 
Peer-to-peer communication 
• 
Resource discovery 
• 
Learner discovery 
• 
Collaborative learning 
• 
Others 
 
How are these issues handled in PLAN, and if they are 
not currently handled in PLAN, can the PLAN model be 
extended so that they are handled? We will look briefly at 
these issues in the following. 
The current PLAN system model handles context-
awareness in a limited way. The current location is one of the 
parameters of the model and can be used to generate a 
suggestion which the learner can choose to follow or not, as 
he should desire. The graph associated with LFST forms a 
type of context, but not, certainly, as specific as the 
ontology-based context of [6]. Further work on incorporating 
context-awareness into the system, possibly via system-
driven user interrogation, would be useful. 
Sensor networks (sensors and actuators) and RFID are 
not currently supported by the PLAN system. The PLAN 
system is oriented towards higher education learning, while 
most of the ubiquitous learning scenarios involving RFID, 
etc. are oriented towards primary and (somewhat) secondary 
schools, for instance learning in a museum. This is a bit of a 
different emphasis on ubiquitous learning from ours, where 
we are more concerned with enabling students to learn at 
anytime than interacting with (a limited set of) real-world 
objects. If desired, we could extend our model by 
incorporating sensor networks as a component, as we do 
social networks. 
Peer-to-peer communication is enabled in our system 
through our incorporation of a learner’s social networks. By 
accessing the location or other data of a learner, along with 
those of his friends/classmates in his social networks, PLAN 
can suggest collaboration with other learners. The actual 
communication is outside of the model, and how it is 
implemented will depend on the software/tools used in the 
implementation. 
Resource discovery is not specifically foreseen in our 
model. It could be incorporated by reference to the data 
mining process which continuously discovers knowledge 
used to make suggestions. Resource discovery techniques 
can be modeled as one particular type of data mining 
process. It might also be useful to make resource discovery 
more apparent/specific in the PLAN model. 
Learner discovery in the PLAN model is already foreseen 
and is accomplished through the use of social networking 
platforms and the geolocation information associated with 
users of those platforms. This could be extended to a more 
general learner location process if multiple learners are using 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

the PLAN system, since the location information of users is 
one of the system parameters. 
Collaborative learning is supported by inclusion of users 
social networks as in the above paragraphs on peer-to-peer 
communication and learner discovery. A more precise 
mechanism for knowledge sharing could be incorporated for 
multiple users of the PLAN system. 
As the above considerations show, while PLAN has 
many aspects which support ubiquitous learning currently, 
there are many ways in which it could be enhanced to further 
support ubiquitous learning. We are currently implementing 
a prototype system, and will consider modifying and/or 
extending the system in such ways. These decisions and the 
prototype system itself will be reported in a future 
publication. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Arndt and A. Guercio, “A Formalism for PLAN – a Big 
Data Personal Learning Assistant for University Students”, 
Journal of e-Learning and Knowledge Society, vol. 12, no. 2, 
2016. 
[2] T. Arndt and A. Guercio, “Ubiquitous E-Learning: Student 
Attitudes 
and 
Future 
Prospects”, 
GSTF 
Journal 
on 
Computing, vol. 4, no. 1, October 2014. 
[3] G.-J. Hwang, and C.-C. Tsai, “Research Trends in Mobile and 
Ubiquitous Learning: A Review of Publications in Selected 
Journals from 2001 to 2010,” British Journal of Educational 
Technology, vol. 42, pp. 65-70, 2011. 
[4] H. Ogata and Y. Yano, “Context-Aware Support for 
Computer-Supported Ubiquitous Learning,” Proceedings the 
2nd IEEE International Workshop on Wireless and Mobile 
Technologies in Education, 2004, pp. 27-34. 
[5] G.-J. Hwang, C.-C. Tsai, and S. Yang, “Criteria, Strategies 
and Research Issues of Context-Aware Ubiquitous Learning,” 
Educational Technology & Society, vol. 11, 81-91, 2008. 
[6] S. Yang, “Context Aware Ubiquitous Learning Environments 
for 
Peer-to-Peer 
Collaborative 
Learning,” 
Educational 
Technology & Society, vol. 9, 188-201, 2006. 
[7] Y.-M. Huang and P.-S. Chiu, “The Effectiveness of the 
Meaningful 
Learning-Based 
Evaluation 
for 
Different 
Achieving Students in a Ubiquitous Learning Context,” 
Computer & Education, vol. 87, 243-253, 2015. 
[8] https://protege.stanford.edu. [Accessed: October 2017] 
[9] S.K. Patel, V.R. Rathod, and J.B. Prajapati. "Performance 
Analysis of Content Management Systems-Joomla, Drupal 
and 
Wordpress." International 
Journal 
of 
Computer 
Applications 21.4 (2011): 39-43. 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-598-2
UBICOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

