Mobile Ubiquitous System Adapted to Locate Disabled and Old People  
Living in Rural Areas 
Raul Igual, Inmaculada Plaza, Carlos Medrano 
EduQTech R&D&i group 
EUPT– University of Zaragoza  
Teruel, Spain 
{rigual, inmap, ctmedra}@unizar.es 
 
 
Abstract—People who depend on others to carry out daily 
activities face additional issues in rural areas. The design of 
assistive 
mobile 
technology 
adapted 
to 
the 
specific 
characteristics of this environment is a promising line of work. 
As an example, this paper presents a ubiquitous smartphone-
based system to locate dependent people living in rural areas. 
A preliminary prototype has already been developed, which is 
aimed at both dependent users and their caregivers. 
Additionally, a 6-month pilot test has been conducted under 
real-life conditions, showing positive results.  
Keywords- ubiquitous systems; location; dependent people; 
rural areas; smartphones 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The number of people who depend on others to carry out 
daily activities is increasing in developed societies. In this 
sense, their quality of life can be affected by a range of 
factors including type of disability, time of onset, social 
support structures, life history and experiences, socio-
economic 
factors, 
and 
each 
individual’s 
level 
of 
psychological resilience [1].  
The proportion of dependent people is higher in rural 
areas, which may be explained by the prevalence of older 
residents in remote environments [2]. In this context, the 
Rural Assistance Centre [3] argues that dependent people 
who live in rural areas face additional challenges. These 
include, among many others, poor and badly maintained 
roads, difficulties with medical appointments, extreme 
climatic conditions for parts of the year, difficulties in 
communication, lack of access to medical care or lack of 
educational opportunities.  
In view of the significant number of rural dependent 
residents and the difficulties to which they are subjected, the 
use of appropriate assistive technologies is a major priority 
in this kind of region. In this sense, systems based on 
ubiquitous computing can help alleviate these problems.  
Specifically, this work is focused on location systems. 
Lots of location applications to assist dependent people are 
available [4], although most of them were designed with the 
assumption that their operation is confined to urban areas 
where there are no communication barriers. However, when 
used in rural environments, they may experience from a mild 
to severe loss in performance, resulting in an abnormal 
operation of the system. If this situation persists, it could 
probably lead to device rejection by both the users and their 
caregivers. Specifically, there are three main factors that can 
compromise the operation of the ubiquitous locators in rural 
environments: 
a) Few technical skills of the rural residents: Calvert et 
al. [5] identified a significant rural-urban digital divide in the 
day-to-day use of common technological devices, which was 
also confirmed by the study of Gandiya et al. [6]. They 
argued that there may be several potential barriers to the 
widespread implementation of communication technology to 
a general clinic population, particularly in remote and rural 
areas. 
b) Internet access: Large differences exist in Internet 
access between rural and urban areas, which results in lower 
quality services at higher costs among the rural population. 
In 2007, broadband (DSL) coverage reached an average of 
98% of the population in urban areas, while coverage of rural 
areas was limited to just 70% of the European Union rural 
population [7]. 
c) Mobile coverage: 3G mobile networks and, to a lesser 
extent, the brand new 4G networks, have a high level of 
penetration in urban areas, medium and small villages and 
the major transport routes of the European Union. However, 
coverage is limited in rural environments: blind areas 
(without mobile coverage) are common, many regions have 
only 2G coverage and 3G is exceptionally available. 
To deal with all these additional issues, this paper 
presents a ubiquitous smartphone-based system to locate 
dependent people, even in remote areas. The system is 
adapted to be used by low skilled users and to operate in 
regions with frequent blind areas. Some strategies to infer the 
position of the user and to detect potentially dangerous 
situations are currently being developed.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 
presents some related work, Section 3 shows the general 
structure of the system, Section 4 describes it in detail, 
Section 5 presents some preliminary results, and finally, 
Section 6 draws some initial conclusions.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Wearable 
location 
systems 
are 
a 
well-known 
technological support as demonstrated by the high number of 
existing devices [4]. As an example, we can cite either some 
research studies [8-10] or commercial products [11, 12]. 
However, among all these systems, we could not find any 
location assistive support specially adapted to operate in 
rural areas with communication restrictions. 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

If we change the search criteria to include not only 
location systems but also any other assistive technologies, 
we find that the work proposed by Havasi et al. [13] is one 
of the few studies that incorporate an adapted version of the 
prototype for rural areas. They present a PDA-centred 
medical sensor system that is suitable for the ambient 
assisting living homecare scenario. The PDA has been 
equipped with a network layer that can provide Internet 
access even in rural areas. Similarly, Sasaki et al. [14] 
propose a Life Support Network for elderly people living in 
a rural area. It consists of a type of Intranet, which 
incorporates a safety confirmation system, a remote 
healthcare system, an emergency information system and 
other useful daily network services in the closed life area. 
This work is just a proposal and only two of the sub-systems 
have been implemented. 
Apart from these few works, we could not find many 
more 
assistive 
devices 
specially 
adapted 
to 
rural 
environments, which is a clear sign that this is an emerging 
line of work. Another proof of this is that there are some 
doctoral theses being conducted on this topic, such as the 
ones included within the TOPs project [15]. 
In this sense, the lack of rural-adapted assistive devices 
may be explained by the traditional reluctance of rural 
residents towards the use of technological tools. But as the 
digital generations of today reach old age, this trend is very 
likely to reverse. Thus, it is necessary to prepare for what is 
to come.  
III. 
GENERAL STRUCTURE OF THE SYSTEM 
The proposed location system comprises three different 
parts: 
a) A ubiquitous smartphone application to be used by the 
dependent people: It is in charge of recording the location 
information, adopting strategies to ensure the operation in 
remote areas. All this is accomplished transparently to the 
user.  
b) A smartphone application and a Web application 
handled by the caregivers: Their main objectives are to 
manage, in a remote way, the users’ smartphone applications 
and obtain feedback about their locations and the potentially 
dangerous situations that might occur. 
c) A Web server with which the other two modules of the 
system communicate: It performs data processing, and 
manages the flow of information.  
A general scheme of the system is shown in Figure 1.  
IV. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE SYSTEM 
The following subsections describe each one of the three 
parts of the system. 
A. Ubiquitous application for the dependent people 
The smartphone application is in intermittent contact 
with the Web server, which allows it to obtain updated 
values of the following parameters: 
- 
The time interval at which the location function 
should be active. 
- 
The location frequency. 
When, at a certain date and time, the location function is 
active, the device takes the corresponding coordinates and 
sends them periodically to the server. 
This is a typical operation of the location systems, but the 
novelty lies in the way those data are sent to the server. The 
application considers the case where there is no coverage and 
the locations cannot be sent, thus they are stored in a ‘stack’. 
When mobile networks are again available, the whole ‘stack’ 
is sent to the Web server, which has been programmed to 
deal with different input data formats. Together with the 
locations (latitude, longitude), the exact time at which they 
were recorded and a field indicating whether they were taken 
in a blind area or not are also sent to the server.   
As the application is aimed at disabled and old people, it 
has been designed to run in the background, minimizing 
interaction of the users with smartphones. Thus, their 
participation is limited to carrying the devices with 
themselves and remembering to charge them.  
Additionally, notifications to the caregivers reporting on 
low battery levels of the devices will be incorporated in 
future versions of the prototype. 
B. The Caregivers’ Management Tools 
The caregivers’ management module is composed of 
two complementary platforms: a Web server application, 
which has been almost completely implemented, and a 
smartphone application, which is still to be developed. 
Dependent person 
 
Caregiver 
 
Caregiver’s smartphone 
 
Management Web app 
 
Web server 
 
Data processing 
 
Data  
storage 
Figure 1. General structure of the system 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

On the one hand, the Web server application has three 
basic screens: 
- 
A configuration screen to define the settings of the 
location function (date, time and frequency). 
- 
A screen that displays the last location of the users 
on a map. It should also contain a notification area to 
report the caregivers on potentially dangerous 
situations (still to be done). 
- 
A screen to visualize the routes performed by the 
users (see Figure 2).  
On the other hand, the smartphone application should 
have a basic screen showing the current location of the 
dependent users. Additionally, the caregivers should receive 
notifications reporting on potentially dangerous situations. 
C. Web Server to Control the System 
The Web server is the central part of the system whose 
main purpose is to interact with the distributed applications. 
The Web server is composed of two different modules of 
increasing complexity: the storage and representation 
module and the processing module. The first module has 
already been developed, while the second part is still to be 
done. 
On the one hand, the storage and representation module 
is in charge of receiving the location data from the 
ubiquitous applications of the dependent users and storing 
them in a database. It can also receive a request from the 
caregivers’ management tools (either the Web application or 
the smartphone application) in order to display a specific 
route or location on a map. In this sense, it retrieves the 
information from the permanent storage and sends it back to 
the agent that made the request. Additionally, the 
transmission of the location settings, previously defined by 
the caregivers, to the smartphone applications of the 
dependent users is carried out by this module.  
On the other hand, the processing module, which is still 
to be done, is more challenging and its main purpose is to 
add a further level of intelligence to the system in order to 
compensate for the limitations of the location function in 
remote areas. Its first phase will consist of training the 
system to obtain a pattern of the users’ displacements. This 
stage may last for several weeks. The training dataset would 
be composed of the location data (latitude, longitude, time, a 
field indicating whether the point was taken in a blind area 
or not) provided by the smartphone applications. Machine 
learning strategies will be used for this purpose [16]. This 
approach is based on the assumption that dependent people 
usually follow similar paths during their walks. This does 
not mean that people have to do the same displacements at 
the same time every day, but it is true that their movements 
tend to follow a certain pattern to some extent.  
Once the processing module was trained, it could 
provide two different outputs: 
a) Estimate the position of the user: If a particular 
caregiver makes a request for information about the current 
location of a person and the smartphone application of the 
user cannot provide a proper response (it is in a blind area), 
the Web server may estimate the position of the user 
according to the model obtained after training. Of course, 
the provision of a response would be conditioned upon the 
previous locations fit with the expected pattern. It could 
happen that the Web server was not able to estimate the 
position (smartphone switched off, etc.), in which case it 
would return an alert message reporting this situation.  
b) Notify potentially dangerous situations: The Web 
server should send a notification to both the Web 
application and the smartphone application of the caregivers 
in case something unusual was detected (the application 
does not communicate with the server for a long time, the 
user deviates from his/her usual path, the user remains for a 
long time in an unusual location, etc). Figure 3 shows an 
example of a use case that should trigger an alert.  
V. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
A preliminary evaluation of this first prototype has been 
conducted under real-life conditions. Specifically, three users 
were selected to wear the location application continuously 
during six months. Additionally, three caregivers were in 
charge of managing the whole system. At the end of this 
period, we collected the views of the two groups using the 
ISO/IEC 2500X (SQUARE) family of standards (under 
development). The SQUARE model is based on the previous 
ISO/IEC 9126 Software engineering – Product Quality 
standards [17], which provide a quality model for the 
evaluation of software products.  
Specifically, as we aimed to conduct a real-world 
evaluation, we focused on part four ISO/IEC TR 9126-4 
Quality in use metrics. The quality in use metrics measure 
whether a product meets the needs of specified users to 
achieve specified goals with effectiveness, productivity, 
safety and satisfaction in a specified context of use. This can 
be only achieved in a realistic system environment.  
The results of the evaluation are shown in Figure 4. A 
value in the range 0 to 5 is provided for each quality-in-use 
characteristic. Both safety and satisfaction were highly 
valued by the two groups, while there is still room to 
improve the effectiveness and productivity of the system, 
which may be because it is still a preliminary prototype 
rather than a final version. 
Figure 2. Screen of the Web application to visualize the routes on a map. 
The caregivers should select the target user and the date and time intervals. 
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper deals with a novel topic: the design of mobile 
ubiquitous assistive technology for rural environments. As 
an example, we have presented a smartphone-based location 
system to assist dependent people living in rural areas. This 
work, which is still in progress, has been evaluated under 
real-life conditions. We expected that the older residents 
were reluctant to use the prototype, but instead it was 
perceived as a useful support to help them stay in their own 
villages for longer. But although the preliminary results are 
promising, the most challenging stages of the project are still 
to be carried out.  
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
Dependent users
Caregivers
Assessment (0-5)
Effectiveness
Productivity
Safety
Satisfaction
 
Figure 4. Preliminary evaluation of the system. The assessment of the 
quality in use for both the dependent users and their caregivers are shown. 
In this sense, the demand for this kind of aids is likely to 
increase in the next decades since the digital generations of 
today will be the elders of tomorrow. Therefore, it is time to 
start preparing for the future, and the design of assistive 
ubiquitous technology adapted to rural environments is a 
promising line of work.  
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Murphy, E. O’Shea, A. Cooney, and D. Casey, The quality 
of life of older people with a disability in Ireland. Dublin: 
National Council on Ageing and Older People, 2007. 
[2] L. Camarero et al., La población rural de España: De los 
desequilibrios a la sostenibilidad social. Barcelona: Fundacion 
la Caixa, 2009. 
[3] Rural Assistance Center: Health and human Services 
Information for Rural America, Aging. Available at 
http://www.raconline.org/topics/aging/ [retreived: July, 2013] 
[4] L. Martin, I. Plaza, M. Rubio, and R. Igual, “Localization 
systems for older people in rural areas: A global vision,” in 
Adv. Intell. Soft-Comput., Eds Springer, March 2012, pp. 
597-600. 
[5] J.F. Calvert, J. Kaye, M. Leahy, K. Hexem, and N. Carlson, 
“Technology use by rural and urban oldest old,” Technol. 
Health Care, vol.17, no. 1, May 2009, pp. 1-11. 
[6] T. Gandiya et al., “Self-Reported Communication Technology 
usage in patients attending a cardiology outpatient clinic in a 
remote regional hospital,” Telemedicine e-Health, vol. 18, no. 
3, April 2012, pp. 219-224. 
[7] Comission of the European Communities, Better access for 
rural areas to modern ICT. Available at http://europa.eu/ 
[retreived: July, 2013] 
[8] G. Lachapelle, “Pedestrian navigation with high sensitivity 
GPS receivers and MEMS environments,” Pers. Ubiquit. 
Comput., vol. 11, no. 6, Aug. 2007, pp. 481-488. 
[9] Y. Chon and H. Cha, “LifeMap: Smartphone-based Context 
Provider for Location-based Services,” IEEE Pervasive 
Comput., vol. 58, April 2011, pp. 58-67. 
[10] J. Hightower and G. Borriello, “Location systems for 
ubiquitous computing,” Computer, vol. 34, no. 8, Aug. 2001, 
pp. 57-66. 
[11] Aerotel 
Medical 
Systems, 
GeoSkeeper. 
Available 
at 
http://www.aerotel.com/en/ [retreived: July, 2013] 
[12] Laipac 
Tech, S-911 
Bracelet 
Locator. 
Available 
at 
http://www.laipac.com/bracelet_application.htm 
[retreived: 
July, 2013] 
[13] F. Havasi and A. Kiss, “Ambient Assisted Living in Rural 
Areas: Vision and Pilot Application,” in Constr. Ambient 
Intell., Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 246-252. 
[14] J. Sasaki, K. Yamada, M. Tanaka, and Y. Funyu, “An 
experiment of Life-support network for elderly people living 
in a rural area,” Int. J. Syst. Appl. Eng. Dev., vol.1, 2007, 
pp.120-124. 
[15] Technology to support Older adults, Personal and Social 
interaction. 
Available 
at 
http://www.dotrural.ac.uk/tops/ 
[retreived: July, 2013] 
[16] C. Piciarelli, C. Micheloni, and G.L. Foresti, “Trajectory-
Based Anomalous Event Detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits 
Syst. Video Technol., vol. 18, no. 11, Nov. 2008, pp. 1544-
1554. 
[17] International Organization for Standardization, ISO/IEC 9126 
Software engineering. Product quality. 2001. 
 
Figure 3. Use case that should trigger an alert. On top, a normal 
displacement pattern; On bottom, a potentially dangerous situation. 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-289-9
UBICOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies

