Improvement of Sequential Tests in IEC-61124 Reliability Testing – 
Compliance Tests for Constant Failure Rate
Ofer Shaham  
Microelectronics Directorate 
 RAFAEL – Advanced Defense Systems Ltd 
Haifa, Israel 
Email: ofersh@rafael.co.il 
Yefim Haim Michlin 
Faculty of Industrial Engineering & Management 
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology 
Haifa, Israel 
Email: yefim@technion.ac.il  
 
 Abstract  —  An improvement of IEC-61124 in the field of a 
sequential probability ratio test (SPRT) is proposed. The current 
standard does not provide a proper solution for modern industry's 
needs, and the test plans are not up-to-date with the knowledge in 
the area of sequential tests. The advantages of the proposed version 
are reflected by the efficacy and accuracy of the tests, the wider 
range of the ready to use test's parameters, and available data 
regarding the test's characteristics. The proposed version is a 
significant improvement over the existing one. The changes will 
extend the use of SPRT and this standard. The proposal for 
updating the standard has been accepted to the work-plan of TC-
56 of IEC. 
Keywords — Exponential distribution; compliance; mass-
production; reliability; sequential probability ratio test. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The main purpose of the work is to improve the standard 
IEC 61124 [1] in the field of sequential tests [2]–[5]. Sequential 
tests have significant importance and actuality in quality 
assurance and reliability [6] [7]. Today's methods and computing 
tools permit better planning of sequential tests, in accordance 
with the latest practical demands (more stringent over time) [8]–
[17]. 
The proposed version will include shorter tests (more 
economically efficient), more accurate tests, a wider range of test 
plans, and significant additional characteristic data. It will also 
address the complex and stringent needs of today's industry. 
The sequential method of testing is described as follows. A 
rule is given for making one of the following three decisions at 
any stage of the experiment: (1) to accept (2) to reject (3) to 
continue the experiment by making an additional observation. 
The process is continued until either the first or the second 
decision is made. 
An essential feature of the sequential test is that the required 
number of observations depends on their outcome and is not 
predetermined, but a random variable. Advantage of the 
sequential test lies in the fact that its expected accumulated test 
time to decision (ETT) is minimal at two typical points of its 
operating characteristic (OC) representing the error probabilities 
of the I- and II-types (α and β) [3] [4]. 
The characteristics of this test are obtainable from its 
boundaries [8] by means of Aroian’s [18] well-known direct 
method, following an idea outlined earlier by Barnard [19]. 
II. MOTIVATION 
Sequential tests have a significant importance and actuality in 
industrial acceptance sampling, in information technology and 
in reliability examination. The improvement is manifested in the 
means of the range, truncation and ETT, accuracy, user interface, 
usability, and in the simplicity of the planning. Accurate data for 
the test characteristics are part of both today’s needs and ability. 
A. Disadvantages of the current standard 
The standard does not provide a proper solution for modern 
industry's needs, and the test plans are not up-to-date with the 
knowledge in the area of sequential tests. 
 
 
General: 
o 
Insufficient range of the test parameters (risks and 
discrimination ratio). Only a total of 17 “ready to use” 
sequential test plans are given.  
o 
The test’s truncation is not optimal and considerations 
for truncation are not homogenous. 
o 
Lack of information for the relationship between the 
test truncation time and the expected test time.  
o 
The method for presentation of the tests (figures and 
detailed tables in Annex A and D) are suitable only for 
a few tests (not suitable for many). It limits the number 
of tests to be displayed in the standard. 
o 
For some of the test plans (A.4, A.7, A.9, C.8) in the 
figures of the “accept and reject” lines Y- axes shows 
non-integer values for the observed number of failures. 
This is an editorial error. 
 
Test plans A.1 – A.9: 
o 
The true producer’s and consumer’s risks are wrong 
and far from the nominal. 
o 
Non-optimal truncation - tests with lower maximum 
duration and lower expected time are available.   
o 
Tests are limited to three equal nominal risks only 
(10%, 20% and 30%). 
o 
Additional test plans can be calculated by formulas 
(given in Annex E). The formula leads to substantial 
deviation (unknown) from the nominal risks and does 
not carry out optimal truncation. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-593-7
VALID 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle

 
Test plans C.1 – C.8: 
o 
Non-optimal truncation - the tests are overly truncated, 
and as a result, have high expected time, so that the 
sequential tests’ advantages are lost. 
o 
The plans are limited to eight tests with D=1.7 only.   
The standard does not provide the needs of modern industry, 
and the test plans are not up-to-date with the knowledge in the 
area of sequential tests. 
B. Advantage of the proposed version 
The proposed version will address the complex and stringent 
needs of today's industry. It will bring to the fore the latest 
knowledge and methods in truncated sequential tests. 
1) The tests are substantially truncated (the maximum test 
duration is low) without significantly increasing the ETT [8]. 
2) The true producer’s and consumer’s risks are given and 
always very close to the nominal. 
3) A wider range of the test parameters (risks and 
discrimination ratio) are given—a total of 60 tests. 
4) The test plans include a series of unequal risks for producer 
and consumer. 
5) Five accurate values of ETT are given in the test plan table 
for fulfilling all practical needs (easy to use with spreadsheet for 
full test characteristics presentation). 
6) Suitable for interpolation by risks. 
 
The proposed version addresses the complex and stringent 
needs of today's industry. It brings to the fore the latest 
knowledge and methods in truncated sequential tests. 
III. DEMONSTRATION AND COMPARISON 
This section deals with the examination of the standard's 
sequential test plans. The analysis included accurate calculation 
of the true characteristics of the tests A and C. In order to 
perform the comparison, corresponding test plans were 
calculated by using the advanced methodology [8]. The 
comparison focused on the differences in the parameter values 
(and accuracy), test characteristics, and available data. It 
expressed the significant advantage of the proposed tests in 
formulating the new version, as is demonstrated in the following 
subsections. 
A. Optimal truncation of the tests 
In the absence of direct relationships between the test’s 
parameters and the test’s expenses and efficacy, for given D, α, 
β, it is possible to consider the following as the main test’s 
efficacy factors:  
•   expected test time function (ETT) as a multiple of m0;  
•   accumulated test truncation time (T*t/m0) (maximum test  
        duration) as a multiple of m0;   
•   test truncation failure number (r0).  
The truncation selection is composed of two considerations: 
a) In general, for sequential tests, as the truncation is heavier 
(lower max duration), the ETT is higher. 
b) Optimal ratio between the max test duration and the max 
failure number permits heavy truncation without 
increasing the ETT function [17] [8]. 
In tests A, the ratio between the max test duration and the max 
failure number is not the optimal. 
In tests C, the tests have very strong truncation while ETT is 
substantially higher than the non-truncated (Wald’s [3]) tests.  
In the proposed tests, the truncation is the heaviest without a 
significant increase of ETT (vs. the non-truncated). See Figs. 1 
and 2. The advantage of the tests over the current ones regarding 
test time is illustrated (as an example) in Figs. 1 and 2 (tests A.8 
and C.1 correspondingly). In order to permit a comparison 
between the tests by their time to decision, corresponding tests 
with the same true risks were designed. 
In Fig. 1, the test truncation failure number (r0) of the 
alternative test is better (7 vs. 8 of the standard's A.8), the 
maximum duration is also better (1.5% shorter) and still, its ETT 
is better. The ETT of test A.8 is 12% higher at the average vs. 
the ideal non-truncated test, while the proposed is only 6%. 
In Fig. 2, r0 of the proposed test is 43 vs. 39 of the 
standard's C.1 (the maximum duration is slightly higher by 
10%), but its ETT is much lower. The ETT of test C.1 is 41% 
higher at the average vs. the ideal non-truncated test, which 
 
 
Figure 1. Expected test time and truncation time for A.8 and the 
alternative.  
Test data: D=1.5, α=β=0.30 (nominal risks), α’=0.289 β’=0.363 
(true risks for both tests). 
A.8 – ETT (Expected accumulated test time to decision, T*e /m0) 
of A.8; 
2    – Ditto alternative; 
3    – Ditto non-truncated test; 
A.8a – Accumulated test truncation time (T*t /m0) of A.8; 
2a – Ditto alternative. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-593-7
VALID 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle

doubts the relevance of the test. The proposed test is very 
close to the ideal non-truncated test (only 10% higher at the 
average). 
Examining all C tests vs. the proposed shows a 20% reduction 
of the ETT (at the average). 
 
 
The advantage of the proposed tests (significantly truncated 
without significantly increasing the ETT vs. the non-truncated 
test) is achieved due to the optimal ratio between the test 
truncation failure number (r0) and the accumulated test 
truncation time (T*t). 
B. Range of the test parameters (variety of test plans, incl. 
interpolation) 
The variety of “ready to use” tests in the current standard is 
very limited (17 total):  
 
Nine A tests that are restricted to equal nominal risks only 
(α=β). 
 
Eight C tests that are limited to D=1.7. 
Additional A tests can be calculated by formulas (given in 
Annex E). The formulas result in substantial unknown deviations 
from the nominal risks and they do not carry out optimal 
truncation.  
For additional C tests the standard refers to GOST R 27.402 
[20].  
 
The GOST 27.402-95 includes 14 SPRT tests for D and 
α=β combinations. 
 
A method for additional test calculations is enclosed in 
Annex K of IEC-61124:  
o 
It consists of a complicated iterative procedure of 
finding values of four unknowns. 
o 
The end of the procedure is detected by an ambivalent 
variance of ETT function (change in the unknown 
values can lead to an increase of the ETT function on 
one side and a decrease on the other, so it is impossible 
to define an optimal test and its parameters).  
o 
No data is available regarding the optimal truncation 
(time and failure number) vs. the ETT function. 
The proposed version includes 60 test plans that are “ready to 
use”. It provides tests with a variety of risk values including 
several risk ratios (Table I), over few discrimination ratios: 
D = 1.5, 1.7, 2, 3, 5. 
 
TABLE I.  NOMINAL RISKS 
α 
0.05 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
β 
0.05 0.1 
0.2 0.05 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.05 0.1 0.2 0.3 
0.1 
 
Simple interpolation formulas for additional test plans are 
proposed. Using the formulas, it is possible to calculate test plans 
with intermediate parameter values with high accuracy (much 
more exact than in the standard’s Annex E). 
C. Risk accuracy 
The sequential A test plans in the standard features two kinds 
of incorrectness regarding the test's risks: 
 
The true risks significantly deviate from the nominal (as 
seen in the standard’s Table II) 
 
The “true” values declared in the standard’s Table II are not 
accurate (the risks relative error is up to 104% when 
checked). 
Detailed analysis of standard’s 2nd edition (2006) is 
available in [17], and valid for the 3rd edition as well. 
The standard's Type C plan features high accuracy of the 
risks. 
In the proposed version, the true values are nominal (the 
average relative deviation is less than 0.002%). 
D. Expected accumulated test time to decision (ETT) 
 
Type A plan's characteristics in the standard have 
substantial errors in the ETT (up to 17%) [17].  
 
In the current standard, the ETT is given by graphs 
(designated for each test plan). This approach is suitable 
only for a limited number of tests and is not necessary for 
practical use. 
 
The proposed test plans include five accurate values of 
ETT vs. m in the region between m1/D0.5 and m0*D0.5 (a 
constant step on a logarithmic scale). The given data is 
enough to restore the ETT function with high accuracy in 
this region. See Table II and Fig. 3. 
 
A spreadsheet (in accordance with Annex F of the 
standard) for generating the graphs and the other test 
characteristics (OC and boundaries) will be attached to the 
proposed version. 
 
 
Figure 2. Expected test time and truncation time for C.1 and the 
proposed alternative.  
     Test data: D=1.7, α’=β’=0.050 (true risks). 
     C.1 – ETT (Expected accumulated test time to decision, T*e /m0)  
               of C.1, r0=39; 
     2    – Ditto alternative, r0=43; 
     3    – Ditto non-truncated test, r unlimited; 
     C.1a – Accumulated test truncation time (T*t /m0) of C.1, r0=39; 
     2a – Ditto alternative, r0=43. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-593-7
VALID 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle

 
For any of the proposed test plans (see Table III), the ETT 
curve is defined via five points vs. the true m (MTBF or 
MTTF), and according to Table II: 
 
 
TABLE II.  ETT VS. TRUE m (MTBF OR MTTF) 
m 
m1
D  
1
0
m
m
D

 
m0
D  
0
m  
m0
D  
ETTj 
ETTL 
ETT1 
ETTM 
ETT0 
ETTH 
Note: j = (L, 1, M, 0, H) 
 
 
 
D. Operational characteristics (OC) 
 
In the current standard, the OC is given by graphs 
(designated for each test plan). This approach is suitable 
only for a limited number of tests and is not necessary for 
practical use. 
 
For the proposed test plans, the OC is in accordance to 
Wald’s formulas as presented in Annex E.3.2 and Annex 
F.2.2 (for construction of the OC graph by spreadsheet 
program).  The OC by Wald’s formulas is accurate only for 
true risks (α’ and β’, see 4.3). 
 
IV. PROPOSED TEST PLANS PRESENTATION 
The proposed version includes 60 tests plans with all the 
required test data (boundaries and characteristics) in one table 
(see Table III). 
The proposed changes can be implemented as follows: 
 
As an updated version of the standard in the part of 
sequential tests. 
 
Annex to the current standard, as an additional option for 
the sequential test plans. 
V. CONCLUSION 
The proposed version will be a significant improvement over 
the existing one. It is the result of development in the field of 
SPRT in recent years and the available computing power, which 
will support the requirements of today. It is both possible and 
necessary to conduct more economically efficient, more precise 
and more complex tests because of the accession of computer 
systems and stricter requirements in quality assurance and 
reliability. The changes will extend the use of SPRT and this 
standard. 
The proposal for updating the standard has been accepted to 
the work-plan of Technical Committee TC-56 of International 
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors are indebted to Mrs. E. Leshchenko and to 
Mrs. M. Zenevich for assistance with the computer program and 
calculations. 
The research project was supported by the Israel Ministry of 
Absorption and the Planning and Budgeting Committee of the 
Israel Council for Higher Education. 
This paper is dedicated to the bright memory of Eng. Eliezer 
Goldberg (1918–2015) in honor of his work over many years of 
phenomenal editing.  
REFERENCES 
[1] IEC 61124:2012, Reliability testing – Compliance test for 
constant failure rate and constant failure intensity. 
[2] IEC 61123:1991, Reliability testing – Compliance test plans for 
success ratio. 
[3] A. Wald, Sequential Analysis. NY: John Wiley & Sons, pp. 221, 
1947.  
[4] A. Wald and J. Wolfowitz, "Optimum character of the sequential 
probability ratio test," Ann. of Math. Stat., vol. 19, no 3, pp. 326–
339, 1948.  
[5] B. Eisenberg and B. K. Ghosh, "The sequential probability ratio 
test," in Handbook of Sequential Analysis, B. K. Ghosh and P. K. 
Sen, Eds. NY: Marcel Dekker, pp. 47–66, 1991. 
[6] K.C. Kapur and L.R. Lamberson, Reliability in Engineering 
Design. NY: Wiley, 1977.  
[7] R. Kenett, Sh. Zacks, and D. Amberti, Modern Industrial 
Statistics: With Applications in R, MINITAB and JMP: John 
Wiley & Sons, Ltd., 2014.  
[8] Y. H. Michlin and O. Shaham, “Planning of truncated sequential 
binomial test via relative efficiency,” Quality and Reliab. 
Engineering Int. vol. 29: 369–383, 2013. 
[9] Y. H. Michlin and G. Grabarnik, "Search boundaries of truncated 
discrete sequential test," J. Appl. Stat., vol. 37, no. 5, pp.707–
724, 2010. 
[10] Y. H. Michlin, G. Grabarnik, and E. Leshchenko, "Comparison 
of the mean time between failures for two systems under short 
tests," IEEE Trans. Reliab., vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 589–596, 2009. 
 
 
Figure 3. Example of the curve of expected test time to decision (ETT). 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-593-7
VALID 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle

[11] Y. H. Michlin and G. Grabarnik, "Sequential testing for 
comparison of the mean time between failures for two systems," 
IEEE Trans. Reliab., vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 321–331, June 2007.  
[12] Y. H. Michlin, D. Ingman, and Y. Dayan, “Sequential test for 
arbitrary ratio of mean times between failures,” Int. J. of 
Operations Research and Information Systems, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 
66–81, 2011. 
[13] Y. H. Michlin, D. Ingman, and V. Kaplunov, “Sequential testing 
for two exponential distributions at arbitrary risks,” Int. J. of 
Quality and Reliability Management, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 451–468, 
2012. 
[14] N. Mukhopadhyay and B. M. de Silva, Sequential Methods and 
Their Applications. Boca Raton FL: CRC Press, 2009.  
[15] Y. H. Michlin and O. Shaham, “Remarks on the Paper "Closed 
Sequential and Multistage Inference on Binary Responses with 
or without Replacement" by Ignatova, Deutsch, and Edwards - 
The American Statistician, vol. 66, 2012” Comment by Michlin 
and Shaham and Reply, The American Statistician, vol. 68 no. 2, 
pp. 128-128, 2014. 
[16] Y. H. Michlin, O. Shaham, and Ya. P. Lumelskii, “Substantiation 
of sequential test parameters for mass-produced electronic 
devices,” 2012 IEEE 27-th Convention of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers in Israel, Eilat, Israel, 2012. 
[17] Y. H. Michlin, L. Meshkov, and I. Grunin, “Improvement of 
"Sequential testing" sections of MIL-HDBK-781A and IEC 
61124,” IEEE Trans. Reliab., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 379–387, 2008. 
[18] L. A. Aroian, “Sequential analysis – direct method,” 
Technometrics, vol. 10, pp. 125–132, 1968. 
[19] G. A. Barnard, “Sequential test in industrial statistics,” J. R. 
Statist. Soc., Suppl., 8, pp. 1–21, 1946. 
[20] GOST R 27.402:95, Dependability technics – Compliance test 
plans for mean operating time to failure or between failures – 
Part 1: Exponential case. 
ABBREVIATIONS  
 (The singular and plural of an abbreviation are always spelled 
the same) 
ETT 
expected accumulated test time to decision 
MTBF mean operating time between failures 
MTTF mean time to failure 
OC  
operating characteristic 
SPRT 
sequential probability ratio test 
SYMBOLS 
a 
the accept line’s intersection with the r axis 
b 
the accept and reject line’s slope 
b* 
b*= b × m0, slope 
c 
the reject line’s intersection with the r axis 
D 
discrimination ratio; D=m0/m1 
m 
true mean operating time between failures (MTBF) 
  
or mean time to failure (MTBF) 
m0 
specified MTTF or MTBF (design goal) 
m1 
lower limit for MTTF or MTBF 
T*e  
expected accumulated test time to decision (ETT) 
T*t 
accumulated test time stated as termination  
   criterion (truncation or max duration) 
r 
observed number of failures during the test 
r0 
test truncation failure number 
α 
nominal producer’s risk (type I risk) 
α’ 
true producer’s risk 
β 
nominal consumer’s risk (type II risk) 
β’ 
true consumer’s risk 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE III.  EXAMPLE FOR SEQUENTIAL TEST PLANS 
 
 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-593-7
VALID 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle

