Concurrent Engineering used to Implement Risk & Hazard Control
Gheorghe Florea
Societatea de Inginerie Sisteme – SIS S.A.
Bucharest, Romania
e-mail: gelu.florea@sis.ro
Luiza Ocheana
University “Politehnica” of Bucharest
Bucharest, Romania
e-mail: luiza.ocheana@sis.ro
Abstract — In the current modern and industry-based society,
automation is the key to success. The technology has changed
over
the
last
decades
towards
full
control
systems.
Requirement specifications for Safety Instrumented Systems
(SIS) form the core of Risk and Hazard (RH) assessment. SIS
are the most flexible and effective tools for guarding the plants.
Despite the debate pro and against the integrated approach of
Basic Process Control System (BPCS) and SIS, more than a
safety system is needed to keep the process running even with
diminished functionalities instead of shutdown the plant. Our
new approach is based on how a new hierarchical decision level
can complete the mission regarding safety when the control
room is not functional or cannot act properly in a hazard
situation. Layers of protection should be used in order to
reduce the risk to an acceptable level. The key is RH control
implemented as a superior hierarchical level of decision and
intervention. Concurrent Engineering (CE) applied to process
control is the approach that can help the designers to achieve
this level and efficiently use the proposed system architecture.
Basically, a remote Process Help Center will host not only the
copy of the process control system but the strategy and
algorithms (RH control) to accomplish the safety task and to
keep the process running. The CE and simulation are basic
approaches to build the functionalities of new systems.
Keywords
–
SIS;
Redundancy;
Remote
intervention;
Simulation; Diagnostics;
Hierarchical decision;
Concurrent
engineering; Risk and hazard assessment.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Process control and optimization represent the current
way for safer and more efficient industrial plants, while risk
management represents the starting point for new control
algorithms and strategies. There is a stringent need for
enhancing plant operations at production management level,
because plants often operate near criticality, meaning in
conditions far from the ideal ones from the point of view of
control and stability. Continuous process industries are
usually very complex and difficult to model and keep under
control. While plant personnel feel there is a tremendous
need for better and more versatile simulation and modeling
tools, no product on the market offers the features necessary
for dealing with the uncertain nature of complex plants [1].
Safety is an important issue nowadays that receives an
increasing
amount
of
focus
lately.
The
reasons
are,
unfortunately, the numerous accidents that occurred in
industrial plants, which compel the industry to take a better
look at current practices like process design, process control,
risk analysis and control, risk assessment. Worldwide
engineering organizations have developed standards for the
engineering of process safety. IEC released two standards
IEC 61508 aimed at the suppliers of process safety
equipment and IEC 61511 aimed at the end users of process
safety equipment. ISA S84.01 “Application of Safety
Instrumented Systems for the Process Industry” includes all
elements from sensors to final elements, including inputs,
outputs, power supply, logic solvers and user interfaces [2].
Applying these standards we obtain reliable facilities, but
still we do not solve the problem of continuity of the
production process - the main goal in the economic
competition. This paper presents a way to solve the problem
of maintaining the continuity of the process by introducing a
level of control for risk and hazard situations.
In this paper, we present the challenge of Safety and
Security systems (Section II), the introduction of Risk and
Hazard control as a new level of decision (Section III),
simulation as the key for Risk and Hazard control (Section
IV), technologies to be used (Section V), results and
conclusions (Sections VI and VII).
II.
SAFETY AND SECURITY (SS) – THE CHALLENGE
In order to obtain the required level of safety and
security, we must take into account four important phases:
analyze the needed level of SS for the plant, design,
implementation and maintenance.
Stand-alone safety systems have been the traditional
method of choice, meaning separate design and operation
requirements for Basic Process Control Systems (BPCS) and
Safety Instrumented Systems (SIS) [3]. Separate systems
were
developed
for
process
control
and
safety
with
proprietary operator interfaces, engineering workstations,
configuration
tools,
data
and
event
historians,
asset
management, and network communications. This approach
affects the costs of infrastructure acquisition, plant systems
integration, control and instrumentation hardware, wiring,
project execution, installation, and commissioning, as well as
ongoing expenses such as training, spare parts procurement,
and logistics contracts [4]. Until recently, users had little
choice other than to use completely different systems for
control and safety. “A war of words is raging in the process
control industry over the “integration” of safety and control
systems. It’s a debate that has been ongoing for years, but the
recent introduction of new integrated systems by several
process controls vendors has lately added fuel to the fire” [5].
Today, integrating safety and control has become a cost
effective choice for manufacturers that could not justify a
separate SIS in the past. As a process manufacturer, you need
to perform rigorous Risk and Hazard (RH) analysis based on
IEC 61511 or ANSI/ISA-84.00.01 safety standards to decide
90
VALID 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-168-7

on the right level of protection required for your plants. You
may do that by selecting a SIS that provides close integration
with the software tools of your BPCS while still providing
the required degree of separation. Figure 1 illustrates the
three options.
Figure 1 – SIS and BPCS Integration Levels
In the traditional sense, process safety refers to additional
components that protect personnel and plant from injury,
death and economic loss. However, many end users now
recognize that the deployment of intelligent integrated safety
solutions can directly improve process and personnel safety.
The entire issue of safety has direct influence upon the
activity of the plant and therefore it must be integrated into
the control system.
III.
RH CONTROL – THE NEW LEVEL OF DECISION
According to process safety standards, the process risk
has to be reduced to a tolerable level as set by the process
owner [6]. The solution is to use multiple layers of
protection,
including
the
BPCS,
alarms,
Operator
Intervention (OI), mechanical relief system and a SIS.
The BPCS is the lowest layer of protection and is
responsible for the operation of the plant in normal
conditions. If BPCS fails or is incapable of maintaining
control, then, the second layer, OI, attempts to solve the
problem. If the operator also cannot maintain control within
the requested limits, then the SIS Layer must attempt to
bring the plant in a safe condition [7]. If SIS also fails in
restoring normal operation, then the hazard is imminent.
Risk is defined as the combination of the probability and
the severity of a hazardous event, meaning how often it can
appear and how severe are the consequences when it does.
The best way to reduce risk in a manufacturing plant is to
design safer processes. Unfortunately, it is impossible to
eliminate all risks, so a manufacturer must agree on a level of
risk that is considered tolerable. After identifying the
hazards, a RH analysis must be performed to evaluate each
risk situation.
The layers of protection and also the impact over the
process are illustrated in Figure 2. On the left side, the layers
of protection are listed; on the right side, the corresponding
actions on the process are listed.
Figure 2 - Layers of protection and impact on process
Risk assessment procedure (detailed in Figure 3) is the
first process in the risk management methodology to
determine the extent of the potential threat and the risk
associated with a system [8]. The procedure includes 5
important steps: (1) identify all possible hazard situations
and (2) risks, (3) evaluation of the existing tools and
strategies, (4) implementation of new ones if needed, and (5)
the continuous monitor and evaluation of the behavior of the
process.
Figure 3 - Risk assessment procedure
BPCS, along with process alarms and facilities for
manual intervention, provide the first level of protection and
reduce the risk in a manufacturing facility. Additional
protection measures are needed when a BPCS does not
reduce the risk to a tolerable level. They include SIS along
with hardware interlocks, relief valves, and containment
dikes. Unfortunately, all the additional protection measures
mentioned above can only help to safely shut down the plant.
91
VALID 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-168-7

We have proposed designed and implement a new level of
decision: RH Control (Figure 4) to keep the plant running.
Figure 4 – System architecture
Better automation is a key aspect for improving industrial
competitiveness [9]. Intelligent automation, at management
levels in particular can play a major role regarding this
aspect. The purpose of RH Control is to help with this
improvement
by
building
a
new
architecture
and
a
distributed, generic decision support software system for
near critical situation management in continuous process
industries. In particular, assistance in terms of diagnosis and
elaborating solutions is provided (directly to the plant’s
control system and/or to the staff) when certain situations are
detected, i.e. situations suitable to be corrected, prevented or
enhanced.
The focus is on new algorithms and strategies for the
integration of different software components as well as on
the system architecture itself. These software components
include core, user interface and problem solving modules.
RH Control follows the conceptual structure of most
distributed control systems
that is a hierarchical and
multilayered structure, similar to a pyramid. The complexity
of the control mechanism increases for the higher layers. All
the basic functionalities of the system are grouped into
problem solving components that work in a cooperative way
to find a solution to the plant problems or to optimize
according to the plant objectives.
These applications include the following functionalities
at different control layers:
 Strategies: Management of global objectives of the plant
and
their
interrelation
(management
of
maintenance
operations, incident prevention, RH control, assessment of
production costs in real time, loop tuning optimization, set-
point deviation detection and alarm management)
 Tactics: Assistance through the problem lifespan, including
process failure prevention, risk detection and diagnosis,
plant-wide
analysis,
corrective
actions,
actions
or
recommendations for reestablishing effective control.
 Operations: Tasks such as filtering and validation of plant
data, variable estimation, alarms analysis and optimization,
intelligent alerting based on intuitive technologies and
trend forecasting.
The main challenges at the beginning of a system
configuration are: software architecture and reusability.
A.
Reusability
The technical approach tries to provide reusability in the
broadest sense using functional blocks. Object oriented
technology can be one of the cornerstones of this approach
[10]. Reusability can be achieved for any stage in the life
cycle:
from
defining
requirements
and
design
to
commissioning and maintenance. The approach is based on
the availability of design template and reusable component
implementation
with
few
design
compromises.
These
implementations are flexible enough to be adapted or
modified to comply with the new requirements with little
effort. The concepts of function block–based development
and integration middleware provide the basis for reusability.
RH Control will incorporate components for process control,
risk analysis, optimization, etc.
The customized components will be integrated in a
global architecture using real-time integration. This software,
based on function block standard, will incorporate extensions
to make possible for its use in real-time applications. This
facilitates the easy reuse of components and even of the
global application architecture because run-time components
can be easily changed without affecting the behavior of
others.
B.
Software architecture
The software architecture is based on the Service–
oriented
architecture
concept
(SOA)
[11].
In
most
applications, the infrastructure and the environment are very
important security-related issues and it gets even more
important if a SOA-based on Web Services has been chosen.
For this purpose, asymmetric cryptography will be used,
implying a pair of two keys: public key and private key.
The benefits of this approach can be classified into two
categories:
 From the user’s point of view: the implementation
addresses problems related to the global management of
the plant while taking into account the interrelation of the
strategic
objectives,
such
as
production,
quality,
maintenance, safety, efficiency and availability, as well as
problems closer to the process control layer.
 From
the
systems
integrator’s
point
of
view:
the
development of an open software architecture, based on the
OPC
standard
and
function
blocks,
will
allow
the
construction of distributed intelligent control systems on
top of the existing ones, with back-up functions.
IV.
SIMULATION - THE KEY FOR AN EFFECTIVE RH
CONTROL
Future applications of simulation technology applied to
process control will be driven by the advancing simulator
capabilities. Many of them are the direct result of computing
technology applied to certain activities with high return on
investment: concurrent engineering, process fault detection,
self testing capabilities for hardware and internet retrievable
simulation models and tools.
 Advanced networking
Advances in network technology are allowing for faster
data sharing between computers, parallel processing for
92
VALID 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-168-7

simulating more complex models and linking the simulator
with the real process. Three types of network interfacing
applicable to simulation can be used:
o
Bus adapter and shared memory
o
Data broadcast network
o
Internet
 Intelligent I/O
Applied Dynamics International (ADI) developed and
uses an intelligent input/output processor card to predict
outputs and update the value more frequently than the update
rate from the simulator, increasing speed for the next
prediction
 Very High Speed Simulation
This approach is based on the development of digital
hardware-in-the-loop
simulations
that
allow
simulation
frame-times lower than 10 microseconds.
Simulation technology
There are many approaches to achieve good results in
time. We will briefly present the most important of them.
 Integration algorithms
Integration algorithms are used to solve a function in the
time domain, given the differential equation of the variable
of interest.
Runge-Kutta is probably the best known
integration algorithm. A newer algorithm, named after its
developers R. Bulirsch and J. Stoer is gaining popularity and
may replace Runge-Kutta [12].
 Discrete-Event Simulation
Two
types
of
discrete-event
simulation
tools
are
available: the state transition diagram editor and user /
resource queuing tools.
State-transition diagram editors allow the user to model a
process by the state the process is in and by the events that
cause a transition from one state to another [13]. The use of
state-transition diagrams allows the behavior of a process to
be dependent on the state. A process simulator with a state –
transition - diagram editor allows different dynamics to be
assigned to different operational states of the same process.
Figure 5 shows the classical states: start-up, nominal and
shut-down but the RH state is added in order to maintain the
system under control.
Figure 5 - Operational states
The user / resource analysis queuing system can be
described as a collection of resources and the tasks using
these resources [14]. The modeling tools allow resources to
be allocated to tasks according to several prioritization
strategies such as first-come-first-served, infinite servers,
last-come-first-served, processor-sharing. System parameters
such as response times, rate of use, queue populations and
throughput rates can be assessed. Probability distributions
and tasks attributes such as creating, terminating and
delaying can be changed. This will be used later to
implement
the
appropriate Distributed
Control
System
(DCS) or Programmable
Logic
Controller (PLC) and
Supervisory
Control
And
Data
Acquisition
(SCADA)
strategies to run on site or remote.
 System Identification
Data handling and processing power available today
enables not only standard on-line identification techniques
but
also
sophisticated,
empirical
model
development
methods that in the past were not feasible. Tools are
available for today’s simulators to help gather perturbation
data from the process and develop empirical models that
sometimes
boast
more
fidelity
than
classical
models.
Although system identification theory has been around for a
long time, only recently these theoretical tools become
practicable because of the large amount of data processing
required.
V.
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
Emerging technologies analyzed helped us to establish
the most important of them to be used in our project.
a)
Concurrent Engineering (CE)
An activity that requires a high degree of effort from a
design company, but not without a rewarding return on
investment is CE. This design paradigm is based upon the
principle that the process and the associated control strategy
are designed in parallel before the process is built. Trade-off
analysis is performed in advance, in order to prevent
conflicting criteria of the two designs. Dynamic process
simulators are combined with traditional static simulators to
assess transient behavior and controllability of the process.
The CE approach is based on the following key elements:
 the system engineering process;
 a multidisciplinary team (process, control, safety and
security, management, accounting, inventory)
 a collaborative platform, control environment and data &
information distribution
 supporting tools and facilities.
The approach can evolve into an Integrated System
Development based on cross functional System / Process
Teams
for
all
systems
and
services,
and
a
System
Engineering
and
Team
to
cover
the
system
issues,
performances, balance requirements.
By applying CE to plant design and installation, non-
value added activities both in the upstream and downstream
activities of the plant can be eliminated at the early stage of
the design process, plant, operations and control. Plant wide
controllability analysis in the conceptual design stage is an
issue that has been raised by process industry [15].
93
VALID 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-168-7

Figure 6 - Concurrent engineering apply to process control
The role of CE is obvious since it reflects that
opportunities exist even at the conceptual design stage, to
optimize
the
downstream
operations
including
the
capabilities to run the process instead of risks and hazards.
This is against the conventional approach of the control as an
add-on to process design after the flow sheet structure has
already been determined.
There are a number of tools available for the design of
process using CE including: simulation, process modeling,
on – line identification, asset assessment, risk and hazard
analysis. Including all this we can have a conceptual
framework for the implementation of CE in process control.
Figure 7 – Conceptual framework
b)
Controller Testing
Using simulators to test control systems is an increasing
trend in almost every industry. Simulator-based testing takes
the control software development from the project critical
path. Tests using simulators can be more comprehensive than
a test using the actual process because the normal safety or
process operational limits are not a concern, so the virtual
test can exceed those limits, if necessary, to perform a more
robust test. The networking options enable interfacing a
simulator to a control system at a higher level in the
architecture
than
in
the past
when
individual
wiring
terminations were required.
c)
On-line Diagnostics
Modern simulators offer the ability to detect faults in
operating plants. A well tuned model of the plant runs in
parallel with the plant, on-site or remote, comparing the
model’s outputs with the real outputs. As shown in Figure 8,
a difference between the two indicates a fault. Advanced
fault-detection algorithms will lead the RH control or the
supervisory engineers to the appropriate action.
Figure 8 - Online diagnostics
d)
Internet Applications
This
technology
offers
today
the
capability
to
interconnect the on-site system with a remote control center
(PH center) and to perform simulation, on-line identification
[16], RH strategies, on-line tests and training, back-up and
restoration. Operating remote from the site, the Process Help
Center will host not only a copy of the process control
system but the strategy and algorithms to fulfill the safety
task and to keep the process running even in RH conditions.
VI.
RESULTS
The new approach in process control system engineering,
based on new algorithms, scalable and modular architectures
and platforms, RH control, is industry independent. The
capability of the systems to model and implement the 4
states, start-up, nominal, RH, shut-down, having 4 different
strategies and the capability to change the state according to
the functional parameters can be taken in consideration by
CE.
The
diagnosis
system,
hosted
remotely,
will
be
continuously improved by gathering knowledge from various
applications, based on identified problems, the solutions
offered and their impact on the plant performance. The
correlation factor between these different applications will
influence future decisions. This way, the required period of
time for solving a problem will be minimized, as well as the
time that a plant needs to be shut down because of the
instrumentation process control strategy.
Some
of
the
expected
results
are
an
integrated
exploitation of a collection of heterogeneous technologies for
the prevention of anomalous situations related to the safety
of an industrial complex and determining the suitability of
94
VALID 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-168-7

function blocks and OPC based development for integrated
control systems construction.
From the user’s point of view, the accomplishment is that
RH Control will allow the integration of the preventive and
corrective aspects of safety, which were dealt, until this
moment, in separate ways. Another advantage arises from
being able to automatically take into account the constraints
posed by the current plant situation and the ongoing
maintenance operations.
The results achieved so far within the R&D project “Help
Center and platform for remote diagnosis and remote
intervention for the management of plants in hazardous
situations – PH Center” will be used to develop and
implement the hierarchically superior level for safety and
security problems. The work carried out in the project
establishes the baselines for a new architecture of process
control taking into consideration the remote operation.
Figure 9 - The simulated process
In the meantime, the results achieved underlay the
feasibility of the idea. This statement is based on two
reasons:
 Two demo-applications have been designed according to
real plant requirements with a large involvement of plant
staff. At present, two applications are installed and under
operation after a period of user validation and evaluation:
- a simulator for a simple process - controlling the level of
liquid in a tank – Figure 9.
- a Building Management System (BMS) designed for a
supermarket – Figure 10.
Figure 10 - Supermarket BMS – remote connection main screen
Also, we are currently working on including a new
connection to the PH Center, a DCS control system
(Experion - Honeywell) from LPG terminal, Midia, Navodari
(Figure 11).
Figure 11 – PH Center connected to DCS
 The three generic products constructed within the project
are truly reusable and can be exploitable components of
other implementations.
This
approach
demonstrates
that
advanced
control
technology can be modularized, deployed and integrated
with legacy control systems, progressing effectively towards
complete automatic operation.
VII.
CONCLUSIONS
In the past, SIS were strictly separated from the BPCS,
mainly to segregate the safety and control functions and to
have
higher
availability
and
reliability.
Lately,
many
"integrated" control systems were deployed that have both
BPCS and SIS systems in the same package
Hazard identification, risk assessment and control are on-
going
processes
that
involve
a
critical
sequence
of
information gathering and also the application of a decision-
making process. They assist in discovering what could
possibly cause a major accident (hazard identification), how
likely it is that a major accident would occur and the
potential consequences (risk assessment) and what options
exist for preventing and mitigating a major accident (control
measures). The state of the art has no real and integrated
solution. The work done by authors and the team has
proposed:

The new concept: Risk and Hazard Control;

A new system architecture of process control;

The guidelines and advantage of using CE to the
design of process control system.
95
VALID 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-168-7

REFERENCES
[1]
Gheorghe Florea, Luiza Ocheana, Radu Dobrescu, and Dan
Popescu - Emerging Technologies - the base for the next goal
of Process Control - Risk and Hazard Control, Proceedings of
WSEAS International Conference, 2011, pp. 227 – 232.
[2]
American Institute of Chemical Engineers - Guidelines for
Safe and Reliable Instrumented Protective Systems, 2007.
[3]
Asish Ghosh and Dave Woll - Business Issues Driving Safety
System Integration, ARC White Paper, 2006.
[4]
Ged Farnaby - Protect the plant. Leading edge trends in
process control safety, InTech, June 2005.
[5]
Wes Iversen - The Great Safety Debate, Automation World
april 2007, pp. 30.
[6]
David Hatch and Todd Stauffer - Operators on alert. Operator
response, alarm standards, protection layers keys to safe
plants. InTech, Cover Story, September 2009.
[7]
Merry Spooner and Trevor MacDougall - Safety Instrumented
Systems can they be integrated but separate?, ABB White
Paper, 2011.
[8]
Gary Stoneburner, Alice Goguen, and Alexis Feringa - Risk
Management Guide for Information Technology Systems.
Recommendations of the National Institute for Standards and
Technology, 2002.
[9]
Ricardo Sanz, Miguel Segarra, Angel de Antonio, and Idoia
Alarcon - Plantwide Risk Management Using Distributed
Objects,
Proceedings
of
IFAC
Symposium
on
Fault
Detection, Supervision and Safety for Technical Processes 2,
2000, pp. 14 – 16.
[10] Michael Guttman and Jason R. Matthews - The Object
Revolution, Wiley, New York, 1995.
[11] Stefan-Helmut Leitner and Wolfgang Mahnke. OPC UA –
Service – oriented Architecture for Industrial Applications.
ABB White Paper, 2006.
[12] Ruppel Francis and Wysor Wes - Mighty microprocessors
boost process simulation, InTech, September 1997.
[13] David Harel - Statecharts: A Visual Formalism for Complex
Systems, Science of Computer Programming vol.8, 1987, pp.
231 – 274.
[14] Christos Cassandras - Discrete Events Systems: Modeling and
Performing
Analysis,
IFAC
Best
Control
Engineering
Textbook, 1999.
[15] Angappa
Gunasekaran
-
Concurrent
engineering:
a
competitive strategy for process industries, Journal of the
Operational Research Society, Volume: 49, 1998,
pp. 758-
775.
[16] Mauro Coccoli and Antonio Boccalatte - Future Directions of
Internet-based Control Systems, Journal of Computing and
Information Technology, 2002, pp. 115–124.
96
VALID 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-168-7

