A Method to Determine the Static NBTI Stress Time of an Embedded 
Component in an Integrated Circuit 
 
Puneet Ramesh Savanur 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Southern Illinois University Carbondale 
Carbondale, IL, USA 62901 
e-mail: puneet1488@siu.edu 
Spyros Tragoudas 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Southern Illinois University Carbondale 
Carbondale, IL, USA 62901 
e-mail: spyros@siu.edu 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a simple mechanism to 
accurately estimate the number of clock cycles that an 
integrated circuit (IC) has operated. It is achieved by 
measuring the delay of an embedded component due to static 
negative 
bias 
temperature 
instability 
(NBTI) 
effects. 
Simulations with the HSPICE tool, using 45nm predictive 
technology model and a NBTI degradation model are 
presented. The results also indicate that using static NBTI 
aging model aides in very early stress time detection. 
Keywords-Negative bias temperature instability (NBTI); 
counterfeit; aging; odometer; built-in self-test (BIST). 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
When a circuit operates, there are changes in certain 
characteristics which are used in this work in order to 
determine its operating time. As Complimentary Metal-
Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) technology is shrinking, 
Negative Bias Temperature Instability (NBTI) was attributed 
as one of the major causes of changes in circuit 
characteristics in digital circuits. The NBTI degradation 
causes an increase in the threshold voltage of a P-type Metal-
Oxide Semiconductor (PMOS) transistor and consequently 
decreasing the transistors drain current and transconductance 
over time [13]. NBTI is attributed to the creation of interface 
traps and oxide charges by a negative bias voltage on the 
gate of the transistor at elevated temperatures. Typically, the 
stress temperature lies in the range of 100-250°C and the 
oxide electric fields below 6 MV/cm. Such conditions occur 
during the burn-in test and normal operation of high 
performance machines [12]. The threshold voltage of PMOS 
transistors 
degrades 
and 
this 
may 
alter 
temporal 
characteristics of a chip. 
The focus of this study is to derive an estimate of the 
number of clock cycles that the integrated circuit (IC) has 
operated. It is determined by measuring delays due to static 
NBTI effects. Several models [3][6][14][15][17][18] have 
been introduced to determine the degradation of the 
threshold voltage due to NBTI effects. The authors in [17] 
provide a general framework to analyze NBTI degradation 
while taking into consideration various circuit parameters 
like supply voltage, temperature, node switching activity, 
input patterns, and the duty cycle. The work in [6] 
introduced an analytical model for dynamic NBTI aging of 
PMOS transistors based on the Reaction-Diffusion (R-D) 
model framework. Meanwhile, the authors in [3] and [14] 
introduced an analytical predictive model for static and 
dynamic NBTI aging of PMOS transistors based on the 
reaction-diffusion mechanism of the atoms. They provided 
an accurate threshold change due to static NBTI aging. 
However, they only provided upper bounds on the threshold 
change due to dynamic NBTI aging because the intent was 
to apply the approach in timing analysis. The authors in [18] 
presented a framework to analyze the impact of NBTI 
degradation on circuit performance under various operating 
conditions such as temperature and frequency. The authors 
in [2] presented a model to monitor delay on paths in the 
presence of NBTI aging and process variation. The authors 
in [7][8][9] considered the effect of hole trapping and 
interface-state generation to develop an accurate analytical 
model to identify the threshold voltage degradation due to 
NBTI. The work in [15] introduced a unified aging model of 
NBTI and HCI degradation for MOSFET circuits. Their 
model considers NBTI and HCI effects together to indicate 
the degradation in threshold voltage at a given time. 
This paper presents a built-in approach that estimates 
accurately the number of operational clock cycles applied to 
a circuit. In semiconductor industry, an odometer is defined 
as the instrument used to identify the age of a given circuit. 
The presented approach acts an odometer as it estimates the 
number of clock cycles that have been applied to the circuit. 
The approach operates under static NBTI stress whenever 
the system clock is enabled. The approach applies static 
NBTI stress (i.e., low voltage) on the PMOS transistors in a 
chain of inverters. This causes a change in the threshold 
voltage of the transistors and subsequently, the delay of the 
chain of the aging inverters increases rapidly. Static signals 
are known to age the transistor very fast and therefore the 
presented approach detects very early stress times. Static 
signals do not induce dynamic NBTI and Hot Carrier 
Injection (HCI) effects whose aging effects are not modeled 
precisely. Hence using static NBTI results into an accurate 
odometer approach. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-593-7
VALID 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle

The proposed method is compatible with the IEEE 
1149.1 standards and does not impact the timing 
performance of the circuit. The presented approach will be 
able to identify the time for which a circuit has been used. 
This will also help us identify if the given circuit is 
counterfeit, i.e., has been used in an unauthorized manner. 
A counterfeit component is defined as a component 
which is either an off-specification, defective, or used 
original component manufacturer (OCM) product sold as 
‘‘new’’ or working [4]. Recycled components from circuits 
would operate slower and may fail to work early during 
their lifetime. Such recycled and remarked components 
jointly contribute to over 80% of counterfeit products [4]. 
The reliability of the product is compromised in 
commercial, industrial or defense applications which pose a 
major concern in safety critical applications, for example, 
defense projects and aviation industry. An application of the 
work is to detect counterfeit integrated chips. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section II overviews 
existing methods to identify aging due to NBTI. Section III 
provides the preliminaries for the presented work. In 
particular, it elaborates on the predictive models for static 
and dynamic NBTI stress. Section IV provides the proposed 
built-in mechanism and details about the design. Section V 
provides the experimental results indicating the accuracy of 
the method in comparison to earlier proposed techniques. 
Section VI provides with concluding remarks and future 
work. 
II. 
PRIOR RELATED WORK 
There exist some recent NBTI based counterfeit 
detection methods in the literature. However, all of them 
rely on dynamic NBTI effects which have not been modeled 
as accurately as static NBTI effects. It is known that the 
threshold voltage does not change as rapidly as with static 
NBTI effects. Instead, the proposed approach uses static 
NBTI and therefore results into a more accurate prediction 
of the circuits operating time. Furthermore, dynamic NBTI 
effects occur concurrently with HCI effects. This 
complicates their application to the problem studied in this 
paper. 
The authors in [10] consider counterfeit circuit detection 
without inserting any additional hardware. Two similar 
circuit paths that undergo dissimilar signal activity are 
chosen and their delay is calculated with simulations among 
several circuit instances. The path delays are also computed 
and curve fitting is done for aged circuit instances. No 
details are presented on the likelihood of identifying 
identical paths that are sensitized similarly and there are no 
details on the signal activity calculation. The latter is a 
challenging task because the activity on a path depends on 
the application being executed on the chip. Furthermore, 
intra-process variations impact the accuracy of the 
approach. Finding a pair of paths given all the above 
constraints is a very challenging problem and for some IC’s 
one might not be able to find such a pair of paths. Finally, 
no results are presented on the total stress time that the 
PMOS transistors on the paths must undergo during the 
circuit operation so that the IC stress time is detected. 
Another approach for counterfeit detection was recently 
presented in [11]. The authors use two identical copies of 
pass logic buffer chains. When the circuit operates, some 
lines undergo stress at almost every clock cycle. A line with 
high zero-duty cycle is selected as an input to the buffer 
chain. The zero-duty cycle was defined as the average time 
for which a signal remains zero during a clock cycle. This 
ensures that one of the buffer chains undergoes continuous 
stress whereas the other chain is kept inactive. The 
difference in the delays of the buffer chain indicates whether 
a circuit is aged or not. However, in [11] the authors 
proposed to take a line from within the circuit. This line 
needs to have a high zero-duty cycle in the range of 0.9-
0.999. It is difficult to find such a line in the circuit. In 
particular, the zero-duty cycle of a line depends on the 
application being executed on the circuit. A given line may 
have the highest zero-duty cycle in a circuit for a specific 
application but low zero-duty cycle for another application. 
Hence, it is challenging to identify the line that minimizes 
the detection of the stress time. Most importantly, we 
observed that the experimental setup in [11] does not work 
for circuits that operate at a frequency greater than 1GHz. 
This happens due to a design flaw. At 1GHz and higher 
frequencies in particular, the pass logic gate buffers fail to 
stay open for sufficient time for the signal to cause aging on 
the PMOS transistor in the chain. This limits the application 
of the approach. The presented method does not suffer from 
such challenges. 
The authors in [1] present an on-chip NBTI and PBTI 
tracking technique. Pass logic transistors are used to track 
dynamic NBTI aging using the model in [3]. The input to 
the aging sensors is either an internal critical line with the 
largest duty cycle or a generated signal with similar duty 
cycle. The objective is to adjust the circuits mode of 
operation (such as voltage and frequency scaling) as it ages. 
 The experiments were performed at room temperature 
but it is known that NBTI effects are pre dominant at high 
temperatures [13]. Our approach is different than [1] and 
[11] since we use static NBTI aging. Unlike dynamic NBTI 
effects, static signals do not cause an increase in 
temperature 
due 
to 
switching. 
Therefore, 
accurate 
experiments can take place using room temperature. In 
addition, dynamic NBTI aging is dominated by the duty 
cycle of the input signal of the aging circuitry which is 
difficult to calculate [11]. Furthermore, as noted earlier, 
dynamic NBTI aging should always be considered in 
concurrence with HCI aging, and neither [1] nor [11] 
consider the impact of HCI aging effects. For these reasons, 
[1] and [11] are not good candidates for the odometer 
application studied in this paper. 
The work in [10] and [11] both utilize dynamic NBTI 
aging, which is explained in the next section. Dynamic 
NBTI is based on zero-duty cycle which is a very difficult 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-593-7
VALID 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle

quantity to be calculated and the analysis using dynamic 
NBTI aging is cumbersome. The authors in [5] try to 
characterize the dynamic NBTI aging effect for different 
operating conditions. The method utilizes controlled stress 
conditions. They control the input frequency (in their 
experimentation, 
this 
amounts 
to 
controlling 
the 
temperature), as well as the zero-duty cycle of the input 
signal. Furthermore, they control the voltage at which the 
ring oscillators (ROSC) operate and the time for which the 
circuit will be aged. Experimental results of manufactured 
circuits show that dynamic NBTI aging varies greatly as a 
function of the temperature, even if the zero-duty cycle and 
other parameters are known. For all these reasons, dynamic 
aging is not recommended for the odometer problem studied 
in this paper. 
III. 
EXISTING PREDICTIVE NBTI MODELS 
Several NBTI aging models have been presented in the 
literature, see [3] and [6]. The change in threshold voltage 
(
) due to NBTI aging is modeled using the Predictive 
Technology Model (PTM) in [3]. It is very accurate in 
modeling static NBTI aging. The static NBTI aging 
equation is: 
= 
  
(1) 
where  is the total stress time and  is the time exponent,  
= 
1/6 
for 
 diffusion 
based 
model. 
Let 
 = 
 where 
 = 
, 
 = 
. Let  
denotes 
the 
Boltzmann 
constant, 
i.e., 
 = 
 and  is the temperature. Let 
 = 0.5 and 
 denotes the oxide thickness and is 
technology dependent.  is given as 
 = 
(2) 
Electric field is given as 
 = 
. Let  be 
the electron charge. Let 
 denote the oxide capacitance 
per unit area and is expressed as 
= 
 = 
 
Let 
 denote the permittivity of free space, its value is 
= 
. Let 
 denote relative 
permittivity and is 
= 
 for 
 Let 
 = 
 and let 
 = 
 
It is observed that under static NBTI stress, the 
temperature of the transistors does not increase since there is 
no switching activity. It will be shown that one can 
accurately estimate the number of clock cycles for which 
static stress is applied as long as the process parameters 
such as 
, 
 are known. 
For completeness, the section also outlines the predictive 
model for dynamic NBTI aging, which is used in 
[5][10][11]. The model provides an upper bound and not 
necessarily an accurate estimate. The upper bound on 
dynamic NBTI aging was calculated using the expression 
below. 
= 
 (3) 
= 
 
(4) 
The underlined term in (3) and (4) was estimated as 
 and 
 respectively which provides the upper 
bound. It is important to focus on an accurate NBTI aging 
model since the goal is to precisely identify the time for 
which the circuit has been used. 
≤ 
  
 
(5) 
The change in the threshold voltage due to dynamic 
NBTI aging is given by (5) [3]. The dynamic NBTI model 
considers various parameters to determine the effect on 
threshold voltage due to NTBI aging namely duty cycle ( ), 
temperature ( ), oxide thickness (
) and gate to source 
voltage 
 as shown in the equations below. From [11] it 
was observed that dynamic NBTI aging is very sensitive to 
. Calculating 
 for embedded lines in an IC is a 
challenging problem. 
 = 
 
 
(6) 
 = 
  
 
(7) 
= 
 
(8) 
For these reasons, it is a cumbersome task to use dynamic 
NBTI aging as a method to predict the number of clock 
cycles that the circuit has operated. 
IV. 
THE PROPOSED APPROACH 
The proposed method inserts two identical chain of 
inverters in comparison to the pass logic transistors used in 
[11]. One of the chain ages while the other does not. When a 
test signal is applied to both chains, the delay difference is 
measured. This delay is sufficiently large enough that it can 
be easily detected at a very early time. Then the proposed 
odometer method uses a pre-determined relation of observed 
delay vs. static NBTI stress time in order to identify the 
number of operating clock pulses in the design, i.e., the age 
of the circuit. 
As stated earlier, the proposed approach consists of 
embedding two inverter chains. One chain will experience 
static NBTI stress and age rapidly. Let this chain be denoted 
as 
. The other chain will not age and will only be 
activated during testing. Let this chain be denoted as 
. 
The delay of the 
 changes due to the static NBTI when 
compared to the delay of the 
. This 
 delay is 
increasing as a function of the static stress time. A built-in 
approach that is capable of detecting a delay on the 
 no 
less than 12.803ps in 45nm technology with 
=
 and 
 = 
 is presented. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-593-7
VALID 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle

Then the odometer method is based on Figure 1 which 
shows the correlation of the 
 delay to the static NBTI 
stress time. The relationship depicted in Figure 1 is very 
accurate for the following two reasons. First, the 
 
calculation in (1) is very accurate given that the mentioned 
constants and 
 = 
, 
 = 
 are used. The 
is 
technology specific and 
 is decided by the designer hence 
these values can be easily extracted. Secondly, there are 
mainly two process parameters that may affect the accuracy 
namely the oxide thickness 
 and temperature . Since the 
use of static NBTI stress, the approach is unaffected by the 
temperature. For 
, using simulations, it has been verified 
that the change in 
 is very negligible to cause any 
significant deviation from the ideal inverter delay shown in 
Figure 1. Thirdly, there are other fabrication parameters that 
might cause variations but the two inverter chains are so 
closely placed, such that those variations will cancel out and 
will not affect the accuracy of the presented approach. Even 
though the work in [10] was unaffected by intra-die process 
variations, it was not immune to the process parameters 
 
and . 
When a circuit is activated the clock is applied to the 
respective module of the circuit based on the application 
executed on the chip. Hence, a circuit has been aged for as 
long as the clock is applied. Thus, it is proposed to use the 
clock signal to monitor the age of the circuit. It is known 
that static NBTI aging causes the most rapid degradation in 
the threshold voltage. Hence, the proposal is to generate a 
static zero signal using the clock of the circuit. 
A combination of an AND gate (G2) and an inverter (G1) is 
used as shown in Figure 2. The system clock signal and its 
inversion are given as input to the AND gate. Due to the 
AND gate properties, a constant zero signal is generated. 
The delay introduced due to the inverter causes very small 
glitches in the generated signal. The glitches do not reach 
sufficiently high voltage to switch the state of the transistor. 
Hence, the glitches are not a problem and the transistor is 
constantly stressed. 
This static zero signal will be an input to stress time 
detection module (STDM). The STDM consists of two  
Figure 1.  
detected delay due to applied static NBTI stress. 
 
Figure 2.  Static zero generation using system clock signal. 
 
Figure 3.  The schematic of STDM. 
similar chain of inverters embedded on the chip which are 
placed very close to each other as shown in Figure 3. Hence, 
the two inverter chains are unaffected by intra-die process 
variations. One of the inverter chain experiences static 
NBTI stress. Let us call this chain as Static Aging Chain 
(
 while the other is only enabled during the testing 
phase. Let us call this inverter chain as Static Non-Aging 
Chain (
). There is a multiplexer to control the input to 
the two the 
 and 
 chains. The multiplexer during 
normal operation of the IC lets the static signal through and 
lets through the test clock during the test phase depending 
on the current mode of operation controlled by circuit test 
enable signal (
. There is a XNOR gate to detect the 
delay between the 
 and the 
. During the normal 
operation of the circuit, the 
 is isolated from aging 
using a pass logic transmission gate S1 meanwhile S2 
isolates the XNOR from aging. 
During normal operation of the circuit, 
 is 1. Thus, 
switches S1 and S2 are closed and the static stress input 
only ages the 
. Meanwhile, the 
 is not aging at all. 
During the test mode, 
  is switched to 0 hence, the test 
clock signal is applied to the STDM. This test clock signal 
can be chosen as the system clock or any signal as per the 
designer. During experimentation, it was assumed as the 
system clock. Since 
 is now 0, the switches S1 and S2 are 
open and the test clock signal is applied to the 
 and 
. This signal propagates through the two chains. The 
 signal is going to arrive earlier than the 
 signal 
due to the aging induced in the 
. The XNOR will 
identify the delay between the two chains and produces a 
pulse proportional to the delay between 
 and 
. This 
pulse can be observed at the output pin of the chip. There 
are many techniques in the literature that can be used to 
detect on-chip delay of paths for example [16]. But having a 
dedicated pin will help us provide more information about 
the chip in the future. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-593-7
VALID 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle

V. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
Experimental results have been evaluated on some of the 
largest ISCAS’89, ITC’99 benchmarks. Experiments were 
conducted on a Linux machine with Intel Xeon 6 core @ 
2.40GHz processor and 23GB memory. The first transistor 
in the chains is minimum sized. The PMOS size is 
(W/L)p=(0.24U/0.045U), 
while 
the 
NMOS 
size 
is 
(W/L)n=(0.12U/0.045U). Successive inverters are sized 
using 
appropriate 
sizing 
techniques. 
HSPICE 
[20] 
simulations are performed by using predictive PTM 45nm 
technology library [19]. 
Firstly, the experiments were performed using a single 
inverter, which experienced static NBTI aging. The PMOS 
and NMOS sizes used for this inverter are as mentioned 
above. The earliest detection time for static NBTI stress was 
found to be 30 days which is an unreasonable static NBTI 
stress detection time. To facilitate a much earlier detection, 
an inverter chain consisting of 100 inverters was used. It 
was necessary to use such a substantial number of inverters 
because only half of the inverters will be stressed. This is 
due to the inversion of the signal and the fact that NBTI 
aging occurs only on the PMOS transistors. 
The experiments were repeated and it was found that the 
earliest detection time using the 100 inverter chain was 
reduced from 30 days to 2 seconds. The corresponding 
delay was observed to be 12.803ps. One can either choose 
an earlier detection time or reduce the hardware overhead 
and have a late detection time. But choosing a later 
detection time may leave your IC’s integrity vulnerable. 
Experiments were performed on some of the important 
benchmarks. The ISCAS’89, ITC’99 benchmarks were used 
in order to compare the results of the presented approach to 
[10]. Table I lists the earliest detection time for the proposed 
approach and [11] with different zero-duty cycle (ζ) 
observed for the known ISCAS’89, ITC’99 benchmarks. 
The work in [5] was excluded from the comparison below 
since it does not work for high frequency circuits and the 
work in [10] since it does not calculate the earliest stress 
detection time. Column 1 lists the approaches and various ζ 
values for [11]. Column 2 in Table 1 lists the earliest 
detection time observed for the two approaches. Column 3 
lists the benchmarks which have the property of having a 
single line with the ζ mentioned in Column 1. 
In particular, row 1 shows that the earliest detection time 
for static NBTI aging is 2 seconds. This detection time 
holds for any given circuit because the proposed approach is 
based on the static NBTI stress generated using the system 
clock. Row 2 presents the earliest detection time for the 
approach using [11] and ζ=0.997. Using input zero 
probability 0.5 and simulations showed that the circuits b15 
and s15850 from the ITC’99 and ISCAS’89 collections, 
respectively, have a line with ζ approximately 0.997. Thus, 
the earliest detection NBTI stress time for each of these two 
circuits is approximately 72.3 hours. 
The improvement over [11] becomes even more 
pronounced for circuit b20 from the ITC’99 collections 
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON OF EARLIEST DETECTION TIME FOR 
BENCHMARKS USING PROPOSED APPROACH AND [11] 
 
Earliest 
Detection Time 
Benchmarks 
Proposed Approach 
2sec 
Any 
[11] 
ζ=0.997 
72.3h 
b15, s15850 
ζ=0.984 
504h 
b20 
ζ=0.981 
528h 
b22 
ζ=0.977 
674h 
s13207, s35392 
 
where the ζ is 0.984 Column 2 shows that the earliest NBTI 
stress time detected using [11] is 504 hours. Likewise, it is 
observed that the impact of the method for circuits b22 is 
much more pronounced. For this circuit, the simulations 
showed that the ζ is 0.981 and the earliest detection time 
was found to be 528 hours. Meanwhile, for s13207 and 
s35392 the ζ was found to be 0.977 and the earliest 
detection time was found to be 674 hours. All these results 
show that the proposed approach is significantly better 
among the two. 
Adding 200 inverters might seem like a huge hardware 
overhead hence a simple study to identify the hardware 
overhead was performed. The total number of transistors for 
the ISCAS’89, ITC’99 benchmarks reported in Table III 
were calculated using the transistor count of individual gates 
and flip-flops present in the benchmarks. Table II lists the 
transistor count of the different gates present in the reported 
benchmarks. Column 1 lists the type of the gate or 
component. Column 2 lists the number of transistors present 
in the respective gate or component. 
Table III lists the hardware overhead of the proposed 
approach on select ISCAS’89, ITC’99 benchmarks. Column 
1 lists the benchmarks that were used to measure the 
hardware overhead. Column 2 provides the total number of 
transistor in the given benchmarks. Column 3 lists the 
overhead percentage of the proposed approach. It is observed 
that the hardware overhead of the complete approach is less 
than 0.54% for some of the biggest ITC’99 benchmarks. 
Even for the smaller benchmarks like b15, s15850, and 
s13207, the hardware overhead is less than 1.26%. This 
proves that the proposed method provides a significant 
improvement over existing approaches as well as minimizes 
the hardware overhead for such a challenging problem 
formulation. 
TABLE II.  
TRANSISTOR COUNT FOR VARIOUS LOGIC GATES 
Logic Gates 
Transistor Count 
D Flip Flop 
18 
AND, OR 
6 
NAND, NOR, BUFFER 
4 
INV 
2 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-593-7
VALID 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle

TABLE III.  
HARDWARE OVERHEAD OF THE PROPOSED APPROACH 
Benchmarks 
Total number of 
transistors 
Overhead (%) 
s13207 
36646 
1.26 
s15850 
41900 
1.1 
b15 
42396 
1.09 
b20 
86340 
0.54 
s35392 
98138 
0.47 
b22 
128600 
0.36 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
A method for the earliest identification of the delays due 
to static NBTI stress is proposed. The approach uses 
inverters that age at each application of the system clock. 
The experimental results show that the approach detects 
static NBTI aging very early in the lifetime of a circuit. The 
method can be used as an odometer for the life cycle of the 
circuit independent of its operating frequency. The approach 
has negligible built-in hardware overhead. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been supported in part by grants NSF 
IIP 1230757, NSF IIP 1432026, and NSF IIP 1361847 from 
the NSF I/UCRC for Embedded Systems at SIUC. Any 
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations 
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily reflect the views of the National Science 
Foundation. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] H.K. Alidash, A. Calimera, A. Macii, E. Macii, M. Poncino, 
“On-Chip NBTI and PBTI Tracking through an All-Digital 
Aging Monitor Architecture,” In: J.L. Ayala, D. Shang, A. 
Yakovlev (Eds.) Integrated Circuit and System Design. Power 
and Timing Modeling, Optimization and Simulation. 
PATMOS 2012. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 
7606. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 
[2] P. Alladi and S. Tragoudas, “Aging-aware Critical Paths in 
Deep Submicron,” IOLTS 2014, pp. 184-185. 
[3] S. Bhardwaj, W. Wang, R. Vattikonda, Y. Cao, S. Vrudhula,  
“Predictive modeling of the NBTI effect for reliable design,” 
CICC 2006, pp. 189-192. 
[4] U. Guin, K. Huang, D DiMase, J Carulli, M Tehranipoor, et 
al., “Counterfeit integrated circuits: A rising threat in the 
global semiconductor supply chain,” Proceedings of the 
IEEE, Vol. 102, Issue 8, pp. 1207-1228, Aug. 2014. 
[5] J. Keane, W. Zhang, and CH. Kim, “An array-based odometer 
system 
for 
statistically 
significant 
circuit 
aging 
characterization,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 
46, no.10, pp. 2374-2385, Oct. 2011. 
[6] SV. Kumar, CH. Kim, and SS. Sapatnekar, “An analytical 
model 
for 
Negative 
Bias 
Temperature 
Instability,” 
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided 
Design, Nov. 2006 
[7] C. Ma, H. J. Mattausch, M. Miura-Mattausch, K. Matsuzawa, 
T. Hoshida, et al., “Universal NBTI model and its application 
for high frequency circuit simulation,” IRPS 2014, pp. 
CA.4.1-CA.4.6. 
[8] C. Ma, H. J. Mattausch, M. Miyake, T. Lizuka, K. 
Matsuzawa, et al., “Modeling of NBTI stress induced hole-
trapping and interface-state-generation mechanisms under a 
wide range of bias conditions,” IEICE Transactions on 
Electron, vol. E96-C, no.10, pp 1339-1347, Oct 2013. 
[9] C. Ma, H. J. Mattausch, M. Miyake, T. Lizuka, K. 
Matsuzawa, et al., “Compact reliability model for degradation 
of advanced P-MOSFETS due to NBTI and hot carrier effects 
in the circuit simulation,” IRPS 2013, p.2A.3. 
[10] R. Moudgil, D. Ganta, L. Nazhandali, M. Hsiao, C. Wang, et 
al., “A novel statistical and circuit-based technique for 
counterfeit detection in existing ICs,” GLSVLSI 2013, pp. 1-
6. 
[11] P. R. Savanur, P. Alladi and S. Tragoudas, “A BIST approach 
for counterfeit detection based on NBTI degradation,” DFTS 
2015, pp. 123-126. 
[12] D. K. Schroder and J. A. Babcock, “Negative bias 
temperature instability: road to cross in deep submicron 
silicon semiconductor manufacturing,” Journal of Applied 
Physics, vol. 94, no. 1, pp. 1-17, July 2003. 
[13] D. Schroder, “Negative bias temperature instability: What do 
we understand?” Microelectronics Reliability 47, pp.841-852, 
June 2007. 
[14] R. Vattikonda, W. Wang, and Y. Cao, “Modeling and 
minimization of PMOS NBTI effect for robust nanometer 
Design,” DAC 2006, pp. 1047-1052 
[15] Y. Wang, S Cotofana, and L. Fang, “A unified aging model of 
NBTI and HCI degradation towards lifetime reliability 
management for nanoscale MOSFET circuits,” IEEE/ACM 
International Symposium on Nanoscale Architectures, Jun. 
2011. 
[16] X. Wang, M. Tehranipoor and R. Datta, “A novel architecture 
for on-chip path delay measurement” ITC 2009 
[17] W. Wang, S. Yang, S. Bhardwaj, R. Vattikonda, S. Vrudhula, 
et al., “The impact of NBTI on the performance of 
combinational and sequential circuits,” DAC 2007, pp. 364-
369. 
[18] W. Wang, S. Yang, S. Bhardwaj, S. Vrudhula, F. Liu, et al., 
“The impact of NBTI effect on combinational circuit: 
modeling, simulation, and analysis,” IEEE Trans. VLSI 
Systems, Vol. 18, Issue 2, pp.173-183, Feb. 2010. 
[19] www.ptm.asu.edu 
[20] www.synopsys.com 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-593-7
VALID 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle

