Project in Control: An Innovative Approach 
 
Jos van Rooyen 
Bartosz ICT BV 
Arnhem, the Netherlands 
jos.van.rooyen@bartosz.nl 
 
 
Abstract-Nowadays, companies are still struggling to execute 
and deliver IT-projects successfully. Several reasons can be 
mentioned. The main question, however, is how the business 
can gain confidence in the new or adapted IT-system? This 
article describes an approach where, from a business point of 
view, the IT-system is monitored to assure that the business 
can use the IT-system in its daily operations. The approach is 
developed in practice, during several projects over the last 5 
years. The experiences are collected and structured in such a 
way, that projects and companies can apply the method into 
their own organization. All the companies who applied the 
approach were successfully Ready for Shipment. 
Keywords-Quality 
Monitoring; 
Change 
Management; 
Integrality; Ready for Shipment and Practical Based Approach. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, companies are still struggling to execute and 
deliver IT-projects successfully. Often, requirements are not 
met, business operations are poorly prepared and the 
business processes are not supported well by the delivered 
IT-system. IT and business are not aligned, project’s 
deadlines are far from planned and the budget is exceeded 
significantly. No wonder new projects are welcomed with 
skepticism. 
The causes of failed projects are all recognized and 
nevertheless the IT industry is still struggling with this issue 
and apparently not able to change this. Is it possible to 
change this at all? How to gain more control to successfully 
implement an IT-system? How to avoid decrease of quality 
when the time pressure on the project increases? How to 
ensure that the end-users are well prepared, accept the new 
system and actually experience added value? 
This article describes an approach to improve the 
success rate of IT projects. Instead of focusing on IT, in this 
approach, the business processes are leading and taken as a 
starting point. From there, it is derived how it can be 
supported automated or manually and how that together 
affects the organization. The approach is not the ultimate 
solution, but the experience till now is that by applying the 
described approach, the success rate of the IT-projects will 
increase significantly. How to achieve this? By not looking 
at IT solely! The approach that will be described is a 
Practical-Based Approach. The approach was developed in 
practice during several projects over the last 5 years. Table I 
shows the number of projects, the domain where the 
approach is applied and the size of the projects. The 
experiences are collected and structured in such a way, that 
projects and companies can apply the method into their own 
organization. 
The paper has the following structure. Section II 
describes the cause of failure of IT-projects. Section III 
describes the integral approach. Section IV presents the 
application of the approach. Section V concerns the related 
work. Finally, in Section VI, conclusions and future work 
are mentioned. 
II. 
CAUSE OF FAILURE IT-PROJECTS 
A much referred cause is the shaky base of the project. 
The business case is not specific enough [8]. Requirements 
are 
incomplete, 
ambiguous 
or 
even 
unclear 
[1][10][11][12][13]. A more soft cause is the alignment of 
business and IT [4]. The business is not understood by the 
IT department and vice versa. How can a system be 
developed, if you do not know what process will be 
supported or by whom it will be used? 
Another cause is the skill of the project member [9]. 
Despite the fact that a lot of methods, processes and 
techniques have been developed, the quality of the 
individual skills determines the end result. The system 
development process is lengthening. Many projects are, e.g., 
outsourced to low-wage countries. As such, this does not 
have to be a problem; but, it complicates communication 
because of the distance and different languages it brings 
cultural differences and, as stated before, results in wrong 
products. If the IT-project is not sure what it wants, how to 
expect that others deliver the right product? A well known 
example is the annotation of numbers. Are you talking about 
inches or cm? 
One final cause to be mentioned here is the one-sided 
way of looking to projects. Very often the technology is 
leading. High tech solutions and state-of-the-art are the 
miracle words and triggers. Developers tend to forget for 
whom they are developing software and in what context 
their contribution is used. It is obvious that there is no fit as 
long as it is not considered and treated in coherence along, 
with the to be supported processes and the organization for 
which it is meant for. 
Despite the fact that project management methods, 
development 
methods, 
techniques, 
development 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-233-2
VALID 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle

environments etcetera are improving enormously and 
expanding continuously, this does not seem to result in more 
successful projects. On the contrary, from publications it is 
derived that the percentage of successful projects hardly 
exceeds 45% [1].  
Considering all the above, there is no single cause for 
the failed projects. One thing is for sure. You cannot blame 
the IT only [7]. The business does not know exactly what 
they want, they are not responsive enough, rely too much on 
others such as vendors and bring in new requirements as the 
project is already underway [2][3][5]. The processes should 
be taken as a starting point. What is required for example to 
implement a procurement process? A new system itself is 
not enough. What about the users, workflow, offices and 
communication? Herein lays the core causes of the 
problems that occur. IT should not be looked at solely from 
an IT-perspective, but from a business perspectives instead 
and, as an integral part of the triangle: IT, Processes and 
Organization.  
 
The question is: “How to solve this?” The answer is not 
straightforward. Having made mistakes in the past and 
having learnt from them, an integral approach has been 
developed, where elements of different fields and skills are 
applied and combined. Fields such as, Change Management, 
Testing and Quality Assurance. Elements from the fields 
Testing and Quality Assurance have been clustered under 
the header of Quality Monitoring. The application of the 
combination of the elements from different fields ensures 
that projects can be implemented more successful. An 
integral approach, in which from the business perspective to 
look at IT and the consequences for the organization, has 
been proven to be a successful one. Herein lays the unique 
character of the approach. The approach has been developed 
over the last few years during various projects and gradually 
evolved to what it is today. One thing is for sure, the 
development of this approach will continue for years. 
III. 
THE INTEGRAL APPROACH 
The distinctive character of this approach, is by looking 
from an integral point of view to the required business 
processes, the required resources (IT) and, the (future) 
organization. The integral approach is based on two main 
components, i.e., a base architecture and a 5 steps action 
plan. The base architecture is presented in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. Base Architecture 
 
In the end, the approach should provide enough 
confidence in the IT-system and organizational readiness to 
decide that the IT-system can be released at a certain 
moment in time. In such a way, that you know when the 
system is released, the planned activities can be continued, 
insight in risks is provided, knowledge about the 
weaknesses is present, goals as defined in the business case 
have been reached and assurance to the organization is 
achieved. This way, you can maintain focus during the 
project. 
Every project starts with a certain goal, preferably 
derived from the business goals as defined by the 
organization [8]. The project should contribute to that goal. 
Often, these goals are derived from the mission statement of 
the organization. The goals are elaborated in a business case 
to a project’s objective. From this objective, the main focus 
is determined. This could be changes of the business 
processes, the functionality of the information system, 
changes to the business or even a combination of these 
three.  
In this approach, the business process is always the 
starting point. From here, the needed changes in IT and 
subsequently the consequences for the organization are 
derived. These insights are the base for defining the Change 
Management plan. The input gathered from this approach, is 
also used in defining the Quality Monitoring plan. 
In order to be able to apply this approach in sequential steps, 
the 5 steps action plan has been developed. This roadmap 
will guide organizations from business case to a fine tuned 
implementation of an IT-system. 
 
The 5 steps action plan 
The 5 steps action plan consists, as the name already 
suggests, of 5 sequential steps that contribute to a fine tuned 
implementation. The 5 steps action plan is shown in Figure 
2. A short description of the 5 steps is given below.  
 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-233-2
VALID 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle

Step1: Visioning 
 
Visioning is the preparation of a successful transition, in 
which on forehand the consistency between processes,  
IT and organization, is defined, to sustain implementation 
and embedding of the information system. 
 
Step 2: Reconnaissance 
 
     During the reconnaissance step the scope of the 
implementation and the embedding of the information 
system in relation to processes, IT and organization, in 
consistency with the vision, is explored. The purpose of this 
step is to get a clear picture of the goal of the project. What 
material is available, what kind of development process is 
used and who are the most important stakeholders? 
 
Step 3: Commitment 
 
     During the commitment step, vision and reconnaissance 
will be elaborated into a commitment agreement (contract, 
plan, quality monitor plan, change plan). This is the 
blueprint for the implementation and embedding of the 
information system. 
 
Step 4: Realizing 
 
Realization consists of developing, implementing and 
embedding of the information system in the organization, 
according the agreed quality level over the axes of 
processes, IT and organization. By observations, it might be 
necessary to adjust vision, reconnaissance or agreement. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. 5 steps action plan 
 
 
 
 
 
Step 5: Improving 
 
In the step of improving, the effect [14][15] of the 
implementation, will be evaluated and if needed, processes, 
IT and organization will be optimized. To do so, the 
Deming circle: plan, do, check and act, can be applied. 
 
The 5 steps action plan assumes that the steps are taken 
sequentially. This is correct, but on basis of observations, 
one may need to take a step back. If it appears that the 
Change Management plan is not effective due to whatever 
reason, one should go back to the step reconnaissance and 
adjust the strategy. 
IV. 
APPLICATION 
From experience, the approach, as outlined, can be 
applied in all type of projects, like inhouse projects or 
offshore development (see Table I and further explanation 
in the next sections). This approach is not only applicable 
for new projects, but for releases as well. Depending on the 
targets, a large and solid process can be used, or a quick and 
pragmatic process. Independent of its size, it has been 
proven that the approach is suitable along with different 
development methods, like Waterfall [6], Agile [27], and 
Rational Unified Process (RUP) [28]. 
Keep in mind that a defined plan is not static. Depending 
on deviations, the plan must be adjusted accordingly and 
timely. One should not only regard the ideal path, but also 
regard the situation that deviations rise. For instance when 
requirements are not achieved as expected or not all defects 
are solved. 
A. Experiences 
The described method has been developed over the past 
years 
and 
evaluated 
against 
literature 
[17] 
[18][19][20][21][22]. In many projects, the approach has 
been applied and gradually shaped. At first an inventory of 
the current situation “as is” of the project was conducted. 
The problem that occurred was that it was difficult to 
determine whether the IT-system suffices the business 
needs. For that reason acceptance criteria were defined, 
including entry and exit criteria, requirements and product 
risks. Based on the acceptance criteria, it became possible to 
measure the quality of the IT-system and the Operational 
Readiness of the organization. Another major development 
was the idea to not only measure and monitor the IT-project 
and report findings, but also to cooperate in the 
improvement of all findings together with all involved 
parties such as business units, third party software vendors 
and system management. 
Change management was able to made adjustments to 
their plan, based on the results of the quality monitoring 
activities. An example is the so-called known error. A 
known error is an accepted bug in the software of an IT-
system for which a validated workaround is available. In 
that case, this bug will not affect the business. However 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-233-2
VALID 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle

Change Management has to communicate this known error 
to the stakeholders. 
This is an example how Quality Monitoring and Change 
Management amplified each other. Another angle of 
integrality. This way, the integral approach has been 
matured to the current level. The projects, where this 
approach has been applied, are all released successfully due 
to the continuous improvements.  
It appeared that in environments in which a lot of (third) 
parties are involved, the approach worked very well. 
Business knew what was going to be delivered, what the 
quality would be, and whether the users and organization 
were ready to support the change and to use the product. By 
defining and agreeing the acceptance criteria up front, it was 
possible to review the test process of the several third party 
vendors. To determine the coverage degree for instance of 
the applied test sets. 
It is about production readiness versus product 
readiness. Production readiness means that the organization 
is ready and prepared to use the new IT-system (product 
readiness). That includes cultural changes, migration of 
information, training of employees and measurement of 
satisfaction of customers. 
 
B. Applicability 
The applicability of the base architecture is high. The 
approach was applied into large international complex 
commercial organizations. Industry, banks and insurance 
companies, 
but 
also 
in 
large 
(semi) 
government 
organizations, the base architecture proved to be a big gain. 
The architecture is not only applicable in the IT domain, but 
we believe it is applicable on projects in general. However, 
there is no evidence yet.  The experience till now is 
collected in IT or IT related companies [16]. Detailed 
information is gathered in Table I. 
 
Table I. FACTS & FIGURES APPLIED PROJECTS 
Domain 
No. of 
projects 
Type of 
project 
Size in million 
euro’s 
Industry 
2 
Third party 
development 
 >20 
Government 
2 
Third party 
development 
>200 
Energy & 
utilities 
2 
Third party 
development 
Inhouse 
development 
>10 
Semi 
government 
1 
Third party 
development 
<1 
 
 
 
The integral approach has appeared to be usable in a 
whole, but also parts of the approach can be used 
autonomic. Especially the step Realizing. Reason for this is 
that projects already started before we were involved into 
the projects.  
C. Validation of the approach 
As stated before the described integral approach is a 
practical based approach. The experience is that validation 
of the approach was hard to achieve. The approach, which 
was chosen, is also practical based. Based on the findings 
the approach was expanded with new techniques. Applying 
these techniques in the project the effectiveness could be 
measured. Based on these measurements, the approach was 
validated. In the situation the techniques were not sufficient 
enough; new ideas were developed to solve the findings. On 
this way, the approach was validated on a continuous base. 
V. 
RELATED WORK 
The presented integral approach is at the moment really 
unique in the industry. Existing approaches are focusing on 
IT solely [18][23]. The presented integral approach, focus 
not only on IT but also on the business processes and the 
related organization. Another main advantage is that the 
presented approach, not only look to the System 
Development Life Cycle but also to the implementation 
phase and the system management phase [26]. There are 
some interesting developments related to parts of the 
presented approach. These are focusing on product quality 
[24]. However, there is no interaction with the involved 
business processes and organization. Another development is 
around the topic of Quality Supervision [25]. This 
development is focusing on improvement of the total System 
Development Life Cycle. The goal of Quality Supervision is 
to remove all waste in the chain. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This article described an integral practical based 
approach, from a business point of view, to collect 
information to determine if the organization is ready for 
usage of the new or adapted IT-product. The described 
approach is applied in several large IT-projects successfully 
(see Table I). All projects are released without major 
problems. Applying the presented approach has several 
advantages such as: Organization is ready for shipment, 
knowledge about weakspots is delivered and the organization 
is able to decide on a structured way to go live or not. One of 
the main topics for the upcoming period is to develop a 
structured questionnaire, which can be used in the 
reconnaissance step to determine the current situation. Based 
on the results, concrete steps can be defined. By executing a 
lot of projects in the coming years more experiences must be 
collected to validate the integral approach. 
 
 
 
 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-233-2
VALID 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I like to thank my fellow authors, Jan Fokke Mulder, 
Hans Somers, Hanneke Kroon van der Linde and especially 
Jurgen van Amerongen. I would also like to thank all the 
companies who have provided input and used the method in 
their development process. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Ernst & Young, ”ICT barometer,” ict-barometer.nl/rapporten, 
2009. 
[2] K. Lindhout, ”5 valkuilen bij veranderen IT,” FM.NL, mei 
2010. 
[3] N. Beenker, ”Opdrachtgever grootste risico bij IT-projecten,” 
nicobeenker.nl, May 2010. 
[4] R. Poels, ”Beïnvloeden en meten van business-IT alignment,” 
Amsterdam: Dissertation VU University, 2006. 
[5] L. Dohmen, ”Hoe adviseurs, coaches en goeroes onbewust 
verandering blokkeren,” ManagementSite.nl, 2011. 
[6] W. Turner, R. Langerhorst, G. Hice, H. Eilers, E. Remmerde, 
and A. Uijttenbroek, “SDM – System Development 
Methodology,” Rijswijk: PANDATA, 1990. 
[7] K. Buren, ”Waarom mislukken al die IT projecten,” 
Persberichten.com, May 2011. 
[8] R. de Jong, M. Webster, A. Bouma, and A. de Jager, 
”Overheid gebaat bij business case,” Automatiseringsgids, 
April 2011. 
[9] T. Mulder and H. Mulder, ”Kwaliteit projectteams onder de 
maat,” Automatiseringsgids, Dec. 2011. 
[10] R. Glass, “The Software Research Crisis,” IEEE Software 
11(6): pp. 42-47, Nov. 1994. 
[11] N. Fenton, S. Lawrence Pfleeger, and R. Glass, ”Science and 
Substance: A Challenge To Software engineers,” IEEE 
Software, pp. 86-95, July 1994. 
[12] R. Charette, ”Why software fails,” IEEE Spectrum, Sept. 
2005. 
[13] R. Glass, “Facts and Fallacies of Software Engineering,” 
Boston: Addison-Wesley, 2010. 
[14] R. van Solingen and E. Berghout, ”Goal Question Metrics,” 
Berkshire: McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, 1999. 
[15] B. Lohman and J. van Os, ”Praktisch lean management,” 
Geldermalsen: Maj Engineering Publishing, 2010. 
[16] J. van Rooyen, J. Mulder, H. Kroon vd Linde, H. Somers, and 
J. van Amerongen, “Project de Baas,” Den Bosch: UTN 
Publishers, 2011. 
[17] B. vd Burgt and I. Pinkster, ”Succesvol Testmanagement: een 
integrale aanpak,” Den Haag: ten Hagen & Stam, 2003. 
[18] T. Koomen, L. van der Aalst, B. Broekman, and M. Vroon, 
“TMAP Next for result driven testing,” Den Bosch: UTN 
Publishers, 2006. 
[19] K. Jung and G. van de Looi, “100% succesvolle IT-
projecten,” Amsterdam: Pearson Education Benelux B.V., 
2011. 
[20]  L. de Caluwe and H. Vermaak, ”Leren Veranderen,” Alphen 
aan den Rijn: Kluwer, 2006. 
[21] S. Covey, ”The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People,” 
Free Press, 1989. 
[22]  P. Crosby, ”Kwaliteit totaal,” Deventer: Kluwer, 1993. 
[23]  C. Schotanus, “TestFrame,” Den Haag: Academic Service, 
2008. 
[24]  J. Hofmans and E. Pasmans, “Quality Level Management,” 
Den Bosch: UTN Publishers, 2012. 
[25]  R. Marselis and E. Roodenrijs, “the PointZERO vision,” 
Groningen: LINE UP boek en media bv, 2012. 
[26]  J. van Amerongen, “softwareapplicaties: goed gebouwd en 
toch niet af!?,” TNN,  pp. 35-39, Jan. 2012. 
[27]  K. Beck, “Manifesto for Agile Software Development,” 
agilemanifesto.org, 2001. 
[28]  R. Collaris and E. Dekker, “RUP op maat,” Den Haag: 
Academic Service, 2011.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-233-2
VALID 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation Lifecycle

