Public Key Infrastructure and Crypto Agility
Concept for Intelligent Transportation Systems
Markus Ullmann∗ †, Christian Wieschebrink∗ and Dennis K¨ugler∗
∗ Federal Ofﬁce for Information Security
D-53133 Bonn, Germany
Email: {markus.ullmann christian.wieschebrink dennis.kuegler}@bsi.bund.de
† University of Applied Sciences Bonn-Rhine-Sieg
Institute for Security Research
D-53757 Sankt Augustin, Germany
Email: markus.ullmann@h-brs.de
Abstract—Secure vehicular communication has been discussed
over a long period of time. Now,- this technology is implemented
in different Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) projects in
europe. In most of these projects a suitable Public Key Infras-
tructure (PKI) for a secure communication between involved
entities in a Vehicular Ad hoc Network (VANET) is needed. A ﬁrst
proposal for a PKI architecture for Intelligent Vehicular Systems
(IVS PKI) is given by the car2car communication consortium.
This architecture however mainly deals with inter vehicular com-
munication and is less focused on the needs of Road Side Units.
Here, we propose a multi-domain PKI architecture for Intelligent
Transportation Systems, which considers the necessities of road
infrastructure authorities and vehicle manufacturers, today. The
PKI domains are cryptographically linked based on local trust
lists. In addition, a crypto agility concept is suggested, which takes
adaptation of key length and cryptographic algorithms during
PKI operation into account.
Keywords–Vehicular Ad hoc Networks (VANETs), Vehicle-to-
Vehicle Communication (V2V), Vehicle-to-Infrastructure Commu-
nication (V2I), Secure Intelligent Transport Systems, Public Key
Infrastructures
I.
INTRODUCTION
Vehicle-to-vehicle
(V2V)
and
vehicle-to-infrastructure
communication (V2I) (consolidated V2X) has been discussed
intensively in recent years. To specify use cases and pre-
pare all the necessary standardizations for V2V and V2I
communication, the Car2Car Communication Consortium was
initiated by European vehicle manufacturers and supported by
equipment suppliers, research organisations and other partners
[1]. The results of the technical discussions are a collection
of ETSI (European Telecommunications Standard Institute)
standards. The ﬁrst milestone in applying this technology in
a realistic setting was the SimTD project with more than
100 vehicles equipped with V2V communication technology
in the Frankfurt area in Germany in 2012 and 2013, see
[2]. In a next step, the V2X technology will be deployed
in large scale intelligent mobility infrastructure projects, for
example SCOOP@F [3] in France and the ITS corridor, a
joint Intelligent Transportation System (C-ITS) cooperation
between Austria, Germany and the Netherlands [4]. In the
C-ITS project Roads Work Warning Trailers are equipped
with a digital Road Works Warning Gateway (RWWG) to
communicate with the bypassing vehicles. This projects mark
only the very beginning of ITS technology deployment in
Europe. Further plans are already mentioned: the integration of
V2X gateways in roadside emergency telephones, sign gantries
etc.
The wireless communication technology for cooperative
V2V and V2X communication is based on the IEEE 802.11p
standard. For this, a frequency spectrum in the 5.9 GHz range
has been allocated on a harmonized basis in Europe in line
with similar allocations in US. The neccessary speciﬁcation
and standardization is sone by the ETSI. This includes the
security standardization as well [5].
According to these standards messages transmitted by vehi-
cles or RSUs shall be digitally signed to guarantee integrity and
authenticity. In order to authenticate the corresponding keys
a suitable PKI has to be established. A number of practical
considerations has to be taken into account when designing
such a PKI.
•
Many different stakeholders like vehicle manufactur-
ers, transportation infrastructure authorities etc. partic-
ipate in ITS, especially in multi-national (e.g. Euro-
pean) systems. The PKI should provide ﬂexibility to
support different operators managing the vehicles and
RSUs in their respective responsibilities.
•
Requirements on cryptographic algorithms, domain
parameters, key lengths etc. may change over time
due to new weaknesses, new attacks or the increase
of computer performance. In general, this means that a
PKI needs a concept to switch to a new cryptographic
setting during its (possibly long) lifetime.
•
Revocation of certiﬁcates may turn out to be challeng-
ing in complex ITS scenarios. A simple mechanism
for revoking signing rights should be used.
In this paper, we introduce a multi-domain PKI for ITS
based on Local Trust Lists (LTL). This concept considers
a IVS PKI domain and different ITS PKI domains. A ITS
PKI domain is slightly different to the IVS PKI proposed
by the Car2Car Communication Consortium [6]. First, our
approach guarantees that the infrastructure components (Road
Side Units (RSU)) remain under control of the particular
infrastructure authority. Second, the ITS PKI is interoperable
with the IVS PKI for the vehicles. This ITS PKI consists of
two parts: a Long Term Certiﬁcation Authority (LT-CA) for
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-434-3
VEHICULAR 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

the identiﬁcation of RSU gateways and a credential CA (C-
CA) for issuing credential certiﬁcates to RSU gateways. With
the C-CA we take the hostile environment of RSU gateways
into account. We assume that attackers are able to manipulate
the RSUs like roadside emergency telephone gateways, sign
gantry gateways etc. physically. A PKI can not prevent such
kind of attacks, but mitigate their effects to a certain degree.
Our ITS PKI proposal supports cryptographic agility in the
sense that modiﬁcations of cryptographic keys and algorithms
during lifetime of the PKI are possible.
Finally, we derive necessary modiﬁcations of the existing
ETSI certiﬁcate format [5] to be compatible to our concept
because concepts for the delegation of rights and a crypto
agility approach are missing to date. Here, we address only
modiﬁcations to the ETSI certiﬁcate format, which are moti-
vated from an infrastructure perspective. Within this paper we
do not analyze the pseudonym concept in depth, which is pro-
posed to assure sender anonymity and message unlinkability
for vehicles. (We brieﬂy present this concept in chapter III-B.)
The following sections of this paper are organized as
follows: Section II is a description of related work. Section III
provides a brief overview of the secure V2V communication
speciﬁed in the according ETSI standards. Also, the suggested
PKI architecture for Intelligent Vehicle Systems, speciﬁed in
[6], is described. Here, we state the problems if this IVS PKI
is used for issuing certiﬁcates for ITS RSU gateways, too.
In the next Section IV, the multi-domain PKI and ITS PKI
concept for RSU gateways and the crypto agility proposal are
introduced. Section V brieﬂy addresses security requirements
for RSU gateways. Finally, in Section VI we summarize our
results.
II.
RELATED WORK
Security and privacy issues in Vehicular Ad hoc Networks
(VANETs) are addressed in a lot of research papers. A detailed
overview of attacks in VANETs is given by Ghassan Samara
et al. in [7]. Di Ma and Gene Tsusik give an overview about
security and privacy in emerging wireless networks including
VANETs. Overall, a good overview concerning security and
privacy in V2X communication can be found in [8]. A detailed
analysis of privacy requirements and a comparison with the
security requirements in VANETs is given in [9]. Beside that,
further security and privacy concepts are presented [10], [11],
[12], [13], and [14].
Different trust models for multi-domain PKIs are described
in general in [15], [16]. Here, we will follow the naming
convention of [16]. It distinguishes between End Entities (EE),
that are subject of a certiﬁcate (vehicle or RSU gateway),
Certiﬁcation Authorities (CAs), that issue certiﬁcates, and
root CAs, which are on top of a hierarchy of CAs. In [6]
Norbert Bissmeyer et al. suggest a generic PKI for securing
V2X communication. The car2car communication consortium
adopted this proposal. We outline this IVS PKI in Section III.
III.
BRIEF OVERVIEW SECURE V2X COMMUNICATION
A. Communication
In the ETSI ITS architecture [17] two different message
types are deﬁned. Cooperative Awareness Messages (CAMs)
are broadcasted periodically with a maximum packet genera-
tion rate of 10 Hz. Based on received CAM messages, vehicles
Figure 1. Examplary message format of DENM. The DENM consists of a
header, different data containers, e.g., the management container, a signature
and the appropriate certiﬁcate.
can calculate a local dynamic map of their environment. It is
not planned to forward CAM messages hop-to-hop. In contrast,
the second message type, Dezentralized Environmental Noti-
ﬁcation Messages (DENMs) , are event-driven and indicate
a speciﬁc safety situation, e.g., road works warning (from
a RSU gateway) or a damaged vehicle warning (from an
IVS gateway). DENM messages can be transmitted hop-by-
hop. RWWGs in the C-ITS project transmit DENM messages.
Figure 1 illustrates the structure of the DENM message format.
For road sign and trafﬁc light gateways etc. new message
formats have still to be speciﬁed in future.
B. Security and Privacy Architecture for Secure V2X Commu-
nication
To guarantee message integrity and authenticity, all CAM
and DENM messages are signed with the cryptographic sig-
nature algorithm ECDSA by the sender. Due to privacy re-
quirements (sender anonymity and message unlinkability), the
messages are signed using pseudonymous certiﬁcates where
the used keys and certiﬁcates are changed periodically. There-
fore, a vehicular gateway has a set of N valid pseudonymous
certiﬁcates for a period of time. The set size N and the
pseudonym change frequency are not speciﬁed and can be
chosen by the vehicle manufacturer. A Pseudonymous Cer-
tiﬁcation Authority (PCA) is responsible for the issuing of
pseudonymous certiﬁcates Pcert1 ...PcertN to the vehicles.
Vehicular pseudonymous certiﬁcates Pcert can not be revoked.
Pseudonymous certiﬁcates will only be issued to authenticated
vehicles.
To identify a valid vehicle, each vehicular gateway is
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-434-3
VEHICULAR 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Figure 2. IVS PKI architecture promoted by the car2car communication
consortium for Intelligent Vehicular Systems. This PKI consists of the Root
Certiﬁcation Authority (IVS-RCA), the Long Term Certiﬁcation Authority
(LTCA) and the Pseudonym Certiﬁcation Authority (PCA)
equipped with a long term key pair and a corresponding vehic-
ular long term certiﬁcate LTcert for authentication purposes.
A key pair and the according long term certiﬁcate LTcert are
issued to a vehicle at the beginning of the vehicle’s lifetime.
The issuing process of long term certiﬁcates is performed
by the Long Term Certiﬁcation Authority (LTCA). Validity
periods of the LTcert and the Pcert are not speciﬁed to date.
PCA and LTCA operate under a root CA called Intelli-
gent Vehicle System root CA (IVS-RCA). To date, following
revocation operations are provided: revocation of a LTCA-
and PCA certiﬁcation authority certiﬁcate and revocation of
vehicular long term certiﬁcates LTcert. The architecture of the
IVS PKI domain is shown in Figure 2.
Long term certiﬁcates and pseudonymous certiﬁcates are
implemented based on the new ETSI certiﬁcate format [5].
This certiﬁcate format was designed for the automotive domain
and is still not widely applied yet. Primary design principle
is shortness of the certiﬁcate format due to the necessary
transmission over the wireless IEEE 802.11p channel.
C. Using the IVS PKI for Road Side Units
The IVS PKI domain shown in Figure 2 is proposed by the
car2car consortium for issuing certiﬁcates to RSU gateways as
well. However, security and privacy requirements for vehicles
and infrastructure components are not necessarily identical. In
contrast to vehicles, RSUs (road work warning, trafﬁc light,
...) do not involve persons during operation comparable to a
motorist. Usually they operate without any human supervision.
That is the reason that from our point of view, RSU gateways
do not have to regard any active privacy concerns. As con-
sequence, RSU gateways do not really need a set of valid
pseudonymous certiﬁcates at each time. Instead, we propose
that RSU gateways need only one Credential Certiﬁcate with a
speciﬁc subject name adressing the RSU for each time frame.
Due to security considerations for RSU gateways, see Section
V, the validity period of credential certiﬁcates should be rather
short.
Moreover, arising security weaknesses of the used security
technology may be asessed differently by vehicle manufactur-
ers on the one side and an infrastructure authority on the other
side. However, the rules of operation for a PKI domain are
deﬁned in a single PKI policy, which will be speciﬁed by the
root certiﬁcation authority. For this reason, we propose a multi-
domain PKI architecture: individual ITS PKIs under control of
infrastructure autorities and an IVS PKI under control of the
vehicle manufacturers, which are cryptographically linked to
each other based on LTLs. So, each individual PKI domain can
specify its own PKI policy for their speciﬁc needs. In addition,
this multi-domain PKI architecture ensures that RSU unit
gateways remain under control of the particular infrastructure
authority.
The concept of a multi-domain PKI architecture without
any superior root CA is not new and already mentioned in [16].
It has been applied globally for electronic passports for many
years. Here, any country operates its own root certiﬁcation
authority and has its own local trust list. The different national
root certiﬁcation authorities are cryptographically linked based
on local trust lists. This concept works quite well and seems to
be a good architecture approach for intelligent transportation
systems, too. The beneﬁt of this approach is the possibility to
conﬁgure PKI domains as needed. A drawback of the multi-
domain PKI concept based on local trust list is that each
PKI domain has to securely mange is own LTL. More details
concerning this issue can be found in Section IV-C.
IV.
ITS PKI CONCEPT
A. Role of Credential Certiﬁcates for Road Side Units
The primary use case for RSU gateways is the transmis-
sion of information, e.g., as DENM message to the vehicles
using the wireless IEEE 802.11p channel. Due to integrity
and authenticity reasons, these messages have to be signed.
Therefore, the RSU gateways need speciﬁc keys and according
certiﬁcates. RSUs do not have to regard any privacy concerns,
as explained in Section III-C. Technically, this means that
RSU gateways do not have to have pseudonymous keys and
certiﬁcates. Instead, we propose that RSU gateways have only
one valid credential key pair and one corresponding credential
certiﬁcate at each time. Only in the transition phase between
two certiﬁcate validity periods a RSU gateway has two valid
credential certiﬁcates CcertN−1 and CcertN .
The RSU gateway should be implemented in such a way
that it acts in his designated role and transmits DENM mes-
sages only if it owns a valid credential certiﬁcate. By this a
possible misuse of RSU gateways is made more difﬁcult.
B. ITS PKI Architecture
As mentioned above, we propose that RSUs have only one
credential key pair and one corresponding credential certiﬁcate
Ccert at each time. The secret key corresponding to such
a Ccert is used for signing RSU gateway messages, e.g.,
DENM messages. For this reason, these certiﬁcates have to be
implemented according to the ETSI certiﬁcate format. Since
it is technically challenging to distribute certiﬁcate revocation
lists (CRLs) to vehicles in time, credential certiﬁcates should
have a short validity period, for example one day. Thereby
implicit revocation of Ccert becomes possible by not issuing
new credential certiﬁcates to RSU gateways. The exact validity
period of credential certiﬁcates have to be speciﬁed according
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-434-3
VEHICULAR 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

to a detailed risk assessment concerning the addressed RSU
type. For example RWWG are deployed for road works sites
which usually are established for one or two days. It may
be good practice then to issue a credential certiﬁcate with a
validity period of a few days to a RWWG shortly before it is
deployed.
For authentication purposes, e.g., to obtain credential cer-
tiﬁcates (for example on a daily basis) an infrastructure com-
ponent requires a long term identiﬁcation certiﬁcate LTcert.
These long term certiﬁcates LTcert are issued by Long Term
Certiﬁcate Authority (LT-CAs) during the enrolment of the
RSU gateway. A long term certiﬁcate LTcert is used within a
certiﬁcate request for credential certiﬁcates towards the C-CA.
We suggest that the credential key pair is generated within
the secure element of the RSU gateway and the credential
certiﬁcate is only issued after mutual authentication of RSU
gateway and C-CA and only if the LTcert of the RSU gateway
is not revoked. Therefore, the LT-CA has to provide a CRL
for revoked long term certiﬁcates LTcert.
A LTcert is only visible inside the ITS PKI and is not
transmitted to vehicles. In particular, it is not communicated
over the IEEE 802.11p channel. For this reason, we suggest
to implement the ITS LTcert according to the X.509 v3 cer-
tiﬁcate proﬁle. This proﬁle is widely applied and provides all
necessary certiﬁcate services like time stamping, issuing CRLs
etc. The validity period of a LTcert should be at the order of
years, e.g., ﬁve to six years for RSU gateways like RWWGs.
As a rule, 5 to 6 years seems to be reasonable concerning
useable cryptography or hardware security vulnerabilities. Due
to different certiﬁcate issuing policies and certiﬁcate formats
the LT-CAs and the C-CAs are attached to different root
certiﬁcation authorities, which are termed LT-RCA and C-RCA
respectively.
Due to the long validity periods of long term certiﬁcates,
certiﬁcate revocation, implemented as CRL according X.509
v3, is suggested. Once a long term certiﬁcate is revoked, no
credential certiﬁcates are issued to the RSU gateway any more.
Due to the short validity period of credential certiﬁcates
of RSU gateways, the RSU gateways require an online com-
munication channel, e.g., via GSM to receive new credential
certiﬁcates.
C. Crypto Agility
Figure 4 shows how the validity periods of the certiﬁcates
within the ITS PKI domain relate to each other. The validity
periods follow the shell model, i.e. the validity periods of
certiﬁcates are enclosed in the validity periods of superior
certiﬁcates.
1)
A certiﬁcate of a CA is in one of three states: active,
passive or expired. After generation of a key pair
the according certiﬁcate is in state active. Over time
the certiﬁcate state changes from active to passive to
expired.
2)
A certiﬁcate in state active is used for issuing certiﬁ-
cates to subordinate CAs or RSU gateways.
•
Assume that a LT-RCA root key pair (secret
key: RCALT SK 1, public key: RCALTP K 1)
is generated at time 0 of Figure 4. The
secret key
RCALT SK 1
is used to sign
Figure 3. ITS PKI domain architecture. An ITS PKI domain consists of a
LT-CA for issuing long term certiﬁcates LTcert and a C-CA for issuing
credential certiﬁcates Ccert.
Figure 4. Certiﬁcate shell model. The validity period of a certiﬁcate is within
the validity period of the issuing Certiﬁcation Authority. E.g., the validity
period of CALTcert 1 is within the validity period of RCALTcert 1
and
issue
a
self-certiﬁed
LT-RCA
cer-
tiﬁcate
RCALTcert 1, ﬁrst. The certiﬁcate
RCALTcert 1 is in state active.
•
The secret key RCALT SK 1 is used to sign
CA certiﬁcates: CALTcert 1 and CALTcert 2.
•
The certiﬁcate RCALTcert 1 switches to state
passive at time point I when the next root
key pair (secret key:
RCALT SK 2, public
key: RCALTP K 2) and according certiﬁcate
RCALTcert 2 are issued. Now, the certiﬁcate
RCALTcert 2 is in state active. A certiﬁcate
in state passive is not used to issue certiﬁ-
cates any longer. However it is still needed to
verify already issued subordinate certiﬁcates.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-434-3
VEHICULAR 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

At time point II certiﬁcate RCALTcert 1 ex-
pires.
3)
Certiﬁcate RCALTcert 2 is termed Link Certiﬁcate
because it is signed with the former LT-RCA secret
key RCALT SK 1.
Over long lifetimes the requirements for cryptographic
mechanisms are changing. This has implications for the cryp-
tographic mechanisms applied within the PKI domain, too. The
cryptographic setting of the PKI has to be adapted according
to current cryptographic requirements. All CAs in a PKI have
to follow the rules and instructions of the root CA. Therefore,
changes of a cryptographic setting for a whole ITS PKI are
prescribed by the root certiﬁcation authority LT-RCA or C-
RCA.
Changes to the following components are conceivable:
1)
Elliptic Curve Domain Parameter (e.g., because
longer key lengths are necessary)
2)
Hash algorithm (e.g., due to new hash collision
problems)
3)
Signature algorithm (e.g., due to weaknesses in the
used signature algorithm).
We suggest to implement a new PKI crypto setting by
means of a link certiﬁcate, assuming that the certiﬁcate format
allows the speciﬁcation of cryptographic parameters. Obvi-
ously, modiﬁcations can only be applied if the infrastructure
components are technically able to perform the new algo-
rithms.
The validity period of a LTcert and a Ccert differ a lot. A
LTcert has a validity period of several years, whereas a Ccert
has a validity period of few days at most. If the issuing PKIs
C-CA and ITS-C-RCA have similar short validity periods with
respect to the shell model, the cryptographic settings between
LTcert and Ccert can differ. In particular, shorter keys can
be used for signing Ccert towards signing a LTcert. Today,
the ETSI certiﬁcate format only provides the NIST Elliptic
Curve Domain Parameter P-256 [18] with 256 bits long secret
keys. This key length is sufﬁcient for the very near future. It
is however highly probable that longer key length have to be
used for long term certiﬁcates LTcert in future.
D. Secure Trust Establishment between PKI domains
An examplary architecture of a multi-domain PKI with
three PKI domains (ITS I, IVS and ITS II) is shown in Figure
5. In our example there is only one IVS domain with the
IVS-RCA to issue certiﬁcates for vehicles managed by the
vehicle manufacturers and two separate ITS domains ITS I and
ITS II with the root CAs C-RCA I and C-RCA II managed
by different infrastructure authorities. These two ITS domains
issue credential certiﬁcates to RSU gateways in their respective
domain. Now trust relations between the different PKI domains
have to be established somehow. This can be accomplished by
securely exchanging self-signed certiﬁcates of the respective
root CAs of the PKI domains. Each root CA maintains a LTL
containing the certiﬁcates of the root CAs of the other domains
it trusts. The LTL of a PKI domain is signed (for authentication
reasons) and issued to all members of the domain by the root
CA, e.g., C-RCA I manages the LTL for the ITS I domain.
Each PKI domain can individually deﬁne the needed rules that
are sufﬁcient to trust a separate PKI domain.
Figure 5. Examplary multi-domain PKI architecture with one IVS domain
and two ITS domains: ITS I and ITS II.
To verify the authenticity of RSU gateway DENM mes-
sages in our examplary architecture, the vehicles have to
know the root PKI certiﬁcates of the PKI domains ITS I
and ITS II: C−RCA ICcert 1 and C−RCA IICcert 1. If the
IVS PKI domain trusts in the ITS I and ITS II PKI domains
the certiﬁcates
C−RCA ICcert 1 and
C−RCA IICcert 1 are
elements of the LTL of the IVS PKI domain. If a LTL of a PKI
domain is changed all entities of the PKI domain (subordinate
CAs and EEs) have to know this information. A time-critical
situation arises when one speciﬁc PKI domain, e.g., the ITS I
PKI domain loses trust and has to be removed from the LTL
of the IVS PKI domain. In this case all affected entities in the
IVS PKI domain have to update their LTL as soon as possible.
Based on the currently discussed ITS applications, trust
relations between the different ITS domains, here ITS I and
ITS II, are not really required since no messages are ex-
changed between these domains. In our example the LTL of
the two ITS domains just contain the RCALTcert 1.
E. Necessary ETSI Certiﬁcate Format Adaptations
In our paper, a multi-domain PKI based on LTLs and an
according crypto agility concept is presented. The described
mechanisms require some adaptation of the current ETSI
certiﬁcate format.
a) Elliptic curve cryptography: The ETSI certiﬁcate
format regards only Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) per-
formed on NIST domain parameters P-256. These domain
parameters have a speciﬁc structure to perform ECC calcu-
lations very fast. But this structure opens speciﬁc side channel
attacks. For example, even effective countermeasurements like
point blinding and scalar blinding of ECC implementations
are not sufﬁcient to resist side channel attacks on NIST ECC
implementations, see [19]. Therefore, further cryptographic
ECC domain parameters (e.g., brainpool curves) should be
added [20].
b) Rights management: Fire trucks and police vehicles
need speciﬁc rights during action. These rights have to be
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-434-3
VEHICULAR 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

coded within certiﬁcates, too. But only qualiﬁed CAs may
issue these kind of certiﬁcates. The ETSI rights management
concept should be enhanced in a sense that a subordinate CA
can only assign restricted rights to issued certiﬁcates.
c) Link certiﬁcate: The ETSI certiﬁcate has to support
link certiﬁcates to support crypto agility.
To date, ECDSA is speciﬁed as signature algorithm.
ECDSA is an appendix signature. Because all entities (vehicles
and RSU gateways) share only one wireless communication
channel (IEEE 802.11p) it is important to restrict the length
of CAMs and DENMs to avoid message collisions on the
wireless IEEE 802.p channel at best. An alternative to appendix
signatures are signatures with message recovery. For elliptic
curve cryptography, e.g., Abes signature scheme with message
recovery is applicable, see [21].
V.
SECURITY REQUIREMENTS FOR RSU GATEWAYS
RSU gateways operate in a potentially hostile environment.
Attackers are able to physically manipulate these RSUs in-
cluding the electronic gateway components. Also misuse of
RSU gateways can not be excluded. First, these RSU gateways
need a speciﬁc security functionality to resist active attacks
and against removal of RSU gateways. But secondly, the PKI
architecture has to appropriately regard this attack scenario
as well. The idea is that a RSU gateway only acts in its
designated role, e.g., as RWWG station, if it owns a valid
credential certiﬁcate Ccert.
Moreover, security requirements for RSU gateways should
be carefully analyzed and speciﬁed, e.g., in form of a Protec-
tion Proﬁle (PP) according the Common Criteria.
The RSU gateways have to be satisfy following exemplary
security requirements:
1)
RSU gateways need a secure storage for crypto-
graphic keys and have to be equipped with side
channel resistant implementations of cryptographic
algorithms.
2)
RSU gateways are resistant against active attacks and
removal from the RSU.
3)
A RSU gateway is only able to act in his designated
role if it owns a valid credential certiﬁcate.
If RSU gateways have speciﬁc resistance against active attacks
they can play an import role as separate trust anchors in a
cooperative ITS system, e.g., for implementing secure time
synchronization, distribution of CRLs etc.
VI.
CONCLUSION
The proposed PKI of the Car2Car Communication Con-
sortium for Intelligent Vehicular Systems (IVS PKI) does not
regard all needs of RSUs. For this reason we suggest a multi-
domain PKI to adequately address the requirements of vehicle
manufacturers and infrastructure authorities. The PKI domains
are cryptographically linked based on LTLs. In this paper the
PKI architecture is only brieﬂy described. Details have to be
speciﬁed within the PKI policy documents of the different PKI
domains. An open issue is the discussion of our multi-domain
PKI proposal with stakeholders.
VII.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank Sandro Berndt and Arno
Spinner from the Federal Highway Research Institute (BASt),
our colleague Hans-Peter Wagner and the anonymous referees
for valuable remarks.
REFERENCES
[1]
Car 2 Car Communication Consortium, “Mission, News, Documents,”
2015, https://www.car-2-car.org.
[2]
SimTD,
“Secure
intelligent
mobility,”
2008-2013,
http://www.simtd.de/index.dhtml/deDE/index.html.
[3]
European
Commission,
“SCOOP@F,”
2013,
http://inea.ec.europa.eu/en/ten-t.
[4]
BMVI, “Cooperative its corridor rotterdam-franfurt-vienna joint deploy-
ment,” 2014, http://www.bmvi.de.
[5]
ETSI,
“Intelligent
Transport
Systems
(ITS);Security;
Security
header and certiﬁcate formats, ETSI TS 103 097 V1.1.1,” 2013,
http://www.etsi.org.
[6]
N. Bissmeyer, H. Stubing, E. Schoch, S. Gotz, J. P. Stotz, and B. Lonc,
“A generic public key infrastructure for securing car-to-x communica-
tion,” in 18th ITS World Congress, 2011.
[7]
G. Samara, W. A. Al-Salihy, and R. Sures, “Security analysis of
vehicular ad hoc nerworks (vanet),” in Network Applications Protocols
and Services (NETAPPS), 2010 Second International Conference on.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 55–60.
[8]
Hagen St¨ubing, Multilayered Security and Privacy Protection in Car-
to-X Networks - Solutions from Application down to Physical Layer.
Springer Vieweg, 2013.
[9]
F. Schaub, Z. Ma, and F. Kargl, “Privacy requirements in vehicular
communication systems,” in Computational Science and Engineering,
2009. CSE’09. International Conference on, vol. 3.
IEEE, 2009, pp.
139–145.
[10]
M. Raya and J.-P. Hubaux, “Securing vehicular ad hoc networks,”
Journal of Computer Security, vol. 15, no. 1, 2007, pp. 39–68.
[11]
J. Camenisch, S. Hohenberger, and M. Ø. Pedersen, “Batch veriﬁcation
of short signatures,” in Advances in Cryptology-EUROCRYPT 2007.
Springer, 2007, pp. 246–263.
[12]
R. Lu, X. Lin, H. Zhu, P.-H. Ho, and X. Shen, “Ecpp: Efﬁcient
conditional privacy preservation protocol for secure vehicular commu-
nications,” in INFOCOM 2008. The 27th Conference on Computer
Communications. IEEE.
IEEE, 2008.
[13]
F. Armknecht, A. Festag, D. Westhoff, and K. Zeng, “Cross-layer
privacy enhancement and non-repudiation in vehicular communication,”
in Communication in Distributed Systems (KiVS), 2007 ITG-GI Con-
ference.
VDE, 2007, pp. 1–12.
[14]
K. Pl¨oßl and H. Federrath, “A privacy aware and efﬁcient security
infrastructure for vehicular ad hoc networks,” Computer Standards &
Interfaces, vol. 30, no. 6, 2008, pp. 390–397.
[15]
J. Linn, “Trust models and management in public-key infrastructures,”
RSA laboratories, vol. 12, 2000.
[16]
R. Nielsen, “Memorandum for multi-domain public key infrastructure
interoperability, rfc 5217,” Tech. Rep., 2008.
[17]
ETSI, “ETSI EN 302 665 V1.1.1: Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS)
- Communications Architecture,” 2010, http://www.etsi.org.
[18]
Recommended Elliptic Curves For Federal Government Use, National
Institute of Standards and Technology, July 1999. [Online]. Available:
http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/ST/toolkit/documents/dss/NISTReCur.pdf
[19]
B. Feix, M. Roussellet, and A. Venelli, “Side-channel analysis on
blinded regular scalar multiplications,” in Progress in Cryptology–
INDOCRYPT 2014.
Springer, 2014, pp. 3–20.
[20]
Brainpool, “ECC Brainpool Standard Curves and Curve Genera-
tion, Version 1.0, available online at http://www.ecc-brainpool.org/ecc-
standard.htm,” 2005.
[21]
M. Abe and T. Okamoto, “A signature scheme with message re-
covery as secure as discrete logarithm,” in Advances in Cryptology-
ASIACRYPT99.
Springer, 1999, pp. 378–389.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-434-3
VEHICULAR 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

