A TCO Analysis Tool based on Constraint Systems for City Logistics
Johannes Kretzschmar, Mirko Johlke, Wilhelm Rossak
Institute for Mathematics and Computer Science
Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany,
Email: [johannes.kretzschmar, mirko.johlke, wilhelm.rossak]@uni-jena.de
Abstract—This paper presents an approach to extend existing
total-cost-of-ownership (TCO) models by a logic and numeric
constraint system. Instead of an only vehicle-centered cost view,
these constraints enable the modeling of various dependencies oc-
curring in a complex application ﬁeld like logistics. The resulting
tool will ensure an economical disposition, ﬂeet management and
business decision-making.
Keywords–TCO; Constraint Model; Electriﬁcation; Logistics.
I.
INTRODUCTION
There have been a lot of changes in the ﬁeld of city
logistics over the last years, like the electriﬁcation of vehicles
(EV), new means of transport built for last-mile-deliveries or
whole approaches like distribution points (hubs), car-sharing or
multi-use concepts. But, despite extensive funding in research
and development in this area, the transportation market is
remaining reserved regarding changes. The cost analysis in
[1] and [2] for example have shown, that electric vehicles
only get proﬁtable with a relatively high mileage compared
to conventional vehicles. This fact is besides the hesitant
development of a charging infrastructure and the limited range
a primary explanation of the hesitant commitment to EVs in
commercial applications. This paper introduces a conceptual
method not only to support and ensure the proﬁtability of ﬂeet
restructuring, but also to enable long-term economical monitor-
ing, extrapolation of new scenarios and strategy development.
This method is based on the idea of TCO models, as introduced
in the related work section.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In section 2,
we embed our approach in the context of current work and
fundamentals. In the following main section, we will introduce
the pivotal idea of the combined use of numerical and logical
constraints for achieving a more comprehensive TCO analysis
in logistics. We close this paper with a concept architecture
for a TCO tool, as well as a summery of the problem area we
will prospectively work in.
II.
RELATED WORK
A vehicle TCO model consists of all expenses which arise
by the acquisition and operation of that vehicle. Thereby, it
is possible to offset these costs against proﬁts or to compare
different vehicle alternatives or rather multiple deployment
scenarios. Especially market changes in automotive industries
over the last years and the upcoming engines based on
renewable energies made a TCO approach very useful for
economical decision-making. Most TCO models, like [1] or
[2], are very vehicle-centered and only contain vehicle speciﬁc
inﬂuencing factors like acquisition, insurance, workshop or
fuel expenses. To fully implement such a TCO model into
a commercial application, it is necessary to enrich the model
with application speciﬁc factors. The method of this paper is
based on a TCO model especially built for logistics by [3].
Besides vehicle costs, this model contains expense data of the
operational context. This covers personnel costs of the driver,
possible trailers or hubs and information about the cargo and
customers. All TCO models have in common that the use is
intended to calculate costs for a speciﬁc set of parameters. An
optimization or variation is only possible by experimentally
varying the parameters.
III.
CONSTRAINT SYSTEM
The evaluation of vehicles in logistics on an operational
level does not only result from vehicle cost factors. Different
means of transport may have varying requirements regarding
driver qualiﬁcation, cargo size and weight or temporal re-
strictions of customers. The choice of a vehicle is strongly
entangled with a tour speciﬁcation and available resources.
TCO models may be an appropriate basis for one-time de-
cisions like the acquisition of a vehicle for a generic use
case. The method of this paper though proposes a much more
holistic approach by implementing the TCO model into an
arithmetic constraint system and extending it by adding logic
constraints. A constraint system features a set of constraints,
which are processable by an automatic solver. This solver
calculates a solution space for every variable in the constraint
system. By doing so, the TCO model gets much more ﬂexible.
Trivially, the solver can compute TCOs, but also possible
combinations of variable input factors like a speciﬁc vehicle for
given TCO for example. By adding comprehensive restrictions
and dependencies of a logistic domain, the system solves
the satisﬁability problem which is identical to a resource
allocation task. A constraint based TCO model is therefore
a much more valuable tool for disposition, ﬂeet management
and business strategy ﬁnding. This method differentiates two
types of constraints:
A. Numerical Constraints
Constraints are typically over a speciﬁc domain, but can be
mixed and calculated within a solver. The logistics TCO model
by [3] is a set of arithmetic formulas in Matlab, which are
transferred into a domain for real numbers. Depending on the
particular application or nature of constraints, a ﬁnite, rational
or linear domain would also be conceivable. We propose
the use of CLP(Q, R)[4] library for SICStus Prolog, because
this solver supports multiple types of domains. By this, the
equation for overall-costs of a vehicle assigned to a tour for
example
K = (12 ∗ Ksalary) + (Sworkdays ∗ Ktour) + Kinsurance + Kinspection
is transformed into an element of the constraint set in Prolog
clpr:{K #= (12 * Salary) + (Workdays * TourCosts) +
Insurance + Inspection.}
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

where the clpr identiﬁes the domain of the various variables.
B. Logical Constraints
A holistic approach to a cost model in logistics comprises
much more dependencies though. Especially the relation be-
tween vehicle, tour and driver implies non-arithmetic con-
straints, like qualiﬁcations or legal restrictions. We are ap-
proaching these problems by modeling ontological constraints
in a logic domain as usually done by default in Prolog. In [5],
we published an ontology specialized for inner-city logistics
including the relation between various driver license classes in
the European Union. We hereby used this description to build a
logical constraint knowledge base in Prolog. First, we deﬁned
taxonomy facts about driver licenses and their associations
with drivers. As shown in Listing 1, we further formalized
generic rules about how the property of a license is subsumed.
driverL(dlA).
driverL(dlB).
subL(dlA,dlB).
staff(bob).
hasLicense(bob,dlB).
hasLicense(X,SubL) :- staff(X), driverL(SubL),
subL(SubL,DlX), hasLicense(X,DlX).
Listing 1. Basic rules for a driver license taxonomy in Prolog
This basic set of facts allows the solver to determine drivers
with a speciﬁc or implied subsumed license. In combination
with the arithmetic TCO model, the solver then only calcu-
lates costs for appropriate tour-vehicle-driver-allocations. The
TCO gets calculated much more on purpose with a resource
allocation as by-product.
IV.
USER AND DATA INTERFACE
Because the handling of a descriptive constraint knowledge
base is not feasible for average consumer, we signiﬁcantly
focus on the integration of a suitable graphical user interface
(GUI). Figure 1 shows the overall architecture concept of
our tool. The Prolog knowledge base initially consists of
the terminological knowledge and basic constraints. A data
importer collects data from the logistics software systems and
translates these into either arithmetic or logical assertional
knowledge constraints. On the user side, an interface interprets
functions to Prolog querys and proccesses results into changes
of the GUI.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In contrast to the existing vehicle-centered TCO models,
our method furthermore represents a holistic economical
view on the disposition process. Besides the calculation of
vehicle, tour or personnel costs it ensures the proﬁtability of
resource allocation by implementing the constraint system
as an optimizer. By using fuzzy ranges or plain variables
as TCO parameters, the tool is able to ﬁnd solution spaces
which is useful for decision-making by logistics experts. The
holistic and descriptive model covers also a daily dispatchers,
as well as long-term use for business strategists.
To date, we implemented basic concepts and rules in
addition to the existing TCO model from [3] to show the
feasibility. We want to extend this basic knowledge base
TCO Parameters
Fleet Management
Tour Allocation
Cost Prediction
Logistics Dispatcher
Business Strategist
Graphical User Interface
Prolog
TCO Model
∑
Logic Constraints
Query
Result
T
Enterprise Data
Data Importer
CRM
ERP
Vehicle DB
A
Query Processor
Figure 1. Conceptual Architecture of TCO-Tool
gradually by all relevant facts and dependencies of a logistics
domain. Eventually, this tool will be tested and evaluated
within a ﬁeld test by various newspaper and media logistic
companies.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The underlying research project of this paper, Smart Dis-
tribution Logistik is funded by the german Federal Ministry of
Economics and Technology (Bundesministerium fr Wirtschaft
und Technologie - BMWi) during the term May 2017 to March
2020.
REFERENCES
[1]
G. Wu, A. Inderbitzin, and C. Bening, “Total cost of ownership of
electric vehicles compared to conventional vehicles: A probabilistic
analysis and projection across market segments,” Energy Policy, vol. 80,
2015, pp. 196 – 214, retrieved March 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301421515000671
[2]
J. Hagman, S. Ritzn, J. J. Stier, and Y. Susilo, “Total cost of
ownership and its potential implications for battery electric vehicle
diffusion,” Research in Transportation Business and Management,
vol. 18, 2016, pp. 11 – 17, retrieved March 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2210539516000043
[3]
A. Apfelst¨adt and M. Gather, “New design of a truck load network,” in
Dynamics in Logistics, H. Kotzab, J. Pannek, and K.-D. Thoben, Eds.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2016, pp. 183–191.
[4]
C. Holzbaur, “Ofai clp (q, r) manual,” edition 1.3. 3. Technical Report
TR-95-09, Austrian Research Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Vienna,
Tech. Rep., 1995.
[5]
T. Prinz, J. Kretzschmar, and V. Schau, “A knowledge base for electric
vehicles in inner-city logistics,” in The Tenth International Conference
on Software Engineering Advances (ICSEA), 2015, pp. 257 – 260.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

