Lane Estimation Algorithm Based on Sensor Fusion 
Database   
   
Seung uk Jeon   
School of Mechanical and Automotive Engineering    
Kyungil University    
Gyeongsan, South Korea    
Email: jsukk94@naver.com   
Byungyong You   
School of Mechanical and Automotive Engineering    
Kyungil University    
Gyeongsan, South Korea   
Email: zealot@kiu.kr  
Abstract— This paper presents a lane estimation algorithm to 
recognize the position of the vehicle and the total number of 
lanes on the road. For more efficient self-driving and ADAS, it 
is 
important 
to 
recognize 
ego-vehicle 
position 
using 
environmental 
sensors. 
This 
algorithm 
provides 
more 
convenient services based on precise position of ego – vehicle. 
The study was based on an actual driving database and 
algorithm is designed according to various road conditions. The 
test results with actual driving data showed high accuracy of 
proposed algorithm.   
   
Keywords- Recognition; Judgement; Algorithm; Lane 
Estimation; Accuracy;     
Ⅰ. INTRODUCTION   
Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) have been 
commercialized to enhance convenience and safety for 
motorists driving cars, and the prevalence of streamlined 
electric 
systems 
worldwide 
is 
increasing. 
Location 
determination technology that estimates the location of cars 
is essential for self-driving cars and ADAS. The 
sensorconverged positioning system uses a method to 
estimate the location of the ego-vehicle by converging 
precision maps with the environment-aware sensors (camera, 
lidar, radar, etc.) along with Global Positioning System (GPS) 
and Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU).   
Once the location of the ego-vehicle is known correctly, a 
variety of technologies, such as environmental awareness, 
vehicle control optimized for the surrounding terrain, and 
change of driving strategy according to the terrain can be 
carried out more effectively. One of the most widely used 
location determination technologies is the radio navigation 
system that uses satellite information, such as GPS. While this 
method provides an absolute position in the earth's coordinate 
system and has the advantage of not accumulating depends on 
the radio wave receiving situation. To compensate for the 
increasing number of errors over time, inertial navigation 
methods such as IMU are being used. Although this approach 
has the advantage of providing a precise relative position at a 
short distance, regardless of the radio reception situation, the 
problem is that the error continues to increase with time due 
to the limitations of the cumulative-based position estimation 
method. To overcome the limitations of these existing 
methods, a recent active study of sensor fusion based 
precision measurements is performed in [1] and [4]. In 
general, sensor fusion based precision vehicle location system 
uses a method to estimate the location of ego-vehicle by 
converging precision maps with environmental recognition 
sensors (camera, lidar, etc.) along with GPS and IMU.  
However, studies have not yet been done to estimate the lane 
of ego-vehicle in these papers. So, this paper focused on 
estimating the lane of ego-vehicle and carried out the study. 
Pre-recognition of the lane information that the ego-vehicle is 
driving will help the driver of the normal driving, or the driver 
of the self-driving control system to provide more efficient 
driving. To further enhance the performance of the lane 
estimation algorithm, a study was made in [3] on the direction 
of improvement of lane assessment that provided an 
integrated framework for lane estimation clues.   
Existing studies [1]-[4] used a sensor fusion based precision 
vehicle location system to pinpoint the position of the ego-
vehicle, but proposed algorithm designed a algorithm to 
estimate the position of the lane under which dynamic 
obstacles are located on the roadway's lane and the position 
of the carriage is unrecognizable. Algorithm designed in this 
study uses relative vehicle information from pre-collected 
database to estimate the lane of the egovehicle based on 
lateral distance from dynamic obstacles around the ego-
vehicle. For the verification of algorithm, the performance 
evaluation was conducted on the actual driving environment 
data of eight roads extracted from the database, and it was 
found that the lanes of the ego-vehicle could be estimated 
relatively accurately even when the total number of lanes of 
the road is not known.   
   
Ⅱ. DATABASE CONSTRUCTION   
The vehicles used in this study are constructed from Figure 
1. by attaching environmental sensors (LIDAR, RADAR, and 
CAMERA) to the KIA Carnival vehicles. The Spatial 
Information Research Institute collected actual driving data 
from the Ansan Expressway in South Korea to the set up the 
database and provided this database in order to support the 
algorithm.   
The sensors that are mounted include environmental 
recognition sensors (five Lidar, three Radar, six Camera) and 
location recognition sensors (two INS/DGPS [VRS RTK], 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

and two DMI and OBD). The information used primarily in 
this study is the x-axis lateral coordinates. Extracted the 
relative vehicle coordinate information of around the ego-
vehicle shows that it has relative distance and direction from 
the ego-vehicle.   
   
Figure 1. Data Acquisition System & X coordinates information   
Ⅲ. ALGORITHM DEVELOPMENT   
The components of the coordinate system set in the 
reference car are directional with x, y and z, and these 
coordinate systems are used to recognize the dynamic 
obstacles around the ego-vehicle. Algorithm uses the lateral 
components of the x-axis coordinates and the relative vehicle 
information recognized around the ego-vehicle.    
The difference in distance between the self-vehicle and the 
perceived center of the adjacent relative vehicle is shown in 
Figure 2. A condition-based algorithm was developed to 
estimate the lane where the ego-vehicle is located by 
extracting the distance difference between the ego-vehicle 
and the recognized adjacent relative vehicle.   
 
Figure 2. Algoribthm development environment 
 
  
Figure 3. Lane Numbers and Parameters   
Depending on the driver's driving habits, the vehicle may 
be driven on the left side of the road or on the right. In each 
case, there is a positional difference of the ego-vehicle The 
parameter 𝑿𝒉𝒐𝒓 , suggested in the algorithm of  lane estimation 
in the ego-vehicle is the lateral distance information between 
the ego-vehicle extracted from the database and the relative 
vehicle in the vicinity of the ego-vehicle.   
𝑹𝒘𝒊𝒅 is the width of the road, 𝑽𝒘𝒊𝒅 is the width of the vehicle, 
𝑴𝑳𝒅𝒊𝒔 is the distance  from boundary of the ego-vehicle to the 
center, (1)LLN1, (2)LLN2, (3)LLN3, (4)LLN4 are the 
corresponding parameters for when the vehicle is driven on 
the left side of the lane. (1), (2), (3), and (4) means how many 
lanes are present depending on the value of the distance 
between the ego-vehicle and the perceived relative vehicle.   
(1) means that there is one lane between the ego-vehicle and 
the perceived relative vehicle, (2) two, (3) three, (4) four lanes. 
(5) RLN1, (6) RLN2, (7) RLN3, (8) RLN4 are 
corresponding parameters for when the vehicle is driven on 
the right side of the road. (5), (6), (7), and (8), likewise 
indicate how many lanes exist between the ego-vehicle and 
the recognized relative vehicle, with the number of lanes as 
shown in the parameter name exists between the ego-vehicle 
and the relative vehicle around the recognized ego-vehicle.   
The width of the road, LN1,2,3,4 was constructed by using 
the distance of the number of lanes, and if the relative vehicles 
are located at the width of the lane classified according to the 
number of lanes, the roadway on which the ego-vehicle is 
driven can be estimated. The road width was set to any value 
because the exact road information for the data collection 
section was not known, the parameters presented are 
expressed in Figure 3.   
    
    
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

TABLE Ⅰ. ESTIMATION ALGORITHM FOR EACH LANE   
  
A lane width section of 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th means the 
number of lanes existing between the ego-vehicle and 
recognized relative vehicle. The estimated result of the 
algorithm depends on how many lanes are existed between 
the ego-vehicle and the recognized relative vehicle. 
expressed in TABLE Ⅰ. The method of applying the 
extracted relative vehicle information to algorithm will be 
explained after looking at a Figure 4.   
The process of estimating a lane is presented in Figure 4. 
First extract the lateral distance coordinates of the 
recognized relative vehicle around the ego-vehicle from the 
database. Convert the extracted coordinates to the distance 
value of the (meter) unit and apply them to the algorithm. 
Then, it is necessary to verify that the distance values of the 
relative vehicles around the ego-vehicle were in the lane 
width section given in the algorithm. If the relative vehicle 
is recognized in the road width section of the algorithm, then 
the lane of the self-vehicle is estimated, but if it is not 
recognized, it is reapplied to the algorithm or cannot be 
estimated to lane of   ego-vehicle. The data applied to the 
algorithm was collected from the reference vehicle (Figure 
1) and brought to the file format. It also provided a viewer 
program that allows users to view data from the Spatial 
Information Research Institute, which has collected sensor 
data. Therefore, information such as distance, coordinates, 
etc. regarding objects around the ego-vehicles is provided in 
the form of CVS files. Currently, data is applied offline to 
the algorithm and automatically performed to estimate the 
position of the ego-vehicle.   
   
Figure 4. Lane estimation Algorithm   
Ⅳ. ALGORITHM VERIFICATION RESULTS 
For performance evaluation of developed algorithm, 
curved roads, tunnels, 1,2,3,4 lane roads, overpass and roads 
with curvature sections were extracted from the database and 
shown in Figure 5.   
  
Figure 5. Tunnel, Curve, Overpass, Multi lane Road    
The performance evaluation was conducted by comparing 
the result of lane estimation algorithm for vehicles developed 
in this study with actual driving data. The evaluation 
environment was established with 71 specific point-in-time 
driving data sections extracted from the database and eight 
types of roads. For each section of the driving data, the 
accuracy was shown by comparing the actual ego-vehicle 
lane to the lane estimated by algorithm.   
For example, an evaluation of performance at a specific 
point in time shows that the lane of the ego-vehicle estimated 
    
    
    
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

by the algorithm is second lane and coincides with the lane of 
the ego-vehicle actually located when compared with the 
actual driving data. Such fact can be found in Figure 6. By the 
above evaluation method estimated the lane from 71 actual 
driving data specific points-in-time.    
As a result of the estimation, the accuracy of the algorithm 
is divided into Known, which knows the total number of lanes 
on the road, and unKown, which has no information on the 
number of lanes. TABLE Ⅲ shows the accuracy of whether 
the lane estimated by the vehicle algorithm matches the lane 
in which the vehicle is located in the actual driving data.   
 
Figure 6. Lane estimation result from algorithm at a specific section 
in database  
TABLE Ⅱ. PARAMETER NAME & VALUE   
 
  
TABLE Ⅲ. LANE ESTIMATION ALGORITHM ACCURACY 
 
 
Ⅴ. CONCLUSION  
The algorithm verification of 71 actual driving data 
sections showed high accuracy, with 90.14% case knowing 
the total number of lanes and 46.48% not knowing the total 
number. Therefore, if there were no dynamic obstacles on top 
of all lanes, it was not possible to distinguish whether the lane 
on which the ego-vehicle is located was a second or a third. 
The reason for the decrease in unknown accuracy is that if the 
total number of total lanes are not known, objects on other 
roads can be recognized. This satisfies the various conditions 
of the algorithm and results in multiple lanes. However, if one 
continues to build previous lane data to the time axis, it can 
distinguish this case unless ego-vehicle is rapidly changing 
lane. Using the estimated lane information from the previous 
lanes of the stacked data every hour, the estimated results will 
be much better in any case. This research is still a work in 
progress, but in the future studies we will use a more flexible 
and accurate kalman filter or particle filter than a specific 
condition-based algorithm, The estimation algorithm with 
these filters will also be able to estimate the curve roads on 
which the curvature exists. Finally, the autonomous vehicle 
"D2" held by the Autonomous a2z will be used to collect data 
directly from specific sections and apply the algorithm 
developed to the actual vehicles to verify the performance of 
algorithm in real time driving.   
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
This work was supported by the Technology Innovation 
Program (10079730, Development and Evaluation of 
Automated Driving Systems for Motorway and City Road 
and driving environment) funded By the Ministry of Trade, 
Industry & Energy (MOTIE, Korea).   
REFERENCES  
[1] Seo.J and Jeong .H, “Precision Vehicle Location System Based 
on Sensor Fusion and Self-Driving Technology,” Automation 
Systems, Tech Insight, pp. 42-47, 2015.    
[2] Eirini.T, Surya.P, John.S and Baras, “Interest, energy and 
physical-aware coalition formation and resource allocation in 
smart IoT applications,” In 2017 51st Annual Conference 
onInformation Sciences and Systems (CISS), pp. 1-6, 2017.   
[3] Park.S, Lee.H, Jeong.Y, Kim.S, Lee,H and Yi.K, “Lane and 
Curb Detection based Vehicle Localization Algorithm for an 
Automated Driving in Complex Urban Roads,” SNU 
Department of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering and 
Institute of Advanced Machines and Design, KSME17-
Th12C004, 2017.   
[4] Seo.J, Jang.J, Min.D and Jeong .H, “Sensor Fusion-based 
Precise Vehicle Localization System,” Research Institute of 
Automotive Control and Electronics, HanyangUniversity, 
WITHROBOTInc, KSAE15-A0230, 2015 
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

