UAVs-assisted Data Collection in Vehicular Network
Mohamed Ben Brahim∗†, Hakim Ghazzai∗, Hamid Menouar∗, Fethi Filali∗
∗Qatar Mobility Innovations Center (QMIC), Qatar University, Doha, Qatar
†HANA Research Lab, University of Manouba, Manouba, Tunisia
Email: {mohamedb, hakimg, hamidm, ﬁlali}@qmic.com
Abstract—In vehicular network, nodes generate and transmit
timely measured data by embedded sensors. Some data needs
to be gathered by remote devices. The limited communication
range of the vehicular wireless system requires to proceed
through multi-hop data routing to collect periodic fresh data.
The hop-by-hop based data journey and the dynamic topology
increase the overall packet delivery delay, as well as the packet
loss ratio. Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) could be used in
relaying vehicular data, particularly for sparse networks. Once
they join the network, they are considered as normal network
nodes however with some speciﬁc link characteristics. In this
paper, a link-aware data collection approach is investigated. More
precisely, an optimization problem maximizing a weighted multi-
objective utility including the wireless link data rate, the wireless
link stability, and the data progress towards the destination is
formulated and solved using a Distributed Minimum Spanning
Forest (DMSF) approach. The outcomes of the proposed approach
and the impact of the UAVs assistance are evaluated. The present
approach outperforms the other algorithms and the usage UAVs
enhances the DMSF-based solution especially for low-density
network.
Keywords–Unmanned aerial vehicles; Vehicular network; Data
collection; Distributed minimum spanning forest.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Vehicular networks are promoting a wide range of ap-
plications rendering the driving experience safer and more
efﬁcient. Indeed, using embedded communication capabilities,
the vehicles are able to exchange timely and accurate infor-
mation reﬂecting their status and mobility. Neighbor vehicles
use the received information to mitigate collisions [1] and
avoid road hazards [2]. Vehicles may disseminate trafﬁc-related
information in the relevant trafﬁc stream to early warn the
incoming travelers to seek alternative routes. An Intelligent
Transport System (ITS) station is usually equipped with an On-
Board Unit (OBU) which is an embedded computer interfacing
with a multitude of measurement-units and sensors mounted in
the vehicle, e.g., Global Positioning System (GPS), proximity
ultra-sound and short-range radars, etc.
Collecting data in real-time in mobile network is chal-
lenging. Unlike data exchange or data dissemination, data
collection’s purpose is to route data towards a gathering node
from all the network nodes. The achievement of this task
should take into account the underlying network character-
istics. Indeed, the vehicles are moving with relatively high-
speed compared to legacy mobile ad hoc network (MANET).
In addition, obstructing objects and signal attenuation due
to mobility and radio interference impose a wise use of the
network resources. Moreover, the height of vehicle-embedded
antennas and the frequency bands used in vehicular network
differentiate vehicular networks from cellular networks with
infrastructure support [3]. These constraints require an op-
timized design of communication protocols to transfer data
between mobile nodes and to ensure reliable data gathering
by remote infrastructure nodes.
The UAVs have recently seen an increasing usage in
civilian and military applications [4]. This trend is explained
by the ease of deployment and the low cost of maintenance.
Among the promising applications, the UAV may contribute in
the monitoring and assistance of the trafﬁc in ITS [5]. Indeed,
the drone could be equipped with wireless communication
system and participates in relaying trafﬁc data or generating
trafﬁc alerts to warn ground road users, as illustrated in
Figure 1. Worthy to mention here that the energy-related issues
of the drones are intentionally skipped and the aerial nodes are
considered as simply hovering over the road junction at a ﬁxed
altitude. the mobility of UAVs is planned to be studied in a
future work.
Figure 1. UAV relays data between two disconnected network fragments.
The present work proposes a new data collection approach
using Distributed Minimum Spanning Forest (DMSF) algo-
rithm: a modiﬁed version of the typical Distributed Minimum
Spanning Tree (DMST) algorithm [6]. The proposed approach
is based on two phases: the paths construction, and the effective
data collection:
• The distributed routes construction phase proceeds with
a parallel building of multiple trees having a minimum overall
utility. These multiple trees enable the establishment of the
routing paths and balance the load of the data trafﬁc over
the network. The utility considered in the construction of
the DMSF is a weighted multi-objective function achieving a
trade-off between three metrics: i) the achieved data rate over
the wireless link, ii) the inter-vehicles link stability, and iii)
the progress towards the destination. Hence, each node selects
the relay node providing the best throughput for rapid data
transfer, the highest link stability to avoid link disappearance
mainly during big size packet transmission, and the closest
route to the destination to reduce delays due to processing at
the relay levels.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

• Once the data collection session is due, nodes transmit
the received data from children nodes and their data content to
their parent nodes in the tree-routing structures. The process is
executed by each node once it has a data to send or to forward.
The data is forwarded towards the roots of the trees. Since the
roots are one-hop neighbors of the sink node, a simple data
forwarding ensures the successful delivery of data. When all
the data is collected by the sink or the collection session is
expired, the non-delivered data is discarded and a new routing
topology is calculated to start a new data collection round.
The proposed approach seeks to ensure periodic data
collection generated by a big number of mobile nodes through
a fast and distributed routes construction. This kind of periodic
data gathering is required especially for network monitoring
and analysis purposes. The performances of the proposed
approach are evaluated against existing algorithms.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section
II provides an overview of the existing work in data collection.
Section III presents the system model. Section IV starts by
presenting the methodology followed by the paper. Afterwards,
it presents the problem formulation. Section V introduces
the proposed DMSF algorithm to solve the data collection
problem. The next section presents the simulation environment
and some selected numerical results. Finally, Section VII
concludes the paper.
II.
RELATED WORK
For many use cases, we need to collect data from mobile
nodes within the network by a collection host, aka sink. At the
collection time, the traveling vehicles may or may not be close-
enough to the collection node in order to deliver their data.
Hence, several studies tackled this issue and investigated the
possible ways to ensure data handing to the collection station.
In [7], the authors presented a survey of the position-based
data routing in vehicular networks. The position information
availability and accuracy is a basic factor of the algorithm
performances. The forwarding decision, which is usually
greedy or an improved form of greedy, ensures a progress
towards the destination node. Although judged to outperform
topology-based algorithms, position-based routing algorithms
present some limitations. Authors conclude that there is not
a position-based protocol performing well in both urban and
highway environments and compare the performance of the
protocols mainly in terms of overhead, availability, resilience,
and latency. In [8], authors leveraged a hybrid communication
scheme using 3GPP/LTE and the IEEE 802.11p-based tech-
nologies to disseminate safety messages in Vehicular Ad hoc
NETwork (VANET). The approach is based on the construction
of multi-hop clusters and the ofﬂoad of data transfer between
farther clusters to the cellular network. The hybrid communica-
tion scheme outperforms the basic clustering and the ﬂooding-
based forwarding algorithms. Even though it resolves the hole
problem especially in sparse networks, the proposed approach
could not be the best option in the present scenario because no
alternative communication technology other than the Dedicated
Short Range Communication (DSRC) wireless technology is
available.
Another approach for data collection based on a mobile
agent is proposed in [9]. The proposed solution takes into
account the lossy nature of the network links and uses mobile
agents in the network to collect data from vehicles in one-
hop fashion. The approach reaches a higher data collection
ratio but is still limited in terms of data freshness, which
is ensured by the present approach, and may be useful for
special cases of deferred ofﬂine data processing scenarios.
An earlier published algorithm, named ADOPEL [10], is
proposed using the reinforcement learning technique for the
data collection in VANET. The approach uses a distributed
Q-learning technique to update Q-values required to select
the relaying nodes to forward data towards the collection
node. The algorithm is fully distributed and outperforms the
non-learning approach. However, the fast topology updates
negatively affect the convergence of the learning strategies.
Indeed, the required time to learn the best relay is likely to
exceed the link duration of all or some of the available links
at a given time. In this paper, we overcome this issue in DMSF
through periodic assessment and re-weighting of the wireless
links. In [11], a data routing optimization approach based on
multi-objective metrics and minimum spanning tree (MST)
is proposed. The solution investigates an interference-aware
routing scheme by fostering the better links and radio channels
for routing the data. The used metrics to compute the link
weight are end-to-end delay, link duration probability, and co-
channel interference. The algorithm needs a global awareness
of the network topology (e.g., convergence of routing tables)
by every node to be able to compute paths to other nodes.
This constraint limits the approach from scaling and from
distributed construction of the spanning tree. However, this
constraint is released in DMSF approach since only relay node
selection is needed to forward data towards collection node.
III.
SYSTEM MODEL
The nodes in vehicular networks are smart agents which
interact with each other through direct ad hoc wireless links,
i.e., V2V and occasionally with infrastructure or Road Side
Unit (RSU), i.e., V2I. Mobile nodes mutually exchange status
information which are useful for efﬁcient mobility and trafﬁc
cooperative awareness. The focus of this paper is on the
collection of data measured by the vehicles within an urban
area. Therefore, we consider a geographical area with multiple
roads and intersections. In the center of the area, an RSU is
placed to regularly collect the data from N connected vehicles
driving around. Every vehicle aims to periodically transfer a
data of size M bytes to the RSU at a transmission power level
Ptr. The obstacles and signal attenuation do not always allow
direct communication between all the nodes and the RSU.
Hence, a multi-hop data transfer is required.
To study the network behavior under different conditions
and evaluate the ITS applications, several research studies
investigated various channel propagation models of DSRC [12]
[3]. In [3], authors carried out extensive measurement cam-
paigns in different communication scenarios: the Line-of-Sight
(LoS) and Non-LoS (NLoS) cases and for urban, suburban,
highway, and rural areas characterized by different trafﬁc
densities. The resulting model is adopted for this paper, it
is well-deﬁned, and its parameters are explicitly given. By
adopting the log-distance power law, the path loss expression
is given by:
PL(d) = PL0 + 10ν log10d + S,
dmin ≤ d ≤ dmax, (1)
where d is the distance between the transmitter and the receiver
in meter and ν is the path loss exponent related to the
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

propagation environment. The parameter S models a zero-
mean random variable with normal distribution and standard
deviation σS modeling the large-scale fading. The term PL0
is given by:
PL0 = PL0(d0) − 10ν log10d0,
(2)
where d0 is the reference distance and PL0(d0) is the path
loss value at the reference distance. Its value is given along
with other parameters in Table I. This model is derived from
measurement campaigns where dmin and dmax are bounding
the model validity domain.
The communication link between the UAV and the ground
nodes is modeled differently. The two nodes are in LoS with
a certain probability Pr which depends on the UAV’s altitude
hu [4]. Pr is given by:
Pr =
1
1 + Bexp(−C[θ(hu, duv) − B]),
(3)
where B and C are environment-dependent constants, θ repre-
sents the elevation angle and is given by θ = 180
π sin−1( hu
duv ),
and duv denotes the Euclidean distance between the UAV and
the ground node. The probability of having a NLoS link is
equal to 1 − Pr. Hence, the path loss expression in dB of the
Air-to-Ground (A2G) link is given by [4]:
PLA2G[dB] = PrPLLoS + (1 − Pr)PLNLoS,
(4)
where PLLoS is the path loss effect of LoS link and is
expressed in dB as PLLoS = 10γlog10( 4πfduv
Cl
) + LLoS,
with γ is the path loss exponent, f is the frequency of the
carrier, Cl is the speed of light, and LLoS is an additional
attenuation of the environment. The second term of the path
loss PLNLoS is the effect of NLoS link and is expressed in
dB as PLNLoS = 10γlog10( 4πfduv
Cl
) + LNLoS with LNLoSis
an additional attenuation for the NLoS environment.
It’s important to remind here that the coherence time of the
channel is very small compared to the time of data collection
and construction time of the tree, therefore, we investigate the
channel based on the average statistics and we consider the
path loss effect only.
IV.
PROBLEM FORMULATION
The investigated problem can be modeled using graph
theory where nodes are the graph nodes and wireless links are
mapped to graph edges. At a given time, a generic undirected
graph G(V, E) with weighted edges results from a spatial
distribution of mobile nodes. An edge matching two nodes
is characterized with different attributes, namely data rate,
link stability, and closeness to sink, which are quantiﬁed and
detailed in the following subsection. The target of the next step
is to leverage the link state of each node in order to compute
a path from each node towards the sink in a distributed
fashion. Indeed, getting information about the locations and
states of all the nodes and the whole network topology in a
centralized manner is an unpractical and unrealistic assumption
mainly during short intervals of time. Therefore, we proceed
with a distributed approach adapted to the network topology
evolution. The constructed paths aim at enhancing packets
delivery within a time-bounded delay while maintaining a fair
exploitation of the network’s resources.
A. Methodology and Metrics
The present paper focuses on the data collection task, and
more speciﬁcally on a periodic data collection rounds triggered
at a preﬁxed time period. Since every node is invited to append
its own data to the received data, if available, before forwarding
it towards the sink node, proceeding with broadcasting data
overwhelms the network and may result in a broadcast storm
especially in dense networks [13]. To avoid these harmful
effects, every node operates through unicasting its data to a
single next hop while taking into account the link states to
maximize the chance of a time-bounded routing and successful
delivery of packets.
To ensure a link-aware approach, three factors are consid-
ered while quantifying the weights of the wireless links. These
properties are directly impacting the link quality and hence,
its ability to deliver data without being distorted. Considering
two nodes i and j of the network, the attributes of the link
(i, j) are:
• Achieved throughput: Links with higher data rates are
privileged in the construction of the data routing paths to
accelerate the data collection procedure. Following is the
achieved rate of link (i, j) based on Truncated Shannon
Bounds (TSB) [14] and denoted by Ri,j:
Ri,j =



Rmax
if SINRi,j ≥ SINRmax,
0
if SINRi,j ≤ SINRmin,
B log2 (1 + SINRi,j)
otherwise.
(5)
where Rmax is given by:
Rmax = B log2 (1 + SINRmax) ,
(6)
where B is the system bandwidth, SINRi,j is the signal-to-
noise-plus-interference ratio at the receiver of the link (i, j),
given by:
SINRi,j = PtrH( ¯d(i, j))
I + N
,
(7)
where Ptr denotes the transmit power level, H is the channel
propagation model which is a function of average-distance
between transmitter and receiver. It corresponds to the inverse
of the path loss between the nodes i and j which is given in (1).
I and N quantify the average interference and the noise power
levels at each receiving node, respectively. Finally, SINRmin
and SINRmax are the SINR thresholds for the discretization
of the data rate in DSRC technology. Their simulation values
are given in Table I.
• Link stability: The relative high speed, dynamic topology,
and the mobility patterns of the vehicular network impose
constraints on the link stability. Hence, wireless link lifetime
between two nodes is expected to persist for short time prior
to be obstructed by static and/or mobile obstacles until it
disappears from the available set of links. In the general case,
the motion of the node in the network is hard to predict, even
though some mobility patterns could be drawn in speciﬁc areas
and during speciﬁc times. Hence, the position (xi,t, yi,t) of the
node i at an instant t is given by:
(xi,t, yi,t) = f(xi,0, yi,0, t),
(8)
where f is a generic function taking as parameters the position
of node i at instant t = 0 and the current time. Taking into
account the locations, speed values, and driving directions of
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

two given nodes at an instant t, and under the assumption that
vehicles are generally driving into linear road segments with
nearly constant speeds speciﬁcally for very short time-scale,
the following mathematical linear system derives the expected
link duration between two arbitrary vehicles i and j:
xj,t = vx,0t + xj,0
(9)


 yj,t = vy,0t + yj,0
(10)
where xj,t and yj,t are the coordinates of node j at an instant t,
xj,0 and yj,0 are the reference coordinates of node j at t = 0,
and vx,0 and vy,0 are the components of relative velocity of
node j with respect to node i. With this setup, the coordinates
of node i are given by:
xi,t = xi,0
(11)


 yi,t = yi,0
(12)
where xi,t and yi,t are the coordinates of node i at an instant
t, xi,0 and yi,0 are the reference coordinates of node i at
t = 0. From (9)−(12), the euclidean distance between the
nodes enables the determination of the expected link duration,
denoted by LD and returns an important indicator about the
radio link stability. Indeed, the resolution of the equation
below, returns the LD:
LDi,j = t, when
q
(xi,t − xj,t)2 + (yi,t − yj,t)2 = Dmax,
(13)
where Dmax is the maximum communication range between
the nodes i and j, which depends on the channel path loss
modeled in (1).
• Closeness to sink: The main goal is to gather the data
from mobile nodes driving along a geographic area to a sink.
In order to reach the destination node in a reasonable time,
data should progress towards the sink at every hop. Otherwise,
packets may spend a long time ﬂoating from a node to another
without reaching the destination. To model the progress of
data towards the destination, a metric characterizing the link
aptitude to approach the sink is considered. Every node is
labeled with a number of hops required to reach the collection
point. If a node i selects the node j as its next hop, and the
latter is ¯Nh(j) away from the destination then, the created link
has an advance attribute, denoted by advi,j, and is given by:
advi,j = ¯Nh(j) + 1, if i selects j as next hop.
(14)
Once the main factors impacting the link quality are
deﬁned, the links are labeled with weights resulting from a
weighted combination of the aforementioned metrics. The best
subset of the set of links maximizing the overall weights is
used to connect the nodes with their respective successors to
reach the collection node.
B. Problem formulation
Consider that each edge of the graph G(V, E), that we
denote by ek, k = 1, . . . , |E| where |.| denotes the cardinality
of a set, is characterized by a weight denoted by wk. The
objective is to divide the graph G(V, E) into Nt disjoint trees
to create a forest. This forest ensures a faster building of
disjoint trees with shorter routes. The total number of trees Nt
is depending essentially on the number of nodes that are within
the coverage of the sink and characterized by a good link
quality, e.g., wk ≥ wth, where wth is a link weight threshold
deﬁned by the operator. Deﬁne Tt ≡ G(Vt, Et) ⊂ G(V, E),
where t = 1, . . . , Nt, a tree composed of a set of vertices
denoted by Vt and a set of edges denoted by Et. Accordingly,
the forest will be formed by Nt trees. Denote by ϵk,t the binary
variable indicating whether an edge k of E belongs to set of
edges Et. Hence, ϵk,t is expressed as:
ϵk,t =
(
1 if ek ∈ Et,
0
otherwise
(15)
Consequently, the optimization problem aiming at minimizing
a multi-objective utility composed of the three metrics dis-
cussed above can be formulated as:
minimize
ϵk,t,k=1,...,|E|
t=1,...,Nt
|E|
X
k=1
wk
Nt
X
t=1
ϵk,t
(16)
subject to:
ϵk,t ≤ δk,
(17)
Nt
X
t=1
ϵk,t ≤ 1.
(18)
The solution of the optimization problem given by (16)−(18)
will associate the edges ek to the Nt trees to connect the
maximum of nodes that will forward their data packets to the
roots of each tree such that the total weight is minimized.
Using the metrics expressed in (5), (13), and (14), the weight
of a given link joining two nodes i and j and corresponding
to the edge k ∈ E can be expressed as:
wk ≡ wi,j = −α Ri,j
Rmax
− β LDi,j
LDmax
+ γ advi,j
advmax
,
(19)
where Rmax, LDmax, and advmax are determined by Monte
Carlo simulation campaigns. They are used to normalize the
magnitude of the different metrics. Note that the parameter
advmax represents the maximum possible number of hops
to reach the sink node, which is equal to the number of
nodes in the network. The parameters α, β, and γ are three
freedom degrees identiﬁed by the operator. Their sum is
equal to one and they have to be set properly according to
the operator’s need. For instance, increasing α will promote
the rate metric at the expense of the others. Constraint (17)
ensures that an edge ek can be considered in the association
if the corresponding SINR provides at least the minimum
requirement for a seamless transmission. This condition is
identiﬁed by the binary parameter δk which is given as follows:
δk =
(
1 if SINRi,j ≥ SINRmin,
0
otherwise
(20)
where SINRi,j is SINR at the receiver of the link k that can
be deduced from (7) while SINRmin is a SINR minimum
threshold. Finally, constraint (18) imposes that an edge can be
associated to only one tree.
V.
DATA COLLECTION WITH DMSF
The data collection is a speciﬁc case of more general
routing problem. Indeed, for data gathering, the destination
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

node is usually not an arbitrary node but is often the sink node
having pre-deﬁned public properties, e.g., its location is known
by nodes belonging to the network. At every data collection
round, the nodes have to check their link states to ﬁnd the
best relevant next hops in order to deliver their data content.
Recall that there is no agent that has real-time global view of
the network topology to execute a centralized computing of
the best paths. Moreover, a given node does not have to be
aware of all the network links to build its best path. Instead,
it requires a local awareness of its links associating it with
one-hop neighbor-nodes to make sure that its path to the sink
node is loop-free. Finally, data sent by the distributed nodes
should reach a subset of nodes, called the roots of the forest
trees, which are responsible to relay data directly to the sink.
Figure 2. DMSF algorithm.
The main idea of the proposed approach is to build multiple
trees with minimum overall weights and rooted at a set of
predeﬁned nodes to create a Forest of Nt trees. We call this
subset of nodes, i.e., the roots, as VR where |VR| = Nt.
The tree-based topology of the collection algorithm focuses
on ensuring a convergence of the collected data towards the
destination and using loop-free paths. Moreover, each node can
join a single tree and forward its own data and other received
data exclusively to one parent node. Working with minimum
spanning forest instead of a single minimum spanning tree
is preferred because it leads to short paths to reach the
destination. In addition, considering multiple roots allows the
network to avoid bottlenecks in the last hops and ensures a
load balance throughout the network.
Figure 2 illustrates a high-level description of the proposed
DMSF algorithm. For a periodic data collection, where all the
vehicles in a given geofence area are expected to transmit their
generated and occasionally received data, nodes should ﬁrst
build routing paths especially when the exchanged data size is
important. In order to build loop-free paths leading to the sink
node, the algorithm starts with the selection of the members of
VR. Then, nodes initiate the construction of fragments based on
the best available link weights and fuse fragments into bigger
ones. The process continues in a fully distributed way until
all the nodes, reachable from at least one of the VR members,
join a tree of the forest. It may happen that some nodes do not
join any of the forest’s trees if the network graph is physically
disconnected. Hence, these nodes will not transmit data until
joining routing trees to save communication bandwidth.
Figure 3. Illustration of routing paths resulting from DMSF algorithm for a
regular vehicles distribution. The set of nodes VR = {9, 14, 20} represents
the roots of the formed Nt trees.
Figure 3 shows an illustration of the paths built for a
network graph with some disconnected parts, e.g., the tree
{11, 12, 17}. The built trees reﬂect the fully distributed and
parallel behavior of the algorithm. The root selection and
rank updates of the fragments are similar to DMST algorithm.
However, some updates are carried out to promote the data
progress towards the RSU. These updates force the nodes
member of VR to be the roots of the formed trees. It is also
worthy to mention that DMSF approach does not ensure the
shortest path in terms of hop count however, it fosters the stable
routes with higher throughput along with the convergence to
the destination. For instance, the node 26 selects a more stable
parent which is node 27 with hop-count equal to four instead
of node 20 at two hops to RSU. The same scenario occurs
with node 15, it chooses to go through longer route and did
not join VR because of the weak connectivity it has with the
sink node.
Once the nodes ﬁnish building their routes, a data collection
is initiated by the nodes joining the trees. Every node appends
its locally generated data with the received data from children
nodes in the routing trees, if any, and forwards data to its
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

parent node. The roots of the trees deliver the received data
to the collection point as soon as they receive data from their
respective children nodes. When the next session is due, the
DMSF algorithm is initiated again and the data gathering is
performed by its end, and so forth. Or, in order to increase the
data collection speed, new DMSFs can be created based on
previously constructed DMSFs during previous session. This
approach is left for a future extension of this work.
VI.
PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
This section describes the simulation environment and
discusses the performance results of the proposed algorithms.
A. Simulation Setup
An urban trafﬁc area is considered under the form of a grid
network with controlled intersections. An RSU is deployed in
the central junction of the studied area. The UAVs are hovering
at a ﬁxed altitude hu above the junctions. The mobility traces
of ground nodes were generated using the Simulator of Urban
MObility (SUMO) [15] and the algorithms were implemented
and tested in Matlab. Table I lists the simulation parameters
that have been used.
TABLE I. SIMULATION PARAMETERS.
Parameter
Value/Description
area dimensions
1km x 1km
Number of junctions
5 x 5
Road segment length
250 m
System bandwidth
10 Mhz
Transmission power (Ptr)
23.8 dBm
P L0(d0)
58.81 dB
Path Loss Exponent (ν)
1.83
σS
4.48 dB
SINRmin
-6.37 dB
SINRmax
7.35 dB
hu
100 m
B. Performance results
In this section, the performance of the algorithms are
quantiﬁed. Indeed, the data collection ratio, the required time
to achieve the collection task, and the average number of hops
to deliver data packets are studied for DMSF, DMST, and
Greedy Perimeter Coordinator Routing (GPCR) [7] protocols.
The latter is a position-based routing protocol. It leverages
the planar property of the graph formed by road segments
and junctions. GPCR uses the restricted greedy forwarding
and a repair strategy to deal with local maximum problem
[16]. Afterwards, the impact of using UAVs in assisting data
collection using DMSF algorithm is evaluated for a low-
density network.
1) Data Collection ratio: The considered data collection
scenario in this paper is periodic and asynchronous. This
means data could be concentrated in intermediate nodes which
need to forward received data from children nodes to respective
parent nodes. If the link quality is not considered in the
selection of the next hop, many packets risk to be lost. Figure 4
shows the variation of the data collection ratio with the number
of vehicles for the three algorithms. The proposed DMSF
algorithm achieved clearly higher data delivery, slightly better
than DMST particularly in low and medium trafﬁc. For dense
network, DMST performance drops signiﬁcantly because of
the increasing routing tree and the dynamic nature of the
Figure 4. Data collection ratio for different trafﬁc densities
network. GPCR is a position-based routing algorithm which
forwards data to the nodes ensuring always a better progress
towards the destination node. It uses a restricted greedy for-
warding. When the restricted greedy forwarding fails to ﬁnd
a next hop, a recovery strategy such as the right hand rule
is used. It is clear that the delivery ratio of this algorithm is
limited for low-density network. However, it grows up with
the network density because of the higher probability to get
better relay node to reach the sink node. Even though, GPCR
algorithm did not achieve DMSF packet delivery ratio.
2) Overall Delay: One major factor of data collection in
mobile networks is the time bound within which the collection
task has been achieved.
Figure 5. Data collection time for different trafﬁc densities
The faster the collection is performed, the better the ap-
proach is. Indeed, in topology-based approaches, the computed
paths are subject to change within a short time. Hence, a slow
data forwarding will probably face outdated paths and end
up with discarding packets or recomputing the path. Figure 5
shows the collection time in milliseconds to route the data
from all the network nodes towards the sink. Of course, only
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

nodes able to ﬁnd a relay will send data. The other nodes will
discard their data and wait to the next data collection session.
For different densities of the network, the DMSF performs
better than DMST, which is, in its turn, performing better
than GPCR in terms of overall data collection delay for low
and medium trafﬁc densities. In dense network, GPCR overall
delay outperforms DMST. In GPCR, the extra delay is caused
by the long paths traveled by some packets when entering the
recovery mode. The difference between DMSF and DMST
in terms of collection time is due to the partitioned routing
structures (i.e., trees) in DMSF leading to load balance and
bottleneck avoidance in the neighborhood of the sink node.
These factors lower the packet processing time in intermediate
nodes, and hence lower the end-to-end journey delay of the
packets.
3) Average number of hops: The average number of hops
denotes the length of the paths of delivered packets traveled
through. Figure 6 shows that GPCR presents shortest paths in
Figure 6. Average hops’ number for different trafﬁc densities
average. This is due to low delivery ratio when the network is
sparse, and the greedy nature of the protocol to approach the
sink node in dense network. For DMSF, the results are slightly
higher because of the consideration of the link quality and the
distributed nature of the paths construction. DMSF performs
better than DMST because the latter uses a single routing tree
causing the leaf nodes to be more distant from the tree root.
4) UAVs impact: For low density trafﬁc, the network is
fragmented. This causes a degraded performance of the data
collection. Exploiting the existing UAVs as relay nodes be-
tween two fragments of the network has a positive impact on
the system performance. Figures 7-9 depict the impact of using
UAVs with DMSF algorithm in low-density network compared
to DMSF with only ground nodes. The hovering of UAVs
above the junctions allow them to link the network fragments
and hence increase the packet delivery ratio which approaches
98% when using 24 drones. The overall delay and the average
number of hops within the network did not change signiﬁcantly
which means the the UAVs enhance the network behavior with
a very low cost.
Figure 7. Impact of UAVs on data collection ratio
Figure 8. Impact of UAVs on data collection time
Figure 9. Impact of UAVs on average hops’ number
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

VII.
CONCLUSION
Vehicular network enables a set of applications which
make the driving experience safer and more efﬁcient. Mobile
nodes continuously transmit data which is gathered by remote
devices. In this paper, the data collection challenge had been
tackled in an urban area through the proposal of DMSF algo-
rithm. The proposed solution achieves a very high data delivery
ratio and scales better than GPCR and DMST algorithms in
terms of collection time. The provided assistance of UAVs in
relaying data between disconnected network fragments clearly
enhances the data collection task with a very low cost in terms
of overall delay. In a broader view, the present solution could
help in enhancing the network nodes connectivity and end-
to-end data delivery by assuring a local link-aware next-hop
selection.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This publication was made possible by NPRP grant
#NPRP8-2459-1-482 from the Qatar National Research Fund
(a member of Qatar Foundation). The statements made herein
are solely the responsibility of the authors.
REFERENCES
[1]
“ETSI
TS
101
539-3
V1.1.1(2013-11)
-
Intelligent
Transport
Systems
(ITS);
V2X
Applications;
Part
3:
Longitudinal
Col-
lision
Risk
Warning
(LCRW)application
requirements
speciﬁca-
tion,” http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi ts/101500 101599/10153903/01.
01.01 60/ts 10153903v010101p.pdf, NOV 2013, accessed: 2018-04-
21.
[2]
“ETSI TS 101 539-3 V1.1.1(2013-11) - Intelligent Transport Systems
(ITS); V2X Applications; Part 1: Road Hazard Signalling (RHS)
application requirements speciﬁcation,” http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi
ts/101500 101599/10153901/01.01.01 60/ts 10153901v010101p.pdf,
AUG 2013, accessed: 2018-04-21.
[3]
H. Fern´andez, L. Rubio, and V. M. Rodrigo-Pe˜narrocha, “Path loss
characterization for vehicular communications at 700 MHz and 5.9
GHz under LOS and NLOS conditions,” IEEE Antennas and Wire-
less Propagation Letters, vol. 13, May 2014, pp. 931–934, DOI:
10.1109/LAWP.2014.2322261.
[4]
H. Ghazzai, A. Feidi, H. Menouar, and M. L. Ammari, “An ex-
ploratory search strategy for data routing in ﬂying ad hoc net-
works,” in Proceedings of the IEEE 28th Annual International Sym-
posium on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio Communications
(PIMRC) Oct 8–13, 2017, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2017, pp. 1–7, DOI:
10.1109/PIMRC.2017.8292474.
[5]
H. Ghazzai, H. Menouar, and A. Kadri, “Data Routing Challenges
in UAV-assisted Vehicular Ad hoc Networks,” in Proceedings of VE-
HICULAR 2017: the 6th International Conference on Advances in
Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications July 23–27, 2017,
Nice, France, 2017, pp. 85–90, ISBN: 978-1-61208-573-9.
[6]
R. G. Gallager, P. A. Humblet, and P. M. Spira, “A Distributed
Algorithm for Minimum-Weight Spanning Trees,” Journal ACM Trans-
actions on Programming Languages and Systems (TOPLAS), vol. 5,
no. 1, Jan. 1983, pp. 66–77, DOI: 10.1145/357195.357200.
[7]
J. Liu et al., “A survey on position-based routing for vehicular ad hoc
networks,” Springer Telecommunication Systems, vol. 62, no. 1, May
2016, pp. 15–30, Online ISSN: 1572-9451.
[8]
S. Ucar, S. C. Ergen, and O. Ozkasap, “Multihop-Cluster-Based IEEE
802.11p and LTE Hybrid Architecture for VANET Safety Message
Dissemination,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 65,
no. 4, Apr. 2016, pp. 2621–2636, DOI: 10.1109/TVT.2015.2421277.
[9]
H. Huang, L. Libman, and G. Geersp, “An Agent Based Data Collection
Scheme for Vehicular Sensor Networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
24th International Conference on Computer Communication and Net-
works (ICCCN) August 3–6, 2015, Las Vegas, NV, USA, 2015, DOI:
10.1109/ICCCN.2015.7288374.
[10]
A. Soua and H. Aﬁﬁ, “Adaptive data collection protocol using rein-
forcement learning for VANETs,” in Proceedings of the IEEE 9th Inter-
national Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference
(IWCMC) July 1–5, 2013, Sardinia, Italy, 2013, pp. 1040–1045, DOI:
10.1109/IWCMC.2013.6583700.
[11]
P. Fazio, F. D. Rango, C. Sottile, and A. F. Santamaria, “Routing
Optimization in Vehicular Networks: A New Approach Based on
Multiobjective Metrics and Minimum Spanning Tree,” International
Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, vol. 9, no. 11, 2013, pp. 1–13,
DOI: 10.1155/2013/598675.
[12]
A. Al-Hourani, S. Chandrasekharan, G. Baldini, and S. Kandeepan,
“Propagation measurements in 5.8GHz and pathloss study for CEN-
DSRC,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Connected Vehicles and Expo (ICCVE) Nov 3–7, 2014, Vienna, Austria,
2014, pp. 1086–1091, DOI: 10.1109/ICCVE.2014.7297518.
[13]
N. Wisitpongphan, O. K. Tonguz, and J. Parikh, “Broadcast storm
mitigation techniques in vehicular ad hoc networks,” IEEE Wire-
less Communications, vol. 14, no. 6, Dec. 2007, pp. 84–94, DOI:
10.1109/MWC.2007.4407231.
[14]
A. Burr, A. Papadogiannis, and T. Jiang, “MIMO Truncated Shannon
Bound for System Level Capacity Evaluation of Wireless Networks,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference Workshops (WCNCW) July 1–1, 2012, Paris, France, 2012,
pp. 1040–1045, DOI: 10.1109/WCNCW.2012.6215504.
[15]
D. Krajzewicz, J. Erdmann, M. Behrisch, and L. Bieker, “Recent devel-
opment and applications of SUMO - Simulation of Urban MObility,”
International Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements,
vol. 5, no. 3&4, Dec. 2012, pp. 128–138.
[16]
C. Lochert et al., “Geographic Routing in City Scenarios,” ACM
SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing and Communications Review, vol. 9,
no. 1, Jan. 2005, pp. 69–72, DOI: 10.1145/1055959.1055970.
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

