Operation in Tunnels Construction Works with Autonomous or Tele-operated 
Trucks  
Felipe Jimenez, Jose E. Naranjo 
University Institute for Automobile 
Research (INSIA-UPM) 
Madrid, Spain 
e-mail: felipe.jimenez@upm.es  
Miguel Martín, Antonio Ramírez  
SACYR Construccion 
Madrid, Spain 
Miguel Anguera, Pablo García 
CAVOSA 
Madrid, Spain 
Abstract— It is possible to transfer the technological base of 
autonomous vehicles to other areas. Such is the case of public 
works and, specifically, tunnels given their particularities. In 
this regard, this area is characterized by the fact that work is 
developed in a limited area, in which vehicles should not be 
registered for using them in public roads and the presence of 
human beings is restricted or prohibited. In this context, the 
implementation of autonomous vehicles in public works can 
provide significant improvements. For this, it is intended to 
improve the process of material removal from the tunnel by 
means of an automation and communication kit for heavy 
public works trucks. Then, the conventional vehicles can be 
transformed to work autonomously in a coordinated way 
between them and with other vehicles that operate also 
autonomously or manually. 
Keywords-autonomous vehicle; public works truck; V2X 
communications; teleopration; autonomous guidance. 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
Almost all major car manufacturers, as well as other 
players outside this industry, are involved in the 
development of vehicles with a certain degree of autonomy, 
in addition to driver assistance systems, which, in some 
cases, take advantage of actuators automation. The results 
suggest that the automotive industry has opted for this type 
of technology for the not too distant future, although there is 
still a long way to go [1]. 
Autonomous driving is not confined to highways. There 
are several areas where the use of this technology can be 
applied, and special applications based on this type of 
vehicles have been implemented over the years. In this way, 
there are specific applications for off road environments, 
military missions, rescue, supervision and surveillance, land 
exploration, agriculture, etc. In general, all these applications 
share the fact that some tasks should not be made by a 
human operator due to the exposure to imminent danger or 
automation could provide a specific service with better 
benefits. 
This paper presents the implementation of the elements 
for transforming a set of conventional public works trucks 
for tunnels construction into a set of autonomous vehicles 
that could operate both automatically or teleoperated from a 
control site. The main system architecture is shown, and 
preliminary results are discussed. 
Section II includes a review of previous works on this 
specific field. Section III presents the specifications required 
for the system operation. Then Section IV shows the 
technological solution used for each of the elements that 
involve the system. Finally, Conclusions and current state of 
the project and future works are commented in Section V. 
II.
AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES FOR CONSTRUCTION 
PURPOSES 
In addition to public roads transport, autonomous driving 
has applications in specific structured scenarios looking for a 
reduction of the presence of the operator. Now we review 
some of these areas, such as mining and construction [2]. 
Mining jobs are highly demanding and workers' 
conditions can be extreme. In this sense, automation has a 
clear positive impact and has already been undertaken for a 
long time, to reduce operating costs and risks for operators. 
For example, fully autonomous mining trucks complete a set 
of tasks without the intervention of the operator and, instead, 
are monitored in a remote-control site by the miners to 
ensure that the trucks are operating efficiently throughout the 
mine. This solution increases productivity. 
Among other examples, we can mention Sandvik, which 
has been developing loaders and autonomous trucks for 
mines over the past 20 years. Sandvik has developed 
vehicles that can automate the entire production cycle. 
Sandvik tests its vehicles to ensure they are safe and 
functional in an underground mine in Finland and also works 
closely with its customers to ensure that product expectations 
are 
met. 
Also, 
Autonomous 
Solutions, 
Inc. 
offers 
autonomous solutions for trucks, excavators, etc. Cyngn is 
another company that proposes autonomous excavators and 
loaders. Caterpillar is committed to assisting operator 
technologies that control specific functions of the machine to 
increase productivity and reduce costs, remote control 
systems that keep operators away from the cabins and even, 
in some cases, by totally autonomous trucks. Another 
example is the use of remotely supervised trucks at the 
Pilbara iron mines in Australia. 80 Komatsu trucks are used 
and each one has worked more than 700 additional hours 
compared to a conventional driven vehicle. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

The negative aspects are the fact that the configuration, 
operation and maintenance of equipment without a driver is 
expensive. In addition to the vehicles themselves, there is the 
additional cost of mapping the mines to operate the vehicles, 
as well as the installation of a control center.  
In the construction field, using robotic systems is a 
reasonable option in the short term since construction sites 
are closed to traffic and people. In addition, construction 
robots can work independently once guidelines are given. 
One of the main advantages lies in the fact that they offer 
safer jobs and less exposed to dust or vibration conditions, 
by managing the operation remotely. Thus, machines can 
autonomously perform dangerous and repetitive tasks. 
However, complex and changing working conditions can 
reduce the potential benefit, which, together with the inertia 
of the sector, means that the presence of autonomous tools is 
still small, but not non-existent. 
In October 2017, Built Robotics developed a loader 
controlled from an iPad that provides the functionality of 
entering operating parameters and, through satellite 
positioning and other sensors, it is able to perform the work. 
In the same year, Volvo introduced the HX2 electric 
charging vehicle and the LX1 hybrid loader, which provide 
considerable savings in energy consumption. Volvo also 
incorporates autonomous capabilities in the L120 excavator 
and the A25 articulated truck. In the same line, Caterpillar 
793F trucks provided an increase of 20% of productivity in 
comparison with the one driven manually. Komatsu offers 
the semi-autonomous D61i-23 dozer, while Caterpillar and 
John Deere work in similar vehicles, which will start being 
semi-autonomous to evolve towards full automation. 
III.
SYSTEM SPECIFICATIONS 
The project presented in this paper corresponds to the 
technological line of transferring the fundamental knowledge 
acquired for road environments to scenarios in the industrial 
sector. This project aims to apply the knowledge of vehicle 
automation, 
positioning, 
obstacle 
detection 
and 
communications to a tunnel excavation, more specifically, in 
the tasks of extracting material from a tunnel to the area of 
intermediate discharge near its exit. This operation has a 
series of safety constraints that limit the human presence, 
and, on the other hand, the operation is very well defined, so 
it is susceptible for automation. As main challenges, beyond 
the type of vehicle, quite different from road vehicles, we 
could highlight the environment detection (considering light 
and dust), positioning (because of the lack of Global 
Positioning System (GPS) signal) and collisions avoidance, 
as well as the automatic and remote management of the 
points of material loading and unloading, and the 
synchronized operation of a small group of vehicles working 
simultaneously. 
The project aims to replace conventional vehicles driven 
manually by autonomous and connected vehicles, also 
managed from a control center. Specifically, the aim is to 
automate 3 Volvo A-25 public works trucks (Figure 1), as 
well as including communication systems and a user 
interface to guarantee compatibility with other manually 
driven trucks, so that they can share the workspace and the 
operation in a coordinated way from a monitoring and 
control center. The 6x6 Volvo A25 has great capacity and 
flexibility in mixed and very difficult terrain conditions.  
Figure 1. Volvo A-25 public works truck 
Excavation of a tunnel is usually executed by means of 
different machinery such as a front wheel loader, model 
Volvo L120 or similar. These machines load the material on 
articulated trucks such as Volvo model A25D. Once arrived 
at the end of the tunnel or near crossing zones enabled for it, 
these trucks will turn around so that their cabin is oriented 
facing the exit of the tunnel. Then, in reverse gear, they will 
be properly positioned so that the loading machines can pour 
the material into the truck's box. Once the load is completed, 
the truck will move to the corresponding dumping area 
outside the tunnel. The rest of the trucks of the fleet will be 
returning and/or waiting inside the tunnel, in the areas 
enabled for it. 
This process can be automatized because of its 
repeatability. To indicate to the trucks the final stopping 
points, both inside and outside the tunnel, beacons are 
placed, which allow the operators to easily modify the 
collection and unloading points. 
We can define 5 specific innovations of the project  
derived from the development of this project: 
•
Development of a kit for automation of Volvo A-25 
trucks, which will equip them with the ability to 
operate autonomously. The vehicle will maintain its 
ability to be driven manually and, in addition, will 
allow autonomous driving. Furthermore, since 
automation is provided by a removable kit, it can be 
installed in conventional machinery that is currently 
working on the construction site so specific 
machinery is not required. 
•
Development of a perception system for operation in 
off-road environments in tunnel construction without 
positioning information, and under poor light and 
dust conditions. 
•
Development of cooperative capacities, so a set of 
vehicles can work in the same area at the same time 
in a coordinated manner. To do this, automation will 
be carried out in three vehicles and communication 
systems will be incorporated to enable them to 
exchange information in real time with each other 
and with the management and monitoring system. 
•
Development 
of 
a 
management 
system 
for 
monitoring the fleet of autonomous vehicles during 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

the operation in the excavation of a tunnel in order to 
control in real time the development of the same.  
•
Development of a methodology for the automation 
of public works vehicles so that the results of this 
project can be extended to other machinery and other 
machinery manufacturers. 
IV.
TECHNOLOGICAL SOLUTION
The technological solution involves 5 main elements: 
•
Automation kit for transforming a conventional 
vehicle into a vehicle with autonomous or 
teleoperated capabilities (Subsections A and B).  
•
Low-layer control system. This element involves the 
steering system automation, speed automation and 
control subsystem, considering all the information 
and 
commands 
provided 
by 
sensors 
and 
communications (Subsection C). 
•
Perception and High-level control system. This 
system includes the information collection (vehicle 
positioning, obstacles detection and reference 
element detection) and processing, as well as the 
guidance system (Subsection D). 
•
Teleoperator site from which vehicles are supervised 
and controlled (Subsection E). 
•
Communications 
systems 
for 
exchanging 
information between vehicles, and with the control 
site in order to achieve a coordinated operation when 
more than one vehicle is involved (Subsection F). 
Figure 2 shows a block diagram with the interconnection 
of these elements, including a new emergency system to stop 
the vehicle externally in case of failure or incorrect 
operation. 
Figure 2. Device for controlling the steering system 
A.
Steering automation  
The Volvo A25 truck has articulated steering, with an 
exclusive Volvo steering system that is self-compensating 
hydromechanically and with re-coupling between the rear 
axle and the steering slide from the steering and tilt valve. 
The steering system is coupled in parallel with the tilt 
system, with which it has common hydraulic pumps.  
There are two ways to act automatically on the steering 
system: 1) act directly on the hydraulic cylinders, inserting a 
bypass on the current hydraulic circuitry with solenoid 
valves controlled from the computer; 2) attach an actuator on 
the steering column that is capable of moving the steering 
wheel, not modifying the pre-existing equipment of the 
truck. 
The second one is chosen. To do this, a motor must be 
attached to the steering column in such a way that it exerts 
the same effect that human drivers do when moving the 
steering wheel. Additionally, an absolute encoder must be 
added to the steering bar indicating the angle that the steering 
of the vehicle is turned, in order to be able to close the 
control loop. 
The solution adopted is based on the patent ES 2516568 
B2, "Equipment to automatically control the steering system 
of a vehicle", property of the Technical University of Madrid 
[3] (Figure 3). It includes the following features [4]: 
•
The device is independent of the type of vehicle and 
the type of steering assistance system (electric or 
hydraulic), including the presence or absence of such 
assistance, unlike other previous developments that 
require a specific type. 
•
The assembly of the device does not imply any 
permanent modification of the vehicle, nor does it 
eliminate the steering column. 
•
Orders through the vehicle internal communications 
bus are not required for the vehicle control, which 
allows the use of the device in every type of vehicle. 
•
The coupling or decoupling of the autonomous mode 
is controlled automatically and not manually, so it 
could be carried out while the vehicle is moving and 
instantaneously, using the same microprocessor that 
controls the rotation angle of the steering wheel. 
•
The driver does not lose control of the vehicle. 
•
It is not visible and does not interfere with the 
driving task. 
•
The device is removable. 
Figure 3. Device for controlling the steering system 
With the solution used, in normal driving, the driver acts 
on the steering wheel, the electric motor is stopped and an 
electromagnet, which acts as a clutch, is deactivated so no 
effort is transmitted. When it is decided to change to 
autonomous driving, the electromagnet is activated, and the 
rotation of the electric motor is transmitted to the steering 
column. This connection can be made at any time and with 
any position of the steering wheel. On the other hand, if the 
vehicle is in autonomous mode and the driver wishes to 
perform different actions than the ones intended by the 
system, the system could be deactivated as soon as the driver 
acts. The device performance has been tested on other 
vehicles types [4] with satisfactory results. The electric 
motor, gears and mechanical parts have been designed in this 
case considering the measured forces involved. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

B.
Speed automation  
The throttle of the Volvo A25 is electronic. In this case, 
in order to automate it, it is necessary to transmit the analog 
signal proportional to the angle of the accelerator pedal from 
an external source. Then, it is necessary to send an 
alternative analog signal generated by a computer that 
emulates the one generated by the original potentiometer and 
allows its operation from the automation system. 
On the other hand, the Volvo A25 is equipped with a 
classic brake assist system with hydraulic assistance. This 
implies that access to related electronics is not enough for its 
automation, so it is necessary to act mechanically on some of 
its components in order to obtain the desired action. 
Finally, the Volvo A25 equips an automatic gearbox with 
a torque converter, where the driver can select from 6 
different positions. The action of the gear selector on the 
Electronic Control Unit (ECU) is totally electronic, 
activating each selection according to a series of 8 bits that 
correspond to the electronic outputs of the selector itself. In 
order to proceed with the automation of this element, it is 
necessary to bypass the outputs of the gear selector in order 
to emulate them from an electronic digital output card. 
C.
Control architecture (low-level control layer)   
The control scheme must define the necessary equipment 
requirements to carry out the automation of the vehicle's 
actuators: throttle, brake, steering wheel and gearshift, as 
well as their interconnection and operation from a centralized 
on-board computer.  
In this way, the control architecture has been designed in 
a distributed manner, where each actuator constitutes a 
subsystem and all components are interconnected in two 
levels. On the one hand, all the components of each 
subsystem will be connected through a real-time Controller 
Area Network (CAN) bus line. This architecture simplifies 
the electronic layout and centralizes all the commands in the 
same protocol for all the actuators. In case any modification 
would be introduced in the future, it is much simpler and 
modular. On the other hand, each subsystem will be 
interconnected and connected to the central computer by a 
TCP/IP network. Then, the malfunctioning of one of the 
subsystems will not cause the global system to fail, since the 
architecture makes it tolerant to failures in its components. 
In this way, we define 3 subsystems: 
•
Subsystem of access to vehicle information. Access 
to the data of the internal bus of the vehicle, in order 
to obtain the data of vehicle speed, engine speed and 
change of gears. An Ethernet/ CAN card, connected 
to the local network of the vehicle, is used for this 
purpose.  
•
Subsystem of actuators driven by motors. In this 
case, this subsystem controls the steering wheel and 
the brake, two elements with the same configuration: 
they are driven by DC motors mechanically 
connected to the controls. These motors will receive 
orders directly through a CAN line through 
CANOPEN protocols. An Ethernet/CAN card is 
used for this, connected to a second ad-hoc bus, 
which will not interfere with the original CAN bus 
of the Volvo A25. 
•
Electronically controlled actuator subsystem. In this 
case, the throttle and the gearshift of the vehicle will 
be controlled by means of this subsystem, which 
obeys the analog electronic signal protocol. To do 
this, these signals will be generated by an analog 
output card, which is connected to the Ethernet 
network through another Ethernet/Serial card. 
All subsystems are linked by a Gigabit switch, which 
ensures the maintenance of real time in the global system. In 
case this switch fails, the system detects that no more new 
data is received so a stopping command is sent automatically 
to the brake pedal, whose actuator receives power directly 
from the vehicle battery. This control system is implemented 
in a box containing all the electronic devices, bus interfaces 
and communication antennas inputs (Figure 4). 
Figure 4. Electronic and communication control box 
D.
Perception and autonomous guidance system (high-
level control layer)   
The fundamental objective of the autonomous guidance 
system is to take control of the different actuators of the 
vehicle and provide them the appropriate commands to 
perform the desired tasks. In order to achieve this objective, 
the vehicle equips a GPS receiver for using this signal when 
available and installs 2 different perception systems: 
•
a 3D laser scanner sensor 
•
a camera placed near the human driver point of view 
As GPS signal is quite poor or unavailable in tunnels, 
positioning and autonomous guidance is performed be means 
of the laser scanner. So, this sensor is used for improving 
positioning accuracy detecting the walls of the tunnel in 
order to follow the path safely. It is also used for obstacles 
detection [5]-[8] to stop the vehicle in case the path is 
blocked and send a warning to the teleoperator. The camera 
sends images to the teleoperation site in order to take control 
decisions. Then, this high-level control layer can work in two 
operating modes: 
•
Autonomous mode: a trajectory or a reference 
element is followed without human actions. For this 
purpose, previous algorithms as presented in [9] are 
used to improve accuracy and robustness.  
•
Remote control: commands are sent from the 
teleoperation site and they are translated to be 
transferred to the low-level control layer. In both 
cases, obstacles detection is active and impose its 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

decisions on the other commands because of safety 
reasons. 
E.
Teleoperation site   
The tele-operator site is responsible for monitoring the 
trajectory and operation of all vehicles that circulate in the 
construction area [10]. It includes devices for controlling 
trajectory and speed of the vehicle in the tele-operated mode. 
Furthermore, one of the screens shows the images from the 
cameras placed on the vehicles near the driver position and 
the other screen presents operation data of the vehicles. 
Finally, in case the autonomous mode is activated, the 
mission tasks are stored in the control computer and sent to 
the vehicles. These missions could be updated in an easy 
way by the operator. 
F.
V2X communications   
Communications allow the exchange of information 
between the teleoperated or autonomous vehicles and the 
teleoperator site. For this purpose, Vehicle-to-X (V2X) 
standard 
communications 
systems 
are 
used. 
The 
requirements that these communication systems must 
comply with are the following ones. 
•
Desired range: 1 km with direct line of sight 
•
Bandwidth of at least 1 Mbps 
•
Operation in broadcast mode. 
•
UDP/IP communications protocol in order to 
guarantee the robustness of the operations. 
In this way, INSIA-ITS communications modules are 
used, which comply with the current standards to support 
communications in road vehicle environments and can be 
used with any type of IP protocol. In order to extend the 
range of these modules, they are equipped with signal 
amplifiers. These modules have been satisfactory tested in 
road scenarios [11][12] and trials in tunnels are expected for 
the near future. 
V.
CONCLUSIONS  
This project aims to develop a cooperative work between 
autonomous trucks in a complex environment such as tunnel 
construction in order to limit human intervention in a highly 
aggressive environment. In addition, it has the particularity 
that autonomous vehicles are obtained transforming 
conventional manual driving with non-permanent nor 
intrusive adaptations, thereby respecting the possibility of 
dual operation, which represents a clear competitive 
advantage. 
The project is a challenge for autonomous driving given 
the environment in which the work of the vehicles must be 
developed, 
which 
negatively 
affects 
perception 
and 
positioning, as well as having a very restricted space. On the 
other hand, communications between the vehicles and with 
the infrastructure and a control site allow the coordinated 
management of the vehicles to achieve greater productivity 
and anticipate potential dangers. 
At the current stage, subsystems have been tested 
independently. In this sense, vehicle automation lower 
control layer has been tested, as well as the internal 
communication bus that provides control commands. 
Furthermore, the teleoperation site for controlling and 
supervising 
the 
vehicle 
operation 
is 
finished 
and 
communication with the vehicle has been tested. Perception 
algorithms are now under modification in order to adapt 
them to the specific scenario that can be found in a tunnel. 
As a final stage, coordinated operation between different 
trucks managed from the same teleoperation site is expected 
to be implemented. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This project has been partially financed by the Spanish 
Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities (project 
"Tunnel Autonomous Driving, TUNNELAD", with code 
RTC-2017-6382-4) and the Spanish Ministry of Economy 
and Competitiveness (CAV project, with code TRA2016-
78886-C3-3-R). 
REFERENCES
[1]
F. Jimenez.. “Retos tecnológicos en el desarrollo e 
implantación del vehículo autónomo y conectado”. Carreteras, 
vol. 216, pp. 8-16, 2017. 
[2]
F. Jiménez. “Aplicaciones especiales de la conducción 
autónoma” Revista de Obras Públicas, in press 
[3]
F. Jimenez, J. E. Naranjo, M. González and O. Gomez. 
“Equipo para controlar automáticamente la dirección de un 
vehículo” Patent ES2516568, 2016 
[4]
F. Jimenez, J. E. Naranjo and O. Gomez. “Dispositivo 
universal para el control automático de la dirección de un 
vehículo”. Dyna Ingeniería e Industria. Vol 89, 4, pp 398-404, 
2014. 
[5]
K. Chu, M. Lee, and M. Sunwoo, “Local path planning for 
off-road autonomous driving with avoidance of static 
obstacles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 13, pp. 
1599–1616, 2012. 
[6]
C. Caraffi, S. Cattani, and P. Grisleri, “Off-road path and 
obstacle detection using decision networks and stereo vision,” 
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 8, pp. 607–618, 2007. 
[7]
J. Larson and M. Trivedi, “Lidar based off-road negative 
obstacle detection and analysis,” Proc. IEEE Conf. Intell. 
Transp. Syst. Proceedings, ITSC, pp. 192–197, 2011. 
[8]
E. Shang, X. An, T. Wu, T. Hu, Q. Yuan, and H. He, “LiDAR 
Based Negative Obstacle Detection for Field Autonomous 
Land Vehicles,” J. F. Robot., vol. 33, pp. 591–617, Aug. 
2016. 
[9]
F. Jimenez,  M. Clavijo, J. E. Naranjo and O. Gómez. 
“Improving the lane reference detection for autonomous road 
vehicle control”. Journal of Sensors. ID 9497524, pp. 1-13, 
2016 
[10] J.E. Naranjo, F. Jimenez, M. Anguita and J. L. Rivera. 
“Automation Kit for Dual-Mode Military Unmanned Ground 
Vehicle for Surveillance Missions”. IEEE Intelligent 
Transportation Systems Magazine, in press. 
[11] J.J. Anaya, E. Talavera, F. Jiménez, F Serradilla and J. E. 
Naranjo. “Vehicle to Vehicle GeoNetworking using Wireless 
Sensor Networks”. Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 27, pp. 133 – 146, 
2015. 
[12] E. Talavera, J. J. Anaya, O. Gómez, F. Jiménez and J. E. 
Naranjo,  “Performance comparison of Geobroadcast 
strategies for winding roads”.Electronics, vol 7, pp. 1-15. 
2018 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

