An ITS-based Architecture for Opportunistic Networking
Rodrigo Silva1,3
IMT Atlantique1
Rennes, France
Email: rodrigo.silva@imt-atlantique.fr
Jean-Marie Bonnin1,2,3,4
INRIA2/IRISA3
Rennes, France
Email: jean-marie.bonnin@irisa.fr
Thierry Ernst4
YoGoKo4
Paris, France
Email: thierry.ernst@yogoko.fr
Abstract—For a smarter use of transportation systems, vehi-
cles need to increase their environment awareness. This could
be achieved by enabling vehicles to communicate with their
environment. Once vehicles become connected, an ecosystem
of applications and services could be developed around them,
enabling the information exchange with other connected devices
and contributing for a Cooperative Intelligent Transportation
Systems (C-ITS). The environment of connected and cooperative
vehicles is characterized by its heterogeneity, i.e., there are a
wide variety of applications, a variety of users with differ-
ent communication preferences. Moreover, countries may have
speciﬁcs regulations. A single access technology to connect all
these heterogeneity is impossible. For ubiquitous connectivity it
is necessary to use existing wireless technologies (e.g., vehicular
WiFi (ITS-G5, DSRC), urban WiFi, 802.15.4, and cellular).
In such heterogeneous network environment, applications and
services cannot take into account all technology particularities.
It is necessary a communication architecture that hides the
underlying differences of access networks from applications,
providing seamless communication independently of the access
technology. Based on the ITS architecture proposed by Inter-
national Organization for Standardization (ISO) and European
Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), we propose a
Decision Maker (DM) architecture that is capable to manage
requirements and preferences from different actors (e.g., ap-
plications, users, administrators and regulators), it takes into
account the short-term prevision about the network environment,
it considers the context information (e.g., vehicle speed, battery
level). And it also takes into account the route conditions between
two communicating devices in order to make proactive decisions.
Keywords—ISO TC 204; ETSI TC ITS; ITS station commu-
nication architecture; C-ITS; decision making.
I. INTRODUCTION
The number of connected devices is growing fast around
the world. These objects are components of a network known
as the Internet of Things (IoT), where each object has the
possibility to exchange data with others. This scenario enables
the development of smart cities, where vehicles are supposed
to be one of the communicating objects. According to Gartner
research company, connected cars would be a major element
of the IoT, representing 20% of all IoT devices [1].
For a smarter use of transportation systems, vehicles need to
increase their environment awareness. This could be achieved
by enabling vehicles to communicate with their environment.
The connection could be local between nearby devices or
global, i.e., connection over the Internet. Once vehicles be-
come connected, an ecosystem of applications and services
can be developed around them. Nowadays, we are connected
to Internet through our computers and smartphones. In the
future, the vehicles will be directly connected too, supporting
a variety of applications (like smartphones do). For example,
vehicles could connect to the Internet to enhance driver and
passenger experience, e.g., improving the navigation and of-
fering on-board Internet connectivity. Vehicles can to connect
and exchange information with other devices in a smart
city environment. In this context, users, devices and vehicles
need to be connected anywhere, anytime with anything. Such
connections will enable the information exchange between
vehicles and their environment for a Cooperative Intelligent
Transportation Systems (C-ITS).
However, a single access technology to connect all these
heterogeneity of services and devices is impractical or even
impossible. For ubiquitous connectivity it is necessary to use
existing wireless technologies, such as vehicular WiFi (ITS-
G5, DSRC), urban WiFi, 802.15.4, WiMAX, cellular (3G, 4G,
and 5G under preparation) [2]–[4]. Each of these networks
has speciﬁc characteristics in terms of bandwidth, data rate,
security and others. Due to this network heterogeneity and its
complementary characteristics, more connectivity opportuni-
ties are available. Mobile devices equipped with multiple com-
munication capabilities could use multiple access technologies
simultaneously in order to maximize ﬂows satisfaction (e.g.,
to maximize communication bandwidth, to reduce latency,
and others) and to satisfy communication requirements (e.g.,
security, monetary cost, trafﬁc load balancing among available
networks, and others).
The environment of connected and cooperative vehicles is
characterized by its heterogeneity. For example, there are a
wide variety of applications, each one with speciﬁc require-
ments. There are a variety of users with different preferences.
Countries could have speciﬁcs regulations. There are a variety
of access technologies, each one with speciﬁc characteristics in
terms of bandwidth, data rate, security and others. Moreover,
vehicles can move at high speed and frequently change its
network environment.
In such heterogeneous and dynamic network environment,
applications and services cannot take into account all technol-
ogy particularities, unless they explicitly need it. The commu-
nication architecture has to hide the underlying differences of
access networks from applications, providing seamless com-
munication independently of the access technology. It should
be capable to handle multiple access technologies simultane-
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

ously while select the most appropriate access network for
each ﬂow. Such an architecture should choose the path, i.e., the
route between two communicating nodes that best meets the
communication requirements (e.g., a local connection between
nearby devices or a global connection over the Internet).
Moreover, in such dynamic environment the communication
architecture should perform proactive decisions taking into
account the short-term prevision about the network availability.
Based on some research work and also based on the ITS
architecture proposed by International Organization for Stan-
dardization (ISO) and European Telecommunications Stan-
dards Institute (ETSI), we propose a Decision Maker (DM)
architecture. Such architecture is capable to manage require-
ments and preferences from different actors (e.g., applications,
users, administrators and regulators), it takes into account the
short-term prevision about the network environment, it consid-
ers the context information (e.g., vehicle speed, battery level).
And it also takes into account the route conditions between two
communicating devices in order to make proactive decisions.
The proposed DM architecture is developed in an ISO/ETSI
standard compliant way.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II overviews the reference ITS station communication
architecture proposed by ISO and ETSI. Section III reviews
some related work. The proposed DM architecture is described
in Section IV. And Section V concludes the paper and pro-
poses future directions.
II. THE REFERENCE ITS STATION COMMUNICATION
ARCHITECTURE
In order to establish an harmonized communication-centric
architecture for ITS, ISO and ETSI have proposed a reference
ITS communication architecture supported by nodes called
ITS Stations (ITS-S), where each ITS-S (e.g., vehicles) can
handle its communication [5]. Such architecture is shown on
Figure 1.
Security
Applications
Safety-
related 
Applications
Trafﬁc 
efﬁciency
Other 
applications
(Infotainment)
MA-SAP
SA-SAP
FA-SAP
Facilities
Application support
Information Support
MF-SAP
FA-SAP
Session Support
SF-SAP
NF-SAP
Networking & Transport
ITS dedicated transport
ITS 
dedicated
MN-SAP
TCP/UDP
Geo-
Routing
Other 
Protocols
IPv6 + 
Mobility
IN-SAP
SN-SAP
NF-SAP
Access
IN-SAP
Other 
Media
CALM
media2
Media GPRS
Media EDGE
CALM
media2
Media WiMAX
Media UMTS
CALM
media2
Media M5
Media WiFi
2G
3G
WLAN
MI-SAP
SI-SAP
MM-SAP
SM-SAP
Security Information Base
(Trust, Identity, Privacy, Key & Certiﬁcat Management)
Authentication, Authorization, 
Conﬁdentiality, Proﬁle Management
Firewall and Intrusion Management
Hardware 
Security Module 
(HSM)
Management
ITS Station
Management
Networking
Management
Cross Interface 
Management
Management Information Base
Cross Interface 
Management
Networking
Management
ITS Station
Management
Management Information Base
Figure 1. The reference ITS station communication architecture.
The concept of the ITS-S communication architecture is to
abstract applications from both the access technologies and
the networks that transport the information between com-
municating nodes. Therefore, applications are not limited to
a single access technology, but they could take advantage
from all available technologies. While the lower layers can
be independently managed, without impacting applications.
In such architecture, two cross layers entities, i.e., “ITS
Station Management” and “ITS Station Security” are respon-
sible to station management functionalities and to provide
security and privacy services, respectively. Since applica-
tions are developed regardless to communication networks,
“ITS Station Management” entity is responsible to choose
the best network interface for each application. In order to
manage different process in the ITS-S, such cross layers
entities communicate with the horizontal layers: “ITS Station
Access Technologies” layer that is responsible for media
access control and provides data transmission through dif-
ferent access technologies, such as vehicular WiFi (ITS-G5,
DSRC), urban WiFi, 802.15.4, WiMAX, and cellular (3G,
4G, and 5G under preparation); “ITS Station Networking &
Transport” layer, which is responsible to execute operations
like packet routing, path establishment, path monitoring and
Internet Protocol (IP) mobility; “ITS Station Facilities” layer
that provides applications, information and communication
supports (e.g., encode/decode message support, time-stamping
and geo-stamping) and “ITS Station Application” layer that
provides Human-Machine Interface (HMI).
Network Mobility Basic Support Protocol (NEMO) [6] has
been chosen by several standardization bodies for IP-based
mobility management, including ISO and ETSI. NEMO allows
a Mobile Router (MR) to manage the IP mobility for all mobile
network attached to it. The MR maintains a bi-directional
tunnel (protected by IPsec) to a server in the cloud referred
to as the Home Agent (HA), as shown on Figure 2. For the
mobile network, it is allocated an IPv6 preﬁx identifying the
mobile network in the IP addressing topology as permanently
attached to the HA. Based on this preﬁx, the MR assigns
unchangeable addresses to its attached nodes called Mobile
Network Nodes (MNN). When a new network is available, MR
generates a new auto conﬁgured IP address (Care-of-address
(CoA)) within the new visited network and notiﬁes them to
the HA. Only the MR and the HA are aware of the network
change, since MNNs remain connected to the MR through
their permanent IP address.
MRs can be equipped with multiple communication inter-
faces. Multiple Care of Addresses Registration (MCoA) [7] is
used to managed these communication interfaces simultane-
ously, as illustrated on Figure 2. MCoA enables the registration
of several CoAs for a single MR. In this case, the MR could
establish multiple tunnels through each of its communication
interfaces and the HA.
The possibility of having multiple applications in an ITS-S
simultaneously competing for communication resources leads
to the need for a controlled access to these resources. In
such a control, requirements and objectives presented by
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

BS
2G/3G
 
AR
Internet
 
AR
AP
802.11p
Mobility Manager
(HA)
 
AR
Routing table: 
Green on tunnel 1
Bleue on tunnel 2
Routing table:
Green on tunnel 1
Bleue on tunnel 2
Tunnel 1
Tunnel 2
Routing policies
MNN1
MNP::LFN1Id
MNN2
MNP::LFN2Id
Home Network
Binding Cache:
HoA - CoA1
HoA - CoA2
Preﬁx Table: 
MNP - HoA
Visited
Network
Bindings:
HoA - CoA1
HoA - CoA2
Mobile Router
(MR)
Correspondant Nodes
(CN2)
Correspondant Nodes
(CN1)
Figure 2. NEMO and MCoA.
application, user preferences, set of rules (e.g., regulations,
network operator policies, etc.) and communication protocols’
status are used by the ITS-S Management Entity (SME),
from “ITS-S Management” cross layer, to select the best
suited communication proﬁle and path per communication
source. The determination of the path implies the selection
of the communication interface, the logical node in the access
network to which the ITS station is locally attached (ingress
anchor node) and the intermediary nodes in the network used
to reach the destination node (egress anchor node). Aware
about paths characteristics, the SME can choose the path
that best meets the communication requirements (e.g., a local
connection between nearby devices or a global connection over
the Internet). The methods to determine the most appropriate
path and to perform ﬂow-interface mapping is implementation
speciﬁc as it could be a competitive factor between stakehold-
ers. It is thus not speciﬁed in the ISO standards.
III. RELATED WORK
Few researches have worked on the development of a
DM architecture that consider the use of multiple access
technologies simultaneously and routing ﬂow per ﬂow, i.e.,
spreading ﬂows among different communication interfaces.
Authors of [8] proposed a modular architecture for multi-
homed mobile terminals. In such architecture, a middleware
interacts with “higher-layers” and “low layers”. The “high lay-
ers” gather the user and the administrator preferences, handle
the applications’ requirements, and detect the current terminal
capabilities. The “low layers” detects the available networks
and provides real-time information about the interfaces and
access networks capabilities as well as it handles the selection
execution process, i.e., it maps the application’s ﬂows on
the preferred access network. It does not consider the path
condition of a given ﬂow between sender and destination
nodes. And it does not consider the near future of the network
environment, i.e., the short-term prevision about the availabil-
ity of networks.
Paper [9] proposes a context-aware management solution to
maximize the satisfaction of the applications while respecting
the stakeholders policy rules. The proposed framework collect
and combining policies from stakeholders (e.g., user, admin-
istrators and applications). Based on such policies and context
information, it evaluates the network that better match the
communication requirements. Once the best network is chose,
the ﬂow routing is enforced on the device using NEMO and
MCoA. Such architecture does not consider the path condition
experienced by a ﬂow or the near future of the network
environment.
Paper [10] proposes a framework for supporting network
continuity in vehicular IPv6 communications. Such framework
follows the ISO/ETSI guidelines for the development of coop-
erative ITS systems and is based on standardized technologies,
such as NEMO protocol to provide an integral management
of IPv6. However, it considers cooperation between mobile
devices and networks based on the 802.21 standard (Media In-
dependent Handover (MIH)), i.e., it considers that all networks
support the speciﬁc functionalities from 802.21 standard [11].
IV. THE ITS-BASED DM ARCHITECTURE
This section describes the modular DM architecture for op-
portunistic networking in heterogeneous access network envi-
ronment. The proposed architecture is based on the previously
described ITS-S communication architecture and designed to
meet the main challenges for communication proﬁle and path
selection in C-ITS environment.
A. Expected properties
As described by [12], the environment of connected and
cooperative vehicles is characterized by a large heterogeneity.
There are a wide variety of applications with different com-
munication requirements. There are different wireless access
technologies each one with speciﬁc characteristics in terms
of bandwidth, data rate, security and others. In such an envi-
ronment, the process to select the best suited communication
proﬁle and path for each data ﬂow presents some challenges.
Different actors are able to present their requirements,
preferences, constraints and policies in the decision making
process. For example, applications can request a speciﬁc
bandwidth, data rate or security level. Users can present
their preferences, e.g., deﬁning a priority or security level
for a given message. Industrial and mobility service providers
(i.e., operators) can present their policies, such as network
constraints and particular billing procedures. Moreover, these
wide variety of objectives could be contradictory. The DM
architecture should be capable of managing these multiple
objectives simultaneously.
The DM architecture should be able to monitor a variety of
information in order to enable more accurate solutions in the
decision making process. One essential piece of information
to be monitored is the wireless networks availability as well
as the performance of the networks in use. Moreover, it is
necessary to monitor ﬂows and their characteristics (e.g., used
bandwidth, ﬂow status).
Besides network monitoring, other signiﬁcant parameters
could be monitored. Vehicles would be able to take infor-
mation from their environment, as vehicle’s battery level,
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

geographical position (e.g., GPS) or vehicle’s speed in order
to adjust the decision’s strategies. For example, a power con-
suming network interface could be deactivated if the vehicle’s
battery level is under a certain threshold. Or a WiFi network
could be privileged if the vehicle is stationary, while a cellular
network could be preferred if the vehicle is moving.
The DM architecture should be capable of handling com-
munication proﬁle and communication path for each ﬂow.
A data ﬂow is deﬁned by ISO as an identiﬁable sequence
of packets [13]. And packets are dependent upon applied
protocols, links and nodes characteristics. For example, pack-
ets sent over different communication paths (routes) to the
same destination node experience distinct network condi-
tions/performances. Such distinct experiences are consequence
of the applied protocol stacks (communication proﬁle) and
the speciﬁc characteristics of the traversed path (e.g., delay,
throughput, security level, etc.). Therefore, on the Flow-
Interface mapping process, it is not enough to indicate only
what access network a given ﬂow should use. In addition,
according to ﬂow requirements and paths characteristics it is
necessary to determine the communication proﬁle and path for
each ﬂow.
Moreover, due the vehicle’s high speed the networks avail-
ability could change rapidly. In such highly dynamic mobility
the decision making process should take into account the short-
term prevision about the network environment condition. If the
DM is aware about the near future of the network environment
it can perform proactive and ﬁne-grained decision. For exam-
ple, it can decide to increase the data buffer for a given video
streaming, if the vehicle is going to cross a wireless dead
zone. Or, an on-board application could decide to delay a data
transmission if it knows that a better network will soon be
available.
The short-term prevision can be obtained in different ways.
It can be obtained by cooperation with networks, e.g., using the
IEEE 802.21 standard if the network support such protocol.
The vehicle can store network information from a previous
traversed route, e.g., for an user who uses the same route
every day, the database could stores information about network
conditions in such route. Or, the short-term information can be
obtained by cooperation with neighbors vehicles. For example,
two vehicles in opposite directions could exchange information
about access points in their upcoming route. For this purpose, a
vehicle stores the position of each access point in its traversed
route, and give them to another passing-by vehicle.
B. Architecture design
To achieve the expected properties, we propose a modular
DM architecture based on the ISO/ETSI standards. Figure 3
shows such proposed DM architecture.
For a better understanding, we split the DM architecture in
ﬁve main parts, which are described below.
1) Requirement gathering: As mentioned before, different
actors are able to present theirs requirements in the decision
making process. In our proposed architecture we consider
four main actors. Applications - it could request a speciﬁc
5) Applying decision
1) Requirement gathering
2) Monitoring
User
Adm.
Reg.
Context
Available 
Network 
& Path
Network 
Flow 
Context 
4) DM
Flow-Interface 
mapping
Filtering /
Hierarchy
Application 
middleware
Filtered 
Policies
Rank 
Alternatives
Decision (best)
Hierarchical 
solutions
GUI
GUI
GUI
Flows
c
c
c
Path 
3) near Future
Network 
database
Filtering 
potential 
Networks
Figure 3. Proposed Decision Maker Architecture.
bandwidth, data rate, security level and more. A middleware
enables different applications to send their requirements to
DM. Users - they can present their preferences through a
Graphical User Interface (GUI), e.g., deﬁning priority or secu-
rity level for a given message. Administrators, i.e., industrial
and mobility service providers - they could present their
policies, such as network constraints and particular billing
procedures. And regulator bodies - each country or region
could deﬁne some speciﬁc rules, such as the prohibition of
certain frequency ranges in certain areas. The requirements
from all actors are stored in decision maker’s databases and
used by the DM to choose the communication interface that
better matches the actors requirements.
2) Monitoring modules: We deﬁned four monitoring mod-
ules. Network monitoring module - in this process, the network
monitoring module listens to the wireless interfaces and in-
forms DM about the available wireless networks and their per-
formances. Such monitoring module should be able to monitor
network information even if no speciﬁc monitoring functional-
ity, such as 802.21 [11], is implemented on the network side.
Context monitoring module - this module is responsible for
vehicle surrounding monitoring. It is responsible to monitor
information like location of the neighboring vehicles, trafﬁc
jam, vehicle’s speed, and others. These information are part of
the Local Dynamic Map (LDM) functionalities, i.e., the con-
ceptual data store located within an ITS-S as outlined in [14].
Therefore, we aim to rely this monitoring module on such
conceptual data store. Flow monitoring module - this module
should inform whether a ﬂow is alive or not and evaluate
ﬂows’ performance, like the currently used bandwidth, the
currently latency, etc. Path monitoring module - this module
is responsible to obtain various information (e.g., throughput,
security level, latency, etc.) about the controllable end points
where packets will be routed and to keep track of all the
candidate and available paths.
3) Near Future: In order to take into account the short-
term prevision about the network environment, we propose a
network database that store the historical information about the
access networks (e.g., network performance and access point
location) and a ﬁltering entity that is responsible to analyze
such network database and, based on the context information
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

of the vehicle (e.g., movement speed), to choose the potential
networks to be considered in the decision making process.
4) Decision making process: The decision making pro-
cess is responsible to take into account the application’s
requirements, user proﬁles, administrative rules (regulation
and policies) as well as different monitored information in
order to manage ﬂows and paths. The decision making process
is detailed in section IV-C.
5) Applying decision: In the applying decision process, the
policies and information produced by the decision making
process are applied in the system. In this process, the decision
maker could interact with controlled entities in all layers of the
ITS station communication architecture. Once the best access
network and path is selected, i.e., the path and access network
that better match the communication requirements, the DM
request the “Flow-Interface mapping” module to enforce the
ﬂow routing decision. To enforce the decision’s polices at the
network layer in an IP-based environment, we are considering
NEMO and MCoA. These protocols allow mobile routers to
manage multiple access technologies simultaneously and to
improve path and ﬂow management.
Since the decision making process take into account the
short-term prevision about the network environment, proactive
decisions are enforced in order to maintain ﬂows always
best connected. However, unexpected changes can occur in a
wireless environment (e.g., a given access network can drops).
In order to adapt to the network conditions in real time, the
DM maintain an hierarchical solution database with all sub-
optimal solutions for each ﬂow. This database is used by the
“Flow-Interface mapping” module in case of emergency, i.e.,
when the best network solution drops unexpectedly and until
the DM ﬁnds another better solution.
C. Decision Making Process
As mentioned before, the decision making process takes
into account the application’s requirements, user proﬁles,
administrative rules as well as information from a variety of
monitoring modules in order to manage ﬂows and paths. We
split our decision making process in three modules, as shown
on Figure 3. Below we describe each one of these modules:
Hierarchy/Filtering: This module is responsible to receive
and manage requirements, preferences, and policies from
different actors. Since actors may have their own speciﬁc
preferences and requirements, we need to “ﬁlter” (in Computer
Science acceptation) the various values deﬁned for the same
parameter. Moreover, it is necessary to deﬁne a priority order
between actors in order to manage contradictory objectives.
For example, if the administrator sets a forbidden network
for a user, and the user set the same access network to
preferred, then it is necessary to deﬁne who has the priority.
The output of such module is a list of ﬁltered and hierarchical
requirements.
Rank Alternatives: This module is responsible to ﬁnd all
alternatives for ﬂow-interface mapping. It is a ﬁrst ﬁlter to
avoid forbidden networks or networks that do not match with
ﬂows’ requirements. Such module receives the coherent list
of requirements from “Hierarchy/Filtering” module, network
information (e.g., networks availability and networks perfor-
mance), and context information in order to ﬁnd the potential
solutions. The output of this module is a list of all potential
solutions for each ﬂow.
Decision Algorithm: This module receives the list of all
potential solutions created in the “Rank Alternatives” module
and apply decision making algorithm in order to evaluate the
matching degree of communication requirements with net-
works and path characteristics. An utility function calculates
a score, representing the matching degree for each solution.
Higher the score, better is the solution. The solutions are sorted
by descending order of score and stored on the hierarchical
solution database. Such database is used by the enforcement
module in case of emergency, i.e., when the best network drops
unexpectedly, the “Flow-Interface mapping” module redirect
the ﬂow through the ﬁrst available sub-optimal network while
the DM ﬁnds a new better solution.
As described by [12], several decision making algorithms
have been used in the network selection process. For example,
the ones based on the game theory, the ones based on Multi-
Objective Optimization (MOO) and the algorithm that uses
Multi-Attribute Decision Making (MADM) techniques. The
most used are the MADM methods (e.g., Simple Additive
Weighting (SAW), Technique for Order Preference by Similar-
ity to Ideal Solution (TOPSIS) and Analytic Hierarchy Process
(AHP)). Despite the MADM techniques present advantage
as relative low computation complexity, this approach has
some issues. For example, it is very difﬁcult to choose the
best weight for each attribute. Moreover, MADM algorithms
could present ranking abnormality, i.e., change in one of
the parameters of the objective function could determine a
very different best solution. The design of a decision making
algorithm is outside the scope of this paper. Such topic will
be addressed in future works.
D. Integration in the ITS-S communication architecture
The ITS-S communication architecture functionalities could
be implemented into a single physical unit, as the practical im-
plementation showed on paper [15], or distributed into several
physical units. Once applied to a vehicle, these functionalities
could be performed by different modules in the vehicle’s
electric/electronic architecture.
Moreover, the NEMO environment mainly separate the
applications and communications into MNN and MR. There-
fore, the ﬁve functions described in Section IV-B can also
be separated into such nodes. For example, the requirement
gathering can be implemented in the MNN, the monitoring
modules can be implemented in both MR and MNN, while the
near future, the decision making process and applying decision
are functions of the MR.
The proposed DM architecture is designed in an ISO/ETSI
standard compliant way. Figure 4 shows one way how we
can integrate such architecture in the ITS-S communication
architecture.
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Management
Security
Applications
Facilities
Networking & Transport
Access
Other 
Media
802.15.4
Cellular
WLAN
 DM
Filtering /
Hierarchy
Rank 
Alternatives
Decision (best)
User
Adm.
Reg.
Context
(LDM)
Available 
Network 
& Path
Network 
Flow 
Context 
Flow-Interface 
mapping
Application 
middleware
Hierarchical 
solutions
GUI
GUI
GUI
Path 
Network 
database
Filtering 
potential 
Networks
Application 
1
Application
2
Application 
n
Flows
2) Monitoring
5) Applying decision
1) Requirement gathering
3) near Future
4)
Figure 4. Integration of DM Architecture in the ITS-S communication
architecture.
However, the standards give some guidelines to the devel-
opers, leaving some room in the way to implement the ITS-S
communication architecture.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we proposed a modular decision maker archi-
tecture that is capable to choose the best available communi-
cation proﬁle and path for each data ﬂow in an heterogeneous
and dynamic network environment. The proposed DM archi-
tecture is designed in an ISO/ETSI standard compliant way
and we show how to integrate it in the ITS-S communication
architecture.
Besides the access network selection, the proposed architec-
ture is able to choose the best path for a given ﬂow, i.e., the
route between two communicating nodes that best meets the
communication requirements (e.g., a local connection between
nearby devices or a global connection over the Internet).
Different actors are able to present theirs requirements in
the decision making process, e.g., applications, users, network
administrators, etc. And this wide variety of objectives could
be contradictory. The proposed DM architecture is capable of
managing these multiple objectives simultaneously. Moreover,
the DM receives information from a variety of monitoring
modules (network, context information, path, and ﬂows mon-
itoring modules), that enable ﬁne-grained decisions.
The proposed architecture address the short-term prevision
about the network environment. This short-term prevision
allows proactive decisions, which is very useful in vehicular
environments that are characterized by highly dynamic mobil-
ity.
Once the best access network and path is selected for a
given ﬂow, the decision’s polices are enforced at the network
layer using standardized protocols, such as NEMO and MCoA.
These protocols allow mobile routers to manage multiple
access technologies simultaneously and to improve path and
ﬂow management.
We highlight the importance of the DM architecture valida-
tion. As future work, we will simulate the proposed architec-
ture using different scenarios and existing decision making
algorithms. We will also design and simulate a decision
making algorithm capable to take advantage of the entire
proposed architecture for smart and ﬁne-grained decisions.
Moreover, it is valuable to conduct such architecture in a real
test-bed.
REFERENCES
[1] “Gartner Says By 2020, a Quarter Billion Connected Vehicles Will
Enable New In-Vehicle Services and Automated Driving Capabilities,”
http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2970017, [Accessed: June 2017].
[2] “ETSI ES 202 663 European proﬁle standard for the physical and
medium access control layer of Intelligent Transport Systems operating
in the 5 GHz frequency band,” Tech. Rep., 2010.
[3] “IEEE 802.15.4 – Local and metropolitan area networks– Speciﬁc
requirements– Part 15.4: Wireless Medium Access Control (MAC) and
Physical Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcations for Low Rate Wireless Personal
Area Networks (WPANs),” Tech. Rep., 2006.
[4] S. Chakrabarti, G. Montenegro, and R. Droms, “IPv6 over Low-Power
Wireless Personal Area Network (6LoWPAN) ESC Dispatch Code
Points and Guidelines,” RFC 8066, 2017.
[5] “ISO 21217 Intelligent Transport Systems — Communications Access
for Land Mobiles (CALM) — Architecture,” Tech. Rep., 2014.
[6] A. Petrescu, R. Wakikawa, P. Thubert, and V. Devarapalli, “Network
Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support Protocol,” RFC 3963, 2005.
[7] H. Soliman, G. Tsirtsis, G. Giaretta, K. Kuladinithi, and N. Montavont,
“Flow Bindings in Mobile IPv6 and Network Mobility (NEMO) Basic
Support,” RFC 6089, 2011.
[8] L. Suciu, J. M. Bonnin, K. Guillouard, and B. Stevant, “Towards a highly
adaptable user-centric terminal architecture,” in The 7th Intl. Symposium
on Wireless Personal Multimedia Communications (WPMC), Italy, 2004.
[9] R. Ben Rayana, “A Smart Management Framework for Multihomed
Mobile Nodes & Mobile Routers,” Doctoral Dissertation, Jan. 2010.
[10] J. Santa, F. Pereniguez-Garcia, F. Bernal, P. Fernandez, R. Marin-Lopez,
and A. Skarmeta, “A Framework for Supporting Network Continuity
in Vehicular IPv6 Communications,” IEEE Intelligent Transportation
Systems Magazine, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 17–34, Spring 2014.
[11] “IEEE 802.21 – Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks –
Part 21: Media Independent Handover Services,” Tech. Rep., 2008.
[12] R. Silva, J.-M. Bonnin, and T. Ernst, “Opportunistic Networking for
ITS,” in Intelligent Transport Systems: Past, Present and Future Direc-
tions.
Nova publisher, 2017.
[13] “ISO/DIS 24102-6 Intelligent Transport Systems — Communications
Access for Land Mobiles (CALM) — ITS station management — Part
6: Path and ﬂow management,” Tech. Rep., 2015.
[14] “ETSI EN 302 895 Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Vehicular Com-
munications; Basic Set of Applications; Local Dynamic Map (LDM),”
Tech. Rep., 2014.
[15] R. Silva, S. Noguchi, T. Ernst, A. De La Fortelle, and W. Godoy Ju-
nior, “Standards for Cooperative Intelligent Transportation Systems: A
Proof of Concept,” in The Tenth Advanced International Conference on
Telecommunications (AICT), Jul. 2014.
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

