 Valuating and Pricing of Vehicle Generated Data as a Marketable Product in the 
Automotive Industry 
 
Frank Bodendorf, Tobias Meissner and Jörg Franke 
Friedrich-Alexander-University of Erlangen-Nuremberg (FAU) 
Institute for Factory Automation and Production Systems  
Erlangen, Germany 
e-mail: frank.bodendorf@faps.fau.de 
e-mail: tobias.d.meissner@fau.de 
e-mail: joerg.franke@faps.fau.de 
 
 
Abstract— Data-driven business models play a significant role 
in the digital transformation of traditional value-added 
industries. More and more existing and potential partners of 
automobile manufacturers show interest in the vehicle data 
generated by their products. However, there is still no monetary 
value assessment to support decisions regarding the release of 
data. Traditional pricing approaches for material goods are 
based on cost, margin, and volume. However, these bottom-up 
calculation approaches are not applicable to digital goods. The 
background to this is, among other things, the uncertainty about 
the potential sales volume, the difficulty of cost splitting, 
and the high cost degression per unit of digital goods. 
This paper provides decision support for selling data to third 
parties as an intangible product. It introduces a concept that 
allows to value data generated by a motor vehicle in order to 
determine potential prospects and prices for sale. The 
evaluation model developed supports the car manufacturer's 
negotiating position towards potential data buyers.  
Keywords - Automotive Industry; Car Data;  Business Model; 
Value Estimation 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
The use of valuable data will fundamentally change 
competition in the future [21]. “The expected growth of the 
value pool from car data and shared mobility could add up to 
more than USD 1.5 trillion by 2030“ [1]. Volume and quality 
of this “data treasure“ will create strategic as well as 
operational competitive advantages [13]. 
Today, data is generated in large quantities by the vehicle, 
recording values of thousands of attributes. On the one hand, 
the vehicle user (driver) has the opportunity to enter data in 
on-board systems and “exchange” them for services. He/she 
receives individually adapted functions, such as voice control, 
comfort settings when entering the car, navigational 
instructions in real time or other services [3][4]. On the other 
hand, a variety of sensors and computers in the vehicle, 
unnoticed by the driver, generates a steady stream of data, 
which among others serves for control purposes [8]. Examples 
are the anti-lock braking system or the automatic windscreen 
wiper and light regulation. According to an internal study the 
data usage can be divided into nine purpose oriented 
categories: 
 
Facilitating vehicle use 
 
Meeting regulatory and legal requirements 
 
Supporting marketing and advertisement  
 
Assessing IT security 
 
Improving technical processes  
 
Fulfilling terms of contract  
 
Innovating and developing products  
 
Ensuring road safety 
 
Offering services to third parties 
 
All of these categories have in common that value is 
created through the use of collected vehicle data. On the one 
hand, this value is reflected in technical or qualitative 
improvements as well as in cost reductions of the company's 
internal processes. On the other hand, the use of vehicle data 
can also lead to an economic improvement of the business 
results and in particular to an increase in turnover [22]. This 
may be a result of higher sales figures of products, i.e., 
manufactured vehicles, which are more attractive through 
data-based functions (“data infused products”). In addition, it 
is possible to offer certain data for sale as an end product itself 
[12].  
This paper focuses on selling data to third parties. The 
demand for vehicle generated data depends on the benefit seen 
or expected by the buyer. From the perspective of the data 
provider, it is important to determine the value of the data in 
order to estimate the demand potential on an external market 
and to create appropriate pricing models.  
The paper consists of three main parts. First, it gives an 
insight into the state of the art of data evaluation and points 
out weaknesses. Second, a new methodology is introduced 
that combines business model analysis and value estimation 
approaches. Third, a use case is presented which illustrates the 
model application and leads through the main process steps of 
value estimation.  
II. 
EXISTING VALUATION APPROACHES 
The generic value of a data product in sales situations 
cannot be determined by a benefit that has already been 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

realized, since the data is not yet being used by the buyer at 
the time of the transfer. Therefore, an evaluation must be 
based on probable and potential benefits [12]. This value can 
be estimated 
by using qualitative and quantitative 
methodological approaches. For a corresponding systematic 
value determination of vehicle data, a number of existing 
evaluation methods is outlined. This is initially done by a 
tabular overview in Section A, followed by a more detailed 
description in Section B and C and by a discussion of 
limitations and transferability in Section III.A. Literature 
often speaks of data and information without exactly 
differentiate between these terms. Some authors see in 
information “refined data”, e. g., by placing it in a context of 
meaning. In this paper, both terms are used synonymously. 
A. Overview of potential methods for data evaluation 
The identification and selection of potential valuation 
procedures is done through a combination of literature review 
and in-depth interviews. First, 20 sources of literature are used 
to collect a comprehensive set of possible valuation 
approaches. Subsequently, valuation approaches are selected 
and specified with the help of 50 in-depth interviews with 
experts from the divisions or departments in the areas of cost 
engineering, data strategy, data analysis, and purchasing. The 
consolidated results are shown in Table I [18]. 
TABLE I. QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE VALUATION APPROACHES FOR 
DATA 
Method 
Characteristics 
Type 
Input 
Operator 
Output 
Data 
Product 
Scorecard 
Qualitative 
Data 
attributes 
Scoring-
method 
Willingness 
to pay 
Data Value 
Design 
Canvas 
Qualitative 
Data use 
case 
Expert 
workshop, 
Canvas 
nine factors 
Interactions / 
connections 
Value 
determi-
nation per 
user 
Quantitative 
Acquisition 
cost 
 
Number of 
users 
 
Discount 
calculation 
Price per 
user-dataset 
Value 
improve-
ment by 
data 
services 
Quantitative 
Data 
material 
Statistical 
analysis, 
e. g, 
hypothesis 
testing 
Increase in 
value or 
quality 
through the 
use of data 
Value 
determi-
nation by 
Laney 
Qualitative 
and 
Quantitative 
Data 
material 
Gartner 
Valuation 
Model 
Qualitiative 
and financial 
value 
Value 
determi-
nation by 
partners 
Quantitative 
Theoretical 
value, 
maturity,  
expiration 
of 
information 
Intangible 
Assets 
Evaluation 
Monetary 
information 
value 
Pricing 
based on 
customer 
value 
Quantitative 
Different 
data 
bundels 
Versioning, 
price 
differen-
tiation, 
surcharge 
calculation 
 
Price for data 
bundels 
B. Qualitative evaluation 
The appraisal of methods has been carried out by literature 
review and interviews as mentioned in section II.A. The 
following most popular methods for evaluating vehicle data 
are identified: 
 
Data Product Scorecard 
 
Data Value Design Canvas 
The Data Product Scorecard is a method of pricing on 
data marketplaces. For this purpose, the customer's 
willingness to pay depending on various data properties must 
first be estimated. This qualitative evaluation of the data 
properties is made by the Data Product Scorecard from a 
simulated perspective of end users or potential buyers of the 
data [20]. As part of an evaluation workshop within the 
company, the role of the user is taken and each data 
characteristic given in the scorecard is rated with 0, 5 or 10 
points. 
The Data Value Design Canvas approach looks at the data 
value chain. The approach is based on the theory of Service 
Dominant Logic and the “Jobs-To-Be-Done” theory [2][14]. 
According to [16], the data value chain begins with the 
generation of data and extends up to the provision of 
information to the (paying) customer. 
C. Quantitative evaluation 
Many companies have problems finding the real economic 
value of their data [15]. For a rethink in the development of 
new business models [7] and the optimization of internal 
processes, the determination of this value, especially for the 
automotive industry, is of particular importance. 
 
Value determination per user  
When acquiring companies with data-driven business 
models who have not yet monetized their database but still 
offer data-based applications to the end user, the data value is 
often determined by the value of the application per user. The 
price of acquisition is divided by the total number of end users 
of the application. From this calculated price per user, the 
average user acquisition costs are subtracted [10][19].  
 
Value determination by Laney   
According to Laney the data is evaluated through quality-
based and quantitative financial analysis [12]. In the quality-
oriented evaluation, the output is a scoring value between zero 
and one, in the financial evaluation an absolute monetary 
value. The two-part consideration focuses on methods for 
improving the “Information Management Discipline” and 
deals with “Foundational Measures” as 
 
How correct, complete and exclusive is the data? 
(Intrinsic Value), 
 
How good and relevant is the data for specific 
purposes? (Business Value), 
 
How does this data affect key business drivers? 
(Performance Value). 
On the other hand, the “Information Economic Benefit“ of 
“Financial Measures“ is examined: 
 
What would it cost us if we lose this data? (Cost 
Value), 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

 
What could we get from selling or trading this data? 
(Market Value), 
 
How does this data contribute to our bottom line? 
(Economic Value). 
Both considerations provide a quantitatively measurable 
contribution to the value of data and will be explained in more 
detail below. Based on a collection and analysis of existing 
valuation approaches according to Laney, the combination of 
a plausibility check and a requirements analysis leads to a new 
valuation perspective introduced into a new model presented 
in chapter III. 
III. 
DEVELOPED METHODOLOGY 
A. Motivation of a new evaluation approach 
Value 
Determination 
by 
Laney 
comprises 
pure 
comparative methods. These do not calculate monetary 
values, yet they show some interesting perspectives. The Data 
Value Design Canvas lists nine factors which affect the value 
of data. The effects of information or data are considered 
generally. For example, information/data protects against 
unwanted events or promotes wanted events. Unwanted 
events always result in costs. Thus, the avoidance of unwanted 
events corresponds to a cost reduction. The realization of 
desired events effects an increase in sales as the most relevant 
example. The Data Product Scorecard assesses the willingness 
to pay of a customer. If the information considered is 
“perfect”, the customer is willing to pay the full price for this 
information. 
The method according to Laney, the Data Value Design 
Canvas, and the Data Product Scorecard focus on the quality 
of the information or data. Both methods have in common that 
always certain use cases of data usage are considered.  
By comparing the different approaches listed in Section II, 
some requirements can be derived for a new concept 
integrating different aspects: 
 
Quality factors must be taken into account. 
 
The willingness to pay is relevant for data sales. This 
depends on various factors, including the purchase 
motive, the perceived benefit, the reputation of the 
seller, and the individual purchase situation.  
 
Data has the potential to increase sales at the customer 
or to reduce costs for internal customer processes.  
 
Competition should be considered as an important 
factor. 
B. Evaluation model 
The developed “integrated methodology” for an 
innovative evaluation model meets these requirements from 
the fields of quality assessment [17], price differentiation [24], 
cost management, and competitive analysis in a combined 
way [22]. So, for a specific use case, it is possible to estimate 
a monetary value of data by integrating different aspects (see 
section III.A). Basically, Laney's approaches are not limited 
to any specific field of application [23].  
The plausibility check of selling prices is achieved by 
combining qualitative tools based on methods such as 
Business Model Canvas or Data Canvas with a practical 
evaluation through quality workshops as well as quantitative 
calculations. These include, among other things, the valuation 
by Laney, a bottom-up cost calculation as well as profit split 
approaches. 
The process model outlined in Figure 1 shows the process 
steps of the model for a use-case-specific value determination. 
The non-rivalry property of data enables multiple sales of 
similar data bundles or even the same dataset. The total value 
of the data bundle can be determined as the sum of the values 
across all (potential) use cases: 
 
𝑉𝐺 = ∑ 𝑉𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
 
(a) 
𝑉𝐺 
Total value of data bundle G 
𝑉𝑖 
Individual value of data for the use case i 
𝑖 
Use case index 
𝑛 
Number of use cases 
 
 
Figure 1. Process for the monetary valuation of data 
 
As a first step in the process, data requests from potential 
business customers are collected or data is proactively offered 
to the customer. In order to be able to identify potential data 
needs, the customer's business model must first be understood. 
(1 + 2) 
The way the customer translates the data into benefits can 
be identified through a systematic analysis of possible use 
cases. For this a combination of the Business Model Canvas 
and Data Value Design Canvas is suitable. With progressive 
understanding of the application, it is theoretically possible to 
offer different or additional versions of data bundles to the 
customer. (2 + 3) 
In order to determine the customer's willingness to pay, the 
value of the use case must be understood in detail [9]. For this, 
a possible cost reduction or increase in sales by the data is to 
be determined.  
For each use case, there is both a short-term and a long-
term monetary benefit, which in individual cases can also be 
zero. The model of Figure 1 shows a parallel approach to 
Laney's business value calculation of information, which 
determines the data relevance for specific processes. (4) 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

In cases where there is competition on "data marketplaces" 
or the self-collection of data is significantly more favorable 
than granting the monetary benefit to a third party, these 
influences must be measured for further calculation. (5) 
At the same time, the data is qualitatively evaluated based 
on selected criteria (see section II.B). The model considers the 
monetary value of quality criteria, following Laney's 
valuation ideas in the form of a quality factor Q. (6) 
In addition, the data contribution factor C takes into 
account that other vehicle generated data or additional 
information may be necessary in addition to the offered 
vehicle generated data. (7) 
After having carried out steps 1 to 7, finally the use-case-
specific combined value of the data is calculated (8). The 
determined preliminary data value 𝑉 is multiplied by the 
quality factor 𝑄 and the data contribution factor 𝐶. Both of 
them are discount factors. The calculations of Q, C, and V are 
illustrated in section IV. Hence, V  is reduced according to low 
quality or insufficient amount of data. Interdependencies 
between the factors are possible but not taken into account. E. 
g., low data quality can lead to a higher demand for data from 
other sources. A lowered data quality factor can therefore 
further reduce the data contribution factor. 
IV. 
USE CASE 
The applicability of the developed methodology is 
experimentally tested for real sales situations. One of them is 
the offering of Road Segment Data (RSD) to a navigation 
maps provider. This data is needed to provide a high definition 
roadmap for autonomous driving. 
A. Business structure analysis 
The results of the structural analysis of the business case 
are outlined below. On this basis, further analysis leads to the 
data needs and the data bundles to be offered [11][20]. 
 
 
Value proposition: build tomorrow’s road network 
 
Customers: companies 
 
Segments: automotive industries 
 
Channels: direct contact 
 
Revenue stream: Selling refined information (HD 
map) for autonomous driving and location based 
services 
 
Cost structure: personnel, data transfer 
 
Key resources: street/road data, navigational data, 
real time traffic information data, road segment data 
(RSD) 
 
Data offering:  road segment data captured by car 
cameras 
(edge markings, center markings, strip width, crash 
barriers, guide posts, signs, wild animal warning 
reflectors and barriers) 
B. Monetary Effect 
An internal study of the car the manufacturer says that the 
willingness to pay for the enriched HD map in the self-driving 
vehicle industry is 60 € per year for a highly autonomous or 
fully autonomous vehicle. For the year 2020, a global volume 
of 3.3 million high or fully autonomous vehicles is expected 
on the market. In 2035 this number is predicted to be 28 
million vehicles. The market for navigation maps in vehicles 
is divided into market shares of 15% to 25% [6].  
These assumptions lead in the worst case scenario 
(assuming a market share of 15%) to a potential turnover of at 
least 29.7 million € in 2020 (3.3 million * 60 € * 0.15) and 
252 million € in 2035 (28 million * 60 € * 0.15). 
C. Market competition 
The market position is qualitatively described by the 
criteria “is it valuable”, “is it rare”, “is it hard to imitate”, and 
“is the firm organized for success” according to [15]. The 
answers to the questions in a conducted survey are based on a 
competitive analysis of 26 navigation maps suppliers. The 
qualitative assessment shows that there is a “short term 
competitive advantage”. 
D. Data quality and contribution factors 
In order to evaluate the data quality, 14 data scientists are 
interviewed in four expert workshops on given quality criteria. 
The results of the workshops are summarized in Figure 2 and 
transformed into a quality factor Q.   
 
𝑄 = ∑ 𝑐𝑖 ∗ 𝑤𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
 
(b) 
𝑄 
Quality factor 
𝑐𝑖 
Evaluation factor of criterion i 
𝑤𝑖 
Weight of criterion i 
𝑖 
Index of criterion 
𝑛 
Number of criteria 
 
0%
10%
20%
30%
Accuracy and Precision
Completeness
Consistency
Data Specification
Frequency and Latency
Reputation
Scarcity
Timeliness
Uniqueness
Usability
Workshop 1
Workshop 2
Workshop 3
Workshop 4
Figure 2 Evaluation of the quality criteria of data 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

The evaluation factor values ci of the criteria result from a 
pairwise comparison of all criteria in a preference matrix. 
The data contribution factor C expresses if all required data 
(contribution factor = 1), almost all data (contribution factor = 
0.75), about half of the data (contribution factor = 0.5), few 
data (contribution factor = 0.25) or no data (contribution factor 
= 0) can be provided.  
 
𝐶 = 𝐶𝑀 ∗ 𝑤𝑐𝑚 + 𝐶𝐾 ∗ 𝑤𝑐𝑘 
 
(c) 
𝐶 
Data contributing factor 
𝐶𝑀 
Contribution factor of metadata 
𝐶𝐾 
Contribution factor of  key data 
𝑤𝑐𝑚 
Weight of metadata 
𝑤𝑐𝑘 
Weight of key data 
The use-case-specific factors CM und CK differentiate 
between key data und metadata (additional data). The expert 
based weights wcm and wck rate the relative data contribution 
of each data type in the use case. Location based services are 
one example. They are based on customer preferences 
(metadata) on the one hand and GPS data (key data) generated 
by the vehicle on the other hand.  Experts give weights of 0.2 
for GPS data and 0.8 for preference data. It is assumed that the 
vehicle can deliver 90 percent of the GPS data needed, 
however none of the preference data. So, the contribution 
factor of the metadata is zero. The calculation of C results in 
the value of 0.18: 
0.2 ∗ 0.9 + 0.8 ∗ 0 = 0.18 
The corresponding calculation for the navigation maps 
provider gives the following result:  
Quality factor Q = 0.8 
Contribution factor C = 0.55 
E. Selling prices 
Through the product of monetary effect (V), quality (Q) 
and contribution factor (C) (see Figure 1) the value for the 
offered data for the use case "navigation map provider" is in 
the worst case scenario 13.07 million € (29.7 million € * 0.8 * 
0.55).  
F. Lessons Learned 
On the one hand the presented evaluation model has been 
applied to several fictitious use cases with real information 
coming from companies interested in buying data but without 
any sales decision. On the other hand the evaluation model 
was tested on several specific sales situations and the 
outcome of the model, i. e. the post calculated data value, was 
compared to the real sales price. The monetary data values 
determined using the evaluation model show an average 
deviation of 8% from the sales prices negotiated in practice. 
 Thus, the created model seems to deliver a good 
approximation to price imaginations which are based on gut 
instincts so far. The model is capable to support price 
negotiations by providing a systematic methodological basis 
and a transparent multidimensional valuation framework. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The methods of data evaluation identified in the literature 
are individually not suitable for practical value determination 
of data and their pricing in sales situations. This paper presents 
a methodology that focuses on the selling of data as intangible 
products to external business partners.  
The methodology can also be transferred to use cases 
within the company. In addition to determining the value of 
the data, decisions regarding the pricing model must be made.  
However, for long-term strategies it is unclear to what 
extent currently recorded data is valuable in the future. Data 
that is still useless, because currently there are no use cases, 
can be highly relevant for future use cases. Because of the 
existing knowledge gap and missing empirical values, it is 
impossible to determine a value of data over the entire 
lifecycle, above all because of very uncertain future potentials.  
This article exemplifies a possible evaluation and 
monetization of a small fraction of the total data available in 
the automotive industry. 
Against the background of the huge amounts of data 
available there, it quickly becomes clear that due to technical 
limitations probably never all potential use cases can be 
implemented. There are various transmission options for 
vehicle generated data. The built-in memory can be read in 
authorized garages, updates can be transmitted at weekly or 
daily intervals, or data can be transferred in real time. There is 
always a technical limitation due to the restricted transfer rates 
or transfer options. Not all conceivable applications can be 
realized at the same time. 
It is also an open question whether it makes sense to regard 
the vehicle as an open platform. In this case, an automobile 
manufacturer or even the automotive industry as a platform 
provider could probably sell the platform as a service (PaaS) 
to service providers who will pay for specific data accessed 
via the platform. As an analogy, platforms of Apple and 
Android can be considered. Third parties develop services to 
be offered on these platforms. The developed services (e. g., 
apps) increase the attractiveness of the platform. Depending 
on the design, there are direct and indirect network effects. 
With regard to autonomous driving, this approach may 
potentially increase the attractiveness of vehicles and vehicle 
fleets acting as such platforms. For example, in addition to 
many existing connected drive services, applications of third-
party providers can be activated, which leads to an immense 
increase of the value of a ride and the driving experience for 
the customer. Here, completely new service ecosystems 
spanning and connecting different industrial sectors are 
appearing. To name only one step toward the future, the 
intelligent personal assistant from BOSCH enables the 
networking of car services and e-home services [5].  
 
 
 
 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. Balasubramanian, S. Beiker, S. Chauhan, T. Colombo, F. 
Hansson, S. Inampudi, R. Jaarsma and M. Kässer, “Car data: 
paving the way to value creating mobility : Perspectives on a 
new automotive business model”, Advanced Industries 
McKinsey, 2016  
[2] L. A. Bettencourt and A. W. Ulwick, “The customer-centered 
innovation map", Harvard Business Review, vol. 86 (5), pp. 
109-114, 2008 
[3] BMW: BMW ConnectedDrive Kundenportal – digitale 
Vernetzung zu Ihrem BMW. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.bmw-connecteddrive.de/app/index.html#/por-
tal/store/Base_TolCarOffer [retrieved: 11, 2018]  
[4] BMW: NOW Mobilitätsdienstleistungen. [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.bmwgroup.com/de/marken/now-
mobilitaetsdienstleistungen.html[retrieved: 01, 2019] 
[5] BOSCH: Nur Fahren war gestern – der persönliche Assistent 
ist morgen. [Online]. Available from: https://www.bosch-
presse.de/pressportal/de/de/nur-fahren-war-gestern- 
%E2%80%93-der-persoenliche-assistent-ist-morgen-
101568.html. [retrieved: 01, 2019] 
[6] A. Brugger: Global production forecast for semi- and fully 
automated 
vehicles. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.oliverwyman.com/con-tent/dam/oliver-
wyman/global/en/files/who-we-are/press-releases/Oli-
verWyman_Graphics_Value%20Pools%20Autonomous%20
Driving_EN_16072015_final.pdf  [retrieved: 11, 2018] 
[7] J. L. L. Francisco and J. Esteves, Value in a Digital World: 
How to assess business models and measure value in a digital 
world, Berlin: Springer, 2017. IS BN 978-3-319-51750-6 
[8] W. Gründinger: Data-Driven Business Models in Connected 
Cars, Mobility Services & Beyond. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.bvdw.org/fileadmin/bvdw/upload/publikationen/
connected_mobility/20180418_data_driven_business_models
_Seiberth_Gruendinger.pdf  [retrieved: 01, 2019] 
[9] R. Harmon, H. Demirkan, B. Hefley , and N. Auseklis, “Pricing 
Strategies for Information Technology Services: A Value-
Based Approach”, 42nd annual Hawai'i International 
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS 2009), Piscataway, 
NJ: IEEE Press, Jan. 2009, pp. 1–10, ISBN: 978-1-424-44197-
6 
[10] N. Henke, et al., The Age Of Analytics: Competing In A Data-
Driven World, McKinsey Global Institute, 2016 
[11] HERE: Location-Based Services for the Autonomous Future. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.here.com/en. 
[retrieved: 01, 2019] 
[12] D. B. Laney, Infonomics, How to monetize, manage, and 
measure information as an asset for competitive advantage, 
New York, NY: bibliomotion inc, 2018, ISBN: 978-1138-
09038-5 
[13] E. Leonidas, DataStreamX: A Practical Guide to Pricing Data 
Products. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://cdn2.hubspot.net/hubfs/573334/Downloadable_Con-
tent_(WP_or_Guides)/DataStreamX_Data_Product_Pricing_
Whitepaper.pdf  [retrieved: 11, 2018] 
[14] C. Lim, et al.,  “From data to value: A nine-factor framework 
for data-based value creation in infor-mation-intensive 
services”, International Journal of Information Management, 
vol. 39, pp. 121–135, 2018, ISSN: 0268-4012 
[15] S.M. Liozu, W. Ulaga, Monetizing Data, A Practical Roadmap 
for Framing, Pricing & Selling Your B2B Digital Offers, 
Guetersloh, Germany: VIA Publishing, 2018, ISBN: 978-1-
945815-04-1 
[16] K. Mathis and F. Köhler, “Data-Need Fit - Towards data-driven 
business model innovation”, The Fifth Service Design and 
Innovation conference (ServDes.), pp. 458–467, 2016, ISBN: 
978-91-7685-738-0   
[17] D. Mcglivary, “Executing Data Quality Projects: Ten Steps to 
Quality Data and Trusted Information: Definitions of Data 
Categories”, Chief Data Officer & Information Quality 
Symposium, 2009 
[18] T. Meißner, Wert und Verwertung von Daten der Hardware- 
und Softwarenutzung im Fahrzeug, University of Erlangen-
Nuremberg, Master Thesis, Erlangen, 2018  
[19] K. O'Neal, Quantifying the Value of Data: The First Step in 
Data, unpublished presentation 
[20] A. Osterwalder and Y. Pigneur: Business Model Generation: A 
Handbook for Visionaries, Game Changers, and Challengers, 
Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons,  2010, ISBN: 978-
0470-87641-1 
[21] B. Schmarzo and M. Sidaoui, Applying Economic Concepts To 
Big Data To Determine The Financial Value Of The 
Organization’s Data And Analytics, And Understanding The 
Ramifications On The Organizations’ Financial State-ments 
And IT Operations And Business Strategies. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://in-focus.dellemc.com/wp-
content/uploads/2017/04/USF_The_Economics_of_Data_and
_Analytics-Final3.pdf  [retrieved: 01, 2019] 
[22] C. Shapiro and H. R. Varian, Versioning, “The Smart Way to 
Sell Information”, Harvard Business Review, vol. 6, pp. 107 f., 
1998 
[23] F. Stahl and G. Vossen, “High quality information provisioning 
and data pricing”, 29th International Conference on Data 
Engineering Workshops (ICDEW 2013), 2013, pp. 290-293 
[24] S. Viswanathan and G. Anandalingam, “Pricing strategies for 
information goods”, Sadhana Indian Academic Sciences 
Journal, vol. 30, 2005, pp. 257–274, ISSN: 0256-2499 
Wirtschaftswoche: 
GPS-Satellitennavigation: 
Wie 
Navigationsgeräte-Firmen 
um 
einen 
Milliarden-Markt 
kämpfen. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
https://www.wiwo.de/unternehmen/gps-satellitennavigation-
wie-navigationsgeraete-firmen-um-einen-milliarden-markt-
ka-empfen-seite-3/5426542-3.html  [retrieved: 11, 2018]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

