Real Deployment of the V2X-Based Data Probe Application and its Integration with 
a Commercial Traffic Platform  
Hamid Menouar and Mohamed Ben Brahim 
Qatar Mobility Innovations Center 
Qatar University 
Doha, Qatar 
e-mail: hamidm@qmic.com, mohamedb@qmic.com 
 
Abstract—In Vehicle to vehicle and vehicle to infrastructure 
communication the vehicles are expected to transmit 
continuously and frequently information that include their 
velocity and location coordinates. Such real-time geographical 
information, if collected properly, can be used for inferring the 
current status of the traffic on the roads. In this contribution, 
the authors elaborate on how this information can be used to 
enable an accurate source of data for traffic management 
platforms. The contribution includes a real implementation of 
the solution using a standard-compliant V2X platform, as well 
as its integration with a commercial traffic platform. 
Keywords-V2X; V2V; V2I; C2X; DSRC; VANET; probe; 
traffic; ITS. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Vehicle to vehicle and to infrastructure communication 
(V2X) is an emerging technology that is expected to bring on 
our vehicles’ dashboards many new interesting applications 
and services  [1]. Certainly, road-safety applications are the 
key driver for such an emerging technology, but there are 
also many infotainment and traffic efficiency applications 
that will be enabled on top of such a technology. 
Indeed, when V2X will be deployed, many new 
applications and improvements of existing applications 
become possible. Traffic information is a good example of 
existing applications that will be improved considerably 
thanks to V2X. 
In V2X related standards  [2], Data Probe is listed as one 
of the first applications that will be enabled by V2X. In such 
an application, selected vehicles participate by sharing their 
probe data with a designated Road Side Unit (RSU) 
deployed on the road.  In this contribution we present our 
implementation of the Data Probe application along with its 
integration with a commercial traffic platform.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II 
presents the related works. Section III presents the 
implemented solution. Section IV presents the test-bed and 
field tests. Finally, Section V concludes the contribution. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
A. Tradditional Traffic Data Calculation  
Different techniques have been used in the field of 
Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) to calculate close-to-
real-time traffic information  [3]. Such techniques rely mainly 
on collected data about road users that come from sensors 
installed either at fixed locations on the road, in road user’s 
vehicles, or in road users’ mobile devices  [6]. These 
collected probe data is used to calculate the traffic 
information and enable different ITS services and 
applications. One of the simplest solutions to calculate the 
traffic information from probe data consists of comparing the 
reported road user’s speed to the normal speed of the road 
segment on which the user is currently driving. 
B. V2X-based Data Probe 
Data Probe is one of the applications listed in the V2X-
related standards  [2], and it consists of using V2X 
capabilities to collect accurate and real-time data about the 
vehicles on the road. As described in  [2] [4], to enable the 
data probe application, the On-Board Units (OBUs), while 
driving on the road, report their current and past probe data 
(location, speed, heading, etc.) to a nearby RSU. After 
receiving the probe data from passing vehicles, the RSU can 
transmit it to the backend. Once the data reaches the 
backend, it is stored and processed to produce real-time and 
historical traffic information. 
As per the related standards  [2], the transmission of the 
probe data by the passing vehicles can happen in three ways: 
(1) periodically: transmitted every defined period of time, (2) 
reactively: transmitted as a response to a request received 
from the RSU, and (3) while moving: transmitted only when 
the vehicles is moving. 
Only some vehicles participate in running the data probe 
application  [2], which leads to some gaps due to the lack of 
information about other vehicles on the road. In  [5], the 
authors propose to have the selected vehicles reporting not 
only theirs, but also their neighbors’ probe data to the RSU 
through multi-hop communications.  
III. 
USING BSM AND CAM TO ENRICH V2X-BASED 
DATA PROBE APPLICATION 
In our solution we propose to use the Basic Safety 
Message (BSM)  [2] or the Cooperative Awareness Message 
(CAM)  [7] to collect the probe data of the passing vehicles. 
The BSM and CAM contain the location, speed, heading and 
other useful information, and they are transmitted 
periodically by each vehicle to inform other vehicles about 
its presence. Therefore, by using the information in the BSM 
and CAM received from neighboring vehicles, a selected 
vehicle can construct the probe data of all those neighboring 
vehicles. That selected vehicle can now include its 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

t
RSU
“A” transmits all stored location 
information of itself and of 
neighbors vehicles met
 on its route.
“A” stores its own and neighbors' 
location infos 
A 
B
C
D
A 
 
Traffic Orang
Traffic Green
Traffic Red
 
neighbors’ probe data when transmitting its own probe data 
to the RSU.  
Our implementation is similar to the solution proposed 
in  [5] with two main differences: (1) the reporting vehicles 
act in a reactive and not in a proactive mode, and they are 
assumed to be pre-equipped (e.g. belonging to a partner 
fleet), and (2) the transmission of the probe data is made 
through one and not multi hop. 
By letting the vehicles that participate in the data probe 
application send theirs and their neighbors’ probe data, the 
RSU can get a broader visibility about a larger number of 
vehicles in the traffic around its location. 
Figure  1 illustrates the proposed solution through an 
example where A is a participating vehicle running the data 
probe application. The vehicle A constantly collects the 
probe data of other vehicles around it through their BSMs or 
CAMs. When entering the RSU’s communication range, the 
vehicle A transmits to that RSU the collected probe data, 
which contain its own and its neighboring vehicles’ probe 
data. The driving direction of the reported vehicles (heading 
field in CAM and BSM) is used in the backend to map each 
vehicle’s probe data on the right road segment.  
Figure 1.  Example of a vehicle reporting the prob data of its own and of 
other vehicles in its communication range. 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION AND FIELD EXPIRMENTS 
To validate our contribution we have implemented and 
deployed it on a real V2X platform that is being piloted in 
Doha, Qatar. Our experimentations included three vehicles, 
each equipped with one OBU, and one RSU installed on the 
side of the road at a selected intersection. Both the OBUs and 
the RSU communicate over 5.9 GHz band in compliance to 
the European V2X standards  [7]. In our implemented 
solution, a selected vehicle is equipped with a data probe 
application that keeps storing the probe data of its own and 
of any vehicle met on the road thanks to the received CAMs. 
To validate our implementation from an end-to-end 
perspective, we interfaced it with our commercial traffic 
platform Masarak™  [8]. On Masarak, we can see both real-
time and historical traffic information that is calculated based 
on the collected V2X probe data. Figure  2 illustrates 
snapshots of the obtained traffic information as shown by 
Masarak™  [8] on a map using road segment coloring codes 
(Red: heavily congested traffic, Orange: slow-moving traffic 
and Green: clear traffic). 
In this initial experimentation work we did not pay 
attention to measuring the impact of the data probe 
application on the overall network overhead. This is 
something we plan to do along with other measurements in 
the future, and present the findings in an extended version of 
this contribution. But, we believe that the impact on the 
network overhead is relatively small, as only pre-selected 
vehicles are enabled with the data probe application. It is 
also important to mention that as per the standards  [7], the 
traffic efficiency applications are assumed to use a different 
radio channel than the one allocated for safety applications.  
Figure 2.  Traffic states information as shown on Masarak™ based on 
V2X probe data messages. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This contribution presents initial findings from our 
experience with the implementation of V2X-based Data 
Probe application and its integration with a commercial 
traffic platform. In our contribution, we proposed an 
enhancement to the conventional solution as described in the 
related standards, by letting a participating vehicle report not 
only its own probe data but also those of its non-participating 
neighboring vehicles through single-hop transmissions. 
Further experiments and results of the implemented data 
probe application will be presented in a future longer paper.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This publication was made possible by NPRP grant 
#NPRP8-2459-1-482 from the Qatar National Research Fund 
(a member of Qatar Foundation). The statements made 
herein are solely the responsibility of the authors. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Harding, et. all., (2014, August) “Vehicle-to-vehicle 
communications: 
Readiness 
of 
V2V 
technology 
for 
application.” (Report No. DOT HS 812 014). Washington, 
DC: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. 
[2] Dedicated Short Range Communications (DSRC) Message 
Set Dictionary, J2735_201603, 2016-03-30, issued by V2X 
Core Technical Committee, SAE International. 
[3] L. Montero, et al., “Impact on Network Performance of Probe 
Vehicle Data Usage: An Experimental Design for Simulation 
Assessment,” Journal of Advanced Transportation, vol. 2018, 
Article ID 3736417, 12 pages, 2018. 
[4] M. B. Brahim and H. Menouar, "V2X-based traffic flow 
calculation with support of unique identifier randomization," 
2016 2nd IEEE International Conference on Computer and 
Communications (ICCC), Chengdu, 2016, pp. 1226-1232. 
[5] L. Yang, J. Xu, G. Wu, J. Guo, "Road probing: RSU assisted 
data collection in vehicular networks." 2009 5th International 
Conference on Wireless Communications, Networking and 
Mobile Computing. IEEE, 2009. 
[6] M. R. Islam, N. Ibn Shahid, D. T. Karim, A. Al Mamun, M. 
K. Rhaman, "An efficient algorithm for detecting traffic 
congestion and a framework for smart traffic control system," 
18th International Conference on Advanced Communication 
Technology (ICACT), Pyeongchang, 2016, pp. 802-807. 
[7] Intelligent 
Transport 
Systems 
(ITS); 
Vehicular 
Communications; Basic Set of Applications; Part 2: 
Specification of Cooperative Awareness Basic Service, ETSI 
TS 102 637-2 V1.2.1 (2011-03). 
[8] Masarak™ - http://www.masarak.com/ [retrieved: May, 2019]
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

