Transmission Range Influence on Secure Routing in VANETs 
 
Afef Slama 
HANA Laboratory 
University of Manouba 
Manouba, Tunisia 
e-mail: slama.afef@hotmail.fr 
Ilhem Lengliz 
Computer Science Department 
Military Academy 
Nabeul, Tunisia 
e-mail: ilhem.lengliz@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract—With the rapid development in smart vehicles, the 
security and privacy issues of the Vehicular Ad-hoc Network 
(VANET) have drawn noteworthy regard. Indeed, every secure 
routing protocol must suit its operation to meet VANETs 
requirements and to yield a better security level. Incorporating 
Route Life Time (RLT) policy to Dynamic Source Routing 
(DSR) routing protocol is one of these adaptations. This policy 
intends 
to 
improve 
the 
global 
route 
lifetime. 
Trust 
Cryptographic Secure Routing (TCSR) protocol is one more 
proposition for secure routing found on the selection of the 
most trustworthy node all along with the route establishment. 
In this paper, we propose a comparative study of DSR-RLT 
and TCSR routing protocols on a highway to evaluate their 
performances in terms of transmission range variation. The 
simulation results show that TCSR exceeds DSR-RLT in terms 
of the packet loss ratio, average network throughput, and 
average delay.   
Keywords-VANET; secure routing; RLT; DSR-RLT; TCSR. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
VANETs refer to the Intelligent Transportation System 
(ITS) where vehicles are intelligent objects communicating 
(sending and receiving data) between each other in a smart 
manner [1]. Their purpose is to assist road users with 
appropriate services like safety, infotainment, and traffic 
management, 
by 
incorporating 
information 
and 
communication technology into vehicles and transport 
infrastructure. The transmission of messages in an open-
access environment like VANETs leads to the most critical 
and challenging security issues [2]. As a result, the design of 
an effective secure routing protocol for VANET is crucial. 
So, the major threat is to design a robust and efficient secure 
routing algorithm that is very adaptable to frequent changes 
in the topology of fast-moving vehicles [3]. 
Diverse routing protocols have been proposed for 
VANETs to address the nodes' powerful mobility. 
Unfortunately, since most of these routing protocols use 
nodes succession during the route foundation among the 
source and the destination, the nature of communications 
characterized by a short duration may provide frequent 
disconnections. To handle this challenge, we provide in this 
work a comparison between two protocols we have 
proposed: the DSR-RLT protocol proposed in [4] and the 
TCSR protocol [5]. These protocols are found on the 
increase of the routing process's vigor toward regular 
common disconnections. The rest of this paper is organized 
as follows. Section II explores the DSR-RLT protocol. 
Section III gives a summary of the TCSR proposal. Section 
IV presents a comparison of the two protocols. The 
conclusion closes the article. 
II. 
DSR-RLT 
In an Intelligent Transportation System (ITS), each 
vehicle can be the sender, the receiver, or the router of every 
broadcasted message in the VANET. It is fundamental to 
secure the routing information since this information can be 
modified by malicious nodes. One of these secure routing 
protocols is DSR-RLT which is an enhancement of the 
native DSR routing protocol [6] using the Route Life Time 
(RLT) policy proposed in [7]. This policy seeks the optimal 
choice of the next hop based on the node's speed and the 
inter-node distances for a given approximation of the optimal 
number of hops in a VANET. When integrated into a routing 
operation, this policy tries to find an optimal choice of the 
next hop (relay node) in order to maximize the associated 
link lifetime and, hence, the overall route lifetime. Indeed, 
when invoked for a route building, the DSR-RLT protocol 
begins to look for the most favorable node positioning so as 
to cope with the RLT policy requirements such that the 
formed route for data transmissions will have the longest life 
time among all possible routes. In the same manner, the 
DSR-RLT protocol acts as the DSR protocol in establishing 
a route for a data packet to be sent on the VANET. 
The preliminary evaluation of DSR-RLT protocol we 
carried out in [4] has shown that it achieves a higher network 
throughput in a realistic environment, especially on a 
crowded highway. 
III. 
TCSR PROTOCOL 
The trust metric has been proposed in various works 
addressing the secure routing in VANETs [8]-[10]. In this 
context, we have designed the Trust Cryptographic Secure 
Routing protocol (TCSR). Its operation takes place in two 
phases, as shown in Fig. 1 below. The first phase aims to 
create a high trust-surrounding level for each node in the 
VANET. It initiates calculating the trust level (TLv) of each 
node in a dynamic and distributed model. Thereby, every 
vehicle is capable to assign a TLv to every vehicle in its 
vicinity. Indeed, the evaluation of the behavior of a node is 
defined upon the interchanged packets. Therefore, depending 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-974-4
VEHICULAR 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

on the result of the overseeing process, the TLv of each 
vehicle can rise, decline or stay fixed.  
 
Figure 1.   Flowchart of the TCSR operation process. 
 The second phase aims to enhance the security level of 
the TCSR model using asymmetric cryptography. Thus, the 
source information is ciphered using the public key of the 
sender to generate a digital signature. Therefore, the receiver 
authenticates the sender before decrypting the received 
message. 
To compute the TLv, the TCSR operation process is 
based on the reuse of the Additive Increase/Multicative-
Decrease (AIMD) [11] technique along with the 3 DUP PKL 
(PacKet Losses) principle derived from the DUP ACK TCP 
congestion control mechanism. As illustrated in Fig. 2 
below, at first, TCSR confesses that each vehicle in the 
transmission range (Tr) has a basic TL0 in [0, 1] that may 
vary in time or over the routing process. 
 
Figure 2.   Flowchart of the node trust level monitoring. 
The TCSR proposal allows each node to communicate 
with the others using a series of plausibility checks enabling 
them to compute the node score before selecting the one 
having the highest score. Consequently, the safest node is 
able to broadcast every signed message. In regard to RLT 
policy, it grants the choice of the route with the longest life 
time among all possible routes during the routing process of 
DSR-RLT.  
IV. 
COMPARISON 
It is interesting to evaluate the performances of the trust 
metric of the TCSR protocol on a highway and to compare 
its performances with those of DSR-RLT in order to verify 
the impact of the evolution on these two protocols. 
A. Simulation model and parameters 
For this study, we designed the VANETs scenario using 
Simulation of Urban Mobility (SUMO) [12]. We then 
converted the resulting SUMO trace file to be the data file 
used in NS-3.27. The objective of this simulation is to study 
the impact of the variation of the transmission range on a 
secure VANET routing protocol in order to evaluate its 
performance under different transmission ranges with 
variable data rates. 
For the purpose of this study, we defined a VANET 
model with the parameters listed in Table 1 below. Two 
hundred nodes (vehicles) with a speed of 110 km/h were 
tested in the scenario to determine the impact of the network 
density on the TCSR and DSR-RLT secure routing process. 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS OF A HIGHWAY  
Parameter 
Value 
MAC layer 
MAC IEEE 802.11p 
Node buffer size 
50 packets 
Propagation model 
Two Ray Ground 
Network bandwidth 
6 Mbps 
Packet length 
100, 200 & 512 Kb 
Communication range 
100 - 700 m 
Highway length 
6 km 
Number of lanes 
6 (3 in each direction) 
Time of simulation 
1800 sec 
 
The performance indicators we selected to evaluate the 
two protocols in different VANETs scenarios are as follows: 
the Packet Loss Ratio (PLR), the average network 
throughput, the delay and the total energy consumed, which 
are the most relevant parameters commonly used to evaluate 
any given routing protocol in VANETs. 
• 
Packet Loss Ratio (PLR): it is the loss rate of 
message delivery among vehicles within the same 
range 
of 
communication 
using 
single-hop 
messaging. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-974-4
VEHICULAR 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

• 
Average Network Throughput: is the total payload 
over the entire session divided by the total time. 
Total time is calculated by taking the difference in 
timestamps between the first and last packet. 
• 
Average Delay: it represents the period of time spent 
to route a packet from the source to the destination. 
That is the ratio of the number of sending bits in the 
packet to the throughput. 
• 
Total Energy Consumed: it measures the total energy 
consumed by nodes during the routing process. 
B. Simulations results 
The purpose of this section is to examine the behavior of 
the TCSR and DSR-RLT protocols according to the variation 
of the transmission range and the traffic load. 
Packet Loss Ratio (PLR): Fig. 3 describes the behavior of 
both protocols as a result of varying transmission range and 
transmitted packet size. We show that for a transmission 
range strictly less than or equal to 500 m, the value of PLR 
is inversely proportional to the value of the range for both 
protocols. It becomes proportional for a range strictly greater 
than 500 m, always for both protocols. This result is logical 
if we know that increasing the range of transmission with the 
maintenance of the number of vehicles reduces the number 
of jumps and thus ensures better connectivity that results in 
higher signal strength. On the other hand, when the 
transmission range exceeds 500 m, the conflict flow 
increases at the MAC layer resulting in a higher interference 
rate. Nevertheless, the CSMA/CA rules limit communication 
to many nodes avoiding collisions, which limit the reuse of 
bandwidth. 
 
Figure 3.  PLR vs Transmission range. 
Fig. 3 shows the adaptability of the two protocols to more 
realistic road scenarios by adjusting the transmission range. 
However, it reveals better performance in terms of PLR for 
the TCSR protocol. This result is predictable because TCSR 
is essentially based on the value of the confidence level Tlv 
of each vehicle. Thus, all relay nodes that it chooses during 
the routing process have the highest levels of trust. As a 
result, the number of internal attacks is reduced, which 
guarantees the successful transfer of the packets of the data 
signed by the CA to minimize external attacks. On a 
congested highway, TCSR differs from DSR-RLT in that it 
adjusts the confidence level of network nodes quickly with 
plausibility 
check 
series 
initiated. 
The 
longer 
the 
transmission range, the higher the number of vehicles 
traveling at high speeds, which increases the response time. 
In addition, the lower performance of the DSR-RLT 
protocol is explained by the fact that the source routing keeps 
the complete path between the source and the destination in 
the header of the data packet. Besides, the use of the RLT 
policy which seeks the optimal choice of the next hop 
according to the speed of the node and the inter-node 
distances induces a loss of time during the phase of the 
construction of the road. The optimal choice of the relay 
node maximizes the lifetime of the link and therefore the 
overall life of the route but does not address the problem of 
internal and external attacks. As a result, the transmitted 
messages may be modified during the routing process which 
causes the loss of data. 
Average Network Throughput: Fig. 4 shows the influence 
of the change in transmission range on the average network 
throughput following the deployment of the TCSR and DSR-
RLT protocols. The PLR influences in the sense that the 
decrease of the PLR increases the flow. Thus, and as 
illustrated in Fig. 4, it increases for ranges less than or equal 
to 500 m and decreases for ranges strictly greater than 500 
m. 
 
Figure 4.  Average Network Throughput vs Transmission range. 
We note that the average network throughput measured 
with the TCSR protocol decreases for the 600 m and 700 m 
transmission ranges, remains higher than the one provided by 
DSR-RLT. Indeed, the use of the AIMD mechanism for 
calculating the trust level of the relay nodes in addition to the 
digital signatures ensures better stability of the route during 
the routing of the data. It turns out that the detection of 
internal and external attacks throughout the routing increases 
network throughput. 
Average Delay: Fig. 5 shows the behavior of both 
protocols as a result of varying transmission range and 
transmitted packet size. We show that for a transmission 
range strictly less than or equal to 500 m, the value of 
Average Delay is inversely proportional to the value of the 
range for both protocols. It becomes proportional for a range 
strictly greater than 500 m, always for both protocols. This 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-974-4
VEHICULAR 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

result is logical if we know that increasing the transmission 
range while maintaining the number of vehicles decreases 
the number of hops and thus guarantees greater connectivity 
that results in higher signal strength. On the other hand, 
when the transmission range exceeds 500 m, the conflict 
flow increases at the MAC layer resulting in a higher 
interference rate. Nevertheless, the CSMA/CA rules limit 
communication to many nodes avoiding collisions which 
limits the reuse of bandwidth. 
 
Figure 5.   Average Delay vs Transmission range. 
Fig. 5 shows the adaptability of the two protocols to more 
realistic road scenarios by adjusting the transmission range. 
However, it reveals better performance in terms of Average 
Delay for the TCSR protocol. This result is predictable 
because TCSR is fundamentally based on the value of the 
trust level Tlv of each vehicle. Thus, all relay nodes that it 
chooses during the routing process have the highest levels of 
trust. As a result, the number of internal attacks is reduced, 
which guarantees the successful transfer of the packets of the 
data signed by the CA to minimize external attacks. On a 
congested highway, TCSR differs from DSR-RLT in that it 
adjusts the confidence level of network nodes quickly with 
plausibility 
check 
series 
initiated. 
The 
longer 
the 
transmission range, the higher the number of vehicles 
traveling at high speeds, which increases the response time. 
In addition, the lower performance of the DSR-RLT 
protocol is explained by the fact that the source routing keeps 
the complete path between the source and the destination in 
the header of the data packet. Besides, the use of the RLT 
policy which seeks the optimal choice of the next hop 
according to the speed of the node and the inter-node 
distances induces a loss of time during the phase of the 
construction of the road. The optimal choice of the relay 
node maximizes the lifetime of the link and therefore the 
overall life of the route but does not address the problem of 
internal and external attacks. As a result, the transmitted 
messages may be modified during the routing process which 
causes the loss of data. 
Total Consumed Energy: Fig. 6 shows the influence of 
the change in transmission range on the amount of Total 
Consumed Energy following deployment of the TCSR and 
DSR-RLT protocols. Thus, and as illustrated in Fig. 6, TCSR 
has the uppermost amount of consumed energy which is also 
expected since the RLT policy reduces the number of control 
packets generated to establish a route between a source and a 
destination. While the TCSR employs a trust metric and a 
cryptography strategy known for their complexity. But we 
should recall that this may not affect the network overall 
status given that vehicles in VANETs are equipped with 
OBUs and batteries. 
 
Figure 6.  Total Consumed Energy vs Transmission range. 
The TCSR protocol is suitable for managing a fast and 
continuous network topology. Indeed, this protocol makes it 
possible to deliver more packet than the protocol DSR-RLT, 
it also reaches better performances in term of flow for a Tr 
equal to 500 m. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we presented a comparison between the 
TCSR protocol that uses the trust metric and the DSR-RLT 
protocol based on RLT policy. We chose to compare their 
respective performances on a congested highway for 
different transmission ranges. We found that the TCSR 
protocol is better adapted to scalability due to its 
performance in terms of PLR, average network throughput 
and average delay for transmission range values up to 500 
m. However, it indicates a poor effect in terms of consumed 
energy compared to DSR-RLT for all transmission ranges. 
For transmission range values strictly greater than 500 m, a 
study should be developed based on the variation of 
simulation parameters such as bandwidth and data packet 
size. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] F. Cunha, L.Villas, A. Boukerche, G. Maia, A. Viana, R.A.F. 
Mini, and A.A.F. Loureiro, “Data communication in vanets: 
survey, applications and challenges”, Ad Hoc Networks 
journal, vol. 44, pp 90 - 103, 2016. 
[2] S. S. Manvi and S. Tangade, “A survey on authentication 
schemes in VANETs for secured communication”, Vehicular 
Communications, vol. 9, pp. 19-30, July 2017. 
[3] Y. Hammouche and S. Merniz, “Vanet cross layer routing”, 
2019 International Conference of Computer Science and 
Renewable Energies (ICCSRE), July 2019. 
[4] I. Lengliz and A. Slama, “ Enhancing VANETs' Routing 
Operation with the Route Lifetime Policy”, International 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-974-4
VEHICULAR 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Journal of Computer Applications, vol. 164, pp. 35-40, April 
2017. 
[5] A. Slama, I. Lengliz and A. Belghith, “TCSR: an AIMD 
Trust-based Protocol for Secure Routing in VANET”, The 
2018 International Conference on Smart Applications, 
Communications and Networking, November 2018. 
[6] D. Johnson, Y. Hu, D. Maltz, RFC 4728, “The Dynamic 
Source Routing Protocol (DSR) for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks 
for IPv4”, February 2007. 
[7] D. Kumar, A. A. Kherani, E. Altman. “Route Life time based 
Interactive Routing in Intervehicle Mobile Ad Hoc 
Networks”, Research Report, INRIA, France, September 
2005. 
[8] T. Gazdar, A. Rachedi, A. Benslimane, and A. Belghith, “A 
distributed advanced analytical trust model for vanets”, 2012 
IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), 
December 2012. 
[9] A. Chinnasamy, S.Prakash and P.Selvakumari, “Enhance trust 
based routing techniques against sinkhole attack in AODV 
based 
VANET”, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Computer 
Applications, vol. 65, issue 15, March 2013. 
[10] T. Gazdar, A. Belghith, and H. Abutar, “An Enhanced and 
Distributed Trust Computing Protocol for VANETs”, IEEE 
Access, vol. 6, pp. 380-392, October 2017. 
[11] RFC5681, TCP Congestion Control. 
[12] http://sumo.sourceforge.net. Accessed April 2022.
 
 
 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-974-4
VEHICULAR 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

