A Time-series Clustering Approach for Sybil Attack
Detection in Vehicular Ad hoc Networks
Neelanjana Dutta
Department of Computer Science
Missouri University of
Science and Technology
Rolla, Missouri 65409
Email: nd2n8@mst.edu
Sriram Chellappan
Department of Computer Science
Missouri University of
Science and Technology
Rolla, Missouri 65409
Email: chellaps@mst.edu
Abstract—Sybil attack is a security threat wherein an attacker
creates and uses multiple counterfeit identities risking trust and
functionality of a peer-to-peer system. Sybil attack in vehicular
ad hoc networks is an emergent threat to the services and security
of the system. In the highly dynamic environment of vehicular
ad hoc networks, due to mobility and density of nodes, it is
challenging to detect the nodes that are launching Sybil attack.
Existing techniques mostly use additional hardware or complex
cryptographic solutions for Sybil attack detection in vehicular
ad hoc networks. In this paper, we propose a fuzzy time-series
clustering based approach that does not require any additional
hardware or infrastructure support for Sybil attack detection in
vehicular ad hoc networks. The proposed technique leverages the
dispersion of vehicle platoons over time in a network and detects
Sybil nodes as those which are traveling closely in a cluster for
an unusually long time. Simulation results and analysis show that
the approach is able to identify Sybil nodes with very low false
positive and false negative rates even under varying intensity of
attack.
Index Terms—Sybil attack; vehicular ad hoc networks; platoon
dispersion; fuzzy time series clustering.
I. INTRODUCTION
Vehicular Ad hoc Network (VANET) is a type of ad hoc
network that is comprised of vehicles and road transportation
infrastructure. The application of VANETs in different emer-
gency notiﬁcation system, safety-related and infotainment pur-
poses have increased over past few years, leading it to become
the backbone of Intelligent Transport System (ITS). Alongside,
new security threats in VANETs have been investigated as well
[1], [2], [3]. In this paper a critical security problem, namely
Sybil attack, has been addressed and a time-series clustering
based approach is proposed for detection of nodes that are
launching this attack in VANETs.
Sybil attack [4] is a security threat wherein an attacker
creates and uses multiple counterfeit identities risking trust
and functionality of a peer-to-peer system. Sybil attack in
Vehicular Ad hoc Networks (VANET) is an emergent threat
to the services and trust of the system. In the highly dynamic
environment of a VANET, an attacker can easily create and use
multiple fake identities, and exploit node mobility to exit the
location of the attack. Consequently, detecting the presence of
Sybil attack and identifying the Sybil nodes become a chal-
lenge considering the dynamic nature of vehicular networks,
ephemeral neighborhood proximities and ad hoc mobility.
In this paper, we propose a fuzzy time-series technique
to cluster mobile nodes’ locations based on neighborhood
proximity. The underlying principle behind our approach is
as follows. As a Sybil node counterfeits multiple identities
and presents them to the system, those fake vehicles (repre-
sented by the counterfeit identities) will generally be reported
around the Sybil vehicle that uses the identities leading these
vehicles to violate normal dispersion dynamics. The proposed
technique leverages the dispersion of vehicle platoons over
time in a network and detects Sybil nodes as those which are
located closely in a cluster as they move for an unusually long
time. Simulation results and analysis show that the approach
is able to identify Sybil nodes with very low false positive and
false negative rates even under varying intensity of attack.
A. Related Work
While Sybil attacks have been addressed in social networks,
Wireless Sensor Networks and Mobile Ad Hoc Networks,
solutions in these domains require long term observation, col-
laboration and veriﬁcation which are not possible in ephemeral
networks like VANETs, where associations are short and
unlikely to repeat. However, there have been research for
detection of Sybil attack and identiﬁcation of Sybil nodes in
VANETs as well. In [5], a physical signal characteristics based
technique was discussed for Sybil node detection in VANETS.
A pair of nodes could be distinguished from each other using
estimate of relative node localization that gives an indication
of the coherence of the received signal. A signal strength
distribution based method for detection and localization of
Sybil nodes is proposed in [6] too. In [7], authors propose
to employ RSUs that issue temporally varying pseudonyms to
vehicles near their vicinity. A cryptographic solution to the
problem of Sybil attack detection is proposed in [8]. In [9],
spatial and temporal correlation between vehicles and RSUs is
used to detect Sybil nodes, exploiting the fact that two vehicles
passing by multiple RSUs at exactly the same time is rare.
In [10], the authors presented a general approach to validate
the VANET data, even in the presence of a few Sybil nodes.
Anomalies are detected by checking the validity of the VANET
data with respect to the VANET model and adversarial model.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-288-2
VEHICULAR 2013 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Existing techniques for Sybil detection in VANETs mostly
require additional hardware and overhead, but they do not
use the available network physics, physical infrastructure
information and statistics. The Sybil node detection technique
proposed in this paper does not need any external support or
complex algorithms, but rather relies on leveraging a basic
mobility feature of nodes in VANET - the dispersion of
vehicle platoons over time, or platoon dispersion [11]. Platoon
dispersion indicates that in normal conditions, vehicles in
proximity of each other at a certain time are unlikely to
sustain their proximity clustering over time, i.e., proximity
clusters are ephemeral. Based on this premise, the proposed
solution in this paper uses fuzzy time series clustering for
detection of Sybil nodes. We incorporate data preprocessing
and feature extraction phases to make the algorithm more
efﬁcient. We perform theoretical analysis and simulations
to derive threshold parameters and demonstrate performance
of the technique. We also take into consideration various
intensities of attack, which the attacker can adopt by utilizing
only a part of its available counterfeit identities at a time.
Such a variation in attack model makes it all the more difﬁcult
to estimate consistent association of nodes with one another.
Simulation results show that the proposed technique succeeds
in identifying most of the Sybil nodes over a period of time
under such conditions as well.
The rest of the paper is arranged as follows. In Section II,
the problem addressed is formally deﬁned. In Section III, our
time-series clustering based solution is presented. Detailed dis-
cussion about data preprocessing and feature extraction phases,
the clustering algorithm and theoretical analysis are parts of
this section. Performance evaluation of the proposed method
is presented in Section IV. Section V presents concluding
remarks and future work.
II. PROBLEM DEFINITION
The network model, attack model and the problem ad-
dressed are deﬁned in this section.
Network Model - The main components of the VANET are -
vehicles, Road Side Units (RSUs) and Certiﬁcation Authority
(CA). Vehicles are alternatively referred to as “nodes” in this
paper. Nodes in VANETs are equipped with On Board Units
(OBUs) to communicate and compute messages. Nodes may
also have sensors, navigation device or Global Positioning
System (GPS), computing devices, display units, etc. Each
node is aware of its own location and the map of the
network area and usually communicates using short range
wireless communication technology, such as Dedicated Short
Range Communication (DSRC), bluetooth, etc. RSUs usually
comprise of cheap embedded devices including sensors, smart
trafﬁc controllers, etc. RSUs store secure information such
as its secure communication keys, trafﬁc information, safety-
related information etc. CA is a central authority, which au-
thenticates vehicles and RSUs using the secure authentication
infrastructure like public key infrastructure. Each node is given
a unique identity or ID by the CA.
Attack Model - A Sybil node is deﬁned to be one which
uses multiple counterfeit identities to pretend to be some other
node(s). As discussed in Section I, the beneﬁts of the attacker
in launching such attacks are multi-fold. A group of malicious
nodes can subvert the trust and reputation system of the
network if they conduct Sybil attack on the network for some
time. Eventually this can deteriorate the overall performance
of the system. In our model, we consider that a malicious
vehicle, with original id V , has n different identities, Vn =
V0, V1, ..., Vn−1. V can determine the intensity of attack by
choosing to use only a certain percentage of the counterfeit
identities at a time. Intuitively, using lesser number of ID’s
at a time will lower its chance of getting detected, but at the
same time it will mitigate the intensity of attack as well. In
our model, V uses x% of these ids over a time duration ∆t
where x ∈ [0, 100]. It is assumed that V randomly selects i
different ids from the set Vn such that x = 100i
n
and uses them
to communicate for the next ∆t, and then again repeats the
same process. We assume that the vehicles follow predeﬁned
speed limits on the roads.
In the very dynamic environment of a VANET, it is chal-
lenging to identify a Sybil node due to the high mobility and
density of nodes. In other words, a node can escape one part
of the network and reach another part very fast. The large
number of nodes in a network makes it all the more difﬁcult
to identify malicious node(s). These challenges warrant the
need of a lightweight and efﬁcient approach to detect Sybil
nodes in VANET. The objective of the paper is to propose an
efﬁcient method to detect Sybil nodes without using additional
hardware or infrastructure support.
III. PROPOSED SOLUTION
In this paper, a time-series clustering method called FSTS
[12] is used to detect Sybil nodes in VANETs under varying
attack intensity. Time-series clustering helps to identify the
nodes that are moving in proximity of each other over a time
period based on the location traces of the nodes. Because of
the large number and density of nodes in a typical VANET,
it is likely that a node can be part of multiple clusters at the
same time, making fuzzy clustering algorithms suitable for
the scenario. In this section we ﬁrst discuss the location data
collection method, followed by different steps of the proposed
technique for Sybil node detection.
The key idea behind the proposed solution comes from
a vehicular network phenomenon called platoon dispersion
[11] as mentioned in Section I. A platoon is a group of
vehicles traveling together. If all vehicles in an existing pla-
toon maintain their speeds, a platoon will never disseminate.
However, due to physical factors like road friction, vehicle
characteristics and signaling, along with human factors like
car following pattern, lane changes, fatigue, there is inherent
randomness in driver behavior, and platoons tend to disperse
over time. Intuitively, longer the travel time between points,
greater is the dispersion, since there is more time for drivers
to deviate from current speeds. We use this idea to derive
a threshold probability PT h of two vehicles being within a
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-288-2
VEHICULAR 2013 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

speciﬁed distance after a given time if their initial locations
were same.
By the virtue of platoon dispersion, different vehicles in a
network are not likely to travel together for very long. Towards
this end, the threshold duration for which vehicles are likely
to travel with each other can be estimated theoretically. If any
two or more vehicles surpass this threshold duration, they are
likely to be the same node faking identities as different nodes.
The clustered time-series correspond to the identities of the
vehicles which are likely to be Sybil nodes.
A. Location Data Collection by Peer Nodes
Standard DSRC communication allows vehicles to update
its location and other physical parameters using periodic
messages at a short, regular interval (usually 20 ms). However,
in the scenario considered in this paper, any node can be a
malicious Sybil node and it can also falsify its own location
information to avoid detection. So, location data of vehicles
over time is collected through peer vehicles through via
messages or report. All nodes send report messages to the base
station on a periodic basis in a ﬁxed time interval. The purpose
of reports is to inform the base station about the nodes which
Vx has heard communicating in the last time interval. Because
only a part of the nodes could be malicious, this collaborative
process of reporting assures that the real location of a node
is reported. For instance, if node Vx receives message from a
node Vy at time t when Vx was at location l, it will incorporate
this information in its next report to the base station. The
location data of Vy collected by peers over time is represented
in form of a time series LVy = lVy(0), lVy(1), ..., lVy(t). It can
be noted that the RSUs deployed along the road serve as local
base stations that can execute the clustering algorithm and
collaborate with each other as needed too.
B. Preprocessing Collected Data
After base station collects the location data from nodes in
the network, all the following steps are executed by the base
station for detection of Sybil nodes. Clustering algorithms
are usually used for evenly distributed sampling for time-
series, or can handle unevenly sampled data to some extant.
But handling the ad hoc nature of data in VANET, specially
when the Sybil node uses only a part of it’s Sybil ID’s at a
time, becomes an orthogonal challenge. In simulation based
experimentations it is feasible to collect data with regular
sampling rates, but it is unlikely to do so in practical scenario.
For instance, locations of Vx can be reported by peer nodes
time instants t0, t1, t5, t9, t10 and t20 whereas locations of
Vy can be reported by peer nodes time instants t0, t1, t2,
t3, t9, t11, t12 and t15. Clustering of these two time-series
becomes due to the irregularity of sampling rate and size.
In this paper, the effect of linear interpolation in time-series
clustering of data is studied. Subsequently in Section III-D,
a prediction technique is proposed to estimate locations of
vehicles when no report is obtained. Although the time-series
clustering algorithm used in this paper supports clustering of
unevenly sampled time-series data, preprocessing of collected
data is done for better results.
Linear Interpolation - Referring back to Section III-A,
the time-series data for Vy can be represented as, LVy =
lVy(0), lVy(1), ..., lVy(t), where, lVy(i) = (xVy(i), yVy(i)).
The linear interpolation between points (xVy(i), yVy(i)) and
(xVy(j), yVy(j))∀(i, j) and (j − i) > 1, can be given by,
y = yVy(i) + (x − xVy(i)) yVy(j) − yVy(i)
xVy(j) − xVy(i)
(1)
The data points between lVy(i) and lVy(j) can be con-
structed on the line represented by Equation 1 at regular
distances ∆d =
||(lVy (i),lVy (j))||
p−1
, where (j − i) = p and ||.||
refer to Euclidean distance.
C. Estimation of Number of Sybil Nodes
Association rule mining is used as a basic feature extraction
step in this paper, in order to have an idea about how many
Sybil nodes are likely to be present in a part of network.
Association Rule Learning mines relation between multiple at-
tributes of an entity based on their frequency of co-occurrence
in a dataset [13]. Let I = i1; i2; i3, ...., ir be a set of r binary
attributes called items. Let τ = τ1, τ2, τ3, ...., τs be a set of s
transactions called a database. Each transaction in τ contains
a subset of the items in I. The problem here is to identify
association rules in the database, which is an implication of
the form X
=⇒
Y , where X, Y ∈ I and X T Y = ∅.
Reverting back to Sybil detection, consider a Vehicle Vx that
has communicated with peers over time. The dataset τx of Vx
is a row of transactions with each time-stamped row consisting
of vehicle ids with which Vx has communicated at that time.
Recall from platoon dispersion that a group of vehicles is
highly unlikely to be consistently associated geographically
(i.e., as a platoon) over a long time period. When a consistent
association of two or more vehicles is seen, those vehicles
can be suspected to be Sybil. Using this technique, different
peer nodes in a network can predict how many Sybil nodes
are likely to be present in its vicinity and report to the base
station. Also, the base station itself can use this technique
to gauge which nodes could possibly be Sybil. However, it is
not possible to draw a conclusion from their analysis when the
Sybil node uses only a part of forged identities over time and
changes them over next time period. This step is only useful
for the base station to predict expected number of clusters,
wij, which is an input to the clustering algorithm as discussed
in Section IV-A.
D. Fuzzy Time-Series Clustering
Fuzzy time-series clustering involves fuzzy clustering of
time-series data collected over time with even or uneven
sampling rate. In this paper, Fuzzy Short Time-Series (FSTS)
clustering of location traces of mobile nodes over a time period
is used for Sybil attack detection. The proposed technique
is based on the FSTS algorithm presented in [12]. It can
be noted that the proposed short time-series based piecewise
slope distance clustering seems intuitively appropriate for the
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-288-2
VEHICULAR 2013 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

application considered in this paper. The type of location
data obtained from vehicles in a VANET can be enormous
in size, but the Sybil detection technique deals with data over
a comparatively shorter period of time. However, there are
several differences in the two approaches. Firstly, in this paper,
two-dimensional data (location) is considered for clustering
over time. So, the time-series data considered is three dimen-
sional unlike the two dimensional clustering performed in [12].
Besides, this technique is further extended in Section III-D to
leverage the advantages of estimation techniques in the domain
of time-series clustering.
Fuzzy short time-series (FSTS) technique proposed in [12]
is a variation of fuzzy C-means clustering for time-series data.
The basic idea is to perform a slope distance computation of
time-series, which can be used for clustering the time-series in
FSTS method. In this paper, the distance considered includes
the three dimensional data (x and y coordinates of location
and time) obtained from VANETs. For time-series of vehicle
lVx = lVx(0), lVx(1), ..., lVx(tn), the linear function between
LVx(t) two consecutive time instants tk and t(k+1) are deﬁned
as,
LVx(t) = mk(t) + bk,
(2)
where tk < t < tk+1, and
mk = ||lVx(k + 1) − lVx(k)||
t(k + 1) − tk
,
(3)
bk = t(k + 1)lVx(k + 1) − tklVx(k)
t(k + 1) − tk
(4)
Consequently, a set of equations can be derived as both
x and y coordinate are separately considered in Equation 4.
The short time-series distance between time-series vector of
vehicle Vx and prototype vector Vy is computed as below -
d2
ST S(Vx, Vy) =
nt−1
X
k=0
Vy(k + 1) − Vy(k)
tk+1 − tk
− Vx(k + 1) − Vx(k)
tk+1 − tk
)2
(5)
Rest of the FSTS algorithm is similar to fuzzy C-means
algorithm . The cost function is deﬁned as,
J(Vx, Vy, u) =
nk
X
i=1
nv
X
i=1
uw
ijd2(Vx(j), Vy(i)),
(6)
where nk is the number of clusters, nv is the number of
vehicles and w is the weight factor. All these values are user-
deﬁned. The value of u determines the membership value of
the element in the cluster. Updating of the partition matrix
is done in the same way as described in [12], where uw
ij is
updated as,
uw
ij =
1
Pnk
q=1 (dST Sij/dST Sqj)
1
w−1
(7)
Further details of this algorithm is abstracted in the current
paper and can be found in [12].
E. Derivation of PT h
In this section, the objective is to derive PT h, the probability
of two vehicles traveling in each other’s vicinity so that the
expected time of observation for Sybil node detection can
be estimated. Towards this end, ﬁrst theoretical analysis is
performed to determine PT h and then the outcome is tested
using simulation studies.
Let us consider that two vehicles are moving on a straight
road. They are initially (time t = 0) at a distance d0 apart. In
a time interval δt, the vehicles can move any distance within
a range of DH and DL on the road. The range is represented
as Drange. At every time instance the vehicles update their
velocities based on past velocities and thus the distances to be
covered (denoted by D1 and D2) in next time interval, δt. D1
and D2 are chosen from Drange using uniform distribution.
Our initial objective is to ﬁgure out the probability that the
two vehicles are within a distance α of each other after a time
interval nδt.
As mentioned above, we assume uniform distribution for
D1 and D2. For simplicity of computation, we assume d0 = 0
throughout this derivation. Now, using normal approximation
of uniform distribution, if D1
∼
Unif(DH, DL) and
D2 ∼ Unif(DH, DL), then
Pn
i=1 D1i
∼
N( n(DL+DH)
2
, n(DH−DL)2
12
)
and
Pn
i=1 D2i ∼ N( n(DL+DH)
2
, n(DH−DL)2
12
).
So, (Pn
i=1 D1i − Pn
i=1 D2i) ∼ N(0, 2n(DH−DL)2
12
).
Now, the probability that the condition | Pn
i=1 D1i −
Pn
i=1 D2i| ≤ α holds true can be written as
P(|
n
X
i=1
D1i −
n
X
i=1
D2i|)
(8)
= P(−α ≤
n
X
i=1
D1i −
n
X
i=1
D2i ≤ α)
= P(
−α − 0
q
2n(DH−DL)2
12
≤ Z ≤
α − 0
q
2n(DH−DL)2
12
)
[where Z =
n
X
i=1
D1i −
n
X
i=1
D2i]
= P(−z ≤ Z ≤ z)
(9)
[where z =
α
q
2n(DH−DL)2
12
]
Using standard normal distribution of Z, i.e., Φ(Z), it
is evident that, Φ(Z) = P(Z ≤ z). So, our probability
expression, (in equation 9) = 2 Φ(Z)-1.
Using the standard normal CDF table, the probability for
different values of DH, DL, n and α can be found out. From
this derivation, it is straight forward to derive the expected
time, texp, that two vehicles will take to reach a threshold
probability Pth that they are traveling in each other’s vicinity.
It can be noted that in real life, based on several physical
and human factors, any other distribution other than uniform
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-288-2
VEHICULAR 2013 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

distribution can be used to model vehicle’s distance traveled
over a time period. However, similar derivation can be done
using other probability distributions too.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0
50
100
150
200
250
Probability of two nodes being within distance α   
α 
theoritical probability
simulation results
Fig. 1.
Determination of Input Parameters where DH = 50 m, DL = 0 m,
n = 10, δt = 1 s
A theoretical probability of two nodes moving within a
given distance over a time period can be obtained by plugging
in values of different input parameters into the expression
derived above. In Figure 1, probability values derived through
theoretical analysis and simulation results are plotted against
different values of α where DH = 50 m, DL = 0 m, n
= 10, δt = 1 s. This ﬁgure shows a case where simulation
data is plotted along with theoretical results to show that the
results match closely. Thus from this derivation, for a given
time period, the probability of two vehicles being in a same
cluster (or within a given distance) for a given time period
can be obtained. For different experiments performed with
different values of network parameters (like DH, DL etc.),
we derived the probability threshold for which two nodes
can be in a cluster for a given time duration. If the output
of FSTS algorithm yielded a higher cluster membership than
the probability threshold derived, the node in the cluster are
detected as Sybil nodes. Derivation of threshold parameter
through this process helped us differentiate among nodes
traveling together for long time and malicious Sybil nodes.
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, the performance of the proposed technique
is presented. Most of the work for this section is still on-
going and only preliminary results are presented. So far, the
main effort in this section has been in developing a customized
simulator for data collection, interpolation and association rule
mining based estimation, and FSTS clustering.
A. Experimental Setup
SUMO (Simulator of Urban Mobility) was used to generate
mobility traces of nodes and this data was used as input
to the network. A C++ simulator is developed to emulate
the vehicular network where the nodes move following the
mobility traces from SUMO, thereby mimicking real trafﬁc
patterns. The ﬁnal clustering experiments are done using the
C++ simulator. By default, there were 100 vehicles with an
average speed of 50mph, and sources and destinations were
randomly chosen for each vehicle. There were 10 Sybil nodes
among them, and each had 10 identities. Each vehicle was
assumed to report it’s location once every second, and the
transmission range was assumed to be 250 m. The simulation
was run for 1000 seconds and the default clustering distance
was 400 m. All simulations were conducted 10 times and
results were averaged.
Different sets of experiments were run in different phases.
First the collected time-series data is preprocessed using linear
interpolation using Matlab and then association rule mining is
used for feature extraction phase estimating expected number
of clusters in the data using WEKA (Waikato Environment
for Knowledge Analysis). For the ﬁrst phase of the study with
association rule mining, each Sybil node used all its counterfeit
identities during query response. Later the cases were studied
when only a smaller percentage of identities are used by a
node during a time period.
Apriori algorithm implemented in WEKA tool was used as
feature extraction technique to estimate number of abnormally
repeating associations or clusters in the dataset of each vehicle.
The success rate was 100% in Sybil vehicle detection without
false positives. However when the percentage of ID’s used
by the Sybil node varied, only 60% of the Sybil nodes were
detected and equal number non-Sybil nodes were detected
as Sybil nodes. It means that the false positive and true
positive rates were equal, which is not a desired performance.
Clearly there is need of further analysis, which is conducted
subsequently. However, several association rule experiments
help get an feel or estimate of how many clusters to look for
and the probable number of Sybil nodes in a set of nodes. For
instance, in the case mentioned above, the results of feature
extraction show that there are likely to be 12 clusters. In reality,
there were 10 clusters that had Sybil nodes in them in that
case. Hence in our experiment, we put the input number of
clusters between 9 and 15, getting the best results when the
number of clusters was 10. It can be noted that usually all
clustering algorithm (including FSTS) require preprocessing
and feature extraction of data or some sort of prior knowledge
to estimate number of clusters. However, the results from
association rule mining are not conclusive, warranting further
experiments using the FSTS technique to determine the Sybil
nodes from past location traces.
B. Clustering of Data
Recall from Section III-E, theoretical analysis can be used
to derive PT h for different input parameters and the output can
be used to determine whether the concerned nodes are Sybil or
not based on their cluster membership values determined using
FSTS. In the clustering process, ﬁrstly the binary connection
metric is clustered using the FSTS algorithm. Figure 2 shows
the detected number of false positives and false negatives aver-
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-288-2
VEHICULAR 2013 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
10
25
50
75
100
% of nodes 
% of Sybil ID's used by a Sybil node at a time instant 
False positives
False negatives
Fig. 2.
False positive and false negative rate for varying percentage of Sybil
ID’s used by a Sybil node at a time instant
aged over 10 runs of simulation each. The X axis represents the
percentage of available fake IDs that a Sybil node is using at
a time instant. As mentioned earlier in this section, there were
10 Sybil nodes using 10 Sybil IDs each and there were 100
vehicles in total in the simulation setup. If all of the available
IDs are used for transmission at every time instant, the false
positive and false negative rates are both zero, indicating that
all the Sybil nodes are identiﬁed. However, as the percentage
decreases, both false positives and false negatives increase,
although a major part of the Sybil nodes are detected over
time. The reason behind the increase in false positives and
false negatives is that with lesser number of counterfeit IDs
being used at a time, it becomes increasingly difﬁcult to cluster
such IDs. This ﬁgure demonstrates the effectiveness of the
proposed technique in detecting Sybil nodes in VANETs.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0
20
40
60
80
100
Detection time (seconds) 
% of Sybil ID's used by a Sybil node at a time instant 
Fig. 3.
Detection time in seconds for varying percentage of Sybil ID’s used
by a Sybil node at a time instant
Figure 3 plots the time required to reach 100% true positive
rate (that is, detects all Sybil nodes) for varying percentage of
ID’s used by the Sybil nodes at a time instant. With increasing
percentage of ID’s used, the detection is faster. But as very less
percentage of ID’s are used by a Sybil node at a time instant,
it still reaches 100% true positive rate in longer time. Clearly,
this trend is exhibited due to the fact that with lesser number
of counterfeit IDs being used at a time, clustering of such IDs
become increasingly harder resulting in longer detection time.
V. CONCLUSIONS
This paper proposes a technique for Sybil attack detection in
VANETs, based on fuzzy time-series clustering. The method
leverages the principle of dispersion of vehicle platoons in a
VANET and detects the nodes clustered with each other for
longer than expected. Theoretical analysis has been conducted
to derive input parameter to the algorithm and simulation
results are presented to evaluate performance of the proposed
method. The proposed method has achieved very low false
positive and false negative rates even when the Sybil nodes
use a small percentage of the counterfeit identities at a time
instant. Future work involve derivation of threshold parameters
considering different mobility models of vehicles and further
investigation of platoon dispersion models to incorporate phys-
ical and human factors into the current analysis.
REFERENCES
[1] J. T. Isaac, S. Zeadally, and J. Camara, “Security attacks and solutions
for vehicular ad hoc networks,” Communications, IET, vol. 4, no. 7, pp.
894–903, April 2010.
[2] L. Cheng and R. Shakya, “Vanet worm spreading from trafﬁc modeling,”
in IEEE Radio and Wireless Symposium (RWS), 2010, pp. 669–672.
[3] N. Dutta, R. Kotikalapudi, and M. Bhonsle, “A formal analysis of
protocol-independent security threats in vanets,” in IEEE Students’
Technology Symposium (TechSym), 2011.
[4] J. R. Douceur, “The sybil attack,” in Revised Papers from the First
International Workshop on Peer-to-Peer Systems, 2002, pp. 251–260.
[5] M. S. Bouassida, G. Guette, M. Shawky, and B. Ducourthial, “Sybil
nodes detection based on received signal strength variations within
vanet.” International Journal on Network Security, vol. 9, no. 1, pp.
22–33, 2009.
[6] B. Xiao, B. Yu, and C. Gao, “Detection and localization of sybil nodes
in vanets,” in Workshop on Dependability issues in Wireless Ad hoc
Networks and Sensor Networks, 2006, pp. 1–8.
[7] T. Zhou, R. Choudhury, P. Ning, and K. Chakrabarty, “P2DAP- Sybil
Attacks Detection in Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 582 – 594, 2011.
[8] M. Rahbari and M. Jamali, “Efﬁcient detection of sybil attack based on
cryptography in vanet,” International Journal of Network Security and
Its Applications, vol. 3, 2011.
[9] S. Park, B. Aslam, D. Turgut, and C. Zou, “Defense against sybil
attack in vehicular ad hoc network based on roadside unit support,”
in Military Communications Conference, 2009. MILCOM 2009. IEEE,
October 2009, pp. 1 – 7.
[10] P. Golle, D. Greene, and J. Staddon, “Detecting and correcting malicious
data in vanets,” in Proceedings of the ACM First International Workshop
on Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks, 2004, pp. 29–37.
[11] R. Denney Jr, “Trafﬁc platoon dispersion modeling,” Journal of trans-
portation engineering, vol. 115, pp. 193 – 207, 1989.
[12] C. Mller-Levet, F. Klawonn, K. Cho, and O. Wolkenhauer, “Fuzzy
clustering of short time-series and unevenly distributed sampling points,”
Advances in Intelligent Data Analysis V, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 2810, pp. 330–340, 2003.
[13] R. Agrawal and T. Imielinski, “Association rules between sets of items
in large databases,” in Proceedings of ACM SIGMOD, 1993, pp. 207
–216.
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-288-2
VEHICULAR 2013 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

