A Proposal for a Comprehensive  
Automotive Cybersecurity Reference Architecture 
 
Christoph Schmittner, Martin Latzenhofer, Shaaban Abdelkader Magdy, Markus Hofer 
Center for Digital Safety & Security 
Austrian Institute of Technology  
Vienna, Austria 
Email: {christoph.schmittner | martin.latzenhofer | abdelkader.shaaban | markus.hofer}@ait.ac.at 
 
 
Abstract— 
Interconnection, 
complexity 
and 
software-
dependency are prerequisites for automated driving and 
increase cybersecurity risks for the whole transportation 
system. Hence, information and communication technology 
infrastructure 
becomes 
a 
second 
layer 
for 
critical 
transportation infrastructure. In a recently started research 
project, we identify involved stakeholders and risks in a 
structured manner to integrate the diverging interests and 
objectives of authorities, road infrastructure providers and 
transport facilitators, which cannot even exclusively leave to the 
original equipment manufacturers. Based on the emerging risk 
scenarios, we develop a comprehensive architectural reference 
framework. Only if all components in the Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) infrastructure provide their 
services in a sufficient quality according to ensured security 
requirements, society can rely on the reliable automotive 
system. 
Keywords- 
automotive 
cybersecurity; 
road 
traffic 
infrastructure; reference architecture; risk management; ICT 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Automated driving in complex and multi-modal 
environments for smart urban mobility requires approaches, 
which interconnect vehicles with other road users and 
infrastructure. Main benefits of connected vehicles are a 
reduction of accidents due to the communication of road 
hazards and critical situations, as well as an increase of traffic 
efficiency through platooning and real-time traffic monitoring 
and control. Reliable connectivity is the mandatory 
prerequisite for processing various states of the automated 
vehicle and accelerating further development. Positioning, a 
creation of complete situational awareness, reduction of 
accidents and increasing of comfort and efficiency depend on 
cooperative and automated driving. Current approaches 
towards stand-alone vehicles are sufficient for driving on 
highway or country roads, but not ready for urban 
environments. In addition, especially in urban environments, 
it is necessary to integrate automated driving vehicles into a 
holistic, intelligent transportation system to take advantage of 
all the potential benefits [1]. Therefore, this paper will focus 
on the infrastructure and connectivity related aspects of 
automated driving. 
Recent projects on an European level [2] identified 
cybersecurity as a key challenge and risk for future 
transportation systems. Like physical security and protection 
for transportation infrastructure, cybersecurity of ICT 
infrastructure for connected and automated vehicles cannot be 
left exclusively to the private sector, as their interests and 
objectives differ, as well as their restricted scopes. Extensive 
mobility needs the cooperation of all stakeholders, i.e., 
automotive Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEM), 
infrastructure providers and road service operators, transport 
facilitators, end user, physical and ICT infrastructure 
providers, and authorities. All these actors with their different 
perspectives, all the components together with their 
relationships are considered to of a comprehensive 
infrastructure 
system 
requiring 
intense 
and 
reliable 
communication among these elements on different tiers not to 
be eavesdropped, compromised or manipulated. This makes 
cybersecurity a mandatory success factor for a securely and 
safely connected automated transportation system, which is 
vital for the physical transportation infrastructure and a 
modern society. Society can therefore rely on safe, 
trustworthy automotive system. 
Our contribution refers to the Austrian national security 
research project “cybersecurity for Traffic infrastructure and 
road 
operators” 
(CySiVuS), 
which 
aims 
to 
tackle 
cybersecurity and privacy as the key challenges for 
cooperative traffic infrastructures and automated driving of 
interconnected cars. The project moves the perspective from 
the OEMs to traffic infrastructure providers and road service 
operators. The existing and future road traffic system, together 
with the concerning digital infrastructure is analyzed, and 
different autonomous driving scenarios are collected. 
Significant aspects require enhanced and further matured 
cybersecurity standards. Based on these conditions, the 
objective is to work out a comprehensive automotive cyber 
security 
reference 
architecture. 
It 
addresses 
all 
interdisciplinary interests and objectives of stakeholders and 
integrates existing and other technological innovations, that 
will be developed in the near future. This article provides a 
brief overview of the project’s approach and highlights the 
urgent need for a complete reference architecture for a (cyber) 
secure automotive traffic infrastructure. 
This paper is divided into six sections. After this 
introduction, we will first give a short overview of the state of 
the art. Section II argues that there is no sustainable structured 
reference architecture that supports a broad perspective on 
automotive cybersecurity. This is underlined by some general 
scenarios from a practical point of view, which we obtained 
from a tailored risk management process discussed in Section 
III. Risks should be identified, assessed and addressed through 
an extensive risk management approach. Based on practical 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

use cases, we motivate the proposal of a future transportation 
system in Section IV. We discuss typical use case scenarios 
affecting the security of these automotive services from the 
infrastructure perspective. It is the objective of a recently 
started research project to develop this comprehensive 
automotive cybersecurity reference architecture in much more 
detail, the core aspects of which we introduce in Section V. 
The final Section VI provides conclusions and outlooks for the 
near future. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
For automated vehicles, the Society of Automotive 
Engineers (SAE) J3061 [3] defines five levels, which give a 
framework to classify automated vehicles. Currently, mass-
market available systems reach up to level three. Examples of 
level three are highway automation and parking assistance 
systems. The best-known example is Tesla’s Autopilot and 
Parking Assistance System [4]. Even higher levels, moving 
towards high driving automation or even complete 
automation, are already in a real-world test stage [5], but not 
yet publicly available. While systems up to level three can rely 
on in-vehicle sensors and generate the world model on-
demand based on local sensor data, higher levels of 
automation need the previous mapping to generate a world 
model in which the vehicle is placed via sensor data [6]. This 
implies that such vehicles require external input to have the 
latest information and react on permanent or temporary 
modification in the road system. This is especially important 
in urban environments where other localisation approaches, 
relying on Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) or road 
infrastructure (road markings or roadway detection) are more 
challenging [6]. 
In the United States, the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration (NHTSA) [7] currently prepares regulations, 
which require connectivity for active safety features for all 
new vehicles sold in the US starting from 2020. Such features 
commonly referred as cooperative active safety, require a high 
level of trust on outside information and communication. 
Safety reasons were the urgent motivation for the OEMs to 
establish information communication initiated by the vehicle. 
Security issues – which are following a different paradigm 
than safety-related ones – are a rather new challenge, currently 
addressed only by the OEMs itself. Recent hacks show that 
the majority of their systems lack security protection [8], [9]. 
Naturally, they restrict their security focus on the vehicle itself 
and do not follow a holistic approach, analyzing the whole 
infrastructure system their cars are elements. Despite first 
approaches, like the H.R.701 – Security and Privacy in Your 
(SPY) Car Study Act of 2017 [10], cybersecurity issues are 
still largely handled by the vehicle manufacturer simply 
ignoring other stakeholders. Especially when moving towards 
connected, intelligent and automated transportation systems, 
the road traffic infrastructure need to be considered in a 
consequently holistic way. However, briefly summarizing the 
legal situation in general, new regulations are evolving, but 
too slow promptly and substantially fragmental. In an 
automated driving scenario, ICT infrastructure becomes a 
second layer of critical transportation infrastructure. Hence, it 
is still in the discussion whether and how the European 
”Directive on Security of Network and Information Systems” 
also known as the NIS Directive [11] applies to the automotive 
sector and what the consequences for the OEMs, as well as the 
road infrastructure providers are in detail. This European 
Directive will be enforced by the end of May 2018 and seeks 
to ensure a high level of network and information security by 
improving the common security level of the provider of 
critical services and digital contents. The transport sector is 
accepted to form such a critical infrastructure and due to the 
increasing 
interoperability, 
connectivity 
aspects, 
communication requirements, ICT in general, and privacy 
issues. Hence, there is an urgent need for a full categorization 
and orderly development. 
The vehicles require detailed data about the environment 
to generate a broad overview of the current situation in real 
time and ensure their safe movement. The integrity of the data 
is a prerequisite for autonomous inter-connected driving. It is 
evident that automated driving scenarios are not restricted to 
the vehicles as a stand-alone system; rather the vehicles must 
interact in real-time with the other components among other 
vehicles and in particular with the infrastructure in order to 
assess the current situation. Thus, interoperability is the first 
key requisite for efficient traffic management, co-operative 
functions and coordinative autonomy [12]. 
Connectivity between vehicles and other traffic elements 
is currently still in development. While almost all new 
premium cars already offer connectivity via Global System 
for Mobile Communication (GSM) to a backend system of the 
manufacturer [13] this is currently driven by the motivation to 
reduce costly recalls due to software adaptions [14] and also 
by the European eCall initiative. Starting with April 2018, all 
new vehicles sold in Europe are obliged to be able to 
automatically call the nearest emergency center in the case of 
a crash and submit position and crash-related information [2]. 
Applications like intelligent coordination are already tested 
and evaluated in real-world scenarios [15]. In such scenarios, 
vehicles and infrastructure need to communicate within a 
defined time frame and exchange information like traffic 
status, travel times, road conditions and road works warnings. 
There are higher requirements on the connectivity for the next 
level of cooperation and connectivity. Although there are an 
Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) architecture available 
and 
connectivity 
scenarios 
defined 
by 
European 
Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) [16], it is 
unclear 
whether 
vehicles 
will 
possess 
multiple 
communication systems for each service provider or the 
communication is handled via a central data hub [17]. 
Different 
approaches 
of 
the 
future 
communication 
infrastructure are presented and discussed in a report of the 
Cooperative Intelligent Transportation System (C-ITS) 
platform [2]. A conclusion is that to support interoperability, 
stay cost-efficient, reduce the number of attack surfaces and 
support future applications the connectivity should follow 
some sort of coordinated model, considering not only the 
vehicle but the complete infrastructure and service value 
chain. 
Especially in the field of cybersecurity, there are multiple 
signs indicating that the current state of the art cannot 
adequately protect the new and vital role ICT will play in 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

transportation. Automotive cybersecurity is slowly rising to 
this aspect [18] triggered by research and governmental 
pressure [13][19][20][21]. Technical developments and 
industrial awareness of new challenges are followed by the 
development of first guidelines for tackling the issues [22]. On 
a higher level, the ITS infrastructure security is also a known 
issue which is addressed [23]. There is still ongoing discussion 
who 
will 
control 
and 
provide 
the 
communication 
infrastructure [2]. Since all mobility and the complete road 
transportation sector will depend on the ICT system, it is of 
utmost important to clarify responsibilities and to achieve a 
dependable balance between private and public control. 
One important discussion is who controls access to the 
data collected by the vehicle. There are first efforts to develop 
processes for addressing these issues [24]. A recent survey of 
the German consumer organization “Stiftung Warentest” 
showed that almost all connectivity solutions offered by 
automotive OEMs have weaknesses in privacy [25]. Personal 
information is exchanged without encryption, and the 
superfluous information is collected and transmitted, partially 
done without informing the user and his agreement. 
III. 
RISK MANAGMENT 
There is currently no domain-specific risk management 
framework available for the automotive domain. First 
approaches [22] are promising, but initial evaluations show 
certain challenges in the application [26]. The guidebook [22] 
was published at the beginning of 2016 and after being 
available for half a year again set to work in progress status. 
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and 
SAE founded a common working group developing a 
standard for the cybersecurity engineering of road vehicles 
(ISO/SAE 21434), but the publication is currently envisioned 
for 2020. In the absence of applicable domain-specific 
frameworks, we propose to tailor ISO 31000 [27] for the 
application in the automotive domain. To set up the context, 
define the stakeholder and the application environment, an 
appropriate management framework has to be established 
first. A second main part of the risk management standard 
proposes the following steps of the risk management process: 
1. Establishing the Context 
2. Risk Assessment 
3. Risk Treatment 
4. Monitoring and Review 
5. Communication and Consultation 
Firstly, we present the framework with suggestions on 
how to tailor it towards the application field. The suggested 
tailoring will partially be done on a higher level. 
A. Establishing the Context 
The previous state of the art overviews shows that there 
is currently no specific regulatory or legal framework for road 
traffic. This means we can only apply generic rules and base 
the context on the environment and values of the society for 
road traffic. There are ongoing discussions about which 
regulations should be applied to the road traffic domain, but 
no clear consensus emerged so far. The automotive and 
transportation domain is an important part of ensuring and 
enabling our modern lifestyle and we, therefore, consider 
following objectives as necessary. It should be avoided, that 
a cybersecurity attack  
• 
causes immediate damage to environment or human 
lives (safety); 
• 
causes the loss of control over personal information 
(privacy); 
• 
causes financial damage (finance); and 
• 
negatively impacts the operation and traffic flow 
(operation). 
We propose two restrictions to these objectives. Firstly, 
we restrict the risk management to direct and immediate 
consequences. This means that we do not consider second-
level consequences, e.g., an operational impact would also 
impact emergency services and could, therefore, cause 
damage to human lives. Our focus lies on the direct 
consequences. Secondly, we assess the impact rating on users 
and society higher than the impact on the organization. That 
means that safety impacts and rate financial impacts for users 
or society are higher prioritized than for organizations. 
Society needs to trust and rely on the transportation system, 
which is supported by ensuring their needs and protection 
first. 
B. Risk Assessment 
Risk assessment includes identification, analysis and 
evaluation of risks. While ISO/IEC 31010 presents examples 
for risk assessment techniques, none of them is tailored for 
cybersecurity in the road traffic domain. There exist multiple 
proposals to extend established safety risk assessment 
methods towards cybersecurity [28], [29] or to tailor 
cybersecurity methods for the automotive domain [30], [31]. 
It should be remarked that there is no silver bullet to risk 
assessment implementation and any selected methodology 
needs to be justified. Depending on the abstraction level, 
different methods are favored. We propose threat modelling 
[33] for the analysis of risks. For risk evaluation purposes, we 
propose four impact levels, divided into four categories, as 
shown in Table I. This is an abstraction of the categories 
proposed by SAE J3061 [22] and EVITA [34]. Both use 
similar categories, but with more levels per category.   
TABLE I.  
IMPACT LEVELS 
 
User / Society 
Service provider / 
company 
Safety 
1 
- 
Operational 
3 
4 
Privacy 
2 
3 
Financial 
3 
4 
 
A critical factor for risk evaluation in cybersecurity is the 
evaluation of likelihood. While for transportation domains it 
is discussed only to consider the impact of risk evaluation 
[35], this could move the focus on very unlikely risks. Details 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

of the likelihood assessment are presented in [26], but in short, 
we propose to evaluate the likelihood based on the following 
four parameters: 
• 
Assumed attacker capabilities  
• 
Ease of gaining information about the systems 
• 
Reachability and accessibility of the system 
• 
Required equipment for an attack 
C. Risk Treatment 
Risk treatment is based on an assessment whether the risk 
is tolerable for the society, which means that the benefits of 
the connected and automated road traffic scenario outweigh 
the risk. Unless this is the case, we need to either modify the 
risk by implementing specific technical or organizational 
measures or avoid the risk altogether by deciding not to 
implement the scenario. Each risk treatment needs to be 
followed by an assessment of the effectiveness of the 
treatment, e.g. if the remaining risk is tolerable and can be 
accepted. Risk treatment assessment also includes the 
evaluation if the chosen measures influence other risks or 
scenarios 
D. Monitoring and Review 
There is currently no clear responsibility for monitoring 
and review of risks. This is impeded by the hierarchical silo 
structure which dominates the automotive domain at the 
moment. OEMs have a restricted system view and are only 
able to identify risks on this level. Suppliers are responsible 
for the implementation of risks treatments for their specific 
contribution and can detect change requirements. There is no 
unambiguous 
allocation 
of 
the 
risk 
monitoring 
responsibilities. Established approaches in the automotive 
domain follow mainly an incident based approach, i.e., 
reactive behaviour. For cybersecurity challenges, active 
monitoring and reaction are necessary. We propose to assign 
a reporting responsibility and develop a cyber incident 
response plan. 
E. Communication and Consultation 
As a continuous and parallel step along the risk 
assessment, treatment and monitoring, the complete 
management process needs to be recorded, documented and 
communicated to the stakeholders. This includes capturing the 
decisions, results and most importantly the justification for 
decisions and actions. Only this step makes the risk 
management transparent and comprehensible. It should be 
remarked that such records are sensitive and could be 
potentially misused by attackers. 
IV. 
PRACTICAL USE CASE 
In the CySiVuS project, we will analyze different use 
cases 
to 
develop 
the 
overall 
context 
requiring 
a 
comprehensive reference architecture. The first collection of 
use cases is based on the C-ITS Day 1 Use Case [36]. Day 1 
refers to the first set of uses cases implemented and evaluated 
in the European Corridor – Austrian Testbed for Cooperative 
Systems (Eco-AT) project. One typical use case is the 
RoadWorks Warning (RWW) use case. This use case 
describes an interaction between vehicles and cooperative 
roadside elements, which provides information to about short 
time modifications in the road infrastructure to optimize 
traffic flow and driving strategy. Further, we analyze the 
Intersection Safety (ISS) use case. This use case refers to an 
interaction between vehicles and cooperative roadside 
elements, which provides information to optimize the traffic 
flow and driving strategy. In Eco-AT the transmitted data will 
only be used as information for the vehicle driver. We will 
consider the next step and assume that vehicles will in the 
future automatically act based on the received information in 
the future. In addition, we will also set up a third Vehicle to 
Vehicle (V2V) use case, e.g., a vehicle is broadcasting 
information about position and speed to enable other vehicles, 
which cannot detect the information with the vehicle sensors 
to consider it in their planning. 
Figure 1 depicts the introduced three use cases. The 
RoadSide Unit (RSU) sends information to all vehicles about 
a temporal change in the road shape. Vehicles A and B 
coordinate how B, which is not visible to A, enters the main 
road and all vehicles receive information from the traffic light 
system. We exercise the risk management approach based on 
the RWW use case. We apply threat modeling [31] for the risk 
assessment step. 
 
Figure 2 visualizes the dataflow model for the interaction 
between vehicle A, B and the roadside units. Without any 
mitigation measures, twelve threats were identified. We focus 
in the following on the interaction type and the following 
threat, seen in Table II. 
For 
connected 
automotive 
vehicles 
and 
their 
corresponding control and steering algorithms, the correct and 
especially secure reception of safety and kinematic related 
messages is of utmost importance. A manipulated sending unit 
Figure 1. Use cases 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

from some distance away could communicate status 
 
information, e.g., nonexistent barriers, road works or 
vehicle positions ahead leading to slow down or even stop of 
the traffic culminating to accidents. To prevent such a threat, 
we propose distance-bounding protocols that allow a safe 
decision if the communication partner is within a certain 
radius, defined as bubble [37], [38]. The adapted Table III 
summarizes, the considerations above. This capability 
requires the introduction of a bidirectional communication 
link between Verifier (V) and Proofer (P) and a fast processing 
of the challenge sent from V to P. This reduces the evaluated 
attack likelihood by enforcing physical access to conduct such 
attacks and reduces the risk to a tolerable level. 
TABLE II.  
DELIVER MALICIOUS UPDATES TO VEHICLE B  
[PRIORITY: HIGH] 
Category 
Spoofing 
Description 
Spoofing vehicle A in order to send 
malicious updates 
Justification 
<no mitigation provided> 
Attack 
method 
Impersonate the car (clone sim or 
similar) and then craft the malicious 
update 
TABLE III.  
DELIVER MALICIOUS UPDATES TO VEHICLE B  
[PRIORITY: LOW] 
Category 
Spoofing 
Description 
Spoofing vehicle A in order to send 
malicious updates 
Justification 
<no mitigation provided>  
Distance bounding avoids remote attacks 
and requires physical access to the 
environment in order to conduct the 
attack 
Attack 
method 
Impersonate the car (clone sim or similar) 
and then craft the malicious update 
V. 
REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE 
An automotive reference architecture for security analysis 
was presented in [9]. While it includes the elements of 
communication between backend and vehicle, it does not 
consider all relevant scenarios for C-ITS like V2V 
communication. Furthermore, it only defines the technical 
elements and does not differentiate between environments, 
stakeholder, objects in the architecture a division. However, 
this pure technical approach is not sufficient and to apply the 
reference architecture in practice, this division is vital. 
As a first approach, we divide the ITS into five clusters of 
elements as shown in Figure 3. On the physical side (blue, left 
side), we have vehicles, infrastructure and personal devices. 
The provider’s side (green, right side) contains elements 
which are maintained and operated by infrastructure operators 
and road service providers offering mobility services (grey, 
lower side) available to the users (yellow, upper side). All 
elements are interconnected by a communication system 
(orange, in the middle). It should be highlighted that these 
blocks can overlap, e.g., infrastructure providers can also 
provide services; and blocks can contain multiple diverse sub-
blocks, e.g., communication collects a multitude of techniques 
like wireless networking (WiFi) or GSM, which can be 
applied for V2V or Vehicle to Infrastructure (V2I) 
communication. 
 
Figure 3. Clustering of elements in the transportation system 
 
Moreover, the approach described above offers a relatively 
high-level view on the system, which is, to a certain degree, 
architecture independent. As it is discussed in [2] and [17], it 
is still in discussion how the connectivity architecture will 
finally look like, but all discussed architectural variants fit in 
the presented structural model. Such a structural model helps 
to identify the involved parties, allows assigning risk 
mitigations 
to 
technical 
elements 
and 
assigns 
the 
responsibility of implementing and maintaining these risk 
mitigations to involved parties. To be practically applicable, 
the identified risk mitigation measure is implemented in 
Infrastructure 
Vehicles 
Personal Devices 
Communication  
Service Provider 
Infrastructure 
Operators 
System OEMs 
User 
Services 
Figure 2. Data flow model for threat assessment 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

infrastructure and vehicle, conducted by system OEM and 
infrastructure providers, which is shown in Figure 4. 
 
 
A possible solution approach is a structured multi-tiered 
reference 
architecture. 
However, 
a 
consistent 
risk 
management method is a critical success factor that this 
consistent architecture can be developed along all perspective 
layers. Our approach is to take the widely accepted risk 
management standard ISO 31000 [27] as a basis and tailor it 
to the automotive requirements. We discuss the five main 
steps of the risk management process when we apply it to a 
road traffic system. It is crucial to restrict the proposed 
approach to direct risks only and to weight the impacts 
differently depending on the consequences. The risk 
management analysis steps are essential to finding an 
appropriate mixture of applicable methods to form a reliable 
methodology for the assessment. Additionally, the evaluation 
of the likelihood and the handling of uncertainty needs to be 
solved. Risk treatment in a complex and interconnected 
environment must consider different actors 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
To conclude our contribution, the technological and legal 
state of the art of automated driving for smart urban mobility 
is still not yet sufficient to cope with the complex 
requirements of such an environment. We identified four 
current challenges in a comprehensive traffic road system. 
Interoperability of the components among the vehicles as well 
as 
the 
infrastructure 
elements; 
connectivity 
and 
communication 
tasks 
especially 
for 
interacting 
and 
cooperation of the different components; ICT in general and 
cybersecurity issues to address security threats; and privacy 
aspects which subsume protection requirements of personal 
data of the vehicle drivers. There are efforts to form a 
compliant legal and technological framework, but all these 
considerations are in a flow. 
Finally, we discuss some previous works and propose core 
considerations on a comprehensive automotive reference 
architecture. We identify five element clusters required to 
interact with each other. The primary task of the CySiVuS 
research project is to develop a wide-ranging model on all 
necessary perspective levels, which the rough approach 
introduced in this article could be a starting point. By 
conducting the risk management process and developing the 
reference architecture, we show the multidimensional nature 
of a road traffic system. The main task in the upcoming period 
is to cope with the complexity and streamline the extremely 
different current and future developments on the various 
perspective levels. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The 
research 
project 
“Cybersicherheit 
für 
Verkehrsinfrastruktur- und Straßenbetreiber” (CySiVuS, in 
English: „Cyber security for transport infrastructure and road 
operators“) (Project-Nr. 865081) is supported and partially 
funded by the Austrian National Security Research Program 
KIRAS (Federal Ministry for Transport, Innovation and 
Technology (BMVIT) and Austrian Research Promotion 
Agency (FFG) 2017). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Q. Xu, K. Hedrick, R. Sengupta, and J. VanderWerf, “Effects 
of 
vehicle-vehicle/roadside-vehicle 
communication 
on 
adaptive cruise controlled highway systems,” in Vehicular 
Technology Conference, 2002. Proceedings. VTC 2002-Fall. 
2002 IEEE 56th, 2002, vol. 2, pp. 1249–1253 [Online]. 
Available: 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ 
xpls/abs_all.jsp? 
arnumber=1040805. [Accessed: 27-Oct-2014] 
[2] 
C-ITS Platform, “Working Group 6 - Access to in-vehicle 
resources and data,” 2015.  
[3] 
SAE, “J3016 Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms Related 
to Driving Automation Systems for On-Road Motor 
Vehicles.” 2016.  
[4] 
M. Dikmen and C. M. Burns, “Autonomous Driving in the 
Real World: Experiences with Tesla Autopilot and 
Summon,” 2016, pp. 225–228 [Online]. Available: 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=3003715.3005465. 
[Accessed: 27-Sep-2017] 
[5] 
M. Aeberhard et al., “Experience, Results and Lessons 
Learned from Automated Driving on Germany’s Highways,” 
IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Magazine, vol. 7, 
no. 1, pp. 42–57, 2015.  
[6] 
G. Bresson, Z. Alsayed, L. Yu, and S. Glaser, “Simultaneous 
Localization and Mapping: A Survey of Current Trends in 
Autonomous Driving,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent 
Vehicles, pp. 1–1, 2017.  
[7] 
United States Department of Transportation, “NHTSA | 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration,” 2017.  
[Online]. Available: https://www.nhtsa.gov/. [Accessed: 28-
Sep-2017] 
[8] 
A. Greenberg, “The Jeep Hackers Are Back to Prove Car 
Hacking Can Get Much Worse | WIRED,” 08-Jan-2016.  
[Online]. Available: https://www.wired.com/2016/08/jeep-
hackers-return-high-speed-steering-acceleration-hacks/. 
[Accessed: 29-Sep-2017] 
[9] 
J. Brückmann, T. Madl, and H.-J. Hof, “An Analysis of 
Automotive Security Based on a Reference Model for 
Automotive 
Cyber 
Systems,” 
presented 
at 
the 
SECURWARE 
2017: 
The 
Eleventh 
International 
Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and 
Technologies, Rome, 2017, pp. 136–141.  
[10] 
Library of Congress, “H.R.701 - 115th Congress (2017-
2018): SPY Car Study Act of 2017,” Congress.gov, 31-Jan-
2017.  [Online]. Available: https://www.congress.gov/bill/ 
115th-congress/house-bill/701. [Accessed: 28-Sep-2017] 
Figure 4. Application of the structural model 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

[11] 
European Union, Directive (EU) 2016/1148 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 2016 concerning 
measures for a high common level of security of network and 
information systems across the Union, vol. L194. 2016 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=OJ:L:2016:194:FULL&from=E
N. [Accessed: 22-Aug-2017] 
[12] 
J. Harding et al., “Vehicle-to-Vehicle Communications: 
Readiness of V2V Technology for Application.” National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Washington DC, 
Aug-2014 [Online]. Available: https://www.nhtsa.gov/ 
sites/nhtsa.dot.gov/files/readiness-of-v2v-technology-for-
application-812014.pdf. [Accessed: 02-Oct-2017] 
[13] 
C. Miller and C. Valasek, “A Survey of Remote Automotive 
Attack Surfaces,” White Paper, 2014.  
[14] 
H. A. Odat and S. Ganesan, “Firmware over the air for 
automotive, Fotamotive,” in Electro/Information Technology 
(EIT), 2014 IEEE International Conference on, 2014, pp. 
130–139 [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ 
xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=6871751. [Accessed: 17-Dec-
2014] 
[15] 
Autobahnen- 
und 
Schnellstraßen-Finanzierungs-
Aktiengesellschaft (ASFINAG, in English: "Autobahn and 
high way financing stock corporation") Maut Service GmbH, 
“ECo-AT The Austrian contribution to the Cooperative ITS 
Corridor,” 2017.  [Online]. Available: http://eco-at.info/. 
[Accessed: 24-Jan-2017] 
[16] 
European 
Telecommunications 
Standards 
Institute, 
“Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Cooperative ITS (C-
ITS); Release 1.” 2013.  
[17] 
B. Datler, M. Harrer, M. Jandrisits, and S. Ruehrup, “A Road 
Operator’s View on Cloud-based ITS – Requirements and 
Cooperation Models,” presented at the 23rd ITS World 
Congress, Melbourne, Australia, 2016.  
[18] 
L. Apvrille et al., “Secure automotive on-board electronics 
network architecture,” in FISITA 2010 world automotive 
congress, Budapest, Hungary, 2010, vol. 8 [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.eurecom.fr/fr/publication/3132/ 
download/rs-publi-3132.pdf. [Accessed: 29-Jan-2017] 
[19] 
D. Spaar, “Car, open yourself! Vulnerabilities in BMW's 
ConnectedDrive,” c’t, no. 5, pp. 86–90, 2015.  
[20] 
J. Petit and S. E. Shladover, “Potential Cyberattacks on 
Automated Vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent 
Transportation Systems, pp. 1–11, 2014.  
[21] 
C. Miller and C. Valasek, “Remote Exploitation of an 
Unaltered Passenger Vehicle,” Black Hat 2015, Aug. 2015.  
[22] 
Society of Automotive Engineers, Cybersecurity Guidebook 
for Cyber-Physical Vehicle Systems (work in progress). 
2017.  
[23] 
ECo-AT, “ECo-AT SWP3.4 Security, Release 3.6.” 2016 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.eco-at.info/system-
spezifikationen.html 
[24] 
International Organization for Standardization, “ISO/DIS 
20077-1 Road Vehicles - Extended vehicle (ExVe) 
methodology - Part 1: General information,” 2016. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.iso.org/iso/home/store/catalogue_ 
ics/. [Accessed: 27-Jan-2017] 
[25] 
Stiftung Warentest, "Connected Cars: Apps of the 
automobile manufacturer are data sniffers" [“Connected 
Cars: Die Apps der Autohersteller sind Datenschnüffler”],  
26-Sep-2017 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.test.de/ 
Connected-Cars-Die-Apps-der-Autohersteller-sind-
Datenschnueffler-5231839-5231843/ 
[26] 
C. Schmittner, Z. Ma, C. Reyes, O. Dillinger, and P. 
Puschner, “Using SAE J3061 for Automotive Security 
Requirement Engineering,” in Computer Safety, Reliability, 
and Security, vol. 9923, A. Skavhaug, J. Guiochet, E. 
Schoitsch, and F. Bitsch, Eds. Cham: Springer International 
Publishing, 2016, pp. 157–170 [Online]. Available: 
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-45480-1_13. 
[Accessed: 28-Sep-2017] 
[27] 
International Organization for Standardization, Ed., ISO 
31000:2009 Risk management - Principles and guidelines. 
ISO, Geneva, Switzerland, 2009.  
[28] 
G. Macher, Harald Sporer, Reinhard Berlach, Eric 
Armengaud, and Christian Kreiner, “SAHARA: A Security-
Aware Hazard and Risk Analysis Method,” in Proceedings 
of the 2015 Design, Automation & Test in Europe 
Conference & Exhibition, 2015, pp. 621–624.  
[29] 
C. Schmittner, T. Gruber, P. Puschner, and E. Schoitsch, 
“Security application of failure mode and effect analysis 
(FMEA),” in Computer Safety, Reliability, and Security, 
Springer, 
2014, 
pp. 
310–325 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/ 978-3-319-10506-
2_21. [Accessed: 04-Nov-2014] 
[30] 
C. Schmittner, Z. Ma, E. Schoitsch, and T. Gruber, “A Case 
Study of FMVEA and CHASSIS as Safety and Security Co-
Analysis Method for Automotive Cyber-Physical Systems,” 
2015, pp. 69–80 [Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.org/ 
citation.cfm?doid=2732198. 2732204. [Accessed: 29-Sep-
2017] 
[31] 
M. Zhendong and C. Schmittner, “Threat Modeling for 
Automotive Security Analysis,” presented at the SecTech 
2016, Jeju, 2016.  
[32] 
G. Sindre and A. L. Opdahl, “Eliciting security requirements 
with misuse cases,” Requirements Engineering, vol. 10, no. 
1, pp. 34–44, Jan. 2005.  
[33] 
Frank Swiderski and Window Snyder, Threat Modeling. 
Microsoft Press Redmond, 2004.  
[34] 
Fraunhofer Institute for Secure Information Technology, 
“EVITA Project Summary,” Deliverable D0, 2013 [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.evita-project.org/Publications/ 
EVITAD0.pdf. [Accessed: 31-Oct-2014] 
[35] 
J. Braband, “Towards an IT Security Framework for Railway 
Automation,” presented at the Embedded Real Time 
Software and Systems, Toulouse, 2014 [Online]. Available: 
http://www.erts2014.org/site/0r4uxe94/fichier/erts2014_7c3
.pdf. [Accessed: 22-Oct-2014] 
[36] 
Federal Ministry of Transport, Innovation and Technology, 
"C-ITS Strategy Austria" ["C-ITS Strategy Austria."], 
Bmvit, 2016.  
[37] 
K. B. Rasmussen and S. Capkun, “Realization of RF 
Distance Bounding.,” in USENIX Security Symposium, 2010, 
pp. 389–402.  
[38] 
G. P. Hancke and M. G. Kuhn, “Attacks on time-of-flight 
distance bounding channels,” in Proceedings of the first 
ACM conference on Wireless network security, 2008, pp. 
194–202.  
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

