Vibro-tactile Notiﬁcation in Different Environments for Motorcyclists
Yuta Yamauchi
Graduate school of Software and
Information Science
Iwate prefectural University
020-0693,Sugo Japan
Email: g231r028@s.iwate-pu.ac.jp
Akimasa Suzuki
Department of Information Science,
Iwate prefectural University
020-0693,Sugo Japan
Email: suzuki_a@iwate-pu.ac.jp
Abstract—This paper evaluates the effectiveness of vibro-tactile
notiﬁcation for motorcyclists under external factors. Although
many car manufacturers provide side and rear collision warning
systems with auditory or visual alarms, the notiﬁcations may
confuse a motorcyclist because they already need to be aware
of many visual targets such as mirrors and monitors, and envi-
ronmental sounds. This paper proposes vibro-tactile notiﬁcation
system using a vibration speaker installed in a motorcycle helmet
between the outer shell and the cushion. The proposed system
should enable motorcyclists to correctly identify the directions
of ﬁve vibrating motors, three level of risk, and three obstacle
types (i.e., pedestrians, vehicles, and motorcycles). We evaluate the
system under windy and engine vibration conditions and examine
accuracy of notiﬁcation via experiment. Our results indicate that
motorcyclists can correctly detect four directions and three threat
levels using this system.
Keywords–vibro-tactile notiﬁcations; helmet actuators; vibration
speakers;
I.
INTRODUCTION
Because once the motorcyclist is in a crash, they are more
likely to die as a result of less protection from the vehicle.
For motorcyclists, hazard notiﬁcation is vital, because of their
limited visibility and the diverse sounds they may hear and
their very high risk of accident. The fatality rate in crashes
for motorcyclists is 1.22% , while that for drivers of four-
wheeled vehicles is 0.35% [1] . Furthermore, motorcycles are
small and difﬁcult for other drivers to recognize. Motorcyclists
therefore need to be highly aware of their surroundings, but
this is difﬁcult because of the blind spots due to their helmet
and small mirrors. To avoid incidents, an intuitive notiﬁcation
system that can specify direction and threat level is required.
Therefore, we propose a system that uses haptic sensations to
quickly notify motorcyclist of possible hazards or obstacles
around the vehicle.
Our proposed hazard notiﬁcation system uses vibro-tactile
actuators installed in a motorcycle helmet. The system no-
tiﬁcations ﬂag the type of object, direction, and threat level
surrounding the vehicle. We evaluate robustness against wind
and motorcycle engine vibration. We also perform experiments
to test the effectiveness of our proposed system. Section II
presents related research. Section III presents system archi-
tecture considerations. Section IV presents the system archi-
tecture. Section V presents an examination of the vibration
intensity to inform. Section VI presents the experiments under
the inﬂuence of motorcycle engine vibration and the results of
the experiments. Section VII presents the experiments under
the inﬂuence of the driving wind and the results are presented.
II.
PREVIOUS AND RELATED WORKS
For preventing accidents on motorcycles, there are two
main approaches: motorcyclists are assisted in checking their
surroundings or drivers around a motorcycle are assisted in
recognizing motorcyclist locations. For the latter approach, a
helmet with brake lights has been investigated for practical
user [2]. However, we focus on the former approach in this
study. Hazard notiﬁcation systems have been proposed for
four-wheeled vehicles [3] [4].
In addition, sensor systems, such as collision [5] or ground
[6] detection methods, have been investigated for detection
around a motorcycle. Many systems focused on the sensor,
however, we would not sense issues, but also provide informa-
tion to the motorcyclist because of lacking of the system. One
study [7] proposed a smart helmet using a multimedia Internet
of Things (IoT) sensor device and visual notiﬁcations. Many
conventional notiﬁcation methods for motorcycles rely on
visual images in the motorcyclist’s view [8] [9], such as front
view, mirror, tachometer, speedometer, navigation system, and
indicators. Therefore, there is the potential that excessive visual
information may instead impact the motorcyclist’s capacity to
adhere to safe driving practices.
We focus on vibro-tactile notiﬁcation as non-visual in-
formation. We could know the information by vibro-tactile
because ancient motor cycles tells engine failure by irregular
vibration to riders. Some systems vibrate a motorcycle’s steer-
ing, but this approach is limited for notiﬁcations in front or
behind the motorcycle [10]. We previously proposed a system
for four-wheeled vehicles that uses haptic sensations to quickly
notify drivers of possible hazards or obstacles surrounding the
vehicle [11]. We examined the system’s robustness against the
different material types and layers used for the driving seat
cushions of four-wheeled vehicles [12]. Seat on the motorcycle
is vibrated by the engine, and it may be more difﬁcult to notify
by the vibration. In this study, we perform experiments under
wind and engine vibration conditions to consider the viability
of a highly intuitive notiﬁcation system for motorcycles.
III.
MOUNTING POSITIONS OF ACTUATORS FOR
MOTORCYCLES
In this section, we represent the system architecture.
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Figure 1: Proposed installation positions for actuators in a
motorcycle helmet.
A. Notiﬁcation Parts of a Body by Vibro-Tactile Actuators
The proposed system aims to help motorcyclists correctly
identify the directions of ﬁve vibrating motors, three intensity
settings as the level of risk, and three obstacle types (i.e.,
pedestrians, vehicles, and motorcycles). The position of vi-
bration is important for giving critical notiﬁcations. We can
consider vibro-tactile actuators on the motorcyclist’s arms,
shoulders, or waist within a motorcyclist’s suit or on the
motorcyclist’s head within a helmet. For locations on the
body, the motorcyclist must use a wearable device, and there
are different types of suit for different motorcycles types
(e.g., Cruiser or Sport) because the riding posture is different.
Drivers may also experience limited mobility in a suit, which
would impact accurate notiﬁcation.
By contrast, helmets are usually ﬁtted to the motorcyclist’s
head, and vibration positions are not affected by varying
postures, although they are limited to facing forward. Helmets
are also required in many countries. Therefore, we choose
helmets for our proposed system.
Figure 1 shows the possible installation positions within a
motorcycle helmet. We cannot mount an actuator inside the
helmet, as at (a), because the direct contact with the driver’s
head would be unsafe. We considered the helmet surface, as at
(b), but our attempts showed that a very strong vibration would
be needed. Therefore, we mount the actuators at the bottom
of the cushion in the helmet, as at (c), so that the actuators
vibrate vertically to each cushion.
We considered three types of vibration mechanisms: vibra-
tion motors, haptic reactors, and vibration speakers. Vibration
motors can only produce sine waves and it is difﬁcult to
distinguish different categories, although they can achieve
strong vibration. Although haptic reactors can realize a va-
riety of vibrations, such as clicking, their vibration is too
weak to produce notiﬁcations. We therefore propose a vibro-
tactile notiﬁcation system using a vibration speaker which can
realize the vibration with strong and varied expression. For
our proposed system, we utilized a vibrating speaker with an
ACOUSTIC HAPTICTMactuator developed by Foster Electric
Company Limited. The acoustic haptic actuator is a type of
woofer that comes into direct contact with the driver’s helmet.
B. Mounting Positions of Actuators on a Helmet
Motorcycle helmets have shields that can reduce visibility.
They may also become foggy with weather and temperature,
Figure 2: Experimental arrangement of mounted actuators.
which further limits the motorcyclist’s visibility. Backward of
the motorcycles have more blind spot where such as motorcy-
clist cannot watch by the mirrors. Therefore, we consider the
need for both backward and forward alerts.
Figure 2 shows the planned layout of actuators in the
helmet. This helmet has four cushions (i.e., front, rear, right
and left), as shown in sections (1) to (4) in Figure 2. To explore
the vibro-tactile directional sense at the motorcyclist’s head,
we installed eight actuators as shown in Figures 2(a) to (h).
Actuators (a), (b), and (h) were mounted on cushion (1), (c)
and (d) were mounted on cushion (2), (e) was mounted on
cushion (3), and (f) and (g) were mounted on cushion (4).
We conducted an experiment to evaluate the resolution of
vibration on the human head. By determining the resolution
of human-perceivable locations, we can determine which di-
rections are identiﬁable. We performed the experiment with
the engine in idle at 1500 ± 300rpm, which is frequently
used as the typically speed range, on a Yamaha MT-01
motorcycle equipped with a V-twin cylinder 1670 cc engine.
We conducted four trials with each participant. We apply ﬁve
students between 19 and 22 years old as the participants. We
randomly induced vibrations at each position with strengths
ranging from −2dB to −12dB and participants estimated the
position in the helmet.
Figure 3 shows the correct answer rates for the direction
using all eight or only four actuators (one on each cushion:
(a), (c), (e), and (g) in Figure 2). The vertical and horizontal
axes denote correct answer rates and installation positions,
respectively, and the green and orange bars respectively in-
dicate results for all eight or only four actuators. The results
demonstrate that there was confusion when multiple actuators
were installed on a single cushion, leading to lower accuracy.
By contrast, all participants had a 100% correct answer rate
when four actuators were used. We therefore decided to utilize
only one actuator per cushion.
IV.
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE FOR OUR PROPOSED SYSTEM
In line with the aforementioned experiment shown in Fig-
ures 2 and 3, we propose a vibro-tactile helmet as illustrated in
Figure 4. Figure 4(A) shows the positions of the actuators (or
vibration speakers) on the helmet. Figure 4(B) shows pictures
of the different actuators in place; note that (b) and (d) are in
the same position on the left and right sides of the helmet, so
only one is shown.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Figure 3: Correct answer rates according to the number and
position of actuators.
Figure 4: Overview of our proposed system.
The actuators shown in Figure 4 vibrate by transmitting
sound data via the ampliﬁers. The sound data are deformed
waves for three categories (i.e., pedestrian, four-wheeled ve-
hicle, and motorcycle) the same as in our previous study for
four-wheeled vehicles [12].
V.
VIBRATION STRENGTH
In this section, we discuss the strength of the vibrations
for our proposed system.
A. Estimation of Strength Levels
Our previous study in four-wheeled vehicles [11] had three
vibration strength levels (i.e., large, medium, and small) as
the level of risk. However, when riding a motorcycle, there
is additional noise, such as from engine vibration or wind.
Furthermore, we have not yet applied the vibration strength
level concept to a helmet. Therefore, we consider the vibration
strength of the three levels.
An experiment was conducted with ﬁve participants be-
tween 19 and 22 years old and the Yamaha MT-01 in idle.
The strength pattern is deﬁned by the difference in the sound
pressure. We considered two strength patterns. Pattern A has
a small difference between the three levels. We can utilize
a fourth level if we can detect the differences in Pattern
A. Pattern B has larger differences than Pattern A, with the
Figure 5: Correct answer rates for strength Patterns A and B.
larger vibration for four-wheeled vehicles adjusted so as not
to prevent the motorcyclist from driving.
The strength levels of Pattern A, ”large”, ”medium”, and
”small”, were respectively −6dB, −10dB, and −12dB from
the original sound data which used by previous study [8], for
all categories. The strength levels of Pattern B were different
according to the category. In the cases of the pedestrian or
motorcycle categories, ”large”, ”medium”, and ”small” were
respectively −2dB, −8dB, and −12dB from the original
sound data. In the case of four-wheeled vehicles, ”large”,
”medium”, and ”small” were respectively −3dB, −8dB, and
−12dB from the original sound data.
This experiment was conducted using random directions,
categories, and vibration strengths. Test participants answered
”large”, ”medium”, ”small”, or ”insensitive” as the levels of
strength. Figure 5 shows the experimental results for both pat-
terns. The vertical and horizontal axes denote correct answer
rates and strength levels, respectively. The blue and brown
bars respectively indicate Patterns A and B. Pattern A had low
correct answer rates for ”medium” and ”small”, and as well
as instances of ”insensitive” shown as 0 percent in Figure
5. Pattern B had correct answer rates of over 69% for each
strength level. Thus, we adopt the notifying method by three
strength levels with large interval such as Pattern B.
B. Normalization by Head Sense
In our previous study, we improved correct answer rates by
using normalized and exaggerated waves for vibrations for the
three categories (i.e., four-wheeled vehicles, motorcycles, and
pedestrians) [12]. In this study, we similarly apply normalized
and exaggerated waves to improve notiﬁcation accuracy be-
cause many motorcyclists pointed out that vibration strength
felt uneven depending on the installation position. Here, we
normalize the vibration strength for the parts of the head an
experiment on the motorcycle.
For normalization, we utilized three actuators, (a), (b),
and (c), on the front, rear, and left cushions in Figure 4,
respectively. Actuator (d) in Figure 4 is considered to have
the same tendency as actuator (b). First, via a questionnaire,
we determined the maximum and minimum strengths motor-
cyclists can detect with no stress. The results indicate that
the difference between the maximum and minimum strengths
for actuator (b) was smaller than that for the other positions.
Thus, we used the maximum and minimum strengths, which
participants feels as same as (b), for all the actuators. The
maximum and minimum strengths were deﬁned as ”large”
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

TABLE I: VIBRATION STRENGTH LEVELS AT EACH
POSITION.
position
large
medium
small
a
−6dB
−10dB
−14dB
b
−8dB
−12dB
−19dB
c
−6dB
−10dB
−13dB
and ”small”. The ”medium” strength level was not deﬁned as
the midpoint value (in decibels) between ”large” and ”small”,
but deﬁned as participants feel “medium” between ”large”
and ”small” vibration. In this normalization, we utilized the
vibration of the four-wheeled vehicle category [12]. Finally,
we adjusted for the strength as shown in Table I, which
presents the strength levels for each actuator position, noting
that the side position is more sensitive than the front and back
positions.
VI.
EXPERIMENT
Finally, we conduct an experiment to verify the correct
answer rates when using actuators mounted on a helmet when
there are external factors, including wind and engine noise.
A. Experimental Trials by t-test
We decided to use t-tests to determine statistically sig-
niﬁcant results. We conducted an independent t-test for each
strength level on actuators (a), (b), and (c) to compare the
differences in correct answer rates under different wind and
idling noises. We adopted a signiﬁcance level of 5%, a mod-
erate effect size of 0.5, and a detection rate of 80%. Possible
answers were ”large”, ”medium”, ”small”, and ”insensitive”.
Sample sizes for the answer of ”large” and the other strength
levels were determined from one-sided and two-sided tests,
respectively. From the t-test, sample sizes from which we could
obtain a signiﬁcant difference were 51, 64, and 64 samples for
”large”, ”medium”, and ”small” answers, respectively.
B. Correct Answer Rates during Idling
We conducted an experiment in the idling state to evaluate
the robustness under engine vibration, as illustrated in Figure 6.
Six test participants on the motorcycle answered when they felt
a vibration. This experiment was conducted with the engine off
as 0rpm, and rotating at 1000rpm, 1500rpm, and 2000rpm.
In the case of 0rpm/h, the experiment was considered as a
stable situation. For each engine speed include 0rpm/h, 51, 64,
and 64 trials for ”large”, ”medium”, and ”small”, respectively,
were performed at random. The vibration categories used were
those applied to four-wheeled vehicles in our previous study
[12].
Figure 7 shows the correct answer rates during idling
rpm at 0rpm, 1000rpm, 1500rpm, and 2000rpm, respectively.
The blue, red, and yellow bars respectively indicate ”large”,
”medium”, and ”small” as answered by the participants. The
vertical and horizontal axes of each ﬁgure denote the correct
answer rate and the three levels of signal strength, respectively.
For example, 10% of participants answered ”medium” for the
”large” strength level given by an actuator at 1000rpm, as
shown in Figure 7(b).
We deﬁned the correct answer rate as the percentage of
matches between the answers of participants and the actual
level of vibration strength. For example, in the case of Figure
Figure 6: Overview of the experiment for the stable situation.
7(b), the correct answer rates for ”large”, ”medium”, and
”small” were 90%, 72%, and 83%, respectively. Let us focus
on the ”medium” strength level in Figure 7. We can conﬁrm
that participants felt as more strong vibration identifying the
”medium” strength level because participants answered ”large”
more often than they did ”small”. The correct answer rates
were lowest in the case of Figure 7(d). This may be due to the
high engine rotation causing stronger vibration and noise from
the motorcycle, obscuring the vibration from the actuators.
VII.
EVALUATION OF DRIVING SCENARIO
We conducted an experiment with six participants using a
car to evaluate degradation in accuracy due to wind. We used
the car because of safety and difﬁculty to collect correctly
answers of notiﬁcation. Although the strength of the traveling
wind is little different between cars and motorcycles, the effect
of the wind can be measured. We compared the wind noise
between the car and the motorcycle, and found that the wind
noise on the motorcycle was almost same as on the car with all
windows open. Each participant evaluated the four speeds of
0km/h, 60km/h, 80km/h, and 100km/h. At each speed, we
performed 51, 64, and 64 trials with ”large”, ”medium”, and
”small” strength levels, respectively, at random. The actuator
vibrated for 5–10 s at random for each trial. In the case of
0km/h, we conducted the experiment as a stable situation, as
same as section 6.2. In the other cases, we used a highway.
Figure 8 shows the experimental highway route. This route
has two lanes in each direction limited to 100km/h, and three
entrances and exits shown as (1), (2), and (3). We set up
sections of 11.1km between (1) and (2), 20.3km between (2)
and (3), and 9.2km between (3) and (1).
The experiment was conducted at speeds of 80km/h,
100km/h, and 60km/h between (1) and (2), (2) and (3), and
(3) and (1), respectively. Figure 9 shows the seating positions
of the participant in this experiment. All windows of the car
were open and the helmet shields were closed. Before the
experiment, participants were provided with examples of the
three strength levels (i.e., ”large”, ”medium”, and ”small”)
at position (b) of 4. We limited the experiment to the four-
wheeled vehicle category. The experimental results were saved
as movie ﬁles and evaluated via post-processing.
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

(a) 0rpm
(b) 1000rpm
(c) 1500rpm
(d) 2000rpm
Figure 7: Answer rates for different strength levels at (a) 0
rpm, (b) 1000 rpm, (c) 1500 rpm, and (d) 2000 rpm.
Figure 8: The course of the experiment on a highway.
Figure 9: The seating position of participants in the vehicle.
Figure 10 shows the correct answer rates at driving speeds
of 60km/h, 80km/h, and 100km/h. The vertical and hori-
zontal axes of each ﬁgure denote the correct answer rate and
the three levels of signal strength, respectively. In the case
of Figure 10(a), in 94%, 73%, and 74% of all trials, the
test participant answered ”large”, ”medium”, and ”small” for
large, medium, and small vibration strengths, respectively, so
these are the correct answer rates. Figure 10(b) indicates a
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

high correct answer rate for large vibration. Test participants
tended to be more likely to select strong vibrations. In the
case of Figure 10(c), the correct answer rates were increased
and decreased, respectively, for medium and large vibrations
as compared to Figure 10(b). In Figure 10(d), a high correct
answer rate was obtained even for small vibration. From
Figures 10(c) and 10(d), the ”medium” strength level showed
only small differences in the incorrect answer rate as compared
to ”large” and ”small”. Therefore, ”medium” is considered to
be appropriate in the high-speed case. We expect a higher
notiﬁcation accuracy can be achieved by adjusting the strength
automatically depending on outside noise. We also found that
notiﬁcation accuracy was more degraded by engine rotation
than by wind noise, which should be a consideration for
practical implementation.
VIII.
CONCLUSIONS
It is difﬁcult for motorcyclists to recognize objects in
their surroundings because of the many blind spots from their
helmets and small mirrors. Furthermore, accidents are more
serious for motorcycles than for four-wheeled vehicles because
of the mortality. We therefore proposed a notiﬁcation system
for motorcycles based on previous works for four-wheeled
vehicles. In our system, parts of the helmet vibrate correspond-
ing to direction of a hazard, the category of an object, and
the level of risk. We considered the strength of vibration to
determine three strength levels. We evaluated the accuracy of
our proposed notiﬁcation method for motorcycles using haptic
actuators in windy and idling situations. We demonstrated
the effectiveness of our notiﬁcation method even for winds
of 100km/h. We expect improved notiﬁcation accuracy can
be achieved by adjusting vibration strength according to the
motorcycle’s speed. Various types of helmets will be studied
in the future.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by MEXT KAKENHI Grant
Number JP 16723884 and Foster Electric Company, Limited.
We would like to thank Uni-edit (https://uni-edit.net/) for
editing and proofreading this manuscript.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Statistics
about
road
trafﬁc
annual
report,
national
public
safety
commision
and
national
police
agency,”
2018.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.e-stat.go.jp/en/stat-search/ﬁles?page=1&
layout=datalist&toukei=00130002&tstat=000001027457&cycle=7&
year=20180&month=0&stat inﬁd=000031800894
[2]
“Brake
free
helmet
light.
digital
image.
indiegogo,”
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.indiegogo.com/projects/
brakefree-the-smart-brake-light-for-motorcyclists#/
[3]
W. Chang, W. Hwang, and Y. G. Ji, “Haptic seat interfaces for driver
information and warning systems,” International Journal of Human-
Computer Interaction, vol. 27, no. 12, Dec. 2011, pp. 1119–1132.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2011.555321
[4]
Y. Gaffary and A. L´ecuyer, “The use of haptic and tactile information
in the car to improve driving safety: A review of current technologies,”
Frontiers in ICT, vol. 5, Mar. 2018, p. 5. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.3389/ﬁct.2018.00005
[5]
M.
Muzammel,
M.
Z.
Yusoff,
and
F.
Meriaudeau,
“Rear-end
vision-based collision detection system for motorcyclists,” Journal of
Electronic Imaging, vol. 26, no. 3, May 2017, p. 033002. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1117/1.jei.26.3.033002
(a) 0km/h
(b) 60km/h
(c) 80km/h
(d) 100km/h
Figure 10: Answer rates for strength levels at each speed.
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

[6]
G. Gil, G. Savino, S. Piantini, and M. Pierini, “Motorcycles that
see: Multifocal stereo vision sensor for advanced safety systems in
tilting vehicles,” Sensors, vol. 18, no. 2, Jan. 2018, p. 295. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.3390/s18010295
[7]
M. I. Tayag and M. E. A. D. V. Capuno, “Smart motorcycle helmet:
Real-time crash detection with emergency notiﬁcation, tracker and
anti-theft system using internet-of-things cloud based technology,”
International Journal of Computer Science and Information Technology,
vol.
11,
no.
03,
Jun.
2019,
pp.
81–94.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.5121/ijcsit.2019.11307
[8]
V. H. Tran, D. Muscat, J. R. Cruz, A. M. Carrillo, D. A. A. Alonso,
and E. Chavez, “Motorcycle and helmet providing advance driver
assistance,” U.S. Patent Application No. 13/897,570, 2013.
[9]
Crosshelmet, “Cross helmet x1 - transform your riding experience,”
2020. [Online]. Available: https://crosshelmet.com/
[10]
C.
Inc.,
“Blind
spot
detection
&
lane
change
assist,”
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.continental-automotive.com/en-gl/
2-Wheeler/Safe-Mobility/ARAS/Blind-Spot-Detection
[11]
A. Suzuki, Y. Murata, and M. Hayashi, “Notiﬁcation of hazards
around a vehicle using seat actuators,” in 25th ITS World Congress.
Copenhagen, Denmark: ERTICO, September 2018, pp. AP–TP1335.
[12]
A. Suzuki, K. Horie, S. Otobe, Y. Murata, and S. Fujimura, “Hazard
notiﬁcations around a vehicle using seat actuators,” The International
Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol. 13, no. 1 and 2, 2020,
pp. 59–68, iSBN:978-1-61208-720-7,ISSN:1942-2679.
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

