Plausibility Checks in Automotive Electronic
Control Units to Enhance Safety and Security
Martin Ring, and Reiner Kriesten
University of Applied Sciences Karlsruhe
76133 Karlsruhe
Emails: {martin.ring, reiner.kriesten}@hs-karlsruhe.de
Abstract— Automobiles nowadays consist of multiple Electronic
Control Units (ECUs) and bus systems. Attacks on these critical
infrastructure elements have increased a lot over the last years,
especially since remote exploitation is possible due to wireless
connectivity. Most of these attacks targeted standard services
implemented in cars. These services, e. g. , allow the activation
of the headlights or turning of the steering wheel via the parking
assist. All these services have to be secured so they can only be
executed when it is safe to do so. These checks for a safe state
are plausibility checks, which nowadays only utilize the vehicle
speed. In this paper we motivate the need for other values that
have to be authentic and integrous. We want to utilize immanent
signals, derived from hard wired sensors, for each ECU that
utilizes plausibility checks.
Keywords–Automotive Security; Vehicular Attacks; Plausibility
Checks.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Modern automobiles feature a myriad of cyber physical
systems. These systems are composed of up to 100 micro-
processors (called ECUs) with up to 100 million lines of
code [1]–[3]. These systems are prone to attacks. Since the
introduction of bus systems to cars they are vulnerable to
attacks that require a physical connection (e. g. , car theft).
With the introduction of wireless interfaces, these attacks and
many more can now be performed from the basement of
hackers [4]. Thus the most acclaimed attacks on automotive
networks nowadays have been remote attacks. These attacks
alone have little to no effect on cars, only combined with ﬂaws
in the internal networks security risks can arise. Miller and
Valasek come to the same conclusion and argue that their work
“shows that simply protecting vehicles from remote attacks
isn’t the only layer of defence that automakers need.” [5].
An defense in depth concept is necessary. One part of such
a concept are the proposed plausibility checks in this paper.
In earlier publications [4]–[8] a lot of the attacks able to
compromise the safety of a car were limited to low speeds.
These limitations stem from plausibility checks in ECUs that
try to determine if the execution of the requested service is
safe. These plausibility checks only rely on the speed of the
vehicle. With this paper, new approaches for such checks will
be introduced.
In the following, we will ﬁrst give an introduction to
plausibility checks and outline the requirements for the used
signals. Section III then describes the method for advanced
plausibility checks and the assessment process to determine
suitable functions to safeguard. Next Section IV gives an
evaluation of our method and its applicability, and ﬁnally
Section V concludes this paper.
II.
STATE OF THE ART
As researchers noticed in their attempts to compromise
cars, most of the time the last barrier to safety critical functions
is a plausibility check. These are simple checks that verify if
the prerequisites to execute a function safely are met. All found
checks use the speed of the car as a signal to check against [5].
All but one ECU (the Antilock Brake System (ABS)/Electronic
Stability Control (ESC)-ECU) obtain this information from a
bus system. The check only determines if the speed is below
a predetermined threshold. This threshold is usually 5 mph
or 8 kph depending on whether the country uses imperial
or metrical units, respectively. Above these thresholds, ECUs
change their internal state to one with very limited triggerable
functions. The problem with this mechanism is not its principle
function but that everything depends on the speed of the car,
which is received by bus messages and can thus be sent by any
host in the same subnet in current automobiles. If no network
separation is present the signal can basically be sent by any
host in the network even by ones plugged in externally.
In order to provide the necessary protection, the signals
used for plausibility checks have to be authentic and inte-
gerous. The approach used nowadays and presented in a recent
publication [9] is the applications of cryptographic functions
to ensure that these preconditions are met. A possible way to
ensure the authenticity and integrity of a message is the use of
an Keyed-Hash Message Authentication Code (HMAC). This
type of message protection can not be found in production
vehicles nowadays. The maximum security offered is the use
of an alive counter and a simple checksum.
III.
ADVANCED PLAUSABILITY CHECKS
As stated before, plausibility checks can be applied as part
of a defense in depth concept to prevent attacks on safety
critical functions. Figure 1 shows the method that can be used
to determine if our proposed checks can be used for a certain
application.
In advance to this assessment, a hazard and risk analysis
has to be conducted. This analysis is part of every automotive
development lifecycle and demanded by the functional safety
standard ISO 26262 [10]. The objective of this analysis is the
identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of the hazards of an item (“a
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Figure 1. Methodology for applying plausibility checks
system that implements a function at a vehicle level” [10]).
Such an item could, e. g. , be the airbag. In addition, safety
goals related to the prevention and mitigation of the found
hazards have to be drafted. For each hazard, an Automotive
Safety Integrity Level (ASIL) has to be calculated. The inputs
for this calculation are the expected loss in case of an acci-
dent (severity) and the probability of the accident occurring
(exposure and controllability). For this contemplation only the
severity as the consequences of a malfunction are considered.
With levels from S 0 to S 3, functions with a severity equal or
above S 1 (light to moderate injuries) are deemed meaningful.
These considerations are embodied by the ﬁrst decision in the
design structure chart pictured in Figure 1. The next necessary
decision is to determine if the function in question depends on
the state of the vehicle.
When these requirements are met, advanced plausibility
checks should and can be used to safeguard functions. As
mentioned before, inputs to these plausibility checks have to
be authentic and integrous. These protection goals can be met
by applying cryptographic functions, e. g. , using HMAC [9].
This type of cryptographic measure ensures the desired pro-
tection goals with an acceptable demand for computational
performance. Nevertheless there also exist a few drawbacks
using HMACs. In particular the key management and reduced
bandwidth on the bus by attaching an HMAC to each message
are problematic. Is there another method to ensure the needed
protection goals without the drawbacks of HMACs? To answer
this question we took a deeper look into automotive architec-
tures like the one presented in Figure 2.
Figure 2 represents a part of a Jeep Cherokee 2014 network
architecture which was the target of the latest attacks of Miller
and Valasek on a car [4], [5]. The ﬁgure shows different ECUs
Figure 2. Sub-architecture of a Jeep Cherokee 2014 [4]
and gateways that are interconnected by bus systems. Further-
more, some hard-wired sensors are apparent delivering relevant
information about the state of the vehicle. This information
can be used to derive ECU immanent signals for plausibility
checks without the need for cryptographic algorithms.
ECU immanent signals should be used for plausibility
checks whenever possible. These signals can be signals pro-
duced in the ECU, like the regulated torque in the engine
ECU that is calculated by adding up all the torque demands
of the engine auxiliaries and the driver requirement. The other
possibility for such signals are hard-wired sensor signals like
the rotational speed sensors for the ABS / ESC ECU. With the
help of Figure 3 we want to show how an immanent signal
of an ECU can be used to make a plausibility check for a
requested function. The latest hacks applied on the Jeep [5]
jammed the signal of another ECU that normally would have
been used to make the plausibility check. In this case the
plausibility check would verify if the car is in reverse and
slower than 5 mph. The check for the driving direction is not
easily possible but we can check for the speed constraint. We
can assume a known level of hydraulic pressure in the steering
system because we have a hard-wired sensor for this signal
to the Steering Control Module (SCM). This module also
evaluates the signal of the torque sensor. With this information
we can determine the speed of the car within small limits.
With the help of the information in Figure 3 it is possible
to determine the speed of a car. As a small example we
will show the determination of the threshold for the steering
torque for the conditions the Jeep has to meet to execute the
steering angle change. With a supposed threshold of 20 kph
for the Jeep and an assumption of 20 bar for the hydraulic
pressure brings us to the conclusion that a steering moment of
more than 2.9 Nm is equivalent to a speed above the deﬁned
threshold and thus the execution of the requested function has
to be refused. An implementation according to this technique
would have prevented the attack on the steering system as
described in [5]. Such immanent signals can be found and
utilized on almost any safety critical ECU in a car. Only if
such signals are not existent signals from other ECUs should
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

be used. As mentioned before these signals have to fulﬁll some
preconditions, namely being integrous and authentic. Only if
these prerequisites are fulﬁlled, such bus signals can be used
for plausibility checks of functions with a severity value of S 1
or above.
Figure 3. Plot of steering moment dependent on hydraulic pressure and
vehicular speed [11]
The other attacks presented in the latest release of
Wired [5] are more problematic as they use legitimate mes-
sages to request certain functions. The slamming on the car’s
brakes is a standard function that is executed while the driver
presses the switch for the electronic parking brake. While
pressing the switch the pump for the ABS / ESC system gets
activated and provides the pressure to engage the brakes of the
car. Such a brake maneuver is comparable with an emergency
braking. As Miller and Valasek were able to request and
execute this function it is reasonable to assume that the switch
for the electronic parking brake is directly connected to the bus
system of the car. The same thing can be concluded for their
last attack, the unintended acceleration of the car. They used
the standard function to enable Apdative Cruise Control (ACC)
and then increase the target speed of the cruise control. This is
possible by replaying messages of the switches embedded in
the steering wheel. We were able to observe the same situation
in an electric vehicle produced by a German manufacturer.
Therefore, safety critical functions with an ASIL of D should
not be able to be activated by bus messages. For all requests
of such functions direct connections should be used (peer-to-
peer); although these connections can be network connections,
like Controller Area Network (CAN) or Ethernet, they should
not be routed over gateways.
IV.
EVALUATION
To demonstrate the validity of this method in this section
we present other examples of instances where plausibility
checks with immanent signals can be used. First, we further
evaluate the examples in Section II. After these examples other
published attacks on safety critical functions (lighting, engine,
Figure 4. Engine ECU with its hard-wired sensors (green) and
actuators (red) [13]
gearbox, brakes and suspensions [4], [6], [8], [12]) and the
possibility to apply plausibility checks with ECU immanent
signals are evaluated.
We start with the engine example. There are multiple
attacks published on the engine of a car [6]–[8], [12]. Most
attacks completely disable the engine and shut it down. To
achieve this result standard services were used to reset the
ECU, deactivate fuel injectors or initiate a ﬂash session. Every
service should use a plausibility check as the safety of its
execution is widely dependent on the vehicles state. There
are multiple immanent sensor values or processed signals that
could be used for these plausibility checks. An extensive
overview is presented in Figure 4. The easiest signal to use
is the rpm-signal of the engine. If this signal is unequal
zero no service that compromises the operation of the engine
should be able to execute. Not necessarily forbidden should
be services that help mechanics with diagnostics of the en-
gine in a workshop, like reading out live data. Besides the
aforementioned rpm-signal there are a host of other sensor
signals which could be used, like the readout of the air mass
sensor, exhaust temperature sensor, fuel pressure sensor and
more. A processed signal that could be used is the calculated
torque of the engine. This torquer is calculated by adding
the demands of all auxiliaries of the engine, like the AC
compressor, the alternator or the hydraulic steering pump as
well as the driver demand. If this signal is unequal zero it can
also be concluded that the car is in use and any execution of
service that compromises the operation of the engine can be
deemed unsafe.
The second and probably most critical point of attack is
the braking system, which was also the target of multiple
attacks [4]–[6], [12]. The executed attacks include wheel
selective braking as well as disabling the braking system
all together. Here it is also possible to use ECU immanent
signals. All wheel speed sensors are hard wired to the ECU.
Modern wheel speed sensors can determine speeds as low as
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

0.1 kph [14]. As soon as any speed is detected all safety critical
services should stop their execution. However, the speed signal
is not the only one that can be used, as an alternative the hard
wired three-axis acceleration sensor can be evaluated. As soon
as these sensors signals show any acceleration the car is not
in a safe state to execute safety critical functions.
Our research shows vulnerabilities in active suspension
systems. The ECUs controlling such systems also use a vast
amount of sensors and signals to control the ride of a vehicle.
Two possible immanent signals of such a system are accel-
eration sensors or sensors for the level of each wheel. If the
signals of the level sensors of the car change or an acceleration
unequal zero is detected it can be concluded that the car is in
motion and thus safety critical functions should not be able to
perform their task of, e. g. , resetting the ECU.
A way to utilize immanent signals to check the safe state
of the car with immanent signals of the steering system was
presented in Section III. This shows that these systems could be
safeguarded in their current implementation with our method.
Furthermore, these examples show that this method allows it
to safeguard every ECU responsible for lateral or longitudinal
behavior of a vehicle.
An instance where an odd sensor signal could be used were
attacks on the headlights of cars [6], [8]. These attacks spoofed
messages of the light sensor or used diagnostic messages to
deactivate the headlights of a car. The sensor signal of the
light sensor is evaluated in the vehicle supply system control
device. This device also powers the electric fuel pump, see,
e. g. , the schematic in [15]. This pump is only active when
the engine is running and during a short time after unlocking
the car or switching on the ignition. The signal is thus also
a good indicator if it is safe to execute the inquired function.
As the sensor is in the mentioned schematic hard wired to the
executing ECU it can determine if the message was spoofed
or issued by the correct sender.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have motivated the need for security
plausibility checks. Such checks are already implemented but
rely on bus messages of the vehicle speed which can be
jammed or spoofed. As they are one crucial part of a defense
in depth approach, a secure implementation is crucial.
With the use of immanent signals a secure way for plausi-
bility checks is found. This approach can be used in modern
cars without any need to change the architecture or wiring; all
that has to change is the software and that can be achieved by
a simple software update. We have discussed that many of the
published attacks can be prevented by the presented approach.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. N. Charette, “This Car Runs on Code,” 2009. [Online]. Available:
http://spectrum.ieee.org/transportation/systems/this-car-runs-on-code
[2]
G. Serio and D. Wollschl¨ager, “Vernetztes Automobil Verteidi-
gungsstrategien im Kampf gegen Cyberattacken,” ATZelektronik -
06/2015, 2015.
[3]
SAE, “Cybersecurity Guidebook for Cyber-Physical Vehicle Systems,”
2016. [Online]. Available: http://standards.sae.org/wip/j3061/
[4]
C. Miller and C. Valasek, “Remote Exploitation of an Unaltered
Passenger Vehicle.” [Online]. Available: http://illmatics.com/Remote
Car Hacking.pdf
[5]
——, “CAN Message Injection – OG Dynamite Edition.” [Online].
Available: http://illmatics.com/can%20message%20injection.pdf
[6]
——,
“Adventures
in
Automotive
Networks
and
Control
Units,”
2014.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.ioactive.com/pdfs/IOActive Adventures in Automotive N
etworks and Control Units.pdf/
[7]
S. Checkoway, D. McCoy, B. Kantor, D. Anderson, H. Shacham,
S. Savage, K. Koscher, A. Czeskis, F. Roesner, T. Kohno et al., “Com-
prehensive Experimental Analyses of Automotive Attack Surfaces,”
2011.
[8]
“Gehackte
Mobilit¨at,”
Apr.
2016.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.3sat.de/mediathek/?mode=play&obj=58732
[9]
K. Beckers, J. D¨urrwang, and D. Holling, “Standard Compliant Hazard
and Threat Analysis for the Automotive Domain,” Information, vol. 7,
no. 3, 2016, p. 36. [Online]. Available: http://www.mdpi.com/2078-
2489/7/3/36
[10]
ISO, “ISO 26262 Road vehicles – Functional safety,” 2011.
[11]
H. Felder, “Autoelektrik – Grundlagen- und Fachwissen.” [Online].
Available: http://www.fahrzeug-elektrik.de/
[12]
K. Koscher, A. Czeskis, F. Roesner, S. Patel, T. Kohno, S. Checkoway,
D. McCoy, B. Kantor, D. Anderson, H. Shacham et al., “Experimental
Security Analysis of a Modern Automobile,” Symposium on Security
and Privacy, 2010.
[13]
R. H. Gscheidle, Ed., Modern automotive technology : fundamentals,
service, diagnostics, 2nd ed., ser. Europa reference books for automotive
technology.
Haan-Gruiten: Verl. Europa-Lehrmittel, 2014.
[14]
“Raddrehzahlsensoren
im
Kraftfahrzeug
Funktion,
Diag-
nose,
Fehlersuche.”
Tech.
Rep.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.hella.com/ePaper/Raddrehzalsensoren/document.pdf
[15]
“STG. Bordnetz - Control Mains Power Supply.” [Online]. Available:
http://www.seatforum.de/uploads/DRAFT01%5B1%5D244.jpg
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

