Technical Limitations, and Privacy Shortcomings of
the Vehicle-to-Vehicle Communication
Markus Ullmann∗ †, Thomas Strubbe,∗ and Christian Wieschebrink∗
∗ Federal Ofﬁce for Information Security
D-53133 Bonn, Germany
Email: {markus.ullmann, thomas.strubbe, christian.wieschebrink}@bsi.bund.de
† University of Applied Sciences Bonn-Rhine-Sieg
Institute for Security Research
D-53757 Sankt Augustin, Germany
Email: markus.ullmann@h-brs.de
Abstract—A deployment of the Vehicle-to-Vehicle communication
technology according to ETSI is in preparation in Europe.
Currently, a Public Key Infrastructure policy for Intelligent
Transport Systems in Europe is in discussion to enable V2V
communication. This policy set aside two classes of keys and
certiﬁcates for ITS vehicle stations: long term authentication keys
and pseudonymous keys and certiﬁcates. We show that from our
point of view the periodic sent Cooperative Awareness Messages
with extensive data have technical limitations and together with
the pseudonym concept cause privacy problems.
Keywords–Vehicular Ad hoc Networks; Vehicle-to-Vehicle Com-
munication; Intelligent Transport System; Cooperative Awareness
Message; Pseudonym Concept; Privacy
I.
INTRODUCTION
Vehicle-to-vehicle
(V2V)
and
vehicle-to-infrastructure
communication (V2I) (consolidated V2X) have been discussed
intensively in recent years. The deployment of this technology
requires accepted standards. The neccessary speciﬁcation and
standardization in Europe is done by the European Telecom-
munications Standards Institute (ETSI) based on consider-
ations of the Car2Car Communication Consortium[1]. This
includes the security standardization as well [2].
The ETSI speciﬁcations deﬁne an architecture for Intelli-
gent Transport Systems (ITS). This architecture deﬁnes differ-
ent ITS stations (e.g., ITS roadside stations, and ITS vehicle
stations) and wireless communication between the ITS stations.
The wireless communication technology for cooperative V2X
communication is based on the IEEE 802.11p standard. A
frequency spectrum in the 5.9 GHz range has been allocated on
a harmonized basis in Europe in line with similar allocations
in US.
The ETSI communication model deﬁnes broadcast com-
munication between ITS stations. Different message types
are deﬁned for information exchange. Primary, these are the
Cooperative Awareness Message (CAM) and the Decentralized
Environmental Notiﬁcation Message (DENM). These mes-
sages are disseminated via broadcast. According the ETSI
speciﬁcations messages shall be digitally signed by the sender
(ITS vehicle station or ITS roadside station) to guarantee
message integrity and authenticity. In order to issue and
authenticate the corresponding cryptographic keys, a suitable
public key infrastructure (PKI) has to be established.
At the moment, the deployment of V2X technology is in
preparation in large scale intelligent mobility infrastructure
projects, for example SCOOP@F [3] in France, the C-ITS
corridor Rotterdam-Frankfurt-Vienna [4] and the Nordic Way
[5], a joint project of Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden.
Research and development of the V2V communication has
started 15 years ago. In the meantime, the IT architecture of
vehicles has signiﬁcantly changed. A lot of components to
assist driving are available: lane keeping support, trafﬁc jam
assist, automatic parking assistant, remote parking assistant
and so on. This is a prestage of automatic driving, which is
one of the main challenges in automotive engineering at the
moment. Already the mentioned systems to support driving
require speciﬁc sensor systems to detect objects (e.g., road
lanes, other vehicles and/or static trafﬁc signs) as well as
pedestrians and bicycles by capturing the environment. Many
modern vehicles are already able to deduce a speciﬁc envi-
ronmental trafﬁc situation based on the captured information
of the sensor elements without any V2V communication. But
the integration of further sensor elements in vehicles is an
ongoing activity due to automated driving in the near future.
We argue that due to this deployment the relevance of the V2V
communication will change over time. So on the one side, the
importance of the periodically sent CAM, to deduce a speciﬁc
environmental trafﬁc situation, will decrease to more or less
additional information in consequence of the integration of
sensor systems in vehicles. On the other side, the signing of
the CAM data and the integration of the certiﬁcate expands
the message size tenfold, which can cause message collisions
on the wireless communication cannel.
In the ﬁnal report of the C-ITS platform (January 2016)
of the EC DG MOVE the data elements of CAM and DENM
messages of ITS vehicle stations are rated as personal data
[6]. To put it brieﬂy, each ITS vehicle station leaves a signed
trace of its geographic location. Each entity within the com-
munication range of the ITS communication technology can
receive that data.
In this paper, we show that it is easy to link CAMs of a
vehicle to a CAM trace even in case of a pseudonym switch.
The effect of cryptographic signed CAMs is that the existance
of the CAM data is not disputable. The applied cryptographic
ECC domain parameter (NIST P-256 [7], BrainpoolP-256r1
[8]) are such that ECDSA signatures are not foregable within
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

the next years. Assuming, an attacker can plot a CAM trace
of a vehicle. Is there any evidence that only one CAM of the
whole CAM trace can be bound to a speciﬁc vehicle then the
whole CAM trace can be bound to this vehicle. The attack
to capture CAM traces and to bind these to a speciﬁc vehicle
respective driver is described in [9]. So, CAMs provide side
effects which can totally jeopardize the privacy of motorist.
The technical limitations and the privacy shortcomings are
raised by the usage of electronic signatures to assure message
integrity and authentication.
Besides sensor elements, modern vehicles are equipped
with wireless interfaces, e.g., bluetooth to connect devices
(smart phones, tablets, etc) to the multimedia component of the
vehicle. Initially, these wireless interfaces have nothing to do
with the V2V communication. But from an attacker perspective
these interfaces enable to bind captured CAM data traces to a
speciﬁc vehicle. Therefore, these wireless vehicular interfaces
has to be regarded in a holostic security analysis of the V2V
technology as well.
The following sections of this paper are organized as
follows: Section II is a description of related work. Next,
Section III provides a brief overview of the secure V2V
communication speciﬁed in the ETSI standards. Especially,
the suggested pseudonym concept for securing CAM and
DENM messages is presented in detail. Subsequent, identiﬁers
for ITS vehicle stations are presented in Section IV. Next,
technical limitations and privacy shortcomings of the current
V2V communication approach are illustrated in Section V.
Finally, in Section VI we summarize our results.
II.
RELATED WORK
A detailed overview of attacks in VANETs is given by
Ghassan Samara et al. in [10]. A security and privacy ar-
chitecture for pseudonymous message signing is described in
[11]. Here, a public key infrastructure is regarded, too. In [12],
Julien Freudiger et al. suggested mix zones for location privacy
in vehicular networks. Giorgio Calandriello et al. propose on-
board, on-the-ﬂy pseudonym certiﬁcate generation and self-
certiﬁcation. The autors developed this approach to alleviate
one of the most signiﬁcant limitations of the pseudonym-
based approach: the need for complex management. To achieve
this, the use of group signatures is proposed. A survey on
pseudonym schemes in vehicular networks is given in [13].
A detailed analysis of privacy requirements and a com-
parison with the security requirements in VANETs is given
in [14]. Wiedersheim et al. [15] analyzed the location privacy
in a speciﬁc communication scenario. Vehicles send beacon
messages periodically. The beacons only carry the geographic
position and an identiﬁer. To support location privacy, the
vehicles use pseudonymous identiﬁer, which are changed reg-
ularly. Assuming a passive attacker who is able to eavesdrop
the communication in a speciﬁc region the attacker is able to
track the vehicles with an accuracy of almost 100% if he uses
the approach in [15]. To perform this attack in a larger area
an infrastructure of receivers is necessary to collect the CAM
data. This can be done, e.g., by
•
ITS roadside stations or
•
an ITS vehicle ﬂeet (e.g., truck ﬂeet)
The ﬂeet of ITS vehicle stations is equipped with additional
V2V communication gateways only for monitoring the ambient
V2V communication. All the collected data is sent to a cen-
tralized server infrastructure to analyze the data. Primary use
case can be the analysis of trafﬁc ﬂow for the ﬂeet to perform
optimized navigation for individual ITS vehicle stations.
Besides the identiﬁcation of ITS vehicle station based
on licence plates or cryptographic certiﬁcates the identiﬁca-
tion based on noise features (individual noise spectrum) are
discussed. That is a very active research area and different
studies are presented [16] [17]. They differ in concerning
single or multi sensor usage and concrete feature extraction.
Surprisingly, neither common security nor privacy analyzation
of the V2V communication consider this issue. Also, Bluetooth
MAC IDs of vehicular multi-media devices are already used to
develop route speciﬁc origin-destination tables and to perform
vehicles counting on speciﬁc roads. In [18], an analysis in
Jacksonville, Florida, is described. Therefore, a set of Blue-
tooth receivers was located at the roadside on speciﬁc streets
to capture the Bluetooth MAC ID of crossing vehicles. But
no paper is found, which analyze the ultimate problem of the
usage of signatures to assure CAM integrity and authenticity.
That issue is addressed here.
III.
SECURE V2X COMMUNICATION
The ETSI speciﬁcation [19] deﬁnes a basic set of applica-
tions for ITS, like active road safety (e.g., emergency vehicle
warning), co-operative trafﬁc efﬁency (e.g., regular speed), co-
operative local services (e.g., automatic access control), and
global internet services (e.g., ﬂeet management).
To date, V2X broadcast communication based on IEEE
802.11p is provided. So, V2X is a short range communication
technology with a communication range of about 600 m in
open space.
The ETSI ITS architecture [19] distinguishes 4 different
ITS station types: ITS roadside stations (typically termed road
side unit), ITS vehicle stations, ITS central stations (e.g., trafﬁc
operator or service provider), and ITS personal stations (e.g.,
a handheld device of a cyclist or pedestrian such as a smart
phone).
The ITS stations exchange information based on two differ-
ent speciﬁed message types: Cooperative Awareness Message,
and Dezentralized Environmental Notiﬁcation Message.
ITS stations will be equipped with two classes of key
pairs/certiﬁcates:
1)
Long term key pairs (certiﬁcates) based on elliptic
curve cryptography (ECC)
2)
Pseudonymous ECC key pairs (certiﬁcates)
Based on the long term key pair an ITS vehicle station is
able to authenticate itself, e.g., against a certiﬁcation author-
ity (Pseudonym Certiﬁcation Authority termed Authorization
Authority according to ETSI). Pseudonymous keys are used
to secure the CAMs and DENMs mentioned in Section III-A
respective Section III-B. It is assumed that pseudonymous keys
and certiﬁcates are not directly linkable to an identity of an
ITS vehicle station.
A. Cooperative Awareness Message
Cooperative Awareness Messages are comparable to bea-
con messages. They are broadcasted periodically with a packet
generation rate of 1 up to 10 Hz. Based on received CAM
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Complete Message
Header
Signer_Info
Generation_Time
its_aid ITS-AID for CAM
Basis Container
ITS-Station Type
Last Geographic Position
Speed
Driving Direction
Longitudinal Acceleration
Curvature
Vehicle Length
Vehicle Width
Steering Angle
Lane Number
…
Vehicle Role
Lights
Trajectory
Emergency
Police
Fire Service
Road Works
Dangerous Goods
Safety Car
…
Signature
ECDSA Signature of this Message
Certificate
According Certificate for Signature Verification
CAM 
Information
High Frequency 
Container
Low Frequency 
Container
Special 
Container
Figure 1. Examplary message format of a CAM. The CAM consists of a
header, different data containers, e.g., the basis container, a signature and the
appropriate certiﬁcate
messages, ITS vehicle stations can calculate a local dynamic
trafﬁc map of their environment. A CAM reveals a lot of
dynamic information about the associated ITS vehicle station:
geographic position, speed, driving direction, etc at a speciﬁc
time. In addition, static information, e.g., the conﬁdence levels
of heading, speed, acceleration, curvature and yaw rate and the
length and width of the ITS vehicle station are given. Length
and width are stated with a precision of 10 centimeters.
To assure message integrity and authenticity CAMs con-
tain an electronic signature and the appropriate certiﬁcate.
As signature algorithm ECDSA, which operates on elliptic
curves, is chosen. Then the receiver is able to cryptographically
verify the message and check the temporal validity (temporary
freshness).
It is not planned to forward CAM messages hop-to-hop.
Figure 1 illustrates the structure of a Cooperative Awareness
Message. The CAM is speciﬁed in detail in [20].
Regarding ECDSA based on the ECC domain parameter
NIST P-256 a CAM without special container has a size of
about 2 kbit. These 2 kbit are splitted into 200 bits for coding
the basic -, high frequency - and low frequency container, 750
bits for the header and the ECDSA signature and nearly 1
kbit for a certiﬁcate according to the ETSI format [2]. So,
only about 10 % of the whole CAM message size are needed
for the data elements. The remainder 1,8 kbit are necessary
for coding the CAM header, the ECDSA signature and the
certiﬁcate of the appropriate public key.
B. Dezentralized Environmental Notiﬁcation Message
In contrast, the second message type, Dezentralized Envi-
ronmental Notiﬁcation Messages (DENMs), are event-driven
and indicate a speciﬁc safety situation, e.g., road works
Figure 2. Examplary message format of a DENM. The DENM consists of a
header, different data containers, e.g., the management container, a signature
and the appropriate certiﬁcate.
warning (from an ITS roadside station) or a damaged vehicle
warning (from an ITS vehicle station). The DENM message
format is speciﬁed in detail in [21]. DENM messages can be
transmitted hop-by-hop. Figure 2 illustrates the structure of a
Dezentralized Environmental Notiﬁcation Message.
C. Pseudonymous Signatures
CAMs and DENMs should not reveal the identity of ITS
vehicle stations (sender anonymity). Furthermore, it should
not be possible to link messages of an ITS vehicle station
(message unlinkability) over longer time periods. Both re-
quirements shall be sufﬁcient to assure location privacy of
the ITS vehicle stations. Due to these privacy requirements,
CAMs and DENMs are signed using pseudonymous ECC keys,
which are not publicly linked to a vehicle. The pseudonymous
ECC keys are randomly chosen. The used key for signing
and the appropriate certiﬁcate are periodically changed during
operation. Therefore, an ITS vehicle station needs a set of
pseudonymous keys and certiﬁcates valid for some period of
time. The set size of pseudonymous keys and certiﬁcates and
the pseudonym change frequency are not speciﬁed in [22].
Moreover, the applied elliptic curve domain parameters
(NIST P-256 or BrainpoolP-256r1) are such that ECDSA
signatures are not foregable within the next years. Therefore,
the effect of cryptographic signing of data is that the existence
of this data is non-disputable. Especially, this means that sent
CAMs are non-disputable.
Figure 3 depicts the usage of the pseudonyms. At time
point t0 pseudonym “1” is still used for signing the CAM.
Then the used pseudonym is switched to pseudonym “2”. So,
in contrast to time point t0 at time point t1 pseudonym “2” is
used for signing during the next time frame.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

time
t = t0
t = t1 
1
2
Figure 3. Switch pseudonymous keys for signing CAMs respective DENMs
(pseudonym concept)
IV.
ITS VEHICLE IDENTIFIER
Here, we categorize the available identiﬁers of vehicles
into three classes. Primary vehicle identiﬁer represent such
identiﬁers which will be typically regarded today, e.g., the
Vehicle Identiﬁcation Number (VIN). Secondary vehicle iden-
tiﬁer come up with new information technologies used in
modern vehicles. Tertiary vehicle identiﬁer are not sufﬁcient to
directly identify a vehicle but to link CAM respective DENM
messages of an ITS vehicle station.
A. Primary Vehicle Identiﬁer
To date, each vehicle is identiﬁable based on the distinct
VIN. In some areas the VIN is integrated as human readable
information in the windscreen of vehicles.
Besides the VIN, vehicles are marked with a licence plate.
This is a further primary vehicle identiﬁer, which is already
used for identiﬁcation.
With the deployment of the V2V technology vehicles
will be equipped with a long term ECC key pair and an
appropriate certiﬁcate. This certiﬁcate becomes an additional
primary vehicle identiﬁer.
B. Secondary Vehicle Identiﬁer
Besides these obvious primary vehicle identiﬁers, vehicles
have further identiﬁers. Modern vehicles are equipped with
multi-media components, which are able to etablish communi-
cations with electronic devices of the driver or passengers. Typ-
ically, wireless communication technologies, e.g., bluetooth are
used for that purpose. A bluetooth multi-media device emits
a static 48 bit MAC identiﬁer. The MAC ID is composed of
two parts: the ﬁrst half is assigned to the manufacturer of the
device, and the second half is assigned to the speciﬁc device. In
addition, each bluetooth device emits a “User-friendly-name”
which is typically alterable. Bluetooth devices operate in the
ISM band (2.4 to 2.485 GHz).
Moreover, vehicle-based wireless routers allow any Wi-Fi
equipped laptop, tablet or mobile phone to access the internet
within the ITS vehicle station while travelling if the router has
mobile communications. But routers conﬁgured as access point
need an unique Service Set Identiﬁer (SSID) or network name
to connect devices. According to the IEEE 802.11 workgroup,
Wi-Fi can be used in following distinct frequency ranges: 2.4
GHz, 3.6 GHz, 4.9 GHz, 5 GHz, and 5.9 GHz bands. Each
range is divided into a multitude of channels. Countries apply
their own regulations to the legitimate channels and maximum
power levels within these frequency ranges. In addition, each
wireless router has an unique MAC address. This is a further
secondary vehicle identiﬁer.
A Wi-Fi access point is accompanied by mobile commu-
nication. Mobile communication requires an International Mo-
bile Subscriber Identity (IMSI). That is an unique identiﬁcation
number to identify a mobile device within the network. In
addition, a SIM card with an assigned mobile phone number
is needed for mobile communication.
Since the 1th of November 2014, vehicles and motorhomes
have to be equipped with a Tyre Pressure Monitoring System
(TPMS) within Europe. There exists direct and indirect TPMS.
Direct TPMS means that speciﬁc physical sensors measure the
air pressure of the tyres. These sensors communicate wireless
with the vehicle and transmit an identiﬁer of 28 to 32 bit
length. There are different wireless technologies available for
125 kHz or 315 kHz respective 433 MHz. A detection range
of up to 40 m for direct TPMS is mentioned in [23].
Initially, secondary vehicle identiﬁer have no formal char-
acter in contrast to a licence plate or VIN. But it is technically
very easy to capture Bluetooth MAC IDs and SSIDs of a
vehicle and to link them to a vehicle because their primary
application is to establish a communication with other devices.
So, attacker can use them for their purpose.
C. Tertiary Vehicle Identiﬁer
CAMs contain a lot of static information, like the vehicle
length and vehicle width and the conﬁdence level of heading,
speed, acceleration, curvature, and yaw rate. These static
information enable to link CAMs only based on the CAM
data elements.
V.
ANALYZATION OF THE V2V COMMUNICATION
From our point of view the main technical- and privacy
problems arise with the periodically broadcasted CAMs. So,
here in our analysis only CAMs are addressed.
A. Technical Issues
1) CAM data elements: A lot of CAM data elements
are results of sensor measures, like: speed, driving direction,
longitudinal acceleration, curvature. But sensors have only a
deﬁned precison level.
The geographic position is typically calculated based on
satellite systems, like GPS. But spooﬁng attacks on GPS to
inﬂuence the geographic position are possible. This issue is
intensively analyzed in Tippenhauer et al. [24]. Open source
code for software deﬁnded radio makes GPS spooﬁng attacks
very realistic. The tool GPS-SDR-SIM generates GPS base-
band signal data streams, which can be converted to RF using
software-deﬁned radio (SDR) platforms, such as bladeRF,
HackRF, and USRP [25]. In addition, spooﬁng attacks on GPS
can also inﬂuence the time synchronization for ITS vehicle
stations.
For that, the data elements of received CAMs can only
be regarded as additional information, which have to be
veriﬁed by internal sensor measurements of the ITS vehicle
station. Even when a receiver can cryptographically verify a
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

CAM respective DENM then the receiver only knows that the
received data is broadcasted by an authentic ITS station and
no error happend on the wireless transmission path of the data.
Nevertheless the receiver can not really trust the CAM data due
to the sensor accuracy and possibly attacks on the time value
and geographic position as well as modiﬁcations of vehicular
components.
2) Capacity of the IEEE802.11p channel: As shown in
III-A only about 10% of the CAM size is used for coding
the data, the remainder to assure integrity and authenticity
of the data (ECDSA signature and certiﬁcate). So, the used
technology to assure message authentication and integrity is
very costly especially considering the fuzziness of the CAM
data as shown in V-A1.
Even today collisions on the IEEE802.11p channel are
feared in case of a large number of communicating ITS vehicle
stations in a local area because all ITS station share only one
frequency channel for the whole broadcast communication. But
obviously we have to adapt the used key length to perform
the ECDSA signature in future. Today, the NSA does not
recommend to use the ECC domain NIST P-256 any more,
due to the progress in quantum computing [26]. The next
existing ECC domain parameters have key length of 384 bit.
This extends the size of ECDSA signature from 512 to 768
bit. This means the CAM size will be increased from 2 kbit
to 2,5 kbit because the signature of the certiﬁcate is affected,
too. This will worsen the collision problem. Looking in the
remote future (20 year ahead) we have to regard that quantum
computers can possibly attack elliptic curve cryptography.
There is large progress in research and construction of quantum
computers based on semiconductors at the moment. Because
vehicles have an operation time of about 15 - 20 years that
issue has to be regarded in future, too. Although, no broadly
accepted alternative post-quantum public key cryptography is
ready for application, one consequence is very certain: in future
new post-quantum public key cryptography have to use much
longer keys compared to ECC today. This worsen the collision
problem if ECDSA signatures should be replaced by post-
quantum signatures algorithms.
B. Security Issues
1) Jamming the IEEE802.11p channel: An attack, which
can be performed very easy is jamming the 5.9 GHz wireless
channel (with a strong sender). As consequence, it can not be
assured that CAM and DENM messages reach the surrounded
ITS vehicle stations in time.
2) Security Shortcomings of the ETSI Speciﬁcations: The
ETSI certiﬁcate format provides only elliptic curve cryp-
tography based on the NIST prime curve P-256. No mechanism
is provided to securely adapt the key length or ECC domain
parameters or cryptographic algorithms if necessary. In the
meantime this issue is already termed: cryptographic agility.
Additional security shortcomings concerning the necessary
Public Key Infrastructure are explained in detail in [27].
C. Privacy Issues
1) Linkability of CAMs based on Certiﬁcates: Each CAM
includes a pseudonymous certiﬁcate. The appropriate secret
key is used to sign the CAMs for a short time frame, e.g.,
15 minutes. As long as the same key for signing is used the
appropriate certiﬁcate is static. So, this static information at
Assumptions: Speed: 50 km / h,     CAM transmission frequency: 10 Hz
time / seconds
t = t0
t = t0 + 0.1
~ 1.4 m
~ 1.4 m
Figure 4. Movement of an ITS vehicle station within 100 ms based on a
speed of 50 km/h
the end of each CAM can be easily used to link CAMs of
an ITS vehicle station. The pseudonym concept (change keys
during operation) is applied to prohibit the linkability of CAMs
after a pseudonym switch. But a linkability of CAMs is even
possible based on the (static) CAM data elements shown next.
D. Linkability of CAMs based on the CAM data
The requested transmission rate for CAMs are 10 messages
per second. Figure 4 illustrates that an ITS vehicle station
moves on nearly 1.4 m in this case if the speed is 50 km/h. 50
km/h is the permitted speed in towns in Europe. Assuming an
ITS vehicle station has a minimum length of 3 m: In that case
the length of an ITS vehicle station overlaps at least 50% of
the movement (1.4 m). If the ITS vehicle station is longer than
3 m it overlaps much more than 50%. So, no other ITS vehicle
station can physically be at the same geographic position.
This means, a linkability of CAMs of a speciﬁc ITS vehicle
station is constituted only based on the geographic position
of the CAMs respective DENMs. In addition, further static
CAM data elements (e.g., vehicle length and vehicle width, and
the conﬁdence level of heading, speed, acceleration, curvature,
and yaw rate) and the current speed (minor change within a
time frame of 100 ms) are helpful to link the CAMs if the
ITS vehicle station is much faster then 50 km/h. Furthermore,
the trajectory (included in the low frequency container of the
CAM) can be used to link CAMs of an ITS vehicle station.
These linkability of CAMs can be exploited to plot com-
plete CAM traces of drives of a speciﬁc vehicle described in
detail in [9].
Also, CAM traces can be bound to a vehicle, e.g, based on
secondary identities. First practical measurements show that,
e.g., bluetooth multi-media devices of analyzed vehicles of
a speciﬁc german OEM have the “User-friendly-name” OEM
name followed by a ﬁgure space and an individual ﬁve-ﬁgure
number. The ﬁve-ﬁgure number are the last 5 ﬁgures of the
VIN.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

VI.
CONCLUSION
Modern vehicles are already equipped with a lot of sensor
elements to support driving assistance. That will be an ongoing
process due to automated driving. ITS vehicle stations can
trust data of internal vehicular sensors much more than the
information contained in the received CAMs as shown in V-A.
Additionally, an ITS vehicle station can not be sure that sent
CAMs can be received in time, due to jamming or collisions
on the wireless communication channel. For the reasons listed
above, we argue that the V2V communication, especially
CAMs, will not have this importance then expected. CAM
data can only be an additional information, e.g., in invisible
situations which have to be checked by the internal sensors. In
addition, the concept to secure messages (ECDSA signature)
and to verify them is very time consuming. In addition, a
complex key management system is necessary to enrole the
needed pseudonymous keys and certiﬁcates. Moreover, the
signing of the data increase the CAM message size by a factor
of 10. Finally, the mechanism to solve the privacy requirements
(pseudonym concept) allows attackers to plot CAM traces of
speciﬁc vehicles and drivers, which are non-disputable, due
to the applied signatures with unique keys. So, the suggested
pseudonym concept neglects the privacy requirements. In sum-
mary, it can be stated that a new V2V approach for the day-2
deployment of ITS vehicle stations is needed, which addresses
the whole analyzed technical limitations and privacy shortcom-
ings of the periodic sent CAMs. One possible direction is to
use symmetric cryptography (message authentication codes)
instead of electronic signatures, mentioned in [13].
In this paper, only the V2V communication, especially
CAMs, are analyzed. In contrast, the adaptation of the
ETSI communication to ITS roadside station - vehicle-2-
infrastructure (V2I) - constituted in [27] is sound and can be
broadly applied that way.
REFERENCES
[1]
Car 2 Car Communication Consortium, “Mission, News, Documents,”
2015, https://www.car-2-car.org/, access date: November 02, 2016.
[2]
ETSI,
“Intelligent
Transport
Systems
(ITS);Security;
Security
header and certiﬁcate formats, ETSI TS 103 097 V1.2.1,” 2013,
http://www.etsi.org/, access date: November 02, 2016.
[3]
European
Commission,
“SCOOP@F,”
2013,
http://inea.ec.europa.eu/en/ten-t, access date: November 2, 2016.
[4]
BMVI, “Cooperative its corridor rotterdam-franfurt-vienna joint deploy-
ment,” 2014, http://www.bmvi.de, access date: November 2, 2016.
[5]
Vejdirektoratet,
“NordicWay,”
2016,
http://vejdirektoratet.dk/EN/roadsector/Nordicway/Pages/Default.aspx,
access date: November 2, 2016.
[6]
C-ITS Platform of the EC DG MOVE, “Final Report,” 2016,
http://ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/its/doc/c-its-platform-ﬁnal-report-
january-2016.pdf, access date: November 2, 2016.
[7]
Recommended Elliptic Curves For Federal Government Use, National
Institute of Standards and Technology, 1999. [Online]. Available:
http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/ST/toolkit/documents/dss/NISTReCur.pdf,
access date: November 02, 2016
[8]
Brainpool.
[9]
M. Ullmann, T. Strubbe, and C. Wieschebrink, “V2V Communication
- Keeping You Under Non-Disputable Surveillance (Short Paper),” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Vehicular Networking Conference(VNC), to
appear.
IEEE, 2016.
[10]
G. Samara, W. A. Al-Salihy, and R. Sures, “Security analysis of
vehicular ad hoc nerworks (vanet),” in Network Applications Protocols
and Services (NETAPPS), 2010 Second International Conference on.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 55–60.
[11]
P. Papadimitratos, L. Buttyan, J.-P. Hubaux, F. Kargl, A. Kung, and
M. Raya, “Architecture for secure and private vehicular communica-
tions,” in Telecommunications, 2007. ITST’07. 7th International Con-
ference on ITS.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 1–6.
[12]
J. Freudiger, M. Raya, M. F´elegyh´azi, P. Papadimitratos et al., “Mix-
zones for location privacy in vehicular networks,” in Proceedings of
the ﬁrst international workshop on wireless networking for intelligent
transportation systems (Win-ITS), 2007.
[13]
J. Petit, F. Schaub, M. Feiri, and F. Kargl, “Pseudonym schemes
in vehicular networks: A survey,” IEEE communications surveys &
tutorials, vol. 17, no. 1, 2015, pp. 228–255.
[14]
F. Schaub, Z. Ma, and F. Kargl, “Privacy requirements in vehicular
communication systems,” in Computational Science and Engineering,
2009. CSE’09. International Conference on, vol. 3.
IEEE, 2009, pp.
139–145.
[15]
B. Wiedersheim, Z. Ma, F. Kargl, and P. Papadimitratos, “Privacy
in inter-vehicular networks: Why simple pseudonym change is not
enough,” in Wireless On-demand Network Systems and Services
(WONS), 2010 Seventh International Conference on.
IEEE, 2010,
pp. 176–183.
[16]
S. S. Yang, Y. G. Kim, and H. Choi, “Vehicle identiﬁcation using
discrete spectrums in wireless sensor networks,” Journal of Networks,
vol. 3, no. 4, 2008, pp. 51–63.
[17]
S. Astapov and A. Riid, “A multistage procedure of mobile vehicle
acoustic identiﬁcation for single-sensor embedded device,” International
Journal of Electronics and Telecommunications, vol. 59, no. 2, 2013,
pp. 151–160.
[18]
C. Carpenter, M. Fowler, and T. Adler, “Generating route-speciﬁc
origin-destination tables using bluetooth technology,” Transportation
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, no.
2308, 2012, pp. 96–102.
[19]
ETSI, “ETSI EN 302 665 V1.1.1: Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) -
Communications Architecture,” 2010, http://www.etsi.org/, access date:
November 02, 2016.
[20]
——, “ETSI EN 302 637-2 V1.3.2: Intelligent Transport Systems
(ITS); Vehicular Communications; Basic Set of Applications; Part
2: Speciﬁcation of Cooperative Awareness Basic Service,” 2015,
http://www.etsi.org/, access date: November 02, 2016.
[21]
——, “ETSI TS 102 637-3 V1.2.2: Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS);
Vehicular Communications; Basic Set of Applications; Part 3: Speci-
ﬁcations of Decentralized Environmental Notiﬁcation Basic Service,”
2010, http://www.etsi.org/, access date: November 02, 2016.
[22]
N. Bissmeyer, H. Stubing, E. Schoch, S. Gotz, J. P. Stotz, and B. Lonc,
“A generic public key infrastructure for securing car-to-x communica-
tion,” in 18th ITS World Congress, 2011.
[23]
R. M. Ishtiaq Roufa, H. Mustafaa, S. O. Travis Taylora, W. Xua,
M. Gruteserb, W. Trappeb, and I. Seskarb, “Security and privacy
vulnerabilities of in-car wireless networks: A tire pressure monitoring
system case study,” in 19th USENIX Security Symposium, Washington
DC, 2010, pp. 11–13.
[24]
N. O. Tippenhauer, C. P¨opper, K. B. Rasmussen, and S. Capkun, “On
the requirements for successful gps spooﬁng attacks,” in Proceedings of
the 18th ACM conference on Computer and communications security.
ACM, 2011, pp. 75–86.
[25]
T.
Ebinuma,
“Gps-sdr-sim,”
GitHub,
2015,
https://github.com/osqzss/gps-sdr-sim,
access
date:
Novemver
2,
2016.
[26]
National
Security
Agency,
“Cryptography
today,”
2015,
https://www.nsa.gov/ia/programs/suiteb cryptography,
access
data:
November 02, 2016.
[27]
M. Ullmann, T. Strubbe, C. Wieschebrink, and D. K¨ugler, “Secure
Vehicle-to-Infrastructure Communication: Secure Roadside Stations,
Key Management, and Crypto Agility,” in International Journal On
Advances in Security, vol 9 no 12.
IARIA, 2016, pp. 80–89.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

