Evaluation of a General Purpose Communication Unit for Two-Wheelers
Jos´e Santa, Pedro J. Fern´andez and Antonio F. Skarmeta
Department of Information and Communication Engineering
Computer Science Faculty, University of Murcia
30100 Murcia, Spain
Email: {josesanta, pedroj, skarmeta}@um.es
Abstract—Vehicular communications are a need in future smart
scenarios, since people can spend hours on a variety of transport
means in daily activities. However, most of the current research
deals with the integration of telematics in light vehicles, while two-
wheelers (or equivalent) present especial conditions that reveal a
need for new communication units that allow integrating bikes
and mopeds (among others) into vehicular networks. In this
paper, this gap is solved with a new embedded design provided
with IEEE 802.11p and cellular communications, which can work
as a mobile router and presents a simple but effective interface
for warning services. A key point of the proposal is the bet for
IPv6 as the base network protocol, which will be the essential
in all-connected environments following the IoT paradigm. The
communication unit has been tested in a real driving scenario, and
one-hop results using the 802.11p channel reveal communication
delays bellow 2 ms, packet delivery rates above 50% within a
road stretch of 400 meters, and a maximum throughput of 4
Mbps. These performance values are adequate for a number of
safety, infotainment and exploitation services.
Keywords–Communication
unit;
Two-wheeler;
Performance
evaluation; IPv6.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Cooperative Intelligent Transportation Systems (C-ITS) are
demonstrating to improve safety and mobility of common vehi-
cles, as it has been reported in results of European projects like
Drive C2X [1] or FOTsis [2]. These systems stretch the range
of isolated systems powered with sensors to better maintain
contextual information about the surrounding trafﬁc, thanks
to wireless communication technologies. Vehicular networks
have reached a standardization stage and vehicle to vehicle
(V2V) and vehicle to infrastructure (V2I) communications are
considered to save lives and improve travel experience in the
near future. The USA government has stated its deployment
strategy in this line [3], for instance. However, the work in this
area focused on two-wheelers is still limited in the ITS context,
even though European studies remarked the need for further
research in the area of vulnerable road users (VRU) [4]. Bikes,
mopeds and motorbikes have special constraints that make
them a different vehicle group to be integrated in the Future
Internet. Power source, mobility patterns, vehicle dimensions,
communication range, positioning capability, human-machine
interface (HMI) or electronics integration are some of these
particular features. The potential of C-ITS in the two-wheel
segment is clear, but a proper technological platform is needed
to provide effective safety and mobility services.
For C-ITS to happen, a network that interconnects all
the different elements of the road is necessary. In this ﬁeld,
different standardization bodies have deﬁned its own reference
communication architecture. IEEE have bet on Wireless Ac-
cess in Vehicular Environments (WAVE), whose most relevant
technology in the last years has been 802.11p, also called
Vehicular WiFi, which provides the physical and access layers
of the stack. ETSI and ISO propose an architecture with an
exchangeable access technology, and propose different routing
protocols. What is remarkable in these three proposals is
the presence of the IPv6 protocol, although it has received
a marginal interest and it is mainly considered by these
organizations as a complementary network protocol mainly for
infotainment applications. However, we understand IPv6 as an
essential piece of a vehicular communication stack to integrate
vehicular networks in the Future Internet.
The work described in this paper follows the objective of
providing a communication unit adapted to the special needs
of two-wheelers by also using IPv6 as a reference intercon-
nection protocol. For this, the proposal raises from the synergy
between current ITS standards (ISO/ETSI), Internet protocols
(IETF) and IEEE technologies. The solution is an embed-
ded communication unit for two-wheel vehicles integrating
IEEE 802.11p and 3G wireless technologies in a small-factor
computer, and running a communication middleware based on
IPv6. Apart from the design, the work is especially focused
on the prototype of the platform and the real communication
performance tests.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II places this
work in the research literature. Section III describes the design
and development of the new communication unit for two-
wheelers, while Section IV focuses on the IPv6 communication
middleware integrated. Section V includes the experimental
evaluation of the unit. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper
and describes the next steps of our work.
II.
STATE OF THE ART
A proper scientiﬁc knowledge supporting the application of
C-ITS technologies in two-wheelers is limited in the literature.
The authors in [5] have recently discussed the importance
of communications for enhancing safety and efﬁciency of
VRU and, particularly, the protection of two-wheelers. Sev-
eral works in the literature already deal with road safety
regarding pedestrians, which are the ones that barely cite two-
wheelers in the area of vehicular communications. In [6],
a review of systems to protect pedestrians reveals that until
2007 communications were rarely used to create cooperative
systems, and vision, thermal, radar or laser sensors were used
to avoid vehicle collisions with VRU. The proliferation of
lower-delay cellular connections and the wide usage of WiFi
contributed to the appearance of cooperative solutions around
2010. In [7], the base idea of exchanging localization data
among pedestrian mobile phones and car on-board devices is
presented. Here, a 3G link is mainly used, although it is also
discussed the establishment of a WiFi connection between both
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

terminals to reduce communication delay. A similar system
is presented in [8] and [9], although they analyze in more
detail the implications of the communication technology used.
The authors in [10] review a communication technology in
the 700 MHz for pedestrian to vehicle communication, which
is far from current USA and EU trend of working in the
microwave band. The solution presented in this paper focuses
on the use of vehicular WiFi technology in the 5 GHz band
for short-range vehicular communications, whose potential for
communications between cars and VRU is discussed in [11],
and cellular networks for ubiquitous access to Internet when
802.11p is not available.
A recent work dealing with the integration of telematics
in bicycles can be found in [12]. It is a preliminary system
concept in which ZigBee is used to improve travel efﬁciency
through cooperative cruise control in bikes. Although the
communication system is apart from current vehicular stan-
dards, it shows an interesting equipment embedded in the
bike with a haptic interface. In [13], a prototype of connected
motorbike uses a communication device installed in the boot
with vehicular WiFi (5 GHz). This is a reference research in
the motorbike segment, although further work is identiﬁed in
a protocol stack lacking support with current trendy standards
in the segment and not considering Internet connection. The
work in [14][15] is focused on light two-wheel vehicles,
presenting a safety system to warn cyclist about the presence
of other vehicles through a visual interfaced embedded in the
helmet. However, as a difference with the present contribution,
it is based exclusively on a 3G/4G connection through the
mobile phone for the case of the bike. The work in [16]
presents a system that also uses a mobile phone for a similar
purpose, although the novelty in this case is found in the
way that regular WiFi is used. Beacon messages are used
to directly embed information about a safety service, thus
avoiding the association. A drawback of this proposal is its
narrow application perspective and the need of using this
especial communication mode of WiFi. A work including
standardized vehicular communication protocols is described
in [17], where motorbikes are equipped with a unit using
an ETSI-compliant communication stack, while bikes use a
especial bluetooth low-power device. Although this work share
with the present contribution the idea of connecting two-
wheelers to the vehicular network, it is focused on especial
protocols for vehicular networks, and thus it sets IPv6 aside.
The proposal in [18] does not integrate up-to-date technologies
in the vehicular segment, but proposes the usage of IPv6 in
the bike domain as a proof of concept.
As can be seen, existent contributions that especially tackle
two-wheelers connectivity are generally based on technologies
and protocols far from dealing with the interconnection of
these transportation means with the rest of the Internet. We
think that IPv6 is the key piece of smart environments (e.g.,
smart cities) and, for sure, of Future Internet architectures
and, for this reason, we present a communication unit able
to integrate two-wheelers in IPv6 networks with a hardware
adapted to this operation scenario.
III.
HARDWARE PLATFORM
A new communication unit has been created for the case of
two-wheel vehicles, including necessary communication tech-
nologies and providing a proper software host. The unit was
Figure 1. Hardware design of the communication unit
initially presented in [19], considering a basic communication
middleware for a constrained safety application, and presenting
an initial prototype. The platform has been now improved to
support IPv6 network mobility to act as mobile router and the
prototype has been assembled in its ﬁnal form, being totally
operational, as it is demonstrated in Section V.
The general architecture of the unit is depicted in Fig-
ure 1. The microprocessor unit (MPU) board contains the base
platform, with the CPU, USB, and communication modules
supporting Ethernet, UMTS (3G), vehicular WiFi, GPS and
regular WiFi, which is mainly used to connect with mobile
devices installed on the two-wheeler or carried by the user(s).
These modules are connected with an appropriate antenna.
The main board is powered by a Lithium battery, given that
the two-wheel vehicle could not include a power supply (e.g.,
bikes). A basic human-machine interface (HMI) is given by an
extra board including LEDs and a Buzzer, which can be used
to execute a basic services based on warnings or for testing
purposes.
A reference prototype of the unit design has been imple-
mented and installed in both a bike and a moped. Figure 2
shows the main parts of the hardware. An overall view of
the platform is included in Figure 2a, where both the main
unit (bottom in black) and the HMI board (upper in blue) are
mounted on an electric moped. Figure 2b shows the hardware
included in the main unit, which includes the functional
modules of the MPU board described above. The unit is
based on the Laguna LGN-20 platform from Commsignia.
The communication board is visible on the top, from where
different cables are connected to the 802.11p, regular WiFi
(802.11n), GPS and 3G antennas. This system mounts an
ARM11 300MHz SoC processor, 16 MB of Flash and 8 GB
of internal storage, and 256 MB of RAM memory. The USB
interface is used to connect with the HMI board. The power
supply used is a 15 volts and 3500 mA lithium battery, which
is able to maintain the unit up more than six hours in the
operation modes used in the tests presented in Section V.
The 802.11p antenna used is a 5.9 Ghz Taoglas Limited
DCP.5900.12.4.A.02 (6 dBi), which has been afﬁxed to the
inner part of the unit enclosure, and it is visible on the upper
right corner in Figure 2b. No 802.11n antennas have been
used for the moment, and the cables are maintained in a foam
piece, but communication with near devices has been possible
without them. The 3G antenna is a common stick used for
WiFi, and it is connected on the lower left corner of the unit.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

(a) Unit mounted on a moped
(b) MPU board
(c) HMI board
Figure 2. Prototype of the communication unit for two-wheel vehicles
The HMI board includes a set of LEDs and a buzzer. The
prototype is showed in Figure 2c. One of the LEDs is used
to inform about the whole unit status, while the others and
the buzzer are left for application purposes, such as the safety
service for two-wheelers described in [19]. The USB connector
is used to connect the circuit to the main board, as can be
seen in Figure 2a. The GPS antenna has been ﬁnally installed
in the same enclosure used for the HMI in order to avoid
interferences with the main unit electronics and improve the
signal reception. This antenna is a PCTEL WS3917, which has
worked correctly in the tests.
IV.
COMMUNICATION STACK
The communication stack of the new embedded unit for
two-wheelers has been ported from the one used in the car mo-
bile router presented in [20]. This stack follows the ISO/ETSI
reference architecture speciﬁcations [21][22]. Its main design
blocks are depicted in Figure 3. IPv6 connectivity is supported
by the set of elements included within the networking and
transport layer of the unit. Network Mobility Basic Support
(NEMO) [23] is in charge of maintaining IPv6 reachability.
Regarding security, the mobile router is equipped with the
needed elements to secure mobility-related trafﬁc by means
of Internet Protocol Security (IPsec) [24]. Communication
ﬂows can be secured with IPsec once security associations
are stablished with Internet Key Exchange Protocol Version 2
(IKEv2) [25].
The functionality provided by NEMO is useful to maintain
Internet connectivity in C-ITS between all the nodes mounted
on the vehicle and the infrastructure. Thanks to NEMO, mobile
devices connected to the mobile router of the two-wheeler
(e.g., a mobile phone), are reachable through the infrastructure
at the same IPv6 address during the itinerancy of the bike or
moped. Additionally, with the aim of supporting multihoming,
Multiple Care-of Addresses Registration (MCoA) [26] has
been included in our unit. This technology allows us to perform
faster handovers, maintaining initial and target communication
ﬂows up during the transition. However, in order to better
decide the most suitable network at every single location, we
have also included modules from the IEEE 802.21 standard. As
discussed in [20], with this technology it is possible to obtain
seamless handovers by minimizing packet losses during the
process.
Figure 3. Design of the mobile router with extended IPv6 mobility support
CAM [27] and DENM [27] messages are supported by
the communication stack. They can be used to develop ITS
applications, such as the safety application for two-wheelers
presented in [19]. In this work, CAM messages are encap-
sulated in UDP datagrams over IPv6, which are sent to the
all-nodes multicast IPv6 address in a direct V2V fashion.
V.
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
The communication unit for two-wheelers has been tested
to assess its performance in real driving settings. Given its
relevance for vehicular applications, the evaluation has been
focused on the 802.11p channel, through a set of one-hop tests.
A. Testbed
The testing scenario was set in the surroundings of the Uni-
versity Centre of Defence at the Spanish Air Force Academy.
For the sake of simplicity, we preferred to move a mobile
router in a car, and maintain static the two-wheeler node, since
the last one has a battery and it is not necessary an external
power supply. Figure 4a shows the open road where the tests
were performed, in which there is direct line of sight between
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

(a) Testing location
(b) Two-wheeler communication node
(c) Mobile router used in the car
Figure 4. Scenario for testing one-hop communications using 802.11p
(a) Two-wheeler to car
(b) Car to two-wheeler
Figure 5. Delay tests using one-hop communication with 802.11p
the two-wheeler unit and the car mobile router. The new em-
bedded node was detached from the moped and placed in a box
on the sidewalk, next to the road and elevated 10 cm, as can be
seen in Figure 4b. The HMI board (blue box) was connected
just to check the correct operation of the unit through one
of the LEDs, while the GPS antenna was necessary to geo-
localise the unit. The box was placed at the middle of the road
stretch showed in Figure 4a. The mobile router mounted on a
common car is showed in Figure 4c. This is a Laguna LGN-20
from Commsignia, running a communication stack equivalent
to the one included in the two-wheeler node. The antenna used
is a combined omnidirectional 3G/11p/GPS 7dBi, which was
attached on the vehicle roof with a magnetic base.
The tests have been carried out with three different proto-
cols:
•
ICMPv6, to check the delay of the communication
link. A continuous check of the link using the ping6
tool at a rate of 1 Hz and with a payload of 56 bytes
has been performed.
•
UDP, to study packet losses. It has been chosen a
transmission rate of 1 Mbps, sending 1230 bytes of
data in each datagram. The iperf tool has been used
to generate this UDP trafﬁc.
•
TCP, to study the maximum achievable throughput.
The iperf tool has been used for this again.
Each transmission type was used to pass six times with the
car near the two-wheeler node, and different tests were carried
out to check the car to two-wheeler transmission direction,
and the two-wheeler to car one. Each record of the test was
geo-located by marking it with the GPS position. This way
the results obtained have been averaged in a 10 meter basis,
computing the distance from the car to the two-wheeler node.
B. Results
The delay results obtained in the tests are showed in
Figure 5. As can be seen, a good performance is obtained
within a communication range of near 600 meters. The round-
trip time value obtained in most of the stretch is between 1.5
and 2 ms. Delay peaks are obtained at the edges of the road
stretch until the communication is broken. As can be seen in
the plots, the results gathered in both communication directions
are equivalent, given that the ping6 generates packets that reach
the destination and then come back.
The study of the packet delivery ratio (PDR), which is
measured in percentage of packets that reach the destination
successfully, is showed in Figure 6. As expected, a similar
communication range is obtained here and, although the dis-
tance with the two-wheeler node affect the performance at
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

(a) Two-wheeler to car
(b) Car to two-wheeler
Figure 6. Packet delivery tests using one-hop communication with 802.11p
(a) Two-wheeler to car
(b) Car to two-wheeler
Figure 7. Throughput tests using one-hop communication with 802.11p
distant points, good PDR results are obtained in general within
the road stretch. It can be observed that the two-wheeler to
car case performs better. This is due to the better reception
sensibility of the antenna used for the case of the car.
TCP results are plotted in the two graphs included in
Figure 7. The ﬁrst noticeable difference with the previous
tests is the communication range decrease. This is attributed
to the features of the communication protocol used, since
TCP needs a successful connection establishment stage prior
to start the transmission. After that, the transmission rate is
adapted according to the detected performance of the link.
Again, it is observed that in the two-wheeler to car case, the
link performs in a steadier way. In any case, the maximum
throughput obtained reaches 4 Mbps in both transmission
directions, which is a good value.
The results obtained indicate a good performance of the
802.11p communication link. The delay and PDR results
assure a good operation of the network for safety services
requiring direct V2V communications. Moreover, the good
throughput of the link enables the cellular network ofﬂoad
for services, such as video transmission or ﬁle downloading,
always when a near roadside unit is available. Nevertheless,
it must be considered that, ﬁrst, the expected performance
when driving near multiple vehicles using 802.11p would be
impacted by the congestion of the communication channel;
and, second, urban scenarios would imply additional signal
reception issues, due to the rest of vehicles and buildings.
VI.
CONCLUSION
The paper describes the work carried out to develop a
communication unit for two-wheel vehicles and its evaluation
under real settings. The design of the unit has been adapted to
the distinguishing features of two-wheelers, such as the need of
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

a battery and the space/interface limitations. The hardware pro-
vides cellular and short-range communications, while a proper
middleware has been added to support IPv6 networking. Both
Internet-based and direct V2V communications are possible
and, due to the inclusion of IPv6 protocols, the unit is ready
for novel Future Internet environments, such as smart cities.
The performance tests carried out with short-range commu-
nications demonstrate the capabilities of the unit for connecting
with road-side units or nearby vehicles. The results obtained
indicate that the communication channel presents an RTT delay
of 2 ms for delivery packets, a PDR above 50% within a road
stretch of 400 meters, and a maximum throughput of 4 Mbps.
Given the embedded design of the new unit, these are good
results that assure the operation of the unit for a number of
potential services.
At the moment, we are further evaluating the unit consid-
ering the network mobility capabilities, and our plans consider
the integral adoption of all means of transport in smart envi-
ronments powered by IoT technologies. For this to be done,
especial IoT protocols will be adapted for the vehicle domain
and research efforts are being identiﬁed for homogenizing data
recovery and processing.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has been sponsored by the Spanish Ministry of
Economy and Competitiveness through the EDISON project
(contract TIN2014-52099-R), and the Spanish Ministry of
Home Affairs - Department of Transport (DGT) through the
S-CICLO project (SPIP2015-01757).
REFERENCES
[1]
“Connecting Vehicles for Safe, Confortable and Green Driving on Eu-
ropean Roads (Drive C2X),” http://www.drive-c2x.eu, 2013, [retrieved:
June, 2017].
[2]
“European Field Operational Test on Safe, Intelligent and Sustainable
Road Operation (FOTsis),” http://www.fotsis.com, 2015, [retrieved:
June, 2017].
[3]
USA Department of Transportation, “Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standards: Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) Communications,” USA Depart-
ment of Transportation, August 2014.
[4]
European Commission, “Directive 2010/40EU of the European Par-
liament and of the Council of 7 July 2010 on the framework for
the deployment of Intelligent Transport Systems in the ﬁeld of road
transport and for interfaces with other modes of transport,” European
Commission, August 2010.
[5]
C. Englund, L. Chen, A. Vinel, and S. Yang, “Future applications of
VANETs,” in Vehicular ad hoc Networks: Standards, Solutions, and
Research, C. Campolo, A. Molinaro, and R. Scopigno, Eds.
Berlin:
Springer, 2015, ch. 18, pp. 525–544.
[6]
T. Gandhi and M. Trivedi, “Pedestrian protection systems: Issues, sur-
vey, and challenges,” Intelligent Transportation Systems, IEEE Trans-
actions on, vol. 8, no. 3, September 2007, pp. 413–430.
[7]
C. Sugimoto, Y. Nakamura, and T. Hashimoto, “Prototype of pedestrian-
to-vehicle communication system for the prevention of pedestrian acci-
dents using both 3G wireless and WLAN communication,” in Wireless
Pervasive Computing, 2008. ISWPC 2008. 3rd International Symposium
on, May 2008, pp. 764–767.
[8]
K. David and A. Flach, “CAR-2-X and pedestrian safety,” IEEE
Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 5, no. 1, March 2010, pp. 70–
76.
[9]
W. Jin, C. Kwan, Z. Sun, H. Yang, and Q. Gan, “SPIVC: A smartphone-
based inter-vehicle communication system,” in Transportation Research
Board 91st Annual Meeting 2012, January 2012, pp. 1–12.
[10]
M. Nagai, K. Nakaoka, and Y. Doi, “Pedestrian-to-vehicle communica-
tion access method and ﬁeld test results,” in Antennas and Propagation
(ISAP), 2012 International Symposium on, Oct 2012, pp. 712–715.
[11]
X. Wu, S. Subramanian, R. Guha, R. G. White, J. Li, K. W. Lu,
A. Bucceri, and T. Zhang, “Vehicular communications using DSRC:
Challenges, enhancements, and evolution,” IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications, vol. 31, no. 9, September 2013, pp. 399–
408.
[12]
S. Cespedes, J. Salamanca, J. C. Sacanamboy, and C. Rivera, “Poster:
Smart networked bicycles with platoon cooperation,” in 2014 IEEE
Vehicular Networking Conference (VNC), Dec 2014, pp. 199–200.
[13]
R. Miucic, S. Rajab, S. Bai, J. Sayer, and D. Funkhouser, “Improving
motorcycle safety through DSRC motorcycle-to-vehicle communica-
tion,” in SAE 2015 World Congress and Exhibition, April 2015, pp.
1–8.
[14]
U. Hernandez-Jayo, J. Perez, and I. de-la Iglesia, “Poster: Wearable
warning system for improving cyclists safety in the scope of cooperative
systems,” in Vehicular Networking Conference (VNC), 2015 IEEE, Dec
2015, pp. 153–154.
[15]
U. Hernandez-Jayo, I. De-la Iglesia, and J. Perez, “V-alert: Description
and validation of a vulnerable road user alert system in the framework
of a smart city,” Sensors, vol. 15, no. 8, 2015, pp. 18 480–18 505.
[16]
K. Dhondge, S. Song, B. Y. Choi, and H. Park, “Wiﬁhonk: Smartphone-
based beacon stuffed WiFi car2x-communication system for vulnerable
road user safety,” in 2014 IEEE 79th Vehicular Technology Conference
(VTC Spring), May 2014, pp. 1–5.
[17]
J. J. Anaya, E. Talavera, D. Gimnez, N. Gmez, J. Felipe, and J. E.
Naranjo, “Vulnerable road users detection using v2x communications,”
in 2015 IEEE 18th International Conference on Intelligent Transporta-
tion Systems, Sept 2015, pp. 107–112.
[18]
A. Dhraief, N. Montavont, R. Kuntz, and M. Tsukada, “E-bicycle
demonstration on the tour de france,” in Computing in the Global Infor-
mation Technology, 2007. ICCGI 2007. International Multi-Conference
on, March 2007, pp. 56–56.
[19]
J. Santa, P. J. Fernandez, and M. A. Zamora, “Cooperative its for two-
wheel vehicles to improve safety on roads,” in 2016 IEEE Vehicular
Networking Conference (VNC), Dec 2016, pp. 254–257.
[20]
P. J. Fernandez, J. Santa, F. Pereniguez, and A. F. Skarmeta, “Towards
seamless inter-technology handovers in vehicular {IPv6} communica-
tions,” Computer Standards & Interfaces, vol. 52, 2017, pp. 85 – 96.
[21]
ETSI TC ITS, “Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Communications
Architecture,” ETSI EN 302 665, European Telecommunications Stan-
dards Institute, September 2010.
[22]
ISO TC 204, “Intelligent transport systems - Communications Access
for Land Mobiles (CALM) - Architecture,” ISO 21217, International
Organization for Standardization, april 2013.
[23]
V. Devarapalli, R. Wakikawa, A. Petrescu, and P. Thubert, “Network
Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support Protocol,” RFC 3963 (Proposed Stan-
dard), Jan. 2005.
[24]
S. Kent and K. Seo, “Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol,”
RFC 4301 (Draft Standard), Internet Engineering Task Force, Dec.
2005.
[25]
C. Kaufman, P. Hoffman, Y. Nir, P. Eronen, and T. Kivinen, “Internet
Key Exchange Protocol Version 2 (IKEv2),” RFC 7296 (Proposed
Standard), Internet Engineering Task Force, Oct. 2014.
[26]
R. Wakikawa, V. Devarapalli, G. Tsirtsis, T. Ernst, and K. Nagami,
“Multiple Care-of Addresses Registration,” RFC 5648 (Proposed Stan-
dard), Internet Engineering Task Force, Oct. 2009.
[27]
ETSI TC ITS, “Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Vehicular Com-
munications; Basic Set of Applications; Part 2: Speciﬁcation of Co-
operative Awareness Basic Service,” ETSI EN 302 637 2, European
Telecommunications Standards Institute, November 2014.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

