Rotated Constellations for a Satellite Communication Link in a DVB-T2 context 
 
 
 
Benjamin Ros, Frederic Lacoste 
Satellite telecommunications systems department 
CNES (French Space Agency) 
Toulouse, France 
Benjamin.Ros@cnes.fr, Frederic.Lacoste@cnes.fr  
Kevin Burgi, Charbel Abdel Nour 
Electronics department 
Institut Mines-Télécom / Télécom Bretagne 
CNRS Lab-STICC, UMR 6285, Brest, France 
firstname.lastname@telecom-bretagne.eu 
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, the focus is on DVB-T2-like rotated 
constellations techniques applied to a satellite link for mobile 
services. Associated with signal space component interleaving, 
a QPSK constellation with rotation is evaluated over S-band 
satellite mobile channel with payload impairments. Channel 
capacity is first assessed showing an important potential for 
improvement. Largest gains are obtained for high spectral 
efficiency and for the cases with high level of impairments. 
Coded simulations show that rotated constellation can bring up 
to 1.5 dB gain for medium to high coding rates over a satellite 
to vehicle channel, confirming channel capacity predictions. 
Keywords— rotated constellations, DVB-T2, DVB-NGH, 
signal interleaving, satellite payload impairments, satellite mobile 
vehicular link  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The second generation of the Digital Video Broadcasting 
Terrestrial standard (DVB-T2) [1], shows excellent results 
over terrestrial channels, with limited mobility. To cope with 
higher mobility requirements with the possibility of covering 
a larger interval of signal to noise ratios and spectral 
efficiencies, DVB-NGH specifications have been drafted. 
They introduce advanced Multiple Input Multiple Output 
(MIMO) antennas schemes, low coding rates and a 
complementary satellite component for a larger coverage. 
Indeed, satellite transmission seems to be an attractive and 
efficient way to broadcast TV or radio over large areas. More 
recently, ITU studies [10] or 5GPP reflexion groups have 
promoted satellite as a service or a coverage complement of 
terrestrial systems. But for mass market considerations, use 
of very-well designed waveforms for satellite link [9] is not 
to consider, in the idea of having the same chipset for 
receiving terrestrial and satellite link. Non optimized 
transmission using a terrestrial standard with well choosen 
settings may be preferred. This thought may explain why in 
this paper, DVB-T2 transmission is studied on a satellite link. 
Thus, as  rotated constellations are considered to improve the 
quality of transmission on terrestrial channels, purpose of this 
work is to assess if such technique may bring such benefits 
over satellite vehicular channel. 
In a conventional Quadrature Amplitude Modulation 
(QAM), half of the information bits are carried by the I 
component and the remaining half by the Q component. 
When constellation rotation is considered, every constellation 
point in signal space has its own projection on the I and Q 
components separately. Therefore, information regarding all 
bits to be transmitted is carried over both I and Q 
components. 
Component 
interleaving 
is 
performed 
afterwards such that the I and Q signals carrying the 
information regarding one symbol are sent in a different time 
and over a different subcarrier of the DVB-T2 Orthogonal 
Frequency Division Multiplexing module. Now, if deep 
fading occurs at a particular time and frequency, it is highly 
unlikely that it would affect both I and Q components of the 
same symbol. Thanks to increased robustness, rotated 
constellations were adopted in the DVB-T2 and DVB-NGH 
standards [1] [2] [3]. 
Nevertheless, despite this adoption, no particular study on 
its potential benefits over a mobile satellite channel has been 
performed. In this paper, transmission from a geostationary 
satellite over S-band mobile propagation channel is studied.  
Roof top vehicular antenna affected by intermediate tree 
shadowing is considered at receiver side. The underlying 
channel aggregates propagation effects and payload 
impairments such as non-linearity effects, phase noise, and 
filtering.  
The paper is organized as follows: first, the principle of 
constellation rotation is recalled in Section II. Then, the Land 
Mobile Satellite (LMS) three-state channel model over S-
band is defined in Section III. It is followed by channel 
capacity computations for rotated and classical QPSK 
constellation in Section IV. Coded simulation results for a 
DVB-T2-like waveform with constellation rotation are 
provided in Section V. These simulations equally include 
satellite payload impairments. Section VI concludes the 
paper.  
II. 
ON THE ROTATION OF CONSTELLATION PRINCIPLE  
Assuming that a Rayleigh-like fading can occur 
independently on the phase and quadrature component of a 
constellation symbol, the situation depicted in Fig. 1 
represents a typical study case for constellation rotation. Bit 
information is carried by both I and Q and therefore is not 
totally lost.  Half of the total amount of transmitted bits 
would have been affected by deep fading in case of non-
rotated constellation. Nonetheless, independent fading is 
assumed possible thanks to frequency/time I/Q interleaving. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Indeed, real propagation channel show correlation both in 
time and in frequency.  
 
 
Figure 1.  On the left hand side: rotated constellation without fading; on 
the rigth hand side: rotated constellation with fading on the I component. 
The general architecture for a constellation rotation 
transmitter adopts a Bit Interleaved Coded Modulation 
scheme (BICM) [4] as depicted in Fig. 2. It is composed of 
the association of an outer error correcting code and a QAM 
mapper applying a constellation rotation and I/Q interleaving 
separated by a bit interleaver. The code represents a 
combination of a Bose-Chaudury-Hocquenghem (BCH) code 
and a Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) code. I/Q 
interleaving is performed in time an frequency via a set of 
cell, time and frequency interleaving as defined in the DVB-
T2 standard [1]. Interleaved components are afterwards 
mapped to OFDM subcarriers according to the DVB-T2 
frame builder.  
Rotation angle  was chosen following a set of 
predefined optimization criteria related to the L-product 
distance [5] and signal space characteristics in case of deep 
fades [3]. The choice is assessed under a DVB-T2 context, 
considering that fading over I and Q component is 
uncorrelated. This condition is reached thanks to the long 
frequency and time interleavers adopted in the DVB-T2 
standard. Adopted rotation angle values in this article, the 
same as in DVB-T2 thanks to the interleavers, are 
summarized in TABLE I.  
TABLE I.  
ROTATION ANGLE FOR A DVB-T2 CONTEXT  
Modulation 
QPSK 
16-QAM 
64-QAM 
256-QAM 
 (degrees) 
29,0 
16,8 
8,6 
3,6 
 
At the receiver side (see Fig. 3), one main difference 
exists when compared with a conventional bit interleaved 
coded modulation with an OFDM receiver. Log-likelihood 
ratios (LLRs) provided by the demapper are now computed 
over rotated symbols. This induces the use of a 2-component 
(in-phase and quadrature) demapper. Indeed, the Euclidean 
distance of received symbol now should be computed over 
the two projections over the I and Q axes as follows:  
          
 
     
                  
 
   
 
      
 
 
     
                  
 
   
 
      
 
             (1) 
where x is a symbol of the QAM constellation,    
  represent 
the symbols of the constellation carrying the bit bi when bi is 
equal to j, I and Q are the received in phase and quadrature 
components, I/Q is the fading on the I or Q component, 2² 
is the Additive White Gaussian (AWGN) noise variance, Ix 
and Qx  denote the reference symbols of the rotated  QAM 
constellation.  
 
 
Figure 2.  General architecture for an OFDM transmitter with a rotation of 
constellation 
 
Figure 3.  Processing at the receiver for rotated constellations. 
 
III. 
S-BAND 3 STATES MODEL 
This model detailed in [6] has been widely used since the 
90’s. It is fully empirical (or equivalently statistical) and 
relies on a specific S-band measurements dataset including 
various environments (open, intermediate tree shadow, 
heavy tree shadow, suburban, urban). Basically, it divides 
the LMS propagation channel into 3 shadowing states: 
 
State  1 : “LOS” -Line of Sight-  
 
State 2 : “Shadowing”, corresponding typically to 
isolated trees in suburban areas 
 
State 
3 
: 
“Heavy 
Shadowing/Blockage” 
corresponding typically to houses in suburban 
areas. 
 
In the generative model, the state change (large scale) is 
synthesised using a 3-state Markov chain whose input 
parameters are the initial state vector and the transition 
matrix. Two more input parameters have also been added: 
 
Each state is assumed to have a minimum length 
(“state length”) 
 
A transition between two states happens over a 
given transition distance (“state transition length”). 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 4.  Excerpt from LMS channel for intermediate tree shadow 
environment 
Then, inside each state (mid-scale), the channel fading is 
assumed to follow a Loo distribution (basically the 
distribution of a Rice process whose direct path amplitude is 
log-normally distributed) [6]. The input parameters for each 
state are the log-normal parameters of the direct path 
amplitude and the multipath power assumed to be constant. 
Another input parameter at this intermediate scale is the 
shadowing correlation length that influences the dynamics 
of the direct path amplitude change within one state. 
At small scale, in our implementation, the fading 
dynamics are taken into account by using a Zheng-Xiao 
model (Classical Doppler spectrum). One should note that 
this model is narrow band. In other words, fading 
coefficients are varying only along the time axis. For 
simulations in this paper, Intermediate tree shadow 
environment is used, with vehicle moving at 50 km/h, seeing 
satellite with 40 degrees elevation. A channel excerpt is 
shown in Fig. 4. 
IV. 
CHANNEL CAPACITY  
When equiprobable assumption is made at the 
transmitter, the channel capacity can be assessed by 
computing mutual information between transmitted and 
received symbols, respectively X and Y, as it has been done 
in [8]. In addition, a computation of mutual information 
using LLR metrics is derived in [7]. This computation is 
performed via averaging measured mutual information over 
a sufficiently large number of samples constituting a 
sufficient statistic. Channel capacity C is therefore defined 
as: 
          
                            (2) 
Nowadays, BICM is adopted in most advanced 
telecommunication standards. Assuming bit interleaving with 
infinite depth, channel capacity can be written as the sum of 
log2(M) independent channels, provided that mutual 
information computation is averaged over a long period. 
                 
                 
   
                          (3) 
E  is the expectation operator, bi  is the transmitted bit, I and 
Q are the in phase and quadrature received symbols, i is the 
mutual information operator, M is the number of states of the 
modulation. Mutual information between bit bi  and received  
I and Q components is defined by  
                      
 
                               (4) 
taking into account that LLR general definition is given by  
                              
             
                                  (5) 
And that : 
                                                (6) 
we obtain: 
 
                             
 
                                         (7) 
As a result i(bi;I,Q) becomes 
                   
 
         
 
                  
          (8) 
Using (3), channel capacity  C, in bits/s/Hz,  is now equal to 
                                            (9) 
 
Figure 5.  Channel capacity for LMS-Intermediate Tree Shadow 
Environment (LMS-ITS). 250 ms Time Interleaving 
Results in Fig. 5 over LMS-ITS environment show 
mainly that for high spectral efficiencies (or high signal to 
noise ratios), rotation of the constellation can show a 
significant gain in required signal to noise ratio Es/N0, 
reaching in some cases more than 1.5 dB. 
Interleaving depth and type does not affect obtained 
results despite computation via Monte Carlo averaging of 
measured 
mutual information. Indeed, averaging is 
performed over a large number of channel uses or 
transmissions far superior to interleaving depth. The 
expectation being between the transmitted bit and its LLR, 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

the order of bit transmission does not alter the average value 
over the sequence.  
V. 
CODED SIMULATIONS 
A. Parameters and simulation chain 
From channel capacity results, suitable working points 
where rotated constellations bring an important gain seem to 
be those with high spectral efficiencies. To verify this 
assertion, the DVB-T2-like transmission chain [1] shown in 
Fig. 6 was chosen considering ideal receiver as a first step. 
Error rates are computed at the output of the LDPC decoder. 
Indeed, the assumption made in the DVB-T2 specification 
that a frame error rate of 10-4 at the output of the LDPC 
decoder corresponds to a frame error rate of 10-7 at the 
output of the BCH decoder is also assumed. Simulation 
parameters are summarized in table II. 
 
 
Figure 6.  DVB-T2 like Transmission chain 
Considered satellite radio frequency model includes 
frequency filtering, phase noise and amplifier non-linearity 
impairments. Applied phase noise and amplifier non 
linearity models are compliant to the definition provided in 
[9]. 
We would like to recall that in satellite microcosm 
technical conventions, Input Back Off (IBO) is defined as the 
power difference between input power giving maximum 
output power  and current input power. Output Back Off 
(OBO) equals to the difference between maximum 
deliverable power in continuous wave signal and current 
output power of modulated signal.  
 
 
TABLE II.  
MAIN PARAMETERS FOR PERFORMED SIMULATIONS 
Parameter name 
Value 
Center frequency 
2,2 GHz 
Bandwidth 
5 MHz 
Constellation and rotation  
QPSK, with = 29.0 degrees rotation 
or without rotation 
Coder 
LDPC 16200 bits length. No BCH 
encoder 
Propagation channel 
LMS-ITS 3 states model, 50 km/h, 40° 
satellite elevation 
OFDM 
2K FFT size, 1/4 guard interval 
Satellite RF model 
with and without, variable Input Back 
Off for the amplifier (IBO) 
 
TABLE III. summarizes considered IBO values and their 
respective OBO. These values condition obtained results and 
are of great importance when dimensioning a satellite link.  
TABLE III.  
IBO VS OBO  FOR CONSIDRED S-BAND AMPLIFIER 
IBO (dB) 
OBO (dB) 
0 
1.37 
2 
1.6 
4 
2.2 
B. System dimensioning and optimization 
From a satellite system optimization/dimensioning point 
of view, two metrics have usually to be considered : power 
loss, corresponding to OBO value, and signal quality loss, 
equal to the performance gap considering RF sub-block or 
not. Total loss metric is then defined as: 
                                              (10) 
A good choice would minimize Total loss value. But for 
different combinations giving nearly the same Total loss 
amount, preferred solution would be the minimization of 
signal quality loss, corresponding to a better carrier over 
intermodulation power ratio. In our case, total loss is around 
1.85 dB obtained by the combination of 0.25 dB of signal 
quality loss and 1.6 dB of power loss. 
C. Performance Results 
Figure 7.  and Figure 8.  show FER simulation results at 
the output of the LDPC decoder for the considered DVB-
T2-like chain with a code rate R = 11/15 and R = 2/3 
respectively. 
Corresponding 
results 
confirm 
channel 
capacity predictions. Indeed at 10-4 of FER, rotated 
constellation brings a 1.3 dB gain over a LMS-ITS channel 
with R = 11/15 and 1.0 dB with R = 2/3 when no 
impairments are considered. Additional gains ranging from 
0.15 to 0.5 dB are achieved when filtering, phase noise and 
amplifier non-linearity with 4.0 and 0.0 dB IBO are 
introduced. Therefore, rotated constellation seems to 
improve robustness to different types of impairments.  
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 7.  FER comparison results between a rotated and a classical QPSK 
for R=11/15 with and without impairments. 
 
Figure 8.  FER comparison results between a rotated and a classical QPSK 
for R=2/3 with and without impairments. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, the study of rotated constellation was 
performed over a satellite-to-vehicle link in S-band. In 
addition, impairments of a satellite payload have been 
considered. Backed by channel capacity computations and 
coded simulation results, a substantial gain greater than 1.5 
dB was pointed out for medium to high spectral 
efficiencies/coding rates. Moreover, larger gains were 
obtained when channel impairments were considered. 
Complexity overhead is negligible provided that interleaving 
blocks process I/Q cells as in the DVB-T2 standard. The use 
of this standard in a satellite context may appear in a  
satellite-terrestrial 
hybrid 
system, 
where 
for 
market 
considerations, there is a single chipset to receive terrestrial 
and satellite link. Through this paper, a way to make DVB-
T2 waveform better optimized for satellite link has been 
shown. Lastly, whereas this paper was limited to QPSK 
modulation and DVB-T2 adopted rotation angle, other 
studies are ongoing considering interleaver design, rotation 
angle choice, and other QAM modulations over such satellite 
channels. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The first author thanks the Research and Technology 
decision board of French Space Agency allowing this kind of 
applicative research. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] ETSI (European Telecommunications Standards Institute), 
“Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Frame structure channel 
coding and modulation for a second generation digital 
terrestrial television broadcasting system (DVB-T2)”, ETSI, 
EN 302 755 V1.2.1, Sophia Antipolis, France, October 2010.  
[2] ETSI, “Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Implementation 
guidelines for a second generation digital terrestrial television 
broadcasting system (DVB-T2)”, ETSI, TS 102 831 V1.1.1 , 
Sophia Antipolis, France, October 2010.  
[3] C. 
Abdel 
Nour 
and 
C. Douillard, 
“Rotated 
QAM 
Constellations to Improve BICM Performance for DVB-T2”, 
5th     Symp.   on   Turbo   Codes   and   Related   Topics,       
Lausanne, Switzerland, Sept. 2008, pp. 55-60. 
[4] G. Caire, G. Taricco, and E. Biglieri, "Bit-interleaved coded 
modulation," IEEE Trans. on Infor. Theory, vol.44, no.3,  
May 1998, pp.927-946. 
[5] J. Boutros and E. Viterbo, "Signal space diversity: a power- 
and bandwidth-efficient diversity technique for the Rayleigh 
fading channel," IEEE Trans. on Infor. Theory, vol.44, no.4, 
Jul 1998 , pp.1453-1467. 
[6] F. Pérez-Fontán, M. Vázquez-Castro and C. Enjamio Cabado, 
“Statistical Modeling of the LMS Channel”, IEEE Trans. on 
veh. technol., vol.50, No. 6, Nov. 2001, pp. 1549-1567. 
[7] J.Olmos, S. Ruiz, M. García-Lozano and D. Martin Sacristan 
“Link Abstraction Models Based on Mutual Information for 
LTE Downlink” European cooperation in the field of 
scientific and technical research, 2010.  
[8] W. Chauvet, C. Amiot-Bazile and J. Lacan, “Prediction of 
performance of the DVB-SH system relying on Mutual 
Information”, 
in 
11th 
signal 
processing 
for 
space 
communications workshop, Cagliari, Italy, Sept 2010, , pp. 
413-420  
[9] ETSI, “DVB-SH implementations Guidelines”, ETSI TS 102 
584 V1.3.1, Nov 2011. 
[10] IMT-advanced “Detailed specifications of the satellite radio 
interfaces 
of 
International 
Mobile Telecommunications-
Advanced (IMT-advanced)”, document 4/40-E,  revision 1, 
oct 2013. 
 
 
 
Signal 
quality loss 
Const. Rotation 
gain 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

