Simulation Evaluation of Cooperative Intersection Traversing Method
for Connected Vehicles
Koki Higashiyama, Kenta Kimura, Habibullah Babakarkhail, and Kenya Sato
Computer and Information Science
Graduate School of Science and Engineering
Doshisha University
Kyoto, Japan
Email: koki.higashiyama@nislab.doshisha.ac.jp, kenta.kimura@nislab.doshisha.ac.jp,
habibullah.babak@nislab.doshisha.ac.jp, ksato@mail.doshisha.ac.jp
Abstract—Connected vehicles can exchange information with
each other by communicating via a network, enabling them
to detect vehicles in their blind spots which cannot be seen
by a vehicle alone, thereby contributing to trafﬁc efﬁciency
and safety. Since it will take time for such vehicles to become
prevalent on roads, connected and non-connected vehicles will
share the road in the future. We have developed a method that
enables connected vehicles to share information gathered by their
sensors on surrounding vehicles near an intersection. Simulation
experiments were used to consider safety and evaluate changes
in efﬁciency as the connected vehicle penetration rate increased.
We found that safety can be ensured by adjusting the Time-
To-Collision parameter dynamically, and that efﬁciency for an
intersection with average trafﬁc volume was improved compared
with using conventional methods.
Keywords–connected vehicle; cooperative automated driving;
V2V communication; mixed trafﬁc.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Connected vehicles can exchange information with sur-
rounding vehicles and roadside infrastructures using commu-
nication methods. Examples of these communication meth-
ods include Dedicated Short Range Communications (DSRC)
and Cellular Vehicle-to-Everything (C-V2X) communication.
DSRC is already being used in toll collection systems on
expressways and in services that provide trafﬁc information
while C-V2X is being evaluated for practical use [1]. As
well as such Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I) communication,
these communication technologies will be used for Vehicle-to-
Vehicle (V2V) communication. Auto manufacturers are going
to produce vehicles featuring V2V communication services
for advanced safe driving support [2]. V2V communication
enables connected vehicles to sense situations that cannot
be recognized from only the vehicle’s sensor information.
A cooperative Intelligent Transport System (ITS) achieved
through a combination of connected vehicles and autonomous
driving technology, will enable trafﬁc to ﬂow more efﬁciently
and safely.
Since it will take time for connected vehicles to be-
come prevalent on roads, we can expect connected and non-
connected (conventional) vehicles, which cannot communicate
with other vehicles, to share the same roads. In the environ-
ment with only connected vehicles, the driving information
(position, speed, etc.) of all vehicles on the road can be shared,
thereby each vehicle is able to know where the other vehicles

	


Non-Connected Vehicle
Connected Vehicle
Priority
Road
Non-Priority
Road

Vehicle A
Vehicle C
Vehicle B
Intersection Danger Range
Figure 1. Usage example
are traveling and which way they will go. That way, for
example, at an intersection, each vehicle can detect in advance
the presence of other vehicles approaching the intersection
from the intersecting road. Then, if necessary, stop before the
intersection to avoid a collision or, if there is no approaching
vehicle, the vehicle can pass without stopping. Therefore, the
safety and efﬁciency can be easily improved. On the other
hand, in the mixed situation, while it is possible to share the
information between connected vehicles, it is not possible to
obtain the information of non-connected vehicles. Connected
vehicles cannot know where non-connected vehicles are travel-
ing. That is why, if the approaching vehicles at the intersection
are non-connected vehicles, the connected vehicle cannot be
able to detect the presence of them, and the improvement in
safety and efﬁciency is incomplete. Therefore, it is necessary
to develop methods that enables connected vehicles to share
and use not only the information of each other but also that
of the non-connected vehicles.
We proposed a method that enables connected vehicles on
priority (higher trafﬁc volume) roads near an intersection to
sense the presence of nearby vehicles (both connected and non-
connected) and to then share with connected vehicles on non-
priority (lower trafﬁc volume) roads via V2V communication
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications


Non-Connected Vehicle
Connected Vehicle
Priority
Road
Non-Priority
Road
Message is not sent
Vehicle D
Vehicle E
Vehicle F
Vehicle G
Vehicle H
Vehicle I
Figure 2. Example of connected vehicle unable to sense vehicles in
intersection danger range

	

	



	



	
		
	
  

 
		
	
		
	







Figure 3. Judgement ﬂow for connected vehicle on non-priority road about
whether to enter intersection
information about whether they can enter and traverse the
intersection. Using a trafﬁc ﬂow simulator, we considered
safety and evaluated the relationship between trafﬁc ﬂow
efﬁciency and the prevalence of connected vehicles when
connected vehicles on non-priority roads approach and traverse
an intersection.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
Section II details of related works. Section III details of the
proposed method to share and use the information between
connected vehicles in the mixed situation. Section IV details
the evaluation of the proposed method. Section V details the
results of the evaluation. Section VI details the consideration
obtained from the evaluation results. Section VII details the
conclusion.
II.
RELATED WORK
In this section, we introduce two related works.
A. Collective Perception
G¨unther et al. [3] proposed a method for enabling con-
nected vehicles to send environmental perception messages
(EPM) to inform other connected vehicles of the position of
surrounding vehicles detected by their radar sensors in addition
to cooperative awareness messages (CAM) [4] to notify other
connected vehicles of their existence in a mixed situation. It
was shown that connected vehicles could perceive the positions
of many vehicles within a radius of 300 meters (communicable
range) around even if the percentage of connected vehicles
among those vehicles (the penetration rate) was less than
100%.
B. Safety and Efﬁciency of Connected Vehicles Traversing an
Intersection
Kimura et al. [5] proposed a method for enabling connected
vehicles on a non-priority road to obtain the speed and current
position of connected vehicles on a priority road using V2V
communication and then use it to determine whether it is safe
to enter an intersection without stopping to check for oncoming
vehicles. It was shown that the travel time of vehicles on
the non-priority road was lower than with two conventional
methods: stopping before entering an intersection to visually
check for approaching vehicles and using trafﬁc lights.
Since this method is based on the premise that all vehicles
are connected vehicles, a method is needed that takes into
account the possible presence of non-connected vehicles as
well.
III.
PROPOSED METHOD
We ﬁrst explain the communication procedure of the pro-
posed method and then explain the operation procedure for
connected vehicles. An example of using the proposed method
is shown in Figure 1. For simplicity, each road has only two
lanes. Here, vp is the speed limit of the priority road, and tT T C
is the Time-To-Collision (TTC). These are declared in order
to use for the explanation in subsection D.
A. Communication Procedure
The intersection and a portion of the lanes leading into the
intersection are deﬁned as the “ intersection danger range. ”
If one or more vehicles on the priority road are within
this range, it is judged that it is dangerous for vehicles on
the non-priority road to enter the intersection. Connected
vehicles on the priority road sense this intersection danger
range (either in front or behind them). If they do not sense
any vehicles in this range, they broadcast a message saying
that the intersection is traversable, meaning that connected
vehicles on the non-priority road approaching the intersection
can safely enter the intersection without stopping to check for
oncoming vehicles. If they sense one or more vehicles in this
range, they broadcast a message saying that the intersection
is not traversable, meaning that connected vehicles on the
non-priority road approaching the intersection cannot safely
enter the intersection. As illustrated in Figure 1, the connected
vehicle traveling from top to bottom (Vehicle A) does not
sense any vehicles in the intersection danger range ahead and
transmits a “ traversable message. ” The connected vehicle
traveling from bottom to top (Vehicle C) does sense a vehicle
in the danger range and transmits a“not traversable message.”
The connected vehicle on the non-priority road enters the
intersection without stopping only if traversable messages are
received from all relevant lanes on the priority road. The
relevant lanes are those intersecting the trajectory of the vehicle
entering the intersection from the non-priority road. If a not
traversable message is received, like that vehicle B in Figure 1,
or if a traversable message for all relevant lanes is not received,
the driver decelerates and stops before the intersection.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Figure 4. Execution screen of Vissim


	



	
	



	


	
	

Figure 5. Conﬁguration of Vissim
B. Operation Procedure for Connected Vehicles on Priority
Road
If a connected vehicle is in a position where it can sense
vehicles in the intersection danger range, either in front or
behind it, it sends either a traversable or not traversable
message depending on the sensed situation. Otherwise, no
message is sent.
•
If it does not detect any vehicles in the intersection
danger range, it transmits a traversable message.
•
If it detects one or more vehicles in the intersection
danger range, it transmits a not traversable message.
•
If the connected vehicle itself is in the intersection
danger range, it transmits a not traversable message.
•
If it cannot sense vehicles in the intersection danger
range due to other vehicles in front or behind, no
message is sent.
Figure 2 shows an example of the last situation. The
connected vehicle running on the priority road from bottom to
top (Vehicle D) is unable to sense vehicles in the intersection
danger range (in this case vehicle F) due to the presence of
a vehicle ahead of it (Vehicle E). Vehicle D thus does not
transmit a message. This prevents vehicles in the intersection
danger range from being overlooked.
C. Operation Procedure for Connected Vehicles on Non-
Priority Road
A connected vehicle on a non-priority road approaching an
intersection with a priority road constantly receives messages
from connected vehicles on the priority road that are within
communication range. The connected vehicle uses these mes-
sages to determine whether to enter the intersection without
stopping to check for oncoming vehicles. The judgement ﬂow
is shown in Figure 3.
•
If traversable messages are received from all relevant
lanes on the priority road and a not traversable mes-
sage is not received, the connected vehicle enters the
intersection without stopping.
•
Otherwise, the connected vehicle decelerates and stops
before the intersection.
The situation in which a connected vehicle on a non-
priority road does not receive traversable messages for all
relevant lanes is illustrated in Figure 2. The connected vehicle
running on the non-priority road from left to right (Vehicle
H) intends to proceed straight through the intersection. A
traversable message is received from vehicle G but not from
vehicle D. Since the connected vehicle cannot conﬁrm the
safety of the intersection, it does not enter the intersection
without stopping. On the other hand, the connected vehicle
running on the non-priority road from right to left (Vehicle I)
intends to turn left. Again, a traversable message is received
from vehicle G but not from vehicle D. However, the con-
nected vehicle can enter the intersection because the vehicles’
trajectory passes only through vehicle G’s lane.
Incidentally, non-connected vehicles on the non-priority
road always stop before the intersection to check the safety
of the intersection as in conventional intersections with stop
signs.
D. Safety with Intersection Danger Range
After deﬁning the intersection danger range, we consider
the safety of the situation. The intersection danger range is
the range in which a vehicle on a non-priority road may
collide with a vehicle on the priority road upon entering their
intersection. Its length L is calculated using the speed limit on
the priority road, vp, and the Time-To-Collision (TTC), tT T C:
L = vptT T C
(1)
We assume that connected vehicles can be human-operated
vehicles in which information is notiﬁed to drivers through on-
board equipment and drivers make decisions and perform oper-
ations, as well as autonomous vehicles. Thus, we deﬁned safety
as not only the prevention of collisions at intersections but
also as the reassurance of drivers of human-operated vehicles
about the behavior of autonomous vehicles when both types are
on the same road. Drivers on a priority road may actually be
surprised by autonomous vehicles entering an intersection from
a non-priority road and brake suddenly. This may affect trailing
vehicles and lead to trafﬁc jams and collisions. The TTC, a
parameter in determining whether a connected vehicle on a
non-priority road enters an intersection without stopping, must
include a time margin prevent surprising drivers of vehicles on
the priority road.
Therefore, the minimum TTC for connected vehicles on
priority roads to transmit traversable messages differ between
autonomous and human-operated vehicles. While the TTC for
autonomous vehicles was set to the maximum time required
for a vehicle on a non-priority road to traverse an intersection,
that for human-operated vehicles was set sufﬁciently higher to
prevent drivers from being surprised. Varying the TTC enables
both efﬁciency and safety to be achieved compared with a
ﬁxed TTC. We obtained the time margin from a study that
analyzed the relationship between the TTC for a pedestrian
and the driver’s surprise when a pedestrian suddenly started
crossing the road [6]. Although the target was a pedestrian, the
situation is similar to that of vehicles entering from intersecting
roads.
IV.
EVALUATION
In this section, we explain the simulation environment and
the way to evaluate efﬁciency of our proposed method.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Priority
Road
Non-Priority
Road
1000 m
1000 m
30 m
Figure 6. Layout of intersection used for evaluation simulation
TABLE I. SIMULATION PARAMETERS

	

	
 	 

				
!"!

#	$
%"
&	'
%(
)	
%	
	
"
)		
%
*	%(
+	 (
#%(,"(
	$
 
)	--.
	

A. Connected Vehicles
The connected vehicles in our simulation evaluation were
assumed to satisfy the following conditions. The communica-
tion range and communication frequency were in accordance
with the ITS communication requirements of the Japanese
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications [7], the
European Telecommunications Standards Institute standards
[4], and the Society of Automotive Engineers standards [8].
The radar sensing range matched that of the in-vehicle mm-
wave radar now in practical use [9].
•
Each connected vehicle can communicate with other
connected vehicles within a radius of 250 m.
•
The communication frequency is 100 ms.
•
The connected vehicles are equipped with a radar
sensor that can detect a vehicle 200 m in front or
behind.
B. Simulator
We used Vissim [10], a microscopic multi-modal trafﬁc
ﬂow simulator developed by Planung Transport Verkehr AG
Figure 7. Setting of trafﬁc lights
in Karlsruhe, Germany. As shown in Figure 4, Vissim can
model various realistic road environments and visualize trafﬁc
phenomena with 3D graphics.
Vissim also supports the Component Object Model inter-
face, and, as shown in Figure 5, can read script ﬁles by using
this interface. The vehicle data in Vissim was obtained using
script ﬁles programmed in Python 2, and the operation of the
connected vehicles was described on the basis of that data.
C. Evaluation Setting
The simulated environment (Figure 6) was a single inter-
section between two roads, each with a length of 1000 m, that
intersect at the midpoint of each. The roads have the same lane
width and number of lanes; one was designated as the priority
road.
We measured the travel time delay (TTD) and the maxi-
mum queue length (MQL) on the non-priority road and used
them as evaluation indexes of efﬁciency. Travel time is the
average time taken for a vehicle to traverse a speciﬁc section.
We set the measurement section length to 530 m, which is the
length from the starting point of the road to the point where the
intersection ended. Since the actual travel time depends on the
length of the measurement section, we also measured the ideal
travel time, i.e., the time it takes to traverse the same length
without stopping when entering an intersection. We deﬁned the
difference between the actual time and the ideal time as the
TTD. The MQL is the maximum length of the trafﬁc queue at
the intersection.
These indexes were evaluated by changing the number of
vehicles per lane per hour (trafﬁc volume) and the penetration
rate of connected vehicles. Table I lists the parameter settings.
The speed limit and trafﬁc volume were set in accordance
with the typical conditions for roads in Japan [11] [12]. The
simulation runtime was 30 minutes, and there were ten runs.
The results for runs were averaged.
D. Comparison with Conventional Methods
For comparison purposes, we created models of two con-
ventional methods: stopping before entering an intersection to
visually check for approaching vehicles (stop model) and using
trafﬁc lights (trafﬁc light model). They were evaluated under
the same conditions.
The stop model is the conventional intersection with stop
signs. All vehicles on the non-priority road stop before the
stop sign for 0.5 s and then enter it after determining that it
is safe to do so.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications





	

	
	










	













 

! 
	

Figure 8. Comparison of travel time delay with model




	


	
	
	
	
	

	










		
	 [m]
Figure 9. Comparison of maximum queue length with model
The trafﬁc light model is the conventional intersection with
trafﬁc lights. All vehicles obey the trafﬁc lights. Figure 7 shows
the trafﬁc light settings. The cycle time, i.e., the time required
for a the trafﬁc light to cycle from green to yellow to red,
was set to 120 s, and the durations of the red and green lights
were determined on basis of the trafﬁc volume ratio between
the priority and non-priority roads.
V.
RESULTS
We show the results of the above simulation experiment.
A. Comparison of TTD and MQL Between Proposed Method
and Conventional Models
Figures 8 and 9 respectively show the results for TTD and
MQL when the trafﬁc volume was 500 vehicles per hour and
the penetration rate of connected vehicles was 70%.















	

	





Figure 10. Changes in travel time delay with trafﬁc volume

the trafﬁc light model.
C. Decrease in TTD with Penetration Rate
Figure 11 shows the results of TTD when the trafﬁc volume
on the priority road was 500 vehicles per hour and the pen-
etration rate of connected vehicles was increased from 0% to
100% in steps of 10%. It shows the TTD for each penetration
rate, as a percentage of the TTD when the penetration rate
was 0% (equal to the value of the stop model). The green line
shows the result with the trafﬁc light model under the same
conditions.
The TTD decreased monotonically as the penetration rate
increased. When the penetration rate was 50%, the TTD was
30% lower than when the rate was 0%, and when the rate was
90%, it was 50% lower. The TTD was less than that with the
trafﬁc light model when the penetration rate of 30% or more.
D. Comparison of TTD with Fixed Versus Variable TTC
Figure 12 shows the TTD when the trafﬁc volume was 500
vehicles per hour, the penetration rate of connected vehicles
was 70%, and the minimum TTC for connected vehicles on
the priority road to transmit traversable message was one of
three patterns. The ﬁrst pattern was taken from the proposed
method: set the TTC to 3.5 s if the connected vehicle is an
autonomous driving vehicle and set it to 5.0 s if it is human-
operated vehicle (variable TTC). The second pattern is to set
it to 3.5 s for all vehicles (ﬁxed 3.5 s TTC), and the third is
to set it to 5.0s for all vehicles (ﬁxed 5.0 s TTC).
The differences in the TTD among the three patterns were
small for left turn and straight ahead. For right turn, the delay
with variable TTC was more than that with ﬁxed 3.5 s TTC,
and less than that with ﬁxed 5.0 s TTC. As described above,
ﬁxed 3.5 s TTC would not be safe in a situation with a mixture
of autonomous and human-operated vehicles. In short, variable
TTC is more efﬁcient than ﬁxed 5.0 s TTC and safer than ﬁxed
3.5 s TTC.
VI.
DISCUSSION
We summarize our discussion according to the results of
Section V.
A. Advantages of Proposed Method
With the proposed method, TTD and MQL on the
non-priority road decreased compared with the conventional
method of stopping before the intersection and then entering
it after determining that it is safe to do so. If trafﬁc volume
is about 500 vehicles per hour, our method is more efﬁcient
than using trafﬁc lights. In Japan, the average of the trafﬁc
volume is 440 vehicles per hour [12]. Therefore, the proposed
method is effective at intersections with an average trafﬁc
volume. Moreover, it is effective even during the early stages of
connected vehicles introduction because its efﬁciency is better
than that using trafﬁc lights when the penetration rate is 30%
or more.
Furthermore, the proposed method does not require media-
tion devices such as trafﬁc lights and roadside devices because
it used only V2V communication. Thus, the cost of device
installation and maintenance is eliminated.
In situations where there are both autonomous and human-
operated vehicles, we found that safety can be ensured by
setting the TTC sufﬁciently high to prevent surprising drivers
of vehicles on the priority road. It is also possible to change
the TTC more dynamically in accordance with other charac-
teristics such as driver’s age and vehicle type. In this study,
only connected vehicles on the priority road judged whether
it was safe for vehicles on the non-priority road to enter
the intersection. A more advanced method would be to have
the connected vehicles on the priority road transmit the TTC
information to the connected vehicles on the non-priority
road. This would enable a connected vehicle on the non-
priority roads to take into account the vehicle’s characteristics
when judging whether it is safe for the vehicle to enter the
intersection.
B. Disadvantages of the Proposed Method
This method would not work at intersections with heavy
trafﬁc on the priority road, such as many intersections in urban
areas, because there are normally few breaks in the trafﬁc ﬂow
that would allow vehicles on the non-priority road to enter
the intersection. Another method is needed, such as the trafﬁc
lights method or a method in which connected vehicles on the
non-priority road could transmit an entry request to connected
vehicles on the priority road.
VII.
CONCLUSION
Looking ahead to the time when connected and non-
connected vehicles will share the road, we developed a method
that enables connected vehicles on a non-priority road to
traverse an intersection with a priority road more quickly on
the basis of information in messages from connected vehicles
on the priority road. An evaluation simulation designed to
examine the safety and efﬁciency of connected vehicles on
a non-priority road traversing an intersection showed that
efﬁciency can be improved, and that safety can be ensured.
We need further research and develop another method to
make intersections with heavy trafﬁc efﬁciency in the mixed
situation.
REFERENCES
[1]
Ministry
of
Internal
Affairs
and
Communications
of
Japan,
”ITS
initiatives
in
Japan”,
2013,
URL:
https://www.mlit.go.jp/road/ITS/pdf/ITSinitiativesinJapan.pdf
[accessed: 2019-12-23].
[2]
Reuters, ”Toyota abandons plan to install U.S connected vehicle tech
by 2021”, 2019, URL: https://www.reuters.com/article/us-autos-toyota-
communication/toyota-abandons-plan-to-install-u-s-connected-vehicle-
tech-by-2021idUSKCN1S2252 [accessed: 2019-12-23].
[3]
H. G¨unther, R. Riebl, L. Wolf, and C. Facchi, ”Collective Perception
and Decentralized Congestion Controlin Vehicular Ad-hoc Networks”,
Vehicular Networking Conference(VNC), pp. 1-8, 2016.
[4]
European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), ”Intelligent
Transport Systems (ITS); Vehicular Communications; Basic Set of
Applications; Part 2: Speciﬁcation of Cooperative Awareness Basic
Service”, 2019.
[5]
K. Kimura, S. Azuma, and K. Sato, ”Evaluation of Safety and Efﬁciency
Simulation of Cooperative Automated Driving”, The Seventh Interna-
tional Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and
Applications (VEHICULAR 2018), pp. 66-71, Venice, Italy, 2018.
[6]
A. Nakamura, S. Tominaga, and M. Okano, ”Car-to-pedestrian Hiyari-
Hatto Incident Analysis by Using Drive-recorder”, The 2010 Technical
Papers of Academic Lecture, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Nihon
University, pp. 343-344, 2010.
[7]
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications of Japan, ”Study
Group Report on Advanced ITS Wireless Systems”, 2009.
[8]
SAE International, ”On-Board System Requirements for V2V Safety
Communications”, 2016.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

[9]
Hitachi Automotive Systems, Ltd., ”Hitachi Automotive Systems Devel-
ops World’s Smallest Class 77GHz Millimeter-wave Radar as a Long-
range, Forward-direction Sensor for Autonomous Driving”, 2017, URL:
https://www.hitachi.com/New/cnews/month/2017/10/171003.html
[ac-
cessed: 2019-08-10].
[10]
PTV Group, ”PTV Vissim”, URL: http://vision-trafﬁc.ptvgroup.com/en-
us/products/ptv-vissim/ [accessed: 2019-05-25].
[11]
Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism of Japan,
”Government
Order
on
Road
Design
Standards”,
2008,
URL:
https://www.mlit.go.jp/road/sign/kouzourei kaisetsu.html
[accessed:
2019-07-07].
[12]
Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism of Japan,
”National Road and Street Trafﬁc Situation Survey”, 2015, URL:
https://www.mlit.go.jp/road/census/h27/index.html [accessed: 2019-07-
07].
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

