Sensor Calibration and Registration for Mobile Manipulators
Steven Legowik
Robotic Research, LLC
Gaithersburg, MD , USA
email: legowik@roboticresearch.com
Roger Bostelman1,2 and Tsai Hong1
1Intelligent Systems Division
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Gaithersburg, MD, USA
2IEM, Le2i, Université de Bourgogne,
Dijon, France
email: roger.bostelman@nist.gov and tsai.hong@nist.gov
Abstract—This paper describes the methods used to
register a mobile manipulator to a workstation to
perform assembly tasks. The nonlinear, least square
model of the system is formulated and Ceres Solver is
used to compute the position of the robot arm relative to
the mobile base. The use of non-contact fiducials to test
the accuracy and repeatability of the mobile manipulator
positioning in the context of an assembly operation is also
discussed. Using mathematical methods and indirect
measurements it is possible to compute the offset between
physical
components
of
the
system
where
direct
measurement is not feasible.
Keywords- robot; AGV; mobile manipulator; collaborative
robotics; registration; Ceres Solver; calibration.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Industry is making increasing use of robotics for material
transport and processing. These robotic systems make use of
many innovative sensing technologies [2]-[5] and control
techniques [6]-[9] to improve their versatility and agility. The
traditional approach to flexible manufacturing is to use
mobile robots to transport materials [10][11] between
workstations containing stationary robotic manipulators [6].
Another approach is to move the robotic manipulators
between the workstations [12] using an Automatic Ground
Vehicle (AGV). This configuration is referred to as a mobile
manipulator in this paper. The use of mobile manipulators
can be advantageous in a number of situations. It can result
in cost savings when a single mobile manipulator can be
used to replace several stationary manipulators. The use of
mobile manipulators is also useful in cases where the item
being worked on is too large to be easily moved. Throughout
this paper the term manipulator will refer to the robotic
manipulator arm mounted on the mobile base, and the
mobile base will be referred to as the AGV. The combination
is referred to as a mobile manipulator.
The use of mobile manipulators in manufacturing
presents new challenges [6]. The use of intelligent sensing
systems such as computer vision or light detection and
ranging (LADAR) sensors [13] can be used to measure a
workpiece’s
location
and
orientation
relative
to
the
manipulator. To effectively act on sensor information, the
systems need to know precisely where those sensors are
located with respect to the other elements of the system. The
calibration of a new sensor involves the determination of the
position and orientation of the sensor relative to other
sensors and manipulators. These parameters are difficult, or
even impossible, to measure directly. Sometimes the only
way of determining these unobservable system parameters is
through the mathematical analysis of the sensor’s own data.
The calculation of arm-mounted camera offsets using images
from the camera has been widely discussed in the literature
[14]-[25]. In most of these methods, a key feature is the
simultaneous
solution
of
two
sets
of
independent
transformations. These transformations are typically the
desired offset of the sensor and the pose of a calibration
target. The solution of the calibration target pose is typically
incidental to the solution of the desired offset. Similar
methods can be applied to determining other system offsets.
The focus of this paper is on indirect methods for
determining the mounting offset of a robot manipulator on a
mobile base. Section II discusses the need to calibrate the
offset
between
the
manipulator
base
and
the AGV's
coordinate system. It also describes the equipment and
methods used to collect the data and evaluate the results of
the mounting offset calibration. Section III. discusses two
methods of computing the mounting offset: the first using
measurements taken at selected positions around a test
artifact, and the second a method of computing the offset
using Ceres Solver and a selection of measurements from a
random set of positions around the test artifact. Section IV.
discusses
the
effectiveness
and
accuracy
of
the
two
calibration methods discussed in Section III.
Section V
discusses the relative merits of using Ceres Solver for
solving this type of calibration problem and the effects of
measurement noise on the procedure.
II.
WORKSTATION REGISTRATION
This
section
describes
the
workstation
registration
problem, the NIST mobile manipulator testbed, a novel
registration
artifact,
and
the
use
of
the
artifact
for
registration.
A.
Description of the problem
The goal is to be able to use the AGV to move the
manipulator to a workstation and be able to accurately
assemble items in that workspace [26]. To perform this task,
it is necessary to accurately determine the location of the
manipulator
relative
to
the
workspace.
Two
crucial
components of this are determining: (1) the actual (not just
the commanded) position of the AGV and (2) the position of
9
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

the manipulator relative to the AGV. For component one, we
need to be able to get the position of the AGV from the
navigation system in near real time. All our prior research to
this
point
has
involved
off-line,
AGV
position
data
processing from log files. For the current task, we must be
able to pass the position information directly to the computer
system that is controlling the manipulator.
The second requirement is to establish the offset between
the AGV and the base of the manipulator. This will allow the
AGV’s position to be used to determine the global location
of the manipulator when the AGV stops at a particular work
station.
B.
NIST Mobile Manipulator Testbed
The mobile manipulator used for the work described in
this paper is a part of the National Institute of Standards and
Technology
(NIST),
Robotic
Systems
for
Smart
Manufacturing Program. It was assembled as a platform for
developing and testing performance standards [26][27] for
mobile manipulators in industry.
The
mobile
manipulator
consists
of
a
six-axis
manipulator mounted on top of an AGV. The AGV is an
electrically-powered,
all-wheel
drive,
automatic
forklift
designed for material transport in an industrial setting. The
AGV navigates from location to location using a path
network that is preprogrammed off-line. The AGV location
is measured using a navigation system that uses a rotating
laser range sensor to detect the locations of reflectors
strategically
mounted
throughout
the
work
area.
The
positions of the reflectors are surveyed during the initial
setup of the system. During operation the position and
orientation of the AGV is calculated based on the range and
angle to reflectors within range of the navigation sensor.
In order to test the positioning accuracy and repeatability
of the mobile manipulator, a laser retro-reflector sensor was
mounted as the end-of-arm-tool (EOAT) of the manipulator.
A digital signal is output from the sensor when the laser is
emitted and reflected to the sensor. The signal is then read by
the manipulator controller. Less intense reflections off of
other objects in the workstation are ignored. The laser is used
to interact with the Reconfigurable Mobile Manipulator
Artifact (RMMA) described in the next section.
C.
Reconfigurable Mobile Manipulator Artifact
The RMMA [26]-[28] is a test fixture developed at NIST
to emulate the environment that would be encountered by a
mobile manipulator. It was designed primarily to emulate the
positioning requirements of an assembly task, specifically
the peg-in-hole insertion task. It does this by providing a set
of precisely positioned mount points for reflective targets.
The targets are detected using a non-contact, laser retro-
reflector sensor designed to detect the presence of retro-
reflective targets in line with the laser beam. The sensor is
mounted as the EOAT. The targets are designed to determine
if the manipulator position is accurate enough for successful
peg-in-hole insertion. The RMMA provides a way to test and
verify the performance of mobile manipulator systems
without the use of expensive 3D tracking systems [29].
The target fiducials are constructed using a piece of
reflective material fixed behind a circular aperture. In some
of the targets a fixed radius aperture is used, in others a
variable aperture is used. A top down view of a target
fiducial is shown in Fig. 1. The laser retro-reflector sensor is
used to detect the alignment of the manipulator with the
fiducial. A signal is returned by the sensor when the laser
beam is reflected back by the fiducial. The position accuracy
can be adjusted by varying the size of the aperture used to
expose the reflector. In addition, a tubular collimator is
added to the fiducial to restrict the detection angle of the
fiducial. The position of a fiducial can be determined by
performing a search starting somewhere near the fiducial’s
actual position. By performing a spiral grid search with a
step size of half the aperture diameter, the position of the
fiducial can be determined with an accuracy bounded by the
aperture diameter. Fig. 1 illustrates the path followed during
a spiral grid search.
Large circular reflectors can also be mounted on the
RMMA to aid in mobile manipulator localization. The center
of the large reflectors is measured by performing a bisecting
search starting from a point within the radius of the reflector.
The center is found by searching outward to find the reflector
edges and bisecting that chord. After locating the center
along one axis, a search for the reflector’s edges is
performed along an axis perpendicular to the first. After the
endpoints of this second chord are determined, the center
position of the reflector can be calculated. The bisection
search is illustrated in Fig. 2(a). After the centers of two
reflectors have been measured, the position and orientation
of the pattern can be determined. Then the positions of all the
other target reflectors in the pattern can be calculated based
on their position relative to the registration reflectors.
Figure 1. Top down view of an RMMA fiducial showing grid spiral
search pattern.
10
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

D.
Registration to RMMA Patterns
The RMMA has a number of precisely-positioned,
threaded holes into which the fiducials and reflectors can be
mounted to exercise the system. There are two main target
configurations: a square target and a circular target as shown
in Fig. 2(b). These are used to test the positioning accuracy
and repeatability of the mobile manipulator after bisecting
the large reflectors.
The two dimensional (2D) pose of the square and circle
pattern of small reflectors can be determined by measuring
the locations of two reflectors, large or small, on each
pattern. The other small reflector locations in the pattern can
be calculated based on their relative offsets when given the
pattern pose. Either a pair of small reflectors using the search
method or a pair of large reflectors using the bisect method
can be used to register the mobile manipulator with the
workspace represented by each pattern. For example, after
moving to the calculated reflector positions, if the small
reflector is not immediately detected, a search is performed.
The distance between the initial position of the manipulator
and the position at the end of the search can be used to
provide
information
on
the
accuracy
of
the
mobile
manipulator’s position and the accuracy of the registration.
III.
MANIPULATOR CALIBRATION
Calibration of the manipulator onboard the AGV is
critical for understanding how to position and orient the
manipulator to a workstation. This section describes manual
and Ceres Solver methods.
A.
Manual calibration method
We experimented with methods to allow strictly manual
calibration of the manipulator mounting offset using a
number of simple measurements. The idea was to select pairs
of calibration data measurements that would lead to the
simple calculation of a single value of the manipulator
mounting offset. This was done by selecting pairs of
positions around the target where the other parameters of the
manipulator mounting offset would effectively cancel each
other out.
The AGV positions were chosen to cancel out the effects
of the other base offset parameters, or to minimize their
effect on the computation. In testing, these values were good
enough to come up with rough values of the offset, but not
good enough for precise positioning of the manipulator.
There were some interactions between the calibration
variables that could not be completely eliminated using this
method. However, the method works well as a sanity check
for the other computation methods.
The equations below describe the manipulator offset
calibration in a 2D plane. The value being determined is the
2D translational offset and rotation offset of the manipulator
relative to the AGV. The reason for doing the calculations in
2D is that the method for taking the measurements using the
laser sensor only constrains the position in 2D, and the AGV
navigation solution is only 2D.
Fig. 3(a) illustrates a pair of mobile manipulator locations
that isolates the x offset of the manipulator base.
Ax1 + Ox - Px1 = Ax2 – Ox + Px2,
(1)
Ox = ½ (Ax2 – Ax1 + Px1 + Px2),
(2)
where:
P is point in manipulator coordinates (Px, Py)
A is AGV coordinate (Ax, Ay, Aa=angle)
O is the manipulator mounting offset (Ox, Oy, Oa=angle)
Fig. 3(b) illustrates a pair of mobile manipulator
locations that isolates the y offset of the manipulator base.
Ay1 + Oy – Py1 = Ay2 – Oy + Py2,
(3)
Oy = ½ (Ay2– Ay1 + Py1 + Py2) ,
(4)
Fig. 3(c) illustrates a pair of mobile manipulator
locations that isolates the angular offset of the manipulator
base.
Ax1 + Ox – Px1 + R1 sin Oa = Ax2 + Ox – Px2 + R2 sin Oa,
(5)
where
Rn = ( Pxn
2 + Pyn
2 )1/2
(6)
and
Oa = sin-1( (Ax1 – Ax2 – Px1 + Px2) / (R2 – R1) ) .
(7)
These formulas assume the manipulator is mounted on
the AGV with its positive y-axis pointing toward the rear
Figure 3. Mobile manipulator (green) positions relative to
the RMMA (gray) selected for manual calibration of
manipulator (blue) mounting offset.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2. (a) Bisection search concept, and (b) the mobile manipulator
positioned next to the RMMA, the RMMA square and circle patterns,
and the large reflectors within each pattern.
11
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

(fork-end) of the AGV (in the direction of the AGV’s
negative x-axis).
There are a number of issues that limit the effectiveness
of this approach for determining the manipulator base
location. One issue is that despite the best efforts to position
the AGV as described, there will be some errors in
alignment. The result is that the other offset terms will not
cancel out exactly, and there will be some interaction
between the parameters that will affect the results of the
calibration.
Another issue with this method is that it does not deal
well with measurement error. Each parameter is calculated
using a single pair of AGV positions. So any errors in the
measurements
are
reflected
directly
in
the
calculated
mounting parameters. The effects of measurement noise can
be compensated for by averaging together a number of
measurements at a given location.
B.
Calibration using Ceres Solver
A better way to solve for the manipulator base offset is to
express it in terms of a non-linear minimization problem.
This allows all the interactions between the base offset
parameters and the calibration measurements to be explicitly
modeled. After the interactions between the calibration
parameters and the calibration data have been modeled, the
calibration parameters can be solved using iterative methods.
The tool used to compute the iterative solution was the Ceres
Solver library [1].
The calibration data consists of paired AGV and
manipulator position data taken at various locations around
the RMMA. The only constraint on the data is that it needs to
be collected at a number of different AGV positions and
angles in order for the solver to converge properly. Data
from multiple target points can also be used as long as the
association is maintained in the data model.
The mobile manipulator system model is formulated as:
wp(k) = agvPose(t) * robotPose * rp(k,t),
(8)
where:
wp(k) is the estimated position of the kth target point in
world coordinates;
agvPose(t) is the measured pose of the AGV in world
coordinates at time t;
robotPose is the estimated pose of the manipulator in
AGV vehicle coordinates;
rp(k,t) is the measured location of the kth target point in
manipulator coordinates at time t.
The agvPose(t) and robotPose are 2D transformations
consisting of a translation and a rotation. The points wp and
rp
are
2D
points.
Individual
calibration
targets
are
enumerated by k, and individual calibration measurements
are enumerated by t.
The program adjusts the values of wp(k) and robotPose
to minimize the residual between the estimated world
coordinates of the target points and the position value
computed in (8) above using the calibration data. The
estimate of the manipulator mounting offset is calculated
using
the
data
collected
for
the
manual
calibration
augmented with additional samples not used in the manual
calibration.
The relationship between the calibration data and the free
variables is established in Ceres Solver by the creation of
residual blocks. The residual is defined as the difference
between the estimated value of wp and the value of wp
calculated by (8). The Ceres Solver then iteratively solves for
the values of wp and robotPose that minimize the sum of the
squares of all the residuals defined by the residual blocks.
Ceres can also make use of a loss function, which can be
used to minimize the effect of outliers. When the loss
function is ρ(x) = x, Ceres minimizes the mean squared error 
of
the
residuals.
The
encapsulation
of
the
residual
computation in the residual blocks also allows Ceres to
automatically
compute
the
partial
derivatives
of
the
modeling equations. This eliminates a potential source of
user error.
This problem bears a close similarity to the three-
dimensional
(3D)
simultaneous,
robot-world,
hand-eye
calibration discussed in [14][15][16]. The camera calibration
problem is typically expressed as AX = ZB, where X is the
3D pose representing the camera offset and Z is the 3D pose
representing the location of the calibration target. It is easy to
see that (8) can be manipulated into this form. Both X and Z
are unknowns that have to be solved simultaneously. A
number
of
closed-form
solutions
[14][25]
have
been
proposed to solve for these values. The principle difference
between the different solutions is how they resolve the
weighting between the positional and rotational components
[11] of the residual that defines the ‘best’ solution to the
problem. Given the 2D nature of the current problem, it is
probable that a closed-form solution to the problem can be
formulated. However, since the calibration parameters do not
need to be computed in real time, the iterative solution
implemented with Ceres Solver is sufficient. The iterative
solution method is also easily adapted to solve for other
calibration constants, some of which may not be solvable
with a closed-form solution.
More data is generally better data. Unlike the manual
calibration approach, the iterative minimization approach can
use additional data to minimize the effects of measurement
noise. However, care must be taken to provide a suitably rich
set of input data. For example, if all the samples were taken
at different positions around the workspace, but with the
same orientation, it is not possible to determine the
orientation offset of the manipulator base. The iterative
solution would either not converge, or would converge to an
unstable value.
Care must also be taken in the construction of the system
model used for iterative minimization. If two or more of the
free variables are correlated, the model will be under
constrained, and may not be able to converge to an answer.
A high degree of correlation between variables can also lead
to a high degree of sensitivity to the input data.
IV.
RESULTS OF TESTING
The initial set of calibration data was collected manually.
The AGV was moved manually to various locations around
the RMMA and its position was recorded. Then the
12
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

manipulator was moved manually to the positions of the first
and second reflectors of the square target. The manipulator
was moved until the retro-reflector sensor detected the
reflectors. Then the position of the manipulator was
manually recorded.
The reflectors used to collect the calibration data had a
3.2 mm (1/8 in) aperture. The positions of the AGV relative
to the RMMA for the manual data collection are shown in
Fig. 4. A subset of these measurements, shown in Fig. 3, was
used to perform the manual calibration described in Section
III.A. The orientation of the EOAT was maintained constant
relative to the manipulator base so that any lateral offset of
the sensor from the tool center could be ignored. Any offset
at the tool becomes part of the base offset for the purposes of
this calibration. A subsequent calibration of the base offset
using all of the collected data was performed using Ceres
Solver.
Testing
of
the
manipulator
base
calibration
was
performed using an automated test program and the RMMA.
A program was set up to drive the AGV to ten different
positions around the RMMA as shown in Fig. 5. At each
docking location, the position of the AGV, the world
coordinate of the reflector, and the manipulator base offset
were used to compute the robot coordinates of the reflectors
using (8). After positioning the sensor, a search was
performed to determine how far off the position calculation
was.
Ideally, it should be possible to move the manipulator
directly to the reflector based on the position of the AGV.
Unfortunately, noise and systematic errors in the AGV
position data prevent this. Fig. 6 shows a plot of consecutive
samples of the AGV’s x-axis position as the AGV sits
motionless. The graph also shows a plot of the average value
of samples 1 through n. This shows roughly how many
samples need to average together to produce a reasonably
stable position value. The y position and the orientation angle
exhibit similar noise. The AGV position data is available at
about 16 Hz, so it requires about 6.25 seconds to collect 100
samples. In this 2D case a simple average of the orientation
angles is sufficient. In the general case of 3D orientations,
greater care needs to be observed in averaging the orientation
[32][33]. In addition to the random noise, tests also indicate
that there are some systematic biases in the AGV position
data depending on the location of the AGV.
The goal is to be able to align the manipulator with the
workspace in the minimum amount of time. The ideal
situation is to be able to perform the insertion task
immediately on arrival at the workstation. However, in this
case it is necessary to compensate for the unavoidable
measurement errors. It becomes a tradeoff between time
spent averaging the position data to produce a stable value
vs. time spent searching for registration points in the
workspace.
The manual calibration method described in section III.A
generated a base offset of (x = 831.5, y = - 7.5) mm and a
rotation of 90.6°, yielding a mean square error of 1.25 mm
and a maximum residual of 6.3 mm. The Ceres Solver came
up with an offset of (x =833.637, y = -8.22223) mm and a
rotation of 90.5314°, yielding a mean square error of 1.19
mm and a maximum residual of 10.7 mm. The Ceres Solver
was seeded with a variety of initial conditions, including
setting all the variable parameters to 0, and had no problems
with convergence. The resulting offset positions agreed with
each other within 0.1 mm
V.
CONCLUSIONS
With care, Ceres Solver has proven to be a valuable tool
in calibrating a variety of hard to measure constants in our
robotic systems. It provides an easy to use framework for
solving difficult non-linear problems iteratively. The main
issues that have to be observed are that the model cannot be
either over or under constrained if Ceres Solver is to
converge properly.
Figure 5. Docking locations used for automated data collection
and system evaluation.
Figure 4. Position and orientation of AGV relative to the
RMMA from manually collected calibration data.
13
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Using Ceres Solver, we were able to compute the base
offset of the manipulator mounted on a mobile platform
despite the fact that the location of the AGV origin was not
directly measureable. Using the computed offset and the
location of the AGV, we were able to position the
manipulator end effector within a few millimeters of the
target regardless of the position and orientation of the AGV.
While perfect initial positioning was not possible, the search
time required to achieve the desired alignment accuracy was
greatly reduced by improving the initial positioning of the
manipulator.
The limiting factors in being able to accurately position
the end effector are the noise and systematic errors in the
AGV navigation sensor. This affects both the final position
calculation and the accuracy of the manipulator base
transform. The AGV position errors in the measurement used
to compute the base offset affect the quality of the solution
derived. The quality of the solution can be assessed by
examining the residuals left after the model has converged to
a solution for the free parameters. Large residuals indicate
corresponding errors in the calibration data, either random or
systematic.
We plan on pursuing other methods to increase the speed
of the workspace registration. The spiral grid search
increases in time proportional to the square of the initial
error. Performing a bisecting search on the large reflectors
goes up approximately linearly with the size of the maximum
expected error, since the size of the reflector needs to be
scaled up to encompass the maximum initial positioning
error. In the future, we are planning to investigate the use of
camera-based position estimates to improve the alignment
time.
DISCLAIMER
Commercial equipment, software, and materials are
identified in order to adequately specify certain procedures.
In no case does such identification imply recommendation or
endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, nor does it imply that the materials, equipment,
or software are necessarily the best available for the purpose.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Agarwal and K. Mierle, “Ceres solver,” http://ceres-
solver.org [retrieved August, 2016].
[2]
B. Hamner, S. Koterba, J. Shi, R. Simmons, and S. Singh,
“Mobile robotic dynamic tracking for assembly tasks,”
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems, pp. 2489-2495, 2009.
[3]
R.
Bostelman,
T.
Hong,
and
G.
Cheok,
"Navigation
Performance Evaluation for Automated Guided Vehicle,"
2015 IEEE International Conference on Technologies for
Practical Robot Applications (TePRA), pp. 1-6 , 2015.
[4]
R. E. Mandapat, “Development and evaluation of positioning
systems
for
autonomous
vehicle
navigation,”
Florida
University Gainesville Center for Intelligent Machines and
Robotics, pp. 1-277, 2001.
[5]
A. Kelly, B. Nagy, D. Stager, and R. Unnikrishnan, "Field
and service applications an infrastructure free automated
guided vehicle based on computer vision an effort to make an
industrial robot vehicle that can operate without supporting
infrastructure." IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine,
pp.24-34, 2007.
[6]
B. Hamner, S. Koterba, J. Shi, R. Simmons, and S. Singh,
“An autonomous mobile manipulator for assembly tasks,”
Autonomous Robot, pp.131-149 , 2010.
[7]
J. Vannoy and J. Xiao, “Real-time Adaptive Motion Planning
(RAMP) of mobile manipulators in dynamic environments
with unforeseen changes,” in IEEE Trans. on Robotics,
pp.1199-1212 , 2008.
[8]
H. Martínez-Barberá and D. Herrero-Pérez, "Autonomous
navigation of an automated guided vehicle in industrial
environments."
Robotics
and
Computer-Integrated
Manufacturing, pp.296-311, 2010.
[9]
R. C. Arkin and R. Murphy, "Autonomous navigation in a
manufacturing environment," IEEE Transactions on Robotics
and Automation, pp.445-454 ,1990.
[10] H. F. Durrant-Whyte, "An autonomous guided vehicle for
cargo handling applications." The International Journal of
Robotics Research, pp.407-440, 1996.
[11] H. Martínez-Barberá and D. Herrero-Pérez, "Autonomous
navigation of an automated guided vehicle in industrial
environments."
Robotics
and
Computer-Integrated
Manufacturing, pp.407-440, 2010.
[12] S. Bøgh, M. Hvilshøj, M. Kristiansen, and O. Madsen,
"Autonomous industrial mobile manipulation (AIMM): from
research to industry." In 42nd International Symposium on
Robotics. Pp. 1-9, 2011.
[13] M. Hvilshøj and S. Bøgh, “Little Helper-An autonomous
industrial mobile manipulator concept,” International Journal
of Advanced Robotic Systems, pp.80-90, 2011.
[14] M. Shah, “Solving the Robot-World/Hand-Eye Calibration
Problem Using the Kronecker Product,” ASME Journal of
Mechanisms and Robotics, Vol. 5, 031007, pp. 1-7, 2013.
[15] F. Dornaika and R. Horaud, “Simultaneous robot-world and
hand-eye calibration, “IEEE Transactions on Robotics and
Automation, pp.617-622 ,1998.
[16] H. Zhuang, Z. Roth, and R. Sudhakar, “Simultaneous
robot/world
and
tool/flange
calibration
by
solving
Figure 6. (blue)AGV position along x-axis, normalized to the first
sample, x(1); (red) the mean of the normalized x value from x(1) to
x(n).
14
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

homogeneous transformation of the form AX = YB,” IEEE
Trans. Robot. Automat, pp.549-554, 1994.
[17] A.
Geiger,
F.
Moosmann,
O.
Car,
and
B.
Schuster,
“Automatic calibration of range and camera sensors using a
single shot,” ICRA, pp. 3936-3943, 2012.
[18] H. S. Alismail, D. Baker, and B. Browning, "Automatic
calibration of a range sensor and camera system," Second
International
Conference
on
3D
Imaging,
Modeling,
Processing, Visualization & Transmission. IEEE, pp. 286-292
,2012.
[19] Z. Zhang, "A flexible new technique for camera calibration,"
IEEE
Transactions
on
pattern
analysis
and
machine
intelligence, pp.1330-1334, 2000.
[20] J-Y. Bouguet, "Camera calibration toolbox for matlab," <
http://www.vision.caltech.edu/bouguetj/calib_doc/> [retrieved
August, 2016].
[21] J. Weng, P. Cohen, and M. Herniou. "Camera calibration with
distortion
models
and
accuracy
evaluation,"
IEEE
Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence
14.10, pp.965-980, 1992.
[22] O. D. Faugeras, Q.-T. Luong, and S. J. Maybank, "Camera
self-calibration:
Theory
and
experiments,"
European
conference on computer vision, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
pp. 321-334, 1992.
[23] Y. Huang, X. Qian, and S. Chen, "Multi-sensor calibration
through iterative registration and fusion, " Computer-Aided
Design, pp.240-255, 2009.
[24] S. Spiess, V. Vincze, and M. Ayromlou, "On the calibration
of a 6D laser tracking system for contactless, dynamic robot
measurements,"
Instrumentation
and
Measurement
Technology Conference, pp. 1203-1208 ,1997.
[25] M. Shah, R. D. Eastman, and T. Hong, “An overview of
robot-sensor calibration methods for evaluation of perception
systems,” In Proceedings of the Workshop on Performance
Metrics for Intelligent Systems, pp. 15-20, ACM, 2012.
[26] R. Bostelman, T. Hong, and J. Marvel, “Performance
Measurement
of
Mobile
Manipulators”,
SPIE
2015,
Baltimore, MD, Vol. 9498, pp. 1-9, April 2015.
[27] R. Bostelman, T. Hong, and S. Legowik, “Mobile Robot and
Mobile Manipulator Research Towards ASTM Standards
Development”, SPIE 2016, Baltimore, MD, pp. 98720F-
98720F , 2016.
[28] R. Bostelman, S. Foufou, S. Legowik, and T. Hong “Mobile
Manipulator
Performance
Measurement
Towards
Manufacturing Assembly Tasks”, 13th IFIP International
Conference on Product Lifecycle Management (PLM16),
Columbia, SC, July 11-13, Vol. 9892, pp. F1-F10, 2016.
[29] R. Bostelman, J. Falco, M. Shah, and T. Hong, “Dynamic
Metrology Performance Measurement of a Six Degree-of-
Freedom Tracking System Used in Smart Manufacturing”,
Autonomous Industrial Vehicles: From the Laboratory to the
Factory Floor, ASTM Book chapter 7, 2016.
[30] R. Bostelman, R. Eastman, T. Hong, O. A. Enein, S.
Legowik, and S. Foufou, “Comparison of Registration
Methods for Mobile Manipulators,” CLAWAR, 2016.
[31] M. Shah, “Comparing Two Sets of Corresponding Six Degree
of
Freedom
Data,”
Computer
Vision
and
Image
Understanding, Volume 115, Issue 10, pp. 1355-1362. 2011.
[32] R. Hartley, J. Trumpf, Y. Dai, and H. Li, “Rotation
averaging,” International journal of computer vision, 103(3),
pp.267-305, 2013.
[33] F. L. Markley, Y. Cheng, J. L. Crassidis, and Y. Oshman,
“Averaging quaternions,” Journal of Guidance, Control, and
Dynamics, pp.1193-1197, 2007.
15
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

