RSU Placement Method Considering Road Elements for Information Dissemination
Kazuyoshi Gomi
Keio University
3-14-1 Hiyoshi Kohoku-ku
Yokohama-shi Kanagawa Japan
Email:gomi@mos.ics.keio.ac.jp
Yusuke Okabe
Keio University
3-14-1 Hiyoshi Kohoku-ku
Yokohama-shi Kanagawa Japan
Email:okabe@mos.ics.keio.ac.jp
Hiroshi Shigeno
Keio University
3-14-1 Hiyoshi Kohoku-ku
Yokohama-shi Kanagawa Japan
Email:shigeno@mos.ics.keio.ac.jp
Abstract—In Intelligent Transportation System (ITS), communi-
cation with RoadSide Unit (RSU) is expected that weak con-
nectivity of vehicle-to-vehicle communication can be improved
since the power average of RSU is large. However, to deploy
and maintain RSUs is costly. Therefore, it is necessary to
effectively place RSUs within limited cost. Many opportunities
to communicate with vehicles are at intersections with a lot of
trafﬁc volume. However, it is necessary to consider not only
the trafﬁc volume but also a connection relation of the road
network because buildings prevent radio waves. In this paper, we
propose an RSU placement method considering road elements
that affect radio wave spreading. This method consists of two
actions: calculation of RSU placement priority with considering
road elements affecting radio wave spreading and operation of
updating RSU placement priority. As a result of simulation,
our proposal is particularly effective in a scenario considering
information relay because the communication performance of
this method was higher than or equivalent to that of other RSU
placements. Further, it is found that our proposal was possible
to suppress redundant RSU placement by updating operation of
RSU placement priority in a scenario which is not considering
information relay.
Keywords–VANET; RSU; Road elements; Priority
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recently, research on Intelligent Transportation Systems
(ITS) that improves the trafﬁc safety and trafﬁc efﬁciency
by making vehicles communicate with each other has been
actively conducted. In ITS, vehicle communication is classiﬁed
into vehicle-to-vehicle and road-to-vehicle communication.
Vehicle-to-vehicle communication can be extended ad hoc
networks easily because ad hoc communication is possible if
only vehicles are equipped with in-vehicle devices dedicated
to communication individually. In particular, ad hoc networks
composed of vehicles are called Vehicular Ad-hoc NETworks
(VANETs), and various applications using this VANET are
being studied in the ﬁeld of ITS.
In ITS, road-to-vehicle communication is expected to have
high connectivity. Propagation radio waves are blocked by
buildings in the city and connection of VANET is unstable
because vehicles move at high speed. Therefore, the con-
nectivity of the VANET is weak, and there arises problems
such that vehicles can not communicate satisfactorily. On the
other hand, road-to-vehicle communication is expected that
weak connectivity of vehicle-to-vehicle communication can be
improved by base station participating in communication. The
Electronic Toll Collection system (ETC) [1] and the optical
detector [2] that only the vehicles nearest to the RoadSide Unit
(RSU) can communicate are currently being put to practical
use, but in the future, it is expected that it will be possible
to form networks with farther vehicles and RSUs, because a
more robust ad hoc network will be formed by vehicles and
RSUs relaying information.
An effective RSU placement within a limited cost is
necessary since to deploy and maintain RSUs are costly.
Various methods have been proposed for placement of RSUs.
For the purpose of increasing communication opportunities
between the vehicle and the RSUs, particularly many methods
for placement the RSU based on the vehicle trafﬁc volume
have been proposed. Speciﬁcally, it is a method of placing
RSUs preferentially at intersections with high trafﬁc volume
[3]. However, in order to achieve effective RSU placement,
RSUs have to be deployed with the metric considering the
other elements as well as the trafﬁc volume. This is because
when assuming information spreading by relaying information,
in order to deploy RSU effectively, it is important to consider
not only the trafﬁc volume but also the other elements of the
road network.
In this paper, we propose an RSU placement method
considering road elements that affects radio signal spreading.
This method consists of two actions: calculation of RSU
placement priority for each intersection with considering road
elements affecting radio wave spreading and operation of
updating RSU placement priority. Evaluation of our proposal
is performed by simulation of information dissemination by
RSUs. We assumed two scenarios, which are assumed packet
relay and not assumed packet relay.
In Section 2, we explain the existing methods of RSU
placement. In Section 3, we describe the proposed method.
In Section 4, we evaluate proposed method using simulation.
We will conclude with Section 5.
II.
RELATED WORK
This section explains related research on spreading infor-
mation and background on RSU placement. In ITS, vehi-
cles exchange various information, thereby improving trafﬁc
efﬁciency and improving safety. Various information to be
exchanged here is assumed in vehicle information, such as
speed and position of surrounding vehicle and itself, safety
information such as where accidents occurred, entertainment
information such as videos. By using this information, the
vehicle can avoid the road where trafﬁc congestion is expected
and avoiding entering the area where the accident occurred.
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

The vehicle sends and receives these information by commu-
nication technology. Especially, ad hoc networks constituted
by only vehicles are called VANETs, and various applications
using VANET are assumed.
However, vehicles can not relay packets unless each vehicle
are in a range of communication of each other. So, if density
of vehicles is small or buildings locate where they disturb
radio wave propagation, it is difﬁcult to spread information
by vehicle to vehicle. This is mentioned in papers [4], [5], [6],
[7]. In a speciﬁc road structure, information spreading among
vehicle to vehicle has limits because information doesn’t
spread wide enough by relay using Flooding. For this reason,
a connectivity of vehicle to vehicle has a weak point. Then,
RSU which improves the weak point of vehicle to vehicle
communication are attention has been paid.
RSU is an infrastructure for telecommunication in ITS.
Generally, RSU is placed on roads, and send information to
vehicle and receive information from vehicle. It is assumed the
situation that RSU processes information, further communicate
to vehicle at local area. Furthermore, it is assumed the situation
that information received by RSU are processed by server
through backbone network, and RSU sends surround vehicles
the packet which are processed by server. RSU is convenient
but deployment cost is high. Also, it is known that cost is
increased because power is frequently used for maintaining
RSU once deployed. Therefore, it is not realistic to deploy
inﬁnitely many RSUs. It is necessary to effectively arrange a
limited number of RSUs so that they can communicate with
more vehicles.
In order to effectively utilize limited RSU, many methods
of RSU placement are researched. H. Zheng et al. proposes an
algorithm to set up RSU based on trafﬁc volume to distribute
advertisements at stores [8]. For each intersection, calculate
the RSU placement priority high in the order of the trafﬁc
volume, and place RSUs in the place where the vehicle has
many opportunities to receive the information. Similarly, J.
Chi et al. also proposes an algorithm that calculates RSU
placement priority at a high value based on trafﬁc volume [3].
In addition, control is exercised not to deploy an additional
RSU around the intersection where the RSU is deployed. This
is an operation for preventing intersections with high RSU
priority from concentrating in one place. Also, some RSU
placement methods focus on deploying RSUs at highways
[9], [10], [11]. Although these are references related to the
placement of RSU, basically there is no constraint to deploy
RSU at intersections like urban areas, so the concept of RSU
placement priorities for intersections is not mentioned.
There are some analyzing methods of road network struc-
tures [12], [13], [14]. However, they don’t analyze road net-
works from the viewpoint of radio wave diffusion. For this
reason, in order to effectively deploy this RSU, we considered
that it is necessary to consider the inﬂuence of static road
elements in the road network on radio wave diffusion in
addition to the trafﬁc volume.
III.
PROPOSED METHOD
This section proposes the RSU placement method based
on road elements for information distribution. This method
enables effective RSU placement suppression of redundant
placement of RSU while considering the inﬂuence on radio
wave diffusion by road elements. This method performs RSU
placement by two operations. The ﬁrst is the calculation of
the RSU placement priority and the second is the update of
the RSU placement priority. By calculating the priority of
RSU by considering various road elements including trafﬁc
volume in the placement priority calculation of RSU, it is
possible to select intersections where packets are likely to
be spread as high priority intersections. Road elements are
weighted based on the magnitude of inﬂuence on radio wave
spread. In the update operation of the RSU placement priority,
it is an operation to lower the RSU placement priority of
the surrounding intersection based on the position of the
existing RSU. By this operation, the redundant placement of
the RSU can be suppressed, and as a result overlap of the
communication range can be reduced. The pi which express
the placement priority of RSU at intersection i is expressed by
the following equation:
pi = w1
1
tmax
ti + w2
1
smax
si + w3
1
Imax
Ii
(1)
where ti is a value of trafﬁc volume at intersection i. si is
a number of connected straight road segments at intersection
i. Ii is a number of connections of the road segment at the
intersection i where the connected road segment has four
intersections at the other end. w1, w2 and w3 are coefﬁcients
for weighting, and we set to be all 1/3. Also, pi is calculated
between 0 and 1. The method of determining (1) is shown
below.
First, in calculating the RSU placement priority, we deﬁne
intersections that should be prioritized. Since information to be
distributed by the RSU needs to be received by many vehicles,
it is necessary to set intersections where information spreads in
a wide range. Therefore, road elements that affect the spread
of information to a wide range are adopted as elements for
calculating the RSU placement priority. In order to spread
information extensively, the information transmitted by the
RSU at the intersection have to be extended over long distances
and many roads. The number of road segments connected
to intersections increases, information spreading tends to be
effective. In addition, a straight road works favorably by
spreading information because radio wave spreading is difﬁcult
to block in straight roads. Furthermore, when spreading infor-
mation over a wide range with multiple hops, trafﬁc volume
becomes important because it is necessary to gather a lot of
vehicles for relaying. In addition, it is conceivable that the
angle of the road segments greatly inﬂuences the transmitted
information to diffuse far without being blocked by buildings.
In this paper, we analyzed the correlation between road
elements and the number of received cars. The road elements
to be analyzed are summarized in Table. I. These road elements
are classiﬁed into ﬁelds such as the number of road segments
connected to the intersection, the length of the road segment,
the angle formed by the road segments connected to the
intersection, the angle of the connected road segment itself, the
position of the intersection. For example, n Seg denotes the
number of connected road segments, d A denotes a connection
angle between road segments, and ABS 90 which is the sum of
differences of each connection angle of road segments and 90◦.
The road map to be used this time is the map of Manhattan,
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

TABLE I. ROAD ELEMENTS.
classiﬁcation
element
Trafﬁc Volume
traffic
Number of road segment
n Seg
n Inter4
p Inter4
Length of road segment
ave Len Seg
total Len Seg
d Seg
Angle of Connection
ABS90
ABS90+
ABS90 + no overlap
ABS180
ABS180 pair
ABS180 pair even
d A
Angle of road segment
n u − deg10
n u − deg5
n Straight
p u − deg10
p u − deg5
p straight
Position
center
Figure 1. Correlation Coefﬁcient between Number of Packet Received and
Trafﬁc Volume.
Berlin, Rome, 1500m square areas. Using these areas, we
analyze road elements that affect information diffusion.
Figure. 1 represents a part of the correlation coefﬁcient
between 21 road elements and transitions of reception numbers
for each intersection in each road map. In this paper, the
minimum correlation coefﬁcient to judge is 0.3. From Figure.
1, since road elements trafﬁc, n Straight, n Inter4 are
correlated with the number of received on all road maps, these
road elements are used for calculating the priority. Trafﬁc is
the trafﬁc volume, n Straight is the number of connected
straight road segments, and n Inter4 is the number of road
segments connected with the connected road segment at the
other end of the four intersections. Also, if different road
elements in the same classiﬁcation are duplicated for RSU
priority calculation, similar road elements may duplicate and
affect the RSU placement priority. Therefore, even if the
correlation coefﬁcient exceeds 0.3, only road elements with the
highest correlation coefﬁcient in the same classiﬁcation shall
be used for RSU placement priority calculation. Also, from
the Figure. 1, even if the road elements are the same, it can be
seen that the magnitude of the correlation coefﬁcient differs
depending on the road map. In addition, it can be seen that
the magnitude relation with different correlation coefﬁcients
also differs depending on the road map. From these facts, it is
assumed that the magnitude of the weight and the magnitude of
relation between the three road elements are all equal because
they change according to the road map.
The purpose of each operation is to spread the RSU widely.
RSUs should be placed at intersections that are advantageous
for information spreading that can distribute information to
many vehicles, but if one RSU is deployed, the surrounding
intersections can be covered by the RSU. In other words, if
RSUs are simply placed at the intersections which are advan-
tageous for information spreading, the RSUs are concentrated
in part, the RSUs are concentrated in part and the vehicles
receive duplicate and identical information from the multiple
RSUs. This is called redundant RSU placement, which causes
redundant information transmission. In order to perform RSU
placement that uniformly transmits information to the vehicle,
it is necessary to suppress the redundant RSU placement
while taking advantage of the RSU placement priority. As a
concrete method, it is an operation to prevent concentrating
placement of the RSUs to be deployed thereafter by lowering
the RSU placement priority of the intersection within the
communication range of the existing RSU. Updated RSU
placement priority pi new is done using (2):
pi new = pi ×
disRSU
distransmit
(2)
where disRSU is a distance between the intersection i
and the RSU deployed immediately before. distransmit is the
distance at which the attenuation of the priority begins to start.
Since distransmit plays a role of a threshold, this priority
attenuation Equation is applied when the distance between the
intersection i and the immediately preceding RSU is smaller
than distransmit. In other words, it applies when this Equation
distransmit is above disRSU. As the value of the distance
distransmit at which attenuation of the priority is started this
time, a value of 700 experimentally obtained is used.
A value of disistransmit actually deployed the RSU in the
simulation and experimentally observed and adopted a value
that maximizes the number of reception. In this paper, the value
of the simulation is made to conform to the reference[15] in
the case where there is no speciﬁc mention. The transmission
power of the radio waves of the RSU and the vehicle was set
to 20 dBm, and the maximum hop number was set to 3. In
the set simulation environment, the information reaches about
350 m from sender with 1 hop at 20 dBm radio ﬁeld intensity.
Since the maximum number of hops this time is set to 3 hops,
the radio waves transmitted from the RSU can reach up to
1050 m. Therefore, we changed the hop number between 1
and 3 this time, that means distransmit was 350, 700, 1050
respectively.
IV.
SIMULATION EVALUATION
We evaluated the performance of our proposal by simula-
tion. To verify the effectiveness of the proposed method, we
compared our proposal with the existing methods that with
existing method of RSU placement methods.
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

A. Simulation Set up
Here, we explain the simulation environment. In the sim-
ulation, we used two methods of RSU placement to compare
with proposed method.
•
Trafﬁc 1 [8]
An RSU placement method to calculate the placement
priority of RSU at intersection based on trafﬁc vol-
ume. There is no operation to prevent the redundant
arrangement of the RSU, and simply arrange the RSU
in the intersection where the trafﬁc volume is large.
•
Trafﬁc 2 [3]
An RSU placement method to calculate the placement
priority of RSU at intersection based on trafﬁc volume.
Perform operations to prevent redundant placement
of RSUs. As a speciﬁc operation, set the placement
priority of RSU to a ﬁxed distance around the already
deployed RSU to 0. In this example, the distance to
set the allocation priority of RSU to 0 m is set to 350
m which is the transmission range of 1 hop.
Distance operation to prevent redundant arrangement of
RSUs adopted in proposed method and Trafﬁc 2 does not
necessarily work in the expected direction. This is because
there is a risk that RSU placement at an intersection at which
information spreading to many vehicles originally could be
hindered by these distance operations.
Next, we explain about simulation scenario that we used.
Place N RSUs in the simulation area. The placement of
the RSU is different for each comparison target. Record
simulation results when N RSUs are deployed respectively.
RSUs deployed N in the area transmit packets at the same
time. In the area, 500 vehicles are running at a speed of 15
to 30 km/h. 500 vehicles process received packets based on
scenarios 1 and 2. In scenario 1, 500 vehicles do not relay
packets received from the RSU. It is possible to receive packets
only for vehicles travelling in front of RSUs. The simulation
time is 600 seconds, and the RSUs in the area simultaneously
transmit information 600 times in total, once a second, from
simulation start to simulation end. N varies between 1 and 10.
In scenario 2, 500 vehicles relay the packets received from the
RSU. Even without travelling in front of the RSU, the vehicle
can receive packets from the RSU within the transmission
range and surrounding vehicles’ relay. All vehicles participate
in relaying and relay up to 3 hops. The simulation time is 130
seconds, and the RSUs in the area simultaneously transmit the
information once at the time of the simulation start of 120
seconds. N varies between 1 and 20.
Finally, we explain about the simulation map that we used.
The simulation area uses 1500 m × 1500 m of San Francisco.
It is shown in Figures. 2. In addition, circles marks indicate
RSU placement by proposed method, triangle marks indicate
RSU placement by Trafﬁc 1, and crossing marks indicate RSU
placement by Trafﬁc 2. Simulator uses Scenargie [16] and map
data is acquired from OSM [17]. The packet size is 128 KB,
and the radio wave propagation model uses ITU-R P.1411 [18]
which reﬂects the inﬂuence such as radio wave shielding by
buildings. Detailed parameters are shown in the Table. II.
B. Simulation Results
Here, the results of the simulation are presented. In scenario
1, there is no packet relay by the vehicles, and it is a scenario
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲ ▲
▲ ▲
●
●
▲
Figure 2. Simulation Area and RSU Placement in San Francisco.
TABLE II. PARAMETERS FOR EVALUATION.
Common Parameters
Simulator
Scenargie2.0[16]
Number of vehicles
500
Velocity of vehicles
15∼30 km/h[19]
Propagation Model
ITU-R P.1411[18]
Frequency
5.9 GHz
Bandwidth
10 MHz
Communication standard
IEEE 802.11p
Mobility Model
Random Way Point
Parameters of Scenario 1
Simulation Time
600 s
Number of N
1 ∼ 10
Number of Packet sent
600
Max Hop Count
1
Transmission Power
20 dBm
Parameters of Scenario 2
Simulation Time
130
Number of N
1 ∼ 20
Number of Packet sent
1
Max Hop Count
3
Transmission Power
20 dBm
that receives information only for vehicles passing in front of
the RSU. Therefore, in scenario 1, in order to improve the
reception rate, it is important to deploy RSUs at intersections
where trafﬁc volume is simply high, regardless of the radio
wave spreading range.
The result is shown in Figure. 3. In San Francisco, the
proposed method is the highest reception rate despite the
weight of the trafﬁc volume in the RSU calculation Equation
being lower than Trafﬁc 1 and Trafﬁc 2. Speciﬁcally, on
average, our proposal was 7.3 points higher than Trafﬁc 2 and
27 points higher than Trafﬁc 1. This is because San Francisco
is a grid road network structure and every intersection has a
similar road element. Therefore, in San Francisco, the static
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Figure 3. Reception Ratio in Scenario 1.
road elements of the road network such as n Inter4 and
n Straight are nearly equal at every intersection, and as a
result the RSU placement priority calculated in our proposal
is depending on trafﬁc volume which is a remaining element
of the Equation of calculation of RSU placement. Therefore,
the weights of the road elements used for the RSU placement
priority calculation in the three comparison targets in San
Francisco are approximately equal, and the difference in the
reception ratio in this graph generated is the performance of
the RSU placement priority update operation for preventing
redundant RSU placement. In other words, in San Francisco
the weight of the considered road element is equal for all
comparison targets, so here, the performance of the updating
operation of the RSU placement priority can be evaluated.
Trafﬁc 1 that has no updating operation of the RSU
placement priority has the lowest reception ratio among the
comparison targets. The reception rate of Trafﬁc 1 was about
55% even when the RSU was 10 pieces. This is thought to be
due to the concentrated RSU placement because intersections
whose trafﬁc volume is high concentrate in one place. Trafﬁc
2 suppresses redundant RSU placement by the operation of
uniformly setting the priority of intersection within the com-
munication range of RSU to 0. However, the opportunity to
receive information depends on the distance from the RSU.
If it ignores the distance and uniformly set the priority of the
intersection within the communication range to 0 for the reason
because it is within the communication range of RSU, RSU
placement priority of an intersection with high possibility of
working for good will is removed from candidates. Therefore,
Trafﬁc 2 has an average reception rate of 7.3 points lower than
that of our proposal which linearly controls the RSU placement
priority according to the distance.
In scenario 2, information relaying by the vehicle is per-
formed. Therefore, it is important to consider the change of
the radio wave spread range by the road network structure in
order to increase the reception ratio. Since proposed method
considers road elements related to the road network structure
such as n Inter4 and n Straight in addition to the trafﬁc
volume to calculate the RSU placement priority, the reception
rate becomes higher than Trafﬁc 1 and Trafﬁc 2 which consider
only the trafﬁc volume.
The result is shown in Figure. 4. As mentioned in Scenario
Figure 4. Reception Ratio in Scenario 2.
1, San Francisco has a regular road network structure, so there
is no big difference in the road elements of each intersection.
For this reason, the three comparison targets determine the
RSU placement priority based on the trafﬁc volume and RSU
placement priority updating operation. The RSU placement
priority updating operation works when RSUs is placed 2
or more. Therefore, when the number of RSUs is one, the
three comparison targets have the same reception rate. When
the number of RSUs placed is two or more, the reception
ratio varies depending on the performance of the update
operation of the RSU placement priority. Trafﬁc 1 without
updating the RSU placement priority is the lowest throughout
the simulation graph in San Francisco. Trafﬁc 1 converges
with a difference of 20 points compared with Trafﬁc2 and
proposed method. This is thought to be due to redundant RSU
placement occurring by concentrating the RSU at intersections
whose trafﬁc volume are high. Trafﬁc 2 is an RSU placement
priority updating operation of uniformly setting the priority
within the communication range to 0, so the RSU placement
priority updating operation does not perform corresponding to
the distance between RSUs. As a result, the RSU placement
priority updating operation of Trafﬁc 1 is lower than that
of proposed method, and the reception rate of trafﬁc 1 is
lower than that of the proposed method. When the number
of deployed RSUs is 4, our proposal already has a reception
rate of 95%, which shows that the highest reception rate is
obtained throughout the graph about proposed method.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed an RSU placement method
considering road elements for information distribution. This
method consists of calculating operation of RSU placement
priority considering road elements that affected radio wave
spreading and updating RSU placement priority in response
to the distance between the intersection and RSU deployed.
In order to determine an operation of calculation RSU place-
ment priority considering the road elements that inﬂuence the
radio wave spreading, we analyzed the correlation with the
number of 21 road elements received for the three cities of
different road network structure. As the result, the number of
straight road segments, the number of neighbor intersections
which have 4 connected road segments and trafﬁc volume
were related to communication performance. In the simulation
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

evaluation, we compared our proposal with existing method
of RSU placement methods. In the simulation results, our pro-
posal was the highest of the comparison targets of equivalent
to the highest about the reception ratio in both scenarios with
and without relay. From this result, our proposal is effective
as an RSU placement method.
In the future work, we will research the value of w in (1).
We use 1/3 in the equation, but we have to use accurate value
to evaluate. We think w is variable in using map. So, we will
research the weight of road elements in each maps.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Num-
ber 16H02811.
REFERENCES
[1]
Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, “Trends in
usage of etc,” http://www.mlit.go.jp/road/yuryo/riyou.pdf, 2014.
[2]
Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, “ETC2.0(radio
beacon 5.8 GHz),” http://www.vics.or.jp/know/service/etc2.html, 2015.
[3]
Jeonghee Chi, Yeongwon Jo, Hyunsun Park and S. Park, “Intersection-
priority based optimal rsu allocation for vanet,” in proceedings of 2013
Fifth International Conference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks
(ICUFN), July 2013, pp. 350–355.
[4]
Ryo Yanagida, Keiji Obara, Koki Ogawa and Hiroshi Shigeno, “An anal-
ysis of road maps based on voronoi diagram for vehicular broadcast,” in
proceedings of 2015 10th International Conference on Broadband and
Wireless Computing, Communication and Applications (BWCCA), Nov
2015, pp. 150–156.
[5]
Ryo Yanagida, Keiji Obara, Koki Ogawa and Hiroshi Shigeno, “An
analysis of roadmap using voronoi area for vehicular broadcast,” in
proceedings of IPSJ SIG technical reports ITS, May 2015, pp. 1–8.
[6]
M. Fogue, P. Garrido, F. J. Martinez, J. C. Cano, C. T. Calafate
and P. Manzoni, “Pawds: A roadmap proﬁle-driven adaptive system
for alert dissemination in vanets,” in proceedings of 2011 IEEE 10th
International Symposium on Network Computing and Applications,
Aug 2011, pp. 1–8.
[7]
M. Fogue, P. Garrido, F. J. Martinez, J. C. Cano, C. T. Calafate and P.
Manzoni, “An adaptive system based on roadmap proﬁling to enhance
warning message dissemination in vanets,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on
Networking, vol. 21, no. 3, June 2013, pp. 883–895.
[8]
H. Zheng and J. Wu, “Optimizing roadside advertisement dissemination
in vehicular cyber-physical systems,” in proceedings of 2015 IEEE
35th International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, June
2015, pp. 41–50.
[9]
X. Liya, H. Chuanhe, L. Peng, Z. Junyu, “A randomized algorithm for
roadside units placement in vehicular ad hoc network,” in proceedings of
2013 IEEE 9th International Conference on Mobile Ad-hoc and Sensor
Networks, Dec 2013, pp. 193–197.
[10]
A. O’Driscoll and D. Pesch, “Hybrid geo-routing in urban vehicular
networks,” in proceedings of 2013 IEEE Vehicular Networking Confer-
ence, Dec 2013, pp. 63–70.
[11]
T. J. Wu, W. Liao and C. J. Chang, “A cost-effective strategy for
road-side unit placement in vehicular networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Communications, vol. 60, no. 8, August 2012, pp. 2295–2303.
[12]
Tetsuo Ikeda, Kazumi Saito, Nobuaki Mutoh and Takayasu Fushimi,
“Road network analysis by complex network analysis methods,” Pre-
sentation papers of GIS Association of Japan(CD-ROM), vol. 20, 2011,
pp. D–6–2.
[13]
Yuta Matsumura, Tetsuo Morita and Shinya Fujita, “The study on the
evaluation method of the city planning road network via graph theory,”
Infrastructure Planning Review, vol. 28, 2011, pp. I813–I821.
[14]
Md Kamrul Hasan, Javed Iqbal Khan, Raquib Ahmed, Mollah Md
Awlad Hossain and Md. Nur-Us-Shams, “Road structure analysis using
gps information,” in proceedings of International Conference on Elec-
trical Information and Communication Technology (EICT) 2013, Feb
2014, pp. 1–6.
[15]
Japan
Automobile
Research
Institute,
“ITScommu-
nication
simulation
evaluation
scenario(ver.
1.2),”
http://www.jari.or.jp/Portals/0/resource/pdf/H23 simyu/%EF%BC%88-
Ver1.2%EF%BC%8920131010.pdf, 2012.
[16]
Yasunori Owada, Taka Maeno, Shigeru Kaneda, Ryosuke Hisanaga and
Mineo Takai, “Realistic ITS Simulation with Scenargie Simulator,” in
proceedings of IPSJ DICOMO, 2008, pp. 233–234.
[17]
H. Mordechai and W. Patrick, “OpenStreetMap: User-Generated Street
Maps,” IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 7, no. 4, 2008, pp. 12–18.
[18]
ITU-R P.1411-7, “Propagation data and prediction methods for the
planning of short-range outdoor radiocommunication systems and radio
local area networks in the frequency range 300 MHz to 100 GHz,”
International Telecommunication Union, Recommendation, 2013.
[19]
Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism, “Travel
speed of the three major cities,” http://www.mlit.go.jp/road/ir/ir-
data/data/107.pdf, 2010.
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

