Proposal of Guidance Method in Car Navigation Systems 
Akimasa Suuki, Yoshitoshi Murata, Nobuyoshi Sato 
Faculty of Software and Information Science 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Japan 
e-mail: {suzuki_a, y-murata,  nobu-s}@iwate-pu.ac.jp  
Ikuya Soma 
Business Strategy Department 
NTT Data Inc. 
Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: Ikuya.Soma@nttdata.com 
 
 
Abstract—Automotive 
navigation 
systems 
have 
become 
increasingly popular. Web-based map applications, such as 
Google Maps, that are available on smartphones are commonly 
used in automotive navigation systems. Such systems help 
drivers navigate through unfamiliar regions. However, drivers 
may occasionally misjudge or make an incorrect turn in 
response to voice directions such as “In XX meters, turn right”. 
This possibly happens because of the difference between 
perceived and actual distance. This study aims to examine the 
differences in the perceived and actual values of not only 
distance but also elapsed time. It then proposes a guidance 
method that instructs drivers to turn on their right or left 
blinker before approaching a turn. The method reduces the 
likelihood of drivers missing turns and does not bother drivers 
with repeated instructions. In addition, the method ensures that 
the cars behind are aware of the driver’s intended actions as the 
blinkers are turned on prior to making the turn; thus, it is 
superior in terms of driving safety.  
Keywords-Car navigation; driving safety; guidance method; 
voice instruction; perceptual distance. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Automotive navigation systems have become increasingly 
popular. Web-based map applications, such as Google Maps 
[1], that can be accessed on mobile devices (e.g., 
smartphones) are a commonly used automotive navigation 
system, helping drivers navigate through unfamiliar regions. 
However, despite voice instructions such as “in XX meters, 
turn right”, drivers may occasionally miss a turn, go in the 
wrong direction, or make a last-minute turn, which can be 
dangerous. This is possibly because drivers miscalculate the 
indicated distance. 
This research examines the difference between the 
perceived and actual values of not only distance but also 
elapsed time. The experiments show that most participants 
could accurately perceive distance within 100 m, although this 
accuracy rapidly decreased when the distance increased to 
more than 100 m. Thus, we conclude that re-instructing 
drivers within 100 m of a turn helps them accurately perceive 
distance.  
We firstly considered that the voice countdown method 
based on conventional visual count down bar [2] was the most 
effective in accurately perceiving distance. In this paper, we 
evaluated the countdown method. However, the method 
tended to offer repeated instructions that can prove 
bothersome to a driver. Thus, we proposed an instruction 
method in which drivers are asked to turn on their right or left 
blinker as they are nearing a turn. The experimental 
evaluations reveal that the method prevents drivers from 
making wrong turns and helps them drive safely, although the 
accuracy of perceived distance is marginally lower than that 
observed in the countdown method. The method does not 
bother a driver with repeated instructions. Moreover, it is 
superior in terms of driving safety because the cars behind 
become aware of the driver’s intended actions when the latter 
turns on the blinker. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II discusses related works. Section III evaluates the 
accuracy of perceived distance and time. Section IV analyzes 
the accuracy of selecting an intersection. Section V presents 
the novel instruction method. Section VI tests the proposed 
instruction method by conducting related experiments. 
Section VII compares the proposed method with existing ones. 
Section VIII offers concluding remarks and suggestions for 
future research.  
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Automotive navigation systems have three main tasks: 
positioning, routing, and navigation (guidance). This study 
focuses on navigation or guidance methods. Guidance 
methods generally include the display of instructions on a 
road map in a navigation system, an information display on a 
windshield, and/or voice instructions. 
However, studies have shown that the continuous need to 
look at the navigation system’s display for information can 
be distracting and dangerous [3]. Therefore, most navigation 
systems are a combination of a road map display and voice 
instructions. Guidance information generally includes 
distance to the destination and landmarks that can help 
drivers locate the destination [4]. It is easy to miss a turn in 
response to distance-based instructions such as “In XX 
meters, turn right/left.” Thus, manufactures of car navigation 
systems have upgraded guidance methods by, for example, 
integrating a 3D map that improves identifiability of mapped 
roads in reality. Figure 1 is an image of Panasonic’s car 
navigation system with a 3D map, Strada CN-F1XVD [5]. 
Augmented reality (AR) technologies have also contributed 
to improving identifiability in guidance instructions [6]-[8]. 
Akaho et.al. [6] analyzed the AR methods and comfirmed 
ease of understanding, safety, and the characteristics of AR-
Navi in comparison with conventional method using 3D 
maps. However, 3D maps and AR technologies do not 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

resolve the problem of drivers having to constantly look at 
the display for instructions. 
The second guidance method, that is, an information 
display on a windshield, was developed to resolve the 
abovementioned issue. Figure 2 depicts an AR navigation 
system and windshield projection unit designed by Pioneer 
Corporation. The AR navigation system is to the lower left of 
the image. The in-vehicle camera captures a real-time video 
of the road and vehicles ahead of the car, and guidance 
information is overlaid using computer-generated imagery on 
a live feed using AR technology. The information on the AR 
navigation system is also projected on a see-through 
windshield display. 
Large and Burnett [9] examine the effects of different 
types of voice navigation described in [6]. However, to the 
best of our knowledge, no study explores ways to improve 
the guidance accuracy of voice navigation systems 
III. 
PERCEIVED DISTANCE AND ELAPSED TIME 
Existing automotive navigation systems offer driving 
instructions such as “in XX meters, turn right” or “turn left at 
the intersection.” However, the difference between perceived 
and actual distance may cause drivers to misjudge a turn or 
even steer abruptly, which can be dangerous. This study, 
therefore, conducts experiments to evaluate differences 
between the perceived and actual values for distance and 
elapsed time. 
A. Experiment for halting vehicles 
A total of 20 students with a driving license were asked to 
drive a Toyota Noah installed with a navigation system on a 
circuit road in Iwate Prefectural University (see Figure 3). 
Each participant is informed of the distance and time (in 
seconds) within which they must halt the car. The distances 
used in this experiment are 100, 300, and 500 m. Each 
participant must drive and stop the car thrice for each distance 
category. The elapsed times are 10, 20, and 30 s, and the 
participants must drive and stop the car for each elapsed time.  
Prior to estimating the perceived values and conducting 
the experiment, the participants were asked to drive few laps 
of the test course to ensure they understand the examiner’s 
instructions and to confirm the distance and elapsed time.  
B. Experiment results for perceived distance 
Table I presents the average distance, average difference 
between the instructed and perceived distance, and standard 
deviations. If the instructed distance is longer, the average 
difference tends to be larger. This difference varies by as much 
as ten percent among the participants, as indicated by the 
standard deviations in Table I. In other words, each participant 
perceives distance differently. This means that additional 
instructions are needed for distances less than 100 m, and 
instructions such as “In XX meters, turn right/left” are not 
effective when the distance is greater than 100 m.  
 
 
Figure 1. Panasonic’s car navigation system, Strada CN-
F1XVD [1] 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Pioneer Corporation’s Cyber Navi [3] 
 
TABLE I. ESTIMATION RESULTS FOR PERCEIVED DISTANCE  
 
100 m 
300 m 
500 m 
Average (m) 
138 
327 
527 
Avg. difference 
(m) 
41 
82 
120 
Std. dev. (m) 
38.7 
91.3 
121.6 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Test course in the university 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Figure 4 shows the frequency distribution for each 
instructed distance. The vertical axis denotes the frequencies 
employed in the experiments and the horizontal axis indicates 
the difference between the instructed and travelled distances. 
The frequency distribution is estimated for iterations for each 
instructed distance. The results suggest that the data are 
widely distributed, and the curve does not take the form of a 
normal distribution. Some participants travelled considerably 
further than the instructed distance, although no participant 
travelled significantly less than the instructed distance. These 
results suggest that re-instructing drivers when they are within 
100 m of a turn or destination decreases the likelihood of them 
going in the wrong direction.  
C. Experimental result  for perceived elapsed time 
Table II presents average distance, average difference 
between instructed and travelled time, and standard deviations 
in the context of elapsed time. Figure 5 presents the frequency 
distribution for each instructed elapsed time. The vertical axis 
indicates the frequencies applied in the experiments and the 
horizontal axis denotes the ranges of time elapsed between the 
instructed time and the vehicle halting. The frequency 
distribution is estimated from 60 iterations for each elapsed 
time. 
The results reveal significantly small deviations from an 
instructed time (<15%). When the instructed time is 10 s, the 
error distance is roughly 20 m at 60 km/hour. 
A method that notifies drivers of the elapsed time would 
be more effective that one with distance instructions. However, 
it is difficult to estimate elapsed time on urban roads or streets 
since drivers 
seldom maintain a 
consistent 
speed. 
Nevertheless, the method can be useful on regional roads such 
as highways, where drivers are generally expected to travel at 
a constant pace.  
The next section proposes a guidance method that can 
prove more effective than the distance instruction method. 
IV. 
NOVEL GUIDANCE METHOD 
The results in the previous section indicate that re-
instructing drivers within 100 m of a turn or destination 
decreases the likelihood of them driving in the wrong 
direction. 
We propose the following alternative guidance methods: 
1) A countdown method that provides drivers with voice 
instructions at various distance intervals (50, 40, 30, 20, 
10, and 0 m). 
2) A blinker method that instructs drivers to turn on their 
blinker at, for example, 30 m before the target 
intersection. In Japan, drivers must turn on their 
blinkers at least 30 m from thae target intersection 
(Article 21 of the Order for Enforcement of the Road 
Traffic Act). 
 
We compare the two methods on a test course, a circuit 
road in Iwate Prefectural University with intersections made 
using traffic cones (Figure 6). We first examine an existing 
navigation system that provides drivers with instructions such 
as “In 100 m, turn left.” A preliminary exploration of a road 
 
(a) Instruction distance = 100 m 
 
 
(b) Instruction distance = 300 m 
 
 
(c) Instruction distance = 300 m 
 
Figure 4. Frequency distribution for an instructed distance 
TABLE II. ESTIMATION RESULTS FOR PRECEIVED ELAPSED TIME 
 
10 s 
20 s 
30 s 
Average (m) 
10.8 
21.9 
32.5 
Avg. difference (m) 
1.25 
2.6 
3.29 
Std. dev. (m) 
1.44 
2.56 
3.17 
 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

map suggests that most distances between intersections are 
less than 20 m and thus, all traffic cones are placed at 20 m 
intervals. Figure 7 shows an image of the test car (Nissan 
Micra) and that of the emergency brake installed on the 
examiner’s side for safety purposes. A total of other 12 
university students with a driving license participated in the 
comparative study. We instructed that the participants halted 
instead of turning when they were notified of an intersection. 
The test was repeated thrice for each method. 
Figure 8 reports the rate of participants who turned (or 
stopped) correctly in response to each instruction method. 
The vertical axis denotes the rate of correct turns and the 
horizontal axis represents each instruction method. The 
countdown method reports the highest rate of correct turns 
(91.7%). However, some participants perceived the repeated 
instructions to be distracting. The rate of correct turns is 
marginally lower for the blinker method (86.3 %). The 
participants stated that this method’s instructions are simpler 
than those of the countdown method. As previously 
mentioned, the blinker method ensures that those in 
subsequent cars are aware of the driver’s intended actions and 
thus, is superior in term of driving safety.  
The blinker method provides the most effective voice 
instructions, particularly when the distance between 
intersections is less than 100 m. Figure 9 is an example of a 
test course for the blinker method. The evaluated distance 
between the intersections is less than 20 m. A total of 10 
participants with a driving license were asked to drive a 
Nissan Micra.  
For the blinker method, the examiner selected three out of 
six intersections shown in Figure 9. All participants made an 
equal number of correct right and left turns (i.e., 15 each).  
 
 
Figure 6. Test course of instruction methods in the university 
 
 
 
                   (1) NISSAN MICRA                 (2) Emergency brake 
 
Figure 7. Test car 
 
 
(a) Instruction time = 10 s 
 
 
(b) Instruction time = 20 s 
 
 
(c) Instruction time = 30 s 
 
Figure 5. Frequency distribution for elapsed time 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

However, one participant selected a wrong intersection. 
This is possibly because the distance between intersections 
VI and V was only 10 m (see Figure 10), making the 
intersection difficult to identify given the significantly short 
distance. 
Next, we compare the blinker method with Google Maps 
on a public road (Figure 9). The test format is similar to that 
employed for the blinker method. The same 10 drivers were 
asked to participate in the evaluation of the blinker method. 
Table III presents the examination results and shows that the 
proposed blinker method is superior to Google Maps on roads 
where the distance between intersections is less than 20 m. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Automotive 
navigation 
systems 
have 
become 
increasingly popular and accessible through applications on 
mobile devices such as smartphones. While they help drivers 
navigate 
through 
unfamiliar 
regions, 
drivers 
may 
occasionally misjudge or make incorrect turns, particularly in 
response to voice instructions such as “In XX meters, turn 
right/left.” This miscalculation can be attributed to the 
difference in perceived and actual distance. Thus, this study 
experimentally evaluates the difference between perceived 
and actual values for distance and elapsed time. The data 
indicate that re-instructing drivers regarding distance is 
effective on urban roads and when the distance is less than 
100 m, and instructions related to elapsed time are useful on 
regional road such as highways. 
We propose a guidance method in which drivers are 
instructed to turn on their right or left blinker upon 
approaching a turn. This method not only decreases the 
likelihood of incorrect turns but also is superior in terms of 
safety driving because it informs the cars behind of the 
driver’s intended actions. 
We employed vibrotactile actuators for notifications and will 
continue to do so for further analyses. Future research could 
explore guidance methods without sound and visual 
notifications.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is financially supported by JSPS KAKENHI 
[grant no. 16K00276]. We would like to thank Uni-edit 
(https://uni-edit.net/) for editing and proofreading this 
manuscript. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Google, 
Google 
Maps, 
Available 
from: 
https:// 
https://www.google.co.jp/maps/ 2020.10.13  
[2] 
Laura Dal Bo, Jens Lembke, Jörg Lemme, METHODS AND 
SYSTEMS FOR PROVIDING AN IMPROVED MANEUVER 
COUNTDOWN 
BAR, 
https://www.freepatentsonline.com/y2020/0096358.html, 
United 
States Patent Application 20200096358, Kind Code:A1, 2020. 
 
 
Figure 8. Correctly turning rate 
 
 
Figure 9. Test course for the blinker method in public roads 
 
 
Figure 10. Detail map around the intersection V 
TABLE III. ACCURACY OF TURNING INTERSECTIONS 
Intersection 
# 
Turn 
L/R 
Blinker method 
(%) 
Google Map 
(%) 
I 
L 
100 
100 
II 
L 
100 
20 
III 
L 
100 
40 
IV 
R 
100 
80 
V 
R 
80 
40 
VI 
R 
100 
100 
 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

[3] 
B. S. Jensen, M. B. Skov, and N. Thiruravichandran, “Studying Driver 
Attention and Behaviour for Three Configurations of GPS Navigation 
in Real Traffic Driving,” ACM, CHI 2010, Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1271-1280, 
2010. 
[4] 
O. Wiles, M. Mahmoud, P. Robinson, E. Dias, L. Skrypchuk, 
“Towards 
a 
User-Centric 
In-Vehicle 
Navigational 
System” 
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Automotive User 
Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications, Oct. 2016, pp. 27-
34. 
[5] 
Panasonic, 
Strada 
CN- 
F1XVD 
Available 
from: 
https://panasonic.jp/car/navi/products/F1XVD/navi/navi03.html 
2020.09.30 [in Japanese] 
[6] 
K.Akaho, T. Nakagawa, Y. Yamaguchi, K. Kawai, H. Kato and S. 
Nishida, “A Study and Evaluation on Route Guidance of a Car 
Navigation System Based on Augmented Reality,” International 
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction; Towards Mobile and 
Intelligent Interaction Environments, Jul. 2011, pp. 357-366.. 
[7] 
S. T. Shahriar and A. L. Kun, “Camera-View Augmented Reality: 
Overlaying Navigation Instructions on a Real-Time View of the Road,” 
ACM, AutomotiveUI 2018, pp. 146-154, 2018. 
[8] 
Pioneer new CYBER NAVI Car Navigation system AVIC-VH99HUD 
introduction, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FODe8JMniX8,  
[retrieved: September 2020] 
[9] 
D. R.Large and G. E.Burnett, “The effect of different navigation 
voices on trust and attention while using in-vehicle navigation 
systems,” ELSEVIER, Journal of Safety Research, Vo. 49, pp. 69-75, 
2014.  
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

