Efficient V2X Data Dissemination in Cluster-Based Vehicular Networks
Yongyue Shi, Xiao-Hong Peng 
School of Engineering & Applied Science 
Aston University 
Birmingham, UK 
Email: {shiy9, x-h.peng}@aston.ac.uk 
Guangwei Bai 
Department of Computer Science & Technology 
Nanjing Tech University 
Nanjing, China 
Email: bai@njtech.edu.cn  
 
Abstract— Vehicular communications and networking 
technologies provide essential support for data services across a 
Vehicular Ad-hoc Network (VANET) and play a key role in the 
Intelligent Transport System (ITS). In this paper, we introduce 
a cluster-based two-way data service model that promotes 
efficient cooperation between Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) and 
Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I) communications, or namely 
V2X, to improve service performance for vehicles and the 
network. Our results show that the cluster-based model can 
significantly outperform the conventional non-cluster schemes, 
in terms of service successful ratio, network throughput and 
energy efficiency. 
Keywords— cluster; V2X communications; VANET; energy 
efficiency. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
With the rapidly increasing number of vehicles and 
complex road networks, traffic congestion, car accidents and 
large amount of energy consumption are among the main 
challenges in the development of smart mobility as part of the 
Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) [1]. To address these 
problems and ensure road safety and traffic efficiency, it is 
vital to make traffic information (e.g., speed and vehicle 
density) and environmental information (e.g., weather and 
road condition) timely available for road users and network 
operators.  
The Vehicular Ad-hoc Network (VANET) is an extended 
version of the Mobile Ad-hoc Network (MANET) and 
intended for improving driving safety and efficiency through  
both vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and Vehicle-to-Infrastructure 
(V2I) communications. V2V and V2I can be operated 
cooperatively as V2X, making the VANET play a better role 
in ITS in a complex traffic environment. 
This paper proposes a V2X-based service system where 
the clustering technique is applied to improve transmission 
and energy efficiencies by significantly reducing V2I 
connections.  A cluster is a group of vehicles within the 
transmission range of each other, as shown in Fig. 1 where 
cluster heads exchange data with RSU via V2I while the other 
cluster members communicate with cluster heads via V2V. A 
data service model with cooperative V2X transmission via 
clustering is also introduced, for effectively uploading the 
local information to the database and downloading the 
required service data from RSUs.  
The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. 
Related work is discussed in Section II. Section III presents 
the clustering algorithm and applies it in the proposed data 
service model. Section IV explains the simulation results 
produced by OMNET++, SUMO and MATLAB software 
tools. Finally, Section V concludes the paper. 
II. RELATED WORK 
The idea of combining V2I and V2V has been applied in 
many works on VANET. In [2], Noori et al. explore the 
combination of various forms of communication techniques, 
e.g., cellular network, Wi-Fi and ZigBee for VANETs. In [3], 
a roadside unit (RSU) plays a vital part to provide services and 
make scheduling arrangements using a simple network coding 
in a V2X approach. This approach may cost more energy to 
complete the service and does not consider the packet loss and 
associated latency caused by the failed services. In [4], 
multiple RSUs are involved in broadcasting data periodically 
to vehicles via V2I and forwarded to vehicles via V2V if they 
are not inside the transmission range. This model requires 
efficient handover mechanisms to ensure stable and in-time 
data services between the vehicles concerned. 
The Dedicated Short-Range Communications (DSRC) 
technology refers to a suite of standards of Wireless Access in 
Vehicular Environments (WAVE) [5] and supports both V2V 
and V2I communications. Vehicles equipped with sensors can 
collect local traffic and environment information and 
exchange it for the similar information of other regions (place 
of interest) with RSUs. A RSU acts as an interface between 
vehicles and the vehicular network to provide vehicles the 
service information requested and pass on the collected 
information to other part of the network. The high mobility 
and density of vehicles presents a big challenge in V2X 
communications, which causes congestion in service delivery 
in this environment. In addition, moving vehicles will keep 
Figure 1. A VANET model with clusters 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

exchanging information and this will cost a significant amount 
energy for continuous data sensing, transmission and 
processing, especially for V2I as it needs to cover longer 
distances than V2V.  
The Lowest-ID clustering algorithm is a basic method to 
select cluster head, which uses the unique vehicle ID numbers 
as the selection standard [6]. This algorithm works stably in 
most MANETs but may not always be suitable for VANET 
due to higher velocity and more restricted routes for vehicles. 
The 
AMAC 
(Adaptable 
Mobility-Aware 
Clustering) 
algorithm [7] mainly considers the destination as the key 
factor in forming clusters to improve the stability of clusters 
and extend the cluster’s lifetime. However, the destination 
may not always be collected from navigation systems as 
drivers do not always use them for the known routes. A three-
layer cluster head selection algorithm based on the interest 
preferences of vehicle passengers is proposed for multimedia 
services in a VANET [8]. This scheme is inefficient when the 
requirements in operations differ too much.  
Based on the discussion of V2X related work, a more 
efficient service delivery method is introduced in this paper by 
utilizing clusters and minimizing channel congestion caused 
by excessive V2I transmission in conventional service models. 
We will show that the cluster model outperforms the non-
cluster model at both service and energy efficiency levels. 
III. SERVICE MODEL THROUGH CLUSTERING 
In MANETs, moving nodes can be divided into different 
sizes of clusters, such as using the “combined weight” 
algorithm to select cluster heads [9]. The selection takes the 
current position, number of neighbours, mobility, and battery 
power of nodes into consideration. In VANETs, vehicles’ 
mobility is more limited by the road type, traffic signs and 
other traffic factors. Therefore, the elements involved in 
forming clusters in a VANET need to be adjusted accordingly. 
A. Cluster Head Selection   
There are three types of nodes (vehicles) in a VANET: 
Free Node (FN), Cluster Head (CH), Cluster Member (CM). 
The clustering algorithm considers the one-hop neighbours of 
each node and the cluster size is decided by cluster head’s 
communication range. CH is responsible for collecting data 
and service requests from CMs, uploading current driving 
information (e.g., traffic is normal or congested), and 
requesting services from the RSUs. This paper defines a new 
weighting metric for selecting the CH, considering the factors, 
such as position, velocity, connectivity and driving behaviour 
of the vehicles involved.  
The position of each node is obtained from GPS (Global 
Positioning System) data. The average distance, Pi, between 
CH and CM should be as short as possible, which is given by 
 
∑
−
+
−
=
=
n
j
i
j
i
j
i
y
y
x
x
n
P
1
2
2
)
(
)
(
1
  
(1)  
where n is the number of neighbours of node ni, x and y are 
coordinate values of two involved nodes. 
The velocity of CH, Vi, is defined to be the difference 
between the velocity of a candidate node vi  and the average 
velocity for the current traffic flow, and given by:  
 
∑ =
−
=
n
j
j
i
i
v
n
v
V
1
1
                             (2) 
where vj is the velocity of the j-th neighbour of the candidate 
node. 
The connectivity of the candidate node is reflected by the 
number of its neighbours, Ni. The ideal connectivity is denoted 
as σ, which represents the maximum number of neighbouring 
nodes within one hop without causing traffic congestion, and 
is given as: 
/1000
133
2
l
t
n
R
×
×
σ =
                            (3) 
where Rt is the transmission range, nl is the number of lanes. 
The constant value 133 represents the highest possible density 
(vehicles/(lane·km) [10]. The actual connectivity, Ci, is to 
measure how close the Ni is to the ideal value σ, i.e.:  
−σ
=
i
i
N
C
                                  (4) 
The last factor is the acceleration of the vehicle, ai, to 
reflect the driving behaviour Di by showing how stable a 
vehicle is when running along the road, i.e.:  
i
i
D = a
                                       (5) 
The weighting matrix is formed by combining the four 
factors discussed above which are considered equally 
important. After the normalization of the four measurements, 
as shown below,  
a)
i
i
i
P
P
P
max
'=
, b) 
max
'
V
V
V
i
i =
, c)
σ
i
i
C = C
'
, d) 
i
i
i
D
D
D
max
'=
    (6)     
the weighting matrix, , is defined as 
 
 
'
'
'
'
i
i
i
i
i
D
C
P V
W
+
+
+
=
                                      (7)                      
where Pmax is the distance between the i-th vehicle and the 
farthest vehicle from it, Vmax is the speed limitation by traffic 
rules that a vehicle can reach in the flow, Dmax is the maximum 
absolute value of acceleration the vehicle can reach when it is 
running. A smaller Wi indicates the higher suitability of the 
candidate for the CH. 
 
When a vehicle detects itself as a free node (FN), it sends 
a vehicle information packet to its neighbours and enables 
them to calculate its weight value Wi based on (7) which is the 
basis of CH selection: the vehicle with the smallest Wi value 
becomes the CH. If a vehicle generates a Wi that is smaller 
than a weight threshold, it will send a claim message with its 
weight Wi to the neighbours to announce its suitability for CH. 
Other nodes will compare the received Wj with their own 
weight and send claim messages to argue if theirs have a 
smaller weight than Wi. Otherwise, it will become the CH after 
a threshold window time and declare its identity as CH of its 
neighbours. This process takes place at either a fixed or varied 
interval(s) depending on traffic conditions given.  
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

The service model that we have developed utilizes cluster-
based V2X communications. In this model, vehicles are 
grouped into clusters for information exchange between 
vehicles and RSUs. CHs are selected to gather and aggregate 
information collected by CMs and disseminate service packets 
to CMs via V2V. V2I transmissions take place only between 
CHs and RSUs via V2I directly, including uploading 
information to the server via RSU and downloading service 
data from RSU by CHs, as shown in Fig. 2.     
The cluster-based service model has transferred most of 
the data delivery from long-range V2I to short-range V2V. In 
this way, both transmission collision in the vehicle-RSU links 
and energy consumption can be reduced. The database server 
shown in Fig. 2 stores service information including the traffic 
and environmental information such as the velocity of current 
traffic flow, real-time density of vehicles, weather conditions 
and road status, which is updated periodically. 
This service system follows the standards of IEEE 802.11p 
and IEEE 1609 family [5], which specifies 7 channels of 10 
MHz each including one control channel and 6 service 
channels. The control channel is used for exchanging control 
messages and safety information, while service channels are 
used for delivering service information packets. 
B. Service Delivery   
Vehicles within the same cluster may gather similar 
information, especially the weather and road conditions. In 
addition, different vehicles may request information for the 
same regions. Therefore, CH integrates the collected 
information before forwarding it to RSU. The aggregated data 
at CH will be less than what it has been collected, so the 
transmission efficiency in the V2I links can be improved. 
Upon receiving the information from CH, RSU updates the 
database and generates the service packets requested by 
vehicles. Service packets are then sent via V2I to CH which 
will redistribute them to CMs via V2V.  
Each RSU maintains its own database to store the recent 
service information collected from different CHs within its 
coverage. RSUs in different areas will periodically exchange 
and update information between them. In this case, vehicles in 
one area can learn the information about a larger range of areas 
ahead. The information service helps drivers to choose the best 
routes to reach their destinations and avoid congestion and 
accidents. They can also be aware of the travelling time they 
will spend. 
The RSU is up to 8-15 meters high [11] and the distance 
between a RSU and vehicles is much farther than the distance 
between vehicles themselves, thus V2I requires higher 
transmitting power than V2V to deliver data. The transmitting 
power for V2V mainly depends on the distance between CH 
and the farthest CM from CH and the maximum transmission 
distance (d*) in this case is mainly based on the number of 
vehicles in a cluster. Denote the distance between two vehicles 
as di,j, then: 
 
 
{
i j }
j n
i n
d
d
,
*
max max
∈
∈
=
                            (8) 
Given the receiver sensitivity Pr, the required transmitting 
power of the i-th transmission by a vehicle, Pti, is given by  
 
pi
r
ti
L
P
P
⋅
=
                                           (9) 
where Lpi is the path loss of this transmission link and 
represented by (assuming the free-space scenario) 
 
 
 
r
t
i
pi
G G
d
L
2
4





= 
λ
π
                              (10) 
where di is the link distance, λ is the wavelength of the signal 
transmitted, Gt and Gr are transmitting and receiving antenna 
gains.  
For cluster-based service delivery, the total transmitting 
power, Ptc, can be calculated as: 
 
 
I
V
n
i
V V i
tc
P
P
P
2
1
1
2
+
= ∑
−
=
−
                          (11) 
where n is the number of vehicles in a cluster, PV2V is the 
transmitting power for V2V communications, defined as Pti in 
(9), and PV2I is the transmitting power for V2I 
communications.  
For service delivery without clusters, the total transmitting 
power Pt, is simply the sum of individual vehicle transmission 
power all in the V2I mode, i.e.:  
∑=
−
=
n
i
V I i
t
P
P
1
2
                                           (12) 
C. Performance Evaluation 
In this paper, the following four metrics are applied to 
evaluate the performance of the proposed system.  
• Service ratio (γ). It is the ratio of the number of 
successful delivered requests ns to the total number of 
requested services n. This is a vital metric to evaluate 
the effectiveness of the V2X system. This performance 
metric is given by: 
n
γ = ns
                                  (13) 
• Average service delay (τ). It is defined as the average 
duration from a vehicle submitting a service request to 
it finally receiving the service packets, which is 
expressed by: 
Figure 2. Cluster-based service model 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

s
n
i
p
us
si
n
t
n
s t
∑ =
⋅
+
=
1
τ
                          (14) 
where tsi is the time duration of the i-th successful 
service transmission, nus is the number of unsuccessful 
service requests, and tp is the waiting time a vehicle 
spends for the service which is not delivered.  
• Throughput (η). It is a widely applied metric to 
evaluate the transmission efficiency of a system. It is 
defined as the average size of data successfully 
delivered over a time unit. 
T
η = ps
                                  (15) 
 
where ps is the total size of delivered service packets, T 
is the total transmission time.  
• Energy Consumption (EC). It is measured as an average 
amount of energy (Joule) consumed for transmitting 
one bit of data, or called energy per bit. Given 
transmitting power Pt and throughput η, the energy 
consumption is given by  
 
η
t
C
P
E
=
                                (16) 
IV. SIMULATION AND RESULTS ANALYSIS 
A. Simulation Setup 
The traffic scenarios and communications models are 
simulated using SUMO [12] and OMNET++ [13]. SUMO is 
a powerful traffic simulator and supports multiple road 
topologies and vehicle attributes. It can cooperate with other 
network simulators via its Traffic Control Interface (TraCI) 
modules. OMNET++ is an extensible, modular, and 
component-based C++ simulation framework, supporting 
various types of network simulation developments.   
We built a one-way straight road with three lanes on 
SUMO, in which vehicles in each lane are running as a flow 
and the related service model is shown in Fig. 2. According to 
the Highway Code [14], the safe stopping distances are related 
to the driving speed. Considering the transmission range of 
V2V, which is usually 300 metres, the number of vehicles in 
a cluster on motorways is related to the flow speed as well. 
Based on the safe stopping distance, we define six scenarios 
in simulation for the flow speed of 32, 48, 64, 80, 96, 112 
km/h, respectively. The relationship between the vehicle 
number and flow speed is shown in Fig. 3.    
 
The transmission model is configured based on the IEEE 
802.11p and IEEE 1609 Family. Table I gives the parameters 
of the physical and MAC (Media Access Control) layers of the 
vehicular communication system and Table II specifies the 
TABLE I.  SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Parameters 
Value 
Frequency band 
5.850-5.925 GHz 
Channel bandwidth 
10 MHz 
Receive power 
sensitivity 
-89dBm 
Propagation model 
Free space model 
Data rate 
6Mbps, 12Mbps 
Number of requests 
20-25 
Data size 
1000 bits 
Number of lanes 
3 
Simulation time 
300s 
 
Figure 3. Service ratio under different flow speeds 
Figure 4. Non-cluster service model 
TABLE II.  TRANSMISSION POWER IN V2V AND V2I 
Flow speed (km/h) 
32 
48 
64 
80 
96 
112 
V2V (mW) 
0.802 
1.020 
0.899 
0.867 
0.925 
0.711 
V2I  (mW) 
2.885 
2.898 
2.890 
2.841 
2.878 
2.821 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

transmission power in different modes (V2V and V2I), which 
are adopted in simulations.  
 
For the purpose of performance comparison with the 
proposed service model, we have also simulated the non-
cluster model, as shown in Fig. 4 where the same number of 
vehicles and vehicle velocity are set in each scenario. Once the 
vehicles enter the transmission range of the RSU, they 
communicate with RSU directly via V2I. The two models are 
evaluated for the same set of performances, featuring the 
service ratio, average service delay, throughput and energy 
consumption. 
B. Results analysis 
Fig. 5 shows different service ratios (or successful rate of 
service delivery) of both Cluster-Based (CB) and Non-Cluster 
(NC) service models under 6 different scenarios and with 
different flow speeds and vehicle densities. CB achieves 
higher and more stable service ratios than NC under all 
scenarios and at both 6Mbps and 12Mbps data rates. The 
service ratio of NC also shows a raising trend with the increase 
of the flow speed. This is due to the lower vehicle density 
when the flow speed is higher, which reduces transmission 
collision and congestion. When the flow speed is low, the 
distance between vehicles is relatively short and more vehicles 
are involved within the same transmission range, leading to 
more service requests and local data collected for 
transmission. In this scenario, by grouping vehicles into 
clusters, transmission loads between vehicles and RSUs are 
reduced, hence less collision events in the CB model than in 
the NC model. When vehicles move out of the transmission 
range of RSU, those without support of clusters will not be 
able to receive service packets directly from RSU. But in the 
cluster-based model, CMs can still obtain services from the 
CH that has stored service data from RSU as long as they are 
in the transmission range with the CH via V2V.  
The average service delay is shown in Fig. 6, which 
includes the time spent on transmitting service data and the 
waiting time for re-transmission when the previous service 
delivery is failed. In the NC model, each vehicle has to wait 
for downloading service data from the RSU in turn. This delay 
is reduced in the CB model since only CH is involved in V2I 
transmissions. In addition, more time can be saved by using a 
cluster where CH transmits aggregated sensing data collected 
from CMs and broadcasts service data from RSU to the CMs 
that request the same information. The delay profile presented 
in Fig. 6 is also correlated with the service ratio results shown 
in Fig. 5. When the flow speed increases, there will be less 
collision or congestion cases as a fewer number of vehicles  
are involved in transmission, thus in this scenario the CB 
model does not show as much advantages as they have at low 
flow speeds.  
In Fig. 7, it is shown that the CB model clearly outperforms 
the NC model in terms of the network throughput under all six 
different scenarios. Throughput in the CB model appears to be 
more sustainable than that in the NC model, and the gaps 
between them are data rate dependant. As we can see, the CB’s 
throughput at 6 Mbps is up to 2.3 times higher than that of the 
NC model, while when at 12 Mbps the difference is increased 
to up to 5 times.  However, the throughput of the NC model 
also increases with the flow rate as less service requests are 
generated at high flow speeds or low vehicle densities.   
The average throughput of individual vehicles is shown in 
Fig. 8 versus the flow speed. Generally, the throughput of 
individual vehicles in all schemes increases with the flow 
speed. As higher flow speeds correspond to lower vehicle 
densities according to Fig. 3, lower congestion in data traffic 
and, as a result, higher throughput will be expected in this 
Figure 5. Service ratio under different flow speeds 
Figure 6. Average service delay under different flow speeds 
Figure 7. Throughput under different flow speeds 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

situation. In addition, it also correlates proportionally with the 
data rate as well. At low flow speeds, the CB model has a clear 
throughput advantage over the NC model because clustering 
helps to improve transmission efficiency. But the NC model 
can achieve competitively high throughput when the flow 
speed increases and with a higher data rate. 
The energy consumption performance in terms of Joule per 
bit is demonstrated in Fig. 9 for the two service models. 
Vehicles in a cluster exchange data with a RSU via V2X, i.e. 
V2V between themselves and V2I between CH and RSU, 
while when clusters are not used all transmissions rely on V2I. 
This will make a significant difference in energy consumption 
between the two service models, as shown in Fig. 9. Like the 
results in other performance figures, the CB model is 
considerably more energy efficient than the NC model, and 
this advantage is particularly evident in the low flow-speed 
regions. The performance gap is closing down as the flow 
speed increases.  
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we propose a service delivery model via V2X 
in a vehicular network to improve the transmission efficiency 
and reduce energy consumption. This model can effectively 
provide vehicles with real-time traffic and environmental 
information for selecting the best routes to their destinations 
and avoiding traffic accidents or congestions. A combined 
weighting metric is introduced in this paper and applied to 
form clusters. The CH is selected based on the mobility and 
connectivity of vehicles to ensure the stability and efficiency 
of data exchange and service delivery. As only CHs are 
responsible for direct communication with RSUs and 
dissemination of service data to other vehicles in the network, 
the cluster-based V2X approach presented in this work can 
significantly enhance service delivery efficiency and reduce 
energy consumption. This has been shown by simulation 
results, in terms of service ratio, average service delay, 
throughput and energy efficiency, in comparison with the 
performance of the V2I dominated non-cluster model.   
Future work will consider more complicated scenarios in 
highway settings. The data aggregation method will be 
extended to develop specific data fusion and integration 
algorithms based on the information entropy theory. In 
addition, the two-way service model and associated energy 
analysis schemes will be established and investigated for 
developing a more realistic and efficient V2X service delivery 
platform.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. M. Vegni, M. Biagi, and R. Cusani, Smart Vehicles, Technologies 
and Main Applications in Vehicular Ad hoc Networks, 2013. 
[2] 
H. Noori and M. Valkama, "Impact of VANET-based V2X 
communication using IEEE 802.11 p on reducing vehicles traveling time 
in realistic large scale urban area," Proc. International Conference on 
Connected Vehicles and Expo (ICCVE), 2013, pp. 654-661. 
[3] 
K. Liu, et al., "Network-coding-assisted data dissemination via 
cooperative vehicle-to-vehicle/-infrastructure communications," IEEE 
Trans. on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 17, pp. 1509-1520, 
2016. 
[4] 
Q. Wang, P. Fan, and K. B. Letaief, "On the joint V2I and V2V 
scheduling for cooperative VANETs with network coding," IEEE Trans. 
on Vehicular Technology, vol. 61, pp. 62-73, 2012. 
[5] 
Y. L. Morgan, "Notes on DSRC & WAVE standards suite: Its 
architecture, design, and characteristics," IEEE Communications 
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 12, pp. 504-518, 2010. 
[6] 
M. Jiang, J. Li, and Y. Tay, "Cluster Based Routing Protocol (CBRP). 
Draft-ietf-manet-cbrp-spec-01," txt, Internet Draft, IETF1999. 
[7] 
M. M. C. Morales, C. S. Hong, and Y.-C. Bang, "An adaptable mobility-
aware clustering algorithm in vehicular networks," Proc. Network 
Operations and Management Symposium (APNOMS), 2011 13th Asia-
Pacific, 2011, pp. 1-6. 
[8] 
I. Tal and G.-M. Muntean, "User-oriented cluster-based solution for 
multimedia content delivery over VANETs," Proc. IEEE International 
Symposium on Broadband Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting 
(BMSB), 2012, pp. 1-5.  
[9] 
M. Chatterjee, S. K. Das, and D. Turgut, "WCA: A weighted clustering 
algorithm for mobile ad hoc networks," Cluster Computing, vol. 5, pp. 
193-204, 2002. 
[10] R. D. Kuhne, "Greenshields’ legacy: Highway traffic," Transportation 
Research E-Circular, 2011. 
[11] B. Association, Code of Federal Regulations, Title 47: Parts 80-End 
(Telecommunications): Federal Communications Commission Revised 
10/05: Claitors Pub Div, 2006. 
[12] D. Krajzewicz, J. Erdmann, M. Behrisch, and L. Bieker, "Recent 
development and applications of SUMO-Simulation of Urban 
MObility," International Journal On Advances in Systems and 
Measurements, vol. 5, pp. 128-138, 2012. 
[13] C. Sommer, R. German, and F. Dressler, "Bidirectionally coupled 
network and road traffic simulation for improved IVC analysis," IEEE 
Trans. on Mobile Computing, vol. 10, pp. 3-15, 2011. 
[14] The Highway Code, https://www.gov.uk/guidance/the-highway-code.
Figure 9. Energy consumption under different flow speeds 
Figure 8. Average throughput of individual vehicles under different 
flow speeds 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

