Event-triggered Robust Output Feedback Controller
for a Networked Roll Control System
Fernando Viadero-Monasterio∗, M. Jim´enez-Salas†, M. Mel´endez-Useros‡,
J. Garcia-Guzman§, B. L. Boada¶ and M. J. L. Boada∥
∗†‡§¶Mechanical Engineering Department
∗†‡¶∥Institute for Automotive Vehicle Safety
§Computer Science and Software Engineering Department
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Legan´es, Spain
Email: ∗ fviadero@ing.uc3m.es, † manuejim@ing.uc3m.es, ‡ mmelende@ing.uc3m.es,
§ jgarciag@inf.uc3m.es, ¶ bboada@ing.uc3m.es, ∥ mjboada@ing.uc3m.es
Abstract—Development of control systems that help to reduce
the danger in risky driving situations while also improving stabil-
ity and comfort are one of the main research focus nowadays. The
use of low-cost sensors integrated in these systems is important
for their commercialisation. Also, more complex architectures
require a larger number of sensors and connections. The delays
generated by these sensors, in addition to those of the network,
must be addressed to provide robust control. The novelty of this
paper is a robust H∞ Output Feedback Controller based on an
active suspension system for roll control that takes into account
the effect of the delays in the network. An event-triggering
condition is included in order to not saturate the network.
Keywords—H∞ control; event-triggering; networked control
systems; roll stability; active suspension
I. INTRODUCTION
The development of advanced vehicle safety systems is a
major research focus in the road transport sector today. These
systems can be divided into active and passive systems. Passive
systems attempt to minimise the damage that vehicle occu-
pants may suffer in an accident from a mitigating perspective.
Active systems act to prevent a potential accident by taking
control of vehicle dynamics. The latter requires sensors to
monitor the dynamic state of the vehicle, as well as controllers
that provide a fast and reliable response.
One of the main causes of fatal accidents in road transport is
rollover. Danger of rollover becomes even greater in vehicles
with a higher centre of gravity, such as SUVs, vans or trucks.
For this reason, previous work has focused on designing
rollover controllers to achieve a certain vehicle behaviour.
Vehicle rollover stability can be improved through different
control strategies, such as four wheel steering, differential
braking, active suspension, or active stabilizer. In [1], a robust
rollover risk suppression controller is proposed by reducing
lateral acceleration through a steer-by-wire system. In [2], an
integrated controller based on active steering and braking is
proposed, taking the expected path of the driver to achieve
better anti-rollover effect into account. A differential braking
rollover mitigation control strategy through a polytopic de-
scription of the vehicle is presented in [3]. In [4], an H∞
controller of roll stability is proposed, taking into account the
effect of delays and noise of low cost sensors. Overall, the
aforementioned studies were good, however a control signal
was generated even when not necessary, as no rules were
defined in order not to update it when the system does not
change substantially.
Accurate knowledge of the variables involved in rollover
dynamics is key to designing reliable controllers that help
improve vehicle stability and save lives. Some of them, such as
roll angle and sideslip angle, cannot be measured directly by
sensors installed in series production vehicles due to their high
cost. Previous work analysed the use of low-cost sensors to
estimate roll angle using different methods [5] [6] which, while
demonstrating good performance, could present relevant noise
and delays related to the low-cost nature of the architecture.
In real control systems, the plant, controller, sensors and
actuators are usually located far from each other. Therefore,
signals must be sent through a communication network. Net-
worked Control Systems (NCSs) bear with delays generated in
transmission process which affect the system. In autonomous
or intelligent vehicles, the architecture network can increase
its complexity significantly and higher bandwidth is required
in order to not saturate the network. This leads to an increment
of the delay between sensors and controllers which could
lead to an unstable system behaviour. Therefore, an event-
triggering condition can be included in the controller design
so that the amount of data transmitted over time is reduced.
This condition, which is evaluated at every sampled time step,
determines if the state of the system has changed significantly
enough. Only in that case, the observed variables from the sen-
sors are transmitted through the network. The event-triggering
method has proven to be an useful way to avoid saturating
the network by not sending data packets through it unless is
strictly necessary [7] [8].
In order to compensate the delays in the network and the
noise in sensor signals, a robust control design is required to
improve the performance of the system. Robust LMI-based
H∞ control is a good option for this kind of problems, as
proven in previous works [9] [10].
The novelty of this paper is the development of a robust H∞
Output Feedback Controller for a NCSs that takes into account
the effect of the delays over the network. An event-triggering
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-974-4
VEHICULAR 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

condition mechanism is included in order to not saturate
the network. Lyapunov-Krasovskii functional approach and
LMI restrictions are used to guarantee system stability and
H∞ criteria. The controller is based on an active suspension
system, taking the anti-roll moment as control input and the
roll rate as measured data.
The document is structured as follows. Section II presents
the mathematical formulation of the problem, introducing the
vehicle model used for the design of the controller and the
control algorithm. Section III includes the simulation results
where the proposed system is compared with the vehicle
without control. Section IV states the conclusion of this study.
II. PROBLEM FORMULATION
This section describes the problem of event-triggered H∞
Output Feedback Controller for roll stability. The diagram of
the network communication and control sequence is depicted
in Figure 1. Every component is described in the following
subsections.
A. Vehicle model
The vehicle model used in the design of the H∞ Output
Feedback Controller describes the roll vehicle motion as seen
in Figure 2, where ϕ is the roll angle and ay is the lateral
acceleration.
˙x(t) = Ax(t)+Bu˜u(t)+Bayay(t)+Bϕrϕr(t)+Bdds(t) (1)
y(t) = C1x(t)
(2)
z(t) = C2x(t)
(3)
with x = [ϕ, ˙ϕ]T as the state vector defined by the roll angle
ϕ and roll rate ˙ϕ, y(t) = ϕ is the observed measurement from
the system, z(t) is the control output to be minimized though
the event-triggered control input u = Mx, where Mx is the
anti-roll moment provided by actuators located at every wheel
suspension. ay is the lateral acceleration of the vehicle, ϕr is
the road bank angle and ds is the unknown vector disturbance.
ay, ϕr and ds are an input disturbance to the system, which
can be represented as ω(t) = [ay(t) ϕr(t) ds(t)], with an input
Fig. 1. Diagram of the networked control system.
disturbance matrix Bω = [Bay Bϕr Bd], leading the system
presented in (1) to
˙x(t) = Ax(t) + Bu˜u(t) + Bωω(t)
(4)
y(t) = C1x(t)
(5)
z(t) = C2x(t)
(6)
B. H∞ Output Feedback Controller
The control input is defined as follows
u(t) = Ky(t)
(7)
where K is the control gain matrix to be determined so that,
the closed-loop H∞ performance of the closed-loop system
(1) is guaranteed, which is satisfied if the following inequality
remains true
zT (t)z(t)

2 < γ2 ωT (t)ω(t)

2
(8)
C. Event-triggering mechanism
In order to reduce the Transmission Rate (TR), the following
event-triggered rule is defined so that the control output is sent
to the actuators only when necessary
eT (t)KT ΩKe(t) ≤ ε2˜uT (t)Ω˜u(t)
(9)
where e(t) is the difference between the current vehicle
measurement and the measurement from the last triggering
instant, ˜u(t) is the last transmitted control input, ε is a user
defined threshold and Ω > 0 is a positive definite matrix to
be designed
D. Network communication
The observed measurement y(t) from the vehicle is sampled
every h milliseconds, then the event-triggering mechanism
decides whether to neglect this information or to update the
control input that the actuators must supply. Every time the
event-triggering mechanism sends new information through
the communication network, this presents a maximum delay
of τM milliseconds. When the system state varies significantly,
actuators will react to stabilize it after a maximum period of
τ = h + τM milliseconds.
Fig. 2. Vehicle model used in the controller.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-974-4
VEHICULAR 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

E. Lyapunov stability
In order to guarantee the system stability, the following
Lyapunov-Krasovskii functional is chosen
V (t) = V1(t) + V2(t) + V3(t)
(10)
where
V1(t) = xT (t)Px(t)
V2(t) =
Z t
t−τ
˙xT (s)CT
1 KT SKC1x(s)ds
(11)
V3(t) =
Z t
t−τ
(s − (t − τ)) ˙xT (s)CT
1 KT SRC1 ˙x(s)ds
(12)
with symmetrical positive matrices P > 0, R > 0, S > 0 to
be determined such that
˙V (t) < 0
(13)
III. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The control gain K is obtained through the minimization
problem
min
γ2
(14)
subject to
P > 0, R > 0, S > 0, Ω > 0
(15)
A feasible solution was found using the MATLAB LMI
Toolbox, with the matrices
γ2 = 16.96
P =
14.306391
0.607416
0.607416
0.464377

R = 3.4 ∗ 10−9
S = 1.25 ∗ 10−10
K = −13552.53
Ω = 1
ε2 = 0.1
The sampling period defined for the observer in this study
is h = 20 ms and the maximum and minimum delays over
the network are assumed as τM = 20 ms and τm = 10 ms
respectively, which are common times for data sampling and
communication delays [4] [7]. It is not expensive to use
data logging devices with higher sampling rates, however, a
sampling frequency of 50 hz is enough for this study.
For the validation of the proposed controller, the CarSim
software is used together with Simulink, where the following
experiments were set
1) A double line change at a speed of 100 km/h
2) A double line change at a speed of 120 km/h, in order
to study the performance in a more severe test
The results for the first test are depicted through Figures
3-10. Figures 3 and 5 show the roll rate and angle obtained
from this simulation, where it can be seen that the proposed
controller achieves a better performance, as the roll rate and
angle are lowered through time. These results are summarized
in Table I. Figures 4 and 6 compare the Power Spectral
Density (PSD) of the roll rate and angle respectively, where the
proposed controller enhances the lateral behaviour, as the PSD
is lowered for all frequencies. The anti-roll moment provided
by the actuators is depicted in Figure 7. The Event Trigger-
ing instants are depicted in Figure 10; the event-triggering
mechanism achieves a TR of 29.14% for this experiment. The
results for the second test are depicted through Figures 11-18
and summarized in Table II. Once again, the controlled system
achieves a better behaviour than the system without control.
The TR is 25.33% for this case, which proves that the network
usage is reduced.
Normalized load transfer (NLT) was calculated in addition
to the above mentioned results. This variable is an accurate
measure for evaluating roll stability control systems. It guar-
antees that the vehicle will not roll over while its value for both
axles is within the ±1 range. The normalized load transfer can
be calculated as:
NLTf = ∆Fzf
Fzf
, NLTr = ∆Fzr
Fzr
(16)
where Fzf and Fzr are the total load on the front and rear
axle, respectively. Values of NLT for experiments 1 and 2 are
depicted through Figures 8-9 and Figures 16-17, respectively.
NLT remains within the determined range in all experiments
and a decrease of the NLT is observed for both experiments
at the front axle, which demonstrates the effectiveness of the
controller.
Overall, the vehicle’s dynamic response shows a smoother
behaviour, ensuring safety and comfort inside the vehicle. Roll
angle and rate have been significantly decreased compared to
[4], and the TR has been reduced as we have implemented an
event triggering mechanism which is more flexible than the
one presented in [7] and facilitates the design of the controller.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
An output-feedback event-triggered H∞ controller that en-
hances the lateral behaviour of the vehicle has been introduced
in this paper. A Lyapunov-Krasovskii functional is chosen
to assure the system stability despite the affection of com-
munication delays. An event-triggering rule is designed in
order to reduce the communication resources. The controller is
designed under a guaranteed H∞ performance index γ, which
represents the impact of the disturbances on the roll rate and
angle. To analyze the performance of the proposed controller,
the RMS and MAX values of the roll rate and angle are
compared, leading to a reduction of up to 50% of the roll rate
and angle in the worst cases. The Event-Triggered mechanism
reduces the use of network communication resources usage by
up to 70%.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-974-4
VEHICULAR 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

TABLE I
ROLL BEHAVIOUR OF THE VEHICLE UNDER THE EXPERIMENT 1
RMS Roll Rate
(º/s)
MAX Roll Rate
(º/s)
RMS Roll Angle
(º)
MAX Roll Angle
(º)
Passive system
3.57
4.15
1.97
3.31
Active system (proposed)
1.70
3.31
1.14
2.22
TABLE II
ROLL BEHAVIOUR OF THE VEHICLE UNDER THE EXPERIMENT 2
RMS Roll Rate
(º/s)
MAX Roll Rate
(º/s)
RMS Roll Angle
(º)
MAX Roll Angle
(º)
Passive system
4.13
11.05
2.18
3.27
Active system (proposed)
2.21
5.38
1.30
2.26
Fig. 3. Roll rate under the experiment 1
Fig. 4. Roll rate PSD under the experiment 1
Fig. 5. Roll angle under the experiment 1
Fig. 6. Roll angle PSD under the experiment 1
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-974-4
VEHICULAR 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Fig. 7. Control signal under the experiment 1
Fig. 8. NLT of front axle under the experiment 1
Fig. 9. NLT of rear axle under the experiment 1
Fig. 10. Event Triggering instants under the experiment 1
Fig. 11. Roll rate under the experiment 2
Fig. 12. Roll rate PSD under the experiment 2
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-974-4
VEHICULAR 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Fig. 13. Roll angle under the experiment 2
Fig. 14. Roll angle PSD under the experiment 2
Fig. 15. Control signal under the experiment 2
Fig. 16. NLT of front axle under the experiment 2
Fig. 17. NLT of rear axle under the experiment 2
Fig. 18. Event Triggering instants under the experiment 2
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-974-4
VEHICULAR 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the FEDER/Ministry of Sci-
ence and Innovation - Agencia Estatal de Investigacion (AEI)
of the Government of Spain through the project RTI2018-
095143-B-C21 and by Centros de Arte, Cultura y Turismo
de Lanzarote through the project Cities Timanfaya.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Shao, J. Zheng, B. Deng, K. Huang, and H. Zhao, “Active steering
control for vehicle rollover risk reduction based on slip angle estima-
tion,” IET Cyber-systems and Robotics, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 132–139, 2020.
[2] X. Qian, C. Wang, and W. Zhao, “Rollover prevention and path following
control of integrated steering and braking systems,” Proceedings of the
Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part D: Journal of Automobile
Engineering, vol. 234, no. 6, pp. 1644–1659, 2020.
[3] M. A. Rodr´ıguez Licea and I. Cervantes, “Robust switched predictive
braking control for rollover prevention in wheeled vehicles,” Mathemat-
ical Problems in Engineering, vol. 2014, no. 4, pp. 1–12, 2014.
[4] J. P. Redondo, B. L. Boada, and V. D´ıaz, “Lmi-based h controller of
vehicle roll stability control systems with input and output delays,”
Sensors, vol. 21, no. 23, p. 7850, 2021.
[5] J.
Garcia
Guzman,
L.
Prieto
Gonzalez,
J.
Pajares
Redondo,
S. Sanz Sanchez, and B. L. Boada, “Design of low-cost vehicle roll
angle estimator based on kalman filters and an iot architecture,” Sensors,
vol. 18, no. 6, p. 1800, 2018.
[6] J. Garcia Guzman, L. Prieto Gonzalez, J. Pajares Redondo, M. M.
Montalvo Martinez, and M. J. L Boada, “Real-time vehicle roll angle
estimation based on neural networks in iot low-cost devices,” Sensors,
vol. 18, no. 7, p. 2188, 2018.
[7] F. Viadero-Monasterio, B. Boada, M. Boada, and V. D´ıaz, “H dynamic
output feedback control for a networked control active suspension sys-
tem under actuator faults,” Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing,
vol. 162, p. 108050, 2022.
[8] G. Wang, M. Chadli, H. Chen, and Z. Zhou, “Event-triggered control for
active vehicle suspension systems with network-induced delays,” Journal
of the Franklin Institute, vol. 356, no. 1, pp. 147–172, 2019.
[9] W. Lyu and X. Cheng, “A novel adaptive h filtering method with delay
compensation for the transfer alignment of strapdown inertial navigation
systems,” Sensors, vol. 17, no. 12, p. 2753, 2017.
[10] M. J. L. Boada, B. L. Boada, and H. Zhang, “Event-triggering h-
based observer combined with nn for simultaneous estimation of ve-
hicle sideslip and roll angles with network-induced delays,” Nonlinear
Dynamics, vol. 103, no. 3, pp. 2733–2752, 2021.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-974-4
VEHICULAR 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

