Acoustic Sensor Network for Vehicle Trafﬁc
Monitoring
Barbara Barbagli, Gianfranco Manes, Rodolfo Facchini
Department of Electronics and Telecommunications, University of Florence
Via di Santa Marta 3, 50139 Florence, Italy,
Email: barbara.barbagli@gmail.com, gianfranco.manes@uniﬁ.it
rfacch@gmail.com
Antonio Manes
Netsens S.r.l.
Via Tevere 70, 50019 Florence, Italy
Email: antonio.manes@netsens.it
Abstract—Real time trafﬁc monitoring is a fundamental
requirement for improving the efﬁciency of transportation
systems. The emerging technology of wireless sensor networks
(WSNs) allows of distributed trafﬁc monitoring systems at large
scale with low cost of installation and maintenance. The develop
of cheap sensor nodes with integrated computing and wireless
communication capabilities has changed the scenery of real-time
trafﬁc data acquisition. This paper describes a WSN based on an
array of acoustic sensor employing an effective signal processing
and a novel parameter estimation procedure. Key features are
trafﬁc monitoring and localization of trafﬁc congestion event
performed in real time, with an impressive space scale. A
particular case study is presented starting from a real problem
and achieving the best architectural solution. Finally the results
of theoretical analysis and extensive experimental results of a
prototype installation on a motorway are provided.
Keywords - wireless sensor networks; trafﬁc monitoring system;
acoustic sensors; vehicle detection; trafﬁc parameters estimation.
I. INTRODUCTION
Trafﬁc monitoring and vehicle detection is of paramount im-
portance in Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS). Improv-
ing the efﬁciency of transportation systems has tremendously
economical and environmental impact. Trafﬁc management
systems, to address the task of an effective management road
strategies, require accurate estimation of trafﬁc parameters
such as average vehicle speed, density, percentage of occu-
pancy lane. A desirable trafﬁc monitoring system should (i)
allows a large-scale deployment, (ii) be passive and operate at
low power, (iii) operate in all weather day-night conditions,
and (iv) be cheap and easy to install and maintain.
System design must include the choice of a particular sensor
as well as the development of adequate signal processing and
parameters estimation method.
Many alternatives exist for collecting data about the transit
of road vehicles at a given location. Trafﬁc sensors commer-
cially available at present can be divided into two groups,
intrusive and non-intrusive sensors, based on their placement.
Sensor placement has signiﬁcant effects on the cost of instal-
lation and maintenance, quality of sensing, lifetime of sensors,
and disruption of trafﬁc.
Intrusive sensors include inductive loops, magnetometers,
microloop probes, pneumatic road tubes, piezoelectric cables,
and other weigh-in-motion sensors. They are installed directly
on the pavement surface. The main advantage of these sensors
is their high accuracy for vehicle detection. However, they
have some drawbacks especially the high cost due to the
disruption of trafﬁc during installation or repair. As a results,
those solutions are not suitable for large-scale deployment and
hence are restricted to small scale applications.
These limitations have pushed towards the development of
non-intrusive trafﬁc monitoring technologies, including radar,
infrared, or ultrasound based detectors; video cameras and
microphones. Like the former sensors, the latter could detect
vehicle’s transit and also they could provide vehicle speed,
vehicle classiﬁcation, and lane coverage. On the other hand,
they are expensive, power-hungry and may be affected by
different environmental conditions.
The acoustic sensors are attractive especially for the low
cost for unit and the simple and non intrusive installa-
tion, but at the same time they require sophisticated post-
processing algorithm to extract useful information. The prob-
lem of detecting vehicles with passive acoustic transducer
has been addressed in many studies. Mainly, two approach
have been developed: with a single transducer or with an
array of microphones. In particular Lo and Ferguson [5]
have formulated a nonlinear least-squares method to estimate
the motion parameters of a target with broadband acoustic
energy spectrum. Valcarce et al. [4] have proposed a maximum
likelihood estimate for vehicle speed detection. Forren and
Jaarsma [2] have detected vehicles by exploiting the tire noise,
using signal correlations among three known microphones
under assumption that vehicle has signal with a stationary
characteristic. However, they do not model any interference
effects of the tires.
Another relevant requirement pushing for the design of an
effective trafﬁc monitoring system is to provide a high spatial
density measurements. A viable solution for achieving that
purpose consists of a system based on a Wireless Sensor
Network (WSN) infrastructure which reduces the required
investment, enables the employment in large-scale and allows
future developments of systems based on multiple sensors
that collaborate in collecting informations. Several wireless
sensor networks have been investigated, including wireless
magnetic sensors [3] [6], and acoustic vehicle detection based
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-241-7
VEHICULAR 2012 : The First International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

on coherent cross-correlation [8].
In this paper, we propose a Wireless Sensor Network
that utilizes a microphone array to detect the sound waves
generated by the road vehicles. System nodes process sound
signals locally to extract trafﬁc parameters on site rather than
transmitting the measurements, in order to save both in energy
and in bandwidth. The basic principle of the sensing technique
is to measure the temporal variation of the differential time of
arrival of the acoustic signal at each pair of sensors with an al-
gorithm based on a generalized cross-correlation method. The
collected information are transmitted to a central server and
made available to a remote user. In comparison with existing
trafﬁc sensors, the proposed system offers lower installation
and maintenance costs, is less intrusive to environment and
allows the detection of trafﬁc congestion location.
In particular, the paper is organized as follow. An outlook
of the system composition and operation is presented in
Section II. Section III and Section IV describes the hardware
and the basic operation of System nodes. Section V brieﬂy
present the communication protocol. Finally, in Section VI,
experimental results of continuous long term operation are
shown.
II. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
Vehicle detection and trafﬁc monitoring is an important
and demanding application of WSN. The equipment and
maintenance cost and time-consuming installations of existing
sensing systems prevent large-scale deployment of real-time
trafﬁc monitoring and control. This leads to deployment of
trafﬁc sensors only at critical location which work indepen-
dently of each other. Small wireless sensors with integrated
sensing, computing, and wireless communication capabilities
offer tremendous advantages in low cost and easy installation.
We propose a real-time trafﬁc monitoring system based on
a WSN infrastructure, the system allows trafﬁc monitoring
and queue detection to be performed in real-time at a larger
space scale with an comparably low investment in installation
and maintenance costs. The developed system is composed
of two different sensor nodes having different hardware char-
acteristics and employing different sensing techniques. The
sensors work together in collecting trafﬁc information in order
to obtain an excellent spatial resolution and allow to detect the
location of a trafﬁc congestion condition (trafﬁc jam or queue).
In Fig. 1, a basic module infrastructure deployed along
the motorway is represented. This module can be spatially
replicated on both side of the motorway to coverage a wide
area.
The basic module of the system infrastructure is composed
of a Master Node (MN), which has superior computational
and energy resources and is connected to a remote database
via TCP/IP over UMTS. The sound signal is detected and
processed by the embedded resource of the MN using an
original algorithm that allow to automatically extract trafﬁc
parameters on site. The information is transmitted to a central
server and made available to a remote user.
The MN is wirelessly connected to a number of regularly
spaced Sensor Nodes (SNs) operating on a low duty-cycle and
woken-up on demand. When a queue or trafﬁc jam is detected
at the MN location the SNs are activated by the MN in order to
locate the position of the queue or trafﬁc jam, thus providing a
real-time picture of the trafﬁc ﬂow sampled at the same space
interval as the SN deployed on the motorway.
2
LWSN
MN3
SN7
SN6
SN10
SN9
8
SN
UMTS
Server
SN1
2
SN
2
MN
SN3
SN5
4
SN
1
MN
LWSN-segment
1
LWSN
Fig. 1.
Basic system infrastructure.
III. MN DESIGN AND OPERATION
Each Master Node is composed of a Sensor Unit detecting
the audio signal coming from the sound sources and a Com-
putational Unit which performs signal processing and vehicle
detection while supporting at the same time the communica-
tion with both the associated SNs by the RF Unit and with the
central server by the UMTS modem. The setup of the MN is
packaged into a compact lightweight panel which can be easy
installed at motorway’s guardrail.
A. Sound Map
Figure
2 shows the arrangement of the sensor unit, con-
sisting in a pair of microphones (MIC1 and MIC2), separated
by 2b m and installed with the baseline parallel to the road.
We suppose that vehicles travel on a straight path along the
road, at the distance of D m, with a constant speed v0 over
the time period of interest. The time observation windows is

− T
2
T
2

.
MIC1
MIC1
V
x-direction
O
X1
X2
L = 2b
D
Fig. 2.
MN Sensor unit setup.
Sound signals generated by traveling vehicles reach the two
microphones at slightly different times due to the difference
in the air path; the propagation time delay is τi = d1 (t; v0) /c
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-241-7
VEHICULAR 2012 : The First International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

where c is the speed of sound in air. The two received signals
can be expressed as:
s1(t) = s(t) and s2(t) = s(t − τ)
The issue of estimating the vehicle’s speed can be reduced
to a Time Delay Estimation (TDE) problem. The objective
of TDE is to determine the relative time difference of arrival
(TDOA) between signals received by a different sensor. The
generalized cross-correlation (GCC) method is the most pop-
ular to do so and is well explained in an paper by Knapp and
Carter [7].
The cross-correlation of the two signals function yields:
Rs1s2(t) =
Z
s1(t)s2(t)(t − τ)dτ = s1(t) ∗ s2(t)
(1)
where ∗ is the convolution operation.
The cross-correlation Rs1s2(t) obtain is maximum when t =
τ. So the differential time, between the two signals, can be
acquired by get the maximum of the cross-correlation function.
The calculation of the cross-correlation could be done in
the Fourier transform domain, thus in the digital processing it
could be implemented with the FFT to reduce the computa-
tional workload. The Fourier transform of the equation is:
F [Rs1s2(t)] = F [s1(t) ∗ s2(t)] = S1(f) ∗ S∗
2(f)
(2)
Therefore, the calculation of the cross-correlation will be
transformed to a Fourier transform, a multiplication and a
Reverse Fourier transform of the two signals s1(t) s2(t).
In the cross-correlation domain, the position of the peak
represents the time delay, and changes with the position of
the source. Measuring the temporal variation of the time delay,
corresponding with the position of the cross-correlation peak,
in a certain observation time interval; we can create a digital
Sound Map, representing the source motion along a predeﬁned
track.
A typical sound map is shown in Fig. 3; the x-axis represents
the observation time and the y-axis represents the time delay
τ.
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4 x 10
−3
Correlogramma 3 massimi
Fig. 3.
Sound Map.
A vehicle passing in front of the sensor unit leaves a
recognizable trace that could be described by an analytic
solution, according to [8]. The shape of the curve could be
derived from the sound path difference in the air and expressed
by:
τ(t) = 1
c
hp
(x + b)2 + y2 + z2 −
p
(x − b)2 + y2 + z2
i
(3)
where, c is the speed of the sound in air, d is the microphones
spacing, x = v0t is the vehicle position in the x-direction,
y = D is the distance between mics and vehicle, z is the
height of the mics above the ground.
The problem for acoustic sensor vehicle detection is to
achieve robust vehicle detection under various acoustic noise
corruption, as can be observed in the sound map. Since the sen-
sor nodes are powered by battery the solution has to be a low
power demanding the development of an efﬁcient algorithm.
To achieve that goal, a solution based on a ﬁltering band-pass
and a phase correlation method has been adopted. The band
pass ﬁlter is designed to remove the unwanted background
acoustic and the noise, whose spectral contributions where
found in the frequency domain below 500HZ.
The phase correlation is a GCC method, in which the
transform coefﬁcients are normalized to unit magnitude prior
to computing correlation in the frequency domain. Thus,
the correlation is based only on phase information and is
insensitive to changes in sound intensity. Although experience
has shown this approach to be successful, it has the drawback
that all transform components are weighted equally, whereas
one might expect that insigniﬁcant components should be
given less weight.
A Sound Map after the described processing is shown in
Fig. 4; if it is compared with the one of Fig. 3, a relevant
improvement in the term of sharpness could be observed. An
automatic trafﬁc parameters extraction procedure, from this
map, can now be developed.
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4 x 10
−3
Correlogramma 3 massimi
Fig. 4.
Sound Map after the post-processing.
B. Parameters Extraction Procedure
In Fig. 5, a Sound Map corresponding to a single vehicle
transit is reported. Multiple sound source could be processed
and hence could appear in the sound map. As in a vehicle
the main acoustic source is represented by vehicle tyres, each
sound map for a single vehicle, would consist of two or more
traces, each corresponding to a vehicle axle.
With the reference of Fig. 2, it could be observed that
when the vehicle crosses the center of the setup, corresponding
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-241-7
VEHICULAR 2012 : The First International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

to the point ”O” or CPA (Closest Point of arrival) the time
difference for the two signals is zero. This correspond with the
crossing of the x-axis in the sound map, in the neighborhood
of this point the curve can be approximated, with a straight
line, and hence could be demonstrated that the trace slope is
proportional to the vehicle speed.
To detect a vehicle transit, two symmetrical points corre-
sponding to the positive time delay τ1 and the negative time
delay τ2 = −τ1 are positioned on the y-axis of the sound map
(see Fig. 5). Those time delays correspond to two symmetrical
positions, X1 and X2, of the vehicle along the traveling path,
whose spacing is L (see Fig. 2 for reference).
109  
110  
111  
112  
113  
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
x 10
−3
Time [s]
Delay time [s]
τ1
τ2
t1
t2
Fig. 5.
Vehicle detection procedure.
A vehicle transit is detected if the sound trace intercepts
in sequence the values τ1 and τ2 that occurs when a vehicle
passes through the two virtual position X1 and X2. Therefore,
as τ1 and τ2 are selected in the linear portion of the trace, the
vehicle traveling speed, Vv, can be easy calculated, according
to the following expression:
Vv =
Lk
t2 − t1
(4)
where k is a scale factor and was estimated on a statistical
basis.
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
−2
−1.5
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2 x 10
−3
Time [s]
Delay Time [s]
Fig. 6.
Multiple detection transit.
In Fig. 6, a sound map is reported, showing the sequence
of square and circle markers associated to multiple vehicle
detection obtained from the automatic procedure previously
described. As it can be observed, all the passing vehicles are
successfully detected in this case.
The output extraction routines are represented by some
parameters indicating the trafﬁc condition at the MN location.
These parameters are related in a summary report and sent to
a central server.
The previously described method for trafﬁc parameter ex-
traction was extensively tested during a long period of contin-
uous operation. In Section VI, we will present results of the
long term system operation.
IV. SN DESIGN AND OPERATION
According to the proposed architecture, the sensor network
also includes Sensor Nodes. As previously mentioned, the
main job of the SNs is to produce trafﬁc reports on-demand
for dynamically locating the position of a queue or trafﬁc jam.
When a trafﬁc queue or jam is detected at the MN location,
the SNs associated with the MN are switched to operative
mode, the detection of trafﬁc conditions (ﬂuid ﬂow or queue)
is performed through an analysis of the energy distribution
features. As long as the SNs stay in the operative mode, they
regularly produce a trafﬁc report containing trafﬁc conditions
information that is passed to the MN according to a scheduling
time interval. Communication between the devices is per-
formed by a cross-layer MAC Routing protocol as described
in Section V.
The MN reports the information to the central server about
the trafﬁc conditions at each individual SN; as a consequence,
the trafﬁc ﬂow distribution is sampled at the same spac-
ing interval as the SNs deployed on the motorway, thus a
complete real-time picture of trafﬁc ﬂow is provided to the
user/customer.
The detection of trafﬁc conditions (ﬂuid ﬂow or queue) is
performed via analysis of the energy distribution features. With
reference of Fig. 7, the energy distribution of the acoustic
signal associated with the trafﬁc ﬂow could be observed.
Moving vehicles yield well deﬁned energy peaks in the time
domain, instead, standing vehicles, feature a smoother energy
distribution and exhibit a much lower associated average
energy.
Thus a qualitative information of a ﬂuid trafﬁc condition, is
associated to the presence of isolated energy peaks, while a
queue or jam condition is associated to an energy ﬂoor, with
a much lower associated average energy.
The processing unit computes the energy distribution in the
time domain and an algorithm based on a state machine detects
the passing vehicle. According to[3], an adaptive threshold
estimated on the energy value’s moving average is on the basis
of the state machine. A block diagram of the processing is
shown in Figure 8.
The acoustic signal sensed by the microphone is ﬁrst high-
pass ﬁltered to remove the contribution of background noise
and opposite roadway vehicles noise. Due to this signal condi-
tioning the energy revealed by the sensor is mainly associated
to the vehicles traveling in the close carriageway.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-241-7
VEHICULAR 2012 : The First International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Time [s]
Energy
Passing Vehicle 
Standing Vehicle
Fig. 7.
Energy distribution.
HP Filter
Energy 
Distribution
Adaptive 
Threshold
State Machine
Decison
s(n)
 vehicle
state 
Fig. 8.
Block diagram of SN operation.
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Time [s]
Energy
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
−2
−1
0
1
2 x 10
−3
Time [s]
Delay time [s]
Fig. 9.
Correlation between energy distribution and sound map.
Fig. 9 shows the result of this process compared with the
sound map generated by the MN. It can be seen that the
implemented algorithm is capable to detect, in this case, all
the peaks of the energy distribution, as the vehicles are fairly
spaced apart. In heavier trafﬁc condition, however, the vehicle
counting could be underestimated, but, in any case, the energy
distribution represents an useful indicator to estimate the trafﬁc
ﬂow in the carriageway.
V. PROTOCOL DESIGN
Main issues in Medium Access Control (MAC) and Routing
protocol design are power consumption and the possibility of
establishing a quick set-up and end-to-end communication.
Other important features are scalability and adaptability of
network topology, in terms of number of nodes and their
density.
Taking these requirements into account, a MAC protocol
and a multi-hop routing protocol were implemented. A multi-
hop approach was preferred as opposed to a star topology
because it also helps to realize an end-to-end communication
in the presence of obstacles (i.e., ﬂyovers, trees, curves) that
TABLE I
ROUTING TABLE GENERAL STRUCTURE
Master Node
Next Hop
Hop Count
Loop Flag
MN1
SN1
ηA
false
MN1
SN2
ηB
true
MN2
SN3
ηC
true
would otherwise prevent the establishment of a direct link
between the SNs and the MNs.
According to the proposed MAC protocol, each node might
be either in an idle mode, in which it remains for a time
interval Tl (listening time), or in an energy saving sleeping
state for a Ts (sleeping time). The transitions between states
are synchronous with a period frame equal to Tf = Tl + Ts
partitioned in two sub-intervals, as shown in Fig. 10
To provide the network with full communication capabili-
ties, all the nodes need to be weakly synchronized, meaning
that they are aware at least of the awaking time of all their
neighbors. To this end, a node sends an HELLO message
frame by frame to each of its neighbor nodes known to be
in the listening mode (Synchronous Transmission), whereas,
during the setup phase in which each node discovers the
network topology, the control messages are asynchronously
broad-casted.
On the other hand, its neighbors periodically awake and
enter the listening state independently (Asynchronous Recep-
tion). The header of the synchronization message contains
the following ﬁelds: a unique node identiﬁer, the message
sequence number and the phase, or the time interval after
which the sender claims to be in the listening status waiting for
both synchronization and data messages from its neighbors.
NODE 1
t
t
t
l
T
l
T
l
T
l
T
T l
l
T
s
T
s
T
s
T
f
T
f
T
f
T
NODE 2
NODE 3
HELLO MESSAGE
Fig. 10.
MAC protocol HELLO message exchange
In order to evaluate the capability of the proposed MAC
scheme in establishing effective end-to-end communications
within each LWSN, a routing protocol was introduced and
integrated according to the cross layer design principle [10]. It
is based on sending periodical information needed for building
and maintaining the local routing tables depicted in Table I.
It resorts to the signaling introduced by the MAC layer with
the aim of minimize the overhead and make the system more
adaptive in a cross layer fashion.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
First of all simulation experiments in laboratories has been
performed to develop the proposed sensing method. Experi-
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-241-7
VEHICULAR 2012 : The First International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

ments were conducted using an acoustic signal recorded at
an test site with the deﬁnitive sensor unit. Results of the
simulation test and analysis are shown in the previous ﬁgures.
At the same time, the design of the hardware components
is been carried out, in order to select the best arrangement of
a prototype basic unit, allowing the sensing and processing
operations, with the best cost-performance.
Finally, the prototype basic unit, has been deployed, along
the Italian highway operated by Autostrade per l’Italia SpA
(ASPI) near Florence. The basic unit was ﬁrst installed on May
2009; since then it is operating collecting trafﬁc parameters
and is transmitting them to a central server. The prototype
unit has been placed closely to a loop detector to test the MN
operation.
During the long-term operation period, the system has
detected various typologies of trafﬁc condition under many
environmental and weather conditions. Also the communica-
tion modality was tested successfully.
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
0
10
20
30
40
Vehicle Number
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
0
50
100
150
200
Speed Vehicle
Fig. 11.
Vehicle transit and average speed for a weekly observation slot.
Below, some of the collected data are presented; in Fig. 11
a weekly data collection related to vehicles transit and average
speed is shown, highlighting the periodicity of the trafﬁc ﬂow
with different behavior depending by day and hours.
The MN operation is validated by comparison with the
loop detector. As is shown in Fig. 12, the two systems
exhibit a good matching. The overestimation of the number
of vehicles during the night is due to the background noise.
For this purpose a speciﬁc post processing algorithm is under
development.
The MN reports are now fully integrated in the ASPI
information system. SN reports are not yet available in graphic
format. Extensive tests during the period of operation have
provided the motorway practitioners with a complete reporting
about trafﬁc trends. Due to the yield and easy deployment of
the system, a 50 km, dual carriageway complete installation is
planned by ASPI to fully exploit the potential of the system
in the A1 motorway, between Florence and Arezzo.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper a real-time trafﬁc monitoring system, based
on acoustic WSN has been proposed. The sensing technique
(a) Loop Detector.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314151617181920212223
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
15/09/2010 Vehicle transit
Hour
Transit / Minute
(b) Audio System.
Fig. 12.
Comparison between audio sensor and loop detector results.
is based on an array of acoustic sensors. The system is able to
extract trafﬁc parameters from the sound signals generated by
the passing vehicles. System’s nodes process sound signals
locally on-site and transmit the collected information to a
central server in order to be available for a remote user.
The signal processing algorithm and the vehicle detection
procedure are described. Experimental results of long-time
period operation are shown.
The developed system shows the following key features:
(i) provides a complete picture state of the trafﬁc ﬂow at an
larger scale and in real-time (ii) collect information coming
from two different devices (iii) presents low installation and
maintenance cost (iv) is able to large scale deployment.
REFERENCES
[1] Klausner, A., Erb, S., Tengg, A., Rinner, B.:DSP Based Acoustic
Vehicle Classiﬁcation for Multi-Sensor Real-Time Trafﬁc. Graz
University of Technology, Graz, Austria.
[2] Forren,J. F., Jaarsma, D.:Trafﬁc Monitoring by Tire Noise. Proc.
IEEE Conf. on Intelligent Transportation System, Boston, MA, Nov
1997, pp. 177-182.
[3] Ding,J., Cheung, S.Y., Tan,C.-W., Varaiya,P.:Signal processing of
sensor node data for vehicle detection. Seventh Int. IEEE Conf.Intell.
Transp. Syst.
[4] Lopez-Valcarce, R., Mosquera, C., Perez-Gonzalez, R.:”Estimation
of road vehicle speed using two omnidirectional microphones: A
maximum likleihood approach”, EURASIP J. Appl. Signal Process.,
p.1059 , 2004.
[5] Lo, K. W., Ferguson, B. G. :”’Broadband passive acoustic technique
for target motion parameter estimation”, IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Elect.
Syst., vol. 36, p.163 , 2000.
[6] Cheung, S., Coleri, S. ,Varaiya, P.:Trafﬁc Surveillance with Wireless
Magnetic Sensors. University of California, Berkley. USA
[7] Knapp,C.H. , Karter,G.C.:The Generalized Correlation Method for
Estimation of Time Delay. IEEE Transactions on Acoustic Speech
and Signal Processing, Vol. ASSP-24, No. 4, August 1976, pp. 320-
327.
[8] Chen,S., Sun,Z.P, Bridge,B.:Trafﬁc Monitoring Using Digital Sound
Field Mapping.IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 50,
No. 6, November 200, pp. 1582-1589.
[9] 802.15.4-2003: part 15.4: Wireless Medium Access Control (MAC)
and Physical Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcations for Low-Rate Wireless
Personal Area Networks (LR-WPANs). IEEE Std., October 2003.
[Online]. Available: www.ieee.org.
[10] Shakkottai, S., Rappaport, T., Karlsson, P.: Cross-Layer Design for
Wireless Networks. IEEE Comm. Mag., vol. 41, pp. 74-80, October
2003.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-241-7
VEHICULAR 2012 : The First International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

