Low-power TPMS Data Transmission Technique Based on Optimal Tire Condition 
Suk-seung Hwang 
Dept. of Mechatronics Engineering,  
Chosun University 
Gwangju, Korea 
hwangss@chosun.ac.kr 
 
 
 
Seong-min Kim 
Dept. of Advanced parts and 
Materials Engineering 
Chosun University 
Gwangju, Korea 
millionairek@naver.com 
Jae-Young Pyun,                 
Goo-Rak Kwon 
Dept. of Information and 
Communication Engineering, 
Chosun University 
Gwangju, Korea 
jypyun@chosun.ac.kr, 
grkwon@chosun.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract—Tire Pressure Monitoring System (TPMS), which is 
a type of wireless communication device used in vehicles, is a 
safety aid system designed to prevent tire-related accidents in 
advance by regularly checking tire pressure and temperature 
and notifying the driver about any abnormality through its 
display. TPMS sensor unit in a tire contains sensors to measure 
the temperature and pressure and transmits the measured data 
to the signal processing unit in a vehicle via wireless 
communication. For the conventional TPMS, there is 
unnecessary power consumption in the sensor unit because of 
continuous transmission of the measured data from the tire to 
the signal processing unit at a regular interval. In this paper, 
we propose the low-power TPMS communication technique in 
which the signal processing unit in the vehicle transmits 
optimal tire pressure and threshold values based on the road 
condition and external temperature to the sensor unit in the 
tire. The sensor unit compares the measured data value with 
the optimal tire pressure value received from the signal 
processing unit and it sends the measured tire pressure data to 
the signal processing unit only if the difference between the 
values exceeds the threshold value. When the difference 
between both values is smaller than the threshold value, the 
sensor unit recognizes it as normal mode and transmits a 
normal mode bit to the signal processing unit. The 
performance of the proposed low-power TPMS communication 
technique is verified through computer simulation example. 
Keywords-Tire Pressure Monitoring System (TPMS); Low-
Power; Optimal Tire Pressure Value. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Tire pressure may become lower or higher comparing 
with the standard condition, due to certain circumstances 
during vehicle operation, resulting in serious accidents. The 
majority of drivers may not be able to detect such risk in 
advance, which often leads to a major accident [1][2]. In 
order to prevent this problem, TPMS was developed and 
there have been active studies to develop high-performance 
TPMS. TPMS can be defined as a safety aid system that 
displays the information about temperature and pressure 
from the sensors attached to the tire wheel or valve to the 
driver so that the driver can check the tire condition in real 
time and thus prevent the tire-pressure related accident in 
advance [3][4][5][6][7]. Currently, many countries are 
promoting to mandate or have already mandated vehicles to 
be equipped with TPMS. A representative example that has 
led to mandating TPMS due to an accident in which some of 
the tires supplied by one of the world’s largest tire 
manufactures had ruptured while driving due to lower air 
pressure, leading to many casualties. With this incident, the 
United States legislated about TPMS on vehicles in 2003 and 
has mandated to install TPMS on every vehicle since 
September 2007 [8][9]. In Korea, it is mandatory to install 
TPMS on all passenger cars and vans less than 3.5 tons to be 
manufactured after January 1, 2013. 
Most of the currently TPMSs need to be replaced when 
the battery for the sensor unit is exhausted, making it an 
urgent need to develop the low-power TPMS. To solve this 
problem, we propose in this paper a low-power TPMS 
wireless communication scheme based on a duplex 
communication. In the proposed scheme, the signal 
processing unit in the vehicle saves the information of 
optimal tire pressure values for road conditions and external 
temperature in its database, measures the road conditions and 
the external temperature using sensors attached to the bottom 
of the vehicle, selects optimal tire pressure and threshold 
value from the database, and sends them to the sensor unit. 
Instead of transmitting data of the tire pressure and 
temperature at a certain interval (for example, per second) to 
the signal processing unit, the sensor unit sends the measured 
data only when the tire pressure is not normal that the 
difference between the measured pressure in sensor unit and 
the optimal pressure transmitted from signal processing unit 
is greater than the threshold for the instant external condition. 
As a result, the sensor unit attached to the tire may consume 
much less power than the conventional TPMS. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 
II, the system model for the low-power TPMS wireless 
communication is presented. The data structure for the 
proposed system is described in Section III and a flow-chart 
for low-power TPMS wireless communications is presented 
in Section IV. In Section V, we provide computer simulation 
results to demonstrate the performance of the proposed 
system. Finally, conclusions are outlined in Section VI. 
II. 
SYSTEM MODEL FOR LOW-POWER TPMS WIRELESS 
COMMUNICATION 
In the low-power TPMS wireless communication scheme 
proposed in this section, the signal processing unit in a  
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-288-2
VEHICULAR 2013 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 1.  Data structure for low-power TPMS wireless communications based on duplex communications (Normal Mode). 
 
 
Figure 2.  Data structure for low-power TPMS wireless communications based on duplex communications (Emergency Mode). 
vehicle transmits the tire pressure and threshold value 
suitable for the road condition and the external temperature 
to the sensor unit on the tire, and the sensor unit compares 
the measured data with the optimal tire pressure value 
received from the signal processing unit and sends the 
measured tire pressure data to the signal processing unit 
only if the difference is bigger than the threshold value. The 
sensor unit compares the measured tire pressure data with 
the optimal tire pressure and threshold value using (1) 
,
1,2,3,4
         
(1)
i
x
a
i
β
−
=

 
where, x  is an optimal value for the tire pressure suitable 
for the road condition and external temperature, 
i
α  means 
the tire pressure measured at the i th tire, and β  is a 
threshold value. 
For example, if the threshold value β  to determine the 
tire condition is set to 3 and the optimal pressure x  for road 
conditions and external temperature to 40Psi, and the 
actually measured tire pressure 
i
α  is 35Psi, the difference 
between the optimal tire pressure and the measured tire 
pressure is 5, which exceeds the preset threshold value of 3. 
In this case, the sensor unit determines the tire condition as 
dangerous state and the sensor unit operates in the 
emergency mode to send the measured tire pressure to the 
signal processing unit at a regular interval (for example, 
every second). For another example, assuming that the 
preset threshold value β  and the optimal tire pressure 
x  for road conditions and external temperature are the same 
as in the first example, if the measured tire pressure 
i
α  is 
38Psi, the difference between the optimal tire pressure and 
the measured tire pressure would be 2. As it is smaller than 
the preset threshold value 3, the sensor unit determines that 
the tire pressure is in normal state. In this case, the sensor 
unit operates in the normal mode, and sends N  bit for 
normal mode to the signal processing unit only when the 
optimal tire pressure and threshold value are received from 
the signal processing unit (e.g., per minute). 
III. 
DATA STRUCTURE FOR LOW-POWER TPMS 
WIRELESS COMMIUNICATION 
In this section, data structures for the low-power TPMS 
wireless communications based on duplex communication 
are proposed. Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 show data structures for 
normal mode and emergency mode for the proposed low-
power 
TPMS 
wireless 
communication 
technique, 
respectively. Most of the currently used TPMSs use simplex 
wireless communication mode, in which the data measured 
at the sensor is transmitted periodically (e.g., per second), 
resulting in unnecessary power consumption. The data 
structure proposed in this paper transmits the optimal tire 
pressure data periodically (e.g., per minute) from the signal 
processing unit to the sensor unit, and transmits the measured 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-288-2
VEHICULAR 2013 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

pressure data from the sensor unit to the signal processing 
unit. It switches to emergency mode only if the measured 
data is larger than the preset threshold value. This allows 
saving the power consumption of the battery installed in tires 
and thus the proposed TPMS communication technique is 
much more efficient than the conventional TPMS in terms of 
power management. 
A. Data Structure for Normal Mode 
Components 
of 
the 
low-power 
TPMS 
wireless 
communication data structure for normal mode are defined 
as follows: 
• 
Wake: a bit for requesting the operation of the sensor 
unit. 
• 
Preamble: data for channel estimation, signal-to-
interference and noise ratio (SINR) estimation, 
synchronization, etc. 
• 
Ack/Nack: Ack bit means that the transmitted data is 
effective and Nack bit means that the transmitted 
data is non-effective (for example, transmitting 
‘1’ for Ack and transmitting ‘0’ for Nack). 
• 
Optimal tire pressure and threshold value: optimal 
tire pressure and threshold value selected from the 
database of measured road conditions and external 
temperature sent to the sensor unit. 
• 
N  Bit: informing the normal state bit. 
• 
END: information bit for the end of the transmission 
of the main data. 
• 
T1: blank in the sensor unit for receiving Wake bit. 
• 
T2: blank in the sensor unit for waiting the 
transmission of the preamble data for other tires. 
• 
T3: blank in the sensor unit for receiving Ack/Nack 
bit from signal processing unit. 
• 
T4: blank in the sensor unit for receiving data of the 
optimal tire pressure and threshold value. 
• 
T5: blank in the sensor unit between transmitting N  
bit and transmitting END bit. 
• 
R1 : blank in the signal processing unit for receiving 
the preamble data. 
• 
R2 : blank in the signal processing unit for waiting 
the transmission of the preamble for other tires. 
• 
R3 : blank in the signal processing unit for  receiving 
N  bit. 
• 
R4 : blank in the signal processing unit between 
receiving END bit and receiving N  bit. 
• 
R5 : blank in the signal processing unit for receiving 
END bit. 
B. Data Structure for Emergency Mode 
Components 
of 
the 
low-power 
TPMS 
wireless 
communication data structure for emergency mode are 
defined as follows (terms already defined in the normal 
mode structure are omitted): 
• 
E  bit: informing the emergency state bit. 
• 
R3: blank in the signal processing unit for receiving 
E  bit. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Flow-chart for low-power TPMS wireless communications 
based on duplex communications. 
• 
R4 : blank in the signal processing unit for receiving 
the main data. 
The proposed low-power TPMS wireless communication 
system based on duplex communications repeats transmitting 
/receiving the above-mentioned data between the sensor unit 
and the signal processing unit as needed.  
IV. 
FLOW-CHART FOR LOW-POWER TPMS WIRELESS 
COMMUNICATIONS 
This section presents a basic flow-chart for the proposed 
low-power TPMS wireless communication based on a two-
way communication, as shown in Fig. 3. Based on the data 
received from the signal processing unit, if the left side of (1) 
is bigger than the preset threshold value, it is deemed 
dangerous condition, causing TPMS to operate in an 
emergency mode. In this case, the tire pressure data is 
transmitted to the signal processing unit every second the 
same as in one-way wireless communications, so that the tire 
pressure can be checked every second. On the other hand, if 
the left side of (1) is smaller than the preset threshold value, 
it is deemed normal condition, leaving TPMS to operate in 
normal mode. In this case, the sensor unit transmits N  bit 
for normal condition to the signal processing unit, only when 
receiving the optimal tire pressure and threshold value data 
from the signal processing unit, instead of transmitting the 
tire pressure data every second. 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-288-2
VEHICULAR 2013 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

V. 
COMPUTER SIMULATION 
In this section, we present the results of computer 
simulation to demonstrate the performance of the low-power 
TPMS wireless communication technique based on duplex 
communications, comparing with the conventional one-way 
TPMS communication scheme. For the first simulation, we 
assume that the length of preamble and main data are 56 bits 
and main 32 bits, respectively, thus the total length of TPMS 
data frame is 88 bits. It is also assumed that the subject 
vehicle operates two hours a day in a 30 days period. For the 
conventional TPMS wireless communication scheme, it is 
assumed that the sensor unit transmits a data frame every 
second in consideration of emergency. For the proposed 
scheme, it is assumed that the signal processing unit 
transmits the optimal tire pressure and threshold value to the 
sensor unit once per minute. Fig. 4 shows the comparison of 
the total number of bits transmitted in the two systems when 
the tire condition was normal for the considered period. As 
shown in the figure, for the 30 days period, the total number 
 
Figure 4.  Number of bits versus duration for the proposed and 
conventional TPMS communiatoin tehcniques for normal mode 
 
Figure 5.  Number of bits versus duration for the proposed and 
conventional TPMS communiatoin tehcniques for considering the 
emergence mode 
of bits transmitted in the proposed system is much smaller 
than in the conventional one-way TPMS system. Fig. 5 
shows the comparison of the total number of bits transmitted 
in the two systems, with the assumption that the systems 
operated in emergency mode for approximately 30 minutes 
as the tire fault was detected on the 15th day. As shown in 
the figure, although the number of bits transmitted in the 
proposed system is increased as it operated in emergency 
mode for 30 minutes on the 15th day, it is much smaller than 
the number of bits transmitted in the conventional one-way 
TPMS system. 
Fig. 6 shows the comparison of power consumption in 
the two systems for 30 days, assuming the transmitted power 
per bit is 0.1 W
µ
 and the tire condition is normal. As shown 
in the figure, the total power consumption for the sensor unit 
in the proposed system is significantly lower than the 
conventional system. Fig. 7 shows the comparison of power 
consumption in the two systems with the assumption that the 
transmitted power per bit is 0.1 W
µ
 and the systems 
 
Figure 6.  Power consumption versus duration for the propsed and 
convetional TPMS communications technues for normal mode. 
 
Figure 7.  Power consumption versus duration for the proposed and 
conventional TPMS communiatoin tehcniques for considering the 
emergence mode 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-288-2
VEHICULAR 2013 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 8.  Power consumption versus number of bits for the proposed and 
conventional TPMS communiatoin tehcniques for normal mode 
 
Figure 9.  Power consumption versus number of bits for the proposed and 
conventional TPMS communiatoin tehcniques for considering the 
emergence mode 
operated in emergency mode for 30 minutes as a tire fault 
was detected on the 15th day. The figure shows that, 
although the power consumption of the proposed system is 
increased as the system operated in emergency mode for 30 
minutes on the 15th day, it is significantly lower than that of 
the conventional system for the considered duration. 
Fig. 8 shows the comparison of power consumption 
versus the length of data frame transmitted from the sensor 
unit to the signal processing unit, in the two systems, while 
driving two hours, assuming that the transmitted power per 
bit is 0.1 W
µ
 and the tire condition is normal. As shown in 
the figure, power consumption for the proposed method 
varies with the changing the length of the data frame 
(number of bits) and is significantly lower than the power 
consumption for the conventional method. Fig. 9 shows the 
result of the compared power consumption for the two 
systems depending on the changing length of the data frame. 
It is assumed that the transmitted power per bit is 0.1 W
µ
, 
the vehicle runs for two hours, and the vehicle has run in the 
emergency mode for 30 minutes. As shown in Fig. 9, while 
operating in the emergence mode for 30 minutes, the power 
consumption of the proposed system is increased compared 
with that in Fig 8., but it is significantly lower than the power 
consumption of the conventional one-way TPMS method. As 
verified through the simulation, we observe that it is more 
efficient to use the proposed system as it transmits 
significantly less data bits and thus significantly saves the 
power of the battery installed in the sensor unit, unless it 
always keeps operating in emergency mode. However, the 
proposed system requires significantly small power 
consumption comparing with the transmitted power for 
comparison of the difference value between the optimal and 
the measured pressure, and the threshold value. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
As the casualties caused by tire accidents increased, 
TPMS has attracted much attention worldwide. Since TPMS 
has the average life of seven years and when the battery life 
is over, the TPMS itself needs to be replaced, it is urgently 
needed to develop a low-power TPMS sensor unit with 
similar life-time to a vehicle. In this paper, in order to extend 
the battery life-time of the conventional TPMS, we proposed 
a new TPMS wireless communication technique, in which 
the sensor unit installed in a tire receives the optimal tire 
pressure and threshold value for road conditions and external 
temperature from the signal processing unit installed in the 
vehicle and transmits the measured tire pressure data to the 
signal processing unit only when it is needed. When the 
difference between the measured tire pressure and the 
optimal tire pressure is not greater than the threshold value, 
the sensor unit transmits one bit indicating normal condition 
to the signal processing unit, instead of periodically 
transmitting the measured pressure vale, which helps reduce 
the power consumption of the sensor unit. The performance 
for saving power consumption of the proposed system was 
illustrated through simulation examples. Currently, we are 
studying for the reduced interelement spacing of antennas for 
the TPMS beamformer. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by Basic Science Research 
Program through the National Research Foundation of 
Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science 
and Technology (Nos. 2012-0008837 and 2011-0024811) 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. N. Hasan, A. Arif, M. Hassam, S. S. U. Husnain, and U. Pervez, 
“Implementation of Tire Pressure Monitoring System with Wireless 
Communication,
”
 
2011 
International 
Conference 
on, 
Communications, Computing and Control Applications(CCCA), Mar. 
2011. 
[2] M. Shao and W. Guo, “Tire Pressure Monitoring System,” 2011 
Second International Conference on, Mechanic Automation and 
Control Engineering(MACE), pp. 1840-1842, July 2011. 
[3] J. Zhang, Q. Liu, and Y. Zhong, “A Tire Pressure Monitoring 
System Based on Wireless Sensor Networks Technology, ” 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-288-2
VEHICULAR 2013 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

International 
Conference 
on, 
Multimedia 
and 
Information 
Technology 2008, MMTT ’08, Dec. 2008, pp. 602-605. 
[4] Q. Zhang, B. Liu, and G. Liu, “Design of Tire Pressure Monitoring 
System Based on Resonance Frequency Method,” IEEE/ASME 
International Conference on, Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics 2009, 
AIM 2009, July 2009, pp. 781-785. 
[5] Y. Zhou, Y. Chai, Y. Lin, and K. Wang, “An application of multi-
sensor information fusion in Tire Pressure Monitoring System,” 
2010 International Conference on, Intelligent Systems and 
Knowledge Engineering (ISKE), Nov. 2010, pp. 187-190. 
[6] X. Wang, Z. Wu, and S. Liu, “Modeling and Simulation of Thermal-
mechanical Characteristics of the Packaging of Tire Pressure 
Monitoring System(TPMS) ,” 2005 6th International Conference on, 
Electronic Packaging Technology, Sept. 2005. 
[7] M. Cheikh, H. Tartarin, J. David, S. Kessler, and A. Morin,  
“Transmission quality evaluation of Tire Pressure Monitoring 
System, ”  12th International IEEE Conference on, Intelligent 
Transportation System 2009, ITSC ’09, Oct. 2009. 
[8] H. Grosinger, L. W. Mayer, C. F. Mecklenbrauker, and A. L. Scholtz, 
“ Determining the Dielectric Properties of a Car Tire for an 
Advanced Tire Monitoring System,” 2009 IEEE 70th Vehicular 
Technology Conference Fall(VTC 2009-Fall), Sept. 2009. 
[9] L. Tan, S. Liu, H. Zahang, Z. Gan, and C. Chen, “Numerical 
Analysis of the Reliability of Tire Pressure Monitoring System 
Installed on Wheel Hub With Glue,” 7th International Conference 
on, Electronic Packaging Technology 2006, ICEPT ’06, Aug. 2006. 
 
 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-288-2
VEHICULAR 2013 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

