 
 
Vehicular Ad Hoc Network Security and Privacy: A Second Look 
 
Jesse Lacroix, Khalil El-Khatib 
Faculty of Business and Information technology 
University of Ontario Institute of Technology 
Oshawa, Canada 
Emails: {Jesse.Lacroix, Khalil.El-Khatib}@uoit.ca  
 
Abstract—VANETs are an emerging infrastructure that makes 
use of vehicles as the main objects within a network. These 
networks 
use 
either 
peer-to-peer 
communications 
to 
communicate with other vehicle objects directly or a more 
centralized client/server approach to communicate with its 
road side infrastructures to either authenticate, send or receive 
information. With this added ability implemented into modern 
and upcoming vehicles, the transportation infrastructure 
would greatly improve in terms of efficiency, safety and user-
friendliness. Although communication introduces better ways 
of traveling, adding a network infrastructure to vehicles and 
their environments also introduces the possibility of security 
breaches inside the vehicles and respective surroundings 
through internal and external components embedded in 
Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks. It has been shown that multiple 
attack surfaces exist and proper defence mechanism must be 
implemented to properly secure and deploy this type of 
network. This survey will present an overview of VANETs and 
synthesize related works to demonstrate new security 
mechanisms and how much this type of network and in-house 
components of vehicles are exposed. 
 
 Keywords—Vehicular 
Ad 
Hoc 
Networks; 
Security; 
Vulnerabilities. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Modern vehicles are now embedded with Electronic 
Control Units (ECUs) and On-Board Units (OBUs) to send 
and receive information to other vehicles or Road Side 
Units (RSUs). RSUs and vehicles are used to send critical 
information to other peers and to communicate to other 
parts and types of network infrastructures such as the 
Internet. RSUs are important in the operation of VANETs 
because they are used as relays to send information to all 
vehicles (for e.g., safety-related messages such as an 
accident 
occurring 
within 
a 
specific 
region 
and 
authentication messages for system validation).  This type 
of communication is called Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I) 
communication. Since these are not mobile, it is much 
easier to have them deliver the messages to affected cars 
because RSUs are deployed in such a way that vehicle 
objects can maintain a constant connection or have an 
indirect way of communicating with them.  RSUs are not 
the only way vehicles can communicate inside the VANET; 
Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) communications will also allow 
vehicle objects to communicate together and exchange 
information.  Vehicle tracking, vehicle speed, Basic Safety 
Messages (BSMs) and other related information can all be 
exchanged between the vehicles themselves directly to 
ensure efficient and safe operation of the vehicles in their 
respective environments. What is important about VANETs 
is that they incorporate other means of communications to 
facilitate their operation. Examples of these as shown by 
Checkoway et al. [4] are: Bluetooth; broadcast channels, 
such as radio and GPS channels); addressable channel, such 
as OnStar [4]; and cellular channels, including 3G/4G LTE 
and basic voice channels for cellular communications. 
Combining all of these technologies together offers much 
more robustness to VANETs; however, on a security aspect, 
it does compromise security standards since more attack 
surfaces are introduced in the formula.  
Each vehicle in VANET has a number of components 
that are used by vehicles for internal operations and data 
flow presented by Everett and McCoy [7]. The internal 
components work in conjunction with the OBUs so that 
proper information is transmitted from one vehicle to 
another. The components are:  
• 
CANs (Control Area Networks) – used as 
backbone channels  
• 
LINs (Local Interconnect Networks) – used for 
low speed and low bandwidth applications  
• 
FlexRay – used for high speed and high 
bandwidth safety critical applications  
• 
MOST (Media Oriented System Transport) – used 
for high speed and high bandwidth media 
applications  
• 
TPMS (Tire Pressure Monitoring System) – used 
to monitor tire condition, precise pressure, etc.  
• 
 HSM (Hardware Security Module) –  Stores and 
secures sensitive data (for e.g., private keys) 
These components produce the overall infrastructure 
implemented inside vehicles to properly function and work 
directly with ECUs to perform proper operations. 
Compromising one of these components potentially leads to 
the full compromise of the vehicle; proper mechanisms must 
therefore be implemented for safeguarding.  
The IEEE 1609 standard, shown by the IEEE Standards 
Association [10], known as the Wireless Access in 
Vehicular Environments (WAVE) is a service recognized 
by the Intelligent Transportation System (ITS). It is 
employed in the United States and similar infrastructures 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

 
 
employed around the world for VANETs so that vehicles 
and respective infrastructure can communicate.  This 
standard can also be associated to the Dedicated Short 
Range Communications (DSRC) protocol for radio 
spectrum allocation used by WAVE technologies.  WAVE 
embodies many standards for its secure and efficient 
communications.  They are as followed (this survey relates 
to the 1609.2 standard): 
• 
IEEE Std 802.11 (2012)—Wireless LAN Medium 
Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) 
specifications for metropolitan and local networks 
as well as data exchange between systems 
• 
IEEE 
Std 
1609.2 
(2013)—WAVE 
Security 
Services 
for 
applications 
and 
Management 
Messages; 
makes 
use 
of 
Elliptic 
Curve 
Cryptographic  (ECC) as an encryption standard 
• 
IEEE Std 1609.3 (2010)—WAVE Networking 
Services 
• 
IEEE Std 1609.4 (2010)—WAVE Multi-Channel 
Operations 
• 
IEEE Std 1609.11 (2010)—WAVE ITS over-the-
air payment data exchange protocol 
• 
IEEE Std 1609.12—WAVE Identifier Allocations  
The European Telecommunications Standards Institute 
(ETSI) has developed its set of standards for VANET 
communication and information exchange for the ITS based 
off IEEE 802.11 technologies shown by Rizzo and 
Brookson [21].  ETSI ITS standards will take in 
consideration the IEEE 1609.2 data sets, but it will adopt 
them to fit explicit protocols developed for ETSI standards 
and will collaborate closely with the IEEE community.  
Here are some of the current ETSI ITS security standards: 
• 
ETSI TS 102 867—ITS Security Service IEEE 
1609.2 stage 3 mapping 
• 
ETSI TS 102 940—ITS Security Service for 
communications security architecture and 
management 
• 
ETSI TS 102 941—ITS Security Service for Trust 
and Privacy Management 
• 
ETSI TS 102 942—ITS Security Service for 
Access Control 
• 
ETSI TS 102 943—ITS Security Service for 
Confidentiality Services 
• 
ETSI TS 103 097—ITS Security Service for 
headers and certificate formats 
RSUs are also responsible for authenticating vehicles 
when one connects to the VANET network. At this moment, 
a centralize authentication scheme in combination with a 
Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) is the approach used to 
authenticate vehicles in the network with the use of trusted 
third parties (TPPs) as well as a central Certificate Authority 
(CA).  This system would provide every vehicle with a valid 
certificate as long as they are part of the legitimate list of 
users located in the CA. This infrastructure makes use of 
what is known as a “legal authority” that binds certificates 
to the actual identities of drivers but is only accessible by 
the Central Authority.  If a certificate is recovered, the 
driver’s personal details are not revealed and only linked to 
a given pseudonym. This authentication scheme is robust 
but faces computational issues when it comes to handling 
pseudonyms in an efficient and timely manner. 
The contribution of this paper is to look at the current 
state of VANET security and privacy mechanisms and 
issues regarding all of its internal and external components 
so that a proper overview is provided to its audience.  This 
paper can be used as reference to the challenges presented 
for future research when tackling presented problems and 
developing future platforms and systems.  This survey will 
present and discuss the following topics to give a proper 
overview of Vehicular Ad Hoc Network security-related 
concepts and vulnerabilities at their current states of 
research. First, related works will be presented and split in 
subsections covering the main security concepts and new 
potential security mechanisms in each respective fields, 
including authentication and confidentiality, availability, 
non-repudiation, 
data 
trust 
and 
privacy. 
Proven 
vulnerabilities inside vehicles and on the network will then 
be discussed followed by the conclusion and future work. 
II.  SECURITY AND PRIVACY CHALLENGES IN 
VANET 
The following section will present works and their 
research states with new security mechanisms in core 
concepts, such as authentication and confidentially, 
availability, non-repudiation, data trust and privacy.  
A. Authentication and Confidentiality 
Authentication plays a huge role in network security 
regardless of the infrastructure it is implemented in. Many 
methods and schemes exist to authenticate legitimate users 
to services, but a popular scheme employs the use of the 
public key infrastructure, as discussed by Fuentes, 
González-Tablas and Ribagorda [9].  This scheme employs 
a CA, TPPs and pseudonyms that form the Vehicular Public 
Key Infrastructure (VPKI). There are two proposals for the 
actual authentication process in the VPKI. The first method 
suggests that vehicle creates the pseudonyms and public 
keys themselves and send the information to RSUs so that 
they can be authenticated. The other method suggests that 
the HSM inside the vehicles takes care of authentication, 
since all stored information is already secured, and private 
keys are always contained inside the HSM; signed 
pseudonyms sent to the system are therefore much more 
secure.  The main goal is to ensure that pseudonyms are 
changed at a regular interval so that enough confusion is 
caused within a network if someone is attempting to link 
acquired information to a specific car.  Of course, other 
levels of addresses must be changed to limit how an attacker 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

 
 
can link stolen information to cars such as the vehicle’s IP 
(Internet Protocol) and MAC (Media Access Control) 
addresses.  An added proposal was suggested by Adigun et 
al. [2] for helping the VPKI re-allocate and change 
certificates to ensure that captured information does not link 
electronic license plate information to private information 
about drivers. The first method suggested is pretty 
straightforward and requires a regional CA to issue a new 
pseudonym to vehicle objects the instant a time “t” 
threshold is reached. The second approach presented is 
basically the same as above except that the vehicle itself 
generates a new pseudonym after the threshold “t” is 
reached. The difference in both approaches in this scheme is 
that the use of speed and distance between a vehicle object 
and RSU is the defining factor in determining the threshold. 
The bandwidth of the environment is also a factor that is 
considered to calculate the time. It was assumed that RSUs 
were equally distributed in the environment (for this 
example and presented scheme). The reasoning of this 
scheme suggests that if speed, distance and bandwidth are 
sufficient with respective categories, changing pseudonyms 
could be done more often and faster without impacting the 
overall authentication process of the vehicle object inside 
the VANET. This would make the current authentication 
scheme more robust.  
As much as authentication is essential, certificate 
revocation methods must be properly implemented to 
remove illegitimate users off VANETs. Legitimate 
infrastructure and vehicle objects can malfunction so false 
information must be flagged and certificates revoked. The 
issue with this scheme is the maintenance poses a challenge 
because revocation lists, also known as CRLs, can be huge 
and hard to update on traveling vehicles. They might also 
not have access to RSUs depending on the area (for e.g., 
rural areas might have unequally distributed road side 
infrastructure in contrast to urban areas that have RSUs well 
distributed for constant communication). Compressed 
Certificate Revocation Lists (RC2RLs) presented by 
Fuentes, González-Tablas and Ribagorda [9] and Salem, 
Abdel-Hamid and El-Nasr [23] are the proposed mean for 
fixing this issue through the use of filters and subsets to 
speed up revocation lookup and updating revocation lists. 
This compressed method allows broadcast channels such as 
Radio Data Systems (RDS) to transmit the information 
through FM waves. In any case, most vehicles, regardless of 
their location, have access to radio waves so they can have 
their 
certificate 
revoked 
if 
malicious/accidental 
malfunctions occur. An extended method has also been 
presented by Zhang et al. [29] in hopes of making certificate 
revocation more efficient. It introduces a new algorithm that 
makes uses of a concept called “k-Means” clustering that 
basically uses nodes and centric points to create groups of 
vehicles to spread CRLs so that all vehicles are checked 
against these revocation lists. This scheme also adds two 
new fields to CRLs, and these are composed of an “Issued 
Data” and “Credibility” field. The credibility field receives 
an assigned value of 0 to 100 (0 means non-trustworthy and 
100 means credible source) that will be based off how the 
source is perceived by the vehicular network. It uses correct 
and historical behaviour as factors in determining if the 
source is faulty, malicious or credible. The issued date field 
helps determine how long a certificate has been issued to 
determine if it should still be valid or not in regards to 
credibility.  
Work shown by Whyte et al. [25] demonstrate the 
current 
leading 
authentication 
design 
for 
V2V 
communications.  This scheme uses a PKI architecture for 
bootstrapping, provisioning of pseudonym certificates, 
reporting misbehaviour and certificate revocation.  The 
designed Security Credential Management System (SCMS) 
used by this design would also allow for safe, reliable and 
private means of communicating and exchanging BSMs; it 
is similar in design to its European counter-part V2X PKI 
infrastructure.  The SCMS mechanism would prevent 
privacy exposures from SCMS insiders and outsiders as 
well as mitigating false warning.  These attacks are 
prevented with CRLs, constant changing of certificates and 
dividing 
operations 
with 
organizational 
separation 
employed by the SCMS. These work in conjunction with 
multiple authority figures to ensure efficient operation of the 
suggested scheme.   
Xiong et al. [26] present the use of group signatures to 
achieve confidentiality and authenticity. In this work, it is 
shown 
that 
vehicles 
sending 
messages 
anonymize 
themselves for authentication among their respective groups 
and can only be identified by a trusted authority while doing 
this efficiently and secretly.  To achieve this type of 
authentication, all vehicles’ OBUs within a group load 
public parameters from another group entity called the 
Member Manager (MM) to generate a private key.  All 
private keys are assumed to be stored into their respective 
vehicle’s safe tamper-proof devices.  This allowed the 
concept of “signcryption”. This concept makes it possible 
for a group to receive a message from the original sending 
one and have the sending one’s MM verify the true identity 
of the sender if dispute arises from the receiving group since 
it can only identify which group a message originates from.  
This allows confidentiality requirements to be achieved as 
well as conditional privacy/anonymity while maintaining 
efficiency for proper operation.  The MM, by then, has all 
OBUs within the group registered and reveals identities of 
vehicles when required. 
There can also be a dynamic approach to the PKI 
architecture elaborated by Salem, Abdel-Hamid and El-Nasr 
[23], which works with vehicles requesting dynamically for 
keys as they pass RSUs that are retrieved from CAs.  The 
scheme shown in this work helps mitigate non-repudiation 
attacks, masquerade, man-in-the-middle attacks, Sybil 
attacks and replay attacks through the use of unique 
identifiers, nonces and information known between the 
source vehicle and certificate authority. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

 
 
Public/private key infrastructures have shown to be 
effective in traditional networks that do not have much 
mobility. VPKI schemes show promise for authenticating 
vehicle objects efficiently with different options, but the 
amount of calculations and computation required to do this 
can be time consuming and compromise performance 
depending on network load and specific scheme used.   
Sulaiman et al. [24] present a different approach in 
authentication schemes to validate users on VANETs. They 
introduce methods that use one-way hashing chain methods 
or also known as Hashed-Chain based Authentication  
Protocol (HAP). The method employed by this type of 
authentication works in the following way:  
• 
RSUs use HAP to generate public/private keys  
• 
These keys are then distributed to newly 
introduced vehicle objects on the network  
• 
These keys are also paired with a variable sized 
hash value and proof cipher  
• 
Synchronized clocks employed by this scheme 
allows vehicles to verify each other using a 
combination of their respective public with the 
variable sized hash code  
With this mentioned technique, computations are 
reduced, and authentication has less overhead, which are 
desirable characteristics in a mobile network. This protocol 
shows efficiency in regards to computation and processing 
when vehicle objects would authenticate.  Although the PKI 
method shows more security, HAP does employ constant 
key changes to ensure randomization so that an attacker 
would have difficulty compromising key sets for attacks on 
the VANET.  Since the traditional public key infrastructure 
offers more efficient security standards, HAP could 
potentially be deployed side-by-side to ECDSA (Elliptic 
Cryptography Digital Signature Algorithms) methods when 
delays in the network are inevitable and faster processing is 
required by the system, similar to a backup to the VPKI. 
The results shown by Sulaiman et al. [24] are promising and 
demonstrate that HAP has the potential to become a  new 
method of authentication in VANETs; however, it will 
unlikely fully replace the already robust PKI architecture. 
B. Availability 
VANETs are mobile networks that require some data 
(for e.g., BSMs) to be sent and delivered to them in real 
time since some crucial decisions need to be done by end 
users. VANETs must be fully operational with barely any 
downtime if drivers are to become more dependent on them 
in the case of having the roadside infrastructure evolve and 
become more efficient. If any network entity was taken 
offline due to malfunction or lack of processing power, the 
vehicle objects would be directly affected since RSUs 
provide important information to vehicles.  In a nutshell, 
availability is firstly about designing a network that is 
capable of handling the intended and predicted network 
load, properly processing it and remaining scalable while 
migrating any type of interference and malicious Denial-of-
Service (DoS) attacks, distributed or not. The issue with 
VANETs is that they deploy prevalent wireless technologies 
and are therefore more susceptible to DoS attacks since 
wireless technologies are easier to access and exploit.  
The issue with availability is that methods to mitigate 
these types of attack are harder to implement than it is to 
find new ways of attacking a network and attempting to 
block legitimate services, if not all.  Kang, Lee and Gligor 
[11] present a new and ground-breaking type of Denial-of-
Service attack that does not take in consideration the 
physical server it wants to bring down (or service in any 
case) but indirectly attacks it by forming a target area 
around it. This attack is called “The Crossfire Attack”. It 
mainly disconnects services and servers by attacking key 
links in the infrastructure with the use of layer 3 mapping. 
This work was presented in a non-VANET environment, but 
these concepts can be applied the same way since Road Side 
Units and its infrastructure are not mobile like vehicles. 
Here is a summary how such an attack works:  
1. 
Select the target area 
where the desired 
servers/services are located  
2. 
Select the links to attack (after doing a layer 3 
mapping of the target area)  
3. 
Select and attack decoy servers so traffic is 
directed to the target area and redirect flows from 
decoy server to the targeted links  
4. 
Attacker then has the rest of the botnet target 
disjoint 
target 
links 
so 
that 
the 
targeted 
services/servers lose Internet connection  
The employed technique clearly demonstrates how 
effective it can be in bringing down networks. The most 
efficient part of this attack is that only decoy servers and 
services are targeted, which makes it more difficult to 
pinpoint the source of origin of the attack. These decoy 
servers could so well spread out that the traffic to them 
might seem legitimate, but would instead be a target of this 
indirect Distributed Denial-of-Service attack.  The evolution 
of attacks demonstrate that proper counter-measures must 
be taken if they are all to be mitigated, especially if attacks 
can be carried over to different types of infrastructures such 
as VANETs. 
     As mentioned above, Denial-of-Service attacks are hard 
to mitigate but not impossible. Methods do exist in attempts 
of stopping or rendering them less efficient so that network 
operations maintain tolerable flow and functionality with 
minimum requirements. Although the method presented by 
Abumansoor and Boukerche [1] is for unintended DoS 
attacks caused by high level congestion of vehicles, the 
presented concepts can be used to mitigate intended attacks. 
One way an attacker can deny service to an area or specific 
victim would be through the use of sending excessive 
amount of information and probes to the victim(s) and/or 
surroundings. The amount of cars in the area that send 
probes for useful information such as localization data and 
reply to other probes would obviously slow down the 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

 
 
network infrastructure if there was an over-saturated amount 
of information being sent and received from any source, 
including malicious ones. The method used to counter such 
means would make use of vehicles using their sensors and 
acquired 
neighbour 
information 
to 
determine 
area 
congestion. Probing rates would then be adjusted so that 
network load heavily reduces. This method is entitled 
Adaptive Group Beaconing shown by Abumansoor and 
Boukerche [1]. Authority management nodes in charge of 
monitoring network activity and sending periodic messages 
can monitor the amount of probing and adjust its periodic 
message notifications and control Quality of Service (QoS) 
so that certain applications inside vehicles continue to 
operate properly regardless of the probing rate in the 
network. This type of adaptive probing behaviour can 
positively affect Denial-of-Service mitigation even if it is 
based off unintentional DoS attacks caused by a congested 
network.  
Since general Denial-of-Service attacks tend to leave 
heavy traces of network traffic to successfully disable 
services, existing mechanism can be implemented with 
Vehicular Ad Hoc Network infrastructures to successfully 
detect abnormalities inside it. Intrusion Detection Systems 
(IDSs) make the use of signatures to detect and report 
attacks and malicious intent to system administrators or 
automated security service so that action can be taken. Even 
better would be Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPSs) since 
they can not only detect malicious attacks but stop them at 
the same time. The work discussed by Coussement, 
Bensaber and Biskri [5] demonstrates that these systems can 
be implemented into the vehicles themselves or into RSUs 
to ensure safety. There is only one issue with this approach 
and that is that these systems do not have a control 
mechanism with VANETs; this would need to be 
implemented. The employed mechanism presented by this 
paper would use a probabilistic scheme to determine 
incoming attacks. Normal behaviour of vehicles and known 
responses to vulnerabilities would be traced and recorded 
(in our case, high traffic load and congestion can be added 
in this probabilistic model to determine whether a DoS 
attack is occurring). Vehicles, when analyzed, would also be 
grouped into clusters to get more generalized predictions 
and behaviour in helping to determine if a vulnerability is 
exposed or services are being disrupted to targets in the 
same vicinity. With the use of this protocol/mechanism, 
IDSs/IPSs could potentially be implemented within 
VANETs to add more layers of security and rendering it 
safer. The true way to mitigate Denial-of-Service attacks is 
to ensure that all traffic is authenticated and that only 
legitimate users can send information. The use of message 
capacity mechanisms associated to each vehicle and 
network object can also be used with previous methods in 
attempts of mitigating the damages caused by DoS attacks, 
if not eliminating the threat altogether. The implementation 
of existing DoS mitigation methods must be considered to 
help eliminate them in VANETs since availability is crucial. 
C. Non-Repudiation 
Non-repudiation of origin consists of having vehicles 
acknowledge that they have sent messages to wherever it is 
destined. The use of digital signatures is employed to sign 
all messages that are being sent. The main encryption 
method employed by VANETs, which is mainly used by the 
IEEE 1609.2 standard because of high performance and 
complex cryptographic scheme, is ECC as shown by 
Fuentes, González-Tablas and Ribagorda [9] and the IEEE 
Standards Association [10]. This encryption type combined 
with non-repudiation of origin make it a strong method for 
sending and verifying messages’ signatures. Signature 
checking isn’t the only required step in signature 
verification: the certificate of the sender must also be 
checked to ensure that it is valid and isn’t part of CRLs. A 
group signature method has also been suggested to add 
privacy to the non-repudiation of origin process. Clusters 
would only send one digital signature to destinations that 
represents the group that sent it. TPPs are the only entities 
that would have access in determining individual objects 
within the source cluster. Non-repudiation of origin allows 
every vehicle object to be held accountable for all action it 
performs on the network so this helps identify attackers 
when attempting to send bogus and/or harmful information, 
which is flagged by vehicle objects and road side 
infrastructure. Attackers would need to find a way to 
retrieve digital signatures or to duplicate another legitimate 
user’s signature so that he/she can impersonate an 
unsuspecting victim and get away with the attack.  Work 
developed in this area working in conjunction with security 
standards in all other security related concepts will help 
identify the sources of attacks so that mitigation is done 
much more easily and have the hackers held accountable.  
Strong authentication message as well as credential 
managements methods must be implemented in the 
authentication schemes to circumvent this type of 
vulnerability. 
D. Data-Trust 
Elliptic Curves Cryptography is the main encryption 
scheme used by the DSRC protocol for encryption and has 
proven to be efficient in terms of overall security and 
computation.  Hash-based authentication presented by 
Sulaiman, Raja and Park [24] shows promise for speed and 
processing but lacks security compared to proven ECDSAs 
and other methodologies, such as those used by the 1609.2 
standard, for example.  ECC, being standardized, makes it 
hard for attackers to exploit, so data will remain unaltered 
and trustworthy. Methods shown by Fuentes, González-
Tablas, and Ribagorda [9], such as two-direction reporting, 
threshold-based trust and the use of group signatures, which 
all incorporate static and dynamic factors, are some methods 
that can be used to ensure this aspect of security in 
VANETs. 
To ensure that data trust is properly implemented as 
mentioned above, the correct approach would be to have a 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

 
 
framework of trust implemented. Such a framework would 
greatly improve the performance of trust determination and 
credibility checks of data being received by vehicles. The 
work presented by Rostamzadeh et al. [22] proposes the 
implementation of such a framework called FACT. 
Successfully implementing this would greatly reduce delays 
in network communications and maximize performance 
since trust verification would greatly be minimized. This 
paper proposes that network segmentation should be 
implemented based on individual roads, neighbourhoods 
and road segments, to name a few. Then, depending on 
known reputation of the area and risk factors, these 
segmentations would be assigned a trust factor that reflects 
upon messages a vehicle sends when in a specific area. 
FACT would then classify all traffic into three categories 
ranking their overall importance. They are as follows:  
• 
Category A – Holds all the critical infrastructure 
messages  
• 
Category B – Holds all road side service 
information  
• 
Category C – Holds all third party service 
messages  
All of these categories employ QoS priorities to ensure 
that the respective messages are sent accordingly to their 
respective destinations in regards to their level of trust 
assigned. For category “A” messages, delay, data integrity 
and reliability are the key security concepts that must be 
considered when delivering these messages since the delay 
with critical information can directly affect a driver’s 
ultimate reaction and decision in the given framework. 
Category “B” messages are more concerned with reliability, 
access control, source anonymity and authentication to 
ensure the source is legitimate as well as access to the 
information is available and accurate. Source authentication 
and reliability are the main security concepts applied to 
category “C” messages since the third parties must be 
legitimate and allow message to be delivered efficiently in 
large numbers. The mechanisms being developed in this 
area of VANET will directly impact a user’s reaction and 
decision making process so data trust must be kept under 
constant check. This field shows that is on the right 
direction.  This framework will further strengthen 
authentication schemes and underlying data trust protocols 
so that data being sent and received by legitimate users is 
trustworthy, authentic and authorized, especially if data trust 
protocols are supported by robust standardized protocols 
that employ ECC or other ECDSA methodologies. 
E. Privacy 
Users are legally entitled to know how their provided 
information will be used, stored and secured when agreeing 
to use a provided Internet service. Law and regulations have 
been put in place by some national/regional governments, 
but these laws vary and are applied in different ways based 
off the user’s location. Some organizations are enforced to 
communicate how they will protect the sensitive data and 
how they are implementing these procedures. The work 
elaborated by Kosa, Marsh and El-Khatib [12] proposes a 
framework that will be used to calculate the privacy states 
that would be automated and used for representing privacy 
concerns and states in VANETs, which are shown in the 
figure below.  This would then lead to determine how data 
is collected and handled by its respective regulators across 
the system.  The framework developed by Kosa, Marsh and 
El-Khatib [12] uses Canadian standards and laws as an 
example but can be extended to fit other country laws for 
adaptation into their transportation system’s VANET. 
 
Figure 1. Different privacy states [12] 
 
In Canada, there are multiple legal documents that 
regulate privacy concerns, what organizations need to do to 
protect this data, and how to communicate this to the users 
so they are made aware. The documents are as follows:  
• 
PIPEDA (Personal Information Protection and 
Electronic Document Act) – covers non-profit 
organization and the private sector [17] 
• 
Privacy Act – Information collected by the federal 
Government [19] 
• 
MFIPPA (Municipal Freedom of Information and 
Protecting Privacy Act) – covers municipal 
organizations [15] 
• 
FIPPA (Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act) – covers provincial organizations [8] 
• 
PHIPA 
(Personal 
Health 
Information 
and 
Protection Act) – covers all health organizations 
[18] 
These acts are used to protect information collected by 
each respective organization according to their specific 
criteria that must be followed and, for this specific case, be 
used in Canada for privacy representation in VANETs.  Any 
other country would adopt their laws and regulation 
documents with this framework to determine its privacy 
representation.  Five privacy requirements must be 
respected when organizations collect information in this 
framework, shown by Kosa, Marsh and El-Khatib [12]. 
They are as follows:  
• 
Privacy Regulation  
• 
Inter-Jurisdiction  
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

 
 
• 
Model Complexity  
• 
Interoperability  
• 
Access Regulation  
The framework would employ a Finite-State-Machine 
(FSM) to determine what the result of a given 
communication between two entities would be in when an 
information transaction occurs. The given framework would 
help identify what to expect in terms of what type of 
communications are occurring so that users are made aware 
of how information is being handled. It basically gives 
consent on what users are expected to disclose and what 
users are expecting in regards to what sensitive information 
is being protected when collected. Privacy in VANETs must 
have the correct guidelines applied to them and must rely on 
current technologies and mechanism to ensure that private 
data is kept safe in accordance to their respective state and 
ruling government.  Any country could adopt this 
framework to its respective laws and regulations for 
determining privacy representation for VANETs.  Overall, 
such a framework helps determine privacy evaluation and 
decision making for end users regarding when and how data 
is collected/stored by respective governments, and how it 
would be handled.  
III.   PROVEN VULNERABILITIES 
VANET security shows that there are many mechanisms 
being developed to ensure that all security concepts are 
enforced and maintain a standard of efficiency for the 
operation of vehicular networks.  The mechanisms being 
developed do have specific reasons and are made to fend off 
many types of attacks that are present and could potentially 
target a VANET.  Work shown by Rawat, Sharma and 
Sushil [20] demonstrates these types of attacks.  Here is a 
list of network attacks that affect network communications 
when it comes to V2V and V2I communications: 
• 
DoS attacks – as mentioned above, these attacks 
can target any specific object within the network 
in hopes of disrupting network service and 
functionality so that all operations are delayed or 
rendered useless with the use of excessive traffic 
and/or over-utilizing key resources in the 
infrastructure  
• 
Sybil attacks – also elaborated by Yu, Xu and 
Xiao [28], Sybil attacks are done when a 
malicious users impersonates multiple identities 
hoping to fool legitimate users in taking different 
routes due to traffic congestion protocols 
• 
Message suppression/alteration/falsification – a 
malicious user manages to drop legitimate traffic 
in the network in attempts of falsifying road 
conditions.  Alteration is when legitimate 
messages are altered to fool legitimate users with 
incorrect data.  Falsification is when an attacker 
broadcasts false information to influence the 
traffic to his liking or cause havoc 
• 
Replay attack – legitimate messages are captures 
and used later in legitimate circumstances for 
illegitimate means  
• 
GPS spoofing – an attacker falsifies GPS 
information to fool other vehicles into thinking 
they are at a different location with his/her own 
GPS simulator 
• 
Tunneling attack – two physically separated parts 
of a VANET are connected through a tunnel 
thinking they are neighbours so an attacker could 
analyze the traffic of perform selective forwarding 
attacks 
• 
Timing attack – time slots are altered so that 
safety critical message are delayed and received 
after their useful lifetime is outlived 
• 
Man-in-the-middle attack – the attacker is 
between a legitimate communication session and 
intercepts traffic to see the content but forwards it 
to the right end destinations to remain invisible 
• 
Home attacks – malicious user attempts to take 
control of the vehicle’s internal components with 
the use of the Internet 
• 
ID disclosure – a target’s location is disclosed and 
made publicly available so that anyone can view 
the location of the vehicle 
• 
Brute-force attack – an illegitimate user attempts 
to break cryptographic keys used in secure 
communication sessions 
     All these types of attacks have the potential of affecting 
VANETs and end users.  That is why security standards are 
being developed so that all fronts are reinforced and that 
these attacks greatly reduced, if not rendered completely 
ineffective.  These attacks, if well-coordinated, could also 
lead to the compromise of internal components if vehicles 
are lured to specific locations which allow an organized 
attacker to perform more sophisticated types of attacks. 
     A different attack has been introduced that basically fully 
compromises a node in the Vehicular Ad Hoc Network.  
The work presented by Lin et al. [13] demonstrates that a 
malicious user attempts to physically capture nodes inside 
the network.  Once physical access is acquired, the 
adversary implements malware as well as attempts to reveal 
secret keys so that all communications with compromised 
nodes are known and traffic is exposed.  Privacy concerns 
also arise as location could then be disclosed, not to mention 
other attacks could be launched including Denial-of-
Service, spamming, Sybil attacks, etc.  A compromised 
node could then affect further nodes attached to it so it can 
spread into the network and increase its potential regional 
reach, if not global up until the entire network is 
compromised.  The only downfall to this attack is that 
physical access is required so some parts of the 
infrastructure are not reachable (e.g., highway RSUs) and/or 
publicly exposed; however, if managed correctly and not 
caught in the act, RSUs that are not easily physically 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

 
 
accessible could fall prey to one that is and compromised.  
This type of attack is dangerous as it enables a platform to 
launch all mentioned above attack through a seemingly 
legitimate node of the infrastructure.  Overall, many 
methods are available for attacking a network. Many 
methods and mechanisms must therefore be deployed and 
further researched to ensure end user security.    
    Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks show definite promise in the 
functionality it is intended to provide. The ability to send 
information about road conditions, accidents, congestion 
warnings from indirect neighbours, to name a few, is useful 
as discussed by Younes and Boukerche [27]. The wireless 
technology employed to do this is quite efficient in enabling 
the operations of VANETs, but like any other infrastructure, 
specifically wireless oriented ones, vulnerabilities to attack 
the network arise.  Rawat, Sharma and Sushil [20] present 
home attacks that are directed towards taking control of 
vehicles using, and not limited to, the Internet, so that 
internal vehicle components are exploited and taken over. 
Works shown in [4][6][11][14][16] present multiple attack 
surfaces that are exposed through external components and 
allow compromise of the internal network components of 
the vehicle objects. There are many attack vectors that are 
of the following:  
• 
OBD II port – direct physical access to internal 
components of the vehicle  
• 
“PassThru” device – Device that connects to OBD 
II port for analysis of system buses and firmware 
updates 
• 
Media devices (e.g., MP3s, USBs, CDs, etc.) – 
direct physical access to internal components of 
the vehicle  
• 
Bluetooth – short range communications access to 
internal components of the vehicle  
• 
Cellular – long range communications access to 
internal components of the vehicle  
• 
Broadcast Channels – long range communications 
access to internal components of the vehicle  
    The work presented by Checkoway et al. [4] explains 
how full vehicle compromise (for e.g., vehicle acceleration 
and braking, to name a few) was attained and all possible 
ways they have managed to successfully do it. Figure 2 
shows all the multiple attack surfaces. Vehicle objects have 
shown vulnerability from direct physical access to the 
vehicle’s OBD II port. If an attacker manages to get access 
to this port when the driver is not present, he can listen in on 
the 
internal 
network 
components 
and 
debug 
the 
communication in attempt of reverse-engineering the 
internal protocols. The user can use packets that he/she 
crafts, based off the debug output, to make the vehicle do as 
he/she pleases. This is the most efficient way of 
compromising a vehicle, but physical access to the port is 
hard and is noticeable by users since the car has to be 
broken into. “PassThru” devices, which are used by vehicle 
manufacturers, authorized dealerships and mechanic shops, 
are used to update and gain access to a vehicle’s internal 
network components (CANs, LINs, FlexRay, etc.). Once 
this device is connected, they can update and maintain the 
firmware, which would be periodically done when a vehicle 
comes in for maintenance schedules and safety checks. 
These devices can also use wireless communications and 
allow an untrusted third party to connect to it. When the 
device connects to the OBD II port, the attacker could gain 
access to the internal components of the vehicle shown by 
Checkoway et al. [4]. No authentication checks are done by 
the internal components when a PassThru device connects 
to it, meaning anyone connected to the PassThru gains 
automatic access to the OBD II port. Authentication means 
would need to be implemented to stop this from happening. 
An attacker could also upload malicious packages to the 
PassThru device so that whenever it connects to a vehicle, 
the files are uploaded to the vehicle to compromise the 
internal network. This method would allow multiple 
unsuspecting vehicle objects to be infiltrated. Media devices 
such as CDs and USB devices can also be used to upload 
malicious information to vehicles if inserted in the proper 
access channels. It has been show by Checkoway et al. [4] 
that if CDs contain malformed audio files, they can update 
the firmware inside the vehicle through a buffer overflow 
attack. 
 
Figure 2. Attacks surfaces in VANETs [4] 
 
      Bluetooth has also shown to be a vulnerability inside 
vehicles. This work demonstrates that through device and 
car pairing, the vehicle can be compromised. With the use 
of “Bluesniff”, which is used to sniff and capture Bluetooth 
MAC addresses, brute-forcing methods can be done to pair 
to the vehicle. Approximately 9 PINs per minute can be 
brute forced to pair to a vehicle according to trials 
successfully made by Checkoway et al. [4]. Although this 
does not sound like a lot of attempts in the given time 
frame, this technique could be done in a public garage 
where thousands of vehicles may be present, brute-forcing 
one within seconds. This is plausible as tests presented by 
Checkoway et al. [4], demonstrate that a single vehicle was 
compromised within 15 minutes. This time significantly 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

 
 
reduces when there’s more than one vehicle, and, once the 
device of the attacker is paired to the vehicle, custom 
applications can be used to gain access to the vehicle’s 
network.  
     Just like Bluetooth, long range communication means 
can also be used to exploit buffer overflow vulnerabilities 
inside the vehicle to fully compromise it. Cellular 
communication can be used to breach a vehicle’s security, 
which demonstrate how volatile and dangerous wireless 
communications can be when exploited. AqLink, a protocol 
used to send and receive voice communication on cellular 
channels, has been reverse-engineered by Checkoway et al. 
[4]. This protocol changes analog bits to digital ones so that 
they can be interpreted by the internal systems. This opens 
up the possibility of using audio playback to trigger an 
exploit that was successfully done in the presented research. 
They were able to phone a remote vehicle that is within 
cellular range and play an audio file through an audio 
device, and it compromised the vehicle through a buffer 
overflow exploit. The issue with this type of attack is that 
the transmission speed is limited and can only send data at a 
certain limited rate; a certain amount of data must therefore 
be delivered before a timeout occurs to trigger the attack. 
Well-crafted and short code must be done to successfully 
exploit the vehicle object. Other mediums such as 3G or 
addressable channels, such as OnStar, allow for faster 
delivery mechanism with a much bigger payload, but the 
vehicle must be within range of 3G transmitters to be 
contacted. Work discussed by Cai et al. [3] shows that 
Bluetooth can further be exploited with the use of antennas 
to boost signals and coupling with devices that have more 
than one antenna (in this case vehicles). The vehicles do not 
need to be in line of sight, and with the use of multiple 
antennas, the vehicle object and Bluetooth device can be 
paired, making it much harder for an attacker of being 
detected since visual cues are not available.  Many attack 
surfaces exist in vehicles for targeting internal components 
of vehicles that interact with the vehicular network of this 
infrastructure, if not targeting the external components of 
VANETs to launch attacks through them, and many 
different types of attacks exist.  Security standards must be 
kept under constant revision to ensure that all components 
are secured and cannot be easily exploited, if not 
impossible, since security in VANETs is extremely 
important to ensure end user safety and well-being.  
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A. Conclusion 
     There is a little doubt that VANETs offer great potential 
in the advancement of vehicles and the development of the 
ITS. The functionality of this network architecture does 
come at a price since it requires high efficiency with no 
room 
for 
security 
flaws. 
Current 
technologies 
in 
authentication, localization, information access and so forth 
show promise, but better mechanisms must be implemented 
to ensure that all standards are met. Current research works 
have shown present alternate solutions with promising 
potential that will possibly be implemented in future 
instances of VANETs as its development cycle extends and 
nears completion. Plenty of vulnerabilities have also been 
discovered and reported to ensure that none of them are 
present when VANETs are publicly available to the masses. 
These vulnerabilities demonstrate to what extent a VANET 
can be exploited, even to the point of full car control that is 
unacceptable considering the damage it could cause to the 
end users. As much as the efficiency of the transportation 
system would increase if the deployment of VANET was 
sooner than later, extended research in its security related 
aspects must be done before being fully implemented.  
B. Future Work 
     Future work from the VANET research community must 
put emphasis not only on developing security mechanisms 
to counter all potential vulnerabilities, but also on platforms 
that could be used by researchers to perform further testing 
on the internal and external components of VANETs. These 
types of networks are not as readily available as the more 
standard Internet architecture platforms so it is important 
that research goes into developing ways for researchers to 
be able to directly test potential solutions to VANET issues, 
security related or not. Work must also be put into testing all 
these proposed solutions unto larger and scalable models to 
ensure that the mechanisms work as predicted. It also goes 
to show that future research must be done to test out all the 
possible security angles of VANETs since room for 
vulnerabilities cannot be tolerated. The extent of such work 
would help ensure the protection of VANET users, which is 
paramount in an architecture that is directly tied to the 
transportation system. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is partially sponsored by NSERC DIVA 
Research Network grant. 
REFERENCES 
[1] O. Abumansoor and A. Boukerche, “Preventing a DoS threat 
in Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks using Adaptive Group 
Beaconing.” Proc. 3rd Annual DIVA Workshop, NSERC 
DIVA workshop, 2013, pp. 233-240.  
[2] A. Adigun B. A. Bensaber, and I. Biskri, “Protocol of change 
pseudonyms for VANETs.” Proc. 3rd Annual DIVA 
Workshop, NSERC DIVA workshop, 2013, pp. 150-155. 
[3] L. Cai, K. Zeng, H. Chen, and P. Mohapatra, “Good neighbor: 
ad hoc pairing of nearby wireless devices by multiple 
antennas.” in NDSS, 2011.  
[4] S. Checkoway, D. McCoy, B. Kantor, D. Anderson, H. 
Shacham, S. Savage, K. Koscher, A. Czeskis, F. Roesner, and 
T. Kohno, “Comprehensive experimental analyses of 
automotive 
attack 
surfaces.” 
in 
USENIX 
Security 
Symposium, 2011.  
[5] R. Coussement, B. A. Bensaber, and I. Biskri, “Decision 
support protocol for intrusion detection in VANETs.” Proc. 
3rd Annual DIVA Workshop, NSERC DIVA workshop, 2013, 
pp. 41-47. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

 
 
[6] L. Ertaul and S. Mullapudi, “The security problems of 
Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANETs) and proposed 
solutions in securing their operations.” in ICWN, 2009, pp. 3–
9.  
[7] C. E. Everett and D. McCoy, “OCTANE: Open Car Testbed 
And Network Experiments bringing cyber-physical security 
research to researchers and students.” in Cyber Security 
Exper. and Test, 2013. 
[8] Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act of 
Canada 
(2011). 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.e-
laws.gov.on.ca/html/statutes/english/elaws_statutes_90f31_e.
htm [accessed: May, 2014]. 
[9] J. M. de Fuentes, A. I. González-Tablas, and A. Ribagorda, 
“Overview of security issues in Vehicular Ad hoc Networks.” 
Handbook of Research on Mobility and Computing: Evolving 
Technologies and Ubiquitous Impacts, 2010.  
[10] IEEE Standards Association, “IEEE guide for wireless Access 
in vehicular environments (WAVE) architecture,” 2013. 
[11] M. S. Kang, S. B Lee, and V. D. Gligor, “The crossfire 
attack.,” in IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2013.  
[12] T. A. Kosa, S. Marsh, and K. El-Khatib, “Privacy 
representation in VANET.” Proc. 3rd Annual DIVA 
Workshop, NSERC DIVA workshop, 2013, pp. 48-52. 
[13] C. Lin, G. Wu, F. Xia, and L. Yao, “Enhancing efficiency of 
node compromise attacks in Vehicular Ad hoc Networks 
using connected dominating set,” Mobile Networks and 
Applications, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 908–922, Dec. 2013. 
[14] X. Lin, R. Lu, C. Zhang, H. Zhu, P.-H. Ho, and X. Shen, 
“Security in Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks.” Communications 
Magazine, IEEE, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 88–95, 2008.  
[15] Municipilaty Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act of Canada (2007). [Online]. Available: 
http://www.e-
laws.gov.on.ca/html/statutes/english/elaws_statutes_90m56_e
.htm [accessed: May, 2014]. 
[16] B. Parno and A. Perrig, “Challenges in securing vehicular 
networks.” in Workshop on hot topics in networks (HotNets-
IV), 2005, pp. 1–6. 
[17] Personal Information Protection and Electronic Document 
Act of Canada, (2011). [Online]. Available: http://laws-
lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/P-8.6/page-1.html [accessed: May, 
2014]. 
[18] Personal Health Information Protection Act of Canada (2010). 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.e-
laws.gov.on.ca/html/statutes/english/elaws_statutes_04p03_e.
htm [accessed: May, 2014]. 
[19] Privacy Act of Canada (2014). [Online]. Available: 
http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/P-21/ [accessed: May, 
2014]. 
[20] A. Rawat, S. Sharma, and R. Sushil, “VANET: Security 
attacks and its possible solutions.,” Journal of Information & 
Operations Management, vol. 3, no. 1, 2012. 
[21] C. Rizzo and C. Brookson, “ETSI white paper No. 1 security 
for ICT – the Work of ETSI.,” ETSI, 2014. 
[22] K. Rostamzadeh, H. Nicanfar, S. Gopalakrishnan, and V. C. 
M. Leung, “A context-aware trust-based communication 
framework for VNets.” Proc. 3rd Annual DIVA Workshop, 
NSERC DIVA workshop, 2013, pp. 156-161. 
[23] V A. H. Salem, A. Abdel-Hamid, and M. A. El-Nasr, “The 
case for dynamic key distribution for PKI-based VANETS,” 
International 
journal 
of 
Computer 
Networks 
& 
Communications, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 61–78, Jan. 2014. 
[24] A. Sulaiman, S. V. Kasmir Raja, and S. H. Park, “Improving 
scalability in vehicular communication using one-way hash 
chain method,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 2526–
2540, Nov. 2013.  
[25] W. Whyte, A. Weimerskirch, V. Kumar, and T. Hehn, “A 
security 
credential 
management 
system 
for 
V2V 
communications,” in Vehicular Networking Conference 
(VNC), 2013 IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–8. 
[26] H. Xiong, G. Zhu, Z. Chen, and F. Li, “Efficient 
communication scheme with confidentiality and privacy for 
vehicular networks,” Computers & Electrical Engineering, 
vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 1717–1725, Aug. 2013. 
[27] M. B. Younes and A. Boukerche, “Efficient traffic congestion 
detection protocol for next generation VANETs.” Proc. 3rd 
Annual DIVA Workshop, NSERC DIVA workshop, 2013, 
pp. 208-212. 
[28] B. Yu, C.-Z. Xu, and B. Xiao, “Detecting Sybil attacks in 
VANETs,” Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, 
vol. 73, no. 6, pp. 746–756, Jun. 2013. 
[29] Q. Zhang, M. Almulla, Y. Ren, and A. Boukerche, “An 
efficient certificate revocation validation scheme with k-
means clustering for Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks.” Proc. 3rd 
Annual DIVA Workshop, NSERC DIVA workshop, 2013, 
pp. 249-254. 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

