A Holistic Approach on Automotive Cybersecurity for Suppliers 
 
Jose Ángel Gumiel Quintana 
Electronics and Communications Unit 
Fundación Tekniker 
Eibar, Spain 
e-mail: jagumiel@tekniker.es 
Jaime Jiménez Verde 
Electronic Technology Department 
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU) 
Bilbao, Spain 
e-mail: jaime.jimenez@ehu.eus 
 
Jon Mabe Álvarez 
Electronics and Communications Unit 
Fundación Tekniker 
Eibar, Spain 
e-mail: jmabe@tekniker.es 
Jon Barruetabeña Pujana 
Mechatronics Area 
BATZ Group 
Igorre, Spain 
e-mail: jbarruetabena@batz.es
Abstract— Electronics are increasingly present in automobiles. 
This has led to a change and automotive parts suppliers are 
forced to integrate electronic components into their mechanical 
parts. As if this were not enough of a change, the transition to 
electronics brings with it other issues, such as cybersecurity. 
Vehicles 
are 
becoming 
increasingly 
technological 
and 
connected, and car manufacturers are already asking suppliers 
to ensure cybersecurity. For a traditional supplier, this is 
something new, and what they often ignore is that it affects not 
just the product, but the whole organization. Therefore, the 
purpose of this article is to shine a spotlight on cybersecurity 
and explain simply, but honestly, the new challenges they face. 
The automotive industry is a sector that has been able to 
reinvent itself throughout its history, and in these times of 
abrupt and accelerated change, it must do so again. 
Keywords 
- 
Automotive 
Engineering; 
Cybersecurity; 
Information Technologies; Connected Vehicle. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Automobiles have already become computers on wheels. 
90% of the technological innovation in vehicles is electronic  
[1], and the number of electronic elements in cars is 
predicted to continue to grow  [2]. Currently, electronics 
account for 30% of the total cost of a vehicle, and are 
expected to account for 50% by 2030 [3]. 
This is a major disruption. The trend towards the 
introduction of electronics, software and smart elements is a 
great opportunity for technology companies, from giants to 
start-ups, as it allows them to enter a new market [4][5]. On 
the other hand, it is a threat to traditional suppliers, so-called 
TIER 1 suppliers, who are forced to renew themselves [4] or 
be relegated to commodity manufacturers, products with 
very low cost and little added value. 
Many of these well-established suppliers are already 
aware of this situation and have begun to take steps to 
integrate electronics into their products [6]. They have some 
advantages over their new competitors in that they are 
experts in the design and manufacture of mechanical parts in 
a variety of materials, they have a good understanding of 
how the industry works, the timelines and processes for 
mass-producing parts and delivering them on time, and what 
is more, they have the prior confidence of the automobile 
manufacturers, 
also 
known 
as 
Original 
Equipment 
Manufacturers (OEMs). 
The integration of hardware (HW) and software (SW) in 
mechatronic components is not a trivial matter, as it requires 
knowledge of electronic design and SW development, 
which is precisely what these companies often lack [7]. In 
addition, there are a number of well-established regulations 
that must be complied with [8], as well as new ones that are 
emerging due to the prevailing needs, such as cybersecurity 
[9]. 
Automotive electronic systems are connected to 
different communication buses and share data with each 
other, they are not isolated [10][11]. This brings new 
challenges, as secure communication must be ensured and 
data must not be compromised [12]. But security goes much 
further; it starts in the corporation, goes through the design 
and 
development 
of 
the 
system, 
passes 
through 
manufacturing, and reaches the vehicle, where it must be 
robust so as not to endanger other elements, and 
invulnerable to the passage of time and new technologies. 
The purpose of this article is to show that security is a 
very broad issue, encompassing the whole organization and 
not just the system developers, and must be ensured 
throughout the vehicle´s lifetime. Section II explores the 
differences between safety and security, with particular 
emphasis on the role of ISO standards in improving both 
aspects of automotive systems. Section III delves deeper 
into the topic of cybersecurity, examining its impact on 
every stage of the automotive product lifecycle, from the 
office to the end of the vehicle's life. This section is divided 
into six subsections that examine specific areas of the 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
VEHICULAR 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

automotive ecosystem, identifying vulnerabilities and 
suggesting protective measures. In Section IV, the 
consequences of potential cybersecurity threats involving 
outdated 
vehicles 
is 
discussed, 
examining 
some 
vulnerabilities 
and 
highlighting 
the 
importance 
of 
collaboration between OEMs and suppliers. Finally, Section 
V presents the conclusions of the research and outlines 
potential areas for future work on the topic. 
II. 
SAFETY & SECURITY 
Safety and security are two distinct, but closely related 
concepts [13]. While safety focuses on preventing accidents, 
injuries or fatalities through the design and operation of the 
vehicle, security aims to protect the vehicle and its 
occupants from unauthorized access, theft, or malicious 
attack. It cannot be ignored that a security breach could also 
have an impact on the functional safety of the vehicle, 
putting occupants and other road users at risk. Several 
standards have emerged to address the growing concern for 
vehicle safety and security. One is ISO 26262, which came 
out in 2011. This is about functional safety. In a nutshell, 
the standard helps to classify the electronic system 
according to the severity, exposure, and repeatability of its 
risks, and urges to take different measures, depending on the 
category of the system, to make it safe. The standard applies 
to the entire project lifecycle and includes activities and 
deliverables for documentation and traceability. In 2018 the 
second version of this standard was released, and already 
anticipated the security issue, including common methods 
for functional safety and cybersecurity [14] to ensure the 
protection of vehicles from malicious attackers. This already 
hinted at the concern for cybersecurity, and the close 
relationship it has with functional safety despite being 
different areas. Both are collaborative elements that require 
comprehensive system engineering [11]. 
On the other hand, and more recently, ISO/SAE 21434, 
which deals with cybersecurity, appeared in 2021. 
Analyzing the standard, it resembles a compendium of best 
practices, because cybersecurity is not something generic; 
each protocol, each electronic system and each SW module 
may require a different approach. 
Unlike other standards, such as ISO 16750, where the 
tests to be performed and the pass ranges are detailed, these 
are not defined. A study must be conducted to analyze the 
system, and tests to validate and verify the operation of the 
system must be previously defined, both for functional 
safety and cybersecurity. 
III. 
FOCUS ON CYBERSECURITY 
Security refers to protecting critical system assets from 
threats and mitigating their impact on the system [11]. 
These assets can be anything of value, either to the company 
or to the final product. If vulnerabilities exist, they can be 
exploited by malicious users or attackers. 
There has been a gradual process of digitization in 
companies [15]. For example, customer communications are 
often on-line, information generated is stored digitally in 
repositories and databases, and production control can be 
done 
remotely. 
At 
the 
same 
time, 
in-vehicle 
communications have evolved [16], users demand wireless 
connectivity for their devices and OEMs can remotely 
update their vehicles’ SW. All this makes it clear that 
cybersecurity must cover the entire lifecycle of an 
automotive component, from the concept phase to the end of 
the vehicles’ life. 
Although it may appear to be a topic that has already 
been addressed at the academic level, it has been observed 
that TIER 1s are unaware of the implications and costs to 
their business of implementing the concept of cybersecurity 
[17]. In some cases, lack of knowledge and prejudice lead 
them to believe that it is something trivial and easy to 
implement. In addition, it has been observed that some 
OEMs have the same lack of knowledge and ask for fuzzy 
requirements in their Request for Quotation (RFQ), which 
can be very vague cybersecurity specifications [18] or 
exaggeratedly high for the type of product. To illustrate how 
cybersecurity encompasses not only the product, but the 
entire organization, development processes, and the entire 
product lifecycle, the following is a breakdown of the areas 
in which security must be ensured in an automotive 
company. 
A. Cyb-Sec at the Office 
Cybersecurity is a culture. Employees must be educated 
on the subject and embrace the fact that security starts with 
them. In the automotive industry, sensitive customer data is 
at stake [19]. Competition is fierce, and OEMs try to 
differentiate themselves from each other in terms of design, 
quality, and innovation. Therefore, confidentiality must be 
ensured, and a secure working environment must be in 
place. 
It is not uncommon for companies in this sector to have 
access control at the entrance to their facilities. These 
systems allow access only to authorized personnel and keep 
a record of entry and exit times. 
In the office, the Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT) department must ensure the security of 
the network infrastructure. Part of their job is to implement 
preventive 
measures 
to 
avoid 
unauthorized 
access, 
modification, deletion and theft of resources and data, 
including industrial espionage [20]. These security measures 
may include authentication, access control, application 
security, firewalls, Virtual Private Networks (VPNs), 
behavioral analysis, Intrusion Detection and Prevention 
Systems (IDPS) and wireless security. 
The international standard ISO 27001 addresses this 
issue. It ensures the confidentiality and integrity of data and 
information, as well as of the systems that process them, 
allowing the organization to assess the risks and implement 
the necessary controls to mitigate or eliminate them. This 
may be combined with periodic internal audits. 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
VEHICULAR 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

There are some best practices that can help secure 
communications. 
• 
Network segmentation: This is an effective way to 
prevent potential intruder exploits from spreading to 
other parts of the internal network. It is possible to 
create different subnetworks; some typical examples 
are a subnetwork for employees and another one for 
visitors and external devices (such as personal 
laptops or smartphones) or subnetworks for different 
workgroups in the organization [21]. 
• 
Firewall:  It is a network security system that 
monitors and controls incoming and outgoing 
network traffic. It allows to establish a barrier 
between a trusted network and an untrusted network. 
By applying rules, a firewall can allow or deny 
incoming and outgoing traffic from different IP 
addresses, protocols and ports [21]. 
• 
Demilitarized Zone: Creating a demilitarized zone 
(DMZ) can also be a good idea. This is a subnetwork 
that lies between the public Internet and private 
networks. It allows the enterprise to access untrusted 
networks, while ensuring the security of its private 
Local Area Network (LAN). Services are exposed, 
but the middle layer protects sensitive data on the 
intranet with a firewall that filters traffic [22]. 
• 
Network devices protection: A primary way to 
improve network infrastructure security is to harden 
devices such as routers, access points, servers, etc. 
Measures can include restricting physical access and, 
in some cases, protecting them from threats such as 
fire or water. In the digital realm, secure user access 
should be ensured, strong administration passwords 
should be used, device configurations should be 
backed up and devices should be tested regularly. 
• 
Access to information: The organization must 
provide a secure way to store and access 
information. There are confidential projects that 
contain data that should not be accessible to all 
employees [20]. An information system based on 
user permissions could prevent read and write access 
to sensitive documentation. Similarly, the use of 
version control systems, such as Git or SVN, can 
increase 
productivity 
while 
maintaining 
confidentiality. 
• 
VPN: This is often the preferred solution to allow 
remote workers to establish a secure connection to 
the corporate network. It creates a secure tunnel 
between the remote worker’s computer and the 
corporate network [23]. It can be used both for 
accessing company resources remotely as well as for 
protection when using public connections, as the 
traffic is encrypted [24]. The main security problem 
is if an intruder gains access to the virtual network. 
The knowledge of authentication protocols helps to 
solve this problem. Today, it is even possible to 
introduce a double authentication factor by receiving 
a unique and temporary key on the mobile phone to 
verify the authenticity of the person who wants to 
connect, thus rejecting imposters. 
• 
Updated software: Keeping SW up to date is 
important. Developers work hard to maintain 
compatibility 
and 
fix 
bugs 
and 
security 
vulnerabilities. 
Despite the efforts of the ICT department to secure the 
work environment, this is pointless if employees are not 
aware of the importance of cybersecurity. There are actions 
that are solely up to them, such as using strong passwords 
and renewing them regularly, being suspicious of emails 
containing hyperlinks or suspicious files or managing 
documents with appropriate backups, among others. 
B. Cyb-Sec in the Development Phase 
Automakers are already starting to hold TIER 1 
suppliers accountable for cybersecurity. Although this is 
new, it will soon become a common requirement due to the 
integration of electronic systems in the car and connectivity. 
Therefore, HW, and SW engineers will have to develop the 
project with the concept of cybersecurity in mind. 
The way of ISO/SAE 21434's breaks down development 
is similar to the functional safety standard in that there is 
still a concept phase and a product development phase. It 
also adds a section on operations and maintenance during 
the post-development phase, indicating that there may be 
incidents, corrections, and updates. Unlike ISO 26262, the 
cybersecurity standard does not distinguish between HW 
and SW but is understood as a system. The following are 
some of the tasks that must be performed when developing a 
new product. 
1) Concept definition 
This part details the requirements for the concept phase. Its 
main objectives are: 
1. Define the item, the operational environment, and 
its interaction with other items: 
This is an initial activity in which a preliminary study 
and design of the architecture is carried out according 
to the description of the item, an analysis of the 
known interactions with other components and some 
assumptions about its operating environment. 
2. Specify cybersecurity goals and cybersecurity 
claims: 
Next, an analysis of the item is conducted. 
Cybersecurity engineers must perform a Threat 
Analysis and Risk Assessment (TARA). This consists 
of a matrix to identify potential threats and their likely 
attack vector, classify them according to their 
characteristics 
and 
their 
impact 
on 
security, 
operational, privacy and financial issues, and obtain 
an impact level. It also evaluates the knowledge 
required by the attacker to execute the identified 
attack. Ultimately, the aim of this document is to 
define cybersecurity goals to make a system robust 
and reliable against hackers and intruders. For those 
familiar with ISO 26262, this will remind them of the 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
VEHICULAR 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Hazard Analysis and Risk Assessment (HARA) 
document. 
While a threat analysis focuses on how an attacker 
might exploit vulnerabilities to gain access to 
resources or sensitive data, threat modelling tries to 
identify potential threats to the item's ecosystem and 
its periphery, as well as any vulnerabilities that could 
be exploited by those threats. Performing this work is 
also encouraged. 
3. Specify cybersecurity requirements and allocate 
them 
to 
the 
item 
or 
to 
the 
operational 
environment: 
Based on the above activities and once the threats and 
cybersecurity goals have been identified, the next step 
is to establish requirements to meet those targets. That 
is, what measures will be taken to mitigate the risks 
and protect the asset against potential attacks. 
2) Product Development 
During this phase, the cybersecurity specifications must 
be defined. For this purpose, the HW and SW architectures 
of the system must also be described, although these may be 
modified to meet the security goals. 
At the HW level, details are needed such as the 
communication protocol that the component will use to 
connect to the vehicle or the role of the item. This is 
important because a point-to-point communication protocol 
does not have the same security measures as a multiplexed 
or wireless protocol. The same is true for the role; the 
measures change if the item is a master or a slave, as well as 
if it is only responding to requests or sending commands to 
other systems. 
There are also HW components, such as the Trusted 
Platform Module (TPM) that ensure the authenticity of the 
device or that the component's firmware has not been 
tampered with by a third party. This enables SW integrity 
reporting and cryptographic key creation and management. 
The applications are varied, but it is used to have a secure 
identification between the ECU and the component, as well 
as to identify against the deployment of updates to the 
system. For example, if an attacker modifies the firmware, 
the key will change, and the component will no longer be 
recognized by the vehicle as a trusted system. 
Implementing cybersecurity in SW can be done in 
several ways. e.g., SW design patterns such as modularity, 
abstraction or layering contribute to system robustness. 
Similarly, domain separation and process isolation are two 
measures that limit privilege escalation and access to certain 
data and resources, making it more difficult for an attacker 
to gain control of the system. Simplicity and minimization 
also play a critical role; the easier it is to use and 
communicate, the easier it is to detect vulnerabilities, and if 
the system has only the necessary features, without extras, it 
will be less vulnerable because fewer violations will go 
undetected. 
When the electronic design is mainly based on sensor 
integration, it is also necessary to ensure that the sensors can 
be calibrated and that the EEPROM can be locked so that it 
cannot be tampered with. The same applies to other 
procurement elements. 
3) Cybersecurity Validation 
This is the process that validates through testing the 
assumptions that were made in the previous stages [11]. 
These tests consist of emulating or simulating cyberattacks 
and testing the effectiveness of the security measures 
implemented, thus validating their functioning. 
To validate the design there are several types of tests. 
Some of them will be mentioned and briefly explained 
below. 
• 
Penetration test: Evaluates an application’s attack 
surface for potential SW weaknesses that, if left 
unaddressed, 
could 
lead 
to 
exploitable 
vulnerabilities. This could result in remote code 
exploitation or sensitive information exposure. The 
way is to take over the device or application. It is 
usually combined with a vulnerability scan of the 
perimeter, where the system is located. 
• 
Vulnerability scan: It is a SW that detects certain 
vulnerabilities in a device, such as well-known 
public vulnerabilities and configuration errors that 
pose a high risk of compromise within a network or 
system. For example: Remote Code Execution 
(RCE), Data Exposure, Denial of Service (DoS) 
vulnerabilities, etc. 
• 
Security scan: Checks for misconfiguration, such as 
unencrypted files, unpatched systems, inadequate 
firewall or use of weak cryptographic methods or 
suites. 
There is another type of analysis that requires knowledge 
of the communication protocol used by the device. In this 
way, it is necessary to check that the communication cannot 
be interrupted, that the identity of the device or sensor 
cannot be impersonated and that there is no repudiation by 
other systems. For certain applications, it must also be 
ensured that the data is protected against attacks (such as 
man-in-the-middle, eavesdropping or spoofing) or that data 
cannot be manipulated [11]. 
4) Product Maintenance 
Over time, new technologies and tools emerge, hackers 
acquire new knowledge and discover new vulnerabilities, 
and systems that were once secure can become susceptible 
to attacks.  
Connectivity has enabled cars with Over-The-Air (OTA) 
updates, which not only improve the performance and 
functionality of a vehicle already on the road, but also make 
it possible to fix bugs and security breaches on the fly. 
When a security vulnerability or bug is discovered in the 
SW, it should be fixed and securely, quickly, and seamlessly 
updated without the need to visit the vehicle maintenance 
shop or garage [11]. The supplier must now ensure that its 
part is secure and respond to any incidents. The upside is 
that, although they have an additional role in maintaining 
safety and security, in some cases they may be able to avoid 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
VEHICULAR 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

a recall, because there are issues that could be resolved 
remotely with a SW update to the component. 
Therefore, a secure online SW update is required for 
every ECU in the autonomous and connected vehicles [11]. 
C. Cyb-Sec at the Testing Department 
Automotive suppliers' typically have departments or 
laboratories dedicated to testing and measuring parts, 
whether they are prototypes, pre-series, or final products. 
Physical security measures are in place to protect know-how 
and intellectual property. In most cases, the site is protected 
by walls that prevent visibility from the outside, as well as 
having access control so that only certain people within the 
organization are allowed to enter. 
However, not all security is physical, but the know-how 
of the ICT department is also relevant here. Because of the 
information handled in these facilities, some security 
measures are taken into consideration. For example, the 
organization may provide operators with digital cameras, so 
that they do not use their connected smartphones to take 
pictures nor videos of the products or tests. This department 
may be under a different subnetwork to further control 
communications with the outside world [21]. When storing 
sensitive test and prototype information, it is essential to 
have a system for managing backups, which can be stored 
and encrypted. 
Protecting this information is important. An attacker 
could use it for a variety of purposes, such as industrial 
espionage, 
plagiarism, 
dissemination 
of 
results 
or 
defamation. On the other hand, backups are also important 
because in some cases there is information that may be 
requested by the OEM to solve problems or improve parts. 
D. Cyb-Sec at the Production Line 
The production line is the place where parts are 
manufactured and assembled in series to be shipped to the 
customer. Nowadays the lines are highly automated and 
quality control is performed on every part that is produced. 
In this case, cybersecurity must also be considered. In 
many projects, the electronics are engraved or finished on 
the line. The SW is loaded, the sensors are calibrated, the 
device is configured with some data and finally, the 
EEPROM is locked so that the electronics cannot be 
manipulated again by third parties. 
A security breach on the production line could affect 
manufacturing in several ways. For example, an attacker 
could remotely access the operation of the machines, 
obtaining data and parameters, changing settings, and even 
stopping manufacturing. It could cause devices to be 
programmed incorrectly, or to write off parts that should be 
rejects. 
This could impact business and customer relationships. 
For these reasons, the ICT department will need to control 
communication and access as it does in other areas of the 
organization. When data is recorded on devices, a 
subsequent check should be made to ensure that the 
recording is correct and, as a last step, the device should be 
locked so that it cannot be recorded again. 
Usually, a record is kept of the parts that come out and 
their characteristics. It is in the interest to protect this data 
and store it properly, with the desired encryption measures. 
E. Cyb-Sec in the Vehicle 
After the entire design and manufacturing process, the 
final product reaches the OEM, who installs it in the vehicle 
and sells it to the public. If the analysis has been carried out 
well, the system should be secure and not pose a risk to 
other elements of the vehicle. 
On the other hand, the OEM also has certain 
cybersecurity responsibilities, as it sends commands to 
different systems, has access ports to ECUs, such as OBD-
II, and in some cases can collect information about the 
performance and operation of its vehicles [11]. Some 
measures can be applied by the carmaker, such as secure 
boot process, IDPS or communication encryption. 
If vehicle usage data is collected, it must be anonymized, 
without driver information, and the transmission paths must 
be secure. Alfa Romeo is a pioneer in providing a complete 
history of car telemetry data, guaranteeing its authenticity 
thanks to Non-Fungible Token (NFT) technology and 
digital certificates. The first vehicle in using NFT and 
blockchain technology will reach the market in 2023. It will 
be able to record data on vehicle’s manufacture, mileage, 
electric battery cycles, overhauls, part changes, etc. This 
will provide complete and tamper-proof traceability over the 
vehicle's lifetime [25]. 
F. Beyond the Vehicle 
This subsection is intended to make the reader aware 
that safety goes beyond the digital and that poor design can 
compromise the integrity of the driver. 
Today's cars are equipped with Advanced Driver 
Assistance Systems (ADAS). Some of them are based on 
computer vision and include in-vehicle video cameras, 
proximity sensors, RADAR, and LIDAR technologies. 
These technologies are sometimes unobtrusive, but they 
are already being used in some vehicles to achieve a certain 
degree of semi-autonomous driving. It should be kept in 
mind that the environment in which the car moves, the real 
world, can also be hacked. 
There are methods an attacker can use to provide wrong 
information to the vehicle. McAfee Advanced Threat 
Research conducted research that revealed these risks. 
Manipulating road signs with small stickers caused the car 
to misinterpret them. Similarly, using a magnet to place 
numbers on speed signs, it was possible to mislead the 
vehicle about the maximum speed of the road [26], posing a 
serious threat to occupants and road users. Another hack is 
the phantom attack [27], which consists of projecting 
images onto the road surface. Cars could be tricked into 
recognizing fake pedestrians or signals, and even non-
existent lanes. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
VEHICULAR 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

IV. 
THE AGING OF THE CONNECTED VEHICLE: 
CYBERSECURITY CONCERNS 
In 2022, the average age of the European car fleet was 
around 12 years [28]. Looking back a decade ago, cars have 
changed significantly, especially in terms of connectivity. 
Although vehicles then already had a lot of electronics, it 
was nothing compared to all the systems that are included 
today, and they lacked wireless connectivity to the outside 
world. As a result, there were fewer potential entry points 
for cyber threats, which made them inherently more secure. 
If the mechanics of the purchased vehicle were good and 
maintenance was adequate, an old vehicle could be in 
service for many years, well beyond its average useful life. 
In such a case, the driver would have to forgo the new safety 
features that a new car could provide. 
More than 400 million connected vehicles are expected 
to be in use by 2025 [29], and each vehicle will produce 
25GB of data per hour [30]. Several factors, including the 
widespread adoption of smartphones and the availability of 
high-speed mobile data networks, have led to the emergence 
of the connected vehicle. Some modern cars offer online 
services such as OTA SW updates, real-time traffic 
information, and remote diagnostics. Users also demand 
connectivity to their smartphones, allowing them to make 
and receive calls in the car, interact with GPS systems, read 
instant messages, and communicate with the infotainment 
system via voice commands using a voice assistant. Users 
also want to receive notifications on their phones about the 
status of the vehicle, whether to remind them when the car 
needs to be refueled or recharged, or when the next service 
is due. These applications can also collect data on schedules, 
routes, driving habits and even the installed updates [31]. As 
for the car itself, in some cases it may record user 
information for configuration purposes, such as customized 
views on the dashboard or preset settings for the position of 
seats and mirrors. This has made vehicles more vulnerable 
to cyberattacks by providing more entry points for malicious 
actors to exploit [31]. In addition, the emphasis on adding 
new features and connected functions has sometimes come 
at the expense of security, as it has been considered a 
secondary concern. 
Electric Vehicles (EVs) also pose cybersecurity 
challenges, both in the car and in the power grid. For 
example, new home charging stations include features such 
as remote control of charging methods, which can be 
convenient but also make these devices more vulnerable 
[30]. In addition, Kaspersky cybersecurity researchers 
identified vulnerabilities in an EV charging station that 
could allow an attacker to damage the home power grid. The 
security threats ranged from stopping the vehicle charging 
process to setting the station to maximum current flow, 
which could lead to a fire [32]. 
As technology evolves, so does the risk of cyberattacks. 
With the rise of connected vehicles, the risk of cybersecurity 
threats is a growing concern. In the future, as today's 
modern, connected cars age, they may become more 
vulnerable. This is because the vehicles’ SW and security 
systems are likely to become outdated and will no longer 
receive updates or patches from the manufacturer. As a 
result, the car may be more susceptible to hacking and data 
breaches, which can jeopardize the privacy and safety of its 
occupants and other road users. In addition, the car's HW 
components may become less reliable and secure as they 
age, increasing the risk of malfunctions and physical threats 
to the car's systems. Suppliers and OEMs must work 
together to address this issue and commit to designing and 
manufacturing safe, secure, and reliable systems. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Cybersecurity is increasingly present in all areas. Every 
day, a lot of digital data is generated and spread through 
various channels. Sometimes this data contains sensitive 
information that needs to be protected. 
Automotive is not different. Cybersecurity has also 
reached this industry and is set to be a growing trend. There 
are currently a lot of electronic systems connected to the 
vehicle's ECUs. Different communication protocols coexist 
inside the car for every need, both wired and wireless. All 
these communications must be secure and so must the in-
vehicle devices. 
Connectivity has made it possible for smartphones to be 
linked to the vehicle. Similarly, the car carries other wireless 
communication systems, such as GPS, 4G/5G mobile 
communications (to receive OTA updates or make 
emergency calls) or radio signals (to detect the car key or 
transmit tire pressure). For the future, there is talk of Drive-
by-Wire, ADAS, autonomous driving and, with smart cities, 
Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X). This makes it necessary to 
secure the vehicle. 
The question that remains is what will happen to the 
connected vehicle in the future. As a current vehicle ages, 
security vulnerabilities may emerge. When they are 
identified, it should be the responsibility of the manufacturer 
or supplier to provide support and fix them with an update. 
This will be difficult in many cases, especially if these parts 
are no longer manufactured and support is withdrawn. The 
digitization of the automotive sector will bring with it 
numerous cybersecurity challenges. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been partially supported by the grant 
‘Ayudas para el desarrollo de proyectos de I+D mediante la 
contratación de personas doctoradas y la realización de 
doctorados industriales, programa BIKAINTEK 2019’, by 
the Department of Economic Development, Sustainability 
and Environment of the Basque Government. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Hammerschmidt, “Innovation in the car: 90% comes from 
electronics and software,” eeNews Europe, Apr. 29, 2014. 
https://www.eenewseurope.com/news/innovation-car-90-
comes-electronics-and-software (accessed Feb. 09, 2023). 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
VEHICULAR 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

[2] P. Mohankumar, J. Ajayan, R. Yasodharan, P. Devendran, 
and R. Sambasivam, “A review of micromachined sensors for 
automotive applications,” Measurement: Journal of the 
International Measurement Confederation, vol. 140, pp. 305–
322, 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.measurement.2019.03.064. 
[3] Statista, “Car costs - Automotive electronics costs worldwide 
2030,” 
2019. 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/277931/automotive-
electronics-cost-as-a-share-of-total-car-cost-worldwide/ 
(accessed Jan. 25, 2023). 
[4] X. Ferràs, E. Tarrats, and N. Arimany, “Disruption in the 
automotive industry: A Cambrian moment,” Business 
Horizons, vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 855–863, 2017, doi: 
10.1016/j.bushor.2017.07.011. 
[5] A. Simonazzi, J. Jorge Carreto Sanginés, and M. Russo, “The 
future of the automotive industry: dangerous challenges or 
new life for a saturated market?” Institute for New Economic 
Thinking Working Paper Series, pp. 1–34, Nov. 2020, doi: 
10.36687/inetwp141. 
[6] O. Burkacky, J. Eichmann, M. Kellner, P. Keuntje, and J. 
Werra, “Rewiring car electronics and software architecture for 
the Roaring 2020s,” McKinsey Center for Future Mobility, 
no. August, 2021. 
[7] J. Á. Gumiel, J. Mabe, J. Jiménez, and J. Barruetabeña, 
“Introducing the Electronic Knowledge Framework into the 
Traditional 
Automotive 
Suppliers’ 
Industry: 
From 
Mechanical Engineering to Mechatronics,” Businesses 2022, 
Vol. 
2, 
no. 
2, 
pp. 
273–290, 
Jun. 
2022, 
doi: 
10.3390/BUSINESSES2020018. 
[8] European Automobile Manufacturers’ Association (ACEA), 
“The Automotive Regulatory Guide.” 2021. 
[9] ISO/SAE, 
“ISO/SAE 
21434:2021. 
Road 
vehicles 
— 
Cybersecurity engineering.” 2021. 
[10] R. Hegde, S. Kumar, and K. S. Gurumurthy, “The Impact of 
Network Topologies on the Performance of the In-Vehicle 
Network,” International Journal of Computer Theory and 
Engineering, 
no. 
January, 
pp. 
405–409, 
2013, 
doi: 
10.7763/ijcte.2013.v5.719. 
[11] S. Kim and R. Shrestha, Automotive Cyber Security: 
Introduction, Challenges, and Standardization. Singapore: 
Springer Singapore, 2020. 
[12] A. Martínez, K. A. Ramírez, C. Feregrino, and A. Morales, 
“Security on in-vehicle communication protocols: Issues, 
challenges, and future research directions,” Computer 
Communications, vol. 180, no. September, pp. 1–20, 2021, 
doi: 10.1016/j.comcom.2021.08.027. 
[13] G. Costantino, M. De Vincenzi, and I. Matteucci, “In-Depth 
Exploration of ISO/SAE 21434 and Its Correlations with 
Existing Standards,” IEEE Communications Standards 
Magazine, 
vol. 
6, 
no. 
1, 
pp. 
84–92, 
2022, 
doi: 
10.1109/MCOMSTD.0001.2100080. 
[14] C. Schmittner, G. Griessnig, and Z. Ma, “Status of the 
Development of ISO/SAE 21434,” in EuroSPI 2018: Systems, 
Software and Services Process Improvement, X. Larrucea, I. 
Santamaría, R. V. O’Connor, and R. Messnarz, Eds. Bilbao: 
Springer, 2018, pp. 504–513. 
[15] K. Felser and M. Wynn, “Digitalization and Evolving IT 
Sourcing Strategies in the German Automotive Industry,” 
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol. 
13, no. 3 & 4, pp. 212–225, 2020. 
[16] A. G. Marino, F. Fons, and J. M. M. Arostegui, “The Future 
Roadmap of In-Vehicle Network Processing: a HW-centric 
(R-)evolution,” IEEE Access, vol. 0, no. July, pp. 69223–
69249, 2022, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3186708. 
[17] F. Luo, X. Zhang, Z. Yang, Y. Jiang, J. Wang, M. Wu et al., 
“Cybersecurity Testing for Automotive Domain: A Survey,” 
Sensors, vol. 22, no. 23, 2022, doi: 10.3390/s22239211. 
[18] C. Bordonali, S. Ferraresi, and W. Richter, “Shifting gear s in 
cyber security for connected cars,” McKinsey & Company, 
2017. 
[19] T. Królikowski and A. Ubowska, “TISAX - optimization of 
IT risk management in the automotive industry,” Procedia 
Computer Science, vol. 192, pp. 4259–4268, 2021, doi: 
10.1016/j.procs.2021.09.202. 
[20] D. Cappelli, A. Moore, and R. Trzeciak, “Insider Theft of 
Intellectual Property,” in The CERT Guide to Insider Threats: 
How to Prevent, Detect, and Respond to Information 
Technology Crimes (Theft, Sabotage, Fraud), Pearson 
Education, 2012, pp. 61–98. 
[21] N. Mhaskar, M. Alabbad, and R. Khedri, “A Formal 
Approach to Network Segmentation,” Computers and 
Security, 
vol. 
103, 
p. 
102162, 
2021, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.cose.2020.102162. 
[22] S. N. Nikoi, C. Adu-Boahene, and A. Nsiah-Konandu, 
“Enhancing the Design of a Secured Campus Network using 
Demilitarized Zone and Honeypot at Uew- kumasi Campus,” 
Asian Journal of Research in Computer Science, pp. 14–28, 
Jan. 2022, doi: 10.9734/ajrcos/2022/v13i130304. 
[23] P. J. Ezra, S. Misra, A. Agrawal, J. Oluranti, R. Maskeliunas, 
and R. Damasevicius, “Secured Communication Using 
Virtual Private Network (VPN),” in Cyber Security and 
Digital Forensics - Proceedings of ICCSDF 2021, K. Khanna, 
V. V. Estrela, and J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, Eds. Springer 
Singapore, 2022, pp. 309–319. 
[24] M. Fadzil, A. Kadir, M. Afif, D. Azmi, A. Nazari, and M. 
Rose, “Secure Communication over Virtual Private Network,” 
vol. 
35, 
no. 
10, 
pp. 
2129–2132, 
2017, 
doi: 
10.5829/idosi.wasj.2017.2129.2132. 
[25] E. Babetto, “Blockchain ed Economia Circolare: Tracciabilità 
e Sostenibilità,” Università di Padova, 2022. 
[26] S. Povolny, “Model Hacking ADAS to Pave Safer Roads for 
Autonomous 
Vehicles,” 
McAfee 
Blog, 
2020. 
https://www.mcafee.com/blogs/other-blogs/mcafee-
labs/model-hacking-adas-to-pave-safer-roads-for-
autonomous-vehicles/ (accessed Nov. 18, 2022). 
[27] B. Nassi, Y. Mirsky, D. Nassi, R. Ben-Netanel, O. Drokin, 
and Y. Elovici, “Phantom of the ADAS: Securing Advanced 
Driver-Assistance Systems from Split-Second Phantom 
Attacks,” in Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGSAC 
Conference on Computer and Communications Security, Oct. 
2020, 
no. 
Report 
2020/085, 
pp. 
293–308, 
doi: 
10.1145/3372297.3423359. 
[28] European Automobile Manufacturers’ Association (ACEA), 
“Average age of the EU vehicle fleet, by country.” 2022. 
[29] Statista, “Size of the global connected car fleet in 2021, with a 
forecast for 2025, 2030, and 2035, by region,” 2021. 
[30] Z. Pourmirza and S. Walker, “Electric Vehicle Charging 
Station: Cyber Security Challenges and Perspective,” 2021 
9th IEEE International Conference on Smart Energy Grid 
Engineering, 
SEGE 
2021, pp. 
111–116, 2021, 
doi: 
10.1109/SEGE52446.2021.9535052. 
[31] D. Colombo, “How I got access to 25+ Tesla’s around the 
world. By accident. And curiosity.,” Medium, 2022. 
https://medium.com/@david_colombo/how-i-got-access-to-
25-teslas-around-the-world-by-accident-and-curiosity-
8b9ef040a028 (accessed Jan. 25, 2023). 
[32] D. Sklyar, “ChargePoint Home security research,” Kaspersky 
Lab Security Services, 2018. 
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
VEHICULAR 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

