Revisiting Message Generation Strategies
for Collective Perception in Connected and Automated Driving
Quentin Delooz and Andreas Festag
Technische Hochschule Ingolstadt / CARISSMA
Ingolstadt, Germany
Email: Quentin.Delooz@carissma.eu
Email: Andreas.Festag@thi.de
Alexey Vinel
Halmstad University
Halmstad, Sweden
Email: alexey.vinel@hh.se
Abstract—Collective perception enables vehicles to exchange pre-
processed sensor data and is being standardized as a 2nd
generation V2X communication service. The European standard-
ization in ETSI foresees the exchange of detected objects and
deﬁned a dedicated message type (Collective Perception Message,
CPM) with rules to decide when and with which objects the
message should be generated, referred to as generation rules. The
choice of these rules is not straightforward and inﬂuences both
channel load and perception quality. For the object inclusion,
ETSI currently follows a similar policy as for the generation
of Cooperative Awareness Messages (CAM): The objects are
ﬁltered based on their dynamics. We regard this approach as
conservative. The present paper revisits the generation rules for
the CPM and applies two approaches for object inclusion to the
CPM – the conservative strategy of ETSI and a more ’greedy’
strategy. We assess the performance by discrete-event simulations
in a scenario representing a city with realistic vehicle densities and
mobility patterns. The simulations take into account the effects
imposed by decentralized congestion control. Considering that
ETSI currently follows the conservative strategy, we conclude
that the application of a greedy strategy improves the perception
quality in low-density scenarios.
Keywords–V2X; vehicular communications; collective percep-
tion; message generation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Sensor data sharing using vehicle-to-everything (V2X)
communications is an effective and low-cost solution to en-
hance the perception range of a vehicle’s sensors. It is the
basis for various advanced use cases for connected and au-
tomated driving. Recently, the European Telecommunications
Standards Institute (ETSI) has completed a study item for
sensor data sharing [1], named ’Collective Perception’ (CP).
CP is based on the periodic exchange of messages with the
direct neighbours in communication range. The study item
implies important design decisions including the deﬁnition of
the Collective Perception Message (CPM) and features of the
communication protocol towards the future standard.
The collective perception complements other communica-
tion services. Speciﬁcally, in the European system for V2X
communications, the Cooperative Awareness (CA) service en-
ables vehicles to report their position and driving dynamics to
others through Cooperative Awareness Messages (CAMs) [2].
Similarly, the CPM carries objects lists, the vehicle’s sensor
conﬁguration, and other data ﬁelds. All message types are
transmitted in the bandwidth-limited wireless channels in the
5.9 GHz band allocated for road safety and trafﬁc efﬁciency
applications. Depending on the message frequency and the
number of objects included, CPMs can considerably increase
the channel load [3]. Decentralized Congestion Control (DCC)
limits the overall data rate a vehicle is allowed to transmit
over the wireless channel, but introduces additional delays or
even drop messages under high channel load [4]. Following the
ETSI study item for the CP service [1], the CP protocol deﬁnes
several mechanisms to reduce the load generated by CPMs.
Although DCC achieves the stabilization of the network, it
can severely affect the performance of the CP service.
For the selection of objects to include in a CPM, i.e.,
inclusion rules, ETSI has adopted the strategy used for the
CAM: By default, a CAM is broadcasted at a rate of 1 Hz.
Then, depending on the vehicle dynamics (position, speed,
and heading variation over time), the rate increases to up
to 10 Hz [2]. In the case of the CPM, the reasoning is the
same but applied to each object. Correspondingly to the CAM
speciﬁcation, the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE)
established the Basic Safety Message (BSM) for the DSRC
system [5]. Though speciﬁed for the same purpose, the default
BSM rate is 10 Hz, but independent of the dynamics of the
vehicle. In this paper, we apply the BSM approach for the CPM
object inclusion, i.e., a detected object will be transmitted at
the rate of 10 Hz.
Both CAM and BSM address the trade-off between channel
usage and message rate. The CAM generation can be seen as a
conservative strategy as it uses the channel only when needed
even though more transmission resources would be available.
In contrast, the BSM generation rules will always send at the
maximum rate if the DCC allows it. This strategy can be
regarded as a greedy approach, which saturates the channel
faster. However, in comparison to a conservative approach, it
reduces the time between updates for an object.
In this paper, we present the design of the ETSI collective
perception service [1] as a decomposition into components
for message sending rules, object inclusion, and redundancy
mitigation. Inspired by the BSM generation rules, we compare
the ’conservative’ strategy currently deﬁned by ETSI for
object inclusion rules with a ’greedy’ approach. The evaluation
relies on simulations using the OMNeT++- based ARTERY
framework [6] and LIMERIC for DCC [7]. We consider a
realistic scenario with urban, suburban, and highway trafﬁc
(LuST [8]) to evaluate the performance of both approaches.
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: After
reviewing existing work in Section II, we give an overview of
ETSI collective perception in Section III and provide technical
background on DCC and LIMERIC in Section IV. Section V
describes our simulation environment and parameters used to
assess the CP performance. Sections VI and VII provide an
analysis of the obtained results and conclude the paper.
II.
RELATED WORK
Thandavarayan et al. [9] analyse two different policies,
which deﬁne the object inclusion and message sending rules
for the CP service. The ﬁxed policy includes all the detected
objects and CPMs are generated at a ﬁxed rate. The dynamic
policy ﬁlters the objects based on their dynamics, similarly to
the sending rules of CAMs [2]. Additionally, if no object has to
be transmitted, the generation of CPMs is omitted. The authors
compare both policies in a highway scenario with different
vehicle densities, all generating CPMs, but without considering
DCC. Garlich et al. [10] analyse the same policies as in [9], but
take into account DCC (a reactive approach, see Section IV),
message sending rules and different channel conﬁgurations.
The paper applies two different scenarios: a realistic (LuST)
and an artiﬁcial one (’spider’). The authors of the two papers
greatly contributed to the standardization process of the CP
service.
Compared to our paper, [9] and [10] do not make a clear
distinction between inclusion and sending rules. Speciﬁcally,
the ﬁxed and dynamic policies combine different inclusion
rules with different sending rules, making the comparison hard
to interpret. Additionally, the authors focus on the corner case
where all vehicles send V2X messages; even considering a
fast-growing rate of V2X-equipped vehicles, this should not
happen before years. In the present paper, we make a clearly
separate inclusion and sending rules. We analyse in deep
the LuST scenario and focus on cases where the number of
vehicles able to send CPM is low. Additionally, we consider
LIMERIC [7], an adaptive DCC approach, which is more
permissive compared to the reactive approach in [10].
III.
OVERVIEW OF COLLECTIVE PERCEPTION
STANDARDIZED IN ETSI
Based on the study item of ETSI about Collective Percep-
tion in [1], we decompose the CP service into components for
triggering, inclusion, redundancy, and sending rules, which are
periodically checked and subsequently executed (see Figure 1).
We note that the component names do not correspond directly
to the terms in [1], but our proposal eases the understanding of
the mechanisms and their relationship. In addition, we do not
consider the segmentation of CPMs as in [1]. Instead, if the
size of the CPM is larger than the maximum message size of
1,100 B, we randomly remove objects from the message until
the maximum message size is reached. Object removal in our
scenario occurs rarely and can therefore be neglected. In the
following, we explain each component.
A. Checking time
The checking time determines the frequency with which
the rules are periodically inspected. It can be regarded as a
sleeping time of the algorithm, i.e., the time duration in which
a CPM cannot be generated. The value should be less than or
equal to the minimum interval between two consecutive CPMs,
i.e., 100 ms. Though [1] does not deﬁne a checking time, we
can assume the same value as speciﬁed for the CA service [2]
(see Section III-B). In addition, most of the existing research
publications use a value of 100 ms.
B. Triggering rules
These rules deﬁne the time to wait between the generation
of two consecutive CPMs. In [1], the lower and upper bound
of the CPM transmission interval time is set to 100 ms and
1 s, respectively. DCC regulates the transmission rate of the
CP service between these bounds. If DCC allows, CP triggers
the generation of a CPM and set its content with the rules
deﬁned by the next components in Figure 1. Both checking
and triggering rules are independent of the conservative and
greedy policy.
C. Locally perceived environment
This component subsumes the pre-processed sensor data as
a set of detected, tracked, and classiﬁed objects in a vehicle. In
general, depending on its technical characteristics, each sensor
type represents an object differently. However, using the CP
service, the objects are represented in a standardized format,
i.e., by their descriptions including position and speed relative
to a reference position of the sending vehicle.
D. Inclusion rules
This component ﬁlters less relevant objects and these with a
conﬁdence level below a pre-deﬁned threshold. The ETSI study
item on collective perception [1] deﬁnes relevance criteria
based on the objects’ dynamics, type, and last transmission
time. The criteria for object dynamics rely on the CAM
generation rules [2], i.e., on the object’s difference in position,
speed, and heading since the last object inclusion. For the
conﬁdence level and threshold, we note that [1] does not deﬁne
the parameter values.
Figure 2 depicts the decision tree that is executed to decide
if an object should be included in the generated CPM, or not.
We stress that these inclusion rules rely only on the perception
of the sending vehicles, i.e., the objects received via V2X
communication are not taken into account. Furthermore, the
inclusion rules are static and are applied irrespective of the
channel load or the vehicle’s driving situation.
In the present paper, we compare the inclusion rules deﬁned
in [1], i.e., the ETSI rules, with an approach where all objects
detected are included in the generated CPM, i.e., no-ﬁltering.
In analogy to the channel usage vs. message generation trade-
off discussed in Section I, the ETSI inclusion rules are seen
as conservative and non-ﬁltering as greedy.
E. Redundancy mitigation rules
A redundant transmission occurs when the same object
is received multiple times from different senders. The redun-
dancy mitigation rules omit the transmission of objects which
were already received. In [1], these rules are only applied if
the channel load is larger than a (still undeﬁned) threshold.
Additionally, [1] proposes several strategies. For example, the
frequency-based approach omits locally perceived objects from
the new CPM if a certain number of previously sent CPMs in
a given time window already included information about the
same objects. As proposed by [3], some of these rules could
also be considered as inclusion rules.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Figure 1. Components for the message generation in ETSI collective
perception derived from [1] (without segmentation).
Figure 2. Rules for object inclusion as deﬁned in [1], which corresponds to
the conservative strategy in this paper.
A typical scenario where the redundancy mitigation rules
would be effective is a road intersection. In that case, poten-
tially many vehicles detect the same object, e.g., a pedestrian,
and start transmitting information about it. The added informa-
tion brought by each vehicle would be small in comparison to
the ’cost’ of its transmission, especially in areas with a dense
number of vehicles.
F. Sending rules
The sending rules represent the last decision point to decide
if the generated CPM should be sent to the lower levels of
the protocol stack. Following [1], at least one of these three
conditions should be respected for the CPM to be generated:
(i) there is at least one object to send, (ii) the last CPM with
sensor information and (iii) the duration since the generation
of the last CPM is at least 1 second.
In [10], the authors compare the non-ﬁltering and the ETSI
inclusion rules. However, the authors apply different sending
rules for the inclusion strategy: With the ETSI inclusion rules,
a CPM is generated if objects are present to be transmitted. For
the non-ﬁltering approach, a ﬁxed rate of 10 Hz is applied, in-
dependently whether objects have to be transmitted. Therefore,
it is hard to analyse the effect of the inclusion rules and the
sending rules separately, especially if the sensors’ parameters
do not allow vehicles to detect always at least one object.
In the present study, CPMs will only be generated if there
is information, such as objects or sensors data, to send, and
independently of the used inclusion rules.
IV.
DECENTRALIZED CONGESTION CONTROL (DCC)
In the following, we provide background information on
DCC in general in Section IV-A and speciﬁcally on LIMERIC
in Section IV-B.
A. General
DCC is a set of mechanisms in the V2X protocol stack that
ensure the stability of the network and fairness in resource
usage among network nodes. Its principal function is to
measure the channel load (channel busy ratio, CBR) and to
control the data that a station generates. DCC is standardized
by ETSI in several standards.
DCC is a cross-layer functionality with interacting enti-
ties at different layers. The access layer functionality [11]
provides trafﬁc shaping for the injected packets. Practically,
it implements a ’gatekeeper’ that realizes a First-In-First-
Out (FIFO) queuing system for each channel. A gatekeeper
has multiple queues for the packets to be sent and a single
server, which dispatches always the non-empty queue with the
highest priority (simple priority queue). When a packet enters
the gatekeeper, and the queue is not full, DCC allows the
transmission of the packet and sets its transmission parameters.
If the queue is full or the lifetime of the packet expires during
the waiting time in the queue, the packet is discarded.
To determine when a packet can be transmitted to the
MAC layer, ETSI standardized two types of strategies for the
gatekeeper [12]: reactive and adaptive. Both strategies respect
the DCC requirements speciﬁed in [13]:
•
0 < Ton < 4ms: Ton is the maximum duration of a
packet transmission.
•
duty cycle <= 3%: it means that a station can occupy
at most 3%, i.e., 30 ms, of channel time.
•
Tof f >= 25ms: Tof f is the duration before the gate-
keeper re-opens after the transmission of packet and
allows a new packet to be transmitted. In other words,
the maximum packet transmission frequency is 40 Hz.
•
if CBR >= 0.62, Tof f >= 1,000ms.
The reactive approach deﬁnes a set of states for which
values of the Tof f time are assigned to speciﬁc CBR thresholds.
The higher the measured CBR, the longer a station needs to
wait between two consecutive transmissions. [12] proposes two
sets of states, each one depending on the maximum allowed
transmission time. Effectively, the reactive approach sets a
predeﬁned rate based on the measured CBR. In contrast, an
adaptive method shares the channel resources between the
stations in communication range such that the CBR converges
to a predeﬁned maximum value. The LInear MEssage rate
Integrated Control (LIMERIC) algorithm [7] meets the ETSI
requirements for the adaptive DCC approach and is used in
the simulation of the present paper.
B. LIMERIC
Instead
of
directly
adapting
the
transmission
rate,
LIMERIC adjusts the duty cycle δ every 200 ms. The duty
cycle is the allowed ratio of the transmitter total ”on” time
relative to 1 s. [12] deﬁnes the algorithm to adapt δ depending
on the observed CBR. [14] provides some insights about the
reason behind the chosen LIMERIC parameters and proposes
a dual-α approach to improve LIMERIC’s convergence time
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

TABLE I. SUMMARY OF LIMERIC’S PARAMETERS
Parameter
Description
Values
αlow
Convergence parameter
0.016
αhigh
Convergence parameter
0.1
th
To choose between the α
0.00001
α
Convergence parameter
as in [14]
β
Convergence parameter
0.0012
CBRtarget
Convergence point
0.68
δmax
Max allowed duty cycle
0.03
δmin
Min allowed duty cycle
0.0006
δinit
Initial δ
0.0153
G+
max
Upper born used to update δ
0.0005
G−
max
Lower born used to update δ
–0.00025
TCBR
Interval for CBR value update
100 ms
Figure 3. Topology of Luxembourg in LuST.
and fairness during transition phases. We decided to use this
modiﬁcation. Table I summarizes the LIMERIC parameters
used in our simulations.
From the allowed duty cycle determined by LIMERIC, [12]
derives Tof f to enforce the rate by
Tof f = min(max(Tonpp
δ
,25ms),1s)
(1)
with Tonpp being the transmission time of the last transmitted
packet. We note that the reactive strategy considers only the
CBR and makes some simple assumptions for the packet size.
In contrast, the adaptive strategy takes into account the size of
the transmitted packet to enforce the allowed duty cycle.
V.
SIMULATION ENVIRONMENT
This section presents the used simulation framework, the
V2X services deployed and their respective message formats,
and how the vehicles are equipped in the simulations.
A. Simulation framework
For the evaluation of the CPM generation strategies, we
used the discrete-event simulator ARTERY [6] to model the
V2X communications following ETSI standards. ARTERY
relies on VANETZA, INET and OMNeT++ (v5.4.1), and
implements the V2X protocol stack based on ITS-G5 (see [6]
for details). To model the trafﬁc and mobility of the vehi-
cles, we used the microscopic road trafﬁc simulator SUMO
(v1.0.1) [15] with the popular Luxembourg scenario, a.k.a.
LuST [8]. Figure 3 shows the topology of the SUMO map
for the Luxembourg scenario (see [3] for the distribution of
vehicles). We note that the LuST scenario was validated with
real mobility data for SUMO version 0.26. Since we have used
a newer version of SUMO, the trafﬁc mobility model cannot
be regarded as formally validated but still represents a realistic
scenario.
Each simulation run is executed for a duration of 13 s with
10 s of warmup. The warmup phase gives time to LIMERIC
to converge to the desired δ for each vehicle.
For the LuST scenario, we have chosen a snapshot at 8 a.m.
This corresponds to a rush-hour with around 5,000 vehicles
in the simulated environment. Within the scenario, we se-
lected three distinct areas: urban, suburban, and highways,
respectively represented in Figure 3 by the blue, orange, and
black squares. In terms of vehicle density, the urban area
will face the highest density and the suburban the lowest.
Table II shows the vehicle dynamics depending on the area; the
dominant dynamic parameter are marked in bold. For example,
for the highway area, the dominant parameter is ∆ position,
i.e., the vehicle speed, because it triggers the generation of
a CAM ﬁrst. Following the vehicle dynamics parameters for
CAMs [2], the theoretically resulting CAM transmission rate
is presented in the last row of Table II. For the urban area,
the two parameters ∆ position and ∆ speed result in an almost
equal CAM transmission rate. Therefore, we indicated both as
dominant in Table II.
B. V2X services and CPM format
Both CA and CP services are enabled. The CA service
operates on the Control Channel (CCH) and the CP service
on the Service Channel 1 (SCH1) of the 5.9 GHz frequency
band. We consider that the vehicles can receive and send at the
same time on both channels and that there is no interference
between them. The fading model used is the one integrated
into ARTERY called VanetNakagamiFading [16].
The CAM and the CPM formats rely on [1] and [2], respec-
tively. Speciﬁcally, the CPM consists of an ITS PDU header
and several containers, including containers for management
and station data containing information about the sender such
as position, heading and velocity, 0 to 127 Sensor Information
Containers (SICs), and 0 to 127 Perceived Object Containers
(POCs). Using default values, the size of a SIC varies from 11
to 88 bytes and a POC from 20 to 46 bytes. The CPM format
is speciﬁed in ASN.1 and encoded by the Unaligned Packed
Encoding Rules in ASN.1 as speciﬁed by ETSI (see Section
6.8.3 and Annex A of [1]). We have used the ASN.1 open-
source compiler asn1c.
TABLE II. AVERAGE CHANGES OF THE VEHICLE DYNAMICS
DURING A 100 ms TIME INTERVAL IN THE LuST SCENARIO
All
Urban
Suburban
Highway
∆ position [m]
1.415
0.777
0.996
2.47
∆ speed [m/s]
0.071
0.097
0.102
0.042
∆ heading [°]
0.006
0.006
0.01
0.007
CAM frequency (Hz)
3.54
1.94
2.49
6.175
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

TABLE III. SUMMARY OF THE SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Parameter
Values
Protocol stack
ITS-G5
Frequency band
5.9 GHz
Channel number
SCH1 (176) for CP service
(IEEE numbering scheme)
CCH (180) for CA service
Channel model
VanetNakagamiFading
DCC
LIMERIC
Inclusion rules
{Etsi, No-ﬁltering}
Scenarios
LuST
PVE
{10, .., 90, 100}
Time of simulation
8 a.m.
Number of vehicles
≈ 5,000
Simulation time
13 s (incl. 10 s of warmup)
Number of repetitions
2
Vehicle sensor equipment
{60 & 174 m, +/-10 & +/-45°}
{150 m, 360°}
C. Vehicle equipment and object detection
It is assumed that with the increasing deployment of C-ITS,
the ratio of vehicles equipped with V2X technologies will grow
over time. The larger the ratio, the higher gets the generated
data load on the channel. To analyse the impact of the V2X
equipment rate on the performance of the ﬁltering approaches,
we varied the V2X equipment rate (PVE = Percentage of
Vehicles Equipped) and used the values PVE = {10 20 , ...,
100} %.
For object detection, the vehicles have local sensors
mounted on them and we used two different conﬁgurations.
In the ﬁrst one, each vehicle has two radars with respectively
a range of 60 and 174 m, and a ﬁeld of view of +/– 45 ° and
+/– 10 °, respectively. Both radars are located in front of the
vehicle and are facing ahead. In the second conﬁguration, each
vehicle is equipped with a radar with a range of 150 m, and
a FOV of 360 °. The ﬁrst conﬁguration simulates the early
development of sensor perception. The second one grossly
reproduces the future perception capabilities of vehicles.
The method to detect objects is the same as explained
in [17]. In brief, each ITS-S mounted with sensors detects
an object if one of the four corners of the object is in the line
of sight of one of the sensors. The information retrieved from
the perception is idealistic, i.e., all object attributes are always
available and no errors in object detection occur.
VI.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
The evaluation compares the performance of the conser-
vative and the greedy strategy for object inclusion in the CP
service for different values of the PVE. In the evaluation, we
also vary the area type (urban U and highway H) and the sensor
vehicle equipment (Field of view of {+/-10 & +/-45°} and
360°). For example, the simulation U-CPM-conservative (360)
corresponds to the conservative strategy for object inclusion
in the urban scenario and with a vehicle sensor conﬁguration
for an FOV of 360°. We collected different metrics to assess
distinct aspects of the CPM-conservative and CPM-greedy
inclusion rules. For readability reasons, we only include results
for the urban and highways areas, which cover most of the
interesting points to discuss.
A. Network-related metrics
The Channel Busy Ratio (CBR) gives a measure of the
channel occupancy. The Packet Error Rate (PER) is the rate
of unsuccessfully decoded messages on the number of received
ones. The higher the CBR, the larger the PER is likely to be.
Figure 4a shows the CBR on the SCH1, i.e., the CBR obtained
with the CP Service, for the urban (U) and highways (H) areas
in the LuST scenario. In general, the CBR for the urban area is
higher than for the highway one. The same applies to Figure 4b
showing the PER obtained for the same scenarios. The highest
CBR is observed with the greedy approach and a sensor with
a FoV of 360°. With this conﬁguration, the PER is around
25 % at PVE=100 %. Still, the CBR does not reach the targeted
CBR deﬁned by LIMERIC, and the channel is not saturated.
The ETSI conﬁguration does not generate sufﬁcient data for
a CBR higher than 0.3. The maximum average observed PER
obtained for ETSI is around 25 % with the CPM-greedy (360)
conﬁguration in the urban scenario.
B. Application-related metrics
Figure 5 shows the results obtained for the Number of
Objects Detected (NOD) and the Time Between Update (TBU)
metrics. The NOD metric represents how many objects a
vehicle was aware of during the last second. The TBU metric
expresses the average time between two consecutive updates
of the same object. Both CAMs and CPMs contribute to these
metrics. In the urban scenario and with the 360° sensor, the
greedy approach provides the highest number of NOD for
any PVE. Interestingly, with this conﬁguration, when the PVE
reaches 50%, the NOD does not vary signiﬁcantly anymore.
We could question the necessity to have more vehicles sending
CPMs if we can assert that CPM transmitter distribution
is uniform. Additionally, the U-CPM-conservative (360) and
the U-CPM-greedy have comparable results. The urban area
with ETSI inclusion rules has the highest TBU. However,
the updating rate is always less than if only the CA service
would be used (see Table II). The smallest TBU, around
50 ms, is obtained in the highway area, a 360° sensor, and
the greedy inclusion rules. The difference between greedy
and conservative is more important in the urban than for the
highway. This is expected since in highway scenarios, vehicles
exhibit higher dynamics than in the urban area (see Table II).
C. Ratio of Resource Used (RRU)
Figure 6 shows the average Ratio of Resources Used (RRU)
by a CPM. Following (1), the RRU is deﬁned by Tonpp/δ.
For example, if δ = 0.001 and the transmission time of a
CPM is 200µs, then the RRU taken by this CPM will be 0.2.
This means that the transmitted CPM takes 20% in a 1 s time
duration of the channel access time determined by LIMERIC.
If the RRU is lower than 0.1, DCC always allows the CP
service to generate CPMs at the maximum rate of 10 CPM/s.
Except for the U-CPM-greedy (360) conﬁguration, the RRU
is in average constant, independently of the PVE. This can
be explained by two reasons: the average size of CPM for
each conﬁguration is the same, independently of the PVE.
The second reason is the convergence time of LIMERIC when
the parameter δ increases. Indeed, even with 10 s of warmup,
corresponding to 50 updates of δ, its highest possible value
would be around 0.023 from δinit. This is not a problem as the
resulting Tof f is always shorter than 100 ms. With the dual-
alpha approach [14], δ converges faster when decreasing.
For the U-CPM-greedy (360), the δ decreases enough
to observe the RRU increasing. It means that with more
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

(a) Average Channel Busy Ratio (CBR)
(b) Average Packet Error Rate (PER)
Figure 4. Network-related metrics for different values of percentage of vehicles equipped (PVE) with V2X capabilities in the LuST scenario.
(a) Average Number of Objects Detected (NOD)
(b) Average Time Between Updates (TBU)
Figure 5. Applications-related metrics for different PVE values in the LuST scenario.
transmitting vehicles and objects to detect, LIMERIC would
only start reducing the transmission rate of the vehicles. Only
in the conﬁguration U-CPM-greedy (360), the RRU increases
with the PVE. Still, in average the RRU remains under 0.1.
Therefore, the CP service can generate 10 CPM/s.
Figure 6. Average Ratio Resource Used (RRU).
D. Discussion
Even if not all kinds of objects, such as pedestrians or
obstacles, are present in the simulations, both scenarios provide
insights about the trade-off between channel load and percep-
tion quality. In the LuST scenario, the CP service is not able to
saturate the channel even without ﬁltering and with a PVE of
100 %. Notably, the conservative inclusion rules underutilize
the channel resources, while largely available, at low PVE
and in areas with a small density of vehicles. Compared to
conservative, the greedy approach provides always a better
perception quality while not saturating the channel.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we addressed the CP service as currently
deﬁned by ETSI and presented it as a decomposed system with
message sending rules, object inclusion, and redundancy miti-
gation. For the object inclusion rules, we analysed two strate-
gies, i.e., conservative and greedy. In comparison, the greedy
strategy, which does not ﬁlter objects, provides a reduced time
between updates and a higher number of perceived objects
at the cost of higher channel usage. Still, in the considered
scenario the target CBR of LIMERIC is never reached. Also,
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

DCC does not have to reduce actively the message rate. While
both greedy and conservative approach differently consider the
trade-off between the perception quality and channel usage, at
a low percentage of equipped vehicles and in areas with a
small density of vehicles, the greedy approach allows for a
higher channel utilization and for better performance.
In our future work, we will study the improvement of the
CP service when the inclusion rules dynamically adapt to the
channel load. This approach smoothly combines the greedy
and conservative approach: When the channel load is low,
fewer objects are ﬁltered and, the quality of perception is
increased. When the channel is close to saturating, we switch
to the conservative approach and ﬁlter more objects. We will
also consider other ﬁltering approaches, such as redundancy
mitigation rules, to reach the same goal.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the German Research Founda-
tion DFG within the priority program Cooperative Interacting
Cars (CoInCar) (SPP 1835) and in part by the Swedish Knowl-
edge Foundation within SafeSmart ”Safety of Connected Intel-
ligent Vehicles in Smart Cities” Synergy Project (2019–2023).
The authors would like to thank H. G¨uenther (Volkswagen),
R. Riebl (Technical University Ingolstadt), K. Garlich and
L. Wolf (Technical University Braunschweig) for valuable
discussions.
REFERENCES
[1]
ETSI, “Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Vehicular Communications;
Basic Set of Applications; Analysis of the Collective Perception Service
(CPS); Release 2,” Dec. 2019, ETSI TR 103 562 V2.1.1.
[2]
ETSI, “Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Vehicular Communications;
Basic Set of Applications; Part 2: Speciﬁcation of Cooperative Aware-
ness Basic Service,” Apr. 2019, ETSI EN 302 637-2 v.1.4.1.
[3]
Q. Delooz and A. Festag, “Network load adaptation for collective
perception in V2X communications,” in 2019 IEEE International Con-
ference on Connected Vehicles and Expo (ICCVE), 2019, pp. 1–6.
[4]
S. K¨uhlmorgen et al., “Evaluation of congestion-enabled forwarding
with mixed data trafﬁc in vehicular communications,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 21, no. 1, 2020, pp.
233–247.
[5]
J. B. Kenney, “Dedicated Short-Range Communications (DSRC) stan-
dards in the United States,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 99, no. 7, Jul. 2011, pp.
1162–1182.
[6]
R. Riebl, H. G¨unther, C. Facchi, and L. Wolf, “Artery: Extending Veins
for VANET applications,” in 2015 International Conference on Models
and Technologies for Intelligent Transportation Systems (MT-ITS), pp.
450–456.
[7]
G. Bansal, J. B. Kenney, and C. E. Rohrs, “LIMERIC: A linear adaptive
message rate algorithm for DSRC congestion control,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 62, no. 9, Nov. 2013, pp. 4182–4197.
[8]
L. Codeca, R. Frank, S. Faye, and T. Engel, “Luxembourg SUMO trafﬁc
(LuST) scenario: Trafﬁc demand evaluation,” IEEE Intell. Transp. Syst.
Mag., vol. 9, no. 2, 2017, pp. 52–63.
[9]
G. Thandavarayan, M. Sepulcre, and J. Gozalvez, “Analysis of message
generation rules for collective perception in connected and automated
driving,” in 2019 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), 2019, pp.
134–139.
[10]
K. Garlichs, H. G¨unther, and L. C. Wolf, “Generation rules for the
collective perception service,” in 2019 IEEE Vehicular Networking
Conference (VNC), 2019, pp. 1–8.
[11]
ETSI, “Decentralized Congestion Control Mechanisms for Intelligent
Transport Systems operating in the 5 GHz range; Access layer part,”
Apr. 2018, ETSI TS 102 687 V1.2.1.
[12]
ETSI, “Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Decentralized Congestion
Control Mechanisms for Intelligent Transport Systems operating in the
5 GHz range; Access layer part,” Apr. 2018, ETSI TS 102 687 V1.2.1.
[13]
ETSI, “Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Radiocommunications
equipment operating in the 5 855 MHz to 5 925 MHz frequency band;
Harmonised Standard covering the essential requirements of article 3.2
of Directive 2014/53/EU,” Feb. 2017, ETSI EN 302 571 V2.1.1.
[14]
I. Soto, O. Amador, M. Urue˜na, and M. Calderon, “Strengths and
weaknesses of the ETSI adaptive DCC algorithm: A proposal for
improvement,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 23, no. 5, May 2019, pp.
802–805.
[15]
P. A. Lopez et al., “Microscopic trafﬁc simulation using SUMO,”
in 2018 21st International Conference on Intelligent Transportation
Systems (ITSC), 2018, pp. 2575–2582.
[16]
L. Cheng, B. E. Henty, D. D. Stancil, F. Bai, and P. Mudalige, “Mobile
vehicle-to-vehicle narrow-band channel measurement and characteri-
zation of the 5.9 GHz dedicated short range communication (DSRC)
frequency band,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 25, no. 8, Oct.
2007, pp. 1501–1516.
[17]
H. G¨unther, O. Trauer, and L. Wolf, “The potential of collective
perception in vehicular ad-hoc networks,” in 2015 14th International
Conference on ITS Telecommunications (ITST), 2015, pp. 1–5.
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

