 Robustness Against Hazard Notifications Around a Vehicle Using Seat Actuators 
Akimasa Suzuki 
 and Yoshitoshi Murata 
Department of Information Science, 
Iwate Prefectural University 
020-0693, Sugo, Japan 
suzuki_a@iwate-pu.ac.jp 
Shoma Fujimura 
Ad-Sol Nissin Corporation, 
Kawasaki-shi, 210-0804, 
Kanagawa, Japan 
oaurn85ns@outlook.jp 
Abstract—This paper examines the robustness of our proposed 
haptic notification system against the different types and layers 
used for driving seat cushions. While many car manufacturers 
provide useful side and rear collision warning systems with 
sound alarms or visual monitors, the addition of similar 
notifications can confuse a driver because they already need to 
be aware of many visual targets such as mirrors, monitors, and 
environmental sounds. Therefore, we have investigated a haptic 
notification system that uses the driver’s buttocks. The results 
show that drivers can correctly identify the directions of five 
vibrating motors, three intensity settings, and three obstacle 
types (i.e., pedestrians, vehicles, and motorcycles). In this paper, 
we investigate whether drivers can discriminate the direction, 
intensity of vibrations, and vibration patterns of the system 
through their buttocks to identify the obstacle direction, degree 
of risk, and the type of obstacle, even if the vibrations are 
attenuated by the seat cushion. The results indicate the high 
potential of the haptic sensation system to notify the driver of 
obstacles, especially those located in the blind spot. 
Keywords-Vibro-Tactile Notification; Type of Obstacle; 
Buttocks; Acoustic Haptic Actuators; Seat Cushion. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
There has been considerable research in investigating 
accident prevention systems for vehicles, particularly in 
relation to developing driving support systems that will 
transition to autonomous driving systems. However, to realize 
autonomous driving systems, we must overcome problems 
related to cyber-security measures and traffic laws (e.g., 
responsibility for accidents by autonomous cars [1]), which 
could take time. Additionally, as many people enjoy driving, 
the demand for manual driving as a hobby is unlikely to fade. 
Driving support systems will thus remain an important feature. 
Moreover, despite the high number of driving support systems 
used in Japan, many fatal vehicle accidents are caused by 
violations of safe driving practices, such as failing to keep 
eyes on the road, careless driving, and failing to make safety 
checks [2], thus highlighting the need to develop more 
techniques that support drivers.  
To develop a support system that helps drivers to avoid 
vehicle accidents, the system needs to quickly and accurately 
sense information and notify the driver so that he/she can 
make a rapid judgement. Most car manufacturers now install 
highly accurate sensor systems at the front and rear of their 
vehicles at a low cost. Support systems located at the front of 
a vehicle use vision [3] or radar [4] sensors to prevent careless 
driving and overcome a driver’s failure to make safety checks, 
while support systems located at the rear of a vehicle use 
sensors and notification systems to monitor a driver’s rear 
view and blind spot [5]. These systems use sound or visual 
images to alert drivers to potential hazards. 
Visual images can quickly notify a driver about many 
kinds of information using shapes and colors. As vision is the 
dominant human sense [6], many notifications rely on the 
driver’s vision, including the front view, mirror, tachometer, 
speedometer, navigation system, and indicators. There is a 
concern, therefore, that excessive visual information could 
affect a driver’s capacity to adhere to safe driving practices [2]. 
We thus consider that developing an additional visual 
notification may cause the driver to confuse it with 
conventional visual notifications. 
Many conventional systems also provide information to 
drivers in the form of sounds (e.g., alerts by horn; car audio, 
including radio; and alarms for reverse gear, pre-collision, and 
lane departure). Directions presented by a satellite navigation 
system are also expressed through the vehicle’s stereo system. 
To avoid confusing the driver, we considered creating 
different sounds, pitches, and patterns for each type of 
obstacle; however, these would not be intuitive. Additionally, 
notifying a driver using speech would be too slow to get 
communicate the message in time. It is also difficult to apply 
a system using sound on a late-night bus travelling long 
distances because sleeping passengers may get up by the alert. 
Therefore, we proposed a system that uses haptic 
sensations to quickly notify drivers of possible hazards or 
obstacles surrounding the vehicle [7]. Our proposed system 
has higher immediacy and directional resolution than 
notifications using sounds. As no driver notification system 
currently uses haptic sensations, we do not have to consider 
conflicts in this area. Our proposed notification system uses 
vibro-tactile haptic devices that remain in constant contact 
with the driver’s buttocks. We evaluated the system’s 
robustness against cushion type for determining the direction 
and intensity of vibrations and road conditions. A high 
intensity expresses the extent of the danger and the direction 
of the vibration indicates the location of the hazard. The 
system can also alert the driver to different types of obstacles, 
such as a pedestrian, car, or bike. The results indicated a high 
potential for notifying drivers of obstacles, especially those 
located in the blind spot. 
To support safe car driving, our proposed haptic 
notification system installing vibration alerts into a driving 
seat. This paper examines its robustness against different 
types and layers used for driving seat cushions. 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. 
Section II discusses relevant studies, Section III describes the 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

proposed system, Section IV describes the modulated 
waveforms generated for precise notification, Section V 
presents the experiments to test the robustness of the system, 
and Section VI presents our conclusions. 
II. 
RELEVANT STUDIES 
Many practical driving support systems apply image 
sensors [3], radar [4], and ultrasonic sensors [8] to detect 
pedestrians and other vehicles with high accuracy. Around-
view monitors are increasingly being used for automatic 
parking [9] and lane-detection systems are being applied using 
three-dimensional (3-D) laser imaging detection and ranging 
(LIDAR) [10]. Despite their weakness to other noise sound, 
ultrasonic sensors can now be installed in driving support 
systems for a low cost, while the cost of 3-D LIDAR is also 
dropping. These devices can be used to detect not only the 
presence of an obstacle, but also the type of obstacle (e.g., 
pedestrian, vehicle, or motorcycle). However, in this research, 
we focus on creating a notification method to alert drivers to 
the potential hazards, rather than the development of a sensor 
system. 
Previous research on evaluating seat comfort has 
demonstrated that buttocks are sensitive to tactile sensations 
[11]. Although not used in the driving seat, some studies have 
reported the effectiveness of vibro-tactile devices for 
notifying drivers of directions when using a wearable device 
such as a belt [12]. The directions of obstacles could be 
detected by using vibro-tactile devices on the seatback [13] 
because the back is more sensitive than the buttocks; however, 
as drivers need to lean against the backrest, the system might 
have a negative effect on the driver’s posture. A vehicle 
notification device using vibro-tactile devices on the buttocks 
was therefore developed [14], although the system was unable 
to indicate the direction of a hazard to the driver. 
In a gaming device, vibro-tactile devices are used to link a 
virtual object with reality [15]. Therefore, we consider 
applying a vibro-tactile device to notify the driver of essential 
information related to potential hazards based on the intensity 
and direction of vibrations. Tactile sensations can include 
rubbing, pain, pressure, and warmth. On the streets, tapping 
on the shoulder is a popular method for pedestrians to alert 
each other. To our knowledge, this study is the first to notify 
a driver of information such as the direction of a hazard in 
relation to the vehicle, the extent of the urgency based on the 
intensity of the vibration, and the type of hazard by the 
vibration pattern expressed using vibro-tactile devices located 
below the buttocks. 
III. 
VIBRO-TACTILE NOTIFICATION SYSTEM AROUND A 
VEHICLE USING SEAT ACTUATORS 
We will indicate our proposed vibro-tactile notification 
system in this section. 
A. System Architecture 
For our proposed system, we utilized a vibrating motor 
with an ACOUSTICHAPTICTM actuator developed by Foster 
Electric Company Limited. The acoustic haptic actuator is a 
kind of woofer that comes into direct contact with the driver’s 
buttocks. Fig. 1 shows the hardware layout for this system. 
The edited waves were played on a PC, and the five actuators 
vibrated on the seat, as shown in Fig. 1. These actuators 
contact with the back of the driver’s knees. We used the AP05 
amplifier produced by Fostex. 
In this experiment, we administered four vibrating patterns 
of the same intensity, representing different obstacle types, to 
fifteen participants. The participants were asked to identify the 
type of obstacle from the vibration pattern. We conducted five 
trials in a random order for each participant. The vibrations 
included the sound of footsteps from leather shoes [16], the 
sound of a V6 engine revving up [17], the sound of a bus 
driving uphill [18], an idling sound [19] as obstacle types of 
pedestrian, small and large four-wheeled vehicles, and a 
motorcycle, respectively. We hypothesized that drivers would 
intuitively recognize the type from the vibration pattern of the 
real sound. 
As shown in Fig. 1, up to three layers of urethane cushions 
were placed over the actuator to evaluate the robustness. The 
thickness of each layer is 2 cm. We also define “layer 0” to 
mean that nothing is placed over the actuators. We utilize 
three types of urethane cushion, with specifications shown in 
Table 1. We defined 20 ss, 35 s, and BZ-10 constructed by 
Toyo Quality One as soft, highly resilient, and less resilient 
cushions, respectively, as shown in Table 1. 
We generated vibration waveforms from these sound data, 
to decreasing up to 2 kHz and increasing between 55 Hz and 
110 Hz, which are resonance frequencies of the 
ACOUSTICHAPTICTM actuator. Fig. 2 shows the waveforms 
of these four vibrating patterns, i.e., (a) a pedestrian, (b) a 
 
Figure 1. Hardware layout of the notification system using an 
ACOUSTICHAPTICTM actuator. 
Wav. data
Actuator
0
1
2
3
layers
PC
5.1ch
Adaptor
FRONT
REAR
CENTER
Amp.
L
R
Amp.
L
R
Amp.
L
R
Actuator 1
Actuator 2
Actuator 3
Actuator 4
Actuator 5
Seat Cushion
TABLE I. CUSHION MATERIALS FOR EVALUATION. 
 
Soft 
Highly 
Resilient 
Less 
Resilient 
Constructor 
Toyo 
Quality 
One 
Toyo 
Quality 
One 
Toyo 
Quality 
One 
Product name 
20 ss 
35 s 
BZ-10 
Density 
(kg/m%) 
20 ± 2 
55 ± 2 
35 ± 3 
Hardness (N) 
30 ± 15 
45 ± 15 
60 ± 15 
Tensile intensity 
(kPa) 
50 ≤ 
60 ≤ 
30 ≤ 
Elongation  
(%) 
200 ≤ 
100 ≤ 
80 ≤ 
Tensile intensity 
(N/cm) 
3.0 ≤ 
2.0 ≤ 
2.0 ≤ 
Compressive 
residual strain 
(%) 
10 ≥ 
12 ≥ 
15 ≥ 
 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

motorcycle, (c) a small 4-wheel vehicle, and (d) a large 4-
wheel vehicle. The horizontal and vertical axes indicate the 
time and amplitude, respectively. A waveform of the pulse 
vibration with a walking frequency of 0.4-s intervals was used 
for the pedestrian. We applied the 55-Hz and 110-Hz 
resonance frequencies to large and small four-wheeled 
vehicles, respectively. The amplitude of the waveforms was 
normalized because we utilized the different amplitudes (i.e., 
the intensity of the vibration) to express the urgency of the 
degree of risk or the distance to the obstacles. 
B. Abilities of the Proposed Notification Systems 
 A study of our proposed conventional system proved it to 
be effective [7].  However, the vibrating motor used in our 
conventional system was unable to assign different vibration 
patterns to different obstacle types. Fig. 3 shows the correct 
answer rates for (a) the direction, (b) vibration intensity, and 
(c) both direction and intensity using the vibrating motor. 
When participants took longer than 5 s to respond, measured 
using a stopwatch, we considered it to be too slow and treated 
their answer as incorrect. In the correct answers shown in Fig. 
3, the response times of all trials indicate that drivers could 
understand the information of the surrounding obstacles in 
less than 1 s. The correct answer rates for direction, intensity, 
and both direction and intensity in all route types were 84.4%, 
72.6%, and 62.2%, respectively [7]. 
Fig. 3(a) shows that the drivers produced the highest 
number of correct answers when driving on the winding local 
road, followed by the arterials and the collector roads; 
however, as Fig. 3 (b) shows, the accuracy of the drivers’ 
responses for the intensity were in the reverse order. This 
difference is likely because the vehicle’s vibrations when 
travelling at low speeds could confuse the driver. The pressure 
between the vibrating motor and the buttocks could also 
change during the trials because the driver had to constantly 
control the accelerator and brake on the winding road. 
Nevertheless, the participants were able to determine the 
direction and intensity of over 50% of the vibrations when 
driving on the proposed seat. 
For determining obstacle types, we applied the 
ACOUSTICHAPTICTM actuator. Figs. 4 and 5 indicate the 
correct answer rates for the four types of obstacles. The graph 
also shows the rate for each trial by type. The vertical and 
horizontal axes in Figs. 4 and 5 show respectively the correct 
answer rate and vibration type of the waveforms shown in Fig. 
2. Fig. 4 presents the correct answer rates based on the 
waveforms of the four obstacles types. As Fig. 4 shows, the 
correct answer rates improved during the trial, except for those 
for the four-wheeled vehicle (small). All participants were 
able to identify the pedestrian and motorcycle vibrations; 
however, they could only identify 50% of the other types of 
vibrations because the vibration patterns were too similar for 
them to sense the differences. However, after combining the 
large and small four-wheeled vehicles, the participants could 
detect the three patterns with high accuracy. Fig. 5 shows the 
results for three obstacle types, integrating the large and small 
four-wheeled vehicles. The correct answer rate reached over 
90% at the fifth trial, as shown in Fig. 5. 
IV. 
MODULATION FOR PRECISE NOTIFICATION 
From the waveforms shown in Fig. 2, we generated 
modulated waves for precise notification. We determined the 
waves with a frequency an octave lower than the original wave 
as the modulated waves for more clearly feeling the 
differences of vibration. Figs. 6(a) and (b) show spectra of the 
original and modulated waves for large four-wheeled vehicles. 
The horizontal and vertical axes indicate the frequency and 
power spectrum, respectively. The spectra of the modulated 
waves consist of sine waves under 1 kHz. 
 
Figure 4. Correct answer rates for notification using haptic actuators. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pedestrian
Motorcycle
4-wheel
Vehicle
(Small)
4-wheel
Vehicle
(Large)
Correct Answer Rate (%)
Obstacle Type
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
 
Figure 2. Waveforms of the vibrations for the four obstacle types. 
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
               
(s)
(b)Motorcycle
(a)Pedestrian
(c)Small 4-wheel vehicle
(d)Large 4-wheel vehicle
 
Figure 3. Correct answer rates on local winding roads, arterials, and 
congested collectors. 
0.0  
10.0  
20.0  
30.0  
40.0  
50.0  
60.0  
70.0  
80.0  
90.0  
100.0  
(a) Direction 
(b) Vibration Strength 
(c) Both 
Correct Answer Rate (%)
Local Winding Road 
Arterials 
Congested Collectors 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

For the intensity expression, we utilized three intensity 
waves, as shown in Table 2, which shows three vibrating 
volumes corresponding to three steps of intensity (e.g., small, 
medium, and large). We applied 8 dB intervals between the 
three steps, and we prepared the signals with the three steps of 
volume on each modulated waveform for the three obstacle 
types: pedestrians, motorcycles, and four-wheel vehicles. 
V. 
EXPERIMENTS FOR ROBUSTNESS AGAINST CUSHION 
TYPE  
We evaluated the robustness against cushion type in a 
near-practical environment. As shown in Fig. 1, we mounted 
a vibrating car seat on a test vehicle for evaluation by five test 
drivers with considerable driving experience. The test drivers 
reported the vibration intensity, direction, and obstacle type 
when they sensed the vibration. Before the evaluation, the test 
drivers felt nine types of vibrations (i.e., three intensities for 
the three obstacle types) at each actuator, shown as Actuator 
1 to Actuator 5 in Fig. 1. The bold line in Fig. 7 indicates the 
experimental route. The actuator is vibrated at random times 
while the test drivers drive on a circuit track, shown in Fig. 7, 
at speeds of less than 20 km/s. Answers were only considered 
valid when received within 5 s of the vibration. 
A. Experimental Results 
Fig. 8 shows the average ratings for comfort of each seat 
layer and material. The vertical and horizontal axes represent 
the average comfort rating and the cushion layer and material, 
respectively. The ratings were ranked according to the 
softness and resilience (high or low) of the seat cushion up to 
several layers. The test drivers tended to evaluate the seat 
based on whether they were conscious of the actuators. 
The experimental results indicate the importance of 
retaining a high notification ability in a thick cushion even 
though a synthetic judgment is required for other evaluations, 
such as ease of driving. 
Figs. 9 to 12 show the results for robustness against 
cushion type and present the correct answer rates as relative 
values based on a correct answer rate for layer 0. The vertical 
and horizontal axes present the correct answer rate and 
cushion layer and material, respectively. Figs. 10 to 12 also 
present the standard deviations for all answers. 
Fig. 9 shows the differences between the correct answer 
rates for the intensity, direction, and obstacle types between 
 
Figure 6. Sound spectra for 4-wheeled vehicles (a) before and (b) after 
modulation. 
(a) Original Waves
Power Spectrum (dB)
Frequency(Hz)
(b)Modulated Wave (octave lower)
Frequency(Hz)
Power Spectrum(dB)
TABLE II. SOUND VOLUME CORRESPONDING TO THREE 
STEPS OF VIBRATION INTENSITY. 
 
Volume (dB) 
Small 
−16 
Medium 
−8 
Large 
0 
 
 
Figure 7. Route for the driving experiment. 
 
Figure 5 Correct answer rate for obstacle type notification on three 
obstacle types 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Pedestrian
Motorcycle
4-wheel Vehicle
Correct Answer Rate (%)
Obstacle Type
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
 
Figure 8. Comfort ratings for each seat layer and material. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
0 layers 
1 layer 
2 layers 
3 layers 
0 layers 
1 layer 
2 layers 
3 layers 
0 layers 
1 layer 
2 layers 
3 layers 
Soft 
Highly Resilient  
Less Resilient  
Average Rating  
Seat Material 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

layer 0 and the other layers. The results show that the correct 
answers for the highly resilient cushion decrease as the layers 
increase; however, the other cushion materials maintain 
robustness even with an increased cushion thickness.  
B. Intensity Expression 
Fig. 10 shows the average differences in the correct 
answer rates calculated from the answers relating to the 
intensity of the vibrations (e.g., small, medium, or large, as 
shown in Table 2). The more layers the seat cushion has, the 
more the correct answer rates decrease, except for the less 
resilient cushion. A high standard deviation is obtained for the 
results of the less resilient cushion, although the trend of the 
correct answer rates for the layers is different. Therefore, it 
cannot be said that the number of correct answers will increase 
for more layers in the less resilient cushion.  
C. Direction Expression 
Fig. 11 shows the average differences in the correct 
answer rates, which are calculated from only the answers 
relating to direction (e.g., left corresponding to Actuator 1 and 
right corresponding to Actuator 5, shown in Fig. 1). In this 
experiment, the test drivers gave the direction by stating 
“right”, “right back”, “back”, “left back”, or “left” when they 
noticed the vibration. The results shown in Fig. 11 confirm 
substantial differences between the different seat cushions. 
D. Obstacle Type Expression 
Fig. 12 shows the average differences in the correct 
answer rates calculated from the answers relating to the 
obstacle types (e.g., pedestrians, motorcycles, or four-wheeled 
vehicles, shown in Fig. 5). The more layers there are, the more 
the correct answers decrease, except for the soft cushion. In 
the case of the soft type with 0 layers, it was difficult to judge 
when the actuators made direct contact with the buttocks 
based on the features of the waveform because the soft type of 
seat sank more easily than the other types. As a result, the 
correct answer rates on the soft cushion could be increased. 
Based on the results shown in Figs. 9 to 12, the total 
correct answer rates are strongly influenced by the intensity of 
the vibrations; thus, the robustness is demonstrated without to 
the intensity steps of the vibrations. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
We examined the robustness of a vibro-tactile device by 
collaborating with a car manufacturer to install acoustic haptic 
actuators into the seat cushion of an actual automotive vehicle. 
We proposed a vibro-tactile notification system using 
vibrating motors to notify drivers of hazards around a vehicle, 
which were sensed using conventional sensors. The 
effectiveness of this method was evaluated from the viewpoint 
of resolution of intensity and direction and robustness against 
cushion type for determining the road conditions. The 
vibration pattern also enabled drivers to recognize the type of 
hazard, such as an approaching pedestrian or motorcycle. 
We conducted several experiments involving driving on 
public roads in a car with seven vibrating motors installed 
under the driver’s seat. By applying acoustic haptic actuators 
as a vibro-tactile device, test drivers could detect three types 
of vibrating patterns, indicating different types of obstacles: 
pedestrians, motorbikes, and four-wheeled vehicles. We also 
determined that drivers’ recognition of the intensity, direction, 
and hazard type could be improved over time because they 
could learn from experiencing the vibration alerts. 
The results indicated the high potential of using a haptic 
sensation device to notify drivers of obstacles in their blind 
spots by creating a vibration against the buttocks. The 
experimental results, shown in Fig. 9 to 12, illuminated that 
the intensity of the vibration, which should indicate the level 
of the hazard, could not be considered in the robustness test. 
By reconfiguring the intensity, as shown in Table 2, the 
robustness could be improved, which we will investigate in 
future work. 
The proposed system is expected to reduce accidents by 
notifying drivers of other drivers and obstacles. In future 
 
Figure 9. Correct answer rates for each seat material. 
 
 
. Correct answer rates for each seat material 
-50 
-30 
-10 
10 
30 
50 
Soft 
Highly Resilient  
Less Resilient  
Correct Answer Rate (%) 
Seat Material  
1 rayer  
2 layers 
3 layers 
 
Figure 10. Correct answer rates for intensity for each seat material. 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
-50 
-30 
-10 
10 
30 
50 
Soft 
Highly Resilient  
Less Resilient  
Standard Deviation 
Correct Answer Rate (%) 
Seat Material  
1 layer  
2 layers  
3 layers  
Standard Deviation 
 
Figure 11. Correct answer rates for direction for each seat material. 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
-50 
-30 
-10 
10 
30 
50 
Soft 
Highly Resilient  
Less Resilient  
Standard Deviation 
Correct Answer Rate (%) 
Seat Material  
1 layer  
2 layers 
3 layers 
Standard Deviation 
 
Figure 12. Correct answer rates for obstacle type for each seat material. 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
-50 
-30 
-10 
10 
30 
50 
Soft 
Highly Resilient  
Less Resilient  
Standard Deviation 
Correct Answer Rate (%) 
Seat Material  
1 layer  
2 layers 
3 layers 
Standard Deviation 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

works, we will conduct these experiments using more test 
drivers to compare elderly people with very young people or 
to observe its effectiveness with truck drivers and people with 
different levels of attention or tiredness. We will also 
evaluate the operational difficulties of the system in case of 
an emergency. We will also corroborate the visual and audio 
notifications of our system and examine the effectiveness for 
making quick driving decisions with intuitive notifications. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was supported by MEXT KAKENHI Grant 
Number JP 16723884 and Foster Electric Company, Limited. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  A. Hevelke and J. Nida-Rümelin, “Responsibility for crashes 
of autonomous vehicles: an ethical analysis,” Science and 
Engineering Ethics., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 619–630, June 2015.  
[2]  National Public Safety Commission and National Police 
Agency, “Traffic accidents situation (2017Oct.),” Dec. 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.e-
stat.go.jp/SG1/estat/GL32020101.do?method=xlsDownloa
d&fileId=000008051596&releaseCount=1 2019.06.24 
[3]  Subaru of America, Inc., Dec. 2017. [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.subaru.com/engineering/eyesight.html 
2019.06.24 
[4]  Toyota Motor Sales, U.S.A., Inc., “SUZUKI GSX-S1000 
normal idling sound motorcycle,” Dec. 2017. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.toyota.com/safety-
sense/animation/pcs 2019.06.24 
[5]  Infineon Technologies AG, Dec. 2017. [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.infineon.com/cms/en/about-
infineon/press/market-news/2009/INFATV200905-
058.html?redirId=46231 2019.06.24 
[6]  I. Rock and J. Victor, “Vision and touch: an experimentally 
created conflict between the two senses,” Science, vol. 143, 
no. 3606, pp. 594–596, Feb. 1964. 
[7]  A. Suzuki, Y. Murata, and M. Hayashi, “Notification of 
hazards around a vehicle using seat actuators,” in 25th ITS 
World Congress, Copenhagen, Denmark, 17–21 Sep. 2018. 
[8]  L. Akonso, V. Milanés, C. Torre-Ferrero, J. Goboy, J. P. 
Oria, and T. de Pedro, “Ultrasonic sensors in urban traffic 
driving-aid systems,” Sensors, vol. 11, pp. 661–673, Sep. 
2011.  
[9]  J. K. Suhr and H. G. Jung, Fully-automatic Recognition of 
Various Parking Slot Markings in Around View Monitor 
(AVM) Image Sequences, 15th International IEEE 
Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), 
Anchorage, USA, 1244-1299, Sep. 2012.  
[10]  L. Qingquan, C. Long, L. Ming, S. Shih-Lung, and N. 
Andreas, “A sensor-fusion drivable-region and lane-
detection system for autonomous vehicle navigation in 
challenging road scenarios,” IEEE Vehicular Technology 
Society, vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 540–555, Feb. 2014.  
[11]  M. Tada, S. Sekiguchi, T. Nisimatsu, and E. Toba, 
“Measurement and evaluation of sitting comfort of 
automotive seat,” in Instrumentation and Measurement 
Technology Conference, 1998. IMTC/98. Conference 
Proceedings. IEEE, St. Paul, MN, USA, USA, 1998.  
[12]  A. Cassinelli, C. Reynolds, and M. Ishikawa, “Augmenting 
spatial awareness with the haptic radar,” i10th IEEE 
International Symposium on n Wearable Computers, 
Montreux, Switzerland, 2006.  
[13]  R. W. Lindeman, Y. Yanagida, J. L. Sibert, and R. Lavine, 
“Effective vibrotactile cueing in a visual search task,” IFIP 
TC13 International Conference on Human–Computer 
Interaction (INTERACT '03:), Zurich, Switzerland, 2003.  
[14]  C. C. Ltd., “Vehicle notification device, vehicle notification 
method 
and 
notification 
signal”. 
Japan 
Patent 
WO2017090355 A1, 1 6 2017. 
[15]  Alps Electric Co., Ltd., Dec, 2017. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.alps.com/prod/info/E/HTML/Haptic/ 2019.6.24 
[16]  M.-studio. official Channel, “Recommend sound effect, 
Footstep-Leather shoes 04 On-Jin” [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A5fGVbsHOfI 
2019.06.25. 
[17]  GYANTARO, 
“Vellfire 
V6 
3.5L 
0-138km/h 
Full 
Acceleration Test (Alphard 30 series),” [Online]. Available 
from: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WI4voS7YF6Y 
2019.06.25. 
[18]  TAKAPON CHANNEL, “Saihi tourist bus JAPAN” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EsJnG-E22ss 
2019.06.25.  
[19]  ahotakuro, “SUZUKI GSX-S1000 Normal Idling Sound 
Motorbike” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c6pK2z9ANRk 
2019.06.25. 
[20]  Google, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.google.com/maps/@39.7560755,141.1615498,
13.42z 2019.06.25. 
 
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

