Driver Response to Gear Shifting System in Motion Cueing Driving Simulator  
Navid Ghasemi, Claudio Lantieri, Andrea Simone 
Valeria Vignali 
DICAM 
University of Bologna 
Bologna, Italy 
{navid.ghasemi3, claudio.lantieri2, andrea.simone, 
valeria.vignali}@unibo.it 
Hocine Imine, Roland Brémond 
PICS-L 
Université Gustave Eiffel  
Paris, France 
{hocine.imine, roland.bremond}@univ-eiffel.fr
 
 
Abstract— Researchers are using driving simulators to design 
and assess the automated driving and driver assistant systems, 
due to the safe nature of experimentation in the virtual 
environment. The motion cues and accelerations felt by the 
drivers are essential for an accurate perception of the events and 
the response of the drivers.  In this paper, the vehicle dynamic 
model and the Motion Cueing Algorithm used for the simulation 
is described in detail, then driver’s performance and subjective 
assessments was studied for the braking, chicane and overtaking 
maneuver in the 3 different gear shifting scenario. The study 
demonstrates that the presence of the motion cueing feedback in 
the driving simulation was satisfactory and gave realistic cues 
for the participants independent of the gear shifting system, 
however no significant effect was found from the driver’s 
behavior due to different gear shifting system. 
Keywords-Motion 
Cueing; 
Driving 
Simulator; 
Driver 
Behaviour; Gear Shift Response; Vestibular Cues. 
 
 INTRODUCTION  
Driving simulators provide a repeatable safe environment 
for a wide range of research and industrial applications. The 
virtual environment in the driving simulator may not be 
identical to real-world scenarios but should provide the 
necessary information for the driver to control the vehicle. 
Most of this information is provided by the visual. However, 
vestibular stimuli are also found decisive in the perception of 
distance and steering for the drivers [1][2].   
Driving task requires perceptual, cognitive, and sensory 
systems, which provide information on the traffic and road 
infrastructure. Therefore, various cueing systems in the 
driving simulator have to ensure that the participant perceives 
the correct cues and feedback for driving. Visual cues provide 
the driver with the information required to detect the road, 
obstacles, road width and markings, that enables the driver to 
guide the vehicle during the simulation and generally agreed 
upon as the primary sensory feedback. However, the driving 
experience is dominated by the sensation of the motion, 
which, by providing the correct vestibular cue, can enhance 
driver immersion in the driving simulator. This feedback 
offers essential information for vehicle guidance, collision 
avoidance and road condition [1]. The vestibular cues in 
driving simulator were found to be crucial for accurate vehicle 
speed and distance perception in the driving simulator [2]. A 
study of the motion scaling for the slalom driving task using 
the human perception limitation of self-motion perception 
found that reduced or absence of the motion cues significantly 
degrades driving performance [3]. 
Motion is the feedback from the simulated vehicle in the 
virtual environment. The motion feedback can improve driver 
engagement in the virtual environment by providing motion 
stimuli on the vehicle states for the driver, while the driver 
may feel the absence of motion that cause even motion 
sickness, due to the impaired visual and motion cues for the 
human vestibular system.  
Various types of motion platform can be used to reproduce 
the movement in driving simulation, but the reproduction of 
the real vehicle movement needs large movements, and 
therefore, Motion Cueing Algorithm is being used to control 
the movements within the platform operative limits. Motion 
Cueing Algorithm used in the simulator should be selected 
according to the motion platform architecture and the intensity 
of the required motion. For example, a classical Motion 
Cueing Algorithm is used in the 6 Degrees of Freedom (DOF) 
Renault driving simulator for motion with low frequency, but 
not including vibrations [4]. While an adaptive Motion Cueing 
Algorithm is implemented on a low-cost driving simulator 
with 2 DOF with longitudinal and seat rotation [5]. Other 
studies suggest using optimized Motion Cueing Algorithm [6] 
in order to investigate different Motion Cueing Algorithm for 
driving simulators.  Another important cueing system in the 
simulator is the proprioceptive cue that provides the driver 
with the control load and feedback on the steering wheel, 
pedals, and gear change. Investigation in the steering feedback 
showed that the proprioceptive cue from the steering, gives 
drivers information about the road and tire dynamics, which 
helps them in curve negotiation.   
The gear shifting behavior studied in the literature was 
mostly for fuel consumption, since the correct gear 
significantly influences the combustion engine speed and CO2 
emission. The gear shift operation indicates as optimal when 
the driver senses a comfortable shifting event [7]. 
In this paper, a low-cost 2DOF motion simulator is used 
to investigate the driver response. Three gear shifting scenario 
have been implemented in the  driving simulator  in order to 
investigate the effect of the gear changing strategy on users   
Driver control inputs, such as steering angle, braking pedal, 
acceleration pedal and gear changed have been observed 
during the simulation. The motion feedback of the platform 
evaluated by participants with the use of a questionnaire and 
objective measures were compared using statistical analysis. 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

The paper is organized into five sections. Section II 
describes the microsimulation modelling of the vehicle, 
followed by Section III, where the simulation scenario and the 
driving task are presented and discussed. The registered 
variables and questionnaire are reported with the statistical 
analysis in section IV, and finally, in last section, some 
conclusions and possible future applications are given.   
 
METHODOLOGY  
The methodology section describes the "Simu-Lacet" 
driving simulator model and motion cueing algorithms. 
A. Driving simulator Simu-Lacet  
The “Simulacet” driving simulator is designed with a 2 
DOF motion cueing platform to study the yaw motion vehicle 
control and simulator sickness in the virtual environment, in 
PICS-L Lab (Université Gustave-Eiffel) [8]. The choices of 
the structure and motion platform are motivated by the 
necessity to produce sufficient motion and while considering 
financial constraints to develop a low-cost driving simulator. 
The simulator is designed as a two degree of freedom in 
motion platform. The cabin consists of a real car dashboard, 
steering wheel, clutch, brake, throttle pedal, gears change 
handle, hand break, blinking handle, and a switch. The 
steering wheel feedback is added with the steering wheel. The 
cabin provides information such as vehicle speed, engine 
round per minutes (rpm), fuel indicator and other vehicle 
states on the dashboard. 
The visual image is provided to the driver in the cabin by 
the means of three fixed screens in front of the driver’s seat. 
The visual system provides 4K resolution with a capacity of 
100 Hz, with 180 degrees of horizontal and 36° of vertical 
field of view, for the participant in the simulator cabin. A rear-
view mirror and two side-view mirrors is implemented on 
each screen with a frame to isolate the screen from the front 
view. Visual rendering unit consists of three computers 
connected and broadcasts the displayed images on three 
mounted screens. The sound cue is provided by a sound 
system with four speakers 30 W (50 Hz), reproducing the 
engine noise, wind sound, rolling noise and other traffic with 
the possibility to regulate the audio cue intensity. 
The acquisition system is composed of an industrial 
input/output board with the bidirectional information 
exchange of 1000 Hz. This board is transmitting data in real-
time between the cabin and the computer in charge of the 
vehicle dynamics simulation (XPC Target). The XPC target 
PC also controls the actuators in the desired position and 
communicates the position of the vehicle to the visual 
rendering system.  The Traffic simulation PC launches the 
visual scenario according to the position of the vehicle and 
simulates the road traffic using Archisim multi-actors traffic 
simulation model [9]. 
The motion cueing platform is composed of two separate 
structure and drivers: the longitudinal rail and the rotating 
circular platform. The longitudinal upper structure can move 
linearly along the rail, which is mounted, on the rotating 
structure. A pulley-belts system is used to move the cabin with 
a brushless servo motor (SMB 80). The rotating structure 
provides yaw angle cabin rotation by using a circular platform 
in which the servomotor directly rotates the upper structure 
with wheel support in the front of the cabin. 
The vehicle model is implemented in MATLAB-
SIMULINK, which calculates the vehicle states in real-time 
using the inputs from the cabin (steering wheel, pedals) [1] 
[10]. In order to compute the engine torque, we use the 
measures on throttle pedal percentage and the engine rotation 
frequency, which is provided from an instrumented vehicle 
(Peugeot 406) , as shown in Figure 1 [11].  
TABLE I. GEAR NUMBER AND THE TRANSMISSION GAIN 
Gear 
one 
two  
three 
four 
Five 
Transmission Gain 
3.25 
1.78 
1.19  
0.87 
0.70 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Engine Torque cartography used in vehicle model 
The gear shifting system of the vehicle is implemented as 
a hybrid model that can be used with automatic or manual gear 
transmission mode. The gear number will apply a gain factor 
on the torque from the engine model as shown in Table 1. 
The calculated torque was then transmitted to the wheels. 
The angular velocity of the wheel is calculated as follows: 
𝐽௪𝜔̇ ௜ = (𝑇௜ − 𝑇௕௜) − 𝐹௜௫ ∙ 𝑅௘                       (1) 
where T୧  is traction torque from the engine, Tୠ୧  is the 
breaking Torque,  J୵ is the wheel rotation inertia, Rୣ effective 
rolling radius of the wheel, F୧୶  friction force and ω̇ ୧ is the 
wheel angular acceleration. The wheel slip coefficient was 
found using Burckhardt formula [12]: 
𝑆௅ = 𝜔௜ ∙ 𝑅௘ 𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝛼௜) − 𝑣௜
𝑣௜
   ∀ (𝑣௜௫ > 𝜔௜௫ ∙ 𝑅௘)               
𝑆ௌ = 𝜔௜ ∙ 𝑅௘ 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑎(𝛼௜)
𝑣௜
    ∀ (𝑣௜௫ > 𝜔௜௫ ∙ 𝑅௘)               
𝑆௅ = 𝑣௜ − 𝜔௜ ∙ 𝑅௘ 𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝛼௜)
𝑣௜
   ∀ (𝑣௜௫ < 𝜔௜௫ ∙ 𝑅௘)        (2) 
𝑆ௌ = 𝑡𝑎𝑛(𝛼௜)       ∀ (𝑣௜௫ < 𝜔௜௫ ∙ 𝑅௘)               
𝑆 =  ට𝑆௅
ଶ + 𝑆ௌ
ଶ                                  
with S୐ and  Sୗ are the side sleep and longitudinal wheel 
slip and  S୲୭୲ is Burckhardt friction coefficient, ω୧  is the 
wheel velocity and v୧ is the wheel contact speed. The tire 
forces shown in (3) are calculated by using Burckhardt model 
for each wheel(i):  
𝜇௜ = (𝐶ଵ ∙ (1 − 𝑒ି஼మ∙ௌ) − 𝐶ଷ ∙ 𝑆)                        (3) 
𝐹௫௜ = 𝐹௭௜ ∙ 𝜇௜ 
 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

where (C1=1.28, C2=23.99, C3=0.52) are dry asphalt 
coefficients and F୸୧ is the normal force on each wheel. 
The “single-track” model or “bicycle model” is used for 
lateral vehicle behavior [12].  The equilibrium must hold in 
lateral, longitudinal and yaw direction with the force applied 
on tires and the moment acting on the vehicle, therefore (4) 
derived from equilibrium: 
 
𝑚(𝑢̇ − 𝑣. 𝑟) = 𝐹௫௙ + 𝐹௫௥                                    
𝑚(𝑣̇ + 𝑢. 𝑟) = 𝐹௬௙ ∙ 𝑐𝑜𝑠 𝛿 + 𝐹௬௥                (4) 
𝐽௭ ∙ 𝑟̇ = 𝑙ଵ ∙ 𝐹௬௙ − 𝑙ଶ ∙ 𝐹௬௥                                   
Where 𝐹௫௙ , 𝐹௫௥  are the front wheel and rear wheel 
longitudinal force, 𝐹௬௙ and 𝐹௬௥ the front wheel and rear wheel 
lateral force, 𝑙ଵ  distance from  COG to front axle, 𝑙ଶ distance 
from COG to rear axle and m is the mass of the Peugeot 406. 
𝛼ி = 𝛿 − ൬𝑣 + 𝑟̇
𝑢
൰                                    
𝛼ோ = − ൬𝑣 − 𝑟̇
𝑢
൰                                (5) 
𝛽 = 𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑡𝑎𝑛 ቀ𝑣
𝑢ቁ                                        
where 𝛿 is the steering angle, 𝛼ி front side slip angle, 𝛼ோ 
rear side slip angle, 𝛽 body slip angle, 𝑟 ̇ is the yaw rate, v and 
u are respectively longitudinal and lateral speed. 
TABLE II.  VEHICLE MODEL PARAMETERS  
Vehicle parameters 
Value 
Unit 
                       m 
1714 
Kg 
lଵ 
0.944 
m 
lଶ 
1.756 
m 
J୸ 
3015 
Kg.m2 
The outputs of the vehicle acceleration and rotation in the 
center of gravity coordinate are used to reproduce the 
longitudinal movement and rotation of the cabin, in real-time, 
with the use of the Motion Cueing Algorithm. In Figure 2, the 
inputs of the vehicle dynamic model (pedal, gear, and Steering 
angle) from one driver during the experiment is shown and in 
Figure 3, some output of the vehicle model, such as vehicle 
speed, longitudinal acceleration, and yaw rate are represented. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Input of the vehicle dynamic model 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Output of the vehicle dynamic model 
B. Motion Cueing Algorithm (MCA) 
Motion Cueing Algorithms (MCA) reproduce the motion 
cues of the simulated vehicle from the accelerations and 
rotations. However, since the motion cueing platform has 
limitations, MCA has to filter the movements and reproduce 
some movement that gives the driver the perception of the 
movement. Therefore, during the simulation, The MCA goal 
is to: 
 
Keep the platform within the physical limitations. 
 
Reproduce movement. 
 
Return the motion platform to zero position for the 
next movement  
In Table III, the limitations of the platform and the actuators 
are shown. 
TABLE III. MOTION PLATFORM AND ACTUATOR LIMITATIONS 
In order to produce the motion cues, the classical Motion 
Cueing Algorithm is used (Figure 4).  The developed MCA 
reproduces transient components of the vehicle acceleration 
with the use of the high pass filters. The tilt rotation is not used 
due to the platform architecture. The Motion Cueing 
Algorithm takes as inputs the longitudinal acceleration, yaw 
rate rotation, and calculates the position of the actuators, 
which are responsible for reproducing yaw rotation and 
longitudinal motion of the platform.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Classical Motion Cueing Algorithm 
Motion 
cue 
Maneuver 
Limits 
Maximum 
Speed  
Maximum 
Acceleration 
Surge 
±0.3 m 
2.45 m/s 
0.41 g  
Yaw 
±23°  
29.07 °/s 
51.15  
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

𝑥௦̈ (𝑠)
𝑎௫(𝑠) =
𝑠ଷ
(𝑠ଶ + 2𝜉ଵ𝜔ଵ + 𝜔ଵ
ଶ) ∗ (𝑠 + 𝜔ଶ)            (6) 
 
The Motion Cueing Algorithm is developed for 
longitudinal and yaw motion cue with the use of two high pass 
filters (third order). The cutting frequency “ 𝜔ଵ ” in this 
algorithm controls the acceleration or yaw rate frequency to 
be filtered with damping coefficient “ζ1“, while the cutting 
frequency “𝜔ଶ” regulates the speed of the platform to return 
to the initial position, which is essential for the reproduction 
of the next motion. The parameters for the experiment are 
shown in Table IV. 
TABLE IV.  MOTION CUEING ALGORITHM PARAMETERS 
MCA 
𝝎𝟏 
𝝎𝟐 
𝝃𝟏 
Surge 
2.65 
0.2 
3 
Yaw 
0.1 
0.25 
1 
 
SIMULATION EXPERIMENT 
The experiment is carried out with 19 subjects (16 male 
and 3 female) with an average age of 32 (SD= 10). All 
participants had a valid driving license, five of them have 
experience with a car featuring an automatic gear change 
system and they had on average driving experience of 11 years 
(SD = 9) and drive 4600 km/year on average (SD= 6300). Six 
of the participants were affected at least once by motion 
sickness on car, bus, or boat. 
A.  Familiarization 
The familiarization took ten minutes for each participant. 
In the first five minutes, the subjects familiarize with the 
motion of the simulator and cabin controls. The participants 
asked to try brake and acceleration pedals and to get familiar 
with the visual, auditory, and motion cues. The subjects are 
also asked to overtake some cars in the scenario and to 
familiarize with the yaw motion. The second familiarization 
is dedicated to experiment the scenario, which lasts 5 minutes. 
B. Driving task and scenario  
In order to study the driver’s behavior and response to the 
gear shifting system, three different gear-shifting scenarios 
were implemented: 
a) Manual gear Change 
b)  Sound Assisst  Gear change 
c) Automatic Gear shift  
The manual gear change scenario was a five-gear shifting 
system, which the user had to use the clutch for changing the 
gears. The sound assisted gear shift session aimed to assist the 
driver when the wrong gear is being used based on the rpm. 
Therefore, if the driver is using low gear with rpm value more 
than 4800, a warning sound is sent to the driver, asking him to 
upshift the gear. In the automatic gear scenario, the driver does 
not need to change the gears and only use accelerator and 
braking pedal. 
The driving task was implemented in a two-lane motorway 
section, with 3.5 meters width and an emergency line. At the 
beginning of the simulation, the driver was located in the 
highway as shown in Figure 5, with a lead vehicle in front, 
located at 70 meters of distance. Vertical cones placed along 
the road at every 15 meters that prevent the driver from taking 
over the lead vehicle. Driving task includes three braking 
phases with different speeds in section A. The participants 
asked to follow the lead vehicle and brake or accelerate while 
maintaining a safe distance with the lead vehicle. 
After the third braking phase, the participants were asked 
to take over the lead vehicle in section B, by a takeover 
command that pops up on the screen. As it is shown in figure 
6, in this section, there was two ISO chicane implemented in 
the scenario with vertical cones. Before the chicane, two 
trucks with amber lights and direction sign are implemented 
in the scenario in order to guide the vehicle through the 
chicane. The participants were asked to perform the chicane 
at speed of 50 km/h. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Simulator Cabin and Visual  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Driving task and sections 
An example of the motion platform feedback for the yaw 
angle and longitudinal motion platform position is shown in 
Figure 7. The cabin reaches the minimum platform limitations 
at the end of each braking phase and returns to the zero 
position for the next maneuver. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Simulator motion platform position 
C. Driving task and visual scenario 
The participants evaluated the simulation session with 
reference to motion cueing feedback using a set of 
questionnaires. The first one asked the participants to specify 
their satisfaction level for the motion cues, during specific 
 
 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

maneuvers. Then, participants filled in a simulator sickness 
questionnaire developed by Kennedy [13], in order to 
investigate motion sickness on the participants. The 4-point 
Likert scale used for the simulator sickness questionnaire and 
the 5-point Likert scale for driving simulation session 
evaluation are shown in Table V. 
TABLE V. LIKERT SCALE   
Simulator 
Sickness 
Questionnaire 
Driving simulation evaluation 
questionnaire 
 
None: 0 
Totally Disagree: 1 
Slight: 1 
Disagree: 2 
Moderate: 2 
Undecided: 3 
Severe: 3 
Agree: 4 
- 
Totally Agree: 5 
 
RESULTS 
The results of the experiment are presented in three 
sections. The first two sections are the results of two 
questionnaires. While in the last section, simulated vehicle 
data and motion platform cues were used to compare 
participants’ gear shifting behavior. 
A.  Participants Simulation Evaluation Questionnaire 
The driving simulation evaluation questionnaires with 14 
questions and the median of the answer to the 5-point Likert 
scale are shown in Table VI. The questionnaire designed to 
evaluate the subject’s motion perception in the driving task, 
which may be subjective to the experience and expectation of 
the drivers. The answers to the session evaluation 
questionnaires shows that the participants were satisfied with 
the motions in the simulator for the automatic session, while 
for the movement on the second chicane higher speed and 
helping the control of the vehicle for the manual and assisted 
scenario most of the users were undecided. 
TABLE VI. SIMULATION EVALUATION QUESTIONNAIRE 
Questions 
session 
1 
2 
3 
1. I had a realistic driving experience 
4 
4 
4 
2. I drove as I normally would 
4 
4 
4 
3. Cabin movements were realistic 
4 
4 
4 
4. Cabin movements helped control the car 
3 
3 
4 
5. In the overtaking maneuver, the movements of the cabin 
were realistic 
4 
4 
4 
6. The movements of the cabin did not cause me any 
problem when I had to go back to the straight line after the 
chicane 
4 
4 
4 
7. The movements of the cabin in the first chicane were 
realistic 
4 
4 
4 
8. The movements of the cabin in the second chicane were 
realistic 
3 
3 
4 
9. The movements of the cabin in turning were not 
exaggerated compared to those of a real car 
4 
4 
4 
10. While accelerating, the movements were realistic 
4 
4 
4 
11. While braking, the movements were realistic 
4 
4 
4 
12. When accelerating and braking immediately, the cabin 
movements were realistic 
4 
4 
4 
13. When braking and accelerating immediately, the cabin 
movements were realistic 
4 
4 
4 
14. The movements were pleasant and not troublesome 
4 
4 
4 
B. Motion Sickness 
The registered the simulator sickness questionnaire (SSQ) 
calculated with SSQ scoring described by Kennedy [14] are 
shown in Table VII, where the sub scores for three sickness 
symptoms of Nausea(N), Oculomotor disturbances(O), 
Disorientation (D) is shown together with the Total Score 
(TS). All Sessions belongs to no symptom’s category 
regarding the median. Considering the mean, the, “Assisted” 
and “Automatic” Sessions makes negligible symptoms, 
whereas the “Manual” session illustrates more simulation 
sickness symptoms. 
TABLE VII. SIMULATOR SICKNESS QUESTIONNAIRE  
Manual 
Score 
N 
O 
D 
TS 
Mean 
9.04 
9.57 
19.8 
13.6 
Median 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Assisted 
Score 
N 
O 
D 
TS 
Mean 
5.02 
3.19 
2.93 
4.33 
Median 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Automatic 
Score 
N 
O 
D 
TS 
Mean 
2.01 
1.20 
2.20 
1.97 
Median 
0 
0 
0 
0 
C.  Vehicle dynamics and motion platform results 
The simulated vehicle data are used to investigate the 
effect of different gear change scenario for the requested 
driving task. The within-group variation analysis conducted 
by disregarding the outliers for braking, take over and chicane 
maneuver. Figure 8 shows the revolutions per minute (RPM) 
of the engine when the vehicle is entering to the chicane, 
although there is no significant difference using Wilks 
Lambda test (Table VIII). The variations of the rpm is much 
lower in automatic gear shifting system comparing to the other 
sessions. However, the Wilks’ lambda test is not showing a 
significant difference between sessions. 
TABLE VIII. MAXIMUM ENGINE RPM IN SECTION B 
Variable 
Within subjects (Wilks’ Lambda) 
DF 
e. DF 
F 
Sig. 
Max engine rpm 
2 
16 
1.698 
0.214 
Figure 8. Maximum engine RPM in section B 
The maximum deceleration in the first braking phase was 
found significantly different between the scenarios as shown 
in Table IX with the Wilks Lambda test. The results suggest 
that the maximum deceleration is different in the first braking 
 
RPM 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

phase (Fig. 9). Therefore, the participants brake harder when 
using automatic gear change in the first braking phase, but 
then user adopts to the vehicle, and therefore for the other 
braking phases the maximum deceleration is not different and 
remain in the same range. 
TABLE IX. MAX LONGITUDINAL DECELERATION IN SECTION A 
Variable 
Phase 
Within subjects (Wilks’ Lambda) 
DF 
e.DF 
F 
Sig. 
Maximum 
deceleration 
1 
2 
17 
3.870 
0.044 
2 
2 
13 
2.464 
0.124 
3 
2 
15 
1.036 
0.379 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Maximum deceleration in braking in Section A 
The maximum lateral acceleration in section B with 
chicane maneuver investigate using the within-subject Wilks’ 
Lambda test (Table 10). However, in this case, no significant 
difference observed between sessions. Figure 10 shows the 
maximum lateral acceleration and variations during the 
chicane maneuver at section B. 
TABLE X. MAXIMUM LATERAL ACCELERATION IN SECTION B 
Variable 
Within subjects (Wilks’ Lambda) 
DF 
e. DF 
F 
Sig. 
Lateral acceleration 
2 
10 
1.406 
0.29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Maximum lateral acceleration at chicane in Section B 
 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The increasing demand for driving simulation in the 
design of vehicle and driver assistant systems needs powerful 
simulators that can provide full stimuli for the drivers. This 
study aimed to investigate the motion cueing feedback in the 
driving simulator with different gear changing system. The 
developed vehicle dynamics model in MATLAB-Simulink 
described in detail together with the specifications of the 
2DOF simulator and the Motion Cueing Algorithm. 
Driving simulator experimentation with 19 participants 
was conducted in the car following/braking scenario, 
overpassing and chicane maneuver. The subjective evaluation 
of the motion feedback on participants is carried out with the 
use of the simulator evaluation questionnaire and the 
simulator sickness questionnaire. The simulator sickness 
scores showed no symptoms of sickness during the sessions, 
and the result of the session evaluation questionnaire showed 
that the motion cueing feedback was favorable by most of the 
participants and increased the immersion in the virtual 
environment.  
The investigation of the motion platform accelerations 
showed no significant difference in driver control input and 
output of the vehicle model with different gear shifting 
scenario. Only the maximum deceleration for the first braking 
phase found different by comparing three scenarios. But this 
effect did not continue over the whole simulation. From the 
results of this study, one may conclude that different gear 
change system did not significantly affect the driver’s 
behavior and the perception of the motion cueing feedback. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Lobjois, I. A. Siegler, and F. Mars, “Effects of visual roll on 
steering control and gaze behavior in a motorcycle simulator,” 
Transp. Res. Part F Traffic Psychol. Behav., vol. 38, pp. 55–
66, 2016. 
[2] A. Kemeny and F. Panerai, “Evaluating perception in driving 
simulation experiments,” Trends Cogn. Sci., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 
31–37, 2003. 
[3] A. Berthoz, W. Bles, H. H. Bülthoff, B. J. Correia Grácio,  P. 
Feenstra,  N. Filliard et al., “Motion scaling for high-
performance driving simulators,” IEEE Trans. Human-
Machine Syst., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 265–276, 2013. 
[4] G. Reymond and A. Kemeny, “Motion Cueing in the Renault 
Driving Simulator,” Veh. Syst. Dyn., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 249–
259, 2000. 
[5] L. Nehaoua, H. Arioui, S. Espié, H. Mohellebi “Motion Cueing 
Algorithms for Small Driving Simulator" , pp. 3189–3194, 
2009. 
[6] D. Cleij, J. Venrooij, P Pretto, M. Katliar, H.H. Bülthoff , D. 
Steffen et al., “Comparison between filter- and optimization-
based motion cueing algorithms for driving simulation,” 
Transp. Res. Part F Traffic Psychol. Behav., pp. pp. 53-68, 
2016. 
[7] A. Haj-Fraj and F. Pfeiffer, “Simulation of Gear Shift 
Operations in Automatic Transmission,” IFAC Proc. Vol., vol. 
31, no. 27, pp. 85–90, 1998. 
[8] F. Vienne, S. Caro, L. Désiré, J. Auberlet M, F. Rosey, and E. 
Dumont, “Driving simulator: an innovative tool to test new 
road infrastructures,” pp. 10p, 2014. 
[9] S. Espié and J. M. Auberlet, “ARCHISIM: a behavioural multi-
actors traffic simulation model for the study of a traffic system 
including ITS aspects,” Int. J. ITS Res., vol. 5, pp. 7–16, 2007. 
[10] N. Ghasemi, H. Imine, A. Simone,C. Lantieri , V. Vignali V.,K. 
Finamore, Longitudinal motion cueing effect on driver 
behaviour: a driving simulator study, Adv. Transp. Stud., pp. 
91-102, 2019. 
[11] A. Simone, M. Carpinone, C. Lantieri, and H. Imine, 
“Development and validation of a powertrain model for low-
cost driving simulators,” Adv. Transp. Stud., pp 85-100, 2017. 
[12] J. 
P. 
Pauwelussen, 
Essentials 
of vehicle 
dynamics, 
Butterworth-Heinemann, 2015.  
[13] R.S. Kennedy, J. M. Drexler, D. E. Compton, K. M. Stanney, 
D. S. Lanham, , D. L. Harm, “Configural scoring of simulator 
sickness, cybersickness and space adaptation syndrome: 
similarities and differences,” Virtual Adapt. Environ. Appl. 
Implic. Hum. Perform, pp. 247–278, 2003. 
 
m / s2 
 
m / s2 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-795-5
VEHICULAR 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

