Trust in Automation: An On-Road Study of Trust  
in Advanced Driver Assistance Systems 
 
Liza Dixon  
Hochschule Rhein-Waal  
University of Applied Sciences 
Kamp-Lintfort, Germany 
email: lizadixon@gmail.com 
William M. Megill  
Hochschule Rhein-Waal 
University of Applied Sciences 
Kleve, Germany 
email: william.megill@hochschule-
rhein-waal.de 
 
    Karsten Nebe  
Hochschule Rhein-Waal 
University of Applied Sciences 
Kamp-Lintfort, Germany 
email: karsten.nebe@hochschule-
rhein-waal.de 
 
 
Abstract—Appropriate user trust is critical in ensuring the 
acceptance and safe use of Advanced Driver Assistance Systems 
(ADAS). Despite the prevalence of ADAS on-road today, there 
is a limited understanding of how trust is affected by a user’s 
first contact with the system on-road. Ten participants without 
prior experience were introduced to a level 2 system and 
completed an on-road test drive session. Utilizing a mixed-
methods approach including the Trust in Automation (TiA) 
questionnaire, verbal trust scores, and Facial Emotion 
Recognition (FER), trust in the system was measured at key 
milestones. TiA scores increased in a majority of participants, 
and a significant shift in the factor Reliability/Competence 
(p<0.05) was observed post-drive. According to FER scores, 
participants with a gain in TiA post-drive and those with a loss 
in TiA post-drive, more frequently displayed the emotions happy 
and angry, respectively. Results indicate that trust increases 
after a user’s first experience with ADAS and further that FER 
may be predictive of user trust in automation. 
Keywords--Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS); Trust; 
Human-Machine Interaction; Autonomous Vehicles.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Foreign, emerging technologies face a proverbial struggle; 
acceptance. As a safety-critical system that creates a 
fundamental shift the role of the primary user (driver to 
passenger), Automated Driving Systems (ADS) present 
substantial challenges in user acceptance.  
The term Automated Driving System refers to vehicles that 
are conditionally, highly or fully automated (level 3, 4 or 5, 
respectively), whereas, Advanced Driver Assistance System 
(ADAS) refers specifically to level 1 (assisted) or level 2 
(partially automated) systems [1][2]. The pervasiveness of 
partial automation (level 2) in the form of Advanced Driver 
Assistance Systems (ADAS) and the dawn of conditional 
automation (level 3) in production vehicles on-road  
necessitates a robust understanding of Human-Machine 
Interaction (HMI) challenges in vehicle automation [1].  
From a road safety perspective, the incentive for 
acceptance is clear—a majority of auto accidents are due to 
human error, killing 1.35 million people each year and leaving 
up to 50 million injured or disabled, internationally [3]. In 
addition to a humanitarian concern, acceptance is also an 
economic concern for companies heavily invested in the 
research and development of vehicle autonomy [4]. Failure to 
support users in their exchange with ADAS on-road today, 
“will become increasingly costly and catastrophic [5],” as 
these systems grow in their prevalence and capabilities. 
A. Trust in Automation 
Studies have been conducted to gather insight regarding 
user sentiment towards vehicle autonomy, the results of which 
point to trust as a major factor in the acceptance of the 
technology [6]–[8]. Trust is defined by Mayer et al. [9] as an 
attitude, it is not risk-taking, "but rather it is a willingness to 
take risk.” Adjusted for the context of automated systems by 
Körber, trust is, “the attitude of a user to be willing to be 
vulnerable to the actions of an automated system based on the 
expectation that it will perform a particular action important 
to the user, irrespective of the ability to monitor or to intervene 
[10].” Trust affects reliance on automation, and in turn 
reliance aids the user in navigating the complexities of 
automated systems, especially when the context of use 
demands adaptive behavior, as is the case with ADAS [5].   
1) Closed Courses & Simulator Studies: Experiments to 
measure trust in vehicle autonomy have been carried out in 
both closed courses [11][12] and simulators [13][14]. For 
example, in an experiment with 72 participants, Gold et al. 
[13] utilized a driving simulator modeling a level 3 system to 
“investigate how the experience of automated driving will 
change trust in automation and the attitude of the driver 
towards automation.” A questionnaire was administered 
before and after a 15-20 minute driving experience. Gaze 
behavior was also recorded in an effort “to measure a change 
of trust by a change in [eye] scanning behavior.” The results 
of this study revealed that participants reported a higher level 
of trust in automation after the driving experience, however 
gaze behavior could not be established as a “valid 
measurement.”   
In an experiment using a Wizard of Oz setup (simulating 
an automated vehicle), Ekman et al. [12] explored a mixed-
methods approach for the assessment of trust during a 15 
minute drive on a closed course with 18 participants. The 
results of the study indicated that “data should not only be 
collected at the very end of a trial only but be complemented 
with data collection also during a trial, in particular in relation 
to events that may influence and contribute to a user’s overall 
experience.”  
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

2) Framework & Questionnaire: Researchers have 
developed frameworks, models and scales for the assessment 
of user trust in vehicle autonomy. Ekman et al. [11] 
constructed the Lifecycle of Trust (LCoT) framework, to 
serve as a tool for HMI design. The LCoT identifies 11 trust-
affecting 
factors 
throughout 
the 
Pre-Use 
Phase 
(Implicit/Explicit Information), Learning Phase (all activities 
from Entering the Vehicle to transitions from Manual to 
Automated Control, to Exiting the Vehicle) and Performance 
Phase (covering Continuous Usage, Change of Context & 
Incidents). Validation of LCoT factors, specifically through 
the Pre-Use and Learning Phases are an area of interest for 
this study, as it is the most current, comprehensive framework 
for understanding the development of trust in automation.  
Based on empirical research, Jian et al. [15] developed the 
“Checklist for Trust between People and Automation” a 7-
point Likert scale comprised of 12 questions designed for use 
as a general scale in any area where human-automation 
interaction occurs. Based on this, the work of Mayer et al. [9], 
Lee & See [5] and others, Körber [10] developed a refined 
model of Trust in Automation (TiA) with an accompanying 
19-item, 5-point Likert scale questionnaire covering the 
following 
factors: 
Reliability/Competence, 
Understanding/Predictability, Intention of the Developers, 
Familiarity, Propensity to Trust and Trust in Automation. The 
questionnaire features questions, such as “The system is 
capable 
of 
interpreting 
situations 
clearly,” 
(Reliability/Competence) and inverse items such as “The 
system reacts unpredictably,” (Understanding/Predictability) 
which correspond to the underlying factors. To the knowledge 
of the authors, this questionnaire has yet to be applied in a 
study of trust in partial automation on-road.  
3) Facial 
Emotion 
Recognition: 
Facial 
Emotion 
Recognition (FER) via the analysis of facial expressions is of 
growing interest to HMI researchers in the area of automated 
driving. FER is currently being used as a tool for in-vehicle 
driver state monitoring (via driver facing cameras) in order to 
improve user experience [16]. According to Lee & See [5], 
“Emotional response to technology is not only important for 
acceptance, it can also make a fundamental contribution to 
safety and performance.”  
FER consists of three main events: 1) face and facial 
component detection, 2) feature extraction, and 3) expression 
classification [17]. The facial expressions which are 
associated with the emotions happy (joy), anger, and surprise 
are thought to be the most relevant in the context of automated 
driving and are used by commercial software companies in 
their analysis [16]. Studies have confirmed that the emotions 
happy and angry are the most influential on how a car is driven 
[18]. When used as part of a mixed-method approach in post-
production, FER enables the observation of connections 
between driver emotional states, vehicle behaviors and 
reported trust in automation.  
B. Research Questions 
While closed courses and simulators provide a stable 
research environment, they are not fully aligned with the 
context of use, nor the state of the art. The release of one’s 
personal safety to the system occurs exclusively while 
engaging with partial automation in an on-road setting. Hence, 
existing research on is unable to specify how exposure to and 
experience with a level 2 system might impact user trust. In 
order to fill this gap in on-road studies, the following research 
questions were addressed in an experiment: 
 
Q1: How does a driver’s first experience with an 
Advanced Driver Assistance System on-road affect their 
level of trust in the system? 
 
Q2: What emotions do first time drivers of Advanced 
Driver Assistance Systems display and is there a 
relationship between the emotions displayed and their 
reported levels of trust in the system? 
 
Incorporating a mixed-method approach utilizing verbal 
trust scores, the Trust in Automation questionnaire [10], 
Facial Emotion Recognition, and qualitative/observational 
data, it was expected that the results of the experiment would 
indicate the following: 
 
H1: Participants will report higher levels of trust in 
ADAS after their first experiential drive with an ADAS.  
 
H2: FER analysis will reveal a relationship between a 
participant’s TiA score and their emotions displayed 
during the drive.  
 
Section 
II 
of 
this 
paper 
discusses 
participant 
demographics, the technical capabilities of the vehicle utilized 
for test drive sessions, and the experiment procedure. Results 
are reported in both Section III and Section IV, summarizing 
qualitative and qualitative findings, respectively. Section V is 
a discussion of the results, followed by Section VI which 
outlines the limitations of this study. The paper concludes with 
Section VII, which offers an outlook on future work.  
II. 
METHODS 
A total of n=10 participants were introduced to the same 
level 2 vehicle and completed one individual test drive 
session. All participants completed their test session within 
the same two-week period. The driving route was designed as 
a loop, beginning and ending at the participant’s respective 
campus. The route included driving time on the autobahn 
(including a construction zone), country roads and in urban 
settings. Each experiment session lasted 1 hour and 30 
minutes, approximately an hour of which was driving time. 
The same moderator accompanied all of the participants; 
participants were not explicitly told to activate the ADAS. A 
pilot test was conducted to refine the experiment structure and 
equipment, after which it was determined the route did not 
include enough highway time and was therefore revised.  
A. Participants 
Of the ten participants selected for this study, there were 
six females and four males. All participants were members of 
the university community. The mean age was M = 31.66 years 
(SD = 9.17, ranging from 20 to 48 years old). Six of the 
participants had been driving for over ten years while four had 
been driving for ten years or less. Educational level was split 
50/50 between the participants, half holding a master’s degree 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

or above and the other half having received vocational 
training. 
Participants were screened prior to the experiment session 
to ensure they met specific requirements for the study: holding 
a valid driver’s license, experience with automatic 
transmission, have no prior experience with the vehicle class 
(Mercedes-Benz GLC), not own or regularly operate a 
Mercedes-Benz, have no prior first-hand experience with 
ADAS, any semi-autonomous or autonomous vehicle systems 
(including for example: autopilot systems, adaptive cruise 
control or lane keeping assistants. Excluding: standard cruise 
control/speed limiters, back up cameras or blind spot 
assistants).  
1) Disclosure: Participants were informed only that they 
would be taking part in a study of Human-Machine Interaction 
in ADAS which involved an on-road test drive. The focus of 
the study being specifically about their trust in the ADAS was 
intentionally withheld from the participants. It was not 
disclosed explicitly nor by accident (e.g., titles removed from 
trust questionnaire, discussion about experiment sessions 
prohibited) in order to mitigate the Hawthorne Effect. This 
effect refers to the inclination of research participants to adjust 
their behavior and act in a way that they believe is aligned with 
the expectation of the moderator [19]. This decision was also 
made in part due to the high cognitive demands of the 
experiment [20] (driving an unknown vehicle with unfamiliar 
technology on public roadways, while under observation) and 
to obtain unbiased and natural reactions in any participant 
commentary related to the discussion of trust in the system.  
B. Vehicle 
The same Mercedes-Benz GLC-250 4Matic was driven by 
all participants. This vehicle was equipped with the Driving 
Assistance Package Plus option which includes an Advanced 
Driver Assistance System (sub-systems relevant to this study 
are listed in TABLE I. ). These features qualify the vehicle as 
a partially automated, level 2 system [1].  
TABLE I.  
SELECT DRIVER ASSISTANCE PACKAGE PLUS FEATURES.  
Feature 
Function 
Active 
Distance-Pilot 
DISTRONIC 
with Steering 
Assist and 
Stop&Go Pilot 
“Autonomous 
intelligent 
cruise 
control system” able to accelerate 
and decelerate according to traffic 
conditions. Steering interventions 
help the driver stay in lane. The 
system can follow the vehicle ahead 
even where there are no or unclear 
lane markings (<130 km/h).  
0-200 
km/h, 
driver 
activated 
 
Hands-Off 
Warning 
A haptic (steering wheel vibration) 
and graphic warning (in the multi-
function 
display, 
next 
to 
the 
speedometer), alerts the driver to 
return their hands to the wheel.  If 
this is not heeded, it is enhanced via 
an auditory warning tone.  
Active with 
DISTRONIC 
Active Lane 
Keeping-Assist 
Detects unintentional lane drift by 
monitoring road markers. Can tell if 
the vehicle veers out of lane without 
signaling, and will vibrate the 
steering wheel. Brakes individual 
wheels for correction, keeping the 
vehicle within the road markers. 
60-200 
km/h, 
(conditional) 
Feature 
Function 
Active 
PRE-SAFE® 
Brake with 
Pedestrian 
Detection 
Able to detect pedestrians ahead and 
will apply the brakes automatically. 
Up to 50 
km/h 
 
Traffic Sign 
Assist 
Identifies traffic signs and speed 
limits on the instrument display via 
camera and GPS data. 
Always 
active. 
 
Source:[21].  
The purpose of this study is not to cross-compare various 
technologies, but rather, to analyze the inherent trust in a 
particular vehicle’s systems, holding this as a constant.  
C. Procedure 
In order to ensure consistency and objectivity between the 
experiment sessions, the moderator adhered to a set procedure 
(see TABLE II. ) and script. At the start of the session, the 
moderator greeted the participant outside of the vehicle in the 
parking lot. This is when the participant was first exposed to 
the make and model of the vehicle. The participant was invited 
to enter the vehicle, where they were then interviewed 
regarding their initial impressions of the vehicle, Mercedes-
Benz, thoughts about ADAS, vehicle autonomy, and their 
expectations of the system, including their initial feelings of 
trust in the system. They were then asked to give a verbal 
rating of trust in the ADAS on a scale from 1 to 5 (1=low, 
5=high). Next, they watched an introductory video, featuring 
original content from Mercedes-Benz, edited to reflect the 
capabilities of the specific vehicle used for testing. The 
participant was informed that they were in full control of the 
vehicle at all times and responsible for obeying all traffic laws 
and posted signs. Next, the Trust in Automation questionnaire 
(modified from [10]) was administered to the participant in 
their native language (German or English, translation from 
[10]). After, they were encouraged to ask questions, to ensure 
their understanding of the system’s functions and capabilities. 
They were asked to rehearse how to activate/deactivate the 
system while the car was parked. Following the introduction, 
each participant was asked for a second time to give a verbal 
rating of trust in the ADAS. Trust in Automation, Pre-drive vs 
Post-drive.  
TABLE II.  
EXPERIMENT PROCEDURE 
Pre-Drive 
Drive 
Post-Drive 
Introduction I 
Introduction II 
Test Drive 
Closing 
1) Interview 
2) VTS #1 
1) Intro video 
2) TiA #1 
3) Interview 
4) VTS #2 
1) Planned route 
2) Think aloud 
3) FER 
1) TiA #2 
2) Interview 
3) VTS #3 
VTS = Verbal Trust Score, TiA = Körber’s Questionnaire for Trust in Automation,  
FER = Facial Emotion Recognition 
As the participants began the test drive with the route pre-
programmed into the vehicle’s GPS, the cameras were 
activated. The driver-facing camera was mounted to the 
windshield to the right of the steering wheel for later FER 
analysis. The driving scene (roadway ahead), multi-function 
display, and participant’s interaction with the system’s 
interface was were captured by a second camera mounted 
behind/next to the driver’s right shoulder.  
During the test drive, the moderator did not give any tasks 
to the participants other than to follow the route on the GPS. 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

The moderator played an observatory role, giving instruction 
only when prompted (e.g., clarifying a system limitation). 
Participants activated the system only as they felt comfortable, 
in the appropriate conditions and were encouraged to think 
aloud [5] while doing so. Participants were asked to state 
aloud whether they or the car was performing certain actions 
(steering, braking, acceleration/deceleration) throughout the 
drive and to share their thoughts on the vehicle’s behavior as 
it occurred. Top speed with ADAS active was recorded for 
each participant as well as adjustments in posture (positioning 
of hands, arms and feet on/off pedals). Immediately following 
the drive, the TiA questionnaire was administered a second 
time. Participants then completed a post-drive interview and 
gave a final verbal rating of trust in the ADAS on a scale from 
1 to 5 (1=low, 5=high), based on their experience. All 
interview audio was recorded for later reference.   
1) Data Analysis: The responses to the TiA questionnaire 
were scored following the procedure used by the System 
Usability Scale [22]. Adjusted for the number of questions, 
responses were reverse coded, added together and then 
multiplied by a factor to convert the original scores of 0-68 
to a 0-100 value, in order to better identify discrepancies in 
participant’s pre-use and post-use scores (the factor 
Familiarity was removed from analysis, as all participants 
were selected purposefully to have no prior experience with 
the technology). A Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test was used to 
examine differences in pre-drive and post-drive, reverse 
coded TiA questionnaire medians. This method was chosen 
as it is appropriate for the comparison of medians in ordinal 
data from related groups with a symmetrical distribution [23]. 
Wilcoxon was performed for all TiA factors together 
(Reliability/Competence, 
Understanding/ 
Predictability, Intention of the Developers, Propensity to 
Trust and Trust in Automation) and for each factor’s 
respective set of questions. Friedman’s Test (adjusted for 
ties) was used at to analyze shifts verbal trust scores (pre-
introduction, post-introduction and post-drive). Friedman’s 
was selected as the data is ordinal, came from a single group 
measured at three intervals, and there are no interacting 
effects between the groups [24], [25]. Statistical analysis and 
plotting of TiA and verbal trust scores was completed in 
RStudio [26] using the stats [27], agricolae [28], and ggplot2 
[29] packages.  
2) Facial Emotion Recognition: Driver facing video 
footage was processed by a convolutional neural network 
(CNN) with 3 convolutional layers and two fully connected 
layers (including the output layer). The CNN was trained for 
the facial emotion recognition of seven emotions [30], 
however a reduced set of emotions was selected for analysis: 
neutral, happy, surprise, and angry [16][20]. Classification 
performance using this set of emotions was reported 81% 
accurate by Mathworks MATLAB 2018b [31], which was 
used to run the network and output the data in text files. The 
text files were then compiled, cleaned and analyzed in 
RStudio.  
III. 
QUALITATIVE RESULTS 
Participant commentary from the interviews (pre-intro, 
post-intro, post-drive) and during the test drives was recorded. 
This Section includes excerpts from the commentary and 
participant behaviors recorded. The commentary was 
transcribed and categorized according to the TiA factors  
examined by the questionnaire [10], and additionally 
participant Driving Style and Weather.  
A. Reliability/Competence 
Toward the end of the drive, P9 said, “I think the benefits 
[of ADAS] are clear and undeniable. Every system here is 
intended to improve safety. I don't think there’s any danger 
posed by the system,” and “I was skeptical. Having seen it in 
action, having felt it under my hands…it is a good thing and I 
could recommend this kind of system to other people as well. 
I could talk positively about my experiences on the road. I 
wouldn’t be averse to having this kind of system in my own 
vehicle.” 
P4 took back control while in an autobahn construction 
zone due to discomfort with Steer Assist, stating, “It's keeping 
us in the lanes but before it was a little bit problematic. It went 
too far to the right and then it went to the left and then I 
intervened because I was not sure if it would do it itself.” 
After the drive, P4 said, “There were a couple of mistakes 
[with Steer Assist] and it was not too clear to me if it was on 
or off. I guess that's not the point of the system, that I have to 
focus more on the [system] than the road. It’s not as useful 
because I have to keep my hands at the wheel anyway.” 
During the course of the test drives the system experienced 
one malfunction, which occurred during P4’s test drive. While 
driving on a country road, the system drifted the vehicle out 
of its lane. P4 allowed the vehicle to continue drifting out of 
lane until half of the vehicle was in the lane of the oncoming 
traffic before intervening.   
B. Understanding/Predictability 
After the introduction to the ADAS, P7 stated, “I was 
curious and skeptical at the beginning but now that I know 
more about how [the systems] work and what they can do for 
me, it makes me more confident. I think I may struggle with 
using them due to a lack of experience. I can trust [assistance] 
more than a full take-over of my driving.” 
P7 expressed how unpredictable vehicle behaviors 
affected feelings of trust, “I felt that I was mostly in control of 
the system, but not when resuming my settings. I knew I was 
faster when I last used the feature, so I wanted to use it to 
accelerate. But sometimes it was much faster than I expected. 
It was alarmingly fast. I did not trust in the braking after such 
a strong acceleration.” 
1) Mental Model: Several participants made comments 
that revealed changes in their mental model of the system as 
the drive progressed.  
During the test drive, when P5 activated the system, they  
did not release their foot from the pedal until ~40 minutes in 
to the drive, which automatically caused the distance control 
system (Distance Pilot) to become passive, leading P5 to 
become confused about the system’s functionality.  
P2 said, “I see the lane is not there, so I will not trust [the 
system.]” and “It is steering but I want to make sure I keep my 
hands on the wheel because there is no lane marking right 
there.” P6 expressed, “Maybe the [steer assist] is off because 
it has to “take some information in to analyze the situation,” 
indicating their perception of the system’s functionality. P9 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

stated, "I thought maybe if I moved to the right a little bit, [the 
system] would start to see a pattern in the lanes. I was trying 
to show the car what the lane looks like. I thought maybe if 
you just adjust the position of the car within these lanes that it 
could find a pattern within it, that it could orient itself.”  
P8 mentioned a time they adjusted their mental model and 
hence behavior, “Most times I felt in control. Except for the 
two times when the car ahead [moved into the adjacent lane 
and] turned off the road. I thought the system misinterpreted 
it a bit. I anticipated it the second time, based on the first time, 
that it could happen, and my anticipation was right.”  
C. Intention of the Developers 
Participants (P1, P3, P5, P7) said that they felt “safe and 
comfortable” in the vehicle due to the brand. Several 
mentioned that they would prefer to drive a vehicle from 
another brand (P1, P8, P9). After an introduction to the 
system, P9 said, “I wouldn’t say I necessarily feel better about 
[the system]…I think the developers did their best to create a 
system that doesn't put people in harm. I have faith in them 
but there are so many variables on the road that I don't feel 
comfortable putting my full trust in the system.” 
a) Implicit Information: P9 referenced stories they have 
heard in the media: “On the news you’ll see, in the United 
States in particular, where people are very excited about 
automated driving systems, that someone runs into something 
because they are not paying attention and then ends up in a 
fatal accident. That puts me on edge about the whole thing. I 
am not exploding with excitement [to use the system].”  
D. Propensity to Trust 
In the initial interview, P1 said, “I am like a dinosaur. I 
don’t have a big trust in the system. I feel safe with things I 
can see.” After an introduction to the system, P1 expressed 
their feelings towards driving: “If I drive, I am concentrated 
on it and I like it. I would not like a car to do things for me 
that I could do myself.” P7 stated, “I am curious and also 
suspicious if it really works. I think that I can do better than 
the automatic calculations of the system. It is making me 
curious but also cautious.”  
E. Trust in Automation 
P5 expressed a desire to test this system but at each 
opportunity they intervened and took back control; in the end, 
stating, “I can’t trust the system so fast. You would have to 
put a wall out of cushions in front of me before I try that” 
(referring to the Stop&Go Pilot). After the test drive, P5 stated 
“It’s up to me how much I trust the system. If I would drive 
with such a system for a long time, I would put more trust in 
it. But now it's a very big contrast in driving for me.” 
P6 said, “I am not totally trusting but for me a [verbal trust 
score of] 4 is very high because I normally do not like these 
systems. But it is very comfortable to me now.” 
Throughout the test drive P10 was animated and 
expressive stating at the end, “It is a bit creepy for me…to 
trust a car. Normally, you trust a driver. I hate to go by 
airplane. Because you have to trust someone else. A stranger! 
But here...you have to trust a car...something with no inside, 
no feelings! It is only a system, a machine, and you have to 
trust it. The longer you drive it and the more you get familiar 
with it…you get a feeling for it and you start to trust the 
system.” 
F. Driving Style 
During the test drive, P9 reflected on the effect the ADAS 
might have on driving styles, “I could imagine the system 
really reducing reckless driving. I don't feel the need to even 
worry about passing this person. I kind of just feel comfortable 
letting the car takeover. It kind of takes the pressure off me to 
take some sort of an action. If driving manual transmission, I 
would probably be more aggressive right now.” 
P9 stated they would “feel better” if other cars around 
them were using ADAS. “There are a lot of really bad drivers. 
I would know the car is going to adjust to keep them within 
tolerance limits automatically. I would probably feel better 
about being in traffic with the person.” P10 said, “Maybe I 
would pay more attention to a car [with ADAS]. Because I 
know it is new a technology. But you can expect more of what 
a system would do than a human. A system would work or not 
work, not be in-between like humans. Maybe these are the cars 
on the road now that you think, ‘Oh that driver drives very 
correctly.’” 
1) Risk-taking: 
Shortly 
after 
expressing 
their 
apprehension at the start (“I am very nervous about what 
we’re going to do today”), P3 engaged in repeated attempts 
to test the system at high speeds while on the autobahn. P3 
intentionally drifted over lane markings several times to see 
if the Active Lane Keeping system would reorient the vehicle 
properly in the lane.  
20 minutes into drive, P8 “provoked” the system, stating, 
“Now [the system] steered, because I provoked it. I tried to go 
straighter than I should have into the turn. If you get the angle 
of the curve wrong, it’s nice that someone assists you with it.” 
When testing the Stop&Go Pilot, P7 said, “The car will 
stop? Cautiously, I am trying that. I’ve got my foot over the 
pedal. The car…the car completely stopped. It is new and 
weird. Okay, wow. Now it’s going again on its own. If I know 
this is doing the job for me, I feel comfortable in releasing my 
foot and not keeping it directly above the pedals.” P9 stated, 
“So it’s going to stop completely? That’s giving me a little bit 
of apprehension right now. That feeling, do I let it? Cause 
that’s like twenty years of driving experience inching up 
towards that bumper.” 
Several of the participants drove through or attempted to 
drive through roundabouts in urban settings while the system 
was active. P4 followed a vehicle in front through the 
roundabout and out of the second exit. P8 also followed a 
vehicle into the roundabout but intervened as the system 
accelerated once the vehicle in front exited. P6, P7, and P10 
approached the roundabout with ADAS active but intervened.  
P4 was the only participant who activated the ADAS near 
its top speed at 190 km/h.  
a) Hands Off: All participants with the exception of P5 
removed their hands from the wheel long enough to trigger 
the hands-off warning graphic and/or auditory warning tone.  
Halfway through the drive, while traveling on the 
autobahn (160 km/h), P1 crossed their arms. P1 also adjusted 
the position of their headrest at high speed, stating “See, this 
is something I would do now, because the system is on” as 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

they put both arms behind their head and adjusted the 
headrest. 
P4 stated, “You get a warning to put your hands on, but 
you don't have to do anything, it’s just going on its own 
anyway." P4 discovered a work-around for disabling the 
hands-off warning; by briefly nudging the steering wheel 
slightly from side to side they were able to cease the warnings 
temporarily. P4 continued to workaround these warnings, 
through a narrow construction zone.  
P3 told the hands-off auditory warning to “shut up” and P4 
referred to it as “annoying.” P4 received the most hands-off 
warning 
notifications 
of 
all 
participants 
(over 
45 
notifications). 
2) Risk-aversion: Participants P1, P2, P5 and P6 did not 
allow the Stop&Go Pilot to come to a full stop while all other 
participants did. P2 had the lowest top speed at 130 km/h and 
possessed the most cautious driving style. 
G. Weather 
One instance of rain occurred which lasted approximately 
15 minutes toward the end of P3’s test drive. P3 said, “I like 
the system. I trust the system. But because of the rain I have 
not such a safe feeling because I don’t know this car and I am 
driving it for the first time. It’s not like you just sit here and 
feel safe, because it’s up to all of the things that can happen 
around you.” At the end of the drive, P3 stated, “If there was 
no rain, I would give the system a [verbal trust score of] 5 
because it worked, and it did what it was supposed to do. 
Because of the rain, I didn’t feel so safe, so I will say 4.” 
IV. 
QUANTITATIVE RESULTS 
A. Verbal Trust Scores 
Participants were asked to give a verbal rating of trust in 
the vehicle’s ADAS on a scale from 1 to 5 (1=low trust, 
5=high trust) three times throughout the experiment session: 
pre-interview, post-introduction, and post-drive.  
 
Figure 1.  Comparison of median verbal trust scores for all participants at 
key intervals during the experiment, which were nearly significant at p>0.05.  
 Verbal trust scores indicated that six of the participants 
had an increase in trust after receiving an introduction to 
system (ranging from +0.25 to +1.50 compared to pre-
interview scores).  Three showed no change and one reported 
a decrease in trust (-0.50). Post-Drive, seven of the 
participants reported an increase in trust (ranging from +0.50 
to +2.50), while one reported no change and two reported a 
decrease in trust (-1.0). A non-parametric Friedman test of 
differences among repeated measures, adjusted for ties was 
conducted and rendered χ2(18)=0.07, p>0.05, which was 
nearly significant (see Figure 1).  
B. TiA Questionnaire 
The Trust in Automation questionnaire was administered 
twice during the experiment session: after participants were 
introduced to the system (pre-drive) and again after the test 
drive (post-drive). Scored results (see Section II.C.1. Data 
Analysis) from the questionnaire indicated that three 
participants had a decrease in TiA after the test drive (P1, P5, 
P4) while all other participants reported an increase of TiA 
after the test drive (see Table III). All of the participants who 
reported a decrease in trust after the drive were >30 years of 
age with ten or more years of driving experience.  
TABLE III.  
TRUST IN AUTOMATION SCORES: 
 PRE-DRIVE VS POST-DRIVE.  
Participant 
Interval 
Pre-Drive 
Post-Drive 
Change in TiA 
P9 
57.408 
82.432 
+ 25.024 
P8 
54.464 
72.128 
+ 17.664 
P10 
45.632 
61.824 
+ 16.192 
P7 
47.104 
63.296 
+ 16.192 
P2 
64.8 
75.1 
+ 10.3 
P3 
63.3 
72.1 
+ 8.8 
P6 
57.408 
61.824 
+ 4.416 
P1 
50 
47.8 
- 2.2 
P5 
75.1 
63.3 
- 11.8 
P4 
54.5 
35.3 
- 19.2 
By participant, pre-drive and post-drive. An increase in TiA occurred in all participants while a 
decrease in TiA was observed in P1, P4 and P5.  
 
In one instance, a participant’s (P1) verbal trust scores did 
not align with their self-reported TiA responses. P1 verbally 
reported a gain in trust post-drive, but in the post-drive 
questionnaire reported a loss of trust.  
Each participant’s TiA response (based on the 5-point 
Likert scale) was recoded, and a pre-drive median and post-
drive median value was given for each participant. A 
Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test performed on all participant’s 
pre-drive and post-drive medians indicated that the post-drive 
TiA median scores were not significantly higher than pre-
drive median TiA scores (Z=-0.86, p>0.05) (Figure 2, factor: 
all).  
 
Figure 2.  Trust in Automation, pre-drive (pre) & post-drive (post) 
medians. Shown overall (all) and for each factor (dev=Intention of the 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Developers, pro=Propensity to Trust, rel=Reliability/Competence, 
tru=Trust in Automation, und=Understanding/Predictability).  
The factors Reliability/Competence, Understanding/ 
Predictability, Intention of the Developers, Propensity to 
Trust, Trust in Automation were also considered individually 
for 
analysis. 
The 
post-drive 
median 
score 
for 
Reliability/Competence was found to be significantly higher 
than the pre-drive median score (Z=-2.17, p<0.05) (see Figure 
2, factor: rel). The pre-drive vs. post-drive median scores for 
the other factors were not found to be statistically significant 
at p>0.05. 
C. Facial Emotion Recognition + TiA Score 
The driver facing camera footage for each participant’s test 
drive was processed by the convolutional neural network for 
FER. A value ranging from 0 to 1.0 for each emotional state 
(where each of the four emotions, happy, angry, surprise and 
neutral share a portion of a 1.0 value) were returned every one 
tenth of a second for the entirety of the drive. The overall mean 
values for each emotion were noted separately for each 
participant. Values were then converted into a percentage, 
indicating which emotions were most dominant throughout 
each drive for each participant, respectively. Figure 3 displays 
the relationship between participant’s reported TiA scores and 
FER scores. The y-axis reflects the change in participants pre-
drive vs. post-drive TiA scores, in order from the greatest gain 
to the greatest loss in TiA. The x-axis presents the FER score 
as a percentage, indicating the dominant emotion for each 
participant’s drive. Neutral was the dominant emotion among 
all participants, however participants displayed differing 
frequencies of the emotions happy, angry and surprise. 
Participants with a gain in TiA post-drive tended to display 
happy whereas participants with a loss in TiA post-drive 
tended to display angry (see Figure 3). Note the distribution 
of angry among participants and its prevalence in those with a 
loss in TiA. 
 
Figure 3.  Participant change in TiA Score compared with FER scores 
(converted to percentage).  
According to their TiA scores, participants P9 and P8 
reported the greatest gain in trust and (with the exception of 
neutral) displayed happy as a dominant emotion. Participants 
P4 and P5 reported the greatest loss of trust and (with the 
exception of neutral) displayed angry as a dominant emotion. 
A loss of trust was observed in both P4 and P5’s verbal trust 
scores, which decreased at the same interval (both -1.0 post-
drive), while P8 and P9 reported an increase in trust at the 
same intervals (both +1.25 post-introduction and post-drive).  
P7 and P10 reported the same gain in TiA post-drive yet 
displayed different dominant emotions according to FER. A 
comparison of the verbal trust scores of P7 and P10 do not 
reveal the same changes in trust (P7 reported verbally no 
change in trust post-drive, while P10 reported +1.0 post-
drive). Additionally, P10 displayed the dominant emotions as 
those drivers which had the greatest loss in trust (P4 & P5).  
Relative to the other drivers in this study, P4 possessed the 
most aggressive driving style (e.g., speed, triggering of hands 
off warning graphic/tone). A contrast to P5, who was the most 
reluctant to give over control to the system and did not take 
their hands-off the wheel. However, both P4 and P5’s TiA 
scores revealed the greatest loss of in trust in automation post-
drive. This loss of trust is also reflected in their verbal trust 
scores, as they were the only participants to verbally report a 
decrease in trust post-drive. Further, P4 and P5’s both 
displayed angry as a dominate emotion. 
V. 
DISCUSSION  
Nesting automation in safety-critical systems requires 
careful consideration from an HMI perspective. In order to 
determine what affect a user’s first contact with an ADAS has 
on their level of trust in the system, an on-road experiment 
with ten participants with no prior experience with ADAS was 
conducted. The use of the Trust in Automation questionnaire 
[14], verbal trust scores, Facial Emotion Recognition, and 
interviews/observational data, enabled a mixed method 
analysis of each user’s experience. It was hypothesized that 
participants would report higher levels of trust in ADAS after 
their first experiential drive, and that FER results would reveal 
a relationship between a participant’s TiA score and the 
emotions displayed (happy, angry, surprised) during the 
drive.  
The scored results of the TiA questionnaire revealed that, 
trust in automation increased after the test drive in a majority 
of the participants. A comparison of pre- vs. post-drive 
median TiA scores however, did not reveal a statistically 
significant difference in trust in automation (p>0.05).  
The significant rise in factor Reliability/Competence 
(p<0.05, Figure 2) after the drive indicates that based on their 
experience driving with the ADAS, participants believe that 
the system performed in a way that reliably assisted them in 
achieving their goals [5]. Additionally, participants made 
comments corresponding to the underlying factors of trust in 
automation, for example, P1 referred to themself as a 
“dinosaur” regarding their approach to technology, which 
may be interpreted as an indicator of their Propensity to Trust. 
Reviewing P1’s median TiA score for the factor Propensity to 
Trust reveals a low score (pre-drive: 3, post-drive: 2). P9 
mentioned their, “faith in the developers” during the 
experiment session. P9’s median TiA score for the factor 
Intention of the Developers was high (pre-drive: 5, post-drive: 
5).  
Perhaps inherent trust in the established Mercedes brand 
had an effect on the initial scores, but it is not clear what effect 
it might have had on the scores post-drive. As noted, a system 
malfunction occurred during the later part of P4’s test drive. 
One can assume that this was weighed as a factor in their 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

reported feelings of trust in the system. Additionally, it is 
plausible that the Hawthorne Effect [19] may have occurred in 
the instance where a participant (P1) reported a increase in 
trust verbally post-drive, but a decrease in trust on the 
questionnaire post-drive.  
Participants with a gain in Trust in Automation post-drive 
tended to display happy more frequently in their FER score 
while those with a loss in TiA post-drive tended to display 
angry more frequently (Figure 3). This finding is of interest, 
as self-reported feelings of trust in automation and emotional 
states appear to follow a similar pattern. This gives validity to 
the combination of TiA, verbal trust score and FER data, 
suggesting that this approach may be able to identify a specific 
persona, who may be less trusting and therefore less accepting 
of ADAS. However, due to some discrepancies (see Section 
IV.C.), additional research is needed to determine if a 
relationship between trust in automation and emotions 
captured via FER can be replicated. 
The driving behaviors of the participants demonstrated a 
willingness to take risks with the system, for example: using 
Stop&Go Pilot, hands-off events, and attempting to use the 
system in complex scenarios such as construction zones, 
roundabouts, and urban settings. This is aligned with the 
definition of trust by Mayer et al. [9]. Based on the results of 
this study however, displaying a willingness to take risks with 
the system alone is not a reliable indicator of trust as the 
participant who took the most risks with the system (P4) 
reported the greatest loss of trust post-drive.  
Referring back to the LCoT framework by Ekman et al. 
[11], the Learning Phase events, Control Transition 1, 
Automated Mode and Control Transition 2 (handover 
scenarios) do not list Mental Model as a trust-affecting factor. 
This is contradicted by the observations in this study. For 
example, during the test drive, while thinking aloud, 
participants stated their beliefs about how the system would 
behave prior to engaging in Control Transition 1. While in 
Automated Mode participants stated their expectations of the 
system’s behavior. When the system behaved in way that was 
not aligned with their expectations, participants engaged in 
Control Transition 2. Participants then stated why they took 
back control, and based on their learning from the scenario, 
adjusted their mental model to adapt their future interaction 
with the system (see Section B.1). Participants who more 
easily developed an accurate mental model aligned with the 
functionality of the system handed control over to the system 
more easily whereas those whose mental model was not well 
aligned with the system had a difficult time handing over 
control to the vehicle. For example, P5 was reluctant to release 
their foot from the accelerator for an extended period of time, 
indicating they possessed a poor mental model of the system’s 
functionality. After several Transitions, P5 made adjustments 
to their mental model and their interaction became more fluid. 
In contrast to P9, who gained an understanding of the system 
functionality quickly, expressed a desire to work with the 
system by showing “the car what the lane(s) looks like.” P9’s 
accurate model of the system (that the vehicle is tracking the 
lane markings) allowed for them to place more trust in the 
system. This suggests that during the Learning Phase, both 
Automated Mode and Control Transition events are impacted 
by the trust-affecting factor Mental Model.  
This study confirms Ekman et al.’s [12] conclusion that a 
mixed methods approach is required to understand trust in 
automation. Results also suggest that the finding by Gold et 
al.’s [13] simulator study (“driving experience increased self-
reported trust in automation”) does in fact carry over to the 
on-road context of use. A method for correlating FER data and 
TiA scores is presented which may be explored in future 
studies.  
VI. 
LIMITATIONS 
Studies in simulators and on closed courses allow for 
significant control over research conditions, whereas studies 
on public roads leave much open to chance. Each participant 
was exposed to a variety of different scenarios at varying 
frequencies and intervals throughout the drive, with 
unplanned events such as rain or a system malfunction 
occurring simply by chance. While this study provides insight 
into the development of trust in ADAS on-road, one should be 
cautious in generalizing the results of this study, 
understanding that the it is specific to the design of Mercedes-
Benz ADAS.  
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
An enhanced understanding of the exchange between the 
user and the system on-road and the resulting effects on trust, 
will aid in the design of safer, more efficient automated 
systems. Further analysis of driver emotional response and/or 
behavioral cues in correlation with specific driving events and 
vehicle behaviors (i.e., hands-off, overtaking a vehicle) are of 
interest due to the relationship between emotion and TiA 
scores observed in this study. FER accuracy could also be 
improved by means of data augmentation or by training the 
network on a more robust dataset. Analysis with an emotion 
recognition method specifically for driver speech may also be 
insightful, especially with the movement towards voice user 
interfaces in-vehicle. The finding that all participants who 
reported a decrease in trust after the drive came from a similar 
demographic (>30 years of age, ten or more years of driving 
experience) warrants further investigation.  
The findings presented here support future research of 
trust in semi-autonomous vehicles and other applications of 
human-automation interaction. More research is needed to 
improve the understanding of the development of trust in 
automation, in order to aid the user in their acceptance of this 
safety-critical technology. Tackling issues of trust in ADAS 
today lays the groundwork for the acceptance of higher levels 
of autonomy in the future, eventually leading to fewer deaths, 
less injury, disability and a safer more enjoyable on-road 
experience for all.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Thank you to Herbrand Mercedes-Benz and Mr. Sven 
Ingenpaß for the generous loan of the vehicle for this project. 
To the administration and staff of Hochschule Rhein-Waal 
University of Applied Sciences for their support and to the 
university staff who participated in this study, thank you. 
Special thanks to Dr. Claudio Abels for assisting with 
logistics, Dr. André Frank Krause for his assistance on the 
CNN for FER, Ms. Sabine Lauderbach for her knowledge of 
statistics, and to Mr. Mario Laugks and Ms. Hale Kadak for 
their attention to detail. 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

REFERENCES 
[1] 
Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) International, 
“Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms Related to Driving 
Automation Systems for On-Road Motor Vehicles: 
J3016_201806,” 2018. 
[2] 
NHTSA, 
“National 
Highway 
Traffic 
Safety 
Administration 
Preliminary 
Statement 
of 
Policy 
Concerning Automated Vehicles,” Natl. Highw. Traffic 
Saf. Adm., p. 14, 2013. 
[3] 
World Health Organization, “Global status report on road 
safety 2018,” World Health Organization, 2019. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/road_saf
ety_status/2018/en/. [retrieved: May, 2019]. 
[4] 
C. Kerry and J. Karsten, “Gauging investment in self-
driving cars,” The Brookings Institution, 2017. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.brookings.edu/research/gauging-
investment-in-self-driving-cars/. [retrieved: May, 2019]. 
[5] 
J. Lee and K. See, “Trust in Automation: Designing for 
Appropriate Reliance,” Hum. Factors J. Hum. Factors 
Ergon. Soc., vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 50–80, 2004. 
[6] 
N. Hutchins and L. Hook, “Technology Acceptance Model 
for Safety Critical Autonomous Transportation Systems,” 
2017 IEEE/AIAA 36th Digit. Avion. Syst. Conf., pp. 1–5, 
2017. 
[7] 
C. Rödel, S. Stadler, A. Meschtscherjakov, and M. 
Tscheligi, “Towards Autonomous Cars: The Effect of 
Autonomy Levels on Acceptance and User Experience,” 
Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Automot. User Interfaces Interact. Veh. 
Appl., pp. 1–8, 2014. 
[8] 
M. Nees, “Acceptance of Self-driving Cars: An 
Examination of Idealized versus Realistic Portrayals with a 
Self- driving Car Acceptance Scale,” Proceedings Human 
Factors Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, vol. 60, no. 
1, pp. 1449–1453, 2016. doi: 10.1177/1541931213601332. 
[9] 
R. Mayer, J. Davis, and D. Schoorman, “An Integrative 
Model of Organizational Trust,” 1995. The Academy of 
Management Review, Vol. 20, No. 3 (Jul., 1995), pp. 709-
734.  
[10] 
M. Körber, “Theoretical considerations and development 
of a questionnaire to measure trust in automation,” in 20th 
Triennial Congress of the IEA, 2018.  
[11] 
F. Ekman, M. Johansson, and J. Sochor, “Creating 
Appropriate Trust for Autonomous Vehicle Systems: A 
Framework for Human-Machine Interaction Design,” 95th 
Annu. Meet. Transp. Res. Board, pp. 1–7, 2017. 
[12] 
F. Ekman and M. Johansson, “Understanding Trust in an 
AV-context : A Mixed Method Approach,” Proc. 6th 
Humanist Conf., no. June, pp. 13–14, 2018. 
[13] 
C. Gold, M. Körber, C. Hohenberger, D. Lechner, and K. 
Bengler, “Trust in Automation – Before and After the 
Experience of Take-over Scenarios in a Highly Automated 
Vehicle,” Procedia Manuf., vol. 3, no. November, pp. 
3025–3032, 2015. 
[14] 
M. Körber, E. Baseler, and K. Bengler, “Introduction 
matters: Manipulating trust in automation and reliance in 
automated driving,” Appl. Ergon., vol. 66, no. January, pp. 
18–31, 2018. 
[15] 
J. Jian, A. Bisantz, and C. Drury, “Foundations for an 
Empirically Determined Scale of Trust in Automated 
Systems,” Int. J. Cogn. Found. an Empirically Determ. 
Scale Trust Autom. Syst., no. January 2015, pp. 37–41, 
2000. 
[16] 
Affectiva Inc., “Affectiva Automotive AI: Metrics in 
Affectiva Automotive AI,” 2018. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.affectiva.com/product/affectiva-automotive-
ai/. [retrieved: May, 2019]. 
[17] 
B. Ko, “A Brief Review of Facial Emotion Recognition 
Based on Visual Information,” Sensors, vol. 18, no. 2, p. 
401, 2018. 
[18] 
T.-K. Tews, M. Oehl, F. W. Siebert, R. Höger, and H. 
Faasch, “Emotional Human-Machine Interaction: Cues 
from Facial Expressions,” Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 
2011, pp. 641–650. 
[19] 
L. Bortolotti and M. Mameli, “Decpetion in Psychology: 
Moral Costs and Benefits of Unsought Self-Knowledge,” 
Account. Res., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 1–20, 2006. 
[20] 
F. Eyben et al., “Emotion on the Road—Necessity, 
Acceptance, and Feasibility of Affective Computing in the 
Car,” Adv. Human-Computer Interact., pp. 1–17, Jul. 2010. 
[21] 
Daimler AG, “Active safety: Intelligent Drive: Assistance 
in all driving situations,” Daimler Global Media Site, 2019. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://media.daimler.com/marsMediaSite/en/instance/ko/
Active-safety-Intelligent-Drive-Assistance-in-all-driving-
situations.xhtml?oid=10001778. [retrieved: May, 2019]. 
[22] 
J. Brooke, “SUS - A quick and dirty usability scale,” 
Usability Eval. Ind., vol. 189, no. 194, pp. 4–7, 1996. 
[23] 
Lund Research Ltd, “Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test in SPSS 
Statistics,” Laerd Statistics, 2018. [Online]. Available: 
https://statistics.laerd.com/spss-tutorials/wilcoxon-signed-
rank-test-using-spss-statistics.php. [retrieved: May, 2019]. 
[24] 
M. Berenson, D. Levine, and T. Krehbiel, Basic Business 
Statistics: Concepts and Applications, New Jersey. Upper 
Saddle River: Prentice Hall, 2012. 
[25] 
Statistics How To, “Friedman’s Test / Two Way Analysis 
of Variance by Ranks,” Statistics How To, 2014. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.statisticshowto.com/friedmans-
test/. [retrieved: May, 2019]. 
[26] 
RStudio, “RStudio: Integrated development environment 
for R.” Boston, MA, 2018. 
[27] 
R Core Team, “R: A language and environment for 
statistical computing.” R Foundation for Statistical 
Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2018. 
[28] 
Felipe de Mendiburu, “agricolae: Statistical Procedures for 
Agricultural Research.” R package version 1.2-8 , 2017. 
[29] 
H. Wickham, “ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data 
Analysis.” Springer-Verlag, New York, 2016. ISBN: 978-
0-387-98141-3.  
[30] 
I. J. Goodfellow et al., “Challenges in Representation 
Learning: A report on three machine learning contests.” 
[31] 
MathWorks Inc., “MATLAB.” 2018.  
 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

