Embedded Network Combining 
CAN, ZigBee and DC-PLC for Motorhome 
 
Fabienne Nouvel 
IETR/INSA 
Rennes, France 
e-mail : fabienne.nouvel@insa-rennes.fr 
 
Hussein Kdouh 
IETR/INSA 
Rennes, France 
e-mail: hussein.kdouh@insa-rennes.fr 
 
 
 
Abstract— Today, the number of motorhomes increases in 
Europe and North America as they offer greater individual 
freedom. As motorhome users spend the most of their time in 
their confined area, it seems essential to develop new solutions 
that make their life easier. In order to meet the new needs of 
customers, a new centralized architecture of a control system 
based on ubiquitous wired and wireless solutions is studied in this 
paper. The objective of this study is to verify the feasibility of 
ubiquitous technologies in this original environment. Different 
measurements have been conducted on a motorhome using 
Controller Area Networks (CAN), ZigBee and direct current 
power line communications (DC-PLC). Results have shown that 
these technologies may be used in a future hybrid control system 
in a motorhome.  
Keywords— Motorhome; Controller Area Networks; CAN; 
ZigBee; Power Line Communications; 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
Recent results of motorhomes sales confirm the 
enthusiasm of people for this type of vehicles, especially in 
Europe and North America [1]. Motorhomes perfectly meet 
the needs of freedom, mobility and the wishes of autonomy 
that users seek. Otherwise, they may be an economic solution 
with respect to expensive hotel and trains reservation rates in 
touristic areas. 
Motorhomes are similar to homes as they include a 
kitchen, a bathroom, sleeping facilities and a dining room. 
One can found several amendies such as refrigerator, gas 
cylinder, boiler, air-conditioner, folding step, and water (fresh, 
gray and black) tanks.  Furthermore, similar electric 
installations can be found. Electrical equipments may be 
powered by different energy sources available in the 
motorhome, such as main and auxiliary house batteries, engine 
battery, solar cells and / or external alternative (AC) 230 V 
available in the camping areas.  
Although today’s motorhomes have a broad array of 
choices to be connected to Internet, motorhomes do not use 
communication network to interconnect the equipments in the 
home area. 
Camper van can be either considered as a vehicle or as a 
mobile home. If it considered as a vehicle, electronic units are 
nowadays connected by networks. Many standards are 
available, the most widespread are control area network 
(CAN), local interconnect network (LIN) and Flexray [2]. 
These networks reduce the number of wires while achieving 
low to medium data rates and better reliability. However, these 
buses are placed in the motor area and mainly used for driving 
and automotive controls. Furthermore, they must be separated 
from the possible camper van “home network”, due to security 
levels. 
If we consider it as a "mobile home", many technologies 
have been developed to make the home smart. The 
technologies include solution for building automation as well 
as the domestic control activities [3]. Furthermore, devices 
may allow remote access. 
It seems to be interesting to combine networks used for 
control driving with solutions used for domestic tasks. 
Actually, all the amenities in camper van are manually 
controlled by the users or via separated control systems. Some 
control systems are proposed by manufacturers but these 
solutions are proprietary solutions and not easy to modified. In 
this paper, we propose to replace separated non connected 
control systems in a camping-car by a centralized control 
system. Another objective is to replace point to point 
connection using a specific wire by a communication network 
that will reduce the weight and number of cables. Proposed 
new architecture may be based on both on wired and wireless 
communications technologies that connect a central unit to the 
different amenities in the motorhome.  
Among the possible solutions, CAN seems to be attractive 
as it is widely used both in automotive [4] and in a variety of 
industries including building, automation and manufacturing. 
Moreover, CAN has been already used to connect home 
appliances for smart home applications [5] [6]. 
We have also to consider the wireless solution in order to 
offer easy plug and play applications while achieving low 
cost. Among the technologies, ZigBee, an IEEE 802.15.4 
standard-based solution defined by the ZigBee Alliance [7], 
was developed specifically to support sensing, monitoring and 
control applications. The ZigBee solution offers significant 
benefits, such as low power, robust communication and a self-
healing mesh network. Common applications supported by 
ZigBee include: personal monitoring, security, access control 
and safety monitoring, home, building and industrial 
automation [7].  
As many devices in the motorhome are powered by AC or 
DC power, another solution to consider reducing the number 
of cables is power line communication (PLC). There is a 
growing in interest for PLC, including smart grids, home 
networking and control, as well as automotive uses [8]. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-434-3
VEHICULAR 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Hence, the proposed PLC technologies have been studied 
in cars and indoor environments, but they have not been tested 
in motorhome environment. Therefore, we will present in this 
paper the results obtained from different measurements in 
order to study the feasibility of these three technologies in 
motorhomes.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 describes the functionalities and the architecture of 
the proposed control system. Section 3 deals with the CAN-
based part of the system, including signals and messages 
definitions, network dimensioning and simulation and 
measurement results. Section 4 focuses on ZigBee tests 
conducted in the motorhome and presents the obtained results. 
Section 5 presents the results of PLC measurements and 
results. Finally, a conclusion is drawn in Section 6. 
II. SYSTEM FUNCTIONALITIES AND ARCHITECTURE 
The considered embedded control system must carry out 
several functionalities. We can cite according to the priority: 
 
Measuring capacity, voltage and current of available 
energy sources (main and auxiliary batteries, solar 
cells) and switching between available energy sources 
 
Measuring the energy consumption of appliances 
(refrigerator, TV, pumps, lights) 
 
Measuring weather data 
 
Generating alarm when detecting an intrusion 
 
Turning on/off and controlling brightness of lights 
 
Exchanging with the environment through internet.  
We aim to develop a user-friendly control system that can 
accomplish these functionalities and possible supplementary 
ones. The system must provide high quality of service in terms 
of reliability, robustness, delays, and at the same time ensure 
the convenience and comfort of motorhome users.  
To ensure the passengers’ convenience and comfort, a 
unique user interface based on embedded OS (Linux, Android) 
will then replace the different interfaces used currently for 
motorhome appliances. Passengers will simply send orders or 
receive measurements to or from appliances by touching a 
user-friendly screen.  
The 
second 
objective 
is 
ensuring 
reliable 
data 
communication between the central control unit and 
equipments. Different communication technologies exist in the 
market for this kind of applications. We have to select the best 
adapted solutions to our environment and applications.  
The above mentioned functionalities may be categorized 
into three main categories: high level security, low level 
security and infotainment functionalities. The first two 
categories do not need high data rates but they must be secure, 
the frames are mainly orders or sensor measurements. 
However, infotainment functionalities, multimedia data, video 
surveillance or internet, necessitate high data rates. 
Therefore, 
we 
propose 
to 
combine 
different 
communication technologies with respect to considered 
functionalities. High level security functionalities will be 
accomplished using sensor and actuators connected to 
corresponding equipments and exchanging via a CAN bus to a 
central control unit. Low level security functionalities such as 
measuring weather data and controlling lights will be 
accomplished by ZigBee nodes. High data rates functionalities 
will be finally exchanged using PLCs without using additional 
wires. Figure 1 shows the general architecture of proposed 
control system and communication technologies used with 
respect to functionalities. 
In order to verify the feasibility of these technologies, we 
have conducted several measurements in a motorhome 
provided by the motorhome manufacturer Autostar. The 
motorhome comprises two main parts. The sleeping 
compartment contains a fixed bed, a shower cubicle and a 
wardrobe. The living compartment includes a kitchenette area 
with a refrigerator, grill and sink. Below the floor of the 
camper, we can find other amenities such as water tanks and 
pump, gas cylinders, batteries and boiler. Following sections 
will describe the performed experiments and present the 
obtained results. We will begin with CAN measurements. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Architecture of the proposed control system based on CAN bus, ZigBee and PLC networks
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-434-3
VEHICULAR 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

III. CAN MEASUREMENTS 
Most of system functionalities will be performed via the 
CAN bus, like monitoring water tanks, switching between 
energy sources, controlling air-conditioner and ventilator, etc. 
Several CAN nodes (each one connected to one or more 
equipment) will communicate to the central node in the 
camping car. The user interface will help the user to send 
orders and analyze measurements sent by sensors given by the 
other CAN nodes. 
A. CAN Overview 
CAN 2.0A/B is a network protocol developed for 
connecting the sensors, actuators, and controllers in a vehicle. 
CAN supports data rates from 5 kbps up to 1 Mbps, which 
allow the CAN network to be used to share status information 
and is available for real-time control. The medium access 
control (MAC) level uses the carrier sense multiple 
access/collision detection (CSMA/CD) protocol to access the 
network, using the field “Identifier” of the frame. 
CAN allows multiple devices (referred to as “CAN 
nodes”) to connect to each other on a single bus. CAN nodes 
do not have strict master/slave roles. Instead, each CAN node 
may operate as a transmitter or receiver at any time. In 
reception, each node decides if the data is relevant by looking 
at the message frame's “Identifier”, which describes the 
content of the message. 
B. System Design 
The CAN bus functionalities are accomplished by sensors 
or actuators connected to corresponding equipments. A sensor 
(actuator) will send (receive) a digital signal to (from) the 
central CAN node via the CAN bus.  
The first step in the network design was the definition of 
signals that will be exchanged through CAN messages and the 
identifiers between the central node and the appliances. A 
database of about 100 signals has been defined for the system.  
The second step was the definition of CAN messages and 
the assignment of digital signals. One or several signals have 
been assigned to each CAN message. A total of 35 CAN 
messages/identifiers have been finally defined for the whole 
network. These messages can be categorized into four 
different categories: 
 
Order messages are generated by the central node and 
contain an order sent to one or several actuators, such 
as opening or closing a gas cylinder. This type of 
message may be generated manually by the user when 
touching the screen, or automatically by the central 
node for security reasons, such as ordering the closure 
gas cylinders and folding the step when the motorhome 
starts moving. 
 
Alert messages are automatically generated by CAN 
nodes to warn the central node about a special event, 
such as intrusion detections. 
 
Sensing messages are periodically generated by CAN 
nodes and contain sensor measurements such as water 
tank levels, batteries voltages, and others.   
 
Life sign messages are periodically generated by CAN 
nodes to ensure their connectivity to the bus. When a 
CAN node sends a life sign message, it waits for an 
acknowledgment from the central node. In absence of 
this acknowledgment, it repeats the transmission of the 
life sign message for a user-predefined maximum 
number of trials. If no acknowledgment is received, a 
CAN node will be considered disconnected from the 
bus and must stop sending its alert and sensing 
messages. However, receiving any type of message 
(acknowledgment or order message) from the central 
node will reactivate the CAN node. 
As the identifier of a CAN message determines its priority 
on the bus, we have assigned to each message an identifier 
based on its priority in the application. Lowest identifiers 
(highest priority) have been assigned to order messages. The 
second, third, and fourth levels of priority have been assigned 
to alert messages, sensing messages and life sign messages 
respectively. 
The third step is the network dimensioning, i.e., the 
estimation of number of CAN nodes in the network. In order 
to minimize the number of CAN nodes in the network, we 
have connected equipments that are nearly placed in the 
motorhome, to the same CAN node. For example, Gas 
cylinders and water tanks have been connected to one CAN 
node. 
C. CAN Bus Simulation 
To study the performance of our CAN architecture, we 
have used the development and testing software tool CANoe 
from Vector GmbH. CANoe is a versatile tool for the 
development, testing and analysis of entire Electronic Control 
Unit (ECU) networks as well as individual ECUs. It supports 
network designers, development and test engineers at 
equipment manufacturers and suppliers over the entire 
development process – from planning to the start-up of entire 
distributed systems or individual ECUs. CANoe supports 
CAN, LIN, FlexRay and other networks.  
At the beginning, CANoe has been used to create 
simulation models which simulate the behavior of the CAN 
nodes. Over the further steps of nodes development, these 
models serve as the basis for analysis, testing and the 
integration of bus systems and nodes. This makes it possible to 
detect problems early and correct them. Graphic and text 
based evaluation windows are provided for evaluating the 
results [9]. 
The simulation procedure consists of developing all CAN 
nodes, exchanged signals and messages, and finally a GUI to 
simulate the central control node. CAN nodes have been 
firstly developed through Vector CAPL (CAN Access 
Programming Language) based on the C programming 
language. Using CANoe in combination with CAPL makes it 
possible to create custom tool applications with user defined 
behavior. Secondly, the database of CAN messages and 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-434-3
VEHICULAR 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

signals is recreated in Vector CANdb++ (which is a data 
administration program with which communication databases 
can be created and modified in the form of CAN databases) 
and added to the simulated bus. Signal generators have been 
added to generate random or predefined sensing values to the 
CAN nodes. Figure 2 explains the architecture of our CAN 
bus simulator using CANoe. 
 
Figure 2. Architecture of the CAN bus simulator using CANoe. 
Several simulations scenarios have been carried out to 
verify the correct behavior of individual CAN nodes (success 
and periodicity of CAN messages transmission) and the whole 
network (bus load and end-to-end delays). As stated before, 
this step helps us to detect problems early to prevent them in 
the implementation phase. Different data rates between 5 up to 
1000 kbps and periods of data transmission, between 0.2 and 
10 seconds, have been tested. In all simulation scenarios, all 
nodes send their CAN messages at the same time to simulate 
worst case scenarios. 
By studying the simulation database and filtering messages 
by CAN node, we have found that all nodes can send 
successfully their CAN messages to the central unit for data 
rates higher than 50 kbps regardless the period of 
transmission. However, the bus load may reach values from 20 
to 100% for rates less than 100 kbps. The maximum end-to-
end delay, defined as the time between the generation of a 
CAN message by a CAN node and its reception by the central 
node, is less than 100 ms for all data rates higher than 30 kbps.  
Using these results, a data rate of 500 kbps and a period of 
1 second have been adopted in our application. For this 
scenario, a bus load of only 0.77% and a maximum end-to-end 
delay of 3.79 ms have been obtained. These values show that 
data traffic exchanged in our application is largely lower than 
the capacity of the CAN network. That proves also that 
possible adding of future supplementary functionalities, will 
not affect the performance of existing network. Simulation 
results motivate us to start the implementation step. 
D. Implementation and Tests of CAN Nodes  
Each CAN node has been developed using an ARM 
Cortex-M3 LPC1758 board from NXP Semiconductors which 
supports two CAN peripherals. A generic embedded C code 
has been developed for all CAN nodes. A 4 bits local address 
represented by a 4 bits input to the microcontroller, has been 
assigned to each CAN node. It determines the part of the 
generic code to be executed to perform the node 
functionalities. Based on the CAN node address, different 
General Purpose Input Output (GPIO), serial ports and/or 
analog-to-digital converter pins are configured to exchange 
digital signals with connected sensors and actuators. 
CANoe has been also used to test the behavior of the 
developed CAN nodes. Using a particular interface, CANoe 
provides the possibility of replacing one, several or all 
simulated nodes by real ones. The conducted test includes 3 
real CAN nodes ( based on the LPC1758-microcontroller) and 
4 simulated CAN nodes as well as the simulated central node. 
The interface CANcardXL allows mixing hardware and 
software running CANoe (on a laptop). In order to test the 
behavior of all CAN nodes, the test has been repeated several 
times. In each test, identifiers of simulated and real CAN 
nodes have been exchanged. 
The CANcardXL interface is a hardware interface between 
the real bus and the simulated one. This hybrid network has 
been tested each time for 3.5 hours (12600 seconds) and each 
CAN node was sending its sensing message every one second 
and its life sign message every 15 minutes. The data rate was 
set to 500 kbps for all nodes.  
By studying the database of exchanged CAN messages 
provided by the Trace window of CANoe, we have found that 
each CAN has sent 12600 sensing messages to the central 
node as well as 16 life sign messages, which means that all 
CAN messages have been successfully sent. Moreover, the 
period between two successive CAN messages was around 1 
second (with several tens or hundreds of microseconds 
corresponding to the arbitration phase between CAN nodes 
trying to send at the same time). 
A last experiment has been carried out without simulation 
using different hardware CAN nodes and a central node 
emulated thanks to an USB-MUX-4C2L board. Similarly, the 
results of this test have shown a frame transmission ratio equal 
to 100% for the CAN nodes and the periodicity of 
transmission (one second between two successive messages) 
has been also respected. 
IV. ZIGBEE MEASUREMENTS 
Several low rate and low security level functionalities such 
as turning on and off lights, measuring external temperature, 
wind speed, TNT signal levels may be communicated to 
central node by ZigBee communications. In order to verify the 
possibility of wireless communications between central and 
peripheral actuator/sensor nodes inside and outside the 
motorhome, 
point-to-point 
measurements 
have 
been 
performed using two ZigBee nodes in a motorhome to 
evaluate the radio link quality. 
A. Measurement Procedure 
Two 
ZigBee 
development 
boards 
from 
Silicon 
Laboratories have been used in these measurements (one 
transmitter (Tx) and one receiver (Rx)). Each board features a 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-434-3
VEHICULAR 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

a C8051F121 microcontroller and a Chipcon CC2420 2.4 GHz 
802.15.4 transceiver. The used frequency was 2.45 GHz and 
the transmit power was 0 dBm for both nodes. The sensitivity 
of both ZigBee nodes is -95 dBm. Tx was connected to a 
laptop via USB connection to configure the measurement 
parameters and to save results. Tx, which represents the 
central node, was fixed above the entrance of the motorhome. 
Rx has been moved between 9 different locations inside and 
outside the motorhome. For each location, 180 packets have 
been transmitted by Tx and the Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR) 
(percentage of packets received successfully) as well as the 
Received Signal Strength Indication (RSSI) have been 
measured. A packet is considered as successfully received 
only when Tx receives an acknowledgment from Rx.  
Figure 3 represents the mapping of the motorhome and the 
locations of Tx and Rx nodes. Locations A, B, C, D, F, G, H 
and I are all inside the motorhome. However, location E is on 
the roof of the camper. 
B. Results 
Table 1 presents obtained measurement results. For each 
Rx location, we give the minimal, maximal, and mean values 
of RSSI, as well as the PDR. 
Measurement results of locations A, B, C, D, F, G, H and I 
show an excellent connectivity inside the motorhome with a 
PDR of 100 % and an average of RSSI above -70 dBm. The 
wireless node of the central control unit may have a reliable 
communication with all the ZigBee sensor/actuator nodes 
placed inside the motorhome. Closing the curtain (represented 
by a green dashed line in Figure 3) which separates the two 
compartments and blocking the line-of-sight between Tx and 
Rx at locations (A, B, C, D and F) has not affected the link 
quality. Moreover, the communication between Tx and Rx 
(location D) has not been blocked when closing the door of 
wardrobe, in spite of the attenuation of 10 dB with respect to 
other locations in the sleeping compartment. This remarkable 
link quality may be explained by the short distances separating 
Tx and Rx (the length of the motorhome is only 7 m) and the 
absence of severe obstacles that can totally block wireless 
communication (metallic walls for example).  
However, location E (on the roof of the camper) does not 
show the same link quality. PDR decreased to 93% and the 
average of RSSI to -77 dBm. There is no direct visibility 
between Tx and Rx for this location. Radio signals are 
received by Rx due to reflections on walls and ceiling. It is 
worth mentioning here that all these measurements were 
performed when the motorhome was parked in a huge hangar. 
Therefore, reflections on the walls of the hangar guided radio 
signals between Tx and Rx. Although the mentioned results 
are not very bad, they may be worst if the motorhome was 
moving in an open area (outside reflections). In order to have 
an efficient connection between the central node and the 
external node, it will be recommended to place the node inside 
the motorhome and connect it by short cables to external 
sensors (temperature, humidity, etc.). In this case, successful 
data transmission will be more guaranteed and independent of 
the motorhome location. However, in this system, the security 
aspect has not been considered. It may be taken into account 
in future work. 
TABLE I.  
OBTAINED RESULTS FROM ZIGBEE MEASUREMENTS 
Rx 
Location 
RSSI (dBm) 
PDR (%) 
Minimal 
Maximal 
Mean 
A 
-67 
-54 
-58.95 
100 
B 
-62 
-54 
-57.43 
100 
C 
-65 
-49 
-54.82 
100 
D 
-76 
-61 
-69.93 
100 
E 
-85 
-60 
-77.12 
93 
F 
-62 
-54 
-59.15 
100 
G 
-58 
-51 
-55.91 
100 
H 
-47 
-55 
-49.44 
100 
I 
-60 
-50 
-56.95 
100 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Locations of ZigBee transmitter and receiver in the motorhome. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-434-3
VEHICULAR 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

V. 
PLC MEASUREMENTS 
Several functionalities like video monitoring, multimedia 
exchange or Internet sharing may be added to the system. 
These functionalities do not need high level of security, but 
need a relatively high throughput which cannot be provided by 
CAN or ZigBee networks. We propose to study the feasibility 
of PLC inside the motorhome, on the DC power lines. This 
technology does not need new wires and is already used in 
indoor networks. Two types of measurements have been 
carried out in the same motorhome. The first one studies the 
transfer function on the electrical harness and the second one 
uses indoor PLC modems to determine the possible 
throughput in a motorhome. 
A. Transfer Functions 
In order to determine the best frequency band for PLCs as 
well as the effect of the battery and amenities in a motorhome, 
we started by measuring the transfer function of the electrical 
harness of a motorhome. Autostar has provided an electrical 
harness before its installation in a motorhome as well as a 
motorhome with installed harness. Using a Vector Network 
Analyzer (VNA), we have measured the S21 parameter for 
two different locations (AB and AC) on the harness in three 
different scenarios: a free harness (without equipment and 
battery connected), in the motorhome with only connected 
equipments (without battery) and finally with connected 
battery and equipments. The 12 V DC battery of the camper is 
totally independent from the engine one. The measurement 
point B is located in the living room and corresponds to the 
television location. Position C is located in the bed room. The 
performed measurements may simulate multimedia sharing 
between the two compartments of the motorhome. The 
measurement parameters are presented in Table 2. 
Figure 4 shows the measurements positions in the 
motorhome. Figure 5 and Figure 6 present the obtained results 
in the three scenarios for paths AB and AC, respectively. One 
can observe a remarkable attenuation for frequencies less than 
3 MHz may be noticed for the two scenarios. Secondly, the 
effect of connecting equipments start at frequencies higher 
than 50 MHz, however the effect of connecting a battery is 
clear for all frequencies (an average of 15 dB of attenuation). 
Finally, we can clearly conclude from these measurements that 
frequency band [3, 30 MHz] is the less affected by the battery 
and equipments and may be convenient for PLCs in a 
motorhome. More particularly, the bandwidth between 8 and 
14 MHz has a minimum attenuation in this band. 
TABLE II.  
S21 MEASUREMENT PARAMETERS 
VNA Model 
Agilent FieldFox Handheld Analyzer N9918A 
Frrequency band 
[30 kHz – 100 MHz] 
Resolution 
4001 points (24,986 kHz) 
IF bandwidth  
30 kHz 
Coupling 
Capacitive 
 
 
Figure 4. Locations of DC-PLC transmitter and receiver in the motorhome. 
 
Figure 5. Transfer function (S21) for path AB. 
 
Figure 6. Transfer function (S21) for path AC. 
B. Throughput Measurements 
The study of PLC throughputs is realized using PLC 
Devolo 200Av modems [10] based on the HomePlug AV 
standard [11]. These modems are commonly used in indoor 
networks and cars [12] and high throughputs have been 
demonstrated. It is interesting to test them in a motorhome. As 
the power line network in-motorhome is different from that in 
a house, the modems have been modified to be used and plug 
on the DC power lines. The modifications affect mainly the 
coupling and the power supply.  
The HomePlug AV standard is the second generation of 
PLC systems developed by the HomePlug Powerline Alliance. 
Now it is suitable for multimedia applications like HDTV or 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-434-3
VEHICULAR 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

VOIP. The PHY layer uses a windowed-OFDM modulation in 
the [2 – 28 MHz] frequency band over 972 subcarriers. The 
HPAV can use different modulation order from binary phase-
shift keying (BPSK) up to 1024 quadrature amplitude 
modulation (QAM) for each sub-carrier according to the 
channel characteristics. To counteract the channel multipath 
effects and the inter-symbol interferences, the HPAV uses a 
guard interval (GI). Moreover, several GI (5.56 μs, to 47.12 
μs) can be used depending on the channel and so the 
throughput can be improved. A frequency mask is used to 
avoid interferences mainly with amateur radio bands. This is 
the reason why the pulse-shaped OFDM symbols is different 
than the classic rectangular window. Thanks to this specific 
window, the out-of-band noise is reduced and the notches are 
deeper. The central coordinator uses the channel estimation in 
order to establish a specific QAM modulation for each OFDM 
sub-carrier. HPAV uses a two-level MAC framing scheme. 
Indeed, the MAC frames are divided into 512 bytes segments 
called PHY Block (PB). An uncorrectable Forward Error 
Correction (FEC) code is used and a header is added with the 
numbers of the PB. 
In the measurement setup, we use a test bed with two PLC 
modems and two laptops running jperf tool, which is used for 
network testing by transmitting transmission control protocol 
(TCP) and user datagram protocol (UDP) streams. These 
modems have been plugged firstly to positions A and B, and 
then to positions A and C respectively to measure the 
throughput of the same scenarios studied in the previous 
section.  
Figure 7 shows the obtained throughput for the two paths 
with disconnected and connected battery respectively. We can 
remark from these scenarios that obtained throughputs are 
quasi-similar for the two paths and are about 20 Mbps, which 
is higher than throughputs provided by other bus technologies 
(maximum 10 Mbps for FlexRay). However, we can notice a 
small decrease of about 1 Mbps for the two paths when the 
battery is connected. Similar results have been achieved with 
UDP and so not represented. These results show that HPAV 
modems can be used for PLCs in a motorhome for multi-
media applications. 
 
Figure 7. Obtained throughputs for paths AB and AC. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
We have presented in this paper centralized hybrid 
architecture for motorhome control mainly based on CAN bus, 
in addition to PLC and ZigBee technologies. Different 
simulations and measurements have been carried out to study 
the performance of these technologies in the motorhome.  
Firstly, CAN bus simulations have been carried out using 
CANoe to evaluate the performance of the future network.  
Then, CAN nodes board and an embedded C code have been 
developed and tested successfully on the network in the 
motorhome. 
Otherwise, ZigBee measurements have shown an excellent 
link quality between the central node and all locations inside 
the motorhome. Motorhome environment is not a difficult 
from a “radio wave propagation” view, as distances between 
nodes will be small and there is no severe obstacle that can 
totally block wireless communications. The security may be 
considered in future work. 
Finally, PLC experimentations have shown the possibility 
of using PLC modems used in indoor applications in a 
motorhome. Possible data rates of about 20 Mbps in realistic 
scenarios can be provided by PLCs.  
The obtained results confirm the possibility of using 
ubiquitous communication technologies to achieve a smart, 
convenient and comfortable motorhome. In future work, 
electromagnetic measurements will be performed in order to 
test the robustness of the network in real environment with the 
camper van in motion. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
RVBusiness, “SSI: Motorhomes sales up 9.1% during October”, 
Available from http://www.rvbusiness.com/2014/12/ssi-motorhomes-
sales-see-9-1-rise-in-october, [retrieved 12, 2014]. 
[2] 
F.Nouvel, W. Gouret, P. Maziero and G. EL Zein,  " Automotive 
Network Architecture for ECUs Communications", in  Automotive 
Informatics and Communicative Systems: Principles in Vehicular 
Networks and Data Exchange, IGI Global, pp 69-90, 2009. 
[3] 
M. Ortiz, M. Diaz, Manuel, F. Bellido,E. Saez, Edmundo and F. Quiles, 
"Smart 
Home 
Automation 
Using 
Controller 
Area 
Network", 
International Symposium on Distributed Computing and Artificial 
Intelligence, pp 167-174, 2011. 
[4] 
K. H. Johansson, M. Törngren and L. Nielsen, “Vehicle Applications of 
Controller Area Network,” in Handbook of Networked and Embedded 
Control Systems Control, 1st ed. Basel, Switzerland: Birkhäuser Basel, 
sec. 6.1, pp 741-765, 2005. 
[5] 
K. C. Lee and H. H. Lee, “Network-based fire-detection system via 
controller area network for smart home automation,” IEEE Trans. on 
Consumer Electronics, vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 1093-1100, 2004. 
[6] 
K. H. The, W. L. Ng, C. K. Ng and N. K. Noordin, “Home Appliances 
Management 
System 
using 
Controller 
Area 
Network 
(CAN) 
Communications", APCC, 17th Asia-Pacific Conference on , pp.899-
904, 2011. 
[7] 
Website of ZigBee Alliance, ZigBee Alliance. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.zigbee.org. 
[8] 
X. Lu; Y. Sun; and I. H. Kim, "Reliable power line communication A 
vehicle to smart home and smart energy," Consumer Electronics (ICCE), 
2012 IEEE International Conference on, pp.86-87, 2012. 
[9] 
Website of Vector Informatic GmbH. Vector Informatic GmbH. 
Available at http://www.vector.com [retrieved 6, 2015]. 
[10] Website of PLC modem Devolo. Available at http://www.devolo.com  
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-434-3
VEHICULAR 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

[11] Official website of the HomePlug Powerline Alliance (HPA). HomePlug 
Powerline Alliance. Available at http://www.homeplug.org [retrieved 
08, 2015]. 
[12] P. Tanguy, F. Nouvel, P. Maziearo, “Power Line Communication 
standards for in-vehicule networks,” 9th ITST2009, Intenational 
Conference on Intelligent Transport Systems Telecommunications, 
pp.533-537, 2009. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-434-3
VEHICULAR 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

