Wide Transmission of Proxy Cooperative Awareness Messages
Masahiro Kitazawa, Manabu Tsukada, Hideya Ochiai and Hiroshi Esaki
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology
University of Tokyo, Japan
Email: {ktzw, tsukada, jo2lxq}@hongo.wide.ad.jp, hiroshi@wide.ad.jp
Abstract—Recently, autonomous vehicles have become a reality.
Most of the research related to autonomous vehicles focuses on
the sensors attached to vehicles. However, owing to blind spots,
sensors are insufﬁcient for avoiding accidents. Cooperative Intelli-
gent Transport Systems (CITSs) have been introduced to reduce
blind spots. These systems wirelessly communicate with other
CITS-enabled vehicles and collect road and trafﬁc information.
There are two types of messages used in CITS: Cooperative
Awareness Messages (CAMs) and Decentralized Environmental
Notiﬁcation Messages (DENMs). CAMs are used to notify the
existence of sender. Some issues are known to exist with these
messages. Several methods have been proposed to help overcome
these issues. One of these methods is Proxy CAM. In this study,
we will describe four problems of Proxy CAM and propose Grid
Proxy CAM, which builds a network of Proxy CAM devices
and forwards Proxy CAM packets. We have been developing
two methods for this system. The ﬁrst is “SDN routing”, which
uses Software Deﬁned Network (SDN) for route control. The
second is “Passive selection”, which is used to select incoming
Proxy CAM packets. Furthermore, we will discuss the advantages
and disadvantages of these methods and the future plan of this
ongoing work.
Keywords–CITS; Proxy CAM; Wide transmission; Grid Proxy
CAM; SDN.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Interest in autonomous driving has increased recently.
Autonomous driving can be divided into several categories,
according to function, from Level 0 to Level 5.
•
Level 0 (No Automation): the vehicle is unassisted
by Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI). Autonomous driving is
unavailable.
•
Level 1 (Driver Assistance): AI performs only one
driving operation, such as steering, acceleration, or
deceleration. Automatic braking and adaptive cruise
control are examples.
•
Level 2 (Partial Automation): AI can do several
driving operations simultaneously. Drivers must keep
control and monitor the AI’s decisions. In Japan, a
system called “Pro Pilot” [1] by Nissan accelerates,
decelerates, and steers to maintain the inter-vehicular
distance and keep to the center of the road by detecting
the vehicle in front and road lines.
•
Level 3 (Conditional Automation): AI performs every
operation of driving. However, if there is an emer-
gency, the AI notiﬁes the driver who takes over.
Additionally, there are limitations to the driving en-
vironment, such as only highways.
•
Level 4 (High Automation): AI does every operation
of driving, even during an emergency. However, there
is a limitation of the environment.
•
Level 5 (Full Automation): AI does every operation
in all circumstances. The driver does not need to keep
watch. All passengers are free from driving.
For now, Levels 1 and 2 are commercialized, and Levels 3 and
4 are realized only at the research level. Intelligent Transport
Systems (ITSs) manage problems related to an accident, trafﬁc
jam, environmental pollution, and the pursuit of convenience
and comfort in road trafﬁc. Autonomous driving is a key ITS
technology, and the main research ﬁeld is now stand-alone.
ITSs use only the vehicle’s own sensors to make the next
move. However, at an intersection, there is always a blind
spot (i.e., an area the sensors cannot detect), and this often
contributes to accidents. Cooperative ITS (CITS) [2] is a
system that utilizes the communication among vehicles and
roadside units (RSU) to share road trafﬁc information and
make blind spots smaller. Additionally, because this system
can get the information from a distance, vehicles can change
paths to avoid trafﬁc jams, thus increasing convenience.
There are problems with designing the CITS network
among vehicles and RSUs because of the communications
protocols and the wireless technologies needed to create a real-
time control system. Vehicles move very fast. Thus, vehicle
information has a very short life span. This causes each vehicle
to broadcast the information at a high frequency. The delay
between sending and receiving also must be very short. The
active distribution and balancing of network trafﬁc is also
very important. IEEE 802.11p [3] is a wireless technology
for connecting vehicles, but it has a low fault tolerance and a
short range, which must be improved for CITS.
In this work, we propose Grid Proxy Cooperative Aware-
ness Message, to solve the problem of dispersing network
trafﬁc load and to improve the low fault tolerance and short
range of IEEE 802.11p. There are two methods to realize
this system: Software Deﬁned Network (SDN) routing and
passive selection. We describe these methods and discuss their
advantages and disadvantages in this paper. By leveraging our
previous work, Remote Proxy CAM [4], we improve the safety
of Grid Proxy CAM.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
highlights CITS in detail, including protocol stack and two
types of messages. Section III discusses related works, such
as SDN, routing control, and Vehicular Ad-hoc Network
(VANET). Additionally, we introduce works that have at-
tempted to solve SDN’s problems. In Section IV, we describe
IEEE 802.11p ’s problems of network trafﬁc load, low fault
tolerance, and short range. In Section V, we ﬁnally deﬁne Grid
Proxy CAM to solve the problems. Section VI concludes our
paper and presents our future studies.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

II.
CITS
CITS is being designed to make road trafﬁc more con-
venient and safer. The stand-alone system uses only the
information from the sensors attached to vehicles to assist
the driver’s operation. However, CITS also enables vehicles to
communicate with vehicles and RSUs and share information
about road trafﬁc. With this combined information, CITS-
enabled vehicles can serve as better driving assistants and
make better decisions. There are CITS architectures designed
separately in Europe, America, and Japan. In this work, we
focus on European CITS architecture.
CITS is composed of four primary layers: application,
facility, network & transport, and access. There is also a man-
agement layer that manages the facility, network & transport,
and access layers and a security layer that is responsible for
CITS safety.
The access layer manages the wireless technologies (e.g.,
Long Term Evolution (LTE) and IEEE 802.11p [3]) and the
network & transport layer manages the route control (e.g.,
GeoNetworking [5] and Basic Transport Protocol [6]). The
facility layer summarizes and stores the information from
sensors and communication messages to make it easier to
utilize for applications, such as local dynamic mapping and
other services.
There are two types of CITS communication massages:
CAMs [7] and decentralized environmental notiﬁcation mes-
sages (DENM) [8]. CAM is a message that every CITS-
enabled vehicle and pedestrian cellphone generates. It contains
highly dynamic information. With this type of message, CITS
devices recognize the senders ’location and vector. Because
of CAMs ’ time sensitivity, messages must be generated
at a high frequency, such as the recommended 1-to-10 Hz.
CAM information may affect a small range (i.e., 100 m), and
to mitigate CITS network bandwidth, messages are single-
hop broadcasted. Thus, CAM message forwarding is not
recommended. However, DENMs are messages that contain
relatively static information about events that affect road and
trafﬁc conditions, such as construction, accidents, and weather.
There is no recommendation for the frequency of transmission.
So, CITS devices transmit DENMs according to their own
conﬁgurations. DENM is recommended to multi-hop because
the information it contains is considered to affect a wide
range. When a CITS device receives CAMs and DENMs, they
are delivered to facility layer and processed to provide the
information to the application layer.
III.
RELATED WORKS
A. SDN
In legacy networks, protocols, such as Open Shortest Path
First (OSPF) and Routing Information Protocol (RIP) perform
routing control according to certain algorithms. Special route
conﬁguration for each node must also be performed manually.
However, if there is a replacement of nodes or a change in
network topology, the conﬁguration must be also performed
manually. They cost a lot to maintain. However, with SDNs,
a controller manages network routing. Thus, it does not need
to be conﬁgured manually. In legacy networks, route control
and data transmission is performed on the same network. In
SDN, it is done on two separate networks: a control plane and
a data plane. The control plane is composed of switches and a
server (i.e., controller). This plane is used for sending control
messages for routing and switch conﬁguration, and for sending
“packet-in” messages to notify the existence of a packet that
does not match any routing conﬁguration. The data plane is
composed of switches and nodes. This network is used for
transmitting and receiving data packets. In this work, we use
Open Flow [9], a technology that supports SDN.
In Open Flow, routing conﬁgurations are called ﬂow entries
and are stored in a ﬂow table. Flow entries are composed of
rule and action ﬁelds. The rule ﬁeld includes a condition; the
switch checks if an incoming packet satisﬁes the condition.
The action ﬁeld includes an operation; the switch performs the
operation if the packet meets the condition. The rule and action
ﬁelds can be described by layers 1∼4 of the Open Systems
Interface reference model. If the controller modiﬁes switch
ﬂow entries, it sends a “Flow-Mod” message to the switch.
Then, whenever the switch receives a packet, it checks the
ﬂow table and performs the appropriate operation. If no ﬂow
entry requirement is met, the switch drops the packet or sends
a “Packet-In” message to the controller. Then, the controller
responds with “Packet-Out.”
B. VANET
The Vehicular Ad-hoc network (VANET) is a system that
enables CITS-enabled vehicles to form an ad-hoc network
and communicate. All vehicles must perform routing control
because of the ad hoc nature. The wireless technology used
in VANET is IEEE 802.11p [3]. It is designed to enable fast-
moving nodes to communicate, and it uses a high-frequency
band (i.e., 5.9 GHz) because the distance between the nodes
changes very fast and the time during which nodes remain
within the communication range is very short; hence the speed
of data communication must be fast.
One of the problems associated with VANETs is the occu-
pancy of the communication bandwidth by periodic packets,
such as CAMs. The higher the frequency of CAM transmis-
sion, the safer the road trafﬁc becomes. However, increasing
the frequency also increases the bandwidth occupancy due to
higher data trafﬁc. Hence, in a urban areas where the vehicle
density is high, the transmission of CAMs exceeds the commu-
nication bandwidth and the packets that are transmitted when
certain events occur, such as DENMs cannot be transmitted.
Additionally, delay and packet loss can occur to the CAM
packets themselves.
Another problem is forwarding the packets that need to
be broadcasted and forwarded, such as DENMs. Basically, a
node that receives such a packet must forward the packet to
all nodes that are connected to the node. However, to applying
this operation to all nodes could create forwarding loops and
a large number of transmissions over a short duration. These
transmissions could occupy the communication bandwidth and
cause a long delay in the delivery of other messages. This delay
is critical to the messages that require real-time property and
this must be avoided.
For the ﬁrst problem associated with VANETs, [10] con-
cluded that nodes establish more connections than needed,
making the transmission burden larger. Thus, they proposed
fair-power adjustment for vehicular environments to control
the network load of periodic packets (e.g., CAM) by setting
an upper limit to network connections (i.e., Max Beaconing
Load (MBL)). This forbids the number of connections at
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

each node from exceeding the MBL. To adjust the number of
the connections, they utilized the transmit power of wireless
technologies. Their method avoided packet loss and delay.
Additionally, if multi-hop packets (e.g., DENM) arrived to the
network, they were less likely to not be broadcasted.
In [11], periodic packets constituted large data trafﬁc
because of the unnecessarily high frequency of transmission.
Thus, the researchers proposed an adaptive beaconing rate
to adjust the frequency of the transmission according to the
surrounding situation and the node’s status. They fed vehicle
status (i.e., accident status and likelihood of causing an ac-
cident) and percentage of same-directional neighbor vehicles
(i.e., density of vehicles moving in the same direction) into
a fuzzy inference engine to calculate the precise transmission
frequency needed for the situation.
For the second problem, [12] proposed The Last One
(TLO) algorithm, which forces only the most appropriate
nodes to broadcast packets. The algorithm transmits backwards
from the sender, which is useful for mitigating an accident.
Using Global Positioning System (GPS) information and the
predeﬁned distance of the communication range, each vehicle
decides whether it is the Last Vehicle (LV) that received the
packets from a sender. If so, it broadcasts the packets. To
describe this algorithm in detail, if a node receives multi-
hop broadcast packets, it receives the GPS information of
the sender from the packets and calculates the geographical
distance between the sender and the node. Similarly, the node
calculates the geographical distance among the surrounding
nodes. These nodes’ GPS information is delivered from their
CAMs. The communication range is common to all nodes and
never changes. Thus, the node checks if there is another node
behind the transmitting node within the communication range
of the sender. If so, the node does not broadcast the packets
for a while. If another node does not broadcast the packets and
the node does not receive the packets, it concludes it is the LV
and broadcasts the packets. Also, if the node cannot ﬁnd any
node that satisﬁes the condition, it decides that it is the LV
and broadcasts the packets. In [13], the authors attempted to
solve this problem by using the cellular network. They divided
vehicles into two types: Gateway service Providers (GP),
which communicate via IEEE 802.11p and cellular wireless
technology; and ordinal vehicles, which communicate only via
IEEE 802.11p. The periodic packets are assumed effective in
for short range from the origin. Thus, they are broadcasted
locally via IEEE 802.11p. Multi-hop packets are assumed to
have a wider effect. Thus, when they are received by GPs, they
send the packets to the cloud server. The server gets the GPS
information of the origin from the packets and identiﬁes the
area needing the packets to be disseminated and sends them
to GPs in that area. When the GPs receive the packets, they
rebroadcast them.
C. VANET using SDN
There are many works to solve the problem of the occu-
pancy of the communication bandwidth by massive packets.
Recently, some methods have proposed using SDN for dy-
namic route control.
In [14], vehicles joined both VANET and cellular network
and RSUs opened ad-hoc connection with vehicles. Addition-
ally, the SDN controller was connected to RSUs and cellular
base stations. The connection between SDN controller and
RSUs and the SDN controller and vehicles belongs to control
plane and the connection between RSUs and vehicles and
vehicles each other belongs to data plane. RSUs and vehicles
send information of connected RSUs and vehicles periodically
to the SDN Controller via control plane. The SDN controller
alters RSUs and vehicles’ ﬂow entries according to this infor-
mation and when some speciﬁc nodes send requests to the SDN
controller. Also, since vehicles and the SDN controller are
connected via wireless technology, the connection can be lost.
In that case, each vehicle has a local SDN agent. This agent
performs the routing control using ordinal VANET routing
protocols (e.g., Greedy Perimeter Stateless Routing (GPSR),
Ad-hoc On-Demand Distance Vector (AODV), Destination-
Sequenced Distance Vector (DSDV), Optimized Link State
Routing (OLSR)) when the connection to SDN controller is
lost.
In [15], the authors proposed the SDN-based Geographic
Routing (SDGR) protocol for route control. The network
topology is same as in [14]. This protocol is designed to be
used when a vehicle sends messages to another vehicle. First,
the sender only knows the IP address of the target, but does
not know its geographical position. Thus, the sender sends
a request to the SDN controller. When the SDN controller
receives the request, it uses an optimal forwarding path algo-
rithm. First, the controller identiﬁes the geographical position
of the target by using the information from periodic RSUs
and vehicles messages sent to the controller. After that, the
controller chooses the geographical path that goes through
the relatively high density of vehicles in order to not lose
the packets and to obtain the shortest path. After choosing
the path, the controller replies with the path choice called
optimal forwarding path (ofp) to the sender. When the sender
receives the ofp, it inserts it into the packets. Using the packet
forwarding algorithm and the ofp, the sender selects the next
node and transmits the packets. The next node checks the ofp
in the packets and uses packet forwarding algorithm to transmit
the packets. All nodes in the path do the same operation, and
eventually the packets reach the target. In SDGR, there are
two modes: forthright mode and junction mode. The forthright
mode is used when a vehicle is not at an intersection. When a
vehicle is in this mode, it only checks the ofp of the packets
and forwards them to the node which is on the path of the
ofp, nearest to the target, and connected to the vehicle. When
a vehicle is in junction mode, it compares its buffer occupancy
with threshold δ. If the buffer occupancy is higher than δ,
it broadcasts an Alarm message. When surrounding vehicles
receive the message, they ignore the vehicle when using packet
forwarding algorithm.
D. Proxy CAM
In CITS, a CITS enabled vehicle can detect vehicles which
transmit CAMs and can be captured by the vehicle’s sensors.
However, IEEE 802.11p is weak to obstacles and it can be
blocked by buildings easily. This creates a type of blind
spot that no vehicle can be detected by either the sensors
or CAMs, which can contribute to an accident. Additionally,
there are vehicles that are not CITS-enabled. These vehicles
need to be detectable by CITS-enabled vehicles. To solve
this problem, [16] proposed Proxy CAM system, which in-
stalls computer vision sensors at the roadside and leveraging
images captured by them. A server detects the vehicles by
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

the images and makes CAMs for them and broadcasts them
from transmitters installed at the roadside using IEEE 802.11p.
In our previous work, we proposed Remote Proxy CAM
[4], which delivers CAMs over the Internet using UDP/IPv6
and LTE with standard speciﬁcation (i.e., basic transportation
protocol/geonetworking and IEEE 802.11p).
IV.
PROBLEM STATEMENT
In this section, we analyze the problems of Proxy CAM
system. There are four problems: short wireless range, low
fault tolerance, inefﬁcient routing, and tradeoff between wide
transmission and trafﬁc load. We describe them in detail below.
A. Short wireless range
In [17], the Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR) of a vehicle
traveling at 20 km/h using IEEE 802.11p with a data rate is
12 MB/s was nearly 100% when the range was to 700 m.
However, this experiment was done in the ﬂat plains with no
buildings around and nearly no other wireless communication.
However, in urban areas, there are buildings and other wireless
communication. This environment can cause multipath prop-
agation and wave interference. Thus, in this environment, the
wireless range of IEEE 802.11p will diminish. Also, this Proxy
CAMs can be used to determine the density of intersections.
This information is very valuable to many applications, such
as navigation for avoiding trafﬁc jams. So, Proxy CAMs need
to be provided enough early and this makes the problem of
how to make the transmission far enough.
B. Low fault tolerance
IEEE 802.11p uses a relatively high-frequency bandwidth,
5.9 GHz. And this makes it weak to obstacles. Proxy CAM sys-
tem overcomes this problem by installing transmitters around
intersections. However, if the road connected to the intersection
is curvilinear or if there is a large track, it may interrupt the
communication between the Proxy CAM device and a vehicle.
This interruption may be temporal, but for safety, it is a critical
hazard.
C. Inefﬁcient routing
Described in short wireless range, there is an unavoidable
case that a vehicle needs far Proxy CAMs and cannot get
them because of the communication range of IEEE 802.11p.
To solve this problem, one solution is to relay the Proxy
CAM packets. The devices to relay and broadcast the packets
(i.e., transmitters) can be vehicles or RSUs. This relaying
the packets adds the problem of how to perform the routing
control. This routing control includes identifying devices for
relaying, and how far Proxy CAM packets need to be relayed.
Additionally, there are road trafﬁc-related factors, such as
trafﬁc volume, accident rate in the past, and time-of-day.
This routing must consider these factors and provide alternate
routing for each Proxy CAM device.
D. Trade-off between wide transmission and trafﬁc load
Described before, it needs to lengthen the communication
range of Proxy CAMs to improve the safety. And to do this,
relaying Proxy CAM packets and transmitting from a remote
transmitter is the solution. However, for the transmitter, if the
range is too long, the number of the Proxy CAM devices
that use this transmitter increases dramatically. This means the
number of the Proxy CAM packets also increases. For wired
communication, the amount of the trafﬁc load is small, but
for wireless communication, especially IEEE 802.11p, the bit
rate is 3∼27 MB/s and this is used for broadcasting Proxy
CAM packets to vehicles in Proxy CAM system. Thus, if the
amount of Proxy CAM packets is too high, the transmitter
cannot handle the packets and this makes packet loss and delay.
V.
GRID PROXY CAM
To solve the problems in the previous chapter, we propose
Grid Proxy CAM system. This system is basically composed of
Proxy CAM device and relaying devices. In inefﬁcient routing
problem described in the previous chapter, this problem would
be solved by relaying the packets, and devices to relay the
Proxy CAM packets can be vehicles or RSUs. In [15], they
used vehicles. Unfortunately, this method depended on vehicle
speed and density, and these factors change quickly in the real
world. The quality of safety-related services must always be
high, and the extant proposals were not suitable for relaying
Proxy CAM packets. So in this study, we use RSUs as the
relaying devices that are routers installed at each intersection
with a Proxy CAM device. For the problems of inefﬁcient
routing and the trade-off between wide transmission and trafﬁc
load, we have been developing two methods: SDN routing and
Passive selection.
A. SDN routing
Figure 1 shows the overview of SDN routing method.
This method uses SDN for routing, and all routers relay the
Proxy CAM packets by following their SDN ﬂow table. Each
Proxy CAM device is composed of a Proxy CAM generator
that detects surrounding vehicles with computer vision and
generates their Proxy CAMs, and a Proxy CAM transmitter
that broadcasts Proxy CAMs using IEEE 802.11p. These
generators and transmitters are connected to each router, and
adjacent routers are also connected. Each router connected to
an SDN controller. These connection are wired, and all Proxy
CAM generators, transmitters, routers, and the SDN controller
have an IP address and communication between generators,
transmitters, and routers use UDP.
Wired Connection
(Control Plane) 
SDN Controller
Send Data Trafﬁc
Information / Change
Flow Table
4) Proxy CAM
1) Detect
3) Proxy CAM 
(IEEE802.11p) 
Router A
Router B
Router C
Proxy CAM
Device 
Flow Table
if src = router A(IP):
   send to router C;
Flow Table
 if src = PCAM Dev(IP):
    send to             
    Transmitter;
    send to router B;
2) Check Flow Table
Wired Connection
(Data Plane) 
Figure 1. Overview of Grid Proxy CAM with SDN routing.
The SDN controller changes the ﬂow entries of each
router’s ﬂow table periodically according to the trafﬁc load
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

of each transmitter which is connected to the router, and the
priority. This priority indicates how important Proxy CAMs
generated by the directly connected Proxy CAM generator
are to road safety. The factors for determining this priority
includes the type of the street where the Proxy CAM device is
installed (i.e., the street is the main street or not), the accident
rate in the past, whether the street is curvilinear and it is
difﬁcult to see far, the density of vehicles, whether there is
a fast moving vehicle that can cause an accident, and whether
there is an emergency vehicle. With the trafﬁc load and the
priority, the SDN controller changes the ﬂow entries so that
each transmitter can broadcast as many Proxy CAM packets as
possible. However, their amount does not exceed the capacity
of the transmitter’s IEEE 802.11p limitations.
The procedure is as follows.
1)
A Proxy CAM generator detects surrounding vehicles
and generates Proxy CAMs and sends to a connected
router.
2)
When the router receives the packets, it checks its
SDN ﬂow table and follows instructions. By default,
in this ﬂow table, there is an entry that checks
if the Proxy CAM packets are from the directly
connected Proxy CAM generator, sending them to the
directly connected transmitter. Additionally, the SDN
controller can add and delete ﬂow entries to duplicate
the packets and sends them to adjacent routers.
3)
The directly connected transmitter broadcasts the
packets with IEEE 802.11p as soon as it receives the
packets.
4)
The router also has the ﬂow entries for incoming
packets from neighbor routers, used to duplicate the
packets and send to adjacent routers and the directly
connected transmitter.
During this procedure, the SDN controller always gets
necessary information from routers and periodically changes
ﬂow entries of each router.
B. Passive selection
Figure 2 shows the overview of passive selection method.
The hardware architecture of this method is very similar to
SDN routing. There are routers and Proxy CAM generators
and Proxy CAM transmitters. Each Proxy CAM generator and
Proxy CAM transmitter is connected to a router, and the router
is connected to adjacent routers. These connections are wired
and use UDP/IP protocol. Transmitters broadcast Proxy CAM
packets using IEEE 802.11p. In this method, we assume that
communication speed of wired connections is enough high
and the data load of Proxy CAM packets does not occupy
the bandwidth. Each router has a geographical range and it
receives Proxy CAM packets from routers which are within
the range. In detail, each router has a list of other routers’
IP addresses which are within the range in advance, and the
routing is done with RIP or OSPF, which are legacy network’s
protocols. With the IP address list, each router sends Proxy
CAM packets.
When a router receives Proxy CAM packets, it duplicates
them and sends to the next routers and to a directly connected
transmitter. The transmitter checks the number of packets. If
it is less than the bandwidth of IEEE 802.11p, it broadcasts
all the packets using IEEE 802.11p. However, if the number is
4) Proxy CAM
1) Detect
3) Proxy CAM 
(IEEE802.11p) 
Router A
Router B
Router C
Proxy CAM
Device 
2) Check IP list
IP list
 
Router B (IP)
Router C (IP)
Wired Connection
(Data Plane) 
Figure 2. Overview of Grid Proxy CAM with Passive selection.
more than the bandwidth, it is impossible to send all of them.
Thus, the transmitter selects the Proxy CAM and broadcasts
the selected packets. The factors for how to select the packets
would be the geographical distance to the original Proxy CAM
device, the street on which the original Proxy CAM device is
installed is the main street or not, the street is curvilinear or
not, the density of vehicles, if there is a fast-moving vehicle,
and if there is an emergency vehicle.
The procedure is as follows.
1)
A Proxy CAM generator detects the surrounding
vehicles and generates Proxy CAMs and sends to a
connected router.
2)
When the router receives the packets, it checks its
IP list and sends the packets to the routers listed.
The routes to them are established using the original
network protocols. Additionally, it sends the packets
to the directly connected transmitter.
3)
The directly connected transmitter broadcasts the
packets using IEEE 802.11p as soon as it receives
the packets.
4)
The transmitter also broadcasts the packets from other
Proxy CAM generators. However, if the data load of
the packets exceeds the capacity of IEEE 802.11p, it
selects the packets and drops the rest.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we proposed Grid Proxy CAM system that
uses RSUs as routers. Each router is connected to Proxy
CAM generator, transmitter, and also neighboring routers. We
introduced two methods of SDN routing and passive selection
that forward Proxy CAM packets and control their load.
SDN routing makes the route control easy and dynamic.
This makes the system ﬂexible to network and situational
changes (e.g., when a new road is built or an existing road
is extended). Additionally, all routes are deﬁned by an SDN
controller and the controller deﬁnes only the necessary routes.
Thus, the load to not only IEEE 802.11p that transmitters
use but also every wired connection in this system should be
minimum. In addition to these points, routers and transmitters
are not given some heavy task to handle the packets. This
means their performance can be low. Thus, the price for the
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

system can be low. On the other hand, SDN routing is done
by an SDN controller. This routing process can still be heavy.
Thus, the controller must be high-performance. Additionally,
if a failure occurs to the controller, all routers cannot change
the routes, which may cause the system to stop.
Passive selection is a decentralized system. This means
there is no single point of failure. Thus, this system is strong.
Additionally, this method does not require complex tasks and
uses legacy network technology. Thus, it is easy to install.
On the other hand, passive selection is not as ﬂexible as SDN
routing. It requires manual operation to change IP address lists
and the range of getting Proxy CAM. Additionally, this system
requires transmitters to select the packets. If this process takes
time, the property of real-time may be lost.
We are also considering that our previous work, Remote
Proxy CAM [4] can be combined with this Grid Proxy CAM.
The remote Proxy CAM system is composed of Proxy CAM
devices and a server. Vehicles can access the server by sending
a request with their position via LTE and can get Proxy CAM
information. When the server receives a request, it checks the
position of the source vehicle and gathers the Proxy CAM from
routers that are within a certain range from the vehicle. It then
sends them to the vehicle. In this system, vehicles use LTE
to communicate, and this wireless technology covers almost
every location in the city. Thus, theoretically, vehicles can get
all information from Proxy CAM devices in the city. With
this different characteristic, we are considering Grid Remote
Proxy CAM system that uses Grid Proxy CAM system for
collecting nearby Proxy CAMs and Remote Proxy CAM for
collecting remote Proxy CAMs. This combined system will
use both IEEE 802.11p and LTE. This means this system
disperses the network trafﬁc load and is also strong to radio
wave interference.
For future work, we plan to propose algorithms of SDN
controller’s altering ﬂow entries and passive selection’s select-
ing incoming packets. Additionally, we will implement this
system in a network simulator and perform experiments. With
the outcome of these experiments, we will discuss the effect
of the methods. In addition to this, we will implement the
combined Grid Remote Proxy CAM system and examine how
much this system improves safety.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was partly supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant
Number JP17H04678.
REFERENCES
[1]
ProPILOT, retrieved: 06, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.nissan-
global.com/JP/TECHNOLOGY/OVERVIEW/propilot.html
[2]
ETSI,
“TR
102
962
-
V1.1.1
-
Intelligent
Transport
Systems
(ITS);
Framework
for
Public
Mobile
Networks
in
Cooperative
ITS
(C-ITS),”
2012,
retrieved:
06,
2018.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi tr/102900 102999/102962/
01.01.01 60/tr 102962v010101p.pdf
[3]
IEEE Computer Society. LAN/MAN Standards Committee., Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers., and IEEE-SA Standards Board.,
IEEE standard for Information technology– telecommunications and
information exchange between systems– local and metropolitan area
networks– speciﬁc requirements : Part 11 : Wireless LAN medium
access control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) speciﬁcations :
Amendment 6: Wireless access in vehicular environments.
Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 2010, retrieved: 06, 2018.
[Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5514475/
[4]
M. Kitazawa, M. Tsukada, K. Morino, H. Ochiai, and H. Esaki,
“Remote Proxy V2V Messaging using IPv6 and GeoNetworking,” in
The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems,
Technologies and Applications (VEHICULAR 2017), July 2017, pp.
74–80, retrieved: 06, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://hal.archives-
ouvertes.fr/hal-01578410
[5]
Its,
“EN
302
636-5-1
-
V1.2.0
-
Intelligent
Trans-
port
Systems
(ITS);
Vehicular
Communications;
GeoNet-
working;
Part
5:
Transport
Protocols;
Sub-part
1:
Basic
Transport
Protocol,”
retrieved:
06,
2018.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi en/302600 302699/3026360501/
01.02.00 20/en 3026360501v010200a.pdf
[6]
——,
“TS
102
636-4-1
-
V1.1.1
-
Intelligent
Transport
Systems
(ITS);
Vehicular
communications;
GeoNetworking;
Part
4:
Geographical
addressing
and
forwarding
for
point-to-point
and
point-to-multipoint
communications;
Sub-part
1:
Media-
Independent Functionality,” retrieved: 06, 2018. [Online]. Avail-
able:
http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi ts/102600 102699/1026360401/
01.01.01 60/ts 1026360401v010101p.pdf
[7]
ETSI,
“EN
302
637-2
-
V1.3.1
-
Intelligent
Transport
Systems
(ITS);
Vehicular
Communications;
Basic
Set
of
Applications;
Part
2:
Speciﬁcation
of
Cooperative
Aware-
ness
Basic
Service,”
retrieved:
06,
2018.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi en/302600 302699/30263702/
01.03.02 60/en 30263702v010302p.pdf
[8]
ETSI
EN
302
637-3
v1.2.2(2014-11),
Intelligent
Transport
Systems(ITS); Vehicular Communications; Basic Set of Applications;
Part 3: Speciﬁcations of Decentralized Environmental Notiﬁcation
Basic
Service,
2014,
retrieved:
06,
2018.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi en/302600 302699/30263703/
01.02.02 60/en 30263703v010202p.pdf
[9]
Software-Deﬁned Networking (SDN) Deﬁnition, retrieved: 06, 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://www.opennetworking.org/sdn-deﬁnition/
[10]
M. Torrent-Moreno, P. Santi, and H. Hartenstein, “Fair sharing of
bandwidth in VANETs,” in Proceedings of the 2nd ACM international
workshop on Vehicular ad hoc networks - VANET ’05.
New York,
New York, USA: ACM Press, 2005, p. 49.
[11]
K. Zrar Ghafoor, K. AbuBakar, M. van Eenennaam, R. H. Khokhar, and
A. J. Gonzalez, “A fuzzy logic approach to beaconing for vehicular ad
hoc networks,” Telecommunication Systems, vol. 52, no. 1, January
2013, pp. 139–149.
[12]
K. Suriyapaibonwattana and C. Pomavalai, “An Effective Safety Alert
Broadcast Algorithm for VANET,” in 2008 International Symposium on
Communications and Information Technologies.
IEEE, October 2008,
pp. 247–250.
[13]
B. Liu, D. Jia, J. Wang, K. Lu, and L. Wu, “Cloud-Assisted Safety
Message Dissemination in VANETCellular Heterogeneous Wireless
Network,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 11, no. 1, March 2017, pp. 128–
139.
[14]
I. Ku et al., “Towards software-deﬁned VANET: Architecture and
services,” in 2014 13th Annual Mediterranean Ad Hoc Networking
Workshop (MED-HOC-NET).
IEEE, June 2014, pp. 103–110.
[15]
X. Ji, H. Yu, G. Fan, and W. Fu, “SDGR: An SDN-Based Geographic
Routing Protocol for VANET,” in 2016 IEEE International Conference
on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing and
Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social
Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData).
IEEE,
December 2016, pp. 276–281.
[16]
T. Kitazato, M. Tsukada, H. Ochiai, and H. Esaki, “Proxy cooperative
awareness message: an infrastructure-assisted v2v messaging,” in 2016
Ninth International Conference on Mobile Computing and Ubiquitous
Networking (ICMU), October 2016, pp. 1–6, retrieved: 06, 2018.
[Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7742092/
[17]
O. Shagdar, M. Tsukada, M. Kakiuchi, T. Toukabri, and T. Ernst,
“Experimentation towards ipv6 over ieee 802.11p with its station
architecture,” in International Workshop on IPv6-based Vehicular
Networks, June 2012, pp. 1–6, retrieved: 06, 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00702923
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

