Test Results for V2V and V2I Optical Camera Communications
Byung Wook Kim
Dept. of ICT Automotive Engineering
Hoseo University, Asansi, Korea 30332
Email: bw-kim@hoseo.edu
Hui-Jin Jeon, Soo-Keun Yun, Sung-Yoon Jung
Dept. of Electronic Engineering
Yeungnam University, Kyungsansi, Korea 30332
Email: {huijin,ysk1438,syjung}@yun.ac.kr
Abstract—Autonomous vehicles require the integration of multi-
ple communication systems. This paper presents test results of
vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-infra (V2I) optical camera
communications (OCC). The ﬂicker-free light emitting diode
(LED) light sources, providing illumination and data transmission
simultaneously, and a high speed camera are used as transmitters
and a receiver in the OCC link, respectively. Test results showed
that vehicle information sent by tail lamps of a running car ahead
and absolute location data sent by streetlights were successfully
received at a vehicle’s camera via the OCC link.
Keywords–Optical camera communications (OCC); vehicle-to-
vehicle (V2V); vehicle-to-infra (V2I).
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recently, many people demonstrate great interests in self-
driving technology and car makers move toward offering fully
autonomous vehicles. Although recent vehicles are equipped
with cameras, sensors, and software essential for driving
assistance, the advanced level of self-driving requires the
functionality of V2V and V2I communication [1]. The future
self-driving cars will talk to each other and also talk to any
road-side infrastructure equipped with dedicated short-range
communications (DSRC) and wireless access in vehicular
environment (WAVE) devices [2][3].
There exist some issues concerning the vehicle communi-
cation reliability of DSRC and WAVE devices because they use
radio frequency (RF) bands, which are vulnerable to multipath
fading and channel congestion. This issue is signiﬁcant when
data transmission of road/vehicle safety messaging and vehicle
safety control is required. Therefore, autonomous vehicles
require the integration of information transmitted via multiple
communication mediums.
With the widespread use of LED lights, optical camera
communications (OCC) technology [4][5] has gained interests
in a variety of ﬁelds. An OCC system is a new trend of
optical communication using a camera receiver at visible
light spectrum. As a back-up system to RF based vehicle
communications, OCC technology can be applied to V2V
and V2I communication for self-driving vehicles. Because the
implementation of an OCC system is based on pre-installed
LED lamps and cameras, an OCC system for vehicle commu-
nication requirea no substantial additional costs. Along with
the advantages of OCC, several researches related to wireless
communication in smart trafﬁc systems based on OCC have
been conducted recently [6][7].
This paper presents test results of ﬂicker-free OCC for V2V
and V2I communications. The ﬂicker-free light sources of car
tail lamps and streetlights were used as data transmitters. OCC
data can be received by a high speed camera via the OCC link.
Test results showed that reliable V2V/V2I communications
were provided using the OCC technology.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II outlines OCC data communication process. Section III
shows test results of OCC based V2V and V2I communications
and Section IV reports the discussion.
II.
DATA COMMUNICATION PROCESS
This section explains the process of data communications
via the OCC link. LED light sources, such as car tail lamps
and streetlights, offer both communication and illumination
performance. Because the human eye cannot perceive the light
pulses blinking at 200 Hz or higher frequency, a manchester
encoding method with a ﬂickering rate of greater than or equal
to 200 Hz was used. We set a data frame consisting of 8 bits
of synchronization data and 16 bits of information data.
At a receiver-side, a high speed camera captures images
with LED light sources containing OCC data and other light
noises. To extract the image pixel regions containing OCC
data, differential images were obtained and cumulated. An
image binarization process was then performed using an ap-
propriate intensity thresholds. To remove the additional noise
induced by a camera equipped in a moving vehicle, a morphol-
ogy erosion scheme was used. Then, region of interests (ROIs)
containing OCC data were obtained and symbolic label were
added to every ROIs. Because we set the same level of the
camera sampling rate and LED ﬂickering rate, a camera cap-
tures successive images containing “On” and “OFF” patterns
of OCC data. By analyzing the intensity of ROIs in successive
images, it is possible to obtain synchronization and information
bits.
III.
TEST RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section we show test results of what we achieved
during OCC ﬁeld tests. For the OCC data transmitter, LED
light sources controlled by an AVR microcontroller (AT-
mega128) were used. As a receiver, a high speed camera
(FL3-U3-20E4C-C) with global shutter was used. In subsec-
tion III-A, we illustrate the test process and results of V2V
OCC. Subsection III-B shows the results of V2I OCC and
performance of vehicle location estimation.
A. V2V optical camera communication
In a V2V OCC scenario, LED tail lamps of a running
car ahead (sedan) transmit data containing the car brake
information (No brake, brake level 1, 2, 3) and the distance
between tail lamps. Note that distance between tail lamps can
be used for vehicle width estimation, the distance estimation
from the car ahead and lane keeping assistance. As an OCC
receiver, a high speed camera was equipped in the following
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Figure 1. V2V communication scenario
Figure 2. V2V OCC data acquisition
SUV car. As shown in Fig. 2, the camera frame rate and LED
ﬂicker rate were set to 200 Hz. The vehicles run within a
speed of 40 km/hr. Fig. 3 shows that OCC data including the
car brake information and the distance between tail lamps were
received successfully even in a moving vehicle.
B. V2I optical camera communication
In a V2I scenario, we consider 6 LED streetlights trans-
mitting their absolute 3D location information. By receiving
these information using a high speed camera, the location of
a moving vehicle can be estimated. As shown in Fig. 4, the
camera frame rate and LED ﬂicker rate were set to 250 Hz.
It can be seen from Fig. 5 that the location estimation error
lies within a range of 1m. This means that an OCC system
can provide lane-level services for self-driving cars. When the
distance from the closest LED was approximately 27.5m, a
change point on the graph was observed due to the change in
the number of total observed LEDs sending OCC data.
C. Discussion
Test results of V2V OCC scenario proved that the informa-
tion from the running car ahead can be transmitted using LED
tail lamps and enhance the car safety aspect of self-driving
vehicles. In the results of V2I OCC case, absolute location
information was transmitted by LED streetlights and captured
images containing OCC data provided the estimated vehicle
location, with the location estimation error less than 1m.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by Basic Science Research
Program through the National Research Foundation of Ko-
Figure 3. V2I communication scenario
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Distance from the closest streetlights [m]
Location estimation error [m]
Vehicle location estimation using OCC
 
 
X−axis
Y−axis
Z−axis
Figure 4. Location estimation error using the received V2I OCC data
rea(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future
Planning(2016R1C1B1013942)
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Conti, A. Bazzi, B. Masini, and O. Andrisano, “Vehicular Networks:
Techniques, Standards, and Applications,” Boca Raton, FL, USA: Auer-
bach Publications, vol. 4, pp. 63-107, 2009.
[2]
D. Jiang and L. Delgrossi, “IEEE 802.11p: Towards an international
standard for wireless access in vehicular environments,” IEEE Vehicular
Technology Conference, IEEE, May 2008, pp. 2036-2040.
[3]
S. Eichler, “Performance evaluation of the IEEE 802.11p WAVE commu-
nication standard,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, IEEE, Oct.
2007, pp. 2199-2203.
[4]
The
IEEE
802.15.7a
Study
Group,
[Online].
Avail-
able
from:
https://mentor.ieee.org/
802.15/documents?is
dcn=DCN%2C%20Title%2C%20Author%
20or%20Afﬁliation
&
is
group=007a.
[5]
S. Rajagopal, R.D. Roberts, and S.-K.Lim, “IEEE802.15.7 visible light
communication: modulation schemes and dimming support,” IEEE Com-
munications Magazine, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 7282, 2012.
[6]
I. Takai, S. Ito, K. Yasutomi, K. Kagawa, M. Andoh, and S. Kawahito,
“LED and CMOS image sensor based optical wireless communication
system for automotive applications,” IEEE Photonics Journal, vol. 5, no.
5, 2013.
[7]
T. Nguyen, N. T. Le, and Y. M. Jang, “Asynchronous Scheme
for Optical Camera Communication-Based Infrastructure-to-Vehicle,”
International
Journal
of
Distributed
Sensor
Networks
vol.
2015,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2015/908139
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

