Car-driving Interface with Load Cells for Upper-extremity-disabled People 
Yoshitoshi Murata 
Faculty of Software and Information Science 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Japan 
e-mail: y-murata@iwate-pu.ac.jp 
Yuto Higuchi, Takaya Abe 
Radio Network Division 
DOCOMO Technology Inc. 
Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: {yuuto.higuchi.nb, takaya.abe.vb}@nttdocomo.com  
 
Abstract— Disabled people generally want to stand on their 
own two feet, and achieving mobility is an important step in 
satisfying that desire. A steering-operation unit for disabled 
people with disability in their arms was developed and 
experimentally evaluated. The unit consists of a set of load-cell 
sensors, one for turning right and one for turning left. The 
driver steps the right or left load cell to turn the car right or 
left. The magnitude of the driver’s stepping force is converted 
to a voltage and input to the power-steering motor. The 
angular velocity of the steering wheel corresponds to that 
voltage. As a result of this configuration, the driver can drive a 
car just by moving their foot and intuitively selects the load-
cell they must apply by foot to turn the car. Experimental 
results using a standard car fitted with the developed steering 
operation unit show that disabled people can drive the car with 
their foot in a manner close to that achieved with a steering 
wheel. 
Keywords-Car driving interface; disabled people; load cell; 
steering operation; foot operation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
People who have physical disabilities generally want to 
stand on their own two feet, and achieving mobility on their 
own is an important step in satisfying that desire. One way 
for them to enhance mobility is by driving cars fitted with 
driving-assistance devices. However, only a few driving 
interfaces that enable disabled people, especially people with 
arm and wrist disabilities, to drive cars have been developed. 
The first auxiliary device for people with arm and wrist 
disabilities, the original of Honda’s Franz system [1], was 
developed in the 1960s. As for this system, the car is 
operated with the feet only. Since the steering wheel is 
turned by pumping the pedals, its operation is not intuitive.  
The steering wheel in the system developed by Wada and 
Kameda in 2009 is controlled with a joystick, and the brake 
and accelerator are controlled with another joystick [2]. This 
system has aided many disabled people, but a certain amount 
of arm strength is needed to operate the joysticks. Moreover, 
the levers onto which the joysticks are fixed have to be 
customized to match the hand positions of individual users. 
In any case, mechanical devices, such as these lack 
flexibility and must be customized for individual users; 
hence, cars customized is this manner are inherently 
expensive. 
At a glance, the autonomous car would be ideal solutions 
for disabled persons. In addition to those developed by 
Google, autonomous cars have been developed by many car 
manufacturers [3]. However, many disabled persons would 
like to not only reach a destination but also enjoy driving the 
car. Although several technologies, such as automatic 
braking and lane keeping, developed for autonomous 
vehicles would enable them to drive safely, riding in an 
autonomous vehicle would not satisfy their desire to drive. 
A current realistic solution for disabled persons is to 
control steering with bodily appendages they can move. We 
have developed several kinds of steering-operation units 
until now. In case of the first operation unit we developed, 
namely, an angle sensor, the angle of the steering wheel 
changes according to the angle of a joint of the driver, such 
as the wrist or ankle [4]. As for the result of an experiment 
using the operation unit fitted in an experimental electric 
vehicle, the driver could drive the vehicle with the operation 
unit and achieved steering close to that with a steering wheel 
on gently curved roads. However, it was difficult for the 
driver to turn the car at intersections. To address that 
problem, we changed the angle sensor to a load-cell sensor 
[5].  
We fitted the load-cell sensor in a standard car with a 
power-steering unit. A steering-control unit was designed for 
people with arm and wrist disabilities, and it was operated by 
the left foot. Since we noticed that it was difficult for a 
disabled driver to drive a car by forward and backward 
movement, not right and left movement, the steering-control 
unit consisted of a set of right and left load-cell sensors. The 
driver stepped on the right or left load cell to turn the car 
right or left. Results of an experiment using the developed 
steering-operation unit showed that the driver could drive the 
car with their left foot in a manner close to that achieved 
with a steering wheel on roads with not only gentle curves 
but also sharp bends. 
After introducing related works in Section II, actions by 
body parts suited for driving are explained in Section III, and 
results of our previous experiments using the angle-sensor 
operation unit fitted in an experimental vehicle are presented 
in Section IV. As for our latest study, described in Section V, 
we investigated whether the load-cell-sensor operation unit 
can be applied as a driving-interface unit. Section VI 
concludes this paper.  
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Highly functional steering wheels have been developed 
by researchers in car manufactures or universities to easily 
drive a car for usual healthy people [6][7]. Sucu and Folmer 
challenged to develop a steering wheel for blind drivers [8]. 
Since the purpose of this study is to design an operation 
interface mainly for disabled people who has disabilities in 
the arm and/or wrist, we introduced existing advanced 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

driving interfaces for people who have difficulty moving 
their arms and/or hands. 
A. Franz system 
The Franz system used by Honda is aimed at people who 
have difficulty moving their arms and hands [1]. The user 
operates a car fitted with the system with only their feet. It 
was originally implemented in a Honda Civic in 1982, 
which was the first vehicle to introduce the Franz system in 
Japan. It has now been implemented in a Honda Fit. The 
steering wheel is turned right or left by pumping a steering 
pedal (see Figure 1). The transmission is shifted into drive 
by lifting the selection bar, into reverse by pushing it down, 
and into park by pushing it further down. The turn signals 
and windshield wipers are operated by turning levers with 
the right and left knees. Power windows and lights are 
controlled by flipping switches up or down with the right 
foot or knee. 
(1) Steering pedal
(2) Steering box
(3) Brake lock button
(4) Selection bar for feet
(5) Side brake for knee
(6) Sub-brake for exercise
Wiper lever for left knee
Winker lever for  right knee
Combination switch es
 
Figure 1. Honda’s Franz system 
B. Joystick operation 
Several kinds of the joystick-operation unit are available. 
Such a unit is usually adopted for people who do not have 
enough strength to control a steering wheel, an accelerator 
pedal, or a brake pedal because of a disability, such as a 
spinal-cord injury. They use joysticks instead of a steering 
wheel and pedals. The operation unit showed in Figure 2 
was developed by Wada and Kameda [2]. It is available as 
two types. One is a single stick, by which steering, braking, 
and acceleration are controlled with one joystick. The other 
is a double stick, by which the joystick on the right controls 
the steering and that on the left controls acceleration and 
braking. The double-stick type is shown in Figure 2.  
The relationship between the angle of the steering wheel 
and the angle of the joystick is a polyline, as shown in 
Figure 3. It means that the driver can sensitively control the 
steering wheel around a neutral position and turn the wheel 
quickly when making a wide turn. People who can freely 
move their hands can drive cars with this device. However, 
such mechanical devices must be customized to fit 
individual users’ disabilities and physical form. 
 
Figure 2. Wada and Kameda’s joystick driving interface 
50
100
- 50
-100
50
100
-50
-100
Angle of joystick (%)
Angle of steering
wheel (%)
 
Figure 3. Relationship between angle of joystick and angle of steering 
wheel 
III. 
DRIVING ACTION BY BODY PARTS 
The purpose of this study is to design an operation 
interface for disabled people that is operated by body parts 
moving smoothly instead of by hand. In a previous study, 
therefore, we measured car-control characteristics for several 
actions: rolling the ankle, moving the forefinger, moving the 
wrist, rolling the lower arm, moving the lower arm backward 
and forward, and moving the upper arm backward and 
forward [9]. The results obtained from the questionnaires 
(answered by 29 participants) are summarized in Table I. 
Most people chose the same action, such as rolling the lower 
arm, for motions that led to right or left movement of the car. 
For example, someone may move their finger down to turn a 
car to the right, while another may move their finger up to 
turn to the right. Hence, we obtained information about 
different 
motions 
by 
individuals 
by 
administering 
questionnaires 
before 
measuring 
the 
car-control 
characteristics.  
However, the number of people who chose alternative 
actions, such as moving their fingers up or down, was 
roughly the same for actions that did not lead to right or left 
movement of the car. For example, 86% of people chose 
rolling their right lower arm to the right to turn the car to the 
right. However, 52% of participants chose “up” and 48% of 
them chose “down” for moving their left finger up or down.   
The results listed in Table 1 show that the operation unit 
must be operated by the actions that lead to right and left 
movement of the car. 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

IV. 
OPERATION UNIT USING ANGLE SENSOR 
An operation unit using an angle sensor was developed 
and fitted in an electric vehicle. Three angle sensors were 
evaluated: a chromium-nickel sensor developed by the 
Research Institute for Electromagnetic Materials [10] and 
TMI-160 developed by Toyo Sokki Co., Ltd [11]. 
According to the results of the evaluation, TMI-160 was 
selected and attached to the parts of a subject’s body, as 
shown in Figure 4. In this experiment, an experimental 
electric vehicle, PIUS [12], developed by MODI Co., Ltd., 
showed in Figure 5, was used. The driver shown in this 
figure has a disability due to taking the drug Thalidomide. 
Her arms are too short to operate a steering wheel. 
Nevertheless, she can operate a stick steering control system 
mounted on the vehicle chassis with her fingers. Servo 
motors were attached to the steering wheel, accelerator 
pedal, and brake pedal so they could be controlled by the 
sensor operation unit. 
The drivability of the driving operation unit using the 
angle sensor was experimentally evaluated. The test courses 
used in the evaluation are a straight course, a square course, 
and a circuit course (see Figure 6). The drivability in terms 
of “straightness” and “turnability” were evaluated with the 
straight course and square course. 
 
 
Figure 4. Mounting situation of angle sensor TMI-160 
 
Figure 5. Experimental electric vehicle PIUS 
 
Overall performance of the driving operation unit was 
evaluated with the circuit course.  
In each test, the length between the right front tire and 
the center line on the straight and circuit courses was 
measured. Its average and Standard Deviation (SD) are 
listed in Table II. The standard deviation was assumed to 
shows the fluctuation. The number of participants in the 
tests was five. Sensors were attached to the middle finger, 
wrist, and ankle of the participants.  
We measured the same data by the steering wheel 
operation to compare with them by the angle sensor unit. As 
introduced in Section III, it is difficult for a driver to 
imagine turning the car to the right or left from the up-down 
action of the thumb. Therefore, we suggested to the 
participants to turn their thumb upward. The action of the 
thumb and ankle control the right or left motion of the car in 
this position. In the case of driving by moving the ankle, we 
suggested to the subjects to tilt their knee outwards to easily 
image the right or left movement of their ankle. The SD of 
the measurements taken by the angle-sensor operation unit 
was greater than that of those taken by steering wheel. 
However, the difference in SDs was not significant. 
TABLE I. RESULTS FROM QUESTIONNAIRES ABOUT ACTIONS FOR TURNING THE CAR TO THE RIGHT 
Left hand 
Turn to right 
Right hand 
Turn to right 
Finger 
Up 
15 
Finger 
Up 
18 
Down 
14 
Down 
11 
Finger 
Right 
26 
Finger 
Forward (Right) 
27 
Forward (Left) 
3 
Left 
2 
Wrist 
Up 
16 
Wrist 
Up 
16 
Down 
13 
Down 
13 
Wrist 
Right 
24 
Wrist 
Right 
27 
Left 
5 
Left 
2 
Lower arm 
Forward 
11 
Lower arm 
Forward 
21 
Backward 
18 
Backward 
8 
Lower arm 
Right 
25 
Lower arm 
Right 
28 
Left 
4 
Left 
1 
Upper arm 
Forward 
17 
Upper arm 
Forward 
14 
Backward 
12 
Backward 
15 
 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

A research partner, Ms. Masuyama was requested to 
evaluate the driving operation unit. She usually drives a car 
fitted with the Frantz system. She operated a stick operation 
unit by her fingers showed in Figure 5, and a sensor 
attached to her ankle. She drove the car fitted in this manner 
on the circuit course. The results of the measurements taken 
by the angle sensor are listed in Table III and plotted in 
Figure 7. According to these results, she could drive the car 
very well. Especially, her fluctuation characteristics were 
better than those in the case of using the steering wheel. 
Drivability in terms of turning was also evaluated by 
using the square course (Figure 8). Three participants drove 
three laps on the square course in both the clockwise and 
counter-clockwise directions. The driver turned twelve 
corners in each direction. In this experiment, the number of 
times the driver drove out of course at the corners was 
recorded. The results of the experiment are listed in Table 4. 
According to these results, unfortunately, every participant 
could not turn the corners well by using the angle-sensor 
operation unit. 
 
 
Figure 6. Test courses 
 
Figure 7. Distance from center line 
TABLE II. DRIVING CHARACTERISTICS IN THE CASE OF DRIVING ON THE STRAIGHT AND CIRCULAR COURSES 
 USING THE ANGLE-SENSOR OPERATION UNIT 
Course 
Operation 
Running time 
[m.:s.] 
Average [cm] 
SD [cm] 
Straight 
Middle -finger 
0: 58 
53.3 
6.6 
Wrist 
1: 03 
56.2 
7.0 
Ankle 
1: 04 
55.8 
6.2* 
S. wheel 
0.59 
54.0 
6.1 
Circuit 
Middle -finger 
6: 12 
56.3 
8.2 
Wrist 
6: 22 
56.5 
10.0 
Ankle 
7: 03 
53.3 
9.4 
S. wheel 
6: 17 
55.3 
7.0 
* One participant drove out of course; therefore, their data was discarded. 
TABLE III. EVALUATION EXPERIMENTS USING A SUBJECT WITH DISABILITY 
Device / BP 
Running time 
[m.:s.] 
Length from center line 
Average [cm] 
SD [cm] 
Stick operation unit 
8:37 
61.3 
8.7 
Ankle 
8:22 
59.0 
5.8 
*BP: Body parts 
TABLE IV. THE NUMBER OF TIMES THE DRIVER DROVE OUT OF COURSE AT THE CORNERS 
 
Device/BP 
Clockwise 
Counter clockwise 
A 
B 
C 
Av 
A 
B 
C 
Av 
The number of 
course out 
SW 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
1 
1 
1 
Mid-finger 
7 
4 
6 
6 
8 
3 
4 
5 
Wrist 
9 
7 
5 
7 
9 
6 
3 
6 
Ankle 
12 
9 
10 
10 
11 
8 
9 
9 
Rate of course out 
SW 
0 
0 
0 
0 
17 
8 
8 
11 
Mid-finger 
58 
33 
50 
47 
67 
25 
33 
42 
Wrist 
75 
58 
42 
58 
75 
50 
25 
50 
Ankle 
100 
75 
83 
86 
92 
67 
75 
78 
*BP: Body parts, A/B/C: Participants 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 8. Square course for right and left turn 
 
V. 
OPERATION UNIT USING LOAD CELL SENSOR 
Participants could smoothly drive the car with the 
angle-sensor operation unit on the circuit and straight course, 
but they could not drive so well on the square course. Lock-
to-lock angle of the steering wheel is about 800 degrees. On 
the other hand, the maximum range of movement of their 
body parts is roughly 90 degrees. That means it is very 
difficult for the angle-sensor operation unit attached to the 
body part to correspond to the lock-to-lock angle of the 
steering wheel. In consideration of that fact, the angle sensor 
was replaced with a load cell sensor. First, whether a load 
cell sensor operation unit can control the car with the hand 
in the same manner as the load cell operation unit was 
experimentally examined. According to the results of that 
experiment, the driver could drive the car by applying 
enough force. Based on that result, a load cell operation unit 
operated by foot was developed. 
The load cell sensor operation unit is available for use as 
a driving operation unit. Hence, we designed a driving 
operation unit for people with arm and wrist disabilities. 
Since this operation unit comprised right and left load cells 
(see Figure 9), the driver can intuitively select a load cell 
and step on it to turn the car to the right or left. In this 
experiment, a load cell, Pedal Force Sensor (PFS) developed 
by Toyo Sokki co. ltd [5] was selected because it is easy to 
step on. The operation unit was connected to the power-
steering motor of a standard car (namely, a Nissan Micra) as 
the test car. The operation unit was mounted on the car as 
shown in Figure 10. In the case of the power-steering motor, 
the steering rotation speed is changed according to an 
impressed voltage. Therefore, intensity of force applied to 
the load cell corresponds to the rotation speed of steering 
wheel (not to the angle of rotation of the steering wheel). 
Two control schemes were examined to determine the 
relationship between intensity of force applied to the load 
cell and control power supplied to the steering unit. Each 
control scheme is listed as follows: 
“Digitize” scheme 
(1) No intensity: the steering wheel is free. It returns to 
the neutral position by the force from the tires. 
(2) Very weak: a foot is just put on the load cell, no 
stepping; the steering wheel stops at its position. 
(3) Weakly stepping on: the steering wheel rotates 
slowly. 
(4) Strongly stepping on: the steering wheel rotates 
quickly. 
“Continuous” scheme 
(1) Same as digitize scheme (1). 
(2) Same as digitize scheme (2) 
(3) Stepping on: rotation speed of the steering wheel 
changes according to intensity of the stepping force. 
 
Drivability of the car fitted with the driving operation 
unit using the load-cell sensor operated by foot was 
experimentally evaluated. The results are shown in Table V. 
The test courses used in the evaluation were the straight 
course and circuit course (described in Section IV). 
Measurement data were also the same as that presented in 
Sections IV and V. The number of participants was seven. 
The driving characteristics are a little worse than those of 
the car operated by the angle-sensor operation unit and load-
cell-sensor operation unit for the hand. 
After that, turning drivability was evaluated. Since 
drivability of the car driven by the load cell sensor operation 
unit for the foot is superior to that in the case of the angle-
sensor operation unit, the right/left-angle corner was used, 
and a white line was painted on the course to indicate traffic 
lanes, as shown in Figure 11. Each of the five participants in 
the test drove the car three times by using the load cell 
operation unit for the foot in each direction. For the sake of 
comparison, they also drove the car with the steering wheel. 
In this experiment, the number of drivers went out of the 
traffic lane was counted. According to the results of the 
experiment, every participant did not drive out of traffic 
lane in both the steering wheel and load cell operation unit 
for foot.  
Since the drivers could drive the car well with a 
combination the digitized scheme and the power-steering 
unit, it was concluded that the drivers can also drive a 
standard car fitted with an operation device that has a 
neutral step and three steps each for right and left turning, 
totally seven steps. As such a device, an angle or load-cell 
sensor are usable, but not necessary.  
TABLE V. DRIVING CHARACTERISTICS IN CASE OF STRAIGHT AND 
CIRCULAR COURSES BY OPERATING THE LOAD-CELL-SENSOR OPERATION 
UNIT BY FOOT 
Corse 
Operation 
Method 
Length from center line 
SD [cm] 
Straight 
S. wheel 
3.7 
Digitize 
5.0 
Continuous 
6.2 
Circuit 
S. wheel 
8.7 
Digitize 
10.2 
Continuous 
10.6 
 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

We think the angle sensor or rotary encoder is one of 
best devices to be controlled by body parts (as mentioned in 
Section IV). Until now, it is expensive for disabled people 
to customize their car. However, they could drive their car if 
the sensor operation unit was simply connected to its power-
steering motor. This operation unit is very flexible and 
cheap, and their car does not need to be significantly 
customized. 
 
 
Figure 9. Operation of load-cell-sensor unit 
 
 
Figure 10. Operation unit mounted in a car 
 
 
Figure 11. Right/Left-angle corner used for evaluating turning drivability 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Several kinds of driving operation units for disabled 
people have been developed. With one of those units, an 
angle-sensor operation unit, the driver could drive well on 
roads with gentle curve. However, this sensor unit was 
found to be unsuitable for sharp corners. Accordingly, the 
angle sensor was replaced with a load-cell sensor. It was 
experimentally shown that the driver can control the angle 
of the steering wheel by adjusting the intensity of the 
stepping force they apply to the load cell. By connecting the 
load-cell operation unit to the power-steering unit on a 
standard car, it was experimentally shown that the driver 
can control the rotation speed of the steering wheel by 
adjusting the intensity of force applied to the unit. A driver 
could drive the car in a manner close to that achieved with a 
steering wheel after just a bit more practice than needed for 
a steering wheel. Moreover, it was found that a device that 
has seven steps, for example, an angle-sensor operation unit 
with seven steps, is suitable for enabling physically disabled 
people to drive a car. Since such a unit is very flexible, 
cheap, and needs little customization to fit in a car, it would 
be suitable for physically disabled people. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Thanks to Kazuhiro Yoshida, Toshiyuki Sato and 
Akihiro Itami for help in performing this research. This 
work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 
16K00276. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Development of Honda's Franz System Car; 
http://www.honda.co.jp/50years-
history/challenge/1982franzsystemcar/index.html, 
[in Japanese, retrieved: May 2019] 
[2] M. Wada and F. Kameda, “A joystick car drive system with seating in 
a wheelchair,” IEEE IECON ’09, pp. 2163-2168, November 2009. 
[3] S. L. Poczter and L. M. Jankovic, “The Google Car: Driving Toward 
A Better Future?,” Clute Institute , Journal of Business Case Studies, 
Vol. 10, No. 1, pp. 7-14, 2014. 
[4] T. Minato, Y. Murata,  A. Suzuki, N. Sato, and Y. Sasaki, 
“Development of Automobile Driving Interface with Strain Sensor 
for Disabled People,” Information Processing Society of Japan, CDS 
Transaction, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 1-11, 2016 [in Japanese]. 
[5] PFS, TOYO SOKKI Co. Ltd.,  
http://www.toyo-sokki.co.jp/download/pfs/pfs_catalog.pdf， 
[in Japanese, retrieved: May 2019]. 
[6] B. Pfleging, S. Schneegass, and A. Schmidt, “Multimodal Interaction 
in the Car - Combining Speech and Gestures on the Steering Wheel,” 
ACM, AutomotiveUI '12, pp. 155-162, 2012. 
[7] S. Anand, J. Terken, and J. Hogema, “Individual Differences in 
Preferred Steering Effort for Steer-by-Wire Systems,” ACM, 
AutomotiveUI '11, pp. 55-62, 2011. 
[8] B. Sucu and E. Folmer, “The Blind Driver Challenge: Steering using 
Haptic Cu,” ACM, ASSETS’14, pp. 3-10, 2014. 
[9] Y. Murata and K. Yoshida, “Automobile Driving Interface Using 
Gesture Operations for Disabled People,” IARIA, International 
Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, pp.329-
341, 2013. 
[10] Research Institute for Electromagnetic Materials, 
http://www.denjiken.or.jp/d-htm/research/group.html,  
[in Japanese, retrieved: May 2019]. 
[11] TMI-160, TOYO SOKKI Co. Ltd.,  
http://www.toyo-sokki.co.jp/pdf/TMI-160.pdf， 
[in Japanese, retrieved: May 2019]. 
[12] PIUS Kit Car, http://www.pius-kitcar.com/,  
[in Japanese, retrieved: May 2019]. 
 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

