Towards Vehicle-Assisted Adaptive Wireless GeoMesh Network for Smarter Cities
Yin Chen∗, Takuro Yonezawa∗ and Jin Nakazawa†
∗Graduate School of Media and Governance
†Faculty of Environment and Information Studies
Keio University, Endo 5322, Fujisawa, Kanagawa, Japan
Email: {yin,takuro,jin}@ht.sfc.keio.ac.jp
Abstract—Recent development in low-power wireless networks
enables us to deploy IoT (Internet of Things) devices in an entire
city with low maintenance and management cost. However, since
such IoT devices cannot have ﬁne-grained location sensors, such
as GPS, types of applications with the IoT devices must be limited.
This paper proposes a method of ﬁne-grained location estimation
for IoT devices in low-power wireless networks, speciﬁcally
Wi-SUN (Wireless Smart Utility Network). We leverage public
vehicles, which go around over an entire city almost everyday
with mounting a GPS sensor and Wi-SUN link. The vehicular
devices are used to collect GPS data for learning the relationships
between the radio strength measured at Wi-SUN stations and
the locations of IoT devices. With the learned data, we expect to
estimate the ﬁne-grained location of a Wi-SUN device.
Keywords–Wi-SUN; Localization; Vehicular Network.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The increasing concentration of the world’s population in
urban areas places the cities in a spotlight. Indeed, on 2%
of the earth’s surface, cities actually use 75% of the world
resources [1]. These aspects inevitably make the cities impor-
tant actors for the world’s sustainable development strategy.
Especially in developed countries including Japan, problems
on people (e.g., continuousely increasing aging population
and weakened links of communities) and problems on city
infrastructure (e.g., worn roads, bridges and buildings) in
urban areas are considered as one of the biggest social prob-
lems. Moreover, cities must have tenacious and dependable
functionalities against big disasters, such as earthquakes or
typhoons. To solve these problems, ICT (Information and
Communication Technologies) have to be more integrated and
leveraged to support urban life for citizens, municipalities and
businesses. Especially, IoT technology and networks to support
IoT are promising ways to enhancing both awareness of cities’
contexts and responsiveness of activities.
Recent development in wireless ad-hoc network technolo-
gies offers several practical protocols, such as WiFi, Bluetooth,
Zigbee, Wi-SUN [2], LoRa [3] and SIGFOX. Compared to net-
works as ﬁxed infrastructure, ad-hoc networks have advantages
of ﬂexibility and adaptability. Especially, in this research, we
focus on low-power communication protocols, such as Wi-
SUN and LoRa, because low-power consumption is one of
the key requirements for easy maintenance and management
of IoT deployed in a city. To get the beneﬁt of low-power
consumption, IoT devices should not have a high power-
consuming location sensors, such as GPS (Global Positioning
System). However, ﬁne-grained location information is indis-
pensable to support various smart cities applications.
In this paper, we propose a ﬁne-grained location estimation
method in Wi-SUN mesh networks. To achieve the goal,
we leverage public vehicles to collect ﬁngerprint of radio
strength measured at Wi-SUN stations and ground-truth GPS
coordinates for location estimation. Public vehicles, such as
garbage trucks, move around over an entire city almost ev-
eryday. Therefore, we can obtain timely relationships between
radio strength and GPS locations, and adapt the relationship
for Wi-SUN devices to estimate locations accurately. The
contributions of the paper are as follows:
•
Addressing the problem for ﬁne-grained location es-
timation in wireless mesh network with low-power
consumption protocols.
•
Proposing a method to improve the location estimation
accuracy by leveraging public vehicles.
The rest of the paper are organized as follows. Section II
introduces Wi-SUN mesh networks and the location estimation
problem. We describe our proposed approach for location
estimation in Section III. Section IV makes a brief review of
related work. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section V.
II.
LOCATION ESTIMATION PROBLEM IN WIRELESS MESH
NETWORKS
This section ﬁrstly introduces Wi-SUN, the adopted wire-
less communication protocol. Then, we discuss the location
estimation problem in Wi-SUN mesh networks.
A. Wi-SUN
Wi-SUN, short for Wireless Smart Ubiquitous Network, is
a wireless speciﬁcation using IEEE802.15.4g in PHY layer and
IEEE802.15.4e in MAC layer. Wi-SUN is designed to meet the
requirements for M2M/IoT communication, such as low cost,
low power consumption, autonomous operation. Compared to
other LPWA (Low Power and Wide Area) protocols, such as
LoRaWAN or SIGFOX, Wi-SUN supports up to 300 Kbps
bandwidth, and forms not only star topology but also mesh
topology called Wi-SUN FAN (Field Area Network). These
features allow for multiple and redundant connection paths
with high network performance compared to other LPWA
protocols, so that it provides a reliable IoT network service
for smart cities.
In our project, we will deploy a wireless mesh network
with Wi-SUN FAN in Fujisawa city, Japan. In Fujisawa,
like in all the other cities in Japan, emergency municipal
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

radio communication stations are installed about every 200
meters for public announcement of emergency information,
such as evacuation. We integrate those stations and Wi-SUN
FAN networks to provide a communication network covering
the entire city. Figure 1 maps the locations of all the radio
communication stations in Fujisawa city. The communication
range of Wi-SUN is around 500 meters, therefore, deploying
Wi-SUN base stations to the stations forms a practical wireless
mesh network over the entire city.
250m
Example of
Radio Station
Figure 1: Locations of emergency municipal radio
communication stations in Fujisawa city, Japan
B. Location estimation in Wi-SUN mesh network
The location is an important information for many appli-
cation scenarios in Wi-SUN and other LPWA protocols. One
of the typical use cases is to watch over elderly people of
dementia; when an elderly is abnormally wandering away from
home, a sensor device with Wi-SUN beacon attached to him,
will detect the abnormality and let care-workers and families
know his locations. Similar applications are also useful for
young children or pets.
Usually, the location of a device in Wi-SUN network
is estimated through identifying which Wi-SUN station is
closest to the device. However, this only estimates the device’s
location as a radius of about 200 meters. This granularity is too
wide when targeting people to be watched over for protection.
To estimate accurate locations, triangulation can be adapted by
measuring Wi-SUN device’s RSSI (Received Signal Strength
Indication) at multiple Wi-SUN stations, the locations of which
are known. However, since signal strength varies greatly in
different environmental conditions (e.g., weather, season and
so on), detailed relationships between RSSI and the locations
should be updated timely. This limitation makes the estimation
of accruate locations very difﬁcult, because there is no suitable
model to updating the relationship in an entire city. We propose
an approach to solve the problem in the next section.
III.
IMPROVE ESTIMATION WITH PUBLIC VEHICLES
In this section, we ﬁrst describe the architecture of the
proposed system and then introduce the idea of vehicle-assisted
location estimation and the automotive sensing platform to be
adopted in our research, respectively.
A. Overview of the proposed system
As shown in Figure 2, we will implement in this research a
system that consists of self-developed Wi-SUN edge devices,
Wi-SUN base stations and vehicular devices with GPS receiver
and Wi-SUN module. The Wi-SUN edge devices will be
attached to users, e.g., young children, the elderly and pets. The
base stations will be deployed to emergency municipal radio
communication stations of Fujisawa city. The devices broad-
cast signals periodically or when requested by base stations. If
a base station is in the vicinity of a edge device, it will be able
to measure the RSSI of the edge device. Via the collaboration
of multiple base stations, it is envisioned that locations of the
edges devices can be estimated via triangulation. The vehicular
devices will be installed into garbage trucks of Fujisawa city
and collect GPS data of their locations to assist the location
estimation of base stations.
R7
R8
R9
Location
Fingerprint
Garbage Truck
with GPS+WiSUN
R1
R2
R3
R6
R4
R5
… Rn
R1 R2 R3 R4
… Rn
RSSI
station
(lat,lon) ={132.331, 38.133}
WiSUN RSSI
GPS location
Data for training
Learning, Classification
omimamori
WiSUN
Device
R5
WiSUN Station
WiSUN RSSI
Location
Estimation
Figure 2: System overview
B. Vehicular-assisted location estimation
In outdoor environment, the propagation of wireless signals
may be affected directly or indirectly by weather, seasons,
buildings and so on, so that the wireless signal strength
(RSSI) would be variable over time. In this research, we
propose to use public vehicles, like buses, taxi cars or garbage
trucks, equipped with GPS and Wi-SUN module, to enhance
the accuracy of location estimation at the base stations. In
particular, these vehicles will broadcast their locations, i.e.,
GPS coordinations, as they move around in the city. The base
stations in the vicinity of these vehicles will receive these GPS
data and also measure the corresponding RSSI of these signals
transmitted from the trucks. The GPS data and RSSI data will
be further analyzed to ﬁnd the relationship between locations
and wireless signal strength, which in turn can be used to
improve the location estimation of our system. It is notable that
since public vehicles typically roam around over their cities
almost everyday, so timely update can be expected.
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3: Sensor node of Cruisers.
Figure 4: The coverage of Cruisers. The size of a cell is set
to 100m × 100m. A cell is marked with red color if a truck
of Cruisers visits the grid at least once per three days.
C. Cruisers: an automotive sensing platform
In our past research, an automotive sensing platform called
Cruisers has been deployed to garbage collection trucks in
Fujisawa. The Cruisers platform will be used in this research to
serve as the host of vehicular devices. As shown in Figure 3, a
sensing module containing a GPS receiver and environmental
sensors are developed and installed on the roof of garbage
trucks. The sensor data are read by the small computer with
embedded 3G connectivity, called OpenBloks BX1, and sent
to backend servers over a carrier network.
Figure 5: Fine-grained sensing of Cruisers
The city operates 140 garbage trucks for waste collecting
and 66 of them have been equipped with the platform by
June, 2017. The garbage trucks provide a good coverage on
Japanese cities, since the garbage collecting system in Japan
works in a daily and door-to-door fashion. In Japan, each
house/mansion maintains at least one garbage container located
in a nearby roadside. Following the schedule made by local
government, residents will throw their family waste to the
container in the early morning of each collecting day (i.e., the
days, typically weekdays, that garbage collecting trucks come
to collect waste). Meanwhile, the garbage collecting trucks
operated by local governments are organized to visit these
containers successively to collect house waste.
Based on the GPS data accumulated from Cruisers, it has
been shown that a wide coverage can be achieved [4]. Figure 4
shows the Cruisers’ coverage performance. In Figure 4, the
urban area of the city are divided into a grid of 100m×100m.
A cell is marked with red color if a truck of Cruisers visits
the grid at least once per three days. Since we haven’t fully
deployed the platform to all the garbage trucks, we mainly
cover the southern part of the city. The Cruisers-attached
trucks visit all the residents’ houses in the southern part,
implying it covers the area where residents’ activities are held.
Additionally, with the platform, a ﬁne-grained data collection
can be achieved as shown in Figure 5. The sensory data are
sent to the backend servers in 100Hz. Supposing a truck is
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

driving at 40km/h, the 100Hz sensing will give us a set of
sensor data for each 11.1cm.
IV.
RELATED WORK
The recent progress in ICT like IoT, 5G and LPWA has
inspired a number of wireless mesh network applications in
smart cities. In [5], the authors proposed a wireless mesh
sensor network based on WiFi and discussed its applications
in smart grid, agriculture and environment protection. While
WiFi provides a high bandwidth, its high energy consumption
hinders its application in power-limited scenarios. A routing
protocol was proposed in [6] to use Bluetooth devices to
construct wireless mesh networks. Simulation was also con-
ducted in [6] to show how the proposed protocol outperforms
conventional routing schemes like blood routing in terms of
energy consumption. A data collecting scheme using frame
aggregation of Wi-SUN was proposed in [7] to improve the
data aggregation efﬁciency of a WSN of smart meters. It
is notable that compared with mature wireless networking
technologies, like WiFi and cellular communication, LPWA
technologies like Wi-SUN, LoRa and SIGFOX achieve long
range communications as well as low power consumption,
making them promising options for smart cities.
Node positioning is a fundamental problem in power-
limited wireless networks where a GPS module is not practical
due to its high power consumption. While node positioning
has been widely explored in wireless sensor networks [8] and
cellular networks [9], node positioning in Wi-SUN networks
remains a not well investigated area. On the other hand, WiFi-
based approach has also been proposed to enhance GPS service
in indoor environment [10]. It is envisioned that while the
methods and experience obtained from previous research are
helpful, the wireless radiation in the proposed network will
be more sensitive to environment factors like weather, so that
new estimation methods are required to address these issues.
Finally, how to effectively utilize vehicular nodes to improve
the estimation accuracy is also an interesting problem.
Automotive sensing is a novel sensing technology where
sensors are installed into vehicles to utilize vehicles’ mobility
to conduct urban sensing. Besides our work [4][11], a couple of
applications have also been proposed in the literature. In [12],
the authors equipped nuclear radiation sensors to agricultural
vehicles to detect nuclear pollution on farmland at Fukushima,
where a nuclear leakage accident occurred after the Great East
Japan earthquake. The authors of [13] used smartphones stood
on the dashboard of a car to detect good view of ﬂowering
cherries along roadside. An on-demand air quality monitoring
system using public vehicles was proposed in [14], where
the authors studies how to adapt the monitoring behavior of
sensors in order to accumulate sufﬁcient information of air
with a relatively few number of vehicles.
V.
CONCLUSION
The paper propose a method to estimating ﬁne-grained lo-
cations in Wi-SUN mesh networks. To solve unstable RSSI in
outdoor environment, we propose to leverage sensorized public
vehicles for collecting relationships between RSSI and GPS
locations. By providing accurate locations, various applications
will be inspired. As the ﬁrst step, we have developed an au-
tomotive sensing platform called Cruisers. We will implement
and delpoy all the components of the system, and evaluate its
location estimation accuracy and feasibility in Fujisawa city.
Through our research, vehicles should play an important role
not only in wireless mesh network but also to support ﬁne-
grained location estimation. Thus, our study will open up a
new networking model of vehicle-integrated functional city
networks to support various smart city applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research and development work was supported by the
MIC/SCOPE #171503013.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. von Uexk¨ull and H. Girardet, Shaping our future: Creating
the World Future Council.
Green Books, May 2005, URL:
http://digital.library.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metadc13722/ [retrieved: 2017-
06-24].
[2]
“Wi-SUN Alliance,” 2017, URL: https://www.wi-sun.org/index.php/en/
[retrieved: 2017-06-24].
[3]
“LoRa Alliance,” 2017, URL: https://www.lora-alliance.org [retrieved:
2017-06-24].
[4]
Y. Chen, T. Yonezawa, J. Nakazawa, and H. Tokuda, “Evaluating the
Spatio-temporal Coverage of Automotive Sensing for Smart Cities,”
in 2017 Tenth International Conference on Mobile Computing and
Ubiquitous Network (ICMU) (ICMU2017), 2017, Manuscript submitted
for publication.
[5]
L. Li, H. Xiaoguang, C. Ke, and H. Ketai, “The applications of wiﬁ-
based wireless sensor network in internet of things and smart grid,” in
2011 6th IEEE Conference on Industrial Electronics and Applications
(ICIEA).
IEEE, 2011, pp. 789–793.
[6]
H.-S. Kim, J. Lee, and J. W. Jang, “BLEmesh: A Wireless Mesh
Network Protocol for Bluetooth Low Energy Devices,” in 2015 3rd
International Conference on Future Internet of Things and Cloud.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 558–563.
[7]
F. Kojima and H. Harada, “Superframe division multi-hop data col-
lection with aggregation on Wi-SUN proﬁle for ECHONET Lite,”
in 2014 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference
Workshops (WCNCW), 2014, pp. 116–121.
[8]
X. Ji and H. Zha, “Sensor positioning in wireless ad-hoc sensor
networks using multidimensional scaling,” in INFOCOM 2004. Twenty-
third AnnualJoint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communica-
tions Societies, vol. 4.
IEEE, 2004, pp. 2652–2661.
[9]
J. Schloemann, H. S. Dhillon, and R. M. Buehrer, “Toward a tractable
analysis of localization fundamentals in cellular networks,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Wireless Communications, vol. 15, no. 3, 2016, pp. 1768–
1782.
[10]
S. Bell, W. R. Jung, and V. Krishnakumar, “WiFi-based enhanced
positioning systems: accuracy through mapping, calibration, and clas-
siﬁcation,” in Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGSPATIAL International
Workshop on Indoor Spatial Awareness, 2010, pp. 3–9.
[11]
Y. Chen, J. Nakazawa, T. Yonezawa, T. Kawasaki, and H. Tokuda,
“An Empirical Study on Coverage-Ensured Automotive Sensing using
Door-to-door Garbage Collecting Trucks,” in Proceedings of the 2nd
International Workshop on Smart Cities: People, Technology and Data,
2016, pp. 6:1–6:6.
[12]
Y. Matsumoto and M. Satoh, “Tablet-type GPS tracking radiation
detection system and viewer software,” in IEEE SENSORS 2014
Proceedings, 2014, pp. 229–232.
[13]
S. e. Morishita, “SakuraSensor: Quasi-realtime Cherry-lined Roads De-
tection Through Participatory Video Sensing by Cars,” in Proceedings
of the 2015 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and
Ubiquitous Computing, 2015, pp. 695–705.
[14]
Y. Shirai, Y. Kishino, F. Naya, and Y. Yanagisawa, “Toward On-Demand
Urban Air Quality Monitoring Using Public Vehicles,” in Proceedings
of the 2nd International Workshop on Smart Cities: People, Technology
and Data, 2016, pp. 1:1–1:6.
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

