Evaluating the Impact of Electric Vehicles on the Smart Grid  
 
Roozbeh Jalali, Zachary Hills, Khalil El-Khatib, 
Richard W. Pazzi, Daniel Hoornweg 
University of Ontario Institute of Technology 
Oshawa, Ontario, Canada 
(Roozbeh.Jalali, Zachary.Hills, Khalil.El-Khatib, 
Richard.Pazzi, Daniel.Hoornweg)@uoit.ca 
Kevin Myers 
Veridian Connections 
Ajax, Ontario, Canada 
Kmyers@veridian.on.ca 
 
 
Abstract— With the 23% of total global GreenHouse Gas 
(GHG) emissions coming from the transport sector, many 
initiatives have been suggested to address this emissions sector, 
including reducing the number of vehicles on the roads using 
ridesharing programs, and switching from Internal Combustion 
Engine Vehicles (ICEV) to battery powered Electrical Vehicles 
(EV). While many governments around the world have started 
various programs to help increase the adoption of EVs, 
including incentive to purchase, introducing new policies, 
increasing 
public 
awareness, 
and 
installing 
charging 
infrastructures, the impact of EVs on the electric grid (load, 
harmonic, line and transformer lifespan) is still not completely 
understood. In this paper, we present a literature review about 
the impact of EV on the electric grid, and the evaluation results 
carried on the grid on a small community in the Greater 
Toronto Area (GTA).  The results of the evaluation show a 
12.5% increase in overloaded transformers within the simulated 
city. 
Keywords-Electrical vehicle; Energy management; Smart 
grid.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Over the last few decades, there has been an increase in 
GHG emission from various sectors, because of fossil fuel 
use. This increase in GHG has resulted in an increase of some 
0.8oC and likely over 2oC this century, and the amount of 
GHG emission is expected to double by 2050 if fossil burning 
continues at the current rate. Much of the emission is 
attributed to vehicles that use fossil fuel in their internal 
combustion engines. In Canada, GHG emission from the 
transport sector accounts for around 23% of the total GHG 
emissions in Canada in 2013, second only to the oil and gas 
sector.  
To help reduce greenhouse emissions from the transport 
sector, several new technologies (e.g., Plug-in Electrical 
Vehicles (PEVs) and buses, natural gas fueled buses) and 
community services (e.g., ridesharing) are currently proposed 
and being tested. Each of these alternatives has social, 
economic, technical, and environmental impacts, as well as 
business opportunities. Of interest to this paper is the PEVs. 
These vehicles can use electricity stored in battery packs 
instead of fuel, and can be recharged from the electrical grid. 
These vehicles have potential for lower cost for operation, 
with minimal or no air pollution and GHG emissions [1]. In 
addition, using EV can also improve the efficiency, stability, 
and reliability of the grid [2]. 
While EV’s can help reducing GHG, their effect on the 
electric grid is still not yet completely understood. The main 
objective of this paper is to present literature review about the 
impact of EV on the electric grid, and the evaluation results 
carried on the grid on a small community in the GTA. The 
rest of the paper is organized as follow: Section 2 presents a 
literature review on the effect of EV on smart grid. The 
results of a simulation exercise on a small community smart 
grid is provided in Section 3, and a conclusion is presented in 
Section 4. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Electrical Vehicles have been recognized as an alternative 
that can diminish toxin and gas emissions. Because of their 
high-energy capacity and potential mass production, 
electrical vehicles will have critical impact on power 
networks, 
electricity 
cost, 
power 
transmission 
and 
distribution. Since this kind of vehicles are not popular yet, it 
is important to study their energy consumption and their 
impact on the electricity infrastructure, which can help in to 
plan for development of the infrastructure. Studies show that 
increasing number of EVs have significant impact on 
transformer life specially in residential area and may require 
more investment on electricity infrastructure [3]. 
There has been some research work on the impact of EVs 
on smart grid in the literature. General effects of EVs on grid 
surveyed 
by 
[4] 
upon 
their 
characteristics. 
These 
characteristics are divided into two different categories: 
vehicle characteristic and charging characteristics.  Most of 
the research is geared toward considering three main factors 
when they estimate the impact of EVs on grid. These three 
factors are charging location, charging demand and charging 
moment [5]. Charging location indicates the site where the 
EV connect for charging.  It can be residential area, working 
place, urban area or even rural area. Charging demand 
reflects the model that is used by EVs to consume electricity, 
which was stored on their batteries. Charging moment 
represents the model that is used to charge the vehicle. There 
are also additional factors that can have indirect effects on the 
grid, such as driving habits, mobility pattern, etc. 
Early research work used simple methods to model 
vehicle behavior, mobility pattern and charging demand 
[6][7][8][9]. For instance, the Shao et al. [9] reviewed the 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

impact of EVs on distribution network at Blacksburg 
residential area. They considered five houses and two 
electrical vehicles and applied different charging strategies to 
see the effect of charging on transformer. The study showed 
that in the worst-case scenario, charging the EVs can increase 
transformer load by 68 percent. They also show that if quick 
charging is used, it can easily overload the transformer.  
Recent research studies use complex methods and more 
factors to model the effect of EVs on the grid [10][11][12] 
[2]. For example, Razeghi et al. [2] modeled the residential 
electricity demand based on household and EVs data. 
Household factors which used are average daily miles travel, 
arrival and departure time, number of available vehicle per 
household and number of trips per day.  EVs data is also 
categorized based on the type of charging and consumption 
model. Razeghi et al. [2] then developed a thermal model to 
find the grid hot spots and calculate the loss of life of all 
transformers. Based on the simulation on southern California 
residential neighborhood, they claimed that uncontrolled 
level 1 charging has a little effect on transformers life but 
uncontrolled level 2 charging will result high transformer 
aging rate and probably transformers failure. 
 Hilshey, et al., [13] have similar findings to [2] with 
some little differences. The authors used Monte Carlo model 
to predict transformers life and aging when EVs charged with 
level 1 and level 2 charging in Phoenix and Burlington 
residential area. In addition to prediction model, Hilsey et al. 
[13] presented a new strategy for decentralized autonomous 
charging. This autonomous charging model can keep the 
transformers power to nominal or acceptable limit value. 
Clement-Nyns, et al., [14] used driving pattern and road 
traffic to find the impact of vehicles on Belgium distribution 
network. They considered two different scenarios for 
charging. In the first scenario vehicles are charged between 
6:00 to 8:00 pm and in the second scenario they are charged 
at the midnight (2:00am). The paper concluded that charging 
pattern and charging characteristic can significantly effect on 
transformers load and consequently effect on distribution 
network.  
The impact of EVs on the smart grid was also studied in 
different areas worldwide such as the work presented in 
[15][16][17]. In Canada, Maitra et al., [18] evaluated the 
impacts of EVs on Hydro- Quebec power network. They 
considered multiple factors in their evaluation such as battery 
type, charging scenario, demands, etc. 
Some research work proposed the use of statistical 
information to model household characteristic such as the 
work in [19], which considered area population, people per 
house, number of vehicle each household has and EVs 
penetration rate as a simulation factor.  Other research used 
historical data as load profile and quadratic programming to 
forecast transformer failure and overloading [14].  
III. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
In this section, we will present the design of a simulation 
tool that was used by Veridian Connections, a local 
distribution company, to evaluate how their electric grid 
performs under various degrees of EV adoption rates. Based 
on mobility models of residents, the work investigated the EV 
specific requirements, and local grid system capabilities, in 
one community in the GTA communities as personal 
transportation is electrified. The work focused on assessing 
the grid performance, as personal vehicles move to electric 
vehicles, EVs, by 5%, 15% and 50% of total fleet over 20 
years. A simulation tool was developed and used to inform 
projections for a GTA-wide roll-out of EVs in terms of grid 
capacities, life-cycle impacts, and specific household impacts 
under a province-wide carbon tax or Emissions Trading 
System (ETS) [20]. 
To identify the effect of various percentage of EV 
penetration on the electric grid (load, harmonic, line and 
transformer lifespan), data about how people commute in the 
designated community, as well as information about the 
electric grid needed to be modeled and used to run different 
simulations using various simulations tools (ns-2 and 
CYME). The details of the work included the following 
ordered steps: 
 
•  Step 1: Analysis of current traffic and driving patterns from 
the Transportation Tomorrow Survey (TTS) database 
and building mobility models of drivers, which 
include the number and mode of trips (use standard 
engineering practice, and modeling tools to enable 
replication across jurisdictions). 
• Step 2: Gathering information on different various 
charging/discharging models for various electric 
vehicles. Vet (and possibly obtain) data through 
Local Distribution Companies (LDC), Veridian 
Connections and Toronto Hydro. 
• Step 3: Running various simulations using the ns-2 
simulation tool to incorporate the mobility and 
charging/discharging models, and various EV 
penetration rates to compute the load that electric 
vehicles can add to the grid. 
 
Running the simulation, we have performed the 
following tasks: 
A. Loading Traffic and Transformers Profile  
The simulated area was divided into four wards; each 
ward has its own traffic behavior. Based on the traffic data, 
electrical vehicles were loaded into the map and given a 
destination for their route that relates to the data (Fig. 1). For 
this simulation, the highest load period in December was 
selected and the hourly transformer data was loaded into the 
simulation as the base load. The simulation covered a 24-hour 
period. Maps are constructed based on OSM files, for the 
purposes. 
B. Electrical vehicle specifications 
The simulation was set so that each electrical vehicle 
begins with a full charge. The simulation had a range of 
battery capacities depending on the type of vehicle. The 
batteries range from 18 kWh to 80 kWh. The vehicles 
supported are: Tesla, Volt, Leaf, Kia Soul.  
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

C. Assumptions 
Most people will charge their vehicles after work or 
before they go to bed. Therefore, it is a reasonable 
assumption that most cars will be plugged in from 6:00 pm to 
5:00 am.  Due to technical restraints, this simulation will have 
no electrical vehicles from other cities commuting to the 
simulated city to charge. All the electrical vehicles will be 
residents of the town of Ajax. 
D. Charging 
Vehicles are assumed to connect to a transformer that is 
within 250 meters away or less to the charge. If no 
transformers are near, that vehicle is disregarded from the 
simulation.  All vehicles are under the assumption that they 
use stage 2 charging. There are 118 potential transformers 
used in our simulation. The rate of charging specific to a car 
is added to the base load depending on the battery level. 
E. Simulation Scenario  
Vehicles are loaded into the simulation beginning at hour 
24:01. The simulation covers a 24-hour period. Simulated 
vehicles have normal behaviors and routes, waiting at red 
lights, obeying traffic speed limits, traffic congestion.  The 
collected traffic data is confined to four wards; the simulation 
was built with wards to emulate the data. Vehicles are 
brought into the simulation based on the data from that ward. 
For this simulation, 10% of vehicles are electric (penetration 
rate). Electrical vehicles behaved the same as combustion 
vehicles, however at the end of their route, electric vehicles 
check to see if a transformer is nearby to charge. 
F. Experimental Results 
Out of the 118 transformers in the simulated area, the 
largest amount with EV connected to was 48 (Fig. 2), among 
those 48 there was an average load increase of 27.222 kW.  
Out of the 48 transformers, 12.5% were overloaded (Fig. 3). 
The results represent the highest peak of transformer loads 
within the 24-hour simulation. 
 
 
Figure 2. Total used transformer. 
 
 
Figure 3. Percentage of Overloaded Transformers. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
To help curb GHG emissions, governments around the 
world started considering various ways to reduce the number 
of ICEV on the roads, including improving public transport, 
introducing High Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) lanes, and tolls 
on vehicles. However, the results of these approaches are not 
well documented. This paper presented a literature review on 
the impact of EV on the electric grid and the preliminary 
experimental results of varying degree of penetration rate on 
the electric grid of a local community in the GTA. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was partially supported by The George Cedric 
Metcalf Charitable Foundation. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Razeghi, T. Brown, and G. S. Samuelsen, "The impact of plug-in 
vehicles on greenhouse gas and criteria pollutants emissions in an 
urban air shed using a spatially and temporally resolved dispatch 
model," Journal of Power Sources, vol. 196, pp. 10387-10394, 2011. 
[2] 
G. Razeghi, L. Zhang, T. Brown, and S. Samuelsen, "Impacts of plug-
in hybrid electric vehicles on a residential transformer using stochastic 
and empirical analysis," Journal of Power Sources, vol. 252, pp. 277-
285, 2014. 
[3] C. Roe, E. Farantatos, J. Meisel, A. Meliopoulos, and T. Overbye, 
"Power system level impacts of PHEVs," in System Sciences, 2009. 
HICSS'09. 42nd Hawaii International Conference on, pp. 1-10, 2009. 
[4] 
S. W. Hadley, "Impact of plug-in hybrid vehicles on the electric grid," 
ORNL 
Report 
Oct 
2006 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://apps.ornl.gov/~pts/prod/pubs/ldoc3198-plug-in-paper-final.pdf.  
[5] 
P. Grahn, "Electric vehicle charging impact on load profile,” BSc. 
Thesis, Department of Electrical Engineering, Royal Institute of 
Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, 2013  
[6] 
S. W. Hadley and A. A. Tsvetkova, "Potential impacts of plug-in 
hybrid electric vehicles on regional power generation," The Electricity 
Journal, vol. 22, pp. 56-68, 2009. 
[7] 
K. Parks, P. Denholm, and A. J. Markel, "Costs and emissions 
associated with plug-in hybrid electric vehicle charging in the Xcel 
Figure 1. Traffic Profile for Simulated Area. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Energy Colorado service territory," ed: National Renewable Energy 
Laboratory Golden, CO, 2007. 
[8] 
D. Lemoine, D. Kammen, and A. Farrell, "Effects of plug-in hybrid 
electric vehicles in California energy markets," in 86th Annual Meeting 
of the Transportation Research Board, Washington, DC, 2007. 
[9] 
S. Shao, M. Pipattanasomporn, and S. Rahman, "Challenges of PHEV 
penetration to the residential distribution network," in 2009 IEEE 
Power & Energy Society General Meeting, pp. 1-8, 2009. 
[10] A. Ashtari, E. Bibeau, S. Shahidinejad, and T. Molinski, "PEV 
charging profile prediction and analysis based on vehicle usage data," 
IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 3, pp. 341-350, 2012. 
[11] Q. Gong, S. Midlam-Mohler, V. Marano, and G. Rizzoni, "Study of 
PEV charging on residential distribution transformer life," IEEE 
Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 1, pp. 404-412, 2012. 
[12] D. Wu, D. C. Aliprantis, and K. Gkritza, "Electric energy and power 
consumption by light-duty plug-in electric vehicles," IEEE 
transactions on power systems, vol. 26, pp. 738-746, 2011. 
[13] A. D. Hilshey, P. Rezaei, P. D. Hines, and J. Frolik, "Electric vehicle 
charging: Transformer impacts and smart, decentralized solutions," in 
2012 IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting, pp. 1-8, 2012. 
[14] K. Clement-Nyns, E. Haesen, and J. Driesen, "The impact of charging 
plug-in hybrid electric vehicles on a residential distribution grid," IEEE 
Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 25, pp. 371-380, 2010. 
[15] A. Karnama, "Analysis of integration of plug-in hybrid electric 
vehicles in the distribution grid," Master’s thesis, Royal Institute of 
Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, 2009 
[16] M. Galus R. A. Waraich M. Balmer G. Andersson K. W. Axhausen "A 
framework for investigating the impact of PHEVs," in Proceedings of 
International Advanced Mobility Forum (IAMF), March 2009. 
[17] M. D. Galus and G. Andersson, "Demand management of grid 
connected plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV)," in Energy 2030 
Conference, 2008. ENERGY 2008. IEEE, pp. 1-8, 2008. 
[18] A. Maitra, K. S. Kook, J. Taylor, and A. Giumento, "Grid impacts of 
plug-in electric vehicles on Hydro Quebec's distribution system," in 
IEEE PES T&D 2010, pp. 1-7, 2010. 
[19] S. L. Judd and T. J. Overbye, "An evaluation of PHEV contributions to 
power system disturbances and economics," in Power Symposium, 
2008. NAPS'08. 40th North American, pp. 1-8, 2008. 
[20] C. Kennedy, N. Ibrahim, and D. Hoornweg, "Low-carbon 
infrastructure strategies for cities," Nature Climate Change, vol. 4, pp. 
343-346, 2014. 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-515-9
VEHICULAR 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

