Reducing Car Consumption by Means of a Closed-loop Drag Control
Camila Chovet, Baptiste Plumjeaeu,
Sebastien Delprat, Marc Lippert
and Laurent Keirsbulck
LAMIH, Umr8201,
59313 Valenciennes, France
email: camila.chovet@univ-valenciennes.fr;
baptiste.plumejeau@icloud.com;
sebastien.delprat@univ-valenciennes.fr;
marc.lippert@univ-valenciennes.fr;
laurent.keirsbulck@univ-valenciennes.fr
Jean-Pierre Richard
Centrale Lille
59651 Villeneuve-d’Ascq, France
email: jean-pierre.richard@centralelille.fr
Maxime Feingesicht
and Andrey Polyakov
INRIA Lille
59651 Villeneuve-d’Ascq, France
email: mfeingesicht@gmail.com;
andrey.polyakov@inria.fr
Franck Kerherv´e
Institut P’, Upr3346,
86962 Poitiers, France
email: franck.kerherve@univ-poitiers.fr
Abstract—We present a closed-loop separation control experiment
on a real car (Renault Twingo GT) using a robust model-based
strategy known as Sliding Mode Control (SMC) and whose goal is
to decrease the gas consumption through the reduction of the drag
force. The study also investigates the feasibility of this control
and estimation approach for an industrial framework. A movable
spoiler, equipped with slotted air jets, is placed on the top trailing
edge of the car in order to actuate the air ﬂow on the rear side
of the vehicle. In order to estimate the drag force, the vehicle is
instrumented with dSPACE and DEWESoft equipment, which are
able to do synchronized measurements in real-time. Concerning
the control algorithm, Sliding Mode Control was designed on
the basis of a non-linear delayed input-output model, which was
recently deﬁned for another ﬂow control application and has
shown a good ability for robustness and disturbance rejection.
Keywords–Flow Control; Vehicle; Sliding Mode Control; Drag
reduction.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the last years, the sales of automobiles (including cars,
trucks, and buses) have sky-rocketed. More than 1 billion
vehicles were in operation in 2010 [1]. The amount of trans-
portation automobiles is highly correlated with carbon-dioxide
CO2 emission in the atmosphere, and the strong decrease of oil
reserves, to name just a few consequences [2]. Car manufactur-
ers are consequently urged to develop new technologies, which
can contribute to signiﬁcantly diminish the environmental
impact of transportation [3]. In this regard, four development
areas are identiﬁed to improve energy consumption, autonomy
and gas emissions: engine performance, reduced friction of
the bearings, the lightening of the mass of the vehicle and
the aerodynamics [1]. The work in progress presented in this
article targets the latter one. The power consumed to resist
the drag constitutes an important portion of the total power
expense. For example, the aerodynamic drag of a car, at a
speed of 50 km/h, accounts for 50 % of the total drag, reaching
80 % at 130 km/h [4]. Initially, drag reduction was achieved
through vehicle shape. This explains why most of the present
cars have similar enclosures [5]; vehicles tend to follow a
unique shape in order to optimize drag reduction. Nonetheless,
there is room to further reduce the aerodynamic drag thanks
to the manipulation and/or control of the wake ﬂow. This
approach is of great challenge for the transport industry and
must be tackled as a multidisciplinary ﬁeld. A combination of
passive and active devices might decrease the drag force by
enhancing the shear layer deﬂection [6]. Our aim is to tackle
this industrial problematic through the knowledge of different
academic areas.
The main goal is to develop an effective control strategy
combined with an industrial actuator to minimize the drag of
a real car and thus reduce both fuel consumption and gas
emissions.
The paper is organized into three sections: Section II
presents the instrumented vehicle. Section III is devoted in
estimating the drag force for a real car conﬁguration, while
Section IV brieﬂy deﬁnes the design of the closed-loop strategy
on an Ahmed body conﬁguration. It will be shown how Sliding
Mode Control is able to reduce and maintain the drag to a
desired set-point regardless of external ﬂow perturbations. A
short conclusion and perspectives are presented in Section V.
II.
INSTRUMENTED VEHICLE
The instrumented vehicle used for experiment proposes is
a Renault Twingo II C44 GT owned by LAMIH laboratory.
The dimensions of the car are as follows: height H of 1.47 m
(from the top part of the car to the ﬂoor), width w=1.39 m
and, length l=3.69 m (see Fig.1(a) and Fig.1(b)). Due to
the presence of two people inside the vehicle, it has two
different ground clearances. The ﬁrst one closer to the front
wheel g1=38.6 cm, while the second is measured at the back
wheel and is equal to g2=51 cm. The results presented are for
car velocities from 45 km/h to 130 km/h, which correspond
to Reynolds numbers, based on the car height h ≈ 1.02
(h = H − (g1 + g2)/2), of Reh ≈ 6 × 106 − 19 × 106.
The results will be described in a Cartesian coordinate system
x, y and z representing the stream-, transverse- (normal to
ground) and span-wise directions, respectively (see Fig.1(a)
and Fig.1(c)). Experiments will take place on a 2km race track
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
w
s11
s9
s10
s8
s7
s6
s3
s4
s5
h/4
w/4
w/4
h/4
g2
g1
H=1.47m*
l
h
y
x
s2
s1
s0
y
z
Figure 1. Sketch of the vehicle Twingo GT. (a) Rear view, (b) Front view,
(c) Actuation mechanism, (d) Side view, (e) Real vehicle image.
located at Clastres (North of France). The track is travelled
in both directions, direction I (dI): departure to arrival and
direction II (dII): arrival to departure.
The car is equipped with a GPS, which is able to measure
the longitude and latitude coordinates (x and z directions,
respectively). The slope of the road is retrieved from GPS
measurements. GPS data is projected on a local plane (Lambert
Projection 93), and the x − z data is then projected on a
local coordinate system aligned with the track and centred at
the end of the runway. The z-coordinate measures the lateral
deviation from the reference axis. Furthermore, the car is
also equipped with two acquisition systems: DEWESoft and
dSPACE. Since two measurement devices are used, the data
must be re-calibrated. For this, a binary signal is sent from
dSPACE to DEWESoft. The registration is then carried out
by synchronizing the ﬁrst rising edge. Twelve sub-miniature
piezo-resistive Kulite XCQ-0.62 sensors are placed at the front
and the back of the car. Three of them are placed at the front
close to the windshield, the ﬁrst one is located at the center
plane w/2 from the side of the body while the other two are
at distance w/8 from the car side edge (one at each side).
On the rear, 9 pressure sensors were also set. The distance
between each sensor is y = h/4 and x = w/4 starting at the
same x − y distance, for a clear view of the sensor positions
please refer to Fig.1(b) and Fig.1(c). Finally, an innovative
actuation mechanism will be placed at the top trailing edge of
the vehicle (see Fig.1(d)). A movable spoiler (commercially
available) will be equipped with slotted jets in order to vary
key actuation parameters such as angle, pressure (jet velocity),
DC (Duty cycle) and frequency.
III.
FORCE ESTIMATION
In order to estimate the drag force, two mechanisms are
here presented. The ﬁrst one is with an approximation of
Onorato relation [7]. 80% of the total drag force is related to
the pressure forces. From this statement, the integral balance
of momentum is simpliﬁed as:
Fx =
x
Sw
(Pt∞ − PtSw) dσ
(1)
where Sw denotes the surface of the wake downstream the
vehicle, Pt∞ and PtSw are the upstream pressure and the pres-
sure in the wake Sw. With this equation, the drag coefﬁcient
Cx can be calculated from equation presented by Onorato [8].
Taking into account the twelve pressure probes placed in the
car, and an equal area for all the sensors, the drag coefﬁcient
can be approximated as
Cx ≈
P3
n=1(Pt∞
n ) − P9
n=1(PtSw
n )
1/2ρU 2∞
(2)
The second one is through an estimation of the external forces
presented in the car. Once a portion of the data is selected, it
is now possible to estimate the external forces exerted on the
vehicle. The dynamics of the vehicle is expressed in the form
of an energy balance equation:
M dv(t)
dt
= Fmot(t) ± mgsin(ϑ(d(t))) − Fext(t)
(3)
The longitudinal acceleration dv(t)
dt
is obtained through the
central inertial unit, while the slope ϑ was previously measured
using the average slope measurement as a function of the
distance d(t) travelled. The ± sign in equation.3 is related
to the fact that the track is travelled in both directions. In
the direction I, the vehicle undergoes a headwind and a slight
rise. In direction II, the vehicle undergoes a wind of back and
a slight descent. The estimation of the external force Fext(t) is
trivial via (3). Additionally, the external force is decomposed
as follows:
Fext(t) = Crrmgcos(±ϑ) + 1/2ρAfCd(v(t) ± vwind)2 (4)
with vwind the unknown wind velocity assumed constant. For
simpliﬁcation, α1 = Crrmgcos(±ϑ) and α2 = 1/2ρAfCd.
In (3) the term cos(±ϑ) is assumed constant because of
the co-sinus function is even, so the sign of the slope will
not inﬂuence the results. Each test is thus summarized to
a pair (¯v(i),
¯
Fext(i)). Then, the parameters are estimated by
minimizing a quadratic model error:
J =
X
i.e.dI
( ¯
Fext(i) − α1 − α2(¯v(i) − vwind)2)2+
X
i.e.dII
( ¯
Fext(i) − α1 − α2(¯v(i) + vwind)2)2
The minimization of J, starting from a realistic solution,
relates to an optimization problem and leads to solving a linear
problem for α1 and α2, which can be solved in a straightfor-
ward manner. The introduction of wind speed complicates the
calculation of the solution and a Trust-Region Quasi-Newton
algorithm is necessary.
The drag coefﬁcient Cx is presented in Fig.2 for a velocity
range of U∞ ∈ [45 km/h, 130 km/h] calculated from the
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

45
65
85
105
125
Speed (km/h)
0
-0.2
-0.4
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Cx
Cp
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.7
0.6
0.5
Figure 2. (a) Cx obtained for different velocities using the two approaches.
(b) Relation between Cx and Cp.
two estimation approaches (red symbols: results using esti-
mation approach, black symbols: results using Onorato’s drag
approximation). The ﬁgure shows both direction results. A
positive curved increase of the Cx is present for an increase in
the velocity. Similar results are obtained for both approaches,
which means there is a good estimation of the drag force. A
small gap is seen from the results in direction I (departure to
arrival, circle symbols) and direction II (arrival to departure,
times symbol). This is due to the effects of the wind that
clearly induced some variations in the results depending on
which direction the track is run. The ratio between the Cp
obtained from the pressure sensor and the Cx estimated from
the energy balance is presented in Fig.2(b). A linear relation
is obtained, for both directions. It is possible to conclude that
both methodologies could be used as sensors to estimate the
drag of a real car. It is worth noting that external parameters,
such as wind speed, probably varied and therefore errors are
introduced in the measures.
IV.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS OF SMC APPLICATION
As previously stated, the goal is to reduce and further main-
tain the aerodynamic drag of a square-back Ahmed regardless
of incoming ﬂow perturbations or again measurement noise
and model inaccuracies. To achieve this, we consider the ﬁrst
closed-loop separation control experiment on a simpliﬁed car
model, also known as Ahmed body, using a robust, model-
based strategy called Sliding Mode Control. This control
approach is based on an initial black-box model identiﬁcation
presented by Feingesicht et al. (2016 & 2017) [9][10]. Without
loss of generality, the sliding mode principle is a problem of a
set-point tracking where a control system is considered as the
form,
˙s(t) = f(s, t) + g(s, t)b(t)
(5)
where f and g are unknown functions and b(t) ∈ {0, 1} is
the relay control input, s is the state and t is the time. The
objective is to determine a control that guarantees s(t) → s∗
as t → +∞, where s∗ is a desired set-point. The control
must be also robust with respect to some uncertainties in f
and g. If we can force the dynamics of the system to lie on
a well behaved surface, then the control problem is greatly
simpliﬁed. Sliding Mode Control [11] is based on the design of
an adequate “sliding surface” (or “sliding manifold”) deﬁned
as,
Σ = {(s, t) | σ(s, t) = 0}
(6)
that divides the state space into two parts, which correspond
to one of the two controls, which commutate between two
pre-deﬁned values (typically zero and one or +V and -V for a
relay) when the state crosses the surface in order to maintain
the sliding mode σ(s(t), t) = 0. The manifold Σ is deﬁned in
such a way that the error |s(t)−s∗| vanishes to zero when the
system state s is restricted to lie on this surface. The control
problem then reduces to the problem of reaching phase during
which trajectories starting off the manifold Σ move toward it
in a ﬁnite time, followed by a sliding phase during which the
motion is conﬁned to the manifold and the dynamics of the
system are represented by the reduced-order model.
An identiﬁcation procedure of the dynamical system is
employed here for ﬂow control application. In the present case,
the sensor output utilized is the instantaneous drag FD(t), the
control variable s(t) = F ∞
D − FD(t), where F ∞
D is a drag
in the uncontrolled steady state, and the control command
is the switching function b(t) send to the actuators. Due to
the non-linear nature of the governing equations driven the
ﬂow dynamics, non-linear models with time-delays are here
preferred. The bilinear model proposed by Feingesicht et al.
(2016 & 2017) [9], [10] is here considered and can be written
as,
˙s(t) = α1s(t−h)−α2s(t)+(β−γs(t−h)+γs(t−τ))b(t−h)
(7)
where αi, β, γ, h and τ are positive constant parameters to
identify. Identiﬁcation of the model parameters is performed
thanks to open-loop control experiments, which consists in suc-
cessive cycles of actuation and relaxation phases for different
values of the control parameters (here frequency FA and duty-
cycle DC). For conciseness, the reader is referred Feingesicht
et al. (2017) [10] for full details of the identiﬁcation procedure.
In the present case, it leads to α1 = 27.37, α2 = 32.70,
β = 1.97, γ = 1.92, τ = 0.18 s and h = 0.01 s. The precision
of the model has been evaluated by a FIT index, presented by
Chovet et al. [12] equal to 59% for the present application.
Experiments were conducted in a closed-loop wind tunnel
(2 m wide, 2 m high and 10 m long). The blunt-edged
bluff body is a simpliﬁed car model known as square-back
Ahmed body, Fig.3(a), with the following dimensions: height
h=0.135 m, width w=0.170 m and length l=0.370 m. The
model was mounted over a raised ﬂoor with a ground clearance
of g=0.035 m. The Reynolds number was kept constant at
Reh = 9.104. Based on previous open-loop results, the set-
point s∗ = −2.5% is considered as the tracked value. Drag
force was measured using a 6-components DELTA-ATI aero-
dynamic balance. The velocity ﬂow ﬁelds were obtained using
a standard two-component TSI Particle Image Velocimetry
(PIV) system. The system consists of a double-pulse laser sys-
tem generating the light sheet and two cameras recording the
light scattered by the tracer particles. The model is equipped
with an actuator slit at the top trailing edge. The slit width is
hs = 0.5 mm and the actuation length is wa = 150 mm. The
pressured air, supplied by a compressed air reservoir, can be
blown tangentially to the free-stream velocity through the slit
(see Fig.3(b)). The pulsed blowing is driven by a FESTO-MH2
solenoid valve that can generate an on/off pulsed jet within
an actuation frequency range between fA = 0 − 500 Hz. A
rounded surface, adjacent to the slit exit, with an additional
plate is installed to blow the jet in a predeﬁned direction (for
this case we used an actuation an θ = −6◦, shown in Fig.3(c).
We choose a pressure value of Pa = 6 bars and a forcing
frequency control DC of 50%, giving a maximum jet velocity
of 32.2 m/s. The real-time processing was achieved using an
Arduino board, with a sampling rate ﬁxed at 100 Hz.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

h
w
l
PIV7field71
W
r
la
lb
PIV7field72
Actuator7device7details
hs7
7
=70.57mm
Plate
2m
2m
ya)
yb)
yc)
w=0.17m
p1
p2
wa
h/2
w/3
g
Drag7balance
System
Solenoid7
valve
Figure 3. Ahmed body setup
−100
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
1
0
1
−1
0
1
Arbitrary(scale
Reaching(phase
Sliding(phase
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
x/h
y/h
1.5
1
0.5
0
y/h
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
x/h
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 4. SMC set-point tracking results: upper plot shows the time history
response. Instantaneous ﬂow ﬁeld captured by the PIV for several forced
conﬁgurations.
An overview of the results obtained with the SMC is shown
in Figures 4, for a further analysis of the wake dynamics
please refer to [12]. Figure 4.a shows the time response of
the drag (top line) for the forcing command b(t) when the
closed-loop controller is activated (bottom line). The calcu-
lated instantaneous duty-cycle DC∗, presented in [12], is also
reported in this ﬁgure (middle line). Snapshots at four distinct
instants of these time histories are reported in Figures 4.b-
e. Three distinct control phases are noticeable in Figures 4.a.
When the actuation is activated (t+ = 0), the controller enters
a phase known as “reaching phase” whose objective is to
approach rapidly the targeted set-point and during which the
drag force is found to decrease rapidly. In the present case,
this phase corresponds to a steady blowing forcing as seen
in Figures 4.a where the DC∗ is found equal to unity. A
transition phase (200 < t+ < 280) is then observed during
which the controller seeks the adequate ON-OFF combination
to rapidly reach the targeted set-point. Finally, the last phase
(t+ > 280) corresponds to the so-called “sliding phase” where
the controller attempts to maintain the drag at the tracked value
s∗ despite any disturbances on the plant.
V.
CONCLUSION
The propositions presented in this short paper may be used
as a reference to orient the work of ﬂow control towards
drag reduction. The ideas proposed here are a consequence
of all the work done for simpler conﬁgurations. Their use
in an industrial application or as an ’experimental showcase’
is of great promise in future works. The car characteristics,
equipment, and actuator are presented in Section II, the vehicle
is already equipped with apparatus able to do measurements
such as pressure, position, etc. Furthermore, a movable spoiler
with jets will be added in order to control the rear wake. To
achieve closed-loop control, two approaches are proposed in
Section III. The ﬁrst one is an approximation of Onorato’s
equation while the second one is an estimation of the drag force
through external forces equation. Similar drag coefﬁcients Cx
were obtained for both propositions. The initial results in this
experience present the possibility to directly estimate the drag
of a car. Finally, we present a novel, robust closed-loop control
to reduce and maintain the drag. We are interested in steering
the drag of an Ahmed body to a set-point s* and stabilizing
it regardless of external conditions. In principle, the control
approach can be seen as a compilation of open-loop control
tests. However, the actuation frequency has to be selected
carefully in real-time depending on the external parameters
up- and down-stream of the ﬂow. Otherwise, actuation energy
is wasted. The robustness and easy implementation in an ex-
perimental set-up make this approach convenient for industrial
applications. Also, SMC might be able to take into account
model design errors of drag estimation, keeping the drag at a
certain value, regardless of these errors. Hence, the beneﬁts of
SMC can be fully exploited.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is being held within the framework of the CNRS
Research Federation on Ground Transports and Mobility, in ar-
ticulation with the ELSAT2020 project supported by the Euro-
pean Community, the French Ministry of Higher Education and
Research, the Hauts de France Regional Council. The authors
gratefully acknowledge the support of these institutions.The
authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Li, “Aerodynamic drag reduction of a square-back car model using
linear genetic programming and physics-based control”. PhD. thesis,
Pprime, Poitiers, France, 2017.
[2]
D. Sperling and D. Gordon, “Two billion cars: transforming a culture”.
TR news 259., 2008.
[3]
W. -H. Hucho, “Aerodynamics of road vehicles”. Society of Automotive
Engineers, e.d. 1998.
[4]
S. L. Brunton, and B. R. Noack, “Closed-loop turbulence control:
Progress and challenges”. Appl. Mech. Rev. 67(5), 050801, pp.01-48, 2015.
[5]
G. Rossitto, “Inﬂuence of afterbody rounding on the aerodynamics of a
fastback vehicle”. PhD. thesis, ´Ecole Nationale Sup´erieure de M´ecanique
et d’A´erotechnique, Poitiers, France, 2016.
[6]
R. J. Englar, “Pneumatic heavy vehicle aerodynamic drag reduction,
safety enhancement, and performance improvement”. The Aerodynamics
of Heavy Vehicles: Trucks, Buses, and Trains, pp. 277-302, Springer, 2004.
[7]
M. Onorato, A. F. Costelli and A. Garonne , “Drag measurement through
wake analysis”. SAE, SP-569, International congress and Exposition,
Detroit, MI, pp. 85-93, 1984.
[8]
Y. Eulalie, “Aerodynamic analysis and drag reduction around an Ahmed
bluff body”. PhD. thesis, Bordeaux Univ, 2014.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

[9]
M. Feingesicht, C. Raibaudo, A. Polyakov, F. Kerherv´e and J. -P. Richard,
“A bilinear input-output model with state-dependent delay for separated
ﬂow control”. European Control Conference, pp. Aalborg, Denmark, 2016.
[10]
M. Feingesicht, A. Polyakov, F. Kerherv´e and J. -P. Richard, “SISO
model-based control of separated ﬂows: Sliding mode and optimal control
approaches”. Int. J. Robust and Nonlinear Control, 27(18), pp. 5008-5027,
2017, DOI:10.1002/rnc.3843.
[11]
V. Utkin, “Sliding Modes in Control Optimization”. CCES Springer-
Verlag, Berlin,1991.
[12]
C. Chovet et al., “Sliding mode control applied to a square-back ahmed
body”. J. Fluid Mech., 2018b (Under revision).
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-643-9
VEHICULAR 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

