Intentional Binding in Direct and Indirect Manipulation for Pointing Task
Kazuhisa Miwa
Graduate School of Informatics
Nagoya University
Nagoya 4648601, Japan
email: miwa@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp
Mizuki Hirata
Graduate School of Informatics
Nagoya University
Nagoya 4648601, Japan
email: hirata.mizuki.f1@s.mail.nagoya-u.ac.jp
Hojun Choi
Graduate School of Informatics
Nagoya University
Nagoya 4648601, Japan
email: choi.hojun.f4@s.mail.nagoya-u.ac.jp
Tomomi Shimizu
Advanced Development Div.,
Tokai Rika Co., Ltd.
Toyota, Oguchi-cho, Niwa-gun, Aichi 4800195, Japan
email: tomomi.shimizu@exc.tokai-rika.co.jp
Abstract—Sense Of Agency (SOA) has the potential to be a useful
indicator for the evaluation of the indirect manipulation of devices
in in-car systems. In this study, we examined whether intentional
binding, which is used as an implicit evaluation index of SOA, is
conﬁrmed when engaging in a task in which a series of sequential
operations are required. Sixteen subjects were tested, and the
results showed that both direct and indirect manipulation of
devices indicated the same patterns of intentional binding as
in previous studies. However, no difference in the magnitude of
binding was detected between direct and indirect manipulation.
Keywords - Sense of agency; Intentional binding; Indirect
manipulation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A. Indirect manipulation
In recent years, automotive infotainment systems have
been developed to integrate advanced driver assistance and
entertainment functions in addition to vehicle-related informa-
tion. Consequently, Human Machine Interactions (HMIs) have
become highly complex [1].
In this context, recent in-car devices incorporate interfaces
that can be operated using touch, voice, and gestures. Early
in-car devices were operated by directly touching a physical
interface, consisting of combinations of knobs, buttons, and
switches. However, as devices became increasingly digitalized,
the target device was operated not by touching it directly, but
via an input device that mediated the operation. For example, a
navigation system installed on a dashboard could be operated
using a touch panel. In this paper, the former is called direct
operation, and the latter is called indirect operation.
In indirect manipulation, operations are performed by a
cursor and a pointer that are displayed on the operating device.
Such a cursor and pointer are considered extensions of the
user’s body (in this case, a ﬁnger), which Seinfeld et al. call
user representations [2]. In an indirect operation, the space that
the user touches for manipulation is called the input space (in
the above example, the touch panel), and the display screen
of the target device is called the output space (the navigation
system operation screen).
In indirect manipulation, two interfaces, the input space and
output space, arise. One of the drawbacks with the emergence
of these two interfaces is the lack of feeling of direct manip-
ulation. Lack of feeling causes problems in that, additional
cognitive resources must be allocated to manipulating the
device, and the user experience is degraded. It is important to
clarify how this sense of direct manipulation can be maintained
during the design and evaluation of increasingly complex in-
car systems.
B. Sense of Agency
An important concept related to the feeling of direct
manipulation is Sense Of Agency (SOA) [3]; SOA is the sense
that one is the subject who causes the result that appears, and
that one intentionally controls that result. In recent years, the
importance of SOA has been widely recognized in the ﬁeld of
human-computer interaction [4].
For instance, in the ﬁeld of VR (Virtual Reality), how
one perceives SOA for one’s own avatar in a VR space has
been intensively studied [5]. Avatars are considered to be one
form of user representation, as mentioned above. In indirect
manipulation in in-car device operation, the feeling of SOA in
the movements of a cursor or pointer displayed in the output
space is an essential requirement for improving the feeling of
direct manipulation.
There are two main types of SOA measurements: explicit
and implicit measurements [3][6]. The most common method
of explicit measurement is to directly and subjectively rate
the degree to which participants perceive SOA. This method
is widely used in many SOA studies because it is easy to
implement, and its usefulness has been conﬁrmed. On the other
hand, it is pointed out that such subjective ratings are prone to
many cognitive biases, and its limitations have been discussed
[7].
C. Intentional Binding
In contrast, implicit measurement measures SOA using be-
havioral indicators that are not directly related to the subjective
sense of SOA. The most widely used method is the one using
Intentional Binding [8][9], a phenomenon in which the time
interval between intentional action and the sensory stimulus
caused by the action, which is fed back after a certain time
is perceived as short. It has been widely conﬁrmed that SOA
is related to Intentional Binding, and a method of measuring
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
VEHICULAR 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Intentional Binding using a temporal sensory evaluation device
called the Libet clock has been established and widely used in
SOA research.
On the other hand, measurements using the Libet clock
requires high visual attention to the clock displayed on the
screen. Therefore, there are signiﬁcant limitations to its use,
such as interference with the context of the main task and
heavy measurement loads on participants. In recent years,
new methods for measuring Intentional Binding have been
developed.
Early experiments on Intentional Binding used button
pressing as an intentional action and audio feedback as the
result of that action. In recent years, various intentional actions
have been taken, such as input by ﬁnger movement in a hollow
space without a physical input device [10], and experiments
using auditory and tactile stimuli have also been conducted
for feedback [11][12]. Thus, examining the circumstances
under which Intentional Binding occurs is important in SOA
research.
D. The present study
As mentioned above, in-car devices have become increas-
ingly digitalized in recent years, and indirect manipulation
has become mainstream. In this context, a major issue is
ensuring the feeling of the direct manipulation of complex
in-car devices. Intentional binding is a valuable indicator for
evaluating the feeling of direct manipulation.
So far, Intentional Binding measurement has been ex-
amined using simple action-feedback pairs. However, when
attempting to apply this method to the development of devices
for in-car systems, it is necessary to measure Intentional
Binding in situations in which a series of sequential operations
is engaged. Therefore, in this study, we measure Intentional
Binding when engaging in such a task. We then answered the
following two research questions.
•
Research Question 1:
Is Intentional Binding conﬁrmed for each of direct
manipulation and indirect manipulation?
•
Research Question 2:
Is there a difference in the degree of Intentional
Binding between direct and indirect manipulations?
Section 2 introduces the summary of the experiment, and
the measures of the results. Section 3 indicates the exper-
imental results. Section 4 summarizes the discussion and
conclusions.
II.
EXPERIMENT
A. Participants
Sixteen participants, recruited from the general public, par-
ticipated in the experiment (8 males, 8 females, age: M=46.69,
SD = 16.62). All the participants were right-handed.
B. Task
Figure 1 shows a screenshot of the task in which the
participants engaged. Participants were asked to trace the
numbers from 1 to 3 displayed on the tablet in sequence, and
ﬁnally, to tap the last number 3. Upon tapping the number 3,
a beep sound was fed back approximately 250 ms later. The
Libet clock was displayed so that they reported the timing of
tapping and hearing the beep sound.
Figure 1. Screenshot of the task.
C. Experimental Design
The experimental design was a three-factors (Direct-
Indirect × Action-Outcome × Baseline-Operant) within-
participant factorial design.
1) Direct-Indirect Factor: In the Direct condition, partici-
pants directly manipulated the tablet (Figure 2 (a)). In the In-
direct condition, participants indirectly manipulated the target
tablet by tracing another tablet placed underneath the target
tablet (Figure 2 (b)). In the Indirect condition, participants
could not see their own hands as they manipulated.
Figure 2. Direct and Indirect conditions of experiment.
The same tablet was used as the input and display devices
in the Indirect condition, and the input from the input device
was output to the display device for presentation. Therefore,
the hardware performance under both conditions was identical,
including the time lag between the ﬁnger movements reﬂected
in the pointer displayed on the display tablet.
Figure 3 illustrates the settings controlled by the Action-
Outcome factor and the Baseline-Operant factor.
2) Action-Outcome Factor: In the Action conditions, the
participant’s perceived timing when the last 3 number was
tapped was measured using the Libet clock, while in the
Outcome conditions, the participant’s perceived timing when
the beep sounded was measured.
3) Baseline-Operant Factor: In the Baseline conditions,
no beep sounded in response to the participant’s action; or a
beep sounded without the participant’s action. In the Operant
conditions, a beep sounded approximately 250 ms seconds
after the participant’s action.
D. Procedure
The participants were informed about the overview of the
experiment, followed by a practice phase. They then moved on
to the main phase, which consisted of twelve trials for each
condition.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
VEHICULAR 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Figure 3. Action Binding, Outcome Binding, and total binding.
Half of the participants engaged in the task in the Direct
condition followed by the Indirect condition; the other half
engaged in the task in the Indirect condition followed by the
Direct condition.
For each of the direct and indirect condition blocks, the
Action-Outcome factor and the Baseline-Operant factor were
counterbalanced using the Latin square method.
E. SOA
For SOA measurement, participants answered the following
two questions after 12 trials under the following conditions
[13][14].
1) SOA for control: In the conditions in which the action
operation is performed, speciﬁcally the Baseline × Action,
Operant × Action, and Operant × Outcome conditions, par-
ticipants were asked, “How much did you feel you had control
over your pointing?” and responded on a seven-point scale
ranging from not at all to very strongly.
2) SOA for causality: In the conditions in which sound
feedback on the action was given, speciﬁcally the Operant
× Action and Operant × Outcome conditions, participants
responded on a seven-point scale to the question, “How much
did you feel that your button press caused the sound to beep?”
F. Action, Outcome, and Total Binding
Three types of binding are deﬁned, as shown in Figure 3.
Generally, the perception of the timing of an action is
delayed in a situation where there is feedback (Operant ×
Action condition), as opposed to a situation where there is no
feedback (Baseline × Action condition). This delay is called
action binding.
Similarly, the perception of the timing of the sound is
brought forward when an action is performed (Operant ×
Outcome condition), as opposed to a situation in which there
is no action (Baseline × Outcome condition). The time carried
forward is called outcome binding.
The total of the action binding and the outcome binding is
the total binding.
III.
RESULT
A. Performance
Figure 4 (a) shows the completion time, that is, the duration
from the start of the task through the time that the ﬁnal number
3 was tapped. Figure 4 (b) shows the distance traveled by the
cursor on the tablet.
Figure 4. Completion time and distance traveled.
The completion time in the Direct condition was signiﬁ-
cantly shorter than that in the Indirect condition (t(15) = 12.78,
p = .001), and the distance traveled in the Direct condition
was marginally signiﬁcantly smaller than that in the Indirect
condition (t(15) = 1.82, p = .09).
B. SOA
Figure 5 (a) shows SOA for control and Figure 5 (b) shows
SOA for causality.
Figure 5. SOA for control and SOA for causality.
The SOA for control in the Direct condition was signiﬁ-
cantly larger than in the Indirect condition (t(15) = 2.63, p =
.002), but the SOA for causality shows no signiﬁcant difference
between the Direct and Indirect conditions (t(15) = 0.28, n.s.)
C. Binding
Figure 6 (a) shows the action, outcome, and total bindings
in the Direct condition, while Figure 6 (b) shows the three
bindings in the Indirect condition.
The expected effects in all three bindings were conﬁrmed
under both the Direct and Indirect conditions.
D. Comparison of Binding
Figure 7 (a) shows a comparison of the action bindings
in the Direct and Indirect conditions, Figure 7 (b) shows a
comparison of the outcome bindings, and Figure 7 (c) shows
a comparison of the total bindings.
No signiﬁcant differences were detected between the Direct
and Indirect conditions in action binding, outcome binding, or
total binding (t(15) = 0.21, n.s. for action binding, t(15) = 0.20,
n.s. for outcome binding, t(15) = 0.15, n.s. for total binding).
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
VEHICULAR 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Figure 6. Action, outcome, and total bindings
Figure 7. Comparison of action, outcome, and total bindings in the Direct
and Indirect conditions.
IV.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
Intentional binding was measured by using a serial manipu-
lation task. Two situations were set up: one in which the tablet
was manipulated directly and the other in which the tablet
was manipulated indirectly, using another input device. Direct
manipulation showed a higher manipulation performance than
indirect manipulation.
The experiment results show that expected binding was
detected for both direct and indirect manipulation situations.
However, there was no difference in the magnitude of the
bindings between the two situations.
Regarding the subjective evaluation of SOA, direct ma-
nipulation exceeded indirect manipulation in terms of the
evaluation of the sense of control. However, there was no
difference in causal perception between the two situations.
This suggests that the magnitude of bindings may be related
to causal perception rather than the perception of the sense
of control. We investigate this point using an experimental
paradigm that allows us to control for causal perception, such
as delaying the feedback of the action [15][16].
REFERENCES
[1]
G. Prabhakar and P. Biswas, “A brief survey on interactive automotive
ui,” Transportation Engineering, vol. 6, 2021, p. 100089.
[2]
S. Seinfeld, T. Feuchtner, A. Maselli, and J. M¨uller, “User represen-
tations in human-computer interaction,” Human–Computer Interaction,
vol. 36, no. 5-6, 2021, pp. 400–438.
[3]
J. W. Moore, “What is the sense of agency and why does it matter?”
Frontiers in psychology, vol. 7, 2016, p. 1272.
[4]
H. Limerick, D. Coyle, and J. W. Moore, “The experience of agency
in human-computer interactions: a review,” Frontiers in human neuro-
science, vol. 8, 2014, p. 643.
[5]
K. Kilteni, R. Groten, and M. Slater, “The sense of embodiment
in virtual reality,” Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments,
vol. 21, no. 4, 2012, pp. 373–387.
[6]
J. A. Dewey and G. Knoblich, “Do implicit and explicit measures of
the sense of agency measure the same thing?” PloS one, vol. 9, no. 10,
2014, p. e110118.
[7]
N. Khalighinejad and P. Haggard, “Extending experiences of volun-
tary action by association,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, vol. 113, no. 31, 2016, pp. 8867–8872.
[8]
P. Haggard, S. Clark, and J. Kalogeras, “Voluntary action and conscious
awareness,” Nature neuroscience, vol. 5, no. 4, 2002, pp. 382–385.
[9]
J. W. Moore and S. S. Obhi, “Intentional binding and the sense of
agency: a review,” Consciousness and cognition, vol. 21, no. 1, 2012,
pp. 546–561.
[10]
P. I. Cornelio Martinez, S. De Pirro, C. T. Vi, and S. Subramanian,
“Agency in mid-air interfaces,” in Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Confer-
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2017, pp. 2426–2439.
[11]
D. Coyle, J. Moore, P. O. Kristensson, P. Fletcher, and A. Blackwell, “I
did that! measuring users’ experience of agency in their own actions,” in
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing
systems, 2012, pp. 2025–2034.
[12]
J. Bergstrom-Lehtovirta, D. Coyle, J. Knibbe, and K. Hornbæk, “I
really did that: sense of agency with touchpad, keyboard, and on-skin
interaction,” in Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, 2018, pp. 1–8.
[13]
A. Kalckert and H. H. Ehrsson, “Moving a rubber hand that feels like
your own: a dissociation of ownership and agency,” Frontiers in human
neuroscience, vol. 6, 2012, p. 40.
[14]
N. Braun, J. D. Thorne, H. Hildebrandt, and S. Debener, “Interplay of
agency and ownership: the intentional binding and rubber hand illusion
paradigm combined,” PloS one, vol. 9, no. 11, 2014, p. e111967.
[15]
A. Sato and A. Yasuda, “Illusion of sense of self-agency: discrepancy
between the predicted and actual sensory consequences of actions
modulates the sense of self-agency, but not the sense of self-ownership,”
Cognition, vol. 94, no. 3, 2005, pp. 241–255.
[16]
M. A. F. Ismail and S. Shimada, “‘ robot ’hand illusion under delayed
visual feedback: Relationship between the senses of ownership and
agency,” PloS one, vol. 11, no. 7, 2016, p. e0159619.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
VEHICULAR 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

