 
Application of Rate Adaptation Algorithm on Road Safety in Vehicular Networks 
 
Kenneth S.  Nwizege 
College of Engineering 
Swansea University, UK 
kennethsorle@yahoo.com 
  
 
Mauro Bottero 
        Independent Consultant, 
Mulan 
         mauro_bottero@yahoo.it 
 
 
 
Abstract - Vehicular communications occur when two or 
more vehicles come into range with one another, to share 
data over wireless media. The applications of vehicular 
communication are far-reaching, from toll collection to 
collision avoidance. One of the goals of rate adaptation is to 
maximize 
throughput 
by 
exploiting 
the 
multiple 
transmission rates available for 802.11 devices by adjusting 
their transmission rates dynamically, based on to the time-
varying and location dependent wireless channel conditions.  
In this paper, we present and study in detail Adaptive 
Context-Aware Rate Selection (ACARS) algorithm that is 
efficient in data transfer, energy utilization and road safety 
applications. The goal of ACARS is to select the rate that 
will yield a good throughput performance, with transmit 
power control and access point (AP) coordination to improve 
data transfer performance and safety application in 
Dedicated Short Range Communication (DSRC). From 
results obtained, ACARS is able to minimize the total 
transmit power in the presence of propagation processes and 
mobility of vehicles, by adapting to the rapidly varying 
channels conditions compared to other rate adaptation 
algorithms. 
Keywords- DSRC; Vehicular Communication; IEEE802.11p; 
Rate Adaptation; Road Safety. 
   
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
       Safety of lives is one of the primary concerns for the 
evolution of Dedicated Short Range Communication 
(DSRC) technology in vehicular networks. The rate at 
which 
accidents 
occur 
on 
our 
roads 
increase 
proportionately, especially as the number of vehicles on 
the road is on the increase. According to recent news, the 
number of connected cars is expected to grow from 45 
million at the end of 2011 to 210 million by 2016 [17]. 
Carelessness from drivers, inexperience, mal-function of 
vehicles and the 'act of god' are some popular reasons for 
cause of road accidents, which leads to death due to its 
regular occurrences.  For this reason, DSRC has proposed 
a technology to be built into every vehicle [1] since safety 
in vehicular communication is inevitable. DSRC is 
designed to offer complete solution for mobile data 
broadcast, and also to active Wireless Access to Vehicular 
Environment (WAVE) protocol. It is a short to medium 
range communication service that supports applications 
like: electronic toll collection, Collision Avoidance (CA), 
Quality of Service (QoS) and public safety etc. 
      The focus of DSRC for any Rate Adaptation 
Algorithm (RAA) is low latency and high data rate, 
experienced due to the fast varying condition of vehicles 
as they change speed and environments. DSRC supports 
both safety (control channel) and non-safety (service 
channel) to enable its effectiveness. Vehicles must be able 
to switch between Control Channel (CCH) and Service 
Channels (SCHs) several times a second. Both of these 
share the limited resources of DSRC. Control Channel 
Interval (CCHI) has direct impact on reliability; the larger 
CCHI, the lower collision probability. 
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 
is review of literature, while Section 3 deals with 
vehicular communication, Section 4 is an overview of 
ACARS, Section 5 presents the network concept and the 
results and discussions are presented in Section 6. Finally, 
Section 7 concludes the paper. 
 
II.  REVIEW OF LITERATURE 
      Auto Rate Fallback (ARF) [18] was first proposed in 
1996, as the simplest and first rate adaptation algorithm. 
Other popular existing RAAs in wireless networks are 
Adaptive Auto Rate Fallback (AARF) [16] (ACARS) 
[11], Channel-Aware Rate Adaptation (CARA) [13], 
Context-Aware Rate Adaptation Algorithm (CARA) [15], 
Robust Rate Adaptation Algorithm (RRAA) [16] etc. 
    In ARF the decision whether to increase or decrease the 
transmission rate is based on the number of consecutive 
successfully or unsuccessfully transmission attempts. This 
algorithm is widely adopted because it is simple. In this 
algorithm, the sender tries to send a packet at a higher rate 
after a fixed number of continuously successful 
transmissions at a given rate. The sender decreases the 
rate after one or two consecutive failures. If the probe 
packet is successful, the next packet will be sent at higher 
rate and if not, the sender will immediately lower the rate. 
The sender also lowers the rate after two consecutive 
failures.  
     In [2]11]15][16], AARF was implemented with  
mobility concept. From these references, some of the 
implementations were with context- information [2] [11], 
while others implemented with power control in analysing 
the performance of rate adaptation algorithm. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

     ONOE [16] is a very slowly adapting algorithm whose 
implementation is available in the MADWifi driver code 
[5]. It tries to change the rate after one second interval. 
ONOE is a credit-based algorithm that maintains the 
credit score of the current rate for every destination and 
after the end of a second; it calculates the credit and 
makes the rate change decision. This rate selection 
scheme has also been implemented with mobility and 
power control in [2][11] [15] where performances of 
various rate schemes were analysed. 
    In [4], SampleRate algorithm was proposed in order to 
maximise throughput in wireless networks. It is based on 
transmission statistics over cycles. In every tenth packet 
data, it picks a random rate that may do better than the 
current one to send the data packet. If it occurs that the 
selected rate provides smaller transmission time, it will 
switch to this rate. The performance of this rate selection 
scheme was evaluated in [2], with different performance 
metrics for various RAAs. 
    Furthermore, in [2] another RAA was proposed known 
as Context-Aware Rate Selection (CARS). This algorithm 
performs better in stressful scenarios, since it adapts its 
bit-rate faster in varying conditions. From [2], results 
show that CARS performs better than ONOE and 
SampleRate by using optimum higher data rates which 
allows CARS scheme to reduce network load. The 
limitation in this scheme is that, it lacks the ability to 
dynamically tune the estimation window size using the 
context-information, and it is not robust to adapt to 
shadowing effect available in wireless and mobile 
environments and detecting channel errors. 
  In  [12] [13] [14] , another rate selection scheme known 
as Context-Aware Rate Algorithm (CARA), also 
considered other RAAs by implemented mobility in 
existing RAAs and CARA itself., but there was no 
implementation of power control scheme to enable 
existing RAAs estimate Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) 
from the Physical (PHY) layer. 
  Adaptive Context-Aware Rate Selection (ACARS) 
algorithm is a SNR-based rate selection scheme that relies 
on 
the 
Request-To-Send/Clear-To-Send 
(RTS/CTS) 
mechanism to provide instantaneous receiver-side Signal-
to-Interference Noise Ratio (SINR) information to the 
transmitter. With the knowledge of the SINR at the 
receiver, the transmitter directly sets the transmission rate 
without wasting time to probe. But the trade-off in a SNR-
based rate selection scheme  is that in trying to solve the 
hidden node problem using RTS/CTS mechanisms, 
introduces significant overhead because  of the time it  
takes in communicating with the receiver to estimate SNR 
from the PHY layer. Although ACARS performs well in 
the presence of fading processes, it has slow response to 
path loss exponents and hence does not perform very well 
[11] [15]. 
    In this paper, we will evaluate the performances of 
various rate selection schemes and discuss results 
obtained as it applies to road safety. 
 
III.     VEHICULAR COMMUNICATION 
    Vehicular communication can either be an Ad-Hoc 
network where all vehicles communicate with each other 
directly or infrastructure network where vehicles 
communicate via an Access Point ( AP). We have only 
shown a Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V21) in Figure 2, 
because that is the only network configuration we have 
used in this paper.   
   The growth of connected cars associated with Mobile 
Information and Communication Technologies (MICT) 
will change the way vehicular environments will be 
planed and maintained. In this scope, context-awareness 
rises as an important technology so as to achieve optimal 
vehicular-centric information , such as assisting vehicular 
applications with meaningful information. 
 
A. IEEE 802.11p Multichannel Operation 
    The PHY layer is responsible for transmitting raw bits 
in wireless channels; this is achieved via channel 
assignment. IEEE 802.11p is an extension of 802.11 
wireless LAN Medium Access (MAC) and PHY.  Three 
different PHY Layer modes have been defined by 802.11-
2007 standards. They are the 20 MHz, 10 MHz and 5 
MHz These modes can be achieved by using a reduced 
clock/sampling rate [3] [4] [8] [9].  
 
B. Medium-Access Control (MAC) Layer 
     The function of the MAC layer is to coordinate the use 
of the communication medium. MAC layer protocol 
decides which node will access the shared medium at any 
given time. The MAC layer uses the Collision Avoidance 
(CSMA/CA) mechanism to regular access to the channel. 
The physical CSMA/CA does not rely on the ability of 
stations to detect a collision by hearing their own 
transmission; an Acknowledgement (ACK) is transmitted 
by the destination station to signal the successful 
reception of the transmitted packets and then transmission 
of ACK is immediately done following the packet 
reception after a Short Interframe Space (SIFS). 
    
IV.     OVERVIEW OF ACARS 
     In vehicular communication, context-information 
include speed, acceleration of the vehicle, position, 
distance from the neighbouring vehicle, environmental 
factors such as location, time of day, weather, type of road 
traffic density. In ACARS, we only used two significant 
parameters: speed of vehicles and the distance of the 
vehicles from the AP. This algorithm is based on CARS 
scheme with some assumptions, and modifications to the 
original CARS algorithm. The full implementation of 
CARS algorithm is not known from [2] because, 
information such as context-information, Packet Error 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Rate (PER) were not discussed, making it difficult to 
implement line 4 of CARS algorithm [2]. 
   In this design, we used some mathematical illustrations 
to derive parameters for context-information and use them 
in implementing the CARS algorithm. For this reason, we 
re-named the original CARS algorithm as seen in [2] as 
modified CARS, because it is not identical to the original 
CARS. The function EC uses context-information, 
transmission rate and packet length as input parameters 
and estimated packet error rate as output. EH uses 
Exponentially Weighted Moving Average (EWMA) of 
past transmission statistics for each bit rate which has 
same working principle as SampleRate [7]. To predict the 
link quality of the channel, we used cars.α which is based 
on speed of the vehicles. When speed is zero, there is no 
prediction of link quality using context-information; 
hence EWMA will be given preference at that condition. 
But when vehicles are moving with high speed, cars.α is 
given 
preference, 
and 
this 
relationship 
α 
=max(0,min(speed/S)) helps to determine the values of 
cars.α with different speed normalizers. The values of 
S=30m/s is chosen based on research in [2]. 
    The three basic layers among the seven layers of the 
Open System Interconnection (OSI) reference model that 
implement ACARS are the application, MAC and PHY 
layers. The vehicles also known as Mobile Nodes (MN) 
use information from  the application layer available in 
each MN, while the MAC layer handles the rate selection 
algorithm, and the PHY layer handles RTS/CTS frame 
exchange, SNR estimation and power control. 
 
Algorithm 1. The Adaptive Context-Aware Rate 
Selection Algorithm 
Function: ACARS_GetRate 
 Output:  Rate 
Input : ctx, α, len 
 
1:  Update    counter of   packet transmissions   
2:  Update average RSSs of  recent  ACKS(RSS) 
3:  BestRate = FindBest_Rate try[ ]  
4 : Determine α  by  using α= max(0,min(1, speed/S)) 
5:  Compute   backoff  using 
6:  backoff = CW size  x slot time 
7:  Decrement all  backoff  counters 
8:  Update   the  simulation    time  accordingly 
9:  Requires: MobModel 
10:  (t,v,oldpos ,ap CommRange, n, xmax   for   Context- 
information)  
11.  Compute  Bper  from  the  PER  table 
  p(n,:) = polyfit (Snr (Ber)Mode1:,1),  
log(n(Ber)Mode1(:,2)),expn) 
12 : Compute α  using 
 cars. α = 1 - EH>0) x max(0,min(1, v(iTx)/cars.S)) 
13:   Ec= cars.Ec (iTx,:) 
14: Determine EH using 
15:  EH= cars. EH (iTx,:) 
16: Compute E_C  
17:  cars.Ec (iTx,jj) = min(1, exp (polyval(Phy.p(jj,:), 
snr{temp))} 
 18: Compute  EH using 
 19: cars.EH (TxVehic,RateLevel (TxVehic))= cars. EH 
(TxVehic, RateLevel(TxVehic)) x (1-a)+ Bper x a 
 20: Compute  PER  using  
  PER=Ec cars. α +(1-cars. α) x EH 
  Avgretries  = (N.PER^{(N+1)} -(N+1).PER^N+1)/(1-
PER)+N.PER^N) 
  Thr =Rate/avgretries.(1-PER^N)^/ρ 
 21: Select  rate 
 22:  IF Thr  > Max_Thr 
 23:  Update link condition 
 24: BestRate       bit-rate 
 25: Max_Thr        Thr 
 26: ENDIF. 
 
V.         NETWORK CONCEPT 
    In this section, we will describe the network 
configuration used in implementing of our algorithm. We 
will also highlight on the parameters used in our 
simulation in MATLAB. 
     
A. Simulation Scenario         
        In this network configuration, each time a vehicle 
enters into the communication range; it communicates 
with the Road Side Unit (RSU). It adds new vehicle 
information such as vehicle speed, position, distance, etc. 
This information helps the RSU to broadcast the 
emergency information to the vehicles. Every minute, 
vehicles leave and enter the communication range with 
high speed. RSU will communicate to vehicles as soon as 
they enter the communication range. For example, if there 
are no vehicles within range,  and there is an accident or 
emergency message at that time , as soon as any vehicle 
enters the range, message will propagate through the first 
entered vehicle in that communication range. This RSU 
communication helps in communication when there is no 
vehicle in cluster range. 
    In this scenario, all vehicles act as clients. We use a 
fixed base station as server, which is similar to what is 
obtained in cities and highways having RSUs (e.g., kiosks 
and cafes) with wireless services. Our scenario consists of 
a road of length 1000 m with multiple lanes. The base 
station is located at the middle of the road.  Vehicles 
select their speeds uniformly over the range [Speedavg 
*0.75, Speedavg *1.25] km/h.  Tables I shows the 
simulation parameters used., while Figure 1 shows the 
V2I configuration used in our simulation. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

 
                      Figure 1. Network Setup. 
 
Speedavg  x  0.75, Speedavg x1.25km/h                           (1) 
d=                                       (2) 
 
where d is distance in meters, x and y are vehicle 
positions in the x and y coordinates and Speedavg is 
average speed of vehicles.  Speedavg  of  55 km/h was used 
for the different number of vehicles. The distance d 
between vehicles and Access Point (AP) or RSU with 
vehicle positions x and y were determined from equation 
(2).  Parameters used in this simulation are listed in Table 
I. 
                 
TABLE 1.     CONFIGURATION PARAMETERS 
Parameters (Units) 
Values 
Length of Road (m) 
1000 
Number of  Vehicles 
150 
Position of AP (m) 
500 
PHY and MAC Protocol 
802.11p 
Frequency (GHz) 
5.89 
 
 
Normalized 
Transmit 
Power (mW) 
40 
Noise Power (dBm) 
-90  
 
 
 ϒ   (Path Loss exponent, 
Urban area cellular radio) 
2.0, 2.7-3.5 
Sigma (dB) 
              6- 8 
Communication Range (m) 
   300 
DIFS (µs) 
            50 
SIFS ((µs) 
30 
HPHY (bits) 
192 
HMAC (bits) 
200 
Data rate (Mbps) 
3, 4.5, 6,9,12,24,27 
Maximum Retransmission 
3 
 
 
B. Propagation Environment 
    Simulation was carried out by implementing a V2I 
network so that analysis of AP coordination for data 
transfer protocol and context-information can be 
evaluated. Mathematical calculations were integrated 
into our MATLAB code and were used in this 
implementation. To ensure accuracy of results, 
simulation was done to 4 iterations and for a highly 
dense network of 150 vehicles. 
 
C. Free Space  Path Loss 
      Free space path loss model is a power off that 
relates to distance. Due to high mobility of vehicles 
as speed changes, the distance between the 
transmitter and receiver changes. This makes 
empirical free space path loss necessary in order to 
model the effect of distance on packet delivery 
probability. This space loss accounts for the loss due 
to spreading of Radio Frequency (RF) energy as 
transmission of signals propagates through free 
space. From the equation (3) of path loss, it is seen 
that the power density is reduced by  
 
     as distance 
is increased. 
 
      Prx=     
  
    
 
                                                      (3) 
 
      where  
   
       is the power density,     is wavelength in 
meters, Prx,     are received and transmit power 
respectively. In free space, the power of electromagnetic 
radiation varies inversely with the square of distance, 
making distance an ideal indicator of signal level as well 
as loss rate. Due to imperfect propagation environment, in 
practice, it is not exactly the inverse square. Distance 
between sender and receiver gives a high correlation 
between signal level and error rate as this affects the 
number of transmitted packets that will be received [19]. 
 
     =                                                          (4) 
    =                                                                               (5) 
RSS                                                                          (6) 
 
where    is power gain,      is path loss,       is 
shadowing and       is multipath fading                                  
is noise power while RSS is the Received Signal Strength. 
 
D. Log-Normal Shadowing  
         Communication channel is a time varying power 
gain which consists of path loss, log-normal shadowing 
and multipath fading. The receivers experience a desired 
signal gain with respect to the transmit power Pt used by 
the transmitter. We used shadowing deviation and path 
loss exponent in our simulation as shown in Table I to 
evaluate the impact of environmental factor on RAAs. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 2.  Average Energy Efficiency vs Number 
Of Vehicles. 
 
Figure 3. Average System Throughput vs Number of Vehicles. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Average System throughput vs 
Distance. 
 
 
Figure 5. Packet Error Rate vs Number of Vehicles. 
 
Figure 6.  Success Probability vs Number of 
Vehicles. 
 
VI.    RESSULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
     AARF has poor energy efficiency than all other rate 
selection schemes from Figure 2. From this figure, 
SampleRate performs better than the other rate schemes 
followed by ACARS. ONOE struggled to increase its 
efficiency at higher vehicle density.  This trend is 
different from the behaviour of AARF that degrades its 
efficiency as the density of the vehicle increases.   
    ONOE is a credit-based rate adaptation algorithm; it 
spends  about 10 seconds on each bit-rate before it 
increases rate and then scaling up to the highest bit-rate of 
27  Mbps, therefore does not perform so well in this 
scenario. 
AARF 
and 
ONOE 
have 
same 
poor 
performances compared to the others, as seen in Figure 3. 
AARF waits for 10 consecutive successful transmission 
attempts before increasing rate. Since it is a transmitter-
based rate adaptation algorithm, it cannot adapt fast in 
selecting the proper transmission rate that will match the 
channel condition, this may be one of the reasons for its 
low performance. ACARS performs better than all other 
rate adaptation schemes. Observation from this figure 
shows that SampleRate performs better than AARF, 
ONOE and MODIFIEDCARS. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

    As observed in Figure 4, mobility results in more rapid 
channel variations that are very challenging for rate 
selection algorithms. In such dynamic environments, we 
expect that it is critical to gain accurate channel 
information quickly in order to effectively utilize the 
channel. From this figure, ACARS and MODIFIEDCARS 
show some fluctuations in performance as the distance 
increases and perform better than the other rate selection 
schemes. ONOE performs worse than the others rate 
selection schemes. From this figure, it is observed that 
ONOE is affected greatly by vehicle mobility, because up 
to about 120 meters, it performs better than all others, but 
dropped greatly from 150 meters. This shows that ONOE 
cannot perform well in high mobility scenario especially 
as the inter-node distance increases 
    From Figure 4, ACARS and MODIFIEDCARS 
compete with each other and almost overlap as the 
network congestion increases due to increase of vehicles. 
Both of them did not perform badly as can be observed 
from this figure. SampleRate performs better than all 
other rate schemes, while AARF and ONOE did not 
perform well compared to the others. The reason for this 
may be because, both of them spend much time before 
changing rate in this circumstance thereby increasing the 
waiting time.  
     The performance measure between SampleRate and 
ACARS/MODIFIEDCARS is large. AARF also degrades 
fast as the number of vehicles increases. We can observe 
how the network congestion greatly affect AARF and 
ONOE.  
     The throughput performance of a network is affected 
by the rate at which packets are in error. From Figure 5, 
ACARS has a low PER rate, which helps in the overall 
throughput performance of this algorithm. On the other 
hand,  AARF and ONOE perform very poorly compared 
to all other rate selection schemes. SampleRate struggles 
to compete with ACARS as can be seen from this figure. 
It also performs better that AARF, ONOE and 
MODIFIEDCARS in this scenario. 
    The success probability for both ACARS and 
MODIFIEDCARS are better than the others Figure 6. 
Success rate is proportional to network throughput. If the 
success rate is high then the final throughput of the 
system will be better. SampleRate performs poorly 
compared to the other rate selection schemes. The channel 
condition in this scenario may have greatly affected its 
ability to choose an appropriate transmission time in order 
to change rate.  
    From these results, we have seen that ACARS can be a 
good RAA, to be used for vehicle safety and data transfer 
in DSRC, because of its good throughout performance 
and high success rate. 
 
VII.      CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
      One of the key contributions in this paper is the 
implementation of a SNR-based rate adaptation algorithm 
that estimates SNR from the PHY layer, so as to be 
effective in packet delivery probability. With this feature, 
ACARS performs better than existing rate adaptation 
algorithms (RAAs) and this can be seen from most of our 
simulation results.  
      Another key contribution in this paper is the 
integration of power control into the design of ACARS 
algorithm and other existing rate adaptation algorithms. 
From literatures, it has either been rate adaptation 
analysis, or power control analysis respectively, without a 
combination of these two. We have combined these two 
in the design and implementation of ACARS. Results 
obtained show that ACARS can minimize energy 
consumption which is one of the major challenges of 
wireless mobile nodes. It can also reduce network 
congestion and enhance QoS with help of the power 
control scheme. 
    In the future, we will evaluate the performance of 
ACARS on other context- information and also consider a 
Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) scenario. 
    . 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
    This research was supported by Education Trust Fund 
(ETF) through the Rivers State Polytechnic, Nigeria. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
  J.  He,  Z. Tang,  T. O’Farrell, and T. Chen.  Performance 
Analysis of DSRC Priority Mechanism for Road Safety 
Applications in Vehicular Network. Aston University, United 
Kingdom. IEEE Wireless Communication and Mobile  Computing, 
2009, pp 980-990. 
[2] 
 P.  Shankar,   T. Nadeem.  J.  Rosca , and  I.  Iftode. Context 
Aware Rate Selection for Vehicular Networks. Department of 
Computer Science, Rutgers University, IEEE, 2008, pp 1-10. 
[3] 
 L.  Armstrong. Dedicated Short Range Communications(DSRC). 
http://www.leearmstrong.com/dsrc/dsrchomeset.htm. 
[4] 
 S. Wu. High Performance Rate Adaptation on IEEE 802.11 
Networks. PhD Thesis, Auburn University, 2008, pp 34-60 
[5] 
   A.  Kamerman , and  L.  Monteban.  A High-Performance 
Wireless LAN for the Unlicensed Band.  AT&T Bell Laboratories 
Technical Journal, 1997, pp.118-133. 
[6] 
  C.  Sommer,  S.  Joerer,  and F. Dressler.  On the Applicability of 
Two-Ray Path Loss Models for  Vehicular  Network Simulation. 
IEEE Vehicular Networking Conference 2012, pp 65-68. 
[7] 
   L. Stibor,  Y. Zang,  and H. Reumerman. Evaluation of 
communication distance of broadcast messages in a vehicular ad-
hoc network using IEEE 802.11p. IEEE communication society, 
2007, pp 254-256. 
[8] 
   K. S. Nwizege,  F. M. Good,  and S. Neenwni. Performance 
Analysis of Adaptive Rate Mechanism for IEEE 802.11p in DSRC 
for 
Road 
Safety 
Application 
in 
Vehicular 
Networks. 
Computational Intelligence, Modelling and Simulation (CIMSIM), 
2011 Third International Conference, pp 362-366. 
[9] 
    K. S. Nwizege,  J. He,  and M. Shedrack,. Optimizing Rate 
Algorithms in Wireless Networks.  European Modelling and 
Simulation  (EMS) , Madrid, 16-18 November, 2011, pp 2-6. 
[10]     S.  R . Saunders,  and  A . A.  Zavala. Antennas and Propagation 
for Wireless Communication systems.  John Wiley and Sons , Ltd, 
second edition, 2007, pp 172-178. 
[11]       K.  S.  Nwizege,  and  J. He. ACARS. Adaptive Context Aware 
Rate Selection  Algorithms in Vehicular Networks.  International 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Journal of Convergence Information Technology , April 2013, pp 
1.5. 
[12]      X.  W.  G.  Judd,  and  P.  Steenkiste. Efficient Channel-Aware 
Rate Adaptation in Dynamic Environments. (Carnegie Mellon 
University, Pittsburgh,PA, USA.), June 2008, pp. 118-131, 
[13]     S. C. J. Kim,  S. Kim,   and  D. Qiao. CARA: Collision-Aware 
Rate Adaptation for IEEE 801.11 WLANs.  IEEE Communication 
Society, 2006, pp 1-3. 
[14]     S.  H.  Wong,  H. Yang,  S.  Lu,  and V.  Hargavan. Robust Rate 
Adaptation for 802.11 Wireless Networks. Proceedings of 
Mobicom, 2006, pp 146-152. 
[15] K. S.  Nwizege , and  M.  MacMammah,. Performance Evaluation 
of Path Loss Exponents on Rate Algorithms in Vehicular Networks 
International Journal of Emerging Science and Engineering 
(IJESE), August 2013, vol.1, pp 103-108. 
[16]      F.  Karnadi,  Z. H.  Mo,   and  K. C.  Lan. Rapid Generation of 
Realistic Mobility Models for VANET.  March 2007, pp 2509-
2513. 
[17]    http://umtri.umich.edu/cvnews/?p=54.0, 
Connected 
Vehicle 
News (2011). Intel Invests in Connected Cars: Connected Vehicle 
Market Expected to Reach 210 Million Units in 2016, Accessed 
January, 2014. 
[18]  K. Zhang, A. Lim, S. Wu,  and  Q. Yang.  A High TCP 
Performance Rate Adaptation Algorithm for IEEE 802.11 
Networks.  International Journal of Computer Networks & 
Communications (IJCNC). Department of Computer Science and 
Software Engineering, Auburn University, Vol.2, No.6, 2010, pp 
32-34. 
[19]    A. Sheth,  and  R.  Han. An Implementation of Transmit Power 
Control in 802.11b Wireless Networks.   Department of Computer 
Science University of Colorado, CU-CS-934-02 August 2002, pp 
3-6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-348-3
VEHICULAR 2014 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

