A Review of Network Models for Internet of Vehicles   
 
Asiya Khan and Sanjay Sharma 
School of Engineering 
University of Plymouth, Drake Circus 
Plymouth PL4 8AA 
e-mail: asiya.khan;sanjay.sharma@plymouth.ac.uk 
Cindy Goh1 and Cheng Leong Lim2 
1School of Engineering, Glasgow University,  
Glasgow G12 8LT UK 
2NXP Semiconductors, Singapore 138628 
e-mail: cindy.goh@glasgow.ac.uk; 
chengleong.lim@nxp.com
 
 
Abstract—Connected vehicles are the building blocks of the 
emerging Internet of Vehicles (IoV) under the umbrella of 
Internet of Things (IoT) and more recently, Network of Things 
(NoT). This paper applies the NoT concept to IoV networks 
and presents a review of the network models for IoV 
highlighting the research challenges and solutions.  
Keywords- IoV; V2V; V2x; NoT; VANET. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Automobiles are currently undergoing a revolution just 
like mobile phones did ten years ago. Future automobile will 
be expected to communicate with other cars – vehicle-2-
vehicle 
(V2V), 
with 
infrastructure/roadside 
sensors/pedestrians/cyclists/anything else (V2x). The vision 
of smart cities includes connected vehicles amongst many 
other things. It is envisaged that 25 million ‘things’ will be 
connected by the year 2020. In one year, globally 
approximately 1.3 million lives are lost and 7.4 million 
injured in road accidents and 90 billion hours lost due to 
traffic delays [1]. Therefore to improve road safety and 
traffic congestion, connected vehicles offer a very promising 
solution. They also contribute towards the roadmap of fully 
autonomous driving becoming a reality. The emerging 
Internet of Vehicles (IoV) is offering the platform to provide 
real time exchange of information to realize the opportunity 
of improving road safety and congestion. It has huge 
applications in autonomous car revolution, intelligent 
transportation system and smart city.  
The key technologies for IoV are presented in [2], 
guidelines and basic principles of IoV are presented in [3], 
whereas [4] focuses on the solutions and challenges for 
connected vehicles. As IoV revolution takes off, the 
conventional Vehicular Ad hoc Networks (VANETs) are 
changing into IoV as VANET [5] turns the connected vehicle 
into a wireless router or mobile node enabling vehicles to 
connect to each other creating a wireless network between 
them. An in-depth tutorial on vehicular networking is 
presented in [6], whereas [7] presents the challenges of 
integrating connected vehicles to Internet of Things (IoT) 
and [8] presents a vehicular cloud for IoV applications. 
There are a number of challenges within the IoV network 
based on the priority of data exchange messages. For 
example, priority has to be given to safety critical messages, 
whereas on-board messages related to infotainment will be 
lower on that scale. Work presented in [9] proposes an 
abstract network model for IoV based on individual and 
swarm activities. Petri-nets have been used recently in 
vehicular authentication [10], modelling and control of 
vehicular networks [11] and traffic signal analysis in [12]. 
Work presented in [13] models vehicular networks using 
spatio-temporal locality and information-centric networks 
(ICN) are presented in [14] to model the connected 
networks.  Recently, the concept of Network of Things 
(NoT) with IoT has been presented in [15].  In this paper, we 
apply the concept of NoT to the emerging IoV as presented 
by NIST [15] and review the connected network models 
presented in literature identifying the challenges and 
solutions.   
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
presents the IoV concept, whereas an overview of the 
network models is presented in Section III. Section IV 
presents the research challenges and solutions for network 
models in IoV. Section V concludes the paper and presents 
future direction of our work. 
II. 
NOT APPLIED TO IOV  
This section presents an overview of IoV, summarizes 
the wireless channels standards used in V2V and V2x and 
applies the NoT concept to IoV. 
A. IoV Concept  
IoV integrates three networks – an inter-vehicle 
network, an intra-vehicle network and vehicular mobile 
Internet. Therefore, IoV integrates these three networks and 
is defined as “a large-scale distributed system for wireless 
communication and information exchange between V2x 
according to agreed communication protocols and data 
standards” [9].  
An inter-vehicle network is defined as network 
communication generated by the vehicle-borne computer, 
control system, on-board sensors, or passengers that is 
disseminated in the proximity to other vehicles. An intra-
vehicle network is a wireless network between sensors 
inside a vehicle. A review of intra-vehicle networks is 
presented in [16]. The number of sensors is forecasted to 
reach 200 per vehicle by 2020 [1]. Electronic Control units 
(ECUs) are built in the vehicle which communicates to other 
ECUs and sensors wirelessly. Connected vehicles require 
Onboard units (OBUs) to broadcast messages through 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

VANET. Work presented in [17] shows that vehicle density 
has an impact on VANET network metrics. The OBUs will 
contain data such as vehicle location, current time, direction, 
speed, traffic volume remarks, acceleration, deceleration. 
The communication between two or more OBUs is the V2V 
communication and that between an OBU and RSU 
(Roadside Sensor Unit) is V2I. Recently, the Society of 
Automotive 
Engineers 
(SAE) 
has 
established 
communication standards for connected vehicles (SAE 
J2725) [18] under Dedicated Short Range Communication 
(DSRC) for V2V and V2x. Table I summarizes the various 
wireless communication channels with their requirements 
for typical communication types, e.g. V2V or V2I, etc.  
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY OF WIRELESS CHANNEL STANDARDS 
Chann
el 
Frequency 
band 
Bandwi-
dth 
Data 
rate 
Range 
Comm
unicati
on 
Type 
DSRC/
WAVE 
5.9GHz 
75MHz 
in USA 
30MHz 
in 
Europe 
27 Mbps 
(max) 
1000m 
V2V & 
V2I/R/
x 
Zigbee 
2.4GHz/868
MHz 
(Europe) 
2 MHz 
20kbps-
250kbps 
10-100m 
V2I/V2
R 
VLC 
[19] 
400 and 
800THz 
~390THz 
10Kbps 
(signals) 
500Mbp
s (LEDs) 
1000-
2000m  
V2I/R 
Wi-Fi 
2.4/5 GHz 
20/40 
MHz 
54Mbps-
600Mbp
s 
35m 
(indoor), 
115m 
(outdoor) 
V2V  & 
V2x 
4G/LT
E 
700/800/90
0/1800/260
0 MHz in 
Europe 
Supported 
by IMT and 
ITU 
20 MHz 
300 
Mbps 
peak 
downloa
d rates, 
75 Mpbs 
upload 
rates 
Worldwi
de – 
limited to 
cellular 
coverage 
zones 
V2V & 
V2x 
 
The sensors in an intra-vehicle communication are 
stationary so a simple star network topology is sufficient. In 
this communication type, the wireless protocols that support 
smaller distance is recommended, e.g. Bluetooth, Zigbee, 
Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID), etc. A vehicular 
mobile network is the cloud-based mobile network that sits 
above both inter-vehicle and intra-vehicle networks. Figure 
1 gives an overview of the V2x connectivity using various 
wireless protocols. The concept behind Figure 1 is that 
connected vehicles will be able to communicate with each 
other and with an intelligent transport system (ITS) using 
different wireless channels such as Wi-Fi, 4G/LTE, etc. and 
integrated with various sensors. Quality of Service (QoS) in 
such application will be critical as vehicles come out of one 
network into the other especially at handover points. 
There have been a number of researchers who have 
exploited both Wi-Fi [20]-[22] and DSRC/WAVE [23]-[26] 
in V2V and V2x communication. Line of Sight was 
achieved in [20][21] but when restricted by obstacles (no 
line of sight) then communication was affected. Work in 
[22] recommend 10MHz for V2V and V2x. Using WAVE 
[23], the environmental effects of antenna height, traffic and 
electromagnetic wave propagation had a severe impact on 
performance. The WAVE (IEEE802.11p) draft proposal is 
presented in [24] and in [25][26] authors confirm the 
viability of WAVE and IEEE802.11 in vehicular 
communication.   
 
Figure 1. Future trends in connected vehicles [27] 
While 
researchers 
have 
presented 
work 
on 
communication protocols, future network models of IoV 
needs to be compatible with all wireless protocols 
depending on the communication type e.g. V2V or V2x.  
B. NoT applied to IoV 
The concept diagram of connected vehicles under IoV is 
presented in Figure 2, which illustrates V2V and V2x 
connectivity using various access networks, which is in turn 
connected to the core network. The data is exchanged 
between Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) and the 
vehicles. We link Figure 2 with NoT as presented by NIST 
[15]. 
 
                               
    
 
 
    
                                                                   
          
   
         
     
       
    
             
           
    
       
   
       
 
      
     
   
        
   
           
                                          
 
  
   
    
   
   
 
 
ITS Infrastructure 
IEEE 
802.11p 
IEEE 
802.11gb 
4G/LTE  
V2V 
V2x 
Access Networks 
Roadside/x 
sensors 
Internet 
Core Network 
 
Figure. 2 V2V and V2x concept diagram under IoV 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

The NoT [15] defines five primitives as Sensors, 
Aggregator, Communication Channel, External Utility and 
Decision Trigger. All vehicles will have sensors connected 
that will be able to transmit/receive ‘useful’ information. 
This information is converted by an Aggregator, defined as 
a mathematical function implemented in software that 
transforms raw data into some ‘useful’ meaning. Both 
Sensor and Aggregator are shown as Roadside sensors in 
Figure 2. This is underpinned by the communication 
channel e.g. WiFi, 4G, etc. Again, Figure 2 shows the 
wireless channels such as Wi-Fi/4G etc. between V2V and 
V2x. The External Utility can be a software/hardware and 
will execute processes into the overall workflow of NoT. 
Finally, the Decision Trigger creates the final result needed 
to satisfy the requirements of NoT. The External Utility and 
Decision Trigger is combined together and presented within 
ITS in Figure 2.   
TABLE II.  
IOV PRIMITIVES 
NIST Primitives 
Proposed Primitives 
Feature 
Sensor 
Sensing Technologies 
Wireless and wired, 
sensors, RFID,  
Aggregate 
Communication 
Channel 
Communication 
Channel 
DSRC/Wave, Zigbee, 
Bluetooth, 
Wi-Fi, 
4G/LTE 
External utilities 
Data Processing 
Data 
created 
by 
connected 
vehicles, 
and 
how 
it 
is 
processed  
Decision Trigger 
 
Based on these NoT primitives [15], we present three 
primitives. We combine the primitives of Sensor and 
Aggregator 
as 
just 
Sensing 
Technologies, 
Communication Channel and again combine External 
Utility (eUtility) and Decision Trigger as one and call it 
Data Processing as shown in Table II. In Table II, feature 
describes the potential features for each primitive.    
III. 
IOV NETWORK MODELS – AN OVERVIEW 
This section presents an overview of the four network 
models presented in literature.  
A. Petri-Net 
Petri-nets combine a well-defined mathematical theory 
with a graphical representation of the dynamic behaviour of 
systems. Precise modelling and analysis of system 
behaviour is allowed by the theoretic aspect of Petri nets, 
whereas, the graphical representation of Petri nets enable 
visualization of the modelled system state changes [28].  
Controller Area Network (CAN) communication bus has 
been modelled using petri nets in [10] and used for timing 
analysis. CAN [29] is generally used to transmit control 
traffic between ECUs within the vehicle (intra-vehicle) and 
is very popular in the automotive application as a 
communication bus for event-triggered communication. 
Petri nets offer huge potential for distributed communication 
which will be key in V2x communication type. For instance, 
petri-nets cope smoothly with defining and implementing 
complicated requests in VANET using tokens and measure, 
i.e. the limits of vehicle numbers of RSU groups. 
Figure 3 shows the structure of a distributed control 
system which includes 2 vehicles, 6 devices, 10 programs 
and 12 functions with 10 data sets. 
 
Figure 3. Petri net example of a distributed control system [10] 
B. Information-Centric Networking  
ICN 
reverses 
the 
traditional 
IP 
address-centric 
networking into a content centric one enabling the user to 
directly retrieve the content using a “name” without 
referring to the IP address of the node string the content.   
 
Figure 4. Named Data Networking Interest processing at an intermediate 
node [14] 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

 This concept sits well with vehicular networks due to 
poor quality wireless links and the mobility of vehicles, data 
delivery is challenging.  ICN-based VANET concept is 
presented in [14] where ICN-based VANETs can be applied 
in areas of application, mobility and security. For example, 
the VANET data will contain location, time-stamp, etc., so, 
if the road conditions are sought, ICN can match this better 
than name-to-IP-address resolution and thus the vehicle 
does not need to be always connected. The mobility issues 
in ICN are addressed by the use of named data and 
therefore, the anycasting and in-network caching properties 
of ICN allow vehicles to retrieve content from the most 
convenient storage point. Content-based security is 
supported by ICN with protection and trust implemented at 
the packet level rather than at the communication channel. 
In Figure 4, a node follows the algorithm, it first looks in 
its content store (CS) to find a content copy, if a match is 
not found it looks in the pending interest table (PIT) and 
eventually in the forwarding information base (FIB). In 
Figure 4 the Interest/Data exchange refers to a vehicular 
environment.  
 
 
Figure 5. Swarm and Individual Network Model of IoV [9] 
C. Swarm and Individual Network Model 
The model presented in [9] integrates human, vehicle, 
thing and environment. The individual model focuses on 
one vehicle and the swarm model focuses on multi-user, 
multi-vehicle, multi-thing and multi-network scenarios. 
Through swarm intelligence, crowd sensing and sourcing 
and 
social 
computing, 
IoV 
can 
provide 
services/applications. Factors such as network partitions, 
route failures, change in channel quality and data rate and 
network load are addressed using swarm intelligence 
computing at the service providing stage. This is shown in 
Figure 5.   
Authors in [9] also highlight that understanding the 
service limits is critical for sustainability i.e. network 
resources under diverse high-dimensional data and limited 
bandwidth of the wireless network. 
D. Cloud, Connection and Clients  
Three major network elements of IoV are identified in 
[30] as cloud, connection and client as shown in Figure 6.  
The ‘cloud’ infrastructure provides a platform for a range of 
wireless access technologies. With the magnitude of traffic 
related information likely to drastically increase, it is ideal to 
handle the information using cloud computing framework. 
‘Connection’, on the other hand, utilises Third Party 
Network Inter Operator (TPNIO) to reduce direct Service 
Level Agreement (SLA) between the operators of the 
networks, enabling seamless roaming without compromising 
the quality and security of network operators. The ‘client’ 
element with the help of Wireless Access Technology 
(WAT) are broadly prioritized and split applications into 
safety and management oriented and business oriented. 
 
Figure 6. The three network elements of IoV [30] 
IV. 
IOV NETWORK MODELS - RESEARCH CHALLENGES & 
SOLUTIONS 
In Section III, we have presented some of the network 
models from literature. These models were chosen as they 
show the new paradigm of ICN and the concept of how the 
proposed network model can communicate both with 
‘people’ and ‘things’. Petri-net was chosen as it gives the 
flexibility for distributed control. The challenge for any 
network model in IoV is to be able to exchange information 
from V2V and V2x, where x can be a roadside sensor, 
another device or a person. In addition, there may be 
incompatibility among devices, different qualities and 
response time for Internet connections and limited access to 
data processing and storage. There will be additional 
complexity where some vehicles will be connected while 
others not.  
Future and emerging vehicle applications will consume a 
huge amount of sensor data in a collaborative manner. 
Content centric [31] and information-centric networks will 
play a key role. Vehicles move fast, therefore, in a content-
centric networking style, vehicle position, speed and 
direction from the rest of the vehicles are continuously sent. 
Whereas, ICN focusses on what instead of where to fulfil 
primary demands from both content publishers and 
consumers. Vehicular-cloud and ICN will contribute to the 
‘cloud’ to produce advance vehicular services, resource 
sharing and storing. The proposed architecture for ICN – 
Named Data Networking (NDN) [32] has been extended to 
vehicular networks where content is found and not hosts or 
IP addresses.  
ICN seems to be the most favorable network model with 
distributed control. From literature, we have shown petri-nets 
[10] used in a number of IoV scenarios. Researchers are 
leading towards layered architectures [30][33] where 
network is one of the layers in the IoV architecture. The 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

revealing of location information has huge concerns in 
vehicle privacy. In addition, location verification of 
neighbouring vehicle is also challenging due to the absence 
of trusted authority in vehicular communication. To capture 
vehicles in line of sight and away from sight presents yet 
another challenge due to the impact of moving and static 
obstacles in the network model.  
Automobiles are undergoing a revolution by changing 
the way we think of the cars. Autonomous driving is trialled 
in developed countries, while fully autonomous driving may 
be a few years away, some cars will be connected in the very 
near future, while others not. This will bring challenges in 
IoV and solutions will have to account for the not connected 
car. A high volume of data will be exchanged in V2x and 
data will split between information-rich and safety-critical. 
Current forms of IP address centric model and control will be 
challenged due to the dynamic environment of the vehicular 
data. Therefore, information-centric networking based on 
distributed control and petri-nets may be the way forward. 
However, in the short term inter-working between existing 
networking technologies and information-centric network 
will be needed. QoS is not guaranteed currently in ICN, and 
to enable that, software defined networks under the umbrella 
of network functions virtualization and vehicular cloud 
networking will be the key enabler.  
The 
integration 
of 
automotive 
and 
information 
technology will be promoted as a result of IoV. The biggest 
challenge in IoV implementation is the lack of coordination 
and communication. The push for IoV will generate massive 
data sets. Their analysis will help in the management of 
traffic systems and towards an intelligent transportation 
system. The main interactions are between the vehicle and its 
environment. Hence separate models can be presented in a 
layered architecture. Some of the challenges identified are: 
• 
Maintaining an accurate line of sight 
• 
Accounting for vehicles/x that are outside the line of 
sight 
• 
Position/velocity of the vehicle in order to model the 
dynamic platoon of vehicles 
• 
Vehicles that are not connected  
• 
Security considerations and protection from theft 
• 
Integration of different wireless protocols e.g. 
DSRC, IEEE 802.11abgn Wi-Fi, 4G/5G cellular 
networks, VLC 
• 
Device-to-Device (D2D) communication (defined as 
direct communication between devices in range 
proximity without the involvement of a network 
infrastructure) [34] based on LTE 
• 
Safety vs comfort applications 
• 
Integration with cloud architecture 
• 
Big data analysis in IoV 
• 
QoS guarantee – investigate into SDN techniques  
based on the combined information from multiple 
sources rather than individual  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper presents an overview of the network models 
for connected vehicles under the umbrella of IoV and applies 
the concept of NoT to IoV. IoV is emerging and will be 
integrated with information technology. The ‘big data’ 
generated as a result of connected vehicles will be useful in 
shaping the management of vehicles thus improving road 
safety and traffic congestion. The QoS will be split between 
safety critical and lower priority applications. For example, 
comfort subsystems within a vehicle are not safety critical. 
However, suspension and braking system, traction control, 
etc., will be prioritized and require QoS. Research in 
understanding existing network models is a key starting 
point and will enable us in establishing the modelling 
direction.  
IoV is a building block towards the roadmap to 
autonomous cars. IoV will revolutionize cars like mobile 
phones did ten years ago. CAN communication model using 
petri-nets will be further examined for IoV application given 
its low bandwidth with high reliability benefits.  
We will build on this review and the future work will 
focus on proposing network models for connected vehicles 
for IoV.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work reported here is supported in part by the 
Santander Seed-Corn Research Grant.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Land 
transportation 
system 
report 
by 
Cisco 
http://www.cisco.com/c/dam/global/pt_pt/assets/cisco-
connect-2013/pdf/16_outubro_helder_antunes.pdf [retrieved 
May 2017]. 
[2] J. W.ang, C. Li, H. Li and Y. Wang, “Key technologies and 
development status of Internet of Vehicles”, 9th Int. Conf. on 
Measuring Technology and Mechatronics Automation, 14-15 
Jan. 2017. 
[3] W. Zhang and X. Xi, “The innovation and development of 
Internet of Vehicles”, Network Technology and Application, 
China Comunications, pp 122-127, 13 June 2016. 
[4] N. Lu, N. Cheng, N. Zhang, X. Shen and J. Mark, “Connected 
vehicles: solutions and challenges”, IEEE Internet of Things, 
Journal, vol. 1, no. 4, pp 289-299, Auguat 2014. 
[5] A. Dua, N. Kumar and S. Bawa, “A systematic review on 
routing protocols for Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks”, Vehicular 
Communications, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 33-52, 2014.  
[6] G. Karagiannis, O. Altintas, E. Ekici, G. Heijemk, B. 
Jarunpan, K. Lin and T. Weil, “Vehicular networking: A 
survey and tutorial on requirements, architectures, challenges, 
standards and solution”, IEEE Communications Surveys and 
Tutorials, vol. 13, no. 4, fourth quarter, 2011.  
[7] S. K. Datta, R. Pedro, F. D. Costa, J. Harri and C. Bonnet, 
“Integrating connected vehicles in Internet of Things 
ecosystems: 
Challenges 
and 
solutions”, 
IEEE 
17th 
International symposium on a A world of woreless, mobile 
and multimedia networks (WoWMoM), 21-24 June 2016. 
[8] M. Gerla, E-K, Lee, G. Pau and U. Lee, “Internet of Vehicles: 
From intelligent grid to autonomous cars and vehiclar 
clouds“, IEEE World Forum in Internet of Things (WF-IoT), 
2014 
[9] Y. Fangchun, W. Shangguang, l. Jinglin, L. Zhihan and S. 
Qibo, “An overview of Internet of Vehicles, Vehicular 
Networking”, China Communication, vol. 11, issue 10, pp. 1-
15, Oct 2014. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

[10] Y. Kim, Y. Song and J. Lee, “Vehicular authentication 
security mechanism modelling using petri nets”, Indian 
Journal of Science and Technology, vol. 8(S7), pp. 443-447, 
April 2015. 
[11] P. Diekhake, T. Kurczveil and U. Becker, “Modelling and 
simulation of distributed time critical communication and 
control systems in vehicles or vehicle networks”, pp. 303-308, 
IFAC 2016. 
[12] M. D. S. Soares and J. Vrancken, “A modular petri net to 
modelling and scenario analysis of a network of road traffic 
signals”, Control Engineering Practice, vol. 20, issue 11, pp. 
1183-1194, Nov. 2012.  
[13] Y. Li, M. Zhao and W. Wang, “Intermittently connected 
vehicle-to-vehicle networks: Detection and analysis”, IEEE 
Globecom, 5-9 Dec. 2011.  
[14] M. Amadeo, C. Campolo and A. Molinaro, “Information-
centric networking for connected vehicles: A survey and 
future 
perspectives”, 
Automotive 
Networking 
and 
Applications, IEEE Communications magazine, vol. 54, issue 
2, pp. 98-104, Feb. 2016.  
[15] J. Voas,.”Network of ‘Things’”, NIST Special publication, 
800-183, 
2016. 
http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.
800-183.pdf [retrieved May 2017].  
[16] S. Tuohy, M. Glavin, C. Hughes, E. Jones, M. Trivedi and L. 
Kilmartin, “Intra-vehicle: A review”, IEEE Transactions on 
Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 16, issue 2, pp. 534-
545, April 2015. 
[17] G.Charalampopoulos, T. Dagiuklas and T. Chrysikos, “V2I 
Applications in Highways: How RSU dimensioning can 
improve service delivery”, 23rd International Conference on 
Telecommunications 
(ICT 
2016), 
May 
16-18, 
2016, 
Thessaloniki, Greece. 
[18] Society of Automotive Engineers, “Dedicated Short Range 
Communications (DSRC) Message Set Dictionary”, J2735 
Ground Vehicle Standard, J2735, 2016. 
[19] S-H. Yu, O. Shih, and H-M. Tsai, “Smart Automotive 
Lighting for Vehicle Safety”, IEEE Communications 
Magazine, vol. 51, issue 12, pp 50-59, Dec. 2013. 
[20] M. Wellens, B. Westphal, and P. Mahonen, “Performance 
evaluation of IEEE 802.11-based WLANs in vehicular 
scenarios”, in IEEE 65th Vehicular Technology Conference, 
April 2007, pp. 1167–1171. 
[21] D. Carona, A. Serrador, P. Mar, R. Abreu, N. Ferreira, T. 
Meireles, J. Matos, and J. Lopes, “A 802.11p prototype 
implementation”, IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), 
2010, La Jolla, CA, USA, June 2010. 
[22] L. Cheng, B. E. Henty, R. Cooper, and D. D. Stancil, “A 
measurement study of time-scaled 802.11a waveforms over 
the mobile-to-mobile vehicular channel at 5.9 GHz”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 46, pp. 84–91, May 2008. 
[23]  A. Paier, R. Tresch, A. Alonso, D. Smely, P. Meckel, Y. 
Zhou, and N. Czink, “Average downstream performance of 
measured IEEE 802.11p infrastructure-to-vehicle links”, EEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Communications 
(ICC) 
Workshops, pp.1 -5, 2010. 
[24] D. Jiang and L. Delgrossi, “IEEE 802.11p: Towards an 
international standard for wireless access in vehicular 
environments,” 
in 
IEEE 
67th 
Vehicular 
Technology 
Conference, May 2008, pp. 2036–2040. 
[25] S. Grafling, P. Mahonen, and J. Riihijarvi, “Performance 
Evaluation of IEEE 1609 WAVE and IEEE 802.11p for 
Vehicular Communications”, International Conference on 
Ubiquitous and Future Networks, pp. 344-348, 2010. 
[26] K. Y. Ho, P. C. Kang, C. H. Hsu, and C. H. Lin, 
“Implementation of WAVE/DSRC devices for vehicular 
communications”, in Computer Communication Control and 
Automation (3CA), 2010 International Symposium on, vol. 2, 
5-7 May 2010. 
[27] IEEE webinar on connected vehicles Part I and II, Dec. 2015. 
[28] T. Murata, “Petri nets:Properties, analysis and applications”, 
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 77, no. 4, pp541-580, 1989.  
[29] CAN Specification, Robert Bosch GmbH, Stuttgart, Germany, 
1991. 
[30] O. Kaiwartya, A. H. abdullah, Y. Cao, A. Altameem, M. 
Prasad, C-T. Lin and X. Liu, “Inter of Vehicles: Motivation, 
layered architecture, network model, challenges and future 
aspects”, IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 5356-5373, 28 Sept. 2016. 
[31] V. Jacobson, D. K. Smetters, J. D. Thornton, M. F. Plass, N. 
H. Briggs, and R. L. Braynard, “Networking Named 
Content,” in ACM CoNEXT, Rome, Italy, 1-4, Dec. 2009. 
[32] S. H Ahmed, S.H. Bouk, M. A. Yaqub, D. Kim, H. Song, and 
J. Lloret, “CODIE: Controlled data and interest evaluation in 
vehicular named data networks,'' IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., 
vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 3954_3963, Jun. 2016. 
[33] J. Contreras-Castillo, S. Zeadally and J. A. G. Ibanez, “A 
seven-layered model architecture for Internet of Vehicles”, 
Journal of Information and Communication, vol. 1, issue 1, 
pp. 4-22, March 2017. 
[34] T. T. Gunes, S. T. Kwaong U and H. Afifi, “Hybrid model for 
LT-assisted D2D communications”, Ad-hoc, Mobilr and 
Wireless Networks conference (AdhocNow), vol. 8487, pp. 
100-113, 2014. 
 
 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-573-9
VEHICULAR 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

