Transmission Performance of an Intra-Vehicle Wireless Sensor Network: An 
Empirical Approach 
Ahmed Aladi and Xiao-Hong Peng 
School of Engineering & Applied Science 
Aston University 
Birmingham, UK 
email: x-h.peng@aston.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— Intra-vehicle wireless communications for sensor-
Electronic Control Unit (ECU) links can help reduce wiring 
harness and improve fuel efficiency - a highly demanded feature 
for new generation cars. To address the challenges from the 
inherent poor channel quality and harsh working conditions 
inside and around a vehicle, this work is aimed to investigate 
wireless channel properties and transmission performance 
using a testbed involving a car and wireless communication 
devices, such as ZigBee, Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) and Wi-
Fi (IEEE 802.11x) modules. Results are generated and analyzed 
from transmissions across passenger, engine and boot 
compartments under different environmental and operational 
scenarios including under interference by other RF signals. 
Keywords—intra-vehicle communications; channel property; 
transmission performance; testbed 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Modern vehicles have many sensors, such as temperature, 
proximity, tire pressure and advanced sensors for autonomous 
control. Conventionally, sensors are connected using wires to 
Electronic Control Units (ECUs), which are responsible for 
collecting sensing data and forward it to corresponding output 
or applications. The communication protocols of the intra-
vehicle sensor network are classified according to the 
transmission speed and sensing function, from class A 
requiring low data rates (less than 10 Kbps) to class D  with 
relatively high data rates (up to 1 Mbps). The architecture of 
the intra-vehicle sensor networks is based on the Control Area 
Network (CAN) protocol [1] which involves wiring to 
interconnect among sensor nodes, ECUs, execution actuators 
and the CAN bus.  
As the number of the sensors increases, cabling for 
connecting different parts in a vehicle will be more 
problematic. Currently, the wiring harness can have about 
4000 parts, 40-50 kg of weight, and 1900 wires for 4 km [2], 
which imposes significant impacts on fuel efficiency, material 
cost and diagnostic and maintenance issues. Another issue 
with the wiring is that for some locations inside the vehicle, it 
is not possible to connect sensors, such as tire pressure sensors 
with wires. 
To address these issues, wireless communication 
technologies have been examined for applying in this use case 
e.g.: deploying wireless sensor networks in vehicles to replace 
wired connections and provide flexibility to the operation of 
ECUs. However, this deployment is required to meet strict 
requirements for safety, level of comfort, energy consumption 
and pollution [3]. It is also required to meet the demands for 
increasing the number of on-board sensors as the current intra-
vehicle network needs to be re-designed for every production 
cycle [2]. In addition, the design of such a wireless system in 
a vehicle will have to address the concerns on the channel 
behaviour and reliability related performance.  
Based on a hardware testbed we set up, this paper presents 
an investigation on the performance of ZigBee and Bluetooth 
devices in data transmission across different parts of a vehicle, 
such as passenger, engine and boot compartments. Our 
investigation will show the efficiency (throughput), reliability 
(packet loss rate) of various transmission scenarios, without 
and with interference. We will also show channel properties 
in terms of path loss and the cumulative distributed function 
of the received signal strength for the cases examined.  
The organization of the paper is as follows. The related 
work is discussed in Section II. Section III describes the 
purposes and settings of four different experiments designed 
for the investigation on an in-vehicle testbed. The test results 
and their analysis are presented in Section IV, followed by the 
conclusion in Section V. 
II.  RELATED WORK 
There has been research work reported that utilized the 
available wireless technologies, such as ZigBee, specified by 
the IEEE 802.15.4 standard [4], and characterized wireless 
channels, such as in Ultra-Wide Band (UWB) [5], millimetre 
wave [6]. ZigBee and Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) are main 
candidate technologies for deploying wireless sensor 
networks inside vehicles due to their low cost and low power 
consumption. They both use the unlicensed Radio Frequency 
(RF) 2.4 GHz global band.  
A simple but robust model is presented in [5] to 
characterize the frequency-dependent transfer function of an 
in-vehicle UWB channel. A large number of transfer functions 
spanning the UWB band (3–11 GHz) were recorded inside the 
passenger compartment of a four-seated car and used to model 
the intra-vehicle channel encountered and understand the 
behaviour of the channel in this frequency range.  
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

ZigBee uses the same physical and Medium Access 
Control (MAC) layers defined in the 802.15.4 standard and 
has the maximum data rate of 250 kbps, while BLE’s data rate 
is up to 300 kbps. BLE has 40 channels separated by 2 MHz: 
3 of them are used for advertisements and 37 channels for data 
transmission. BLE uses the Frequency Hopping Spread 
Spectrum (FHSS) technique to hop between these channels 
[7]. ZigBee has 16 channels on the 2.4 GHz band and uses the 
Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum (DSSS) technique for the 
air interface. Both technologies face challenges when they are 
used for in-vehicle applications due to non-light-of-sight, 
severe signal scattering and interference problems caused by 
other sources of radio activities [8]. 
Costa et al. [9] present the channel characterization of a 
non-line-of-sight in-vehicle wireless communications at 2.4 
GHz frequency band, including a signal reflection beam from 
ground. Helped by 3D EM simulation, the impact of 
environmental profiles on path loss performance is specified 
by using static and dynamic on-board measurements. 
Similar work also took place on transportation buses 
where the E-field strength distribution within an urban bus 
was studied [10]. In this study, multipath propagation and 
shadowing were considered to enable E-field exposure 
analysis and determine the function of transceiver’s location 
within the bus.  
A research on intra-vehicle channels both 3-11 GHz and 
the 55-65 GHz frequency bands provided power-delay 
profiles which exhibit their differences in root mean square 
value, delay spread, number of resolvable clusters, and 
variance of the maximal excess delay [11]. The measured and 
calculated results also indicated a strong level of noise inside 
the vehicle examined. 
Most related work has been focused more on intra-vehicle 
channel modelling through simulation or tests, while the work 
reported here was intended to explicitly reveal the 
transmission performance in terms of efficiency and reliability 
of existing wireless technologies. This work was carried out 
in a real-world environment with varied data transmission 
scenarios, i.e.: with and without interference, to show the 
potential of the technologies currently available and identify 
the areas for improvement in future design. In addition, the 
performance concerned has been examined in three difference 
compartments across a vehicle, rather than a single 
compartment reported in other work. 
III.  EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
Three testing scenarios (in Engine, Boot and Passenger 
compartments) were used in our experiments based on a small 
Vauxhall Corsa 2008 car, as shown in Fig. 1. For obtaining 
the measurements of the Received Signal Strength Indicator 
(RSSI), the transmitter was placed in the engine compartment 
and connected to a laptop to transmit data at a rate of 1Hz (1 
packet/s) for one minute each run. The receiving node was 
placed on the car dashboard. Another laptop having a packet 
sniffer (Dongle CC2531 for ZigBee or CC2504 for BLE) 
plugged in was placed close to the receiver node to capture the 
packet sent from the transmitter. The sniffer was used to 
monitor and log the RSSI of each received packet.  
A. ZigBee Measurements without Interference 
In this experiment, ZigBee transmission was tested for the 
three scenarios specified above. The receiver was fixed on the 
dashboard for all scenarios. The ZigBee module used in this 
research is Digi XBee-PRO S1 802.15.4 with an extended 
wire antenna. Some of the specifications of this module are 
shown in Table I. 
TABLE I. ZIGBEE PRO S1 SPECIFICATIONS 
RF Data Rate 
Up to 250 kbps 
Receiver Sensitivity 
-100 dBm 
Frequency Band 
2.4 GHz 
Interference Immunity 
DSSS (Direct Sequence 
Spread Spectrum) 
Transmit Power 
0 dBm 
 
Each XBee module was placed on an XBee adapter to 
provide an easy PC interface for configuring the module using 
XCTU software. One module was configured as the ZigBee 
transmitter and the other as the receiver. Both were configured 
to use Channel 10 and with a transmit power of 0 dBm. 
For the throughput and packet loss measurements, the 
HyperTerminal was used to send out a text file through the 
XBee module. The file data was transmitted in 4848 packets 
of size 128 Bytes each. At the same time, the logging 
software located on the dashboard was capturing the packets 
from the air.  
B. ZigBee Measurements with Interference 
The impact of the interference from Wi-Fi on ZigBee was 
observed, given the fact that some Wi-Fi channels have the 
same frequency as those of ZigBee channels, e.g., Wi-Fi 
Channel 11 overlaps with five ZigBee channels, 20-24. An ad-
hoc connection between two laptops was setup using Wi-Fi 
and the channel was set to 11 while the ZigBee channel for 
both the transmitter and packet sniffer was set to 23, to be 
compatible with the Wi-Fi channel in terms of operating at the 
same frequency. ZigBee’s transmission using HyperTerminal 
started after setting up the File Transfer Protocol (FTP) 
between the two laptops.  
 
Figure 1. Testbed with testing device positions for three scenarios. 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. BLE Measurements without Interference 
BLE has been considered for use in wireless sensor 
networks inside the vehicle due to its attractive performance 
in terms of low power, low complexity and low cost [12]. In 
this experiment, the evaluation of BLE was done by using 
two BLE nodes, an Android phone that supports BLE, and a 
BLE packet sniffer attached to a laptop. The phone was used 
as a sensor node and the CC2540 dongle with a receiver 
sensitivity of -87 dBm was used as the packet sniffer or 
receiver. The performances, such as the path loss and packet 
loss rate were obtained by analyzing the packets captured and 
applying certain metrics discussed later.  
An Android phone was placed inside one of the car 
compartments, followed by adjusting the transmit power to 
0 dBm and the sending rate to 1Hz. The packet sniffer was 
then used to collect the RSSI value of each packet on 1 
second interval up to 100 second in total. For throughput and 
packet loss measurements, packets were sent at a rate of 7 Hz 
for a period of one minute. The car was parked in an area 
without Bluetooth or Wi-Fi signal in order to eliminate any 
possible interference.  
D. BLE Measurements with Interference 
To examine the effect of coexistence of BLE and Wi-Fi, 
wireless FTP connection was setup between two laptops. As 
the BLE frequency is hopping around the three non-
overlapping Wi-Fi channels, the Wi-Fi channel was 
randomly selected from these three channels. The Adaptive 
Frequency Hopping (AFH) technique specified in BLE was 
disabled as the transmission was for a single direction only. 
E. Metrics  
 
We apply the following metrics in this paper for 
performance evaluation; first, we define some variables: 
Packet loss rate (%):  
N
NF
NR
N
p
)
(



 
(1) 
Throughput (bps):   
T
B
NF
NR
S
) 8
(



 
(2) 
Path loss (dB):   
r
P
P
EIRP
L


 
(3) 
where N is the number of transmitted packets, NR the total 
number of received packets, NF the number of packets that 
failed Cyclic Redundancy Check, T the total transmission 
time in second, B the packet size in byte, EIRP the Equivalent 
Isotropic Radiated Power (transmit power + transmitter 
antenna gain) in dBm, Pr the received power at the output of 
the receiver antenna in dBm.  
IV.  RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
The measurements collected from different experiments 
will be displayed and discussed in this section.  
A. ZigBee and BLE Transmission without Interference 
 
The path loss results for both ZigBee and BLE are shown 
in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3, respectively, which exhibits a very similar 
channel behavior although measured by different transmission 
protocols. The Passenger channel varies in a range of 20-30 
dB in some instances due to driver movement. The Engine 
channel has the highest loss among them due to significant 
signal degradation, caused by multipath fading in such a small 
enclosure with mixed material, despite the small distance 
between the engine and the dashboard.  
Table II shows the mean and the standard deviation of all 
the RSSI measurements obtained. The mean of the received 
signal for the Engine scenario is above the sensitivity 
threshold of 0.1% of Bit Error Rate (BER) define by both 
ZigBee and BLE specifications. Both Engine and Boot 
scenarios seem to have a relatively small variation despite the 
existence of passengers inside the car.  
The Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) of the 
measured RSSI is shown in Fig. 4. The specification of BLE 
[7] mandates a sensitivity better than −70 dBm, but the CDF 
shows that the probability of the RSSI below that level is 
almost zero, i.e. even the Engine scenario is also above this 
standard threshold given the transmit power of 0 dBm.  
Figure 2. Path loss for ZigBee. 
Figure 3. Path loss for BLE. 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

The throughput performance is shown in Fig. 5, with the 
maximum throughput being achieved when no interference 
exists. Fig. 6 also shows that packet loss is not significant for 
both ZigBee and BLE without interference, although the BLE 
link has more dropped packets compared to ZigBee. 
 
TABLE II. MEAN AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF RSSI 
 
ZigBee 
BLE 
Scenario 
Mean 
(dBm) 
Deviation 
(dBm) 
Mean 
(dBm) 
Deviation 
(dBm) 
Passenger  
-34.13 
6.44 
-25.70 
4.49 
Boot 
-48.17 
2.20 
-46.83 
2.66 
Engine 
-54.11 
0.74 
-57.27 
1.97 
 
  
 
B. Impact of Interference 
ZigBee has 16 channels separated by 5 MHz at the 2.4 
GHz frequency band, hence any of the non-overlapping Wi-
Fi channel with 20 MHz of bandwidth at the same band can 
overlap with 5 ZigBee channels except Channel 1 in Wi-Fi 
which only overlaps with 4 ZigBee channels.  
In this experiment, Wi-Fi Channel 11 was used to 
transfer a large file for 2 minutes, and the corresponding 
ZigBee Channel 23 was used in this case. The ZigBee link 
suffers from packet losses due to continuous Wi-Fi 
transmission (Fig. 6). The number of packets dropped 
increased considerably on a scale of more than 30 %, 
compared to the zero-interference case. This factor can vary 
depending on the signal-to-interference ratio (SIR), defined 
as: 
 
 
 
SIR (dB) = Pr – Pi  
 
(4) 
where Pr is the received signal power of ZigBee/BLE and  Pi  
is the interfering power by Wi-Fi (all in dBm) detected at the 
receiver. 
BLE has 37 data channels with separation of 2 MHz [8]. 
Only 9 out of 37 BLE channels are free from Wi-Fi 
interference, which means most of the time the centre 
frequency during the hopping is overlapping with one of the 
Wi-Fi channels. This effect can be observed using one of the 
Wi-Fi analyzer Apps. In this experiment, Adaptive 
Figure 5. Throughput for all scenarios: (a) Bluetooth Low 
Engergy, (b) Zigbee. 
(b)
ZigBee 
(a)
Bluetooth Low Energy 
Figure 4. Cumulative distribution function of the recieved power: 
(a) Bluetooth Low Energy, (b) Zigbee.  
(b)  Zigbee 
(a) Bluetooth Low Energy 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Frequency Hopping is disabled, i.e., no avoidance of 
potential interfering channels. As expected in this case, the 
Boot scenario has a packet dropping rate of 54 %. There is a 
discrepancy between the packet dropping rates among the 
three scenarios because SIR is high enough for the passenger 
compartment compared to the other two scenarios. Frequency 
hopping is operated randomly hence it is difficult to make the 
same interference period for all the scenarios tested. 
C. Wi-Fi Transmission 
We have also examined the Wi-Fi transmission 
performance over this testbed. Fig. 7 shows the path loss for 
each scenario. As expected, the Engine channel suffers a loss 
around 56-60 dB, more than the other channels. This feature 
is also reflected in the throughput and the packet loss results, 
as shown in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9, respectively. Both results are 
consistent across all scenarios.  
There is a significant reduction in throughput for the 
Engine and Boot scenarios because of the effect of multipath 
fading on the coherence bandwidth of the channels involved. 
The Passenger channel can achieve a throughput of up to 52.9 
Mbps given the transmitter data rate of 54 Mbps. However, 
the overall packet loss rate in the Wi-Fi transmission is higher 
than those in the Zigbee and BLE cases without interference.  
The CDF plot in Fig. 10 verifies that the received signal 
is above the receiver sensitivity (approx. -73 dBm for 54 
Mbps) and a reduction in the transmitting power for the 
Engine scenario could fail this sensitivity threshold.  
The results of these experiments have shown that 
communications between the transmitter and the receiver in 
a vehicle can be made reliable provided that some key 
parameters are adjusted with caution based on the receiver 
sensitivity specified. The transmit power in the engine 
compartment needs to be increased to compensate losses, 
while transmit power reduction can be considered in the 
passenger compartment to avoid dissipating excessive energy 
Path Loss (dB)
Time (s)
Figure 7. Path loss for Wi-Fi. 
Passenger
Engine
Boot
Figure 6. Packet loss for all scenarios: (a) Bluethooth 
Low Energy, (b) Zigbee. 
 
(b)
ZigBee 
(a)
 Bluetooth Low Energy 
52.9
27.6
23.2
Throughput (Mbps)
Passenger                    Boot                       Engine 
Figure 8. Throughput for Wi-Fi.        
1%
2%
5%
Packet Loss Rate
Passenger                    Boot                      Engine
Figure 9. Packet loss rate for Wi-Fi.         
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

and causing interference to neighbouring users. In particular, 
the interference examined in this work exhibits a significant 
impact on the intra-vehicle transmission performance. 
V.  CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have investigated wireless channel 
properties inside a vehicle and the transmission performance                   
of ZigBee, BLE and Wi-Fi as the popular components of 
intra-vehicle wireless sensor networks. Results have 
indicated that both ZigBee and BLE can meet the physical 
layer requirements in terms of the link reliability when they 
are deployed in any of the compartments in a car. However, 
the performance can be degraded significantly with co-
existence of Wi-Fi transmission, which will lead to serious 
considerations of the 2.4GHz band in this type of 
deployment.  
To address the problems identified, more robust and 
adaptive communications protocols and optimization 
algorithms, such as cooperative communications with virtual 
MIMO (Multiple Input and Multiple Output) and power 
control technologies, can be applied to enhance transmission 
reliability and mitigate the interference encountered.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Controller Area Network Protocol (CAN): “Road Vehicles – 
Controller Area Network,” ISO 11898-1 thru ISO 11898-4  
[2] 
M. Ahmed, C. Saraydar, T. ElBatt, J. Yin, T. Talty, and M. Ames, 
“Intra-Vehicular Wireless Networks,” Proc. IEEE Globecom 
Workshops, Nov. 2007, pp. 26-30.  
[3] 
L. D'Orazio, F. Visintainer and M. Darin, "Sensor Networks on the 
Car: State of the Art and Future Challenges," Proc. Design, 
Automation & Test in Europe, 2011, pp. 1-6. 
[4] 
H.-M. Tsai et al., “ZigBee-based intra-car wireless sensor networks: 
A case study,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 14, no. 6, Dec. 
2007 pp. 67–77. 
[5]  
A. Chandra et al., "Frequency-domain in-vehicle UWB channel 
modeling," IEEE Trans. on Vehicular Technology, June 2016, pp. 
3929-3940. 
[6]  
J. Blumenstein et al., "In-Vehicle mm-Wave Channel Model and 
Measurement," Proc. IEEE 80th Vehicular Technology Conference 
(VTC2014-Fall), Vancouver, BC, 2014, pp. 1-5. 
[7]  
R. Heydon, Bluetooth Low Energy: The Developer's Handbook. 1st 
ed. 2012, p.84.  
[8] 
N. Lu, N. Cheng, N. Zhang, X. Shen, and J. Mark, “Connected 
vehicles: Solutions and challenges,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 
1(4), pp.289-299, 2014. 
[9] 
C. A. M. Costa et al., “Damper-to-damper path loss characterization 
for intra-vehicular wireless sensor networks,” Proc. 47th European 
Microwave Conference (EuMC), Oct. 2017, pp. 1341–1344. 
[10] M. Celaya-Echarri et al., “Spatial characterization of personal RF-
EMF exposure in public transportation buses,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, 
pp. 33038-33054, March 2019.  
[11] J. 
Blumenstein 
et 
al., 
“In-vehicle 
channel 
measurement, 
characterization, and spatial consistency comparison of 3-11 GHz and 
55-65 GHz frequency bands,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 66, no. 
5, pp. 3526–3537, May 2017. 
[12] J. R. Lin, T. Talty and O. K. Tonguz, "On the potential of Bluetooth 
low 
energy 
technology 
for 
vehicular 
applications," 
IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 267-275, January 2015. 
 
. 
 
Figure 10. Cumulative distribution function of the recieved power for  
Wi-Fi. 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-720-7
VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

