Challenges for Periodic Technical Inspections
of Intelligent Cars
Mona Gierl
Institute of Energy Efficient Mobility
University of Applied Sciences
Karlsruhe, Germany
mona.gierl@h-ka.de
Felix M¨uller
Institute of Energy Efficient Mobility
University of Applied Sciences
Karlsruhe, Germany
felix.mueller@h-ka.de
Reiner Kriesten
Institute of Energy Efficient Mobility
University of Applied Sciences
Karlsruhe, Germany
reiner.kriesten@h-ka.de
Philipp Nenninger
Institute of Energy Efficient Mobility
University of Applied Sciences
Karlsruhe, Germany
philipp.nenninger@h-ka.de
Eric Sax
Institute for Information Processing Technologies
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT)
Karlsruhe, Germany
eric.sax@kit.edu
Abstract—The periodic technical inspection is a regulatory
measure to ensure road safety and environmental sustain-
ability during the operation of vehicles. It contains a non-
destructive visual and impact assessment of its systems and
components. With the advancement of autonomous and con-
nected cars, new technologies, growing number of sensors, and
new electrical/electronic-architecture designs find their way into
the vehicle, which implies new challenges for the evaluation of
road safety and environmental sustainability. In this paper, the
need for advanced inspection methods due to upcoming new
technologies enabling autonomous driving is investigated. A brief
background about ongoing research and regulations addressing
the verification and validation of autonomous and connected cars
is given. The current procedure of periodic technical inspections
in Germany is summarized and prospect challenges - addressing
both, advancing technologies for autonomous vehicles and cyber
security considerations of connected cars - are identified. Based
on the listed challenges, possible improvements are derived, which
should serve as a reference work to upcoming discussion about
the extent of Periodic Technical Inspections (PTI) for autonomous
cars.
Keywords—periodic technical inspection, security, autonomous
driving, homologation.
I. INTRODUCTION
As of today, human fault is still the main reason for acci-
dents [1], whereas the advances in technology enable enhanced
safety features leading to autonomous, connected vehicles.
With the introduction and application of Advanced Driver
Assistance Systems (ADAS) and connectivity features (as
Car2X) the automotive industry provides intelligent vehicles
as a solution for improved road safety.
Prospective vehicles are expected to have 20 times more
computational power [2] and to be running on 100 million
lines of code [3]. Thus, the technical advances come with an
increase in sensor systems to reconstruct the surroundings and
a growing number of software solutions which require a higher
amount of data and computational effort. One side effect
is the growing complexity which might lead to additional
unwanted technical errors. Thus, it is common consensus to
apply functional safety and cyber security standards during the
development as well as testing throughout the development
process and afterwards.
Beside verification and validation activities during develop-
ment by the Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs), the
vehicle has to be approved by an accredited authority to get
road admission. This allows for an independent analysis on the
car’s roadworthiness and environmental sustainability across
various types and models. Further, road admission depends
on the condition of the vehicle which is regularly checked
through mandatory periodic technical inspections which, e.g.,
occur every 2-3 years for passenger cars in Germany [4].
a) Problem statement: Mandatory technical inspections
review the roadworthiness of vehicles and probe compliance
with national environmental sustainability regulations. Regula-
tory standards (e.g., Regulation (EU) 2018/858 [7], Directive
2014/45/EU [8], etc.) prescribe a minimum set of required
test procedures to show compliance to these regulations.
With the advance of autonomous vehicles, a growing number
of electronic systems (cameras, RADAR, LIDAR, etc.) are
added as common equipment and enable the car to drive
autonomously which simultaneously leads to a higher number
of safety relevant systems. Consequently, an adaptation from
the current mandatory test procedures is required.
b) Contribution: In this paper, current efforts to estab-
lish new test procedures for technical inspections are briefly
highlighted and upcoming challenges due to the advances
of intelligent vehicles are presented. In addition, current test
procedures of passenger cars in Germany are summarized
and potential improvements for periodic technical inspections
based on the listed challenges are elaborated.
c) Classification of driving automation: In the field of
autonomous driving, the SAE J3016 Standard defines six levels
of automation [5]:
• Level 0 - No automation
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-974-4
VEHICULAR 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

• Level 1 - Driver assistance
• Level 2 - Partial automation
• Level 3 - Conditional automation
• Level 4 - High automation
• Level 5 - Full automation
From Levels 0-2 the driver is considered as driving but
might be supported by assistance features whereas from Levels
3-5 the driver is not considered to drive even if seated in the
“driver’s seat”. These levels are important for the classification
within this work as Level 3 or higher levels of driving
autonomy features are considered to challenge future technical
inspections.
d) Paper structure: Section II provides the background
on current verification and validation efforts for autonomous
driving functions. Two essential efforts are highlighted, namely
the PEGASUS project [6] and the United Nations Regulation
UN R155 concerning the approval of vehicles with regards
to cyber security [9]. Afterwards, the Periodic Technical
Inspection (PTI) in Germany is presented to elaborate on
the current mandatory road inspection methods. Based on
the legal framework, Section IV derives upcoming challenges
for technical inspections. To address the challenges, potential
improvements are presented in Section V.
II. BACKGROUND
A first effort towards new verification and validation meth-
ods for autonomous driving functions has been made by the
PEGASUS Project, which was concluded in 2019 [6]. It is a
“Project for the Establishment of Generally Accepted quality
criteria, tools and methods as well as Scenarios and Situations
for the release of highly-automated driving functions” [6].
A second effort is currently made by the United Nations
Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE). It developed
“two new UN Regulations on Cybersecurity and Software Up-
dates [...] which are the first ever internationally harmonized
and binding norms in this area” [10].
A. PEGASUS
Pioneering the efforts in Germany to create a standard to
test autonomous driving functions, in order to clear them for
use in production vehicles on public roads, PEGASUS project
created a method to assess the Level 3 function “Highway
Pilot”. The idea was to define a process that can be used
to validate such a system in order to green-light its use on
public roads. Instead of driving thousands of kilometers on
the roads (distance-based validation), a scenario-based testing
approach is presented, which enables a systematic validation
of the automated driving function. The result of this project
was a possible approach consisting of the following five steps
[6]:
• Definition of requirements
• Data processing
• Information storage and processing in a database
• Assessment of the highly automated driving function
• Argumentation
Starting with a collection of all the information available,
the PEGASUS Method aims to define logical scenarios and
reuses recorded test drives to create a pool of relevant scenar-
ios to test the function. In parallel, the requirements to asses
the driving function are defined.
In succession to these two steps, all the gathered information
is transferred into databases, where the data can be accessed
and augmented with information gathered in the later stages.
Based on the scenarios, the parameters for the different test
runs are generated as well as the corresponding pass / fail
criteria.
After these steps, tests of the driving function are performed
and evaluated in order to allow for the creation of a risk
assessment. These tests can be performed in simulation, driv-
ing on proving grounds and in real traffic, depending on the
concrete test. As a final step, the results are compared to the
predefined safety argumentation and can be reused for the
next test iteration. Based on the results of PEGASUS, new
projects are underway, to use the results for the development
of procedures for systems of Level 4 and 5.
B. Security Regulations for Type Approval
In 2021, the UNECE WP.29 working party published the
regulation text “Uniform provisions concerning the approval of
vehicles with regards to cyber security and cyber management
system” (UN R155) [9], which is planned to be mandatory
for all new vehicle types within the European Union as
of July 2022 [10]. The UNECE WP.29 working party for
Automated/Autonomous and Connected Vehicles (GRVA) is
responsible for the harmonization of vehicle regulations and
addresses autonomous and connected vehicles. The proposal is
the first regulatory step demanding the integration of security
processes and measures during the development of vehicles.
As of 2022, there are currently 64 contracting parties including
the European Union and others [11].
At the time the regulation takes effect, type approval with
regard to cyber security is only granted to vehicle types
that satisfy the requirements of the UN R155 regulation.
The regulation differentiates between the responsibility of
the manufacturer to implement a cyber security management
system and the requirements for the approval of a vehicle
type. Thus, according to the regulation text [9], the vehicle
manufacturer shall provide evidence for:
• Requirements for the Cyber Security Management Sys-
tem (CSMS)
– CSMS shall be applicable to the development, produc-
tion and post-production phase
– demonstrate processes to adequately identify and man-
age cybersecurity related risks
– implement incident response capabilities within “a
reasonable timeframe”
– identify and manage supplier-related risks
• Requirements for vehicle types
– the vehicle manufacturer shall evidence a compliant
CSMS
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-974-4
VEHICULAR 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

– identify and manage supplier-related risks
– identify critical elements of the vehicle type by per-
forming exhaustive risk assessment
– manage identified risks with proportionate countermea-
sures
– verify effectiveness of the security measures by per-
forming appropriate and sufficient testing
– provide monitoring and forensic capabilities to enable
attack analyses
The exact implementation measures are not defined as these
are specified by each manufacturer, ideally through applying
relevant standards (e.g., ISO/SAE 21434). Thus, a variety of
different security measures is expected to be implemented for
next generation vehicles which have to meet the cyber security
regulation’s requirements. From the perspective of approval
authorities, new challenges arise as to define the evidence
and test scenarios which prove roadworthiness to grant type
approval.
Both projects, PEGASUS and the UN R155 security reg-
ulation, indicate significant effort being made to develop
advanced test methods for autonomous and connected vehicles
and show how current these topics are for the automotive
industry. Thus, in our understanding, these efforts are the first
steps done to advance test methods for type approvals of intel-
ligent vehicles, however, further research is certainly required.
Further, regular technical inspections are also challenged by
the introduction of intelligent vehicles, but currently not yet
addressed in funded research projects or within regulatory
initiatives. Hence, as a first step to also address PTI, in the
subsequent sections the present PTI procedure is presented and
prospective challenges are outlined.
III. PERIODIC TECHNICAL INSPECTION IN GERMANY
In Germany, as in many other countries, it is mandatory
to have your vehicle inspected at regular intervals to ensure
its roadworthiness [4, Anlage VIII, 1.2.1]. Depending on the
vehicle and its use, these intervals vary. For the purpose of
this paper, a standard passenger car is assumed. The work is
supposed to include other types of vehicles, but all examples
will focus on passenger cars. Here, the usual interval is set
to once every two years, after an initial period of three years
for new cars, starting with the day of the first registration [4,
Anlage VIII, 2.1.2.1.1].
A. Extent
To give a report on the roadworthiness, the technical inspec-
tion covers different characteristics of the presented vehicle.
As stated in [4, Anlage VIIIa, 6], these include:
• Braking equipment
• Steering
• Visibility
• Photometric equipment and other parts of the electric
installation
• Axles, wheels, tires, suspension
• Chassis, frame, platform, attached parts
• Other equipment
• Environmental impact
• Identification and classification of the vehicle
The focus is therefore placed mostly on the mechanical state
of the vehicle. These parts are to be inspected visually, through
a functional and performance evaluation of the vehicle and its
parts, as well as by the reaction of the car and its systems to an
action performed by the inspector [12, pp. 75]. The inspection
is set up deliberately as described, to allow for the inspection
to be performed in a similar manner across different makes
and models of vehicles and to not depend on the specific
functional implementation of a specific vehicle, but to also
asses the performance of certain components or systems.
B. Procedure
The inspection itself does currently consist of multiple parts:
Registration for Inspection:
The Registration for Inspection is the first step, so that
the car and its specific testcases are known to the person
conducting the inspection.
Test Drive:
A short test drive is performed, in order to ensure that all
control units in the car are booted up and operational.
Emissions Test:
For cars with internal combustion engine, the emissions
of the car are to be checked before or during the periodic
technical inspection, to ensure they are within an accepted
range.
Brake Test:
During the brake test, a series of measurements are
taken to ensure that the brakes are performing within the
expected limits [4, Anlage VIIIa, 4.4]. Multiple ways are
available to take these measurements.
Further inspection:
Inspection regarding the composition, condition, function
and effect of its components and systems
During the subsequent vehicle inspection, the car is checked
visually, manually and electronically while sitting on the shop
floor and while lifted up [4, Anlage VIIIa, 4.3].
C. Results
As the ideal result for a PTI, a car passes all tests and is good
to continue driving on public roads for the next two years.
Having only minor defects (e.g., defective bulbs or scratched
exterior mirrors), it is possible to allow the vehicle back on
the road with the requirement to have them fixed as soon as
possible. If there is one or more major or dangerous defects
(e.g., impacting the brake functionality), the car has to be
repaired and presented again. If the car is deemed a hazard on
the road, the car can be decommissioned. In this most severe
case, the car cannot be legally driven on the road. The results
of each technical inspection is communicated to a centralized
institution, the so called “Zentrale Stelle (FSD)” [13], to be
aggregated and evaluated.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-974-4
VEHICULAR 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

TABLE I
ESTIMATION OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE AUTOMOTIVE MARKET IN
REGARDS TO THE DISTRIBUTION OF CARS SHOWN IN MILLION UNITS,
GROUPED BY THE CAPABILITIES ACCORDING TO THE SAE-LEVEL [14].
SAE Level
Robot
Year
0
1
2
3
4
5
vehicles
2015
59.3
24
8.2
0
0
0
0
2016
59.1
26.9
9.8
0
0
0
0
2017
58.2
28.4
10.9
0
0
0
0
2018
55.7
29.9
11.9
0.1
0
0
0
2019
51.8
33.1
13.4
0.6
0
0
0
2020
49
35.4
15.1
1.1
0
0
0
2021
46.5
37.9
16.5
1.7
0
0
0
2022
42.8
40.2
18.5
2.6
0
0
0.1
2023
41.1
42.5
20.8
2.7
0
0
0.1
2024
37.7
45.3
22.8
5.8
0
0
0.1
2025
35.3
47.4
25.2
7.6
0.1
0
0.2
IV. CHALLENGES FOR TECHNICAL INSPECTIONS
According to estimations of [14], the number of autonomous
driving cars is expected to grow and first Level 4 cars are pre-
dicted for 2025 to be found on the road. Prospective vehicles
are announced to have 20 times more computational power
[2], whereas automotive software and sensors are expected to
exhibit a 9 % for the software segment and 8 % for the sensors
segment compound annual growth rate (CAGR) between 2020
and 2030 [15]. Further, [15] estimate an overall market size of
USD 84 billion by 2030 for software development including
OS, middleware, functional domains (powertrain, chassis, en-
ergy, body, etc.), connectivity and security. Considering these
estimations, the following major challenges to impact future
PTI were identified:
Challenge I
The condition of vehicle sensors is essen-
tial for autonomous driving, thus new test
scenarios are required to test the growing
number of safety-relevant sensors.
Challenge II
Growing complexity of data to be pro-
cessed and software which is prone to
unintended technical faults.
Challenge III
Vehicle data might not be accessible but is
essential for demonstration of roadworthi-
ness.
Challenge IV
Security measures require validation meth-
ods that enable inspection engineers to
evaluate the roadworthiness.
Challenge V
The composition of software and hardware
determines the correct operation of the
vehicle system, thus the detection of any
unauthorized modifications (e.g., firmware
alteration, etc.) is necessary.
V. IMPROVEMENTS FOR THE PERIODIC TECHNICAL
INSPECTION (PTI)
With regard to new features in cars, specifically regarding
connectivity and autonomous driving, the PTI has to keep up
in order to fulfill its intended role to ensure the safety of the
different road users from a technical standpoint. Therefore, the
subsequent ideas are proposed as an addition to the PTI to also
address security and autonomous driving capabilities.
According to [4, Anlage VIIIa, 4.], the vehicle compo-
nents and systems shall be examined for their composition,
condition, function and effectiveness. As a result, Table II
summarizes the proposed improvements based on the defined
regulation’s categorization.
A. To Inspect the Security of Vehicles
Security has the special characteristic that if it is running
correctly, it should not be recognizable and it should not affect
the driving functionalities of the car. Yet, the software also
displays “aging effects” due to constantly new evolving attack
methods that might allow bypassing implemented security
measures. These aging effects are not identifiable by visual
examination as it might be the case for mechanical components
(e.g., braking pads, etc.). Instead, a regular threat and risk
analysis for deployed vehicles as presented in [16] should be
considered and could help to analyze the security condition of
the vehicle.
Another challenge is the variety of integrated security
measures - as the ISO/SAE 21434 aims to provide a secu-
rity framework to facilitate security by design, it does not
provide technology specific solutions. Each manufacturer has
to integrate effective measures to protect their critical systems
and functions adequately [10]. To prove effectiveness, security
testing methods exist that aim to demonstrate both: a) the
correct functioning of integrated security measures and b) a
low risk for unintended or undefined system states that might
provoke misbehavior. However, applying these test methods
after the development phase, especially penetration testing,
is not desired by manufacturers as the car is not able to
differentiate between a hacker and a penetration tester. As a
reaction the car might lock down affected electronic control
units to protect its assets. To counter this worst-case, but
to also be able to inspect the correct functioning and effect
of the security measures for deployed vehicles, the approval
authorities and OEMs should hold a dialogue on how to
enable security testing techniques in a controlled environment
including the PTI.
Lastly, lessons learned from the Information Technology
(IT) domain show that securing assets is a race between
attackers and security engineers, and that vulnerabilities or
known attacks are valuable insights to improve the systems se-
curity. For this reason, a collection of all known vulnerabilities,
similar to the Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE)
database [17], would be beneficial for the automotive industry.
First efforts are made by [18]–[20] but the main hindrance is
still the strong competition between players in the automotive
industry.
B. To Inspect the Operation of the Autonomous Driving Ca-
pabilities
In order to ensure the correct function of the autonomous
driving system, different parts of the vehicle have to be
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-974-4
VEHICULAR 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

TABLE II
OVERVIEW OF THE CURRENT STATE OF THE PERIODIC TECHNICAL INSPECTION IN GERMANY AND THE PROPOSALS TO INCLUDE AN ASSESSMENT
REGARDING THE SECURITY OF THE VEHICLE AND ITS AUTONOMOUS DRIVING FUNCTIONS.
Context
Composition
Condition
Function
Effectiveness
Current State
Assessment and
identification of built-in
parts and components
Assessment of wear and
tear (aging, damage,
corrosion, etc.)
Actuation of control
devices (pedals, levers,
switches, etc.) to assess
whether the operation is
correct in terms of time
and function.
Measurement of a
component or system for
compliance with specified
limit values
Security
Check hardware and
software to correspond to
the specifications of the
OEM
Vulnerability analysis
and/or threat and risk
analysis to identify
deprecated/missing security
measures
Security testing and
reading self-diagnosis
results through OBD to
monitor correct functioning
CSMS assessment and
detection of unintended
behavior
Autonomous Driving
Check hardware and
software to correspond to
the specifications of the
OEM
Assessment of the current
state of the sensor and
actor systems required to
perform the driving
functions
On-Board-Diagnostic and
inspection of the associated
functions
Assessment of the
performance of the sensors
and actors required to
perform the driving
functions
checked. These include:
• the sensors detecting the surroundings,
• the actuators performing the driving function,
• the control units running the associated software and
• the software to perform the driving function itself.
Different parts of the driving system are subject to different
kinds of problems during the daily use of the accordingly
equipped vehicles. The hardware, for example, is aging from
the moment the system is produced and the vehicle is leaving
the assembly line. Therefore, the biggest differences between
otherwise identical vehicles is the wear and tear the vehicle has
been subjected to during its lifetime. Accidents, not properly
performed repairs and just general misalignment can cause the
autonomous driving system to malfunction. Therefore, it is
proposed that a future PTI has to include a test of the sensor
systems to ensure that they are detecting the surroundings,
e.g., detecting the objects in the designated areas as well as
locating them correctly. All major sensor systems used in
the specific vehicle have to be inspected to ensure they are
operating according their specifications.
In the same sense, the hardware to perform the driving
function has to be inspected. This includes:
• steering,
• braking,
• acceleration and
• communication with other road users.
For the most part, the hardware of these systems is already
part of the PTI today. The brakes, for example, are already
tested for their performance (see Section III-B). In addition to
these tests, triggering of these systems electronically via the
driving function has to be tested, especially their capabilities
to provide granular access to these functions.
The communication with other road users and infrastructure
presents a special case. Nowadays, cars are getting more
connected via Car2X communications aiming to enable the
exchange of traffic information. In addition, the first visual and
acoustic communication systems are getting mounted to luxury
cars to enable an interaction with its surroundings [21]. These
initiatives can also be seen as part of the autonomous driving
systems and therefore have to be inspected during future PTI.
C. To Inspect the Security and the Autonomous Driving Ca-
pabilities
As software is essential for both fields of study, a process
needs to be defined, which would allow a check for both
research topics simultaneously, as that will streamline the in-
spection and helps to keep time and thus costs low. Therefore,
the authors propose to implement a version control system
that allows the verification of the installed software in the
vehicle under test. Having this system in place allows checking
for manipulation on the software side as well as for outdated
software that might not include the latest traffic signs or rules
and as a result would not be able to follow the latest traffic
regulations. A first effort to identify type approval relevant
software is done by [22].
As the software can nowadays massively alter the behavior
of the car on the road, see for example [23], it is a necessity
to have a suite of tests similar to the type approval of such
a driver assistance system, to ensure correct functionality
after the update has been installed. Such a system should be
put in place for all systems which can alter the movement
characteristics of the car under test. Having passed such a
test scenario, key parameters, such as version identifier and
checksums can be recorded in order to be able to match the
installed software in the car with the list of approved versions.
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-974-4
VEHICULAR 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

VI. CONCLUSION
As of today, present regulations are adapted to enable au-
tonomous cars to get road admission. The advancing technolo-
gies challenge these efforts which is the reason for research
projects and developed amendments to existing regulations
(see Section II). However, these efforts should also address
PTI as these are responsible to regularly probe compliance
over the life cycle of the vehicle until its decommission.
The applied test procedures during a PTI have to adapt to
upcoming technologies. Thus, new test methods have to be
defined since an increase in autonomy leads to a growing
number of safety relevant driving systems that have to be
examined for possible technical failures due to wear, tear or
tuning. The associated upcoming challenges were identified
by the authors and listed in Section IV. Based on these
challenges, improvements to address the safety and security
of autonomous cars are proposed in Table II. This table
was designed to match the current regulatory framework in
Germany and elaborates improvements based on the cat-
egories: composition, condition, function and effectiveness.
The provided information should serve as reference work to
upcoming research and discussions about the extent of PTI.
Thus, within future work, it is planned to identify evaluation
methods for inspection engineers that enable an assessment of
the roadworthiness of vehicles throughout their time of road
admission. To address the challenges of intelligent vehicles,
both advanced sensor systems and continuous security activi-
ties need to be considered.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The work presented in this paper was funded by GT ¨U
Gesellschaft f¨ur technische ¨Uberwachung mbH in Stuttgart,
Germany.
REFERENCES
[1] Statistisches
Bundesamt,
“Fehlverhalten
der
Fahrzeugf¨uhrer
bei
Unf¨allen mit Personenschaden” (Misconduct of drivers in accidents
with personal injury), July 2020, online, https://www.destatis.de/DE/
Themen/Gesellschaft-Umwelt/Verkehrsunfaelle/Tabellen/fehlverhalten-
fahrzeugfuehrer.html, retrieved: April 2022.
[2] Automotive World, “The new BMW iX xDrive40 and new BMW iX
xDrive50” , March 2021, online, https://www.automotiveworld.com/
news-releases/the-new-bmw-ix-xdrive40-and-new-bmw-ix-xdrive50/,
retrieved: April 2022.
[3] R.
Charette,
“This
Car
Runs
on
Code”,
2009,
online,
https://spectrum.ieee.org/transportation/systems/this-car-runs-on-code,
retrieved: September 2020.
[4] 2. Straßenverkehrs-Zulassungs-Ordnung (2nd road traffic licensing reg-
ulations), Version including revisions until 18 May 2017.
[5] SAE International, “SAE J3016 - Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms
Related to Driving Automation Systems for On-Road Motor Vehicles”,
2018
[6] PEGASUS Project, “Pegasus Method An Overview”, online, https:
//www.pegasusprojekt.de/files/tmpl/Pegasus-Abschlussveranstaltung/
PEGASUS-Gesamtmethode.pdf, retrieved: March 2022.
[7] European Parliament and European Council, “Regulation (EU) 2018/858
of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 on the
approval and market surveillance of motor vehicles and their trailers,
and of systems, components and separate technical units intended for
such vehicles, amending Regulations (EC) No 715/2007 and (EC) No
595/2009 and repealing Directive 2007/46/EC”, 2018, online, https://
eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32018R0858, re-
trieved: January 2022
[8] European Parliament and European Council, “Directive 2014/45/EU of
the European Parliament and of the Council of 3 April 2014 on periodic
roadworthiness tests for motor vehicles and their trailers and repealing
Directive 2009/40/EC Text with EEA relevance”, 2014, online, https://
eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32014L0045, re-
trieved: January 2022
[9] UNECE, “Uniform provisions concerning the approval of vehicles with
regards to cyber security and cyber security management system”, March
2021, Revision 3, online, https://unece.org/sites/default/files/2021-03/
R155e.pdf, retrieved: April 2022.
[10] UNECE, “UN Regulation on Cybersecurity and Software Updates to
pave the way for mass roll out of connected vehicles”, June 2020, online,
http://www.unece.org/?id=54667, retrieved: April 2022.
[11] UNECE, “Status of the 1958 Agreement (and of the annexed regu-
lations)”, online, https://unece.org/status-1958-agreement-and-annexed-
regulations, retrieved: January 2022.
[12] H. Braun, J. B¨onninger, S. Missbach, and R. S¨ussbier: “Erkennen
und Bewerten von M¨angeln an elektronischen Systemen und Bauteilen
im Kraftfahrzeug” (Detection and evaluation of defects in electronic
systems and components in motor vehicles) Kirschbaum, Bonn, 2015.
– ISBN 978–3–7812–1920–5
[13] FSD, “Die FSD - Zentrale Stelle stellt sich vor” (The FSD - Central
Office introduces itself), online, https://fsd-web.de/, retrieved: April
2022.
[14] C. Malaquin: “Towards ADAS to Imaging radar for automotive market
and technology trends”, Microwave & RF Conference 2019.
[15] McKinsey
&
Company,
“Automotive
software
and
electronics
2030
-
Mapping
the
sector’s
future
landscape”,
2019,
online,
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/automotive-and-assembly/our-
insights/mapping-the-automotive-software-and-electronics-landscape-
through-2030, retrieved: March 2022.
[16] M. Gierl, R. Kriesten, P. Neugebauer, and E. Sax, “Reverse Threat
Modeling: A Systematic Threat Identification Method for Deployed
Vehicles”, 18th International Conference on Scientific Computing (CSC
2020), Las Vegas, USA, 2020
[17] MITRE Corporation, “CVE Security Vulnerability Database”, online,
https://cve.mitre.org/, retrieved: January 2022.
[18] AUTO-ISAC, “Automotive Information Sharing and Analysis Center”,
online, https://automotiveisac.com/, retrieved: April 2022.
[19] Upstream
Security
Ltd.,
“Autothreat
Intelligence
Cyber
Incident
Repository”,
online,
https://www.upstream.auto/research/automotive-
cybersecurity/, retrieved: March 2022.
[20] M. Ring, J. D¨urrwang, F. Sommer, and R. Kriesten, “Survey on vehicular
attacks - building a vulnerability database”, 2015 IEEE International
Conference on Vehicular Electronics and Safety (ICVES), Yokohama,
2015, pp. 208-212, doi: 10.1109/ICVES.2015.7396919
[21] K. Groeneveld, “The F 015 Luxury in Motion at the Ars Electronica
Festival in Linz: Creative break on the journey to the future”, September
2015, online, https://group-media.mercedes-benz.com/marsMediaSite/
ko/en/9919078, retrieved: April 2022.
[22] UNECE, “Uniform provisions concerning the approval of vehicles with
regards to software update and software updates management system”,
March 2021, online, https://unece.org/sites/default/files/2021-03/R156e.
pdf, retrieved: April 2022.
[23] C.
Dhabhar,
“Tesla
Model
3
Braking
Improves
With
On-Air
Software Update”, May 2018, online, https://www.carandbike.com/
news/tesla-model-3-braking-improves-with-on-air-update-1859322, re-
trieved: April 2022.
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-974-4
VEHICULAR 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

