Advertising Roadside Services using Vehicular Ad hoc Network (VANET)
Opportunistic Capabilities
Kifayat Ullah*, Luz M. S. Jaimes*†
*ICMC, University of São Paulo (USP)
São Carlos Campus, Brazil
†University of Pamplona, Colombia
e-mails: kifayat@icmc.usp.br, lsantosj@icmc.usp.br 
Roberto S. Yokoyama*, Edson dos Santos Moreira†
†ICMC, University of São Paulo (USP)
São Carlos Campus, Brazil
*Instituto de Computação, UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil
e-mails: sadao@lrc.ic.unicamp.br, edson@icmc.usp.br
Abstract—Vehicular  Ad  hoc  Networks  (VANETs)  support  a
large  number  of  Intelligent  Transportation  System  (ITS)
applications, ranging from safety to non-safety purposes. Non-
safety  applications  encompass  comfort,  infotainment  and
marketing of services. In order to promote business, alongside
roads  and  highways,  and  reach  to  maximum  number  of
customers, the Business Managers (for instance: gas stations,
restaurants, hotels, parking lots, coffee shops, supermarkets,
etc.) would need a mechanism to advertise their services using
a third party broker. Moreover, travellers (drivers, passengers)
would need an efficient and cost effective way to discover these
services, during their trips. However, the unique characteristics
of VANETs (e.g., dynamic topology, high speed and densities,
short inter-contact time, etc.) make the deployment of such
applications a challenging task.  This paper describes the use of
the  Opportunistic  Service  Discovery  Protocol  (OSDP)  –a
beaconing based protocol for roadside services discovery. We
performed extensive simulation experiments to evaluate the
performance  of  different  phases  of  OSDP,  under  different
traffic densities. The results concluded that: a) the number of
advertisement packets, in a given region by different Road Side
Units (RSUs), effect the success rate of receptions by moving
vehicles; b) short inter-contact times (of around 1s) seem to be
sufficient for a fast moving vehicle on a highway to receive at-
least 70% of the advertisement packets from RSUs; c) the
success rate of receiving response packets is highly affected by
the density of neighbour vehicles; d) the model suggests that
the system can be used to simulate several business models,
including a number of advertisement points, their distances to
the  business's  premises  and  duration  that  the  packets  are
stored in the cache, etc.
Keywords-Vehicular  Ad  hoc  Networks;
 Opportunism;
Services Advertisement; Roadside Services Discovery.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Vehicular  Ad  hoc  Networks  (VANETs)  play  an
important role in Intelligent Transportation System (ITS), by
enabling  Vehicles  to  Vehicle  (V2V)  and  Vehicle  to
Infrastructure  (V2I)  communications.  It  has  become  an
emerging  field  of  research  by  gaining  attention from
different  standardization  organizations,  government
agencies, auto-mobile industry and research communities.
The  Federal  Communications  Commission  (FCC)  has
already granted 75 MHz of bandwidth, in the 5.9 GHz band
for exclusive use of VANETs. The allocated spectrum is
called  Dedicated  Short  Range  Communication  (DSRC),
which enables high speed, short to medium range wireless
communications (up to 1000m). The spectrum is divided into
seven channels of 10 MHz each. The most important channel
is the Control Channel (CCH), which is restricted for the use
of  safety  applications  and  service  announcements.  The
remaining channels are known as Service Channels (SCHs)
[1][2].  VANET consists of many components. The most
important  components  are:  On  Board  Units  (OBUs),
mounted in vehicles, and Road Side Units (RSUs), installed
at fixed locations alongside roads and highways [3].  
The Institute of Electrical  and Electronics  Engineers
(IEEE) has developed a system architecture for VANETs
called Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments (WAVE).
WAVE  supports  two  different  protocol  stacks:  Internet
Protocol  version  six  (IPv6)  and  WAVE  Short  Message
Protocol (WSMP). For Physical (PHY) and Medium Access
Control (MAC) layers, an amendment has been made to the
802.11a  protocol,  called  IEEE  802.11p.  Similarly,  IEEE
1609.4 is standardized for coordination among multi-channel
operations. Details about these protocols are provided in [4]. 
Apart from IEEE 802.11p –the de facto standard for
VANET– the Long Term Evolution (LTE), developed by 3rd
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), is considered to be a
competitor technology for V2I communications only. Its
advantages include: high data rate, low latency, support for
high mobility, large coverage area and support for Internet
based  applications  (e.g.,  live  streaming,  Voice  over  IP,
online gaming and cloud services etc.). However, the LTE
does not support V2V communications. A detailed survey
about the strength and weakness of LTE and LTE-Advanced
(LTE-A), for V2I communications is presented in [5]. 
In addition to the standardization efforts from IEEE, the
European  Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI)
also  constitutes  a  technical  committee  for  VANET
communications. The standard developed by the committee
is know as  ETSI ITS-G5 [6]. Like the WAVE architecture,
the lowest layers of ITS-G5 are based on IEEE 802.11p,
with  its  own  channel  access  and  usage  algorithms  [7].
Unlike the  WAVE  standard,  ITS-G5 has  no support  for
WSMP;  instead  it  uses  multi-hop  geographical  routing.
Moreover, the standard did not specify support for WAVE
Service Advertisement (WSA), which is used for service
announcements in WAVE architecture. 
These standardization efforts have created a great deal
of opportunities for the deployment of a large number of
applications.  Broadly  speaking,  these  applications  are
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-434-3
VEHICULAR 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

divided  into  two  categories:  safety  and  non-safety
applications. Safety applications would ensure safety of lives
and properties on the roads, by reducing accidents. On the
other  hand,  the  non-safety  applications  would  make  the
travelling experience, for both the drivers and passengers,
more enjoyable, by providing access to a large number of
services. In this paper, we tackle the challenge of near-by
roadside services advertisement and means to discover them
by the travelers. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
gives an overview of the related work. Section III presents
our system model. A motivational scenario is provided in
Section  IV.  The  different  phases  of  OSDP  are  briefly
discussed in Section V. Experimental setup is explained in
Section VI. Results and Discussions are presented in Section
VII. Section VIII concludes this paper, with some future
directions.
II.
RELATED WORK
In order to promote business and reach a maximum
number of customers, the Business Managers (for instance:
gas  stations,  restaurants,  hotels,  parking  lots,  bars,
supermarkets, etc.) alongside the roads and highways would
need a mechanism to advertise their services using a third
party  broker.  Moreover,  travellers  (drivers,  passengers)
would need an efficient and cost effective way to discover
those  services  during  their  trips.  To  address  the  issue,
different  studies  regarding  service  discovery  in  VANETs
have been conducted.
In [8], the authors studied the problem of providing
information  about  the  traffic  and  road  conditions to the
drivers. To address the problem, they offered an application
layer, location based protocol called Vehicular Information
Transfer Protocol (VITP). The vehicle requesting the service
sends a query towards the target  region using multi-hop
transmission. Once the query is received by a vehicle inside
the targeted area, it is resolved by the peers and the response
is sent back towards the source region, where it is broadcast
by the underlying network protocol. However, their protocol
is not capable of dealing with dense traffic scenarios and
large number of requests.
An  Address  Based  Service  Resolution  Protocol
(ABSRP)  was  proposed  in  [9].  The  authors  used  IEEE
802.11a  wireless  interfaces  for  communication,  and  IP
addresses for RSUs. The RSUs were interconnected using
the Internet as a backbone. Vehicles need to be associated
with a RSU each time they enter into its range. To locate a
near-by service, the vehicle sends a query to its leader RSU
(the one with which it is currently associated). If the service
is not present at the current RSU, the request is forwarded to
the next RSU using its IP addresses by Internet connection.
The weakness  of their solution is the time spent in the
association  process  between  the  vehicle  and  the  RSU,
followed by granting access to the Internet, which make the
communication ineffective.
An  Internet-centric  architecture  for  VANETs  was
suggested in [10]. The architecture consists of three main
components: Roadside Gateways (RGs), Roadside Routers
(RRs) and Road Vehicles (RVs). The RRs were connected
using heterogeneous backbone network. A hybrid (proactive
and reactive) service discovery protocol was proposed. There
was no direct V2V communication for service discovery.
Instead,  the  RRs  collect  and  store  advertisements  from
advertising  vehicles,  in  the  service  information  table.  A
vehicle requiring service sends a query to a near-by RR. If
the service is present in the information table, the RR replies.
Otherwise, the query is forwarded to the appropriate RR,
using network layer routing. They also described a proof of
concept, in order to verify the accuracy, completeness and
correctness of the proposed algorithm. However, they left the
simulations to validate the findings, for future work.
In  [11],  the  authors  presented  two  Location-based
Vehicular Service Discovery Protocols (LocVSDP): election
based-LocVSDP  and  naive-LocVSDP.  Their  scheme
operates  in  four  phases:  advertisement  of  services,
propagation of requests, election for the leader and service
response.  The  driver  sends  a  query  to  the  neighbour
Roadside Router (RR), in the Region of Interest (RI). The
RR  separates  the  service  information  from  routing
information, and sends the request to other RR, if required. A
leader,  inside  each  RI,  is  selected  by  using  an  election
process, which is responsible for generating service reply
and its propagation to the driver. The disadvantage of this
approach is that the election phase is executed for each
service query, which leads to high overhead and degrades the
overall performance. 
In a recent  study in [12], the authors addressed the
problem of providing location based service information to
the  travellers  by  proposing  an  Opportunistic  Service
Discovery  Protocol  (OSDP).  Their  solution  is  based  on
layer-2 and makes use of beacons for service advertisement
and discovery. However, they did not performed simulation
studies to evaluate the performance of their protocol; instead
they carried out real experiments using five Access Points
(APs), built with IEEE 802.11a interfaces.
The main objectives of this work are: a) to evaluate the
performance of OSDP, presented in [12], by performing an
extensive  set  of  simulations;  b)  to  extend  the  service
discovery phase of OSDP. This study is different from the
above mentioned proposals in numerous ways. First, we
implemented our solution on top of WAVE protocol stack
(i.e., IEEE 802.11p, 1609.4, and WSMP standards). Second,
our  solution  does  not  rely  on  the  Internet  for  resolving
queries and responses. Like OSDP, we make use of beacons
for service advertisements and discovery. Finally, we present
the simulation scenario in a way that the results could be
used  by  users  for  designing  new  business  models.  We
performed  simulation  studies  in  order  to  evaluate  the
performance of OSDP under different traffic scenarios. For
V2I communications, we increased the number of  services,
advertised by RSUs, while for V2V communications, we
change the vehicle densities. 
III.
SYSTEM MODELLING
In  this  section,  we  discuss  the  main  entities  and
messages of our system.
A.
System Entities
Following are the main entities of our system.
1)    Business Manager (BM)
Business Manager (BM) is an entity, e.g., restaurant,
hotel, gas station, coffee shop, supermarket, etc., interested
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-434-3
VEHICULAR 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

in  advertising  its  services  to  the  travellers.  The  offered
services would include: food menu, price list, special offers,
discount on products and available facilities.
2)    The Broker
The broker is a third party entity, which would be in
charge of feeding one or more RSUs in the neighbourhood of
the  BM  premises,  accordingly  with  a  Service  Level
Agreement (SLA). The SLA would include: number of RSUs
to  broadcast  the  advertisement  packet,  frequency  of
advertisement packet, distance of the premises from which
the packets will be advertised, time and day of the week etc.
The BM would register their services with the broker, using
Internet connections.
3)    Road Side Unit (RSU)
RSUs are fixed entities, which are installed at fixed
locations along the roads and highways. These RSUs would
be administered by the brokers, eventually in association
with the roads or highways managers.  In order to reach a
maximum  number  of  customers,  the  RSU  broadcast  the
registered services –as per SLA details– using push-based
strategy.
4)    On Board Unit (OBU)
The  OBU  is  an  important  entity,  installed  in  each
vehicle, with storage and processing capabilities. When a
vehicle enters in the coverage area of RSU, it starts receiving
service advertisement packets, using V2I communications.
Those packets are cached for a specific amount of time or a
certain distance. BM could make special agreement, such as
promotions and incentives, in order to stimulate the vehicles
to carry their advertisement  packets in their caches  and,
hence, to be able to transmit to other cars opportunistically.
Additionally,  the  OBUs  would  send  and  receive
query/response  messages  in  V2V  communications,  using
IEEE 802.11p based wireless interface.
B.
System Messages
In this subsection, we discuss the messages of our
proposed system. 
1)     Advertisement Packets
Advertisement is a well known marketing strategy for
announcing products and services to the customers. In our
system, the BM would register their services with a broker,
via  Internet  for  advertising  them  to  the  travellers.  The
registration process is out of the scope of this work. The
RSU(s) would then broadcast advertisement packets for the
nearby passing vehicles.
2)    Query Packets
To  discover  a  desired  service,  the  vehicle  would
broadcast a query message to the neighbour vehicle(s) using
a pull-based strategy. The query is said to be successful, if
the querying vehicle receives a response from neighbour
vehicles. Otherwise, it is unsuccessful. In our experiments,
the vehicle  repeats  sending the  query  packet  every  20s.
Additionally, we use single-hop strategy to broadcast the
query packet. 
3)    Response Packets
When a vehicle receive a query packet, it will search its
local cache for the required service. If one or more services
are  found,  the  vehicle  would  broadcast  the  response
message.  For  this  work,  we  assumed  that  all  neighbour
vehicles  –receiving  queries–  already  have  the  requested
services inside their caches. 
IV.
MOTIVATIONAL SCENARIO
In  this  section,  we  explain  our  system  model  by
assuming a motivational highway scenario with two lanes
on each side.  The scenario is depicted in Figure 1. Vehicles
enter  into the  scenario  from  two different  origins. Four
RSUs are deployed, on both sides of the roads. RSUs are
interconnected using Internet as a backbone. We assume that
all RSUs and vehicles are equipped with WAVE devices and
IEEE 802.11p based wireless interfaces. Additionally, each
vehicle  has a  built-in Global  Positioning  System  (GPS)
device  and  an  OBU,  with  storage  and  processing
capabilities. Each RSU will broadcast advertisement packets
on a regular interval, using beacons, and vehicles would
start receiving these advertisements packets, as soon as they
enter into the coverage area of an RSU. 
Consider  a  vehicle
 v1,  which  has  received
advertisement packets from RSU1 (gas station, coffee shop),
RSU2  (hotel,  restaurant,  shopping  mall),  RSU3  (hotel,
restaurant,  shopping  mall)  and  RSU4  (coffee  shop,  gas
station)  respectively.  v1 will  store  and  carry  all  these
services  information  and  will  opportunistically  forward
them to other vehicles, upon receiving a query packet. Now
suppose that vehicle v9 is interested in finding information
about a near-by gas station. First, v9 will check its own local
cache. If no such information exists, it will broadcast a
query packet towards its neighbour vehicles. In this case,
only vehicle v1 will receive the query packet.
Figure 1. Motivational scenario: services advertisement and discovery.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-434-3
VEHICULAR 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

To resolve this query, vehicle  v1 will search  its own
cache for gas station information. Since v1 has information
about a single gas station, it will broadcast this information
in a V2V communications, using response packet. However,
for some reasons,  if  v9  does not receive any response
packet, it will re-send the query packet, after some time or
distance.   OSDP protocol uses the unicast  approach  for
sending back responses to the vehicles. We modified the
unicast  approach,  by  allowing  vehicles  to  broadcast  the
response  packet.  This  mechanism  would  allow  other
neighbour vehicles to receive advertisement packets without
making queries for them.
V.
OSDP PHASES
In this section, we emphasize the main points of OSDP
phases. For a detailed description about phases, its operations
and message formats, we refer the readers to [12]. It is
important to note, that we use single hop communication
mechanism in this work for the implementation of all the
phases.
A.
Advertisement Phase
This  phase  refers  to  the  periodical  broadcast  of
advertisements  by  RSUs,  at  regular  intervals,  in  a  V2I
communication  scenario.  These  advertisements  contain
necessary  information  about  the  services  (for  example:
location, name of the service and its descriptions etc.). In our
work,  we  utilize  the  SCH  (Channel  No.  174)  of  IEEE
802.11p protocol, for  broadcasting our packets. 
B.
Caching Phase
In  this  phase,  the  vehicle  stores  the  received
advertisements packets in its cache. However, if the service
is already present in the cache, it is simply ignored by the
vehicle. The main objective behind caching approach is to
forward advertisements information, opportunistically, to the
querying  vehicles,  upon  requests.  We  used  store-carry-
forward mechanism for this phase.
C.
Querying Phase
The purpose of this phase is to discover the services by
querying  the  near-by  vehicles  in  a  V2V communication
scenario. The vehicle interested in finding a service sends a
query  message  towards  the  neighbour  vehicles.  Upon
receiving the query, the vehicles check their local caches and
if at-least one service is found, it will send towards the
requesting vehicle, using broadcast. 
VI.
SIMULATION SETUP
The aim of this section is to present the simulation tools
and parameters selected for this work. 
A.
Simulation Tools
The  main  purpose  of  this  work  is  to  evaluate  the
performance of OSDP and elaborate its capabilities, under
different traffic densities. To achieve this goal, we carried
out extensive experiments with different set of parameters.
Nowadays,  a large  number of simulation tools –ranging
from open source to commercial products– are available,
therefore,  an  important  aspect  of  performing  VANET
simulations  is  to  be  cautious  in  the  selection  of  the
appropriate simulator tool. A comprehensive survey about
current  simulators,  their  capabilities  and  approaches  is
provided in  [13]. 
The first step required to perform VANET simulations,
is to use a realistic  mobility simulator. Mobility simulator is
responsible for defining road networks and generate traffic
flows. We used Simulation of Urban Mobility (SUMO) [14],
a  well  known  microscopic  and  open  source  mobility
simulator. After defining road network and traffic flows, the
next important step is to enable the vehicles to talk to each
other and road side infrastructure. This is achieved by using
a network simulator. We used an object-oriented modular
discrete  event  network  simulation  framework  called
Objective Modular Network Testbed in C++ (OMNET++)
[15].  OMNET++ represents each vehicle as a node inside
the network and allows communication among these nodes.
Finally, in order to bridge the gap between the two worlds
(SUMO  and  OMENT++),  we  used  an  open  source  bi-
directional  simulation  framework  called  Vehicles  in
Network Simulation (Veins) [16].  Veins couples SUMO
with OMNET++  using Traffic  Control  Interface  (TraCI)
[17]. Veins already implements WAVE protocol stacks. It is
mostly noticeable for IEEE 802.11p, IEEE 1609.4 multi-
channel operation and comprehensive MAC and PHY layers
models. We  implemented  the  OSDP protocol  on top of
WSMP and IEEE 802.11p. 
B.
Simulation Parameters
We defined the traffic parameters inside SUMO. One of
the most  important  parameter  is vehicle velocity. In our
experiments, we used constant velocity of 120km/h for all
vehicles. We performed our experiments using a highway of
140km, with multiple lanes on both sides. Additionally, we
deployed a maximum of 7 RSUs (Section-VII A for details)
along roadsides, for advertising the services. Vehicles were
injected into the scenario from two different origins, with a
fixed interval of 1.6s for the first experiment and 40s for the
second experiment. 
TABLE I. 
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Parameter
Value
Wireless medium
IEEE 802.11p
Transmission rate
6 Mbps
Transmission power
33 dBm
Message type
WSMP data
Channel bandwidth
10 MHz
Beacon generation rate
1 Hz
Frequency band
5.9 GHz
Radio propagation model
Simple path loss model [18]
Simulation Time
Experiment 1: 250 s
Experiment 2: 4200 s  
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-434-3
VEHICULAR 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

The parameters we used for our network simulator, are
summarized in the Table 1.
VII. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
This section discusses the results we obtained from our
simulations. Based on the OSDP phases (Section-V), we
divided our experiments into two parts. 
A.
Evaluation of Advertisement Packets
In  this  experiment,  we  tested  the  first  two  phases
(advertisement  and  caching)  of  OSDP  in  a  V2I
communication scenario (see Figure 2). We measured the
success rate of advertisements packets received by vehicles,
in a given inter-contact time.  Success rate refers to the total
number  of  received  advertisement  packets  by  the  total
number of delivered packets. An inter-contact time refers to
the  duration  in  which  a  vehicle  continues  to  receive
advertisement  packets from an RSU, inside its coverage
area. As soon as the inter-contact time expires, the vehicle
stops receiving  advertisements.  We  considered  the  same
inter-contact  times  (ranging  from  0.2s  to 2.0s)  used  by
OSDP.  We  control  the  inter-contact  time  by  simTime()
function of OMNET++. Similar to OSDP, we increased the
density of  RSUs, offering the services, from 1 RSU to 7
RSUs. 
Each RSU broadcasts a single advertisement packet per
second.  In  OSDP,  all  APs  (which  emulate  RSUs)  were
deployed in the same location, therefore, we followed the
same setup for the deployment of RSUs in our experiment.
To achieve more reliable results, we calculated the average
of  samples  collected  from  100  vehicles,  for  each  inter-
contact time. 
Figure  3  shows  the  success  rate  of  advertisement
packets received by vehicle in relation with inter-contact
time. In general, the success rate increases as the inter-
contact time increases. In case of a single service offered by
an RSU, inter-contact time of 1s seems to be sufficient, for a
vehicle to successfully receive the advertisement packets. It
could also be observed that inter-contact time of 0.8s is
enough for a vehicle to receive at-least 50% of the offered
services, by at-most 7 RSUs. Moreover, the success rate
decrease as the number of offered services increase. The
reason  of this performance  degradation  is likely due  to
packet collision at the MAC layer.
Figure 2. RSU broadcasting service advertisements .
Figure 3. Success rate of service advertisements received by vehicles
from RSUs (ranging from 1 to 7), under different inter-contact times.
B.
Evaluation of Query and Response Packets
In this experiment, we tested the third phase (service
discovery) of OSDP, using V2V communications among
vehicles (see Figure 4). We divided our experiment into two
sub-categories. In the first experiment, we evaluated the
performance of service discovery by changing the number
of vehicles responding to the query packet. While in the
second  experiment, we  changed  the number  of  vehicles
querying for services. 
i) Evaluation of Response Packets
In this experiment, a single vehicle would query its
neighbour vehicles for a required service. We increased the
density  of  neighbour  vehicles  responding  to  the  query
packet,  from  1 vehicle  to  21 vehicles.  Like  OSDP,  we
assumed that all neighbour vehicles have already received
and stored the required service in their local caches. Success
rate in this case, refers to the total number of received
response packets by the total number of neighbour vehicles
in that region. Vehicle  density means,  total  number  of
neighbour vehicles inside the coverage range of querying
vehicle. 
Figure 4. Vehicles querying for/responding to services.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-434-3
VEHICULAR 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

To  achieve  more  reliable  results,  we  calculated  the
average of samples collected from 100 vehicles for each
density. In OSDP, neighbour vehicle send back the response
message in a unicast manner. We amended the unicast mode
and permitted vehicles to broadcast the response packets. 
An  important  conclusion  of  OSDP  was  that  inter-
contact time does not effect the success rate. Therefore, we
consider constant inter-contact time of 0.2s, for all vehicle
densities.
Figure  5  depicts  that  the  success  rate  of  response
packets is highly dependent on the vehicle density, in a V2V
communication  scenario.  It  could  be  observed  that,  the
success  rate  is  100%,  for  traffic  densities  of  up-to  9
vehicles. However, the performance degrades to 50%, as
soon as the traffic density reaches 21 vehicles. The reason
behind this degradation in performance is due to the attempt
made by vehicles to access the channel at the same time.
       ii) Evaluation of Query Packets
In this experiment, we extend the OSDP by increasing
the traffic density, querying for services from 1 vehicle to 21
vehicles. We consider only a single neighbour vehicle to
respond to those query packets. We made the assumption
that, all the vehicles are interested to search for the same
service. The performance evaluation is depicted in Figure 6.
It could be observed that, it is difficult to achieve 100%
success rate, even in case of small traffic density (e.g., 3
vehicles). The success rate is 50% up-to traffic density of 7
vehicles. Performance further decreases, as the number of
vehicles asking for services increases, and it reaches 10%
for traffic density of 21 vehicles. We observed a speedy
performance degradation in this experiment (as compared to
the previous one), because in this case, only a single vehicle
is trying to resolve the query packets of different vehicles.  
Figure 5. Success rate of received messages with varying number of
responding vehicles.
Figure 6. Success rate of received messages with varying number of
querying vehicles.
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we addressed the problem of roadside
services  advertisement  and  discovery  in  VANET,  by
implementing  OSDP  –a  recent  beaconing  based
opportunistic service discovery protocol– on top of IEEE
802.11p  and WSMP standards,  and performed  extensive
simulations using SUMO, OMNET++ and Veins simulators.
To evaluate the performance, we conducted two different set
of experiments, under different traffic densities and inter-
contact  time.  In  the  first  experiment,  we  evaluated  the
performance  of  advertisement  packets  by  RSUs  in  V2I
communication scenario. In the second set of experiments,
we evaluated the performance of service discovery in V2V
communication  scenario.  We  also  extended  OSDP,  by
changing the number of vehicles, querying for services. The
results  conclude  that  the  success  rate  of  service
advertisements decreases as the number of offered services,
by an RSU, increases. Moreover, success rate of response
packets is highly dependent on  vehicle densities. The model
suggests that the system can be used to simulate several
business models, including number of advertisement points,
their distances to the business's premises, duration that the
packets are stored in the cache, etc.
Presently, we are evaluating the performance of OSDP
using more sophisticated path loss models (e.g., Obstacle
Shadowing, Two Ray Interference) and Quality of service
(QoS) parameters, for more realistic and congested traffic
scenarios. As a future work, we would study the security
and privacy aspects of OSDP. We also intend to implement
OSDP using Named Data Networking (NDN, aka Content-
Centric  Networking  -  CCN),  for  interest  based  service
discovery. We would like to extend OSDP operations to
Vehicular Social Network (VSN). 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The  authors  are  thankful  to  the  world  academy  of
sciences  (TWAS),  Italy  and  to  the  national  council  for
scientific and technological development (CNPq), Brazil for
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-434-3
VEHICULAR 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

providing  financial  support  under  the  grant  number
190275/2011-1. 
REFERENCES
[1]
D.  Jiang  and  L.  Delgrossi,  “IEEE  802.11p:  Towards  an
International  Standard  for  Wireless  Access  in  Vehicular
Environments,”  in  Vehicular  Technology  Conference,  2008.  VTC
Spring 2008. IEEE , May 2008 , pp. 2036–2040.
[2]
Y. Li, “An Overview of the DSRC/WAVE Technology,” in Quality,
Reliability, Security and Robustness in Heterogeneous Networks (X.
Zhang and D. Qiao, eds.), vol. 74 of Lecture Notes of the Institute for
Computer  Sciences,  Social  Informatics  and  Telecommunications
Engineering, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 544–558.
[3]
S. Al-Sultan, M. M. Al-Doori, A. H. Al-Bayatti, and H. Zedan, “A
Comprehensive Survey on Vehicular Ad Hoc Network,” Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, vol. 37, no. 0,  2014, pp. 380 –
392.
[4]
R.  Uzcategui  and  G.  Acosta-Marum,  “WAVE:  A  Tutorial,”
Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 47, May 2009, pp. 126–133.
[5]
G. Araniti, C. Campolo, M. Condoluci, A. Iera, and A. Molinaro,
“LTE  for  Vehicular  Networking:  A  Survey,”  Communications
Magazine, IEEE, vol. 51, May 2013, pp. 148–157. 
[6]
ETSI ES 202 663, ”Intelligent Transport Systems; European profile
standard on the physical and medium access layer of 5 GHz ITS”,
Draft Version 0.0.6, October 2009.
[7]
D. Eckhoff, N. Sofra, and R. German, “A Performance Study of
Cooperative  Awareness  in  ETSI  ITS  G5  and  IEEE  WAVE,”  in
Wireless On-demand Network Systems and Services (WONS), 2013
10th Annual Conference on, March 2013, pp. 196–200.
[8]
M. Dikaiakos, A. Florides, T. Nadeem, and L. Iftode, “Location-
aware Services over Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks using car-to-car
Communication,” Selected Areas in Communications, IEEE Journal
on, vol. 25, Oct 2007, pp. 1590–1602.
[9]
B. Mohandas, A. Nayak, K. Naik, and N. Goel, “ABSRP- A Service
Discovery Approach for Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks,” in Asia-Pacific
Services Computing Conference, 2008. APSCC ’08. IEEE, Dec 2008,
pp. 1590–1594.
[10] A. Boukerche and K. Abrougui, “A Service Discovery Protocol for
Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks: A Proof of Correctness,” in Parallel
Distributed  Processing,  2009.  IPDPS  2009.  IEEE  International
Symposium on ,  May 2009, pp. 1–8.
[11] K. Abrougui, R. Pazzi, and A. Boukerche, “Performance Evaluation
of  Location-Based  Service  Discovery  Protocols  for  Vehicular
Networks,”  in  Communications  (ICC),  2010  IEEE  International
Conference on , May 2010, pp. 1–5.
[12] R. Yokoyama, B. Kimura, L. Jaimes, and E. Moreira, “A Beaconing-
Based  Opportunistic  Service  Discovery  Protocol  for  Vehicular
Networks,” in Advanced Information Networking and Applications
Workshops (WAINA), 2014 28th International Conference on , May
2014 , pp. 498–503.
[13] F. J. Martinez, C. K. Toh, J.-C. Cano, C. T. Calafate, and P. Manzoni,
“A Survey and Comparative Study of Simulators for Vehicular Ad
Hoc Networks (VANETs),” Wireless Communications and Mobile
Computing, vol. 11, no. 7, 2011, pp. 813–828.
[14] M. Behrisch, L. Bieker, J. Erdmann, and D. Krajzewicz, “SUMO-
Simulation of Urban MObility-an Overview,” in SIMUL 2011, The
Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation ,
2011, pp. 55–60.
[15] A. Varga and R. Hornig, “An Overview of the OMNET++ Simulation
Environment,” in Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on
Simulation Tools and Techniques for Communications, Networks and
Systems & Workshops, Simutools ’08, (ICST, Brussels, Belgium),
ICST  (Institute  for  Computer  Sciences,  Social-Informatics  and
Telecommunications Engineering), 2008, pp. 60:1–60:10.
[16] C. Sommer, R. German, and F. Dressler, “Bidirectionally Coupled
Network and Road Traffic Simulation for Improved IVC Analysis,”
Mobile Computing, IEEE Transactions on , vol. 10, Jan 2011, pp. 3–
15. 
[17] A. Wegener, M. Pi orkowski, M. Raya, H. Hellbr uck, S. Fischer, and
J.-P. Hubaux, “TraCI: An Interface for Coupling Road Traffic and
Network Simulators,” in Proceedings of the 11th Communications
and Networking Simulation Symposium , CNS ’08, (New York, NY,
USA), ACM, 2008,  pp. 155–163.
[18] K. Wessel, M. Swigulski, A. Kopke, and D. Willkomm, “MiXiM: The
Physical Layer An Architecture Overview,” in Proceedings of the 2nd
International  Conference  on  Simulation  Tools  and  Techniques,
Simutools  ’09,  (ICST,  Brussels,  Belgium),  ICST  (Institute  for
Computer  Sciences,  Social-Informatics  and  Telecommunications
Engineering), 2009, pp. 78:1–78:8.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-434-3
VEHICULAR 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

