Simulation of a Security Function Based on
Vehicle-to-X Communication and Automotive
Lighting
Peter Knapik
Volkswagen AG
Wolfsburg, Germany
Email: peter.knapik@volkswagen.de
Elmar Schoch
Audi AG
Ingolstadt, Germany
Email: elmar.schoch@audi.de
Frank Kargl
University of Twente
Enschede, The Netherlands
Email: f.kargl@utwente.nl
Abstract—Crime
and
feeling
of
security
are
pervasive
occurrences and can be inﬂuenced by lighting conditions.
However, lighting improvements are generally concentrated on
street lighting. Meanwhile, a vast variety of new technologies,
including innovative lighting systems and connected mobility,
are entering into the automotive ﬁeld. Hence, opportunities are
not limited only to provide trafﬁc improvements, entertainment
features or safety functions but also measures to tackle (vehicle
related) crime and to increase the feeling of security. In this
paper, we present an idea for a function which has the potential to
tackle crime and increase drivers’ feeling of security. Moreover,
we explain our approach to measure the effectiveness of the
function based on a proprietary simulation environment.
Index
Terms—security
function,
V2X-communication,
simulation.
I. INTRODUCTION
Advanced
driver
assistance
systems
(ADAS)
and
Vehicle-to-X (V2X) communication are on the advance.
Meanwhile, a vast diversity of ADAS exists, where systems
drawing on vehicle lighting are one part. ADAS like dynamic
cornering lights, which light into corners, or adaptive high
beam assistants, which detect oncoming trafﬁc and adjust
beams accordingly, actively intervene with the vehicle’s
lighting
system.
Additionally,
lighting
systems
underlie
a steady development so that incandescent systems are
continuously replaced by LED systems, partly in combination
with xenon lights [1]. Also, the penetration of mobile devices
is increasing so that they have largely become our daily
companion. Thus, connected mobility, which brings these
new technologies together, has become a part of our life.
In the last decades, there has been a lot of research on the
inﬂuence of lighting, especially street lighting, on crime and
the fear of crime [2]–[5]. A positive effect of lighting on fear
of crime has been mostly assumed, whereas the research on
the effect on crime has provided equivocal results.
We
elaborate
on
a
security
function
that
makes
use
of
vehicles’
advanced
lighting
opportunities
and
vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communication to combat crime
and mainly to increase drivers’ feeling of security.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section II,
we provide a short overview of automotive lighting systems
followed by an explanation of our function’s basic idea in
Section III. In order to measure the effectiveness of our
function, we are implementing a simulation environment,
which is presented in Section IV. Then, we brieﬂy show our
implementation approach of the simulation in Section V before
concluding our paper and providing an outlook on future work.
II. LIGHTING SYSTEMS
Dependent on the equipment level, vehicles, usually,
posses at least the mandatory lighting systems for outside
illumination. To avoid dazzling oncoming trafﬁc, manual
level adjustment exists besides the more sophisticated static
and even dynamic automatic leveling. The static leveling
system automatically adjusts the level dependent on vehicle
loading. Dynamic systems additionally take into account
vehicle’s acceleration and deacceleration to adjust the tilt angle
dynamically.
A further lighting feature, cornering light, occurs in a static
and dynamic variant. The static cornering light usually turns
on one of the front fog lamps to light into the according
direction while turning. The static cornering light is intended
to be used at lower speeds in urban areas. In contrast, the
dynamic system is designed to be used in rural areas or on
highways while driving through corners at higher speed. Low
and high beams are actively moved horizontally into the corner
with a maximum angle of commonly 15 degrees. Beams are
usually controlled via electromotive actuators.
III. (COOPERATIVE) EXTENDED COMING / LEAVING
HOME FUNCTION
Most OEMs provide a so called coming / leaving home
function (CHF / LHF). Of course, the functionality differs
by OEM speciﬁc adjustments but the basic idea is similar.
When leaving the car, i.e., coming home (CHF), low beams,
taillights and other available light sources keep on lighting
(during darkness) for a speciﬁed period of time in order to
light the driver the way “home”. The duration can generally
be adjusted by the vehicle owner. Referring to the LHF, the
aforementioned light sources start lighting as soon as the driver
remotely opens the vehicle.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-288-2
VEHICULAR 2013 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

This described functionality has the drawback to be static.
The lighting duration can only be adjusted in the vehicle
and it is independent of the drivers position. That means, if
the duration is to short, the illumination turns off before the
driver even reaches the vehicle and vice versa respectively.
Furthermore, the vehicle turns on all light sources although
some light sources are probably unnecessary since the driver
approaches the vehicle from one direction.
Our idea is to extend the existing CHF / LHF by the
opportunities of advanced sensors, sophisticated light systems
and V2X communication. We suggest to use the opportunity
that low beams can be swiveled vertically and horizontally to
light the driver’s direct route to the vehicle, of course within
the mechanical limits of the beams. Additionally, only light
sources are turned on which directly inﬂuence the illumination
of the route so that energy consumption is reduced.
To realize the extended CHF / LHF (ECHF / ELHF),
a bidirectional communication between the vehicle and a
sophisticated key fob is assumed. The key fob is a smart
device, such as a smartkey or smartphone, and must be in
possession of the driver. Since the key only communicates with
the own vehicle, the common IEEE 802.11a/b/g [6] standard is
suitable for communication. Furthermore, position estimation
of the key relatively to the vehicle is necessary. This challenge
can be faced by localization based on ultra-wideband (UWB)
technology [7]. Thereby, it is irrelevant whether the position is
calculated by the key or by the vehicle since position data is
continuously synchronized between both participating partners
via bidirectional communication.
The ELHF is activated as soon as the doors are remotely
unlocked. Both, the two-way communication between the key
and the vehicle as well as the location estimation of the key
are triggered. The position of the key is updated at regular
intervals so that the vehicle can evaluate the position. Movable
low beams are aligned in the direction of the driver. Other
non-moveable light sources are only turned on when they
illuminate the direct path of the driver. Since the driver of the
vehicle is moving, the direct route to the vehicle is constantly
changing. Therefore, low beams are continuously adjusted.
Turned off light sources are turned on when they become
relevant for the direct path of the driver to the vehicle. In
return, turned on light sources are turned off when they lose
relevance for illuminating the direct path. Further, there is no
need to consider the time to turn off lighting because it is
turned off with reaching and entering the vehicle or even after
having closed the door. Nonetheless, a speciﬁc run-time can
be deﬁned as fallback option.
When exiting the vehicle (ECHF), the driver’s path is
illuminated analogously to the ELHF. The duration of
illumination can be determined by a deﬁned delay time.
However, there is also the possibility to deactivate the
illumination after the driver has left a certain radius around
the vehicle. An irregular surface around the vehicle is also
possible since the effectiveness of involved light sources is
different. The function can be disabled with the key as well.
Due to the physical and mechanical constraints, the own
vehicle is not always in a position to illuminate the direct
path of the driver. Therefore, the ECHF / ELHF can use
vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communications to be enhanced to
a cooperative function (CECHF / CELHF). Vehicles in the
surrounding environment are included to illuminate the driver’s
path. The own vehicle broadcasts a request to ask for lighting
help. Surrounding vehicles being willing to support in lighting
reply by providing their pose (position and heading) as well
as lighting capabilities. This way, our vehicle is able to create
a local map of participating vehicles with the aforementioned
information. Since our vehicle is continuously aware of the
driver’s position, it continuously requests participating vehicles
to light speciﬁc areas.
To realize inter-vehicle communication, we suggest to
consider standardization provided by IEEE [6] and ETSI [8].
Thereby, V2V communication is based on IEEE 802.11p [6].
This way, designated communication and security mechanism
are used. Further, positions of vehicles are either estimated
in the traditional way with the help of GPS and compass or
by making use of UWB technology, which is also suitable
for indoor use, e.g., for parking garages. Research projects,
such as AIM [9] or V-Charge [10], also partly address
localization challenges to estimate vehicle positions within
parking facilities.
IV. SIMULATION ENVIRONMENT
Our goal is to model diverse parking constellations of
vehicles and diverse routes the driver goes to or from the
vehicle. This way, we aim to compare the effectiveness of the
different forms of (CHF / LHF) under different constellations.
Our effectiveness criteria is the driver’s duration in a lighted
area when approaching or leaving the vehicle. Additionally,
referring to the cooperative form of the (CHF / LHF), we
want to investigate several equipment rates of vehicles being
able to participate in V2V communication and see which
penetration rates are necessary to achieve a gapless lighting
of the driver’s route. A further criteria is energy consumption.
Under certain circumstances, it is not necessary to involve all
V2V communication capable vehicles to light the route since
several vehicles are eventually able to light the same area.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no simulation
environment supporting a simulation of our security function.
Consequently,
we
decided
to
implement
a
proprietary
simulation environment, which is schematically illustrated in
Figure 1.
A. Parking Constellations
The number of parking constellations is inﬁnite since the
driver’s route can be manifoldly modeled and vehicles can
be positioned in different ways. Nevertheless, we demand
both, to freely position vehicles and to model driver’s route.
Further, a lot of possibilities exist how a vehicle is equipped.
Consequently, we will have to pick out wisely “typical”
constellations to be simulated and evaluated. Actual equipment
rates of advanced lighting systems can be used to determine
penetration rates for the simulation. Additionally, we think
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-288-2
VEHICULAR 2013 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

Fig. 1. Simpliﬁed schematic and dimensionless illustration of the simulation
environment
that regarding an area of 100m around the host vehicle is a
good approach since typical remote keys and low beams work
nearly up to this distance.
B. Vehicles
Each vehicle has a set of light sources which can be used to
light the environment. Light sources are not limited to low and
high beams. We also consider fog beams, rear lights, license
plate illumination and lighting elements integrated into exterior
mirrors. Each vehicle is conﬁgured separately, so that vehicles
with different equipment levels can be simulated. For reasons
of simpliﬁcation, we limit the lighted area of each light source
in the ﬁrst approach to one speciﬁc area. This way, we would
not consider different light technologies, which consequently
implies different lighted areas, especially regarding low beams.
But, we keep the opportunity to model different lighted areas
for each vehicle, as will be seen in section V-A. Furthermore,
in reality, there is a ﬂuent transition from a lighted to a
non-lighted area due to effects of scattered light. However,
we will approximate lighted areas by polygons so that lighted
areas end abruptly. Vehicles supporting dynamic low beams,
have also an adjustable yaw and pitch angle. Additionally, each
light source has a predeﬁned energy consumption parameter
so that consumed energy is calculated within the simulation.
C. Driver’s Route
Driver’s route is modeled via linear interpolation of a chain
of points, hereafter referred to as waypoints. A polynomial
interpolation was discarded due the tendency for oscillation
[11]. Furthermore, the driver’s walking speed is adjustable
so that the covered distance is calculated dependent on the
discrete simulation steps.
D. Communication
The propagation of electromagnetic waves highly varies
affected by many inﬂuencing factors. For example, Kwoczek
et al. [12] investigated the inﬂuence of roof curvature, roof
racks and panorama glass roofs on the antenna gain in the
reserved V2V communication frequency band and found inter
alia a high loss of gain caused by glass roof. Hence, it is highly
challenging to consider and simulate all inﬂuencing factors.
We choose the Friis propagation model [13], which models
a deterministic path loss over the distance from sender to
receiver, in order to simulate propagation aspects of wireless
communication. Since we don’t have moving vehicles in
our environment, we discard fading models accounting for
non-deterministic effects of moving objects. When making
our decision, we took into consideration available models
benchmarked by [14] and implemented in the most widely
used network simulator NS-3 [15]. However, we keep the
propagation model exchangeable in our simulation to have the
opportunity to use another loss model.
V. IMPLEMENTATION
A. Coordinate Systems
Our parking environment is represented by a coordinate
system called environmental frame (e-frame), which could
be mapped when needed to the World Geodetic System
1984 (WGS84) or a system related to a parking facility.
Further, each vehicle has a coordinate system (v-frame),
which is attached to the center of the vehicle. Each lighted
area, which is generated by light sources, is represented
by a polygon whose points refer to a coordinate system
called a-frame. Consequently, several a-frames are attached
to a vehicle depending on the vehicle’s conﬁguration. To
represent the driver, we also decided to use a Cartesian
coordinate system (d-frame) instead of a point in order to
have the opportunity to model driver’s orientation. Since we
have two-dimensional (2D) right-handed Cartesian coordinate
systems, rotations happen in the plane around the z-axis, which
is directed out of the plane. All aforementioned frames are
illustrated in Figure 2.
Fig. 2. Schematic illustration of frames involved in the simulation
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-288-2
VEHICULAR 2013 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

B. Coordinate System Transformations
We
use
homogeneous
coordinates
[16]
to
calculate
transformations between as well as within our frames. Since
we have different frames of reference, we precede vectors
with a superscript to show the related system. Transformation
matrices are followed by a subscript to show the source frame
and preceded by a superscript to show the target frame. For
example, to calculate a point V p =

