VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019. ISBN: 978-1-61208-720-7
94
The Design of a Divide-and-Conquer Security Framework
for Autonomous Vehicles
Abdelkader Magdy Shaaban
Center for Digital Safety & Security
Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH
Gieﬁnggasse 4, 1210 Vienna, Austria
Email: abdelkader.shaaban@ait.ac.at
Christoph Schmittner
Center for Digital Safety & Security
Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH
Gieﬁnggasse 4, 1210 Vienna, Austria
Email: christoph.schmittner@ait.ac.at
Arndt Bonitz
Center for Digital Safety & Security
Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH
Gieﬁnggasse 4, 1210 Vienna, Austria
Email: arndt.bonitz@ait.ac.at
Abstract—The vehicular security engineering process endeavors
to build up a secure vehicle with a high level of security
assurance. The well-identiﬁed security ﬂaws and conforming
security countermeasures help to deliver secure vehicles. This
work presents a newly Divide-and-Conquer security framework
which can be integrated with the early stages of the vehicular
development process to emphasize the security-by-design. The
framework proposes to divide the vehicle components into
separate layers and sublayers, according to common security
parameters. Subsequently, the framework applies a series of
security management actions to deﬁne potential threats and
security vulnerabilities in a vehicle; thereupon, it selects a list
of security countermeasures which can mitigate the vehicular’s
risk. Eventually, the framework performs a security veriﬁcation
and validation to ensure that the vehicle has been developed
according to the highest degree of protection level.
Keywords–Threats;
Vulnerabilities;
Security
Requirements;
Risk Assessment; Ontologies; Automotive.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The technology of autonomous vehicles is one of the
leading innovative research topics in the automotive in-
dustry. This technology considers one of the most vivid
application examples of the new Internet of Things (IoT)
applications. The global automotive IoT market is expected
to reach $106.32 billion by 2023 as declared by Netscribes
market research [1]. Autonomous vehicles will play an es-
sential role in lessening accident rates and improving trafﬁc
efﬁciency by providing information about trafﬁc conditions,
and critical situations. According to the World Bank, trafﬁc
congestion can cost developing economies up to 5%, and
for developed economies 0.5-3% of their annual Gross
Domestic Product (GDP). Therefore, the trafﬁc issues cause
to reduce the global economy to $1.4 trillion annually [2].
Fully or highly autonomous vehicles require the co-
operation of all road transport actors, road infrastructure,
and service providers. These parts inﬂuence as a com-
prehensive infrastructure system that requires new reli-
able communication approaches to enable communication
between vehicles-to-vehicles and vehicles-to-infrastructure.
Accordingly, reliable connectivity is the primary require-
ment for processing various states of the motorized vehicle
and accelerating further development [3]. Modern cars can
communicate with smartphones via Bluetooth for various
purposes, such as hands-free calls, navigation, or multi-
media applications. Additionally, new motor cars can con-
nect to the internet to provide additional services such as
unlocking and starting the car remotely [4]. These connec-
tivity methods come at a cost; however, that launches a new
set of cybersecurity attacks. Other interconnected interfaces,
ports, units, or wireless sensors which are directly connected
to the internal bus of the vehicle, that can lead to severe
attack surfaces [2]. The connected cars and the existence
of hackers are now part of life. Therefore, the security must
be involved as an integral part of all vehicle development
phases to be able to address security vulnerabilities in the
early stages of the vehicular development process [2].
Currently, there is no speciﬁc risk management frame-
work available for the automotive domain [3]. This contri-
bution presents the ﬁrst steps into a comprehensive risk
management framework for the current and future vehic-
ular industry. The framework proposes to integrate with
the vehicular development lifecycle. Divide-and-Conquer
inspires the concept of this framework. The Divide-and-
Conquer works recursively by breaking down a problem into
sub-problems of equivalent speciﬁcations until it becomes
simple to be solved. The framework follows the same con-
cept of the Divide-and-Conquer by dividing the vehicle into
separate layers and sublayers according to common security
parameters. Then, the model performs multiple actions
on each layer recursively by identifying assets’ potential
threats, and vulnerabilities. Then, the model evaluates the
risks to differentiate between hundreds or thousands of
risks that needed to be addressed by the precise security
countermeasures. Finally, the framework veriﬁes and val-
idates the selected security countermeasure and suggests
additional security countermeasures which can meet the
actual security needs.
The paper is structured as follows; the related work
on automotive cybersecurity is discussed in section II.
Section III includes the main contribution of this work. The
section discusses the structured phases of the Divide-and-
Conquer security framework. The framework applied to a
self-automated vehicle case study as is presented in sec-
tion IV. The paper concludes with a summary, conclusion,
and presents our plans for future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
A baseline deﬁnition regarding self-driving or partially
automated vehicles has been established by SAE Interna-
tional, which has been founded as the Society of Automotive

VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019. ISBN: 978-1-61208-720-7
95
Engineers. It deﬁnes ﬁve levels of self-driving technology [5].
By this deﬁnition, level zero until two describe varying levels
of acclimatization, ranging from warnings and momentary
assistance to brake/acceleration and steering support. One
example of a more advanced level two vehicle is the Tesla
Autopilot [6], which offers both steering support and driv-
etrain control, but does not yet fall into the SAE level three
until ﬁve categories. Here, an operator is not considered a
"driver" of a vehicle, even when placed in the drivers seat.
A basis for further automation can be extended and
more verbose between vehicles, as well as vehicles and
roadside infrastructure. However, full connectivity among
vehicles and other roadside elements is still under devel-
opment phases [3]. As described by [3], the connectivity
should follow some coordinated model not only based on
the vehicle itself but also with the complete infrastructure.
The term Cooperative Intelligent Transport Services (C-
ITS) summarises these efforts to create a fully integrated
transport system. On the forefront of standardization are,
as described in [7], the Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS)
standards by the European Telecommunications Standards
Institute (ETSI). Also worth mentioning are the Cooperative
ITS standards from ISO [8]. First attempts to test the fea-
sibility of these standards and C-ITS have been made with
the European Cooperative ITS joint development project,
which created the ﬁrst implementation of such a system
spreading across the borders of the Netherlands, Germany,
and Austria.
The diversity in communication protocols and hetero-
geneity of components in vehicles that creates new security
threats can exploit vulnerabilities to attack vehicle [9]. The
work [10] presents several security vulnerabilities, threats,
and suggest a variety of security standards for existing and
future vehicular systems. However, these points are suitable
for particular security conditions in vehicular systems due
to the entirely different attacker motivations, attacker skills,
and various potential damages [11]. To cope with that, secu-
rity objectives have to be deﬁned. The ﬁrst three objectives
are Conﬁdentiality (C), Integrity (I) and Availability (A) [12].
III.
THE ARCHITECTURE MODEL OF DIVIDE-AND-CONQUER
SECURITY FRAMEWORK
The lack of existing security framework in the vehicular
sector motivates the ISO and the SAE organizations to
propose a novel cybersecurity engineering standard for road
vehicles [3]. The standard is still undergoing, and the ﬁrst
version is purposed to be published in 2020 [13].
This contribution looks forward to introducing a new
security framework for the automotive domain. That work
is a part of the Austrian national security research project
"Cybersecurity for Trafﬁc Infrastructure and Road Opera-
tors" (CySiVuS) [14]. The framework strives to ensure vehicle
development life-cycle:
•
Identify the potential threats which threatened the
vehicle.
•
Deﬁne security vulnerabilities that can be exploited
by potential threats.
•
Evaluate the risks of all detected threats and deﬁned
vulnerabilities.
•
Address the unaccepted risks with suitable security
countermeasures.
•
Verify and validate the selected security counter-
measures to ensure, they meet the actual security
protection level.
The security protection level measures of trust that the
Industrial Automation Control Systems (IACS) is free from
vulnerabilities. ISA/IEC 62443-3-3 speciﬁes security levels
that enable a component to mitigate threats for given
security protection level [15]:
•
SL 1: Prevent the unauthorized disclosure of infor-
mation via eavesdropping or accidental exposure.
•
SL 2: Prevent the unauthorized disclosure of infor-
mation to an entity actively searching for it using
simple means with low resources, general skills, and
low motivation.
•
SL 3: Prevent the unauthorized disclosure of infor-
mation to an entity actively searching for it using
sophisticated means with moderate resources and
moderate motivation.
•
SL 4: Prevent the unauthorized disclosure of infor-
mation to an entity actively searching for it using
sophisticated means with extensive resources and
high motivation.
Figure 2 depicts the architectural plan of the Divide-
and-Conquer security framework. The framework consists
of ﬁve main phases (i.e., Security Layers, Risk Analysis,
Risk Assessment, Risk Treatment, and Security Assurance).
These phases are iterative processes and could be started
at any separate stages in the process life-cycle, as shown
in Figure 1. The following subsections canvass the task of
each phase.
Figure 1. Divide-and-Conquer security framework lifecycle
A. Security Layers
The framework organizes the vehicle into four separate
layers. Each layer contains components with common cri-
teria such as type of components, security aspects, security

VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019. ISBN: 978-1-61208-720-7
96
Figure 2. Vehicular security framework architecture model
protection levels, etc. This work proposes to classify the
components according to the types of components such
as Sensors, Control Units, Actuators, etc. Additionally, some
components need more security concerns; consequently,
it is proposed to accommodate these components into
sublayers according to a speciﬁc security protection level.
a)Layer One: Sensors and Interfaces: this layer con-
tains all sensors, ports, and communication interfaces
which communicate internal vehicle components together
or with the external environment. Some components can be
stacked into equivalent sublayers, according to a speciﬁc
security protection level. For example, internal interfaces
which are connected directly with internal units in the ve-
hicle do not need a highly-level of security protection; where
external communication interfaces which communicate the
vehicle with the external world that require a higher level
of security to keep the vehicle secure.
b)Layer Two: Communication and Network:
this
layer encompasses all communication devices, which allow
the internal vehicular units to communicate together within
the vehicular boundary. Moreover, the external networking
units are organized as highly protected sublayers, which
needs more protection concerns.
c) Layer Three: Control Units: this layer has different
types of electronic control units (ECUs) in a vehicle. Several
ECU units have a list of security parameters (i.e., Tamper
Protection, Authentication, Secure Boot, ASIL Rating, etc.)
which are used to deﬁne the security mechanism for each
ECU component. Furthermore, the model uses these pa-
rameters to classify the vehicular ECUs according to speciﬁc
protection level need to be achieved for each unit.
d)Layer Four: Road Infrastructure: as mentioned pre-
viously, fully automated vehicles need assistance from the
road infrastructure, such as Road Side Units (RSUs), Com-
munication Infrastructure, Trafﬁc Controls, or Intelligent
Transportation Systems (ITS) [16]. This layer accommodates
all components related to the trafﬁc infrastructure and
classiﬁes them into sublayers according to the degree of
protection level.
B. Risk Analysis
The risk analysis is an activity that aims to deﬁne the
relationships between threats and the vulnerabilities which
are threatened the vehicle. These relationships establish a
set of classes and subclasses to decompose threats scenario
into possible attack paths [17]. This activity consists of three
main stages as Asset Identiﬁcation, Threats Analysis, and
Vulnerability Analysis.
1) Asset Identiﬁcation: an asset in a vehicle considered
as data, device, component, or either a physical or a logical
object. The assets identiﬁcation process concerns with the
following tasks [18]:
•
Create an asset record.
•
Identify asset information.
•
Deﬁne the topological structure of interconnected
assets.
2) Threat Analysis: in the vehicular domain, the threat
analysis is an activity that identiﬁes the potential negative
actions that affect the security mechanism in vehicles. The
threat analysis process can be divided into the following
essential steps:

VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019. ISBN: 978-1-61208-720-7
97
1)
Model the vehicle with all security related assump-
tions and necessary information.
2)
Model potential adversaries with there capabilities,
actions, tactics, techniques, and procedures.
3)
Apply the threat model to the system model to
identify potential threats.
4)
Evaluate all identiﬁed threats and decide on the
risk treatment.
5)
Update the system model with the security coun-
termeasures.
6)
Repeat step 3 in order to identify missed or new
threats.
In the course of our research, we developed the Threat
Management Tool (ThreatGet) [19]. ThreatGet identiﬁes and
understands potential threats in the automotive domain. It
helps to:
•
Identify threats.
•
Detect security vulnerabilities.
•
Evaluate the risks of the identiﬁed security issues.
ThreatGet has a threat catalog contains the most com-
mon potential threats in the vehicular domain. The threat
catalog is managed by ThreatGet to ensure a wide range
of potential threats is considered. The following source
documents were used to develop the threat catalog:
•
Threat Modelling for Automotive Security Analy-
sis [20].
•
Connected Cars - Threats, Vulnerabilities and Their
Impact [12].
•
Threat Landscape and Good Practice Guide for
Internet Infrastructure [21].
•
A survey of Remote Automotive Attack Surfaces [22].
The tool classiﬁes the potential threats into six main
groups according to the STRIDE model (i.e., Spooﬁng,
Tampering, Repudiation, Information Disclosure, Denial of
Service (DoS), and Elevation of Privilege) [23].
3) Vulnerability Analysis: the vehicle vulnerability analy-
sis process concerns with exploring, deﬁning, identifying,
and prioritizing vulnerabilities or security weaknesses in
vehicles. The researcher in the Austrian Institute of technol-
ogy developed a vulnerability analysis tool is called Failure
Modes, Vulnerability, and Effect Analysis (FMVEA) [24].
FMVEA is based on the Failure Mode and Effect Analy-
sis (FMEA) [25] and extends the standard approach with
security-related threat modes [26].
C. Risk Assessment
Risk assessment is an activity for evaluating the degree
of risks. This activity is based on the parameters of impact
and likelihood, which are used to evaluate the speciﬁc risk
level. This phase takes place after it collects all details
about vehicular components, threats, and vulnerabilities
which are identiﬁed and detected by the previous phase
(Risk Analysis). The next subsections discuss the likelihood,
impact, and risk evaluation brieﬂy.
1) Likelihood Evaluation: the evaluation of likelihood
considers the signiﬁcant factor for the risk evaluation pro-
cess. The likelihood assessment is explained in details in
[27]. However, this work proposes four different aspects of
the likelihood [3]:
•
Assumed attacker capabilities.
•
Ease of gaining information about the vehicle.
•
Reachability and accessibility of vehicular data.
•
Tailor-made equipment to attack vehicles.
Table I shows the parameters of the likelihood evalua-
tion. The attacker capabilities are classiﬁed according to the
skills of the hacker. The data reachability and availability
are the main parameters of this evaluation process, which
deﬁne how easy it is for an attacker to get data. The attacker
could use tailor-made devices to attack vehicles; the last row
in this Table shows the likelihood values of these outcomes
to occur. These parameters are explained in [3].
2) Impact Assessment:
the impact assessment process is
an activity that aims to evaluate risk when potential threats
and security vulnerabilities are deﬁned. In the automotive
domain, it is important to ensure that different types of
impacts do not damage the vehicle or cause other accident
scenarios:
•
Causes immediate damage to the environment or
human lives (safety).
•
Causes the loss of control over personal information
(privacy).
•
Causes ﬁnancial damage (ﬁnance).
•
Negatively impacts the operation and trafﬁc ﬂow
(operation).
Table II discusses the impact levels of these four accei-
dent scenarios. The parameter values of these impact levels
are discussed in [3].
•
Firstly, the direct consequences (i.e., the operational
impact would also impact emergency services and
could, cause damage to human lives).
•
Secondly, assesses the impact evaluation on users
and society higher than the impact on the manufac-
turer. That means the rates of the safety impacts and
the ﬁnancial impacts for users or society are higher
prioritized than for organizations. That is because
the community trusts the transportation system.
3) Risk Evaluation:
this phase uses the estimated pa-
rameters of likelihood and impact, as described previously.
Then, it performs a risk assessment methodology to calcu-
late the exact risk level. This work applies the well-known
risk assessment formula as described in (1).
Risk = T hreat ∗V ulnerabilit y ∗Consequence
(1)
where:
T hreat ∗V ulnerabilit y = Likelihood
Consequence
= Impact
The formula evaluates the risk level of each detected
threats based on the parameters of Table I (likelihood)

VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019. ISBN: 978-1-61208-720-7
98
TABLE I. PROPOSED LIKELIHOOD PARAMETERS
Parameters
Values
Capabilities
Amateur
(4)
Mechanic,
Repair shop, etc.
(3)
Hacker,
Automotive expert,
etc. (2)
Expert
etc. (1)
Availability
Public (4)
Information for
Maintenance
Availability (3)
information for
maintenance
availability (2)
information for ECUs’
company availability (1)
Reachability
Untrusted Network
(4)
Private Network
(3)
Part time
Accessible (2)
Physical Access
(1)
Financial
Standard Devices
(4)
Specialize Devices
(3)
Tailor-Made
Device (2)
Multiple
Tailor-made
devices (1)
TABLE II. IMPACT LEVELS [3]
Impact Levels
User/Society
Manufacturer
Safety
1
-
Operational
3
4
Privacy
2
3
Financial
3
4
and Table II (impact). The results are plotted on a risk
scale, is called "Risk Curve," as depicted in Figure 3. This
work expects that the Tolerable Value (TV) is equal to two.
That means all values (risk evaluation results) above this
threshold (TV), need to be addressed by suitable security
countermeasure(s) to mitigate risk.
Figure 3. Risk mitigation curve
For example, the point T1 on the Risk Curve is con-
sidered as a threat, and its severity is Extreme. Therefore,
security countermeasure(s) apply to mitigate that risk into
an acceptable security level and to reach the Security Target
(ST). Once the security countermeasures are applied, T1
moves into a new level of risk; this state is called Security
Achieved (SA), which implies the current state of the secu-
rity level. The process repeated until the SA=ST otherwise,
other security countermeasures, have to be applied to
decrease the risk further to a satisfactory security level. In
this case, these security countermeasures are called Security
Enhancement (SE)
D. Risk Treatment
Selecting the security countermeasures process is con-
sidered a signiﬁcant challenge in the system development
process. This phase plays an important role to address
potential threats and security vulnerabilities to keep the risk
always low. In the course of our research; we developed
a Model-based Security Requirement Management Tool
(MORETO) for managing a vast number of different security
requirements. MORETO reuses different features driven by
concepts and knowledge of system modeling.
The tool plays a vital role in this work for generating
a list of security countermeasure for a large number of
different components. MORETO receives the data generated
from the previous phases, such as risk evaluation of the de-
tected threats and vulnerabilities. Then, it generates security
countermeasures according to the speciﬁc security target
which needs to be achieved. MORETO is an Enterprise
Architect (EA) plugin for managing the IEC 62443 security
standard [28].
E. Security Assurance
In the vehicular domain, the Security Assurance (SA) is a
method of guarantee vehicles operate at a high level of se-
curity protection. For that purpose, the authors introduced
a newly ontology security testing algorithm (OnSecta). On-
Secta generates an ontological representation of all detected
threats, vulnerabilities, and selected security countermea-
sures. The algorithm performs a series of inference rules
to verify that the selected security countermeasures are
handled the detected security ﬂaws. Then, OnSecta validates
these countermeasures to a speciﬁc security protection
level. The algorithm manages numerous security coun-
termeasures which are stored in an ontological structure.
OnSecta uses the stored data to select additional security
countermeasures when the selected ones have not met the
needed security level.
IV.
CASE STUDY: SELF-AUTOMATED VEHICLE
Automotive driving is an essential aspect of future trans-
portation. Develop a fully automated vehicle, of the mobility
system for people and goods, is demanded. According to
the growth of the vehicular industry, new security issues
arise. The cybersecurity is considered an integral part of
the vehicular development process. A secure vehicle can be
designed and developed if security issues are well-identiﬁed,
and security countermeasures are correctly deﬁned. This
case study shows, how our contribution can be conducted
in the early stages of the vehicular development lifecycle to
ensure security-by-design.
Figure 4 depicts a self-driving scenario. It shows two
vehicles A and B communicate together throughout a V2X
gateway. The vehicles receive trafﬁc updates from multiple

VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019. ISBN: 978-1-61208-720-7
99
road units over the V2X gateway. The vehicles A and B
contain multiple sensors, actuators, electronic control units,
internal gateways, various communication protocols, and
various communication interfaces. The red links represent
the highest risks points in this example, which communicate
vehicles with external environments.
All these components are divided into four layers (i.e.,
Sensors and Interfaces, Communication and Network, Con-
trol Units, and Road Infrastructure) according to the Divide-
and-Conquer security framework as described in Sec-
tion III-A. The framework deﬁnes the security issues in this
example by applying risk analysis methodology as described
in Section ( III-B). It is essential to evaluate the detected
security issues to determine the exact risk, as explained
in Section ( III-C). Furthermore, it determines the security
countermeasure to address the detected security ﬂaws, as
discussed in Section ( III-D). Finally, the security framework
veriﬁes and validates the reached security level to ensure
that the SA = ST as considered in Section ( III-E). The
following subsections explain how the framework applies
a series of security methodologies to achieve an acceptable
level of security protection and to deliver a secure vehicle.
A. Risk Analysis
This phase applies ThreatGet on that example, and
without changs in the security parameters of components,
the tool detects over 300 potential threats. Currently, mod-
ern vehicles have an average of 60 to 100 sensors, and
communication interfaces on board [29]; plus, around 150
Automotive ECUs [30]. Therefore, the number of potential
threats in fully automated vehicles is expected to be thou-
sands.
ThreatGet classiﬁes the detected threats according to
the STRIDE model. Table III reviews the classes and the
numbers of the identiﬁed potential threats.
TABLE III. THE CLASS AND NUMBERS OF THE DETECTED POTENTIAL
THREATS ACCORDING TO SREIDE MODEL
Threat Types
Numbers
Denial of Service
44
Elevation of Privilege
43
Information Disclosure
88
Repudiation
21
Spooﬁng
80
Tampering
50
Afterward, the FMVEA tool applied to this example to
perform vulnerabilities analysis. The FMVEA deﬁnes the
vehicles and the road infrastructure as environments. The
environment is a container that has components as depicts
in Figure 5.
The FMVEA deﬁnes security vulnerabilities based on a
set of rules to deﬁne the structural behavior of components
in a given model. In this example, these rules need to be
deﬁned ﬁrst. In this example, the following rules are applied
to detect security vulnerabilities:
a)Secure Remote Access Point:
Rule:
RemoteAccessPoint.attributes(Authentication
=
false).hasAncestor(vehicle)
Description: If the remote access point of a vehicle is
not secured by Authentication this Access Point could be
exploited as weakness in a vehicle.
b)External Gateway Update Frequency and Security:
Rule:
Connection.from(InfrastructureGateway)
.to(VtoXGateway).attributes(UpdateFrequency>10s,
Encryption=false)
Description:
External Gateway must communicate in a
safe manner over an encrypted connection.
Figure 6 illustrates the detected security vulnerabilities
by FMVEA. The red color represents the venerable compo-
nents in this example,
B. Risk Assessment
This phase evaluates risks based on parameter values
of the likelihood and impact level, as explained in Table I
and Table II respectively. The assessed risk is classiﬁed
as one of the primary four risk levels (i.e., extreme, high,
medium, or low). The evaluation process focuses only on
the highly valued components from the attacker viewpoint,
which need a high level of security protection. Figure 7
shows the results of the risks evaluation process of that
example.
C. Risk Treatmeant
The MORETO tool plays a vital role in this work to
cover the detected security gaps with suitable security coun-
termeasures to mitigate the unacceptable risks. MORETO
automatically selects security countermeasures according to
the detected threats and vulnerabilities for each affected
unit separately, as shown in Figure 8. The ﬁgure displays
the elected security countermeasures of the V2X Gateway
based on the IEC 62443-4-2 security series [31].
D. Security Assurance
The last step is to validate and verify the selected
security countermeasures, which are selected by MORETO
to coved security ﬂaws in this example. OnSecta is applied
to verify and validate the security protection level. It deﬁnes
the ontological representation of threats, vulnerabilities, and
countermeasures, as shown in Figure 9. Then, it applies
various reasoning rules to validate and verify the selected
security countermeasures and suggests further ones to meet
the actual security level.
V.
SUMMARY, CONCLUSION, & FUTURE WORK
The paper has introduced a novel comprehensive se-
curity framework for autonomous vehicles. The framework
aims to be a part of the early stages of the vehicular
developments phases to detect security ﬂaws and address
these issues with proper security countermeasures. It di-
vides the vehicle into four layers according to the types
of components. Each layer contains other sublayers which
accommodate components that need a high level of protec-
tion. Afterward, the model uses the ThreatGet and FMVEA
to deﬁne the potential threats and the vulnerabilities in
a vehicle. Then, the framework calculates the likelihood
and determines the impact levels of the identiﬁed security
issues. The risk treatment phase selects security counter-
measures to mitigate the overall risk. Finally, the OnSecta
algorithm veriﬁes the security countermeasures to ensure
that all detected threats and vulnerabilities have been han-
dled; additionally, validates the security countermeasures

VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019. ISBN: 978-1-61208-720-7
100
Figure 4. Dataﬂow between vehicles A, B, and infrastructure units
Figure 5. Automotive vehicle example model using FMVEA
to meet the actual security level needed. Future work will
include the following points:
•
Improve the threat database of ThreatGet.
•
Integrate additional security countermeasures with
MORETO’s database like as ISO 27000 for informa-
tion security management systems.
•
Improve the risk evaluation methodology to be
suitable for complex models.
•
Enhance the OnSecta building blocks to manage
more characteristics and relationships of threats,
vulnerabilities, and security countermeasures.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The
research
project
"Cybersicherheit
für
Verkehrsinfrastruktur-
und
Straßenbetreiber"
(CySiVuS,
in English: "Cybersecurity for transport infrastructure and
road operators") (Project-Nr. 865081) is supported and
partially funded by the Austrian National Security Research
Program KIRAS (Federal Ministry for Transport, Innovation

VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019. ISBN: 978-1-61208-720-7
101
Figure 6. Affected elements and connections regarding rule the applied rules
Figure 7. Statistical percentage of risk levels
Figure 8. List of IEC 62443-4-2 security requirements of the V2X Gateway
and Technology (BMVIT) and Austrian Research Promotion
Agency (FFG) 2017).
REFERENCES
[1]
Netscribe Blog, “Applications of IoT in the automotive industry
| netscribes blog.” [Online]. Available: https://www.netscribes.com/
the-present-and-future-role-of-automotive-iot/ [accessed on: 2019-
05-19].
[2]
Carrie Cox and Andrew Hart, “How autonomous vehicles could
relieve or worsen trafﬁc congestion,” Here Technologies, Tech. Rep.,
2017.
[3]
C. Schmittner, M. Latzenhofer, A. M. Shaaban, and M. Hofer, “A pro-
posal for a comprehensive automotive cybersecurity reference archi-
tecture,” in VEHICULAR 2018, The Seventh International Conference
on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications,
2018.
Figure 9. The ontological representation of threats, vulnerabilities, and
security requirements
[4]
A. Birni and T. van Roermund, “A multi-layer vehicle security frame-
work,” BU Automotive, NXP Semiconductors, Automotive Security,
2016.
[5]
P.
WARRENDALE,
“SAE
international
releases
updated
visual
chart
for
its
"Levels
of
Driving
Automation"
standard
for
self-driving
vehicles,”
2018.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sae.org/news/press-room/2018/12/sae-international-
releases-updated-visual-chart-for-its-%E2%80%9Clevels-of-
driving-automation%E2%80%9D-standard-for-self-driving-vehicles
[accessed on: 2019-05-10].
[6]
Electrek,
“Tesla
autopilot,”
2019.
[Online].
Available:
https://
electrek.co/guides/tesla-autopilot/ [accessed on: 2019.05.18].
[7]
L. Chen and C. Englund, “Cooperative its - eu standards to ac-
celerate cooperative mobility,” in 2014 International Conference on
Connected Vehicles and Expo (ICCVE).
IEEE, 2014, pp. 681–686.
[8]
ISO, “Iso 17427-1:2018 intelligent transport systems – cooperative its
– part 1: Roles and responsibilities in the context of co-operative
its architecture(s),” International Organization for Standardization,
Standard, 2018.
[9]
A. M. Shaaban, C. Schmittner, T. Gruber, A. B. Mohamed, G. Quirch-
mayr, and E. Schikuta, “Cloudwot-a reference model for knowledge-
based iot solutions,” in Proceedings of the 20th International Con-
ference on Information Integration and Web-based Applications &
Services.
ACM, 2018, pp. 272–281.

VEHICULAR 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019. ISBN: 978-1-61208-720-7
102
[10]
Wolf, Marko and Daly, PW, Security Engineering for Vehicular IT
Systems, may 2009 ed.
Vieweg and Teubner, 2009.
[11]
M. Wolf and M. Scheibel, “A systematic approach to a qualiﬁed
security risk analysis for vehicular it systems,” Automotive-Safety &
Security 2012, 2012.
[12]
S. Strobl, D. Hofbauer, C. Schmittner, S. Maksuti, M. Tauber, and
J. Delsing, “Connected cars - threats, vulnerabilities and their im-
pact,” in 2018 IEEE Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems (ICPS).
IEEE,
2018, pp. 375–380.
[13]
C. Schmittner, G. Griessnig, and Z. Ma, “Status of the development
of isosae 21434,” in European Conference on Software Process Im-
provement.
Springer, 2018, pp. 504–513.
[14]
KIRAS
Security
Research,
“Cyber
security
for
transport
infrastructure- and road operators (cysivus).” [Online]. Available:
https://www.kiras.at/en/ﬁnanced-proposals/detail/d/cyber-
security-for-transport-infrastructure-and-road-operators-cysivus/
[accessed on: 2019.05.02].
[15]
IEC 62443-3-3, “Industrial communication networks - network and
system security - part 3-3: System requirements and security levels,”
International Electrotechnical Commission, Tech. Rep., 2013.
[16]
S. Mehar, S. M. Senouci, A. Kies, and M. M. Zoulikha, “An optimized
roadside units (rsu) placement for delay-sensitive applications in
vehicular networks,” in 2015 12th Annual IEEE Consumer Commu-
nications and Networking Conference (CCNC).
IEEE, 2015, pp. 121–
127.
[17]
ISO-SAE 21434, “Road vehicles – cybersecurity engineering cd,”
2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.iso.org/standard/70918.html
[accessed on: 2019.05.16].
[18]
Oracle Asset Identiﬁcation, “Overview to Asset Identiﬁcation,” 2013.
[Online].
Available:
https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E26228_01/doc.93/
e21539/ [accessed on: 2019.04.28].
[19]
Sparx
Services
CE,
“Threat
Modeling
with
STRIDE,”
2019.
[Online]. Available: https://cybersecurity.sparxservices.eu [accessed
on: 2019.05.21].
[20]
Z. Ma and C. Schmittner, “Threat modeling for automotive security
analysis,” Advanced Science and Technology Letters, vol. 139, 2016,
pp. 333–339.
[21]
C. Lévy-Bencheton, L. Marinos, R. Mattioli, T. King, C. Dietzel, and
J. Stumpf, “Threat landscape and good practice guide for internet
infrastructure,” EU Agency for Network and Information Security
(ENISA), 2015.
[22]
C. Miller and C. Valasek, “A survey of remote automotive attack
surfaces,” black hat USA, vol. 2014, 2014, p. 94.
[23]
A. Shostack, “Experiences threat modeling at microsoft,” vol. 413,
2008.
[24]
C. Schmittner, Z. Ma, and P. Smith, “Fmvea for safety and security
analysis of intelligent and cooperative vehicles,” in International
Conference on Computer Safety, Reliability, and Security.
Springer,
2014, pp. 282–288.
[25]
I. E. Commission et al., “Iec 60812: Analysis techniques for system
reliability-procedure for failure mode and effects analysis (fmea),”
Geneva, Switzerland: International Electrotechnical Commission,
2006, pp. 1–93.
[26]
C. Schmittner, Z. Ma, E. Schoitsch, and T. Gruber, “A case study
of fmvea and chassis as safety and security co-analysis method for
automotive cyber-physical systems,” in Proceedings of the 1st ACM
Workshop on Cyber-Physical System Security. ACM, 2015, pp. 69–80.
[27]
C. Schmittner, Z. Ma, C. Reyes, O. Dillinger, and P. Puschner, “Using
sae j3061 for automotive security requirement engineering,” in In-
ternational Conference on Computer Safety, Reliability, and Security.
Springer, 2016, pp. 157–170.
[28]
A. M. Shaaban, E. Kristen, and C. Schmittner, “Application of iec
62443 for iot components,” in International Conference on Computer
Safety, Reliability, and Security.
Springer, 2018, pp. 214–223.
[29]
Automotive Sensors and Electronics Expo 2017, “Automotive sensors
and electronics expo 2017,” 4th Annual Conference and Exhibition,
2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.automotivesensors2017.com
[accessed on: 2019.04.27].
[30]
embitel, “ECU is a three letter answer for all the innovative features
in your car: Know how the story unfolded,” 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://www.embitel.com/blog/embedded-blog/automotive-
control-units-development-innovations-mechanical-to-electronics
[accessed on: 2019.05.15].
[31]
IEC 62443-3-2, “IEC 62443 security for industrial automation and
control systems - part 3-2: Security risk assessment and system
design.” ISA, Security Standard Committee Draft for Vote (CDV) IEC
62443-3-2 ED1.

