The Charge Collector System  
A New NFC and Smartphone-based Toll Collection System
João R. Dias, Arnaldo S. R. Oliveira, João Nuno Matos 
Departamento de Electrónica, Telecomunicações e Informática, Universidade de Aveiro 
Instituto de Telecomunicações 
Aveiro, Portugal 
(jmrd@ua.pt, arnaldo.oliveira@ua.pt, matos@ua.pt)  
 
Abstract — This paper proposes a new system to collect tolls 
on open road tolling (ORT) infrastructures. The actual 
Electronic Toll Collection (ETC) systems do not fulfill 
fundamental user requirements, such as interoperability and 
portability between systems and road operators (in the same or 
different countries), as well as advanced toll logging and 
reporting (capabilities ensuring user privacy, an interesting 
feature in car rental or sharing use cases). The C2S is a work in 
progress project that will provide some features, such as flexible 
payment options, recording of incurred tolls and make them 
available to the end user and management entities, exploring a 
synergy of technologies in ETC scenario, namely Dedicated Short 
Range Communication (DSRC), Global Navigation Satellite 
System (GNSS), Near Field Communication (NFC) and 
smartphone-based mobile applications. This system is also an 
approach to interoperable European ETC solutions, in a way 
that uses DSRC and GNSS-based solutions together. 
Keywords— Electronic toll collection; EETS; DSRC; GNSS; 
multitechnology OBU. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Since the 60’s, the Electronic Toll Collection (ETC) is used 
around the world and, on last decade, it is becoming more and 
more pervasive [1]. The benefits of ETC associated to free 
flow systems are well known and the actual trends point to the 
creation of Open Road Tolling (ORT) infrastructures, i.e., 
roads where tolls are entirely electronic with little or no impact 
on traffic flow. The two main technologies used on ORT are 
based on:  
• Dedicated 
Short 
Range 
Communication 
(DSRC) 
transponders [2], using 5.8 GHz microwave technology; 
• Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) with Global 
System for Mobile Communications (GSM) [3], i.e., 
satellite positioning coupled with mobile communications. 
 
Besides its advantages, the current ORT systems do not 
address conveniently the following issues: 
• The flexibility of the bank account that can be used for toll 
payment, i.e., currently, users have always to pay by the 
same bank account, which can be an issue in some cases;  
• The payment information/receipts or toll logs are not 
readily available to the user or management entities. In 
some cases, such as rent-a-car or car sharing companies, 
there is a need to know if costumers used tolls and 
payment has been done. In some systems, the information 
or toll receipt takes 48 hours to be available [4]; 
• The lack of an On-Board Unit (OBU) user interface that 
could provide road information and support for 
implementing Dynamic Road User Charging (DRUC) [5] 
systems. On current systems it is impossible to apply 
different prices on several users in real-time because there 
is no user interface to say how much he/she has to pay [6]; 
• The problems related to interoperability between different 
systems. If a user travels abroad, she/he cannot use ETC 
automatically without buying the local OBU [7]; 
• In case of GNSS-GSM based infrastructures, the toll 
companies have to use GSM so they are dependent of 
mobile operators [8]. 
These issues constitute a set of challenges that motivate the 
researching on new technologies and tolling mechanisms. 
This paper starts with the motivation to this work, i.e., what 
is the problem that this solution solves. Next, the architecture 
and the utilization methods are described, as well as the OBU 
operation. Then, we show a first step in the development of the 
proof-of-concept, the technologies and challenges related to its 
implementation. Finally, two user cases are presented, one 
related to the interoperability between systems and the other 
targeted to a car sharing system. 
II. 
MOTIVATION 
The C2S proposed in this paper is specially developed to 
ORT infrastructures and it consists of a new OBU that 
integrates the most used technologies on toll collection: DSRC 
and GNSS, with a smartphone mobile application, providing 
new features to the users, such as: 
• A mobile application with a user-friendly interface, which 
provides several types of information (e.g. road prices, 
best routes, tolls to pay, selection of the payment method / 
bank account, etc.); 
• A new payment method based in NFC, that many believe to 
be widely used in a near future – user simply touches the 
OBU with a smartphone and collects all the bills to pay. 
Moreover, gathering the characteristic of this system proposal, 
there is an opportunity to establish a new mechanism of 
interoperability between the different technologies used on toll 
collection [7], since the C2S OBU proposal combine the two 
technologies used on most of the actual systems. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-288-2
VEHICULAR 2013 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

III. 
C2S OVERVIEW AND ARCHITECTURE 
The idea to create this system arises from the expectable 
demand for mobile applications and NFC technology to pay 
bills. This system proposal breaks the current paradigms, 
introducing the possibility of flexible payment after incurring 
on tolls. 
In most ORT infrastructures this system will follow the 
process illustrated in Figure 1: the C2S enabled vehicle acts as 
an OBU that is not recognized by the conventional DSRC 
tolling system. When it passes on tollbooths, the enforcement 
system is triggered and the Automatic License Plate 
Recognition (ALPR) takes a picture; however, the C2S OBU 
saved the toll and it provides the possibility to pay in a legal 
time period. 
C2S OBU
DSRC RSU
Enforcement Picture
C2S
NFC
1
2
3
4
 
Figure 1 – Utilization steps. 
 
So, basically, there is an OBU, called C2S, that collects the 
tolls while the user is driving. After the travel, the user can 
transfer all the toll logs to a smartphone (with NFC) by a 
simple touch and pay the tolls via a mobile application, in a 
legal time period (e.g., one week). 
 
Although it seems awkward, there are some niche markets 
interested in a log and post payment, as discussed bellow in use 
case scenarios. 
A. OBU Architecture 
The base of C2S is a new OBU composed of several 
blocks, as illustrated in Figure 2, and implemented on an 
embedded 
computer 
that 
provides 
General 
Purpose 
Input/Output (GPIO) and USB ports to connect with a GPS 
receiver, a DSRC Beacon Service Table (BST) detector and the 
NFC interface. The embedded computer runs several processes 
to control those peripherals. On the block diagram, in Figure 2, 
we also included a smartphone as an element of the system 
because it is where the user interface and a mobile application 
which communicates with the system OBU via NFC are 
implemented. 
(1) Embedded 
Computer
(2) GPS Receiver
(3) BST Detector
(4) NFC Interface 
Module
(5) Smartphone
USB - serial
GPIO
GPIO
 
Figure 2 – Overall on-board system block diagram. 
The main block is an (1) embedded computer that receives 
all information from a (2) GPS locator and a (3) BST detector. 
The GPS locator is responsible for tracking the vehicle and 
setting time/date when the OBU is turned on. The BST is the 
first message received from the Road Side Unit (RSU) in a 
DSRC toll system. Its detector is a small radio device that 
triggers a signal to the embedded computer when the vehicle 
passes in a toll. Finally, this OBU can establish communication 
with a smartphone (with a mobile application) via NFC. 
B. OBU Operation 
The OBU operation is divided into several steps, as 
illustrated in Figure 3: 
• When the system starts, it sets the time and date via GPS 
and determines if the vehicle is on a DSRC or GNSS/GSM 
infrastructure; 
• In case of a DSRC infrastructure, when a vehicle (with this 
OBU) passes in a toll, it detects a BST and saves its 
location via GPS receiver; If the vehicle is in a 
GNSS/GSM infrastructure, it will track the location and 
find the position of virtual tolls; 
• If the toll is valid to pay, the system saves the information 
about date and tollbooth location; 
• During the road trip, the user has only to touch his 
smartphone with the OBU and the data containing the tolls 
to pay is transmitted to the mobile. So the user can check 
via mobile application how much he has to pay for the 
tolls; 
Finally, the user has to pay the tolls in a legal time period, via a 
web service. 
Wait for a BST
Track GPS
Toll 
detected
?
Log Toll
Valid Toll
?
Query a 
DataBase
Start
Set Time, Date 
and Location
DSRC
Infrastructure
?
no
no
no
yes
yes
yes
Physical 
Memory
Save Log on 
NFC Device 
start connection
Conﬁgure NFC
Transfer 
Logs to 
SPhone
Tolls 
were 
payed? 
Delete associated logs
NFC Process
 
Figure 3 - Operational flow diagram. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-288-2
VEHICULAR 2013 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

The web service component and mobile application are 
outside of the scope of this paper, but it is worth to mention 
that the ability to specify the payment method, the bank 
account and other options can be provided. 
IV. 
PROOF OF CONCEPT IMPLEMENTATION 
To build a proof-of-concept prototype, in order to test the 
functionality of the system, we chose a cheap and widely used 
computer called Raspberry Pi (RPi) model B as host computer 
and a GPS receiver [9] attached via USB-Serial was employed, 
as illustrated in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4 – Prototype - RPi, USB GPS Receiver and BST Detector. 
Running on Raspberry Pi is the lightweight and flexible 
Arch Linux distribution.  As already mentioned, there are three 
peripherals on the system: BST detector, NFC module and 
GPS receiver. The BST detector simply triggers an interrupt 
via GPIO pins. One possibility to connect the NFC module is 
via 
RPI 
UART 
(Universal 
Asynchronous 
Receiver/Transmitter). Finally, to communicate with the GPS 
receiver, it was used the GPS daemon (gpsd) service. It is a 
service that monitors the GPS receiver organizing the sensor 
data (like location or velocity) to be queried by a client session.  
A. GNSS – GPS receiver 
The gpsd service is widely used because it is easier to parse 
information compared with NMEA 0183 (National Marine 
Electronic Application specification) emitted by most GPSes 
[10]. On the other hand, it recognizes different sensors and it 
can sniff all the incoming data with zero configurations, it is 
almost plug and play. 
Although the gpsd is an open-source project, it has quality 
and it is an audited code, which already won the Good Code 
Grant from the Alliance for Code Excellence [11]. 
Figure 5 illustrates the dataflow diagram. When the sensor 
receives a signal it fed the packet sniffer, which has the job to 
tell core library that contains payload to be interpreted. The 
driver determines the type of packet information. When the 
packet reaches the end, the data is sent to an exporter to be 
available to a client. The main exporter uses sockets where an 
object is generated in JSON and it is provided to all the clients 
that are watching the device. There is also the option to export 
data via Shared Memory or via D-Bus [12]. 
 
Figure 5- GPS dataflow [12]. 
The gpsd service includes a linkable C service library that 
encourages developers to use it on their applications. So, the 
objective is to implement a program, which launches a process 
that configures and creates a client session.  
On GNSS/GSM infrastructure, the client session will track 
the GPS and compare its location with the fix locations of 
virtual tollbooth. Here, there is an implementation challenge. 
To increase the efficiency of the system it is important to 
define a strategy of how to determine if the vehicle incurred on 
tolls. One option is to use a data structure that sorts the location 
of tollbooths by route, i.e., tracking few points it determines in 
which route the vehicle is and predicts which is the location of 
the next tollbooth, as illustrated in Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6 – Route Tollbooth. 
The process has a cache memory where the recent positions are 
saved and compared to each other. For example, sampling two 
points: P1 and P2, illustrated in Figure 6, it is possible to define 
a path, to assign it to a route (A8) and then to predict the 
probable next tollbooth (T3). This approach is in progress and 
under study. 
 
On DSRC infrastructures, we do not have this problem. 
Due to BST detector, a flag is raised when the vehicle passes 
on tollbooth. So, a process logs the position of tollbooth and 
subsequently compares this with a database of tollbooth 
locations, to infer the validity of the logging and offer other 
type of information to the user (price, etc.). 
B. General purpose Input/Output pins 
 
Using the GPIO and a simple electronic circuit to control a 
Radio Frequency module, it is possible to activate an interrupt 
a line of the host computer (Raspberry Pi). 
 
Finally, the GPIO will be also used to connect to a NFC 
device via an UART to subsequently communicate with the 
smartphone mobile application. The goal is to implement a 
communication based on NFC, because it is a user-friendly 
technology and, at the same time, secure, as it implies that 
anyone who wants read, the data of the OBU, has to touch on it 
so she/he has to be inside of the vehicle. 
 
Figure 7 – Primary embedded computer processes. 
GPS Tracker 
BST Detector 
SPhone Talker 
Main 
T4 
A8 
N17 
P2 
P1 
T3 
T2 
T1 
A8 
N3 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-288-2
VEHICULAR 2013 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

 
Briefly, there are several processes: GPS Tracker, BST 
Detector and Smartphone Talker. These support the main 
process, illustrated in Figure 7, and together implement the 
algorithm presented on operational diagram from Figure 3. 
V. 
USE CASE SCENARIO 
 
In some countries, there are user needs that are not satisfied 
on ORT infrastructures due to the limitations already 
mentioned. The two issues already listed are the lack of 
interoperability and a factual case related to car rental or car 
sharing.  
A. Interoperability 
One of the most unreasonable restrictions on ETC from the 
user perspective is the lack of interoperability between 
distinctive ETC systems of different countries, illustrated in 
Figure 8. For example, in Europe, there are systems based on 
same technology (DSRC) and there are countries that use 
different systems, like Germany that uses GNSS-GSM [13]. In 
both cases there is no evidence of interoperability between 
systems. If a driver wants to go from Nice to Aveiro he has to 
use the manual toll collection systems or travel on national 
routes, or in worst case, if he has to do it frequently, affix 
several DSRC electronic tags on his vehicle. 
CEN DSRC EFC
Countries without ETC
GNSS-GSM
DSRC & GNSS-GSM
Italian DSRC (Telepass)
 
Figure 8 – Distribution of the systems in EU. 
 
From the economical perspective, the road-networks are 
essential to support the competitiveness, sustainability and 
success of the markets between states that share long line land 
borders [7].   
So, to address these issues, the European Commission 
decided to create a European Electronic Toll Service (EETS), 
launching the Directive 2004/52/EC and related Decision 
2009/750/EC [7]. The main objectives are to establish 
interoperability and to reduce the proliferation of incompatible 
systems in European Union. The project takes into account 
technology already implemented and aims to create a road-
usage declaration by means of a single OBU. 
Following the directive, the C2S proposal constitutes a 
system technologically compatible with the existing systems. 
Moreover, the system conceptually ensures interoperability 
between systems. The user can drive on GNSS-GSM or DSRC 
infrastructures. The C2S saves the incurred tolls and makes 
them available for payment in real-time. The user has only to 
access to the pay web platform (which can be via mobile 
application), paying in the preferable method, in a legal time. 
This feature allows users to pay when they have a good and 
cheap Internet connection (e.g., WiFi) and it represents an 
advantage to the GNSS-GSM systems where the payment is 
made via GSM [3]. To implement this feature, it is only needed 
that each toll company of each country creates a web platform 
available to the user that receives all the toll payments. 
B. Car Rent/Sharing 
 
Another pitfall of the actual systems arises when a 
costumer rents a car or uses a car sharing service (in a vehicle 
without an OBU) and passes in an ORT tollbooth. The 
enforcement system is triggered and a picture is taken and the 
vehicle is identified via ALPR system. So some time later the 
rent car company receives the toll receipts to pay the expenses 
of some costumer. So usually the company sends the receipt to 
the costumer that probably already left the country, in case of 
tourism or business travels and then it charges the expenses on 
the credit card associated with the rent car contract [4]. 
Otherwise, if the costumer is still around, he can pay the tolls 
for example in central post office or in a pay shop. 
 
In both cases, the current system causes troubles to 
costumers, which undeservedly do not understand the 
information and easily are driving on an ORT. It also causes 
problems to the hire firms that have to install OBUs on their 
vehicles and even then do not solve the problem, since the 
receipts are sent only 48 hours after the incurrence, so the 
costumer already left the country. 
 
The C2S solves this problem with a simple feature of 
providing to the rent car company a toll declaration of each 
costumer. Using a simple and cheap OBU (C2S), it is possible 
to know if the vehicle incurred tolls just touching a smartphone 
or a NFC reader to the C2S OBU. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
The number of ORT infrastructures is increasing, based on 
their benefits for the user and the reduction of operational costs 
for toll companies.  
However, these systems have some limitations and do not 
answer to the requirements of some users, such as rent-a-car 
costumers, car sharing users and foreign drivers. 
The C2S will allow any road user to pay easily the incurred 
tolls in a friendly user interface. 
For now, the system is a work in progress project with the 
main 
system 
blocks, 
interfaces 
and 
communication 
technologies already operating. 
For the future work, we need to develop an application that 
transfers all the toll data to the toll provider, via mobile 
application, so it is essential to create an API (Application 
Programming Interface), in toll providers systems. Finally, to 
conclude the proof of concept, it is required to test this solution 
in real scenarios, across several countries in different systems. 
 
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-288-2
VEHICULAR 2013 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

REFERENCES 
[1] 
K. Persad, C. Walton, and S. Hussain, “Toll Collection Technology and 
Best Practices Vehicle,” pp. 1–2, 2007. 
[2] 
R. Zhengang and G. Yingbo, “Design of Electronic Toll Collection 
System in Expressway Based on RFID,” 2009 International Conference 
on Environmental Science and Information Application Technology, pp. 
779–782, Jul. 2009. 
[3] 
K. Persad, C. Walton, and S. Hussain, “Electronic vehicle identification: 
Industry standards, performance, and privacy issues,” pp. 1–3, 2007. 
[4] 
“The News Online,” 2013. [Online, retrieved: July, 2013]. Available: 
http://www.theportugalnews.com/news/view/1147-1 
[5] 
N. Velaga, K. Pangbourne, and K. Papangelis, “GNSS-based Dynamic 
Road User Charging System,” pp. 11–13, 2010. 
[6] 
R. Sanchez, “Pricing Models in the Toll Road Business,” 2011. 
[7] 
E. P. E. Council, “Directive 2004/52/EC interoperability of electronic 
road toll systems in the Community.” EUR-Lex. European Union, pp. 4–
54, 2011. 
[8] 
W. Beier and R. L. Rodriguez, “EG5 on GNSS technologies for EFC 
Open issues to enable the widespread introduction of GNSS-based EFC 
services in Europe Final report,” p. 15, 2005. 
[9] 
“USGlobalsat BU 353,” 2012. [Online, retrieved: July, 2013]. Available: 
http://www.usglobalsat.com/p-62-bu-353-
w.aspx#images/product/large/62.jpg. 
[10] “National Marine Electronics Association (US).,” NMEA 0183--
Standard for Interfacing Marine Electronic Devices, 2002. 
[11] “CATB,” 
2013. 
[Online, 
retrieved: 
July, 
2013]. 
Available: 
http://catb.org/gpsd/. 
[12] “GPSD,” 
2013. 
[Online, 
retrieved: 
July, 
2013]. 
Available: 
http://www.aosabook.org/en/gpsd.html. 
[13] IBTTA, “State of the Art Analysis of European Toll Collection 
Systems,” 2004.  
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-288-2
VEHICULAR 2013 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications

