The Role of Complexity in  Visual Perception: Some Results and Perspectives 
Vittoria Bruni  
Dept. of SBAI 
University of Rome La  Sapienza 
Rome, Italy 
e-mail: vittoria.bruni@uniroma1.it 
Domenico Vitulano  
Institute for Calculus Applications (IAC) 
CNR 
Rome, Italy 
e-mail: d.vitulano@iac.cnr.it
 
 
Abstract— In the last years, there has been a change of 
perspective in approaching some information processing 
problems: from functional to human perception  perspective. 
In this work, some information theoretic concepts concerning 
information complexity will be revised and used as formal 
model for  human visual perception based approaches that 
have been used for solving some image and video processing 
problems, as for example restoration, detection, tracking and 
visual quality assessment. 
Keywords-Kolmogorov complexity; asymptotic equipartition 
property;just noticeable detection threshold; human perception. 
I.INTRODUCTION 
The vision process has much in common with 
compression and more in general with the concept of 
information complexity. The idea behind compression is  to 
reduce  the statistical redundancy  of the data, for example 
for storage purposes. In particular, the compressor is an 
algorithm whose aim is to produce a string of bits whose 
length is less than the string of bits that are necessary for 
representing the original data. On the other hand, the 
Kolmogorov complexity [1] of a signal is the length of the 
shortest computer program that outputs it. Several 
neurological  studies  proved  that  in  the  observation  of  a  
scene (early vision) very  few  points  are  used  by  human  
observers  to  understand scene content [2]. These points are 
foveated, i.e., human attention decreases  as  one  moves  
away  from  them,  and  they  are  the ones  showing  
independence  between  local  luminance  mean and contrast. 
In other words, few fixation points are necessary to  code  
scene  information  and   to  understand  (learn) its  content.  
Vision  process  can  be then  modeled  as an  
encoder/decoder  system,  where  human  eye  is  the  
decoder (final receiver of image information) or the 
transmission channel. As a result, information theory 
concepts can be used for coding visual information  in order 
to  
 
design algorithms for objective evaluation of 
quality in a way that is consistent with subjective 
human evaluation;  
 
develop automatic algorithms adapted for optimal 
perceptual quality. 
This strategy provides a new perspective on image 
content representation where image pixels are no longer seen 
as simple probabilistic data but should be accounted for by 
Human Visual System (HVS) limits and rules.   
Next section provides some examples while the last 
section draws the conclusions. 
II.SOME NOTES ON VISUAL COMPLEXITY 
Human perception can guide digital restoration according 
to a new paradigm: reducing the visual contrast of image 
anomalies till they are masked by  surrounding information. 
As a result, according to the task, image degradation is not 
removed but its contribution is hidden in the image 
according to the visual contrast masking effect; in other 
words, it represents negligible information and does not 
contribute to signal complexity/quality [3]. Figure 1 shows 
an example: noise is equally distributed in the image but it is 
not perceived in the textured region, as correctly measured 
by the Structural SIMilarity index (SSIM); therefore, 
denoising can be applied only in regions where noise is 
visible in order to avoid the introduction of visible artifacts 
due to oversmoothing or misalignments --- the latter are 
caused by a not correct motion estimation in case of video 
denoising. The same concepts have been successfully 
applied for tuning and balancing quantization errors in  
image compression. 
In this context, looking at the scene inspection as a 
random walk, image anomalies capture human eye attention 
at first sight as they are perceived as foreign objects in the 
scene, independently of scene complexity. As a result, the 
automatic detection of image anomalies, as well as a moving 
target, is allowed by looking at them as those resulting 
visually different from the remaining image content. In other 
words, the anomaly represents a “surprise” and then the code 
of visualized information increases whenever the “surprise” 
occurs.  More in general, human perception offers new ways 
for the representation of image content; for example, in a 
hierarchical way: from the most visible to the less one 
(saliency maps); or using perception-based sampling rules 
(fixation points). It seems based on a measure of object 
complexity in the sense of Kolmogorov complexity, i.e., the 
probability of finding that object in the nature. It is obvious 
that this kind of interpretation generalizes the common 
concept of surprise which is  measured by the Shannon 
entropy. Therefore, the challenge is to define novel 
mathematical tools able to directly account for these 
concepts. The minimum description length represents a 
useful tool in this sense as it  provides a formal equivalence 
between coding and learning [4]. It is  based on the Occam 
razor concept [5] for which the simplest solution is more 
likely to be the best, not necessarily the real one. However, 
some refinements are required as it represents, in some 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

sense, 
a 
computable 
interpretation 
of 
Kolmogorov 
complexity which, in contrast, is not computable even 
though more close to the real scenario. Classical information 
theory  concepts can be then used not only for coding but 
also for learning: simple and few  information is enough for 
describing a more complex one. In this setting, feature 
extraction is a way of coding and if the characteristics of the 
decoder (human eye) are embedded in the model, feature 
extraction becomes a way of coding based on human vision.  
An example is shown in Figure 2 where fixation points are 
used for assessing image quality, or where human perception 
is used for segmenting dermoscopy images.  
III.CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The simulation of human visual system represents the 
key issue for developing novel and effective solutions for 
some 
classical 
visual 
information-based 
processing 
problems. In this paper, the double role of complexity, in the 
sense of information compression, has been discussed. On 
the one hand, complexity provides a theoretical tool useful 
for formal modeling. Conversely, the mechanisms regulating 
human perception can offer the way of defining novel 
paradigms for information coding. The goal of future 
research is then to provide formal models and mathematical 
methods able to represent and process such visual 
information. In particular, since compact representation is 
the key issue in several applications, the definition of a 
visual perception-inspired multiscale transform  represents 
an interesting and promising challenge. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Cilibrasi and P. M. B. Vitányi, “Clustering by 
compression,” IEEE Transactions onInformation Theory, vol. 
51 no. 4, pp. 1523-1545, 2005. 
[2] R. A. Frazor and W. S. Geisler, “Local luminance and 
contrast in natural images,” Vision Research, vol. 46, pp. 
1585-1598,  2006. 
[3] H. R. Sheikh, A. C. Bovik, and G. De Veciana, “An 
information fidelity criterion for image quality assessment 
using natural scene statistics,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., 
vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 2117–2128, 2005 
[4] V. Bruni, E. Rossi, and D. Vitulano, “On the equivalence 
between Jensen-Shannon divergence and Michelson contrast,” 
IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 4278-
4288, 2012 
[5] P. D. Grünwald, “A tutorial introduction to the minimum 
description length principle,” Advances in Minimum 
Description Length: Theory and Applications, I. J. Myung, P. 
D. Grünwald, and M. A. Pitt, Eds. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 2004. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Top) Noise is differently perceived in the image: more visible in the red box than in the cyan box. Accordingly, SSIM in the red box is darker than 
in the cyan box. Bottom) Denoising applied to the noisy image increases the visual quality in the red box but decreases the one in the cyan box. Accordingly, 
SSIM of the denoised image in the cyan box is darker than the one of the noisy one in the same box. 
 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Left) Blurred image. Middle) Red boxes are the points necessary for assessing image quality in a way which is consistent with HVS. Right) 
Dermoscopic image and its human perception based-quantized version  using the least number of quantization bins. 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

