The Rational Dilation Wavelet Transform: A Flexible Tool for Perception-inspired 
Signal and Image Processing 
 
Vittoria Bruni  
Dept. of SBAI 
University of Rome La  Sapienza 
Rome, Italy 
e-mail: vittoria.bruni@uniroma1.it 
Domenico Vitulano  
Institute for Calculus Applications (IAC) 
CNR 
Rome, Italy 
e-mail: d.vitulano@iac.cnr.it
 
 
Abstract—The aim of this work is to investigate the properties 
of an adaptive multiscale transform for defining perception-
based methods for signal and image processing. Particular 
attention is devoted to the possibility of partitioning the 
frequency plane in a flexible way, which depends on both 
human perception and task purpose. Examples concerning 
image enhancement and timbre recognition will be presented 
and discussed. 
Keywords-contrast sensitiviy; rational dilation wavelet 
transform; MEL cepstrum; adaptive scale selection. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In the last years, there has been a huge research work 
concerning time-frequency transforms, since many problems 
of signal and image processing can be successfully solved by 
expanding the signal in a proper basis where signal features 
are emphasized. In general, this property is indicated with 
the term sparsity, i.e., the signal is represented as a series 
expansion in a proper basis where only few coefficients are 
non zero.  Unfortunately, there is not a unique optimal basis 
for each kind of signal or for each kind of problem; 
moreover, sometimes there is not a unique optimal basis for 
a given signal, since it depends on its spatial/spectral 
components. That is why the family of transforms/bases is 
wide. They differ according to the class of functions they are 
able to compactly represent, the existence of a computable 
inverse transform and a fast algorithm for their discrete 
implementation.  
 
Figure 1.  Left) Campbell-Robson map. The white curve is the contrast 
sensitivity function (CSF). Right) CSF sampling grid (top); corresponding 
frequency partition (bottom).  
On the other hand, in several applications there is the 
need of reproducing the different spectral components of a 
signal or image which not always obey a logarithmic law. 
Let us consider, for example, visual perception. The 
Campbell Robson image in Figure 1 represents a sinusoidal 
stimulus having  changing frequency and contrast ---  
contrast is constant at each row and  decreases from bottom 
to top; frequency increases from left to right. However, the 
stimulus is not perceived in the same manner in the whole 
image. At a fixed distance, the sinusoidal shape is perceived 
just below the white line and it is more evident in the middle 
of the image. By changing the observation distance, the 
curve shifts, changes its amplitude, shrinks or dilates. The 
curve that separates the perceptually homogeneous region 
(top) from the non homogeneous part (bottom) is the 
Contrast Sensitivity Function (CSF) [1]. It would be then 
desirable to construct a CSF that is better adapted to the 
content of the analyzed image in order to simulate frequency 
axis partitioning to eye sensitivity, i.e.,  more dense close to 
CSF maximum. Hence, a multiscale transform that changes 
its frequency resolution according to CSF shape has to be 
defined: higher resolution is required at frequencies to which 
human eye is more sensitive while less resolution is allowed 
far from them. Similarly, in audio processing, Mel scale is 
the one that better simulates the ability of the auditory 
system to distinguish two similar sounds [2]. Even in this 
case, Mel scale does not correspond to a logarithmic partition 
of the frequency axis.  
The paper is organized as follows: Section II briefly 
revises the rational-dilation wavelet transform (RADWT) [3]  
properties. Section III shows two representative examples, 
while the last section draws the conclusions and provides 
hints for future work.  
 
II. 
THE RATIONAL-DILATION WAVELET TRANSFORM 
RADWT [3] is an overcomplete discrete wavelet 
transform in which the dilation factor  can be set between 1 
and 2 to perform a more gradual scaling between consecutive 
subbands, as depicted in Figure 2. It is a powerful tool for 
signal analysis and our purposes for the following reasons: 
 
it allows a tunable scale factor (known as Q factor). It 
means that it gives a time-scale representation of the 
signal where the scale parameter changes according to a 
factor that is smaller than two. Hence, the high 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

frequencies of the signal are analysed with a finer 
resolution than in the dyadic case; 
 
it is implemented through a filter bank by using just a 
couple of filters (low-pass and high pass) that satisfy the 
perfect reconstruction condition (Figure 2); 
 
it involves downsampling and upsampling operations 
(Figure 2) even though it has some redundancy with 
respect to the dyadic case. The redundancy depends on 
the Q factor, i.e., the frequency resolution chosen for the 
analysis; 
 
it allows a high flexibility in the construction of the 
involved filters since it is possible to select not only the 
Q factor and/or the redundancy, but also the filter decay 
in the transition band; 
 
it also has a straightforward extension to 2D, making it 
also suitable for image analysis. 
 
 
Figure 2. Top) RADWT implementation. Bottom) Frequency partition 
provided by two different Q factors. 
 
Based on these properties, the dilation factor can be 
adjusted at each scale while preserving perfect reconstruction 
property.  As a result, RADWT provides a useful tool for 
defining a multiscale transform that changes its frequency 
resolution according to human perception. 
 
III. 
EXAMPLES  
In the field of audio processing, the Mel-cepstrum 
transform [2] combines two elements: the logarithmically 
spaced Mel scale, modeled on the human auditory system; 
and the cepstrum transform, which allows separation 
between excitation and resonances. The aim of our research 
is to mimic the Mel scale using RADWT to obtain the Mel 
frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCC). The main idea is to 
find the parameters pj, qj, sj, such that the support of the high 
pass filter Gj at level j is close to the support of the j-th Mel 
band. The result is shown in Figure 3, where the energy 
distribution in the adaptive RADWT of three different 
instruments is also shown. The energy distribution clearly 
characterizes the instrument and then it represents a feature 
that can be successfully used in timbre recognition. 
 
Figure 3.  Top) RADWT-based frequency partition according to MEL 
filters. Bottom) RADWT energy distribution of three different instruments. 
 
With regard to visual perception, the adaptive transform 
derives from an adaptive sampling of the contrast sensitivity 
function related to the analysed image. CSF sampling is 
based on the conjecture in the field of visibility, which 
asserts that CSF is the envelope of the contrast sensitivity of 
the cortical cells that take part to the visual perception 
process [1]. Hence, it is possible to design a filter bank 
covering all the frequency axis but having bandwidths that 
are adapted to the curve shape: tighter around the point of 
maximum visibility and wider elsewhere, as shown in Figure 
1.right. The distance between consecutive points is fixed 
such that the interpolation error is less than a prefixed 
tolerance. Once the transform is fixed, expansion coefficients 
can be processed according to the task, as for example, 
denoising, deblurring, fusion, etc. For example, for degraded 
images, coefficients can be modified in order to map the CSF 
of the degraded image to the one of the ideal not degraded 
image, preserving or emphasizing frequencies close to the 
maximum of the curve. Preliminary results showed that 
whenever this mapping is used as a preprocessing step of 
conventional restoration methods, the final result improves in 
terms of objective measures, as Peak Signal to Noise Ratio 
(PSNR), and, especially in terms of image quality 
assessment measures, as Structural SIMilarity Index (SSIM).  
TABLE I.  
DENOISING USING RADWT-BASED CSF MAPPING AS 
PREPROCESSING STEP: IMPROVEMENT WITH RESPECT TO STANDARD DWT 
Metric 
Denoising results (Lena image) 
Noisy 
image 
Denoised after DWT- 
based CSF mapping 
Denoised after RADWT- 
based CSF mapping 
PSNR 
20.22 
28.31 
28.40 
SSIM 
0.599 
0.788 
0.812 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper the properties of the rational-dilation 
wavelet transform (RADWT) have been revised and the 
advantages in using it in some perception-based models have 
been discussed. Specifically, contrast sensitivity function 
sampling and Mel-like frequency axis partition have been 
considered and the benefit given by RADWT has been 
demonstrated 
respectively 
in 
some 
classical 
image 
processing problems and for audio processing purposes. 
Future research will be devoted to define automatic and fast 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

methods for the definition of the best level-dependent 
dilation parameters for the analysed data and/or the task. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Barten, “Formula for the contrast sensitivity of the human 
eye,” Proc. of SPIE El. Imaging, vol. 5294, 2004. 
[2] L. R. Rabiner and B. H. Juang, “Fundamentals of Speech 
Recognition,”  Prentice Hall, 1993 
[3] I. Bayram and I. W. Selesnick, “Frequency-domain design of 
overcomplete rational-dilation wavelet transforms,” IEEE 
Trans. Signal Process., vol. 57, pp. 2957–2972, Aug. 2009.
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

