Review of Core Graphic Design Principles Used in Computer Games 
An Evaluation of Graphical User Interface Design 
 
Christy Martin, Michael Cooper 
Visual Communication Studio + Consultancy  
Queensland,  
Australia 
e-mail: voxelandpixel@gmail.com 
Manolya Kavakli 
AIE Institute 
33 Mountain St, Ultimo 
Sydney, Australia 
e-mail: manolya.kavakli@aieinstitute.edu.au
 
 
Abstract—Our goal in this paper is to review the use of core 
graphic design principles in computer games. We believe that 
the architecture of great Graphical User Interface (GUI) design 
is built upon a solid foundation of core graphic design 
principles. First, we define core principles used in graphic 
design, such as the grid, hierarchy, scale, balance, and framing. 
Then, we analyse the examples of core graphic design 
principles in computer games. Our findings state that there is 
evidence of all being utilised, despite the disparity in game 
genre. 
Keywords- computer games; GUI design; graphic design 
principles; user interface; evaluation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Our current technologies for visual communication 
(through print, digital, environment and increasingly 
virtual/interactive means) all fall back on an established set 
of basic design principles to consider when approaching a 
design, across these platforms [1][2]. New technologies are 
expanding considerations needed for graphic design layout, 
with screen sizing and touch capabilities also impacting 
possibilities in design. There are opinion articles about best 
user interfaces as seen in games [3][4] and what the medium 
is capable of delivering on, however no reviews about how 
basic graphic design principles are used in interface design. 
The core principles of graphic design have remained 
approximately the same from modernist-era developments, 
having proven their efficacy over time. We have a basic 
framework for graphic design, developed and expanded upon 
since the International Typographic Style (ITS) emerged in 
the 1960’s, to assist us in organising and understanding the 
digital era challenges we now face as designers, in a fast-
moving and ever-more technical world. Our potential toolkit 
for executing graphic design grows, as we experiment with 
new technologies, and engage with new ideas and 
social/political constructs. 
Design principles prove to offer a great foundational 
architecture for visual communicators to build their designs, 
with huge scope for further discussion and development of 
graphic design concepts within the bounds of the two, three 
or even fourth dimensional spaces we interact with today.  
 
 
Graphic design serves as the bridge between the game 
software and the player. Graphic designers design the 
different User Interfaces (UI) the player interacts with. The 
menus, icons, navigation bars, data, and in-game displays 
must be organized with the user utmost in mind, and simple 
to understand. They must accommodate users from different 
backgrounds and cultures by applying universal design 
principles to communicate in the most efficient way possible. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the core graphic design principles. Section III 
demonstrates the use of core graphic design principles in 
computer games. Section IV addresses the analysis of 
underutilized elements of graphic design in contemporary 
computer games. Section V draws an evaluation with respect 
to the GUI design and lessons learnt from the analysis. The 
acknowledgement and conclusions close the article. 
II. 
CORE GRAPHIC DESIGN PRINCIPLES 
The architecture of great graphic design is built upon a 
strong foundation of core graphic design principles that most 
designers begin with [2]: 
• 
the grid 
• 
hierarchy 
• 
scale 
• 
balance (symmetry and asymmetry)  
• 
framing 
These five principles give structure to layout, to allow the 
designer to then experiment with other elements of form, for 
instance: colour, line, pattern, texture, and layers.  
A.  The Grid 
A grid could be seen as the “bones” of a design layout - a 
series of columns with margins, to place text and image 
within – the organization of content. A grid allows the 
designer to align content vertically and horizontally across 
multiple pages of layout. Column width and depth can either 
be set as a strict adherence or varied to the designer’s 
specifications, making this structural element work hard 
throughout the design (thus giving flow and balance and 
allowing great control over hierarchy).  
From this foundation, the designer may choose to break 
out of the grid boundaries, to enhance the impact of the 
work; with Gestalt principles, asymmetry, contrast, and scale 
contributing to this dynamism. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-978-2
VISUAL 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

 B.   Hierarchy 
When we speak of hierarchy as a graphic design term, we 
are insinuating an order of importance in the reading of 
information, the visual hierarchy of design. Creating a 
hierarchy of visuals aims to clearly convey a message, a goal 
achieved using a range of concepts defined as the Basic 
Design Principles. Sources might list slightly different 
versions of the “Principles of Graphic Design”, such as in 
[5]. The terminology used might be different, but the 
fundamental concepts are the same.  
The gaze concept draws on psychological studies to 
determine the way we take in valuable information – how we 
process what we see, what we look for in (for instance) a 
piece of design work. Our viewing patterns tend toward 
creating order to conceptualise, rationalise and group what 
we see; a factor further explored in Gestalt principles. We 
are looking for things which stand out to guide us visually: 
differentiation.  
The message or information - the communication in 
design - is often the order of text content, creating 
typographic hierarchy to clearly, as Ellen Lupton [5] states, 
“add difference methodically” and create visual “signals of 
difference, signals of separation”. 
In layout, defining and differentiating content, such as 
heading, sub-heading, body text and caption can be achieved 
by adjusting the character of the text, using combinations of: 
• 
size and scale (drama/dynamism) 
• 
weight (bold, medium, light, italic) 
• 
colour (emotion, tone) 
• 
spacing (flow and pause between text) 
• 
case (all capitals, all lowercase) 
• 
character (typeface selection). 
Hierarchy provides order and direction to structure. Our 
eye naturally gravitates to differentiations, spatially and 
typographically, so with appropriate design we can 
communicate an order of importance in our messaging and 
lead a user’s eye around a page or screen. 
Typographic hierarchy is particularly important to 
communication as the ability to clearly read and understand 
where information begins, and ends, gives the reader 
comfortable flow (with visual pauses and punctations) when 
absorbing the text. 
Hierarchy also makes life easier for the designer, as we 
can set our particular “styles” for typography, line spacing 
and kerning at the beginning of the design process, and in 
layout software programs like InDesign, apply them across 
the board. 
C.  Scale 
Scale gives dimension to design. Designers use contrast  
in scale to draw the eye, for impact and added drama.  Scale 
of text or image on the page can assist with hierarchy. 
Appropriate scale for text sets a comfortable reading size, or 
makes a headline stand out. In design, we see two types of 
scale: 
1. Objective scale: how large something is (in reality, 
or the scaled down actuality of the real thing). 
2. Subjective scale: how big we think something is 
(our impression; in relation to other things). 
Similar sized graphics in a design can lead to flatness, or 
monotony, therefore adding variation through scale creates 
movement and flow. 
D.  Balance (symmetry and asymmetry) 
A graphic designer will often play with the shapes and 
text in their design piece until a tenuous balance, or flow, 
develops. The resulting rhythm and balance, contribute to the 
overall feel of a piece of design. The goal of both 
symmetrical and asymmetrical design principles is to 
engender a sense of harmony and balance to a piece - a 
stability of form and flow. 
Whilst symmetry harnesses the power of harmony and 
simplicity, asymmetry challenges the eye with form which 
may appear random, however placement of elements is 
deliberate, to add interest and movement. Symmetry through 
simplicity of form gives us strong, clear messaging. 
Asymmetry through a harmonious balance guides us through 
the communication, promoting interaction. 
E.    Framing 
Framing concentrates focus within the design space. The 
edges of the page, screen or object form a natural barrier. 
Framing for images through cropping is a subtle skill; the 
challenge being to identify and choose an appropriate 
section, angle, and subject. Margins on layouts also provide a 
framing opportunity. The placement or orientation of design 
elements on a page become dictated by the grid, with text, 
image and illustration layered across these lines, but all have 
an end-point – the edge of the page, or an internal shape.  
Framing “creates the conditions for understanding an 
image or object”, according to Lupton & Phillips [2, pp.116). 
Content within a frame becomes our focus, the frame or 
border itself a tool of visual acuity. 
All graphic design is contained in a frame of reference, 
be it a device screen, a book jacket, magazine spread or 
package. The way a graphic designer chooses to use the 
frame is where creativity surfaces - sometimes what is left 
out of the frame can be as important as what remains inside. 
III. 
USE OF GRAPHIC DESIGN PRINCIPLES IN GAMES 
The GUI is the arrangement of visual components that 
act as a means of communication between the user and 
various aspects of the game code, for example, in-game 
interactivity, information displays, narrative, and settings. A 
graphic designer designs the user interface (UI) of a game. A 
single game often has multiple user interfaces; thus, the 
designer decides the placement of all these visual elements 
and typography to create not only a pleasing aesthetic, but 
also to avoid restricting gameplay. There are a few studies 
published using design principles to enhance engagement in 
therapy-based video games [22] and cloud games [23]. 
UI in games takes on different forms (Figure 1), such as 
diegetic (elements that exist within the game world), or non-
diegetic (an on-screen UI element that is separate from the 
game world) [7]. These two approaches can markedly affect 
the way the graphic design appears in the game, but the core 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-978-2
VISUAL 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

design principles in creating it will remain similar. Other UI 
types are Meta (elements which exist within the game world 
and are used as a form of UI) and Spatial (an element or 
pop-up which appears in the game but is not of the game 
world).  
 
 
Figure 1.  Table of GUI types and uses [7]. 
In this paper, we will examine the 5 Core Graphic Design 
Principles of Grid, Hierarchy, Scale, Balance and Framing as 
they apply to recent game titles with a range of GUI styles. 
A. The Grid 
There is an acceptable level of valuable screen ‘real 
estate’ used for UI, which allows it to be visible and 
playable, but not overtly intrusive. Perspective and view 
(keeping it clear) are of utmost importance.  
Use of a grid to develop the staging for a game’s UI can 
depend on the style of game (the difference between a 
console game and a mobile game, for example, may include 
the screen size and shape, style of game, and simplicity of 
controls). 
GUI for diegetic games operates on a slightly different 
basis to those which present UI as a screen overlay. Diegetic 
UI will often be gridded out, with the same hierarchical 
principles, but when they appear onscreen diverge; the 
viewpoint of the player affects how the UI appears 
(dependent on the element in question and camera view 
being used, the grid is skewed.).  
The non-diegetic grid remains flat and neat, arranged 
around the screen (a ‘Head’s Up Display’ or ‘HUD’), or 
popping up as a layered sub-screen when required, with ease 
of use and clarity the goal. 
Appropriate design of UI grid systems will give the user 
a sense of space - that all elements in the layout have the 
right amount of proximity. In this example from first-person 
shooter (FPS) “Destiny 2” (Bungie Games), we see use of 
grid systems to position inventory UI onscreen, in squares 
with strict alignments, hanging from and ending at a 
specified point (Figure 2).  
Diegetic UI, such as in the action-adventure, third-person 
shooter “Tom Clancy’s The Division 2” (Ubisoft), require 
the same build structures but appears onscreen quite 
differently, often from the perspective of the character 
(Figure 3). The information and icons are in columns, with 
necessary alignment and structure. The player views them as 
‘built in’ to the world, in this case as a projection from the 
character’s watch. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Example of grid elements in non-diegetic UI (“Destiny2”, 
Bungie Games) [8]. 
“Tom Clancy’s The Division 2” gives us a good example 
of a UI where the character is looking at an ‘in-world’ object 
and interacting with it. We can clearly see that it is set within 
a grid structure, with all the alignments and boxes neatly 
arrayed. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Example of grid elements in diegetic UI (“Tom Clancy’s The 
Division 2”, Ubisoft) [9]. 
B. Hierarchy 
Hierarchy exists in all facets of games, from typography 
to the visual dominance of imagery. There is example of 
visual and typographic hierarchy observed in this UI for 
“Destiny 2” (Figure 4). 
With value on simplicity, one sans serif typeface remains 
used (almost) exclusively throughout the game, with 
importance indicated by variances in weight, size/scale, case 
and spacing. In this example the headline and sub-heading 
are in all uppercase with alternate weights, whilst the body 
text is sentence or lowercase and much smaller. This 
typographic strategy produces a harmonious and clean result, 
which is easy to read and understand.  
The large visual element of the ‘Pariah’ gun draws our 
attention to its features, thus also demonstrating visual 
hierarchy through placement and scale of image. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-978-2
VISUAL 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

 
Figure 4.  Typographic hierarchy (“Destiny2”, Bungie Games) [10]. 
C. Scale 
Applying appropriate scale to UI is not only extremely 
important to prevent information from impeding the view, 
but also to create a UI which is legible and easily operated.  
The examples from non-diegetic racing game, “Forza 
Horizon 5” (Playground Games) in Figure 5 and Figure 6, 
we demonstrate how effective use of scale through 
differentiation of image and text is utilised as a graphic 
device; to create visual hierarchy and draw attention 
dynamically to the information of most import. In Fig.5 the 
‘1000’ text stands out as the dominant lead-in graphic, 
through its comparatively large scale on the screen. In Fig.6 
the use of a large car image becomes the directive element, 
The eye looped back across the screen to the ‘Start Race 
Event’ box by its size and positioning. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Example of scale (“Forza Horizon 5”, Playground Games) [11]. 
D.    Balance (Symmetry and Asymmetry) 
An isometric puzzler game, Monument Valley (Ustwo) is 
renowned for its zen-like qualities, benefitting from a 
sensitive use of colour. In this game, as seen in Figure 7 and 
Figure 8, the symmetry applied to each screen – with 
harmony achieved by the isometric structure – enhances this 
balance by use of a minimalist UI. The peaceful nature of the 
game visuals due in large part to the graphic design 
principles applied.  
 
 
Figure 6.  Example of scale (“Forza Horizon 5”, Playground Games) [12]. 
   
Figure 7.  Symmetrical balance (“Monument Valley”, Ustwo) [13]. 
   
 
Figure 8.  Example of symmetrical balance of visual and UI tools 
(“Monument Valley”, Ustwo) [14][15]. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-978-2
VISUAL 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

   Similarly balanced but in a different genre, adventure 
game “Firewatch” (Campo Santo), as seen in Figure 9 and 
Figure 10, demonstrates a minimalist, light, and airy non-
diegetic UI HUD with plenty of space surrounding text 
elements, centred text boxes for speech, and use of diegetic 
UI pieces throughout the gameplay, The elements appear to 
pivot in the middle of screen, as the player opens a map 
(Figure 10), or uses a compass, for example. 
 
Figure 9.  Symmetrical balance (“Firewatch”, Campo Santo) [16]. 
 
Figure 10.  Symmetrical balance (“Firewatch”, Campo Santo) [17]. 
   The perspective of the player is of foremost importance to 
the balance and symmetrical nature of the visuals here, and 
this has affected the design choices for a harmonious UI. 
E. Framing 
In this example of framing (Figure 11), from isometric 
dungeon crawler “Hades” (Supergiant Games), we see clever 
use of a dark, shadowy vignette to draw attention inwards 
from the edge of the screen, toward the speech box pop-up 
(also inset in a framed box). This device facilitates 
discussions with the Gods, however actual frames also 
appear as a regular element throughout the gameplay to hold 
information and communications (Figure 12) and direct the 
eye.  
 
 
Figure 11.  Example of framing (“Hades”, Supergiant Games) [18]. 
 
Figure 12.  Example of framing (“Hades”, Supergiant Games) [19]. 
IV. 
THE ANALYSIS OF UNDERUTILIZED ELEMENTS OF 
GRAPHIC DESIGN IN COMPUTER GAMES 
Aspects of graphic design in games are utilised well and 
often. Colour, for example, works with significant effect to 
make differentiations and highlight important touchpoints in 
most games. Gestalt Principles, and affordances, are also 
widely used and critical to how players both view the action 
and the UI elements, thus experiencing a game [1]. However, 
there are certain elements of graphic design which are either 
harder to incorporate onscreen or potentially overlooked. 
A.      Dynamic Contrast / Asymmetry 
Few games include a truly dynamic UI. “Persona” (by P-
Studio, Atlus) is a stand-out example of this, where the UI’s 
highly graphic, contrast-heavy, and animated shapes flow 
with the player and give an extremely stylised, attention-
seeking and rule-breaking [3] game experience (see Figure 
13 and Figure 14). This game remains one of few to embrace 
a sense of order-in-chaos through asymmetry, contrast in 
colour and dynamic animation. 
B.       Typographic Knowledge 
How to use typographic hierarchy effectively is a design 
principle which can be tricky on digital surfaces, and games 
are no exception. Selecting the correct and most appropriate 
typeface, for example, can have major influence on the result 
from a UI perspective. A font which does not “match” the 
character or ‘feel’ of the game, or is not clear enough in its 
communication, and legibility (particularly when sized down 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-978-2
VISUAL 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

to UI level), can slightly lift the player out of a sense of 
immersion, or at worst actively inhibit the player from 
understanding what they need to do. 
 
 
Figure 13.  Asymmetry and contrast (“Persona” P-Studio, Atlus) [20]. 
 
Figure 14.  Asymmetry and contrast (“Persona” P-Studio, Atlus) [21].  
C.        Simplicity & Clarity 
Simplicity references the ‘less is more’ principle that 
most designers ascribe to – that simple is, in fact, hard to do 
well. Computer games, from in-game facets to UI and 
marketing material, trend toward a very narrative and/or 
illustrative style to the design work – which can be 
necessary, but also requires restraint in execution. With the 
importance of screen real-estate and the goal of player 
immersion HUD UI elements are typically simple and non-
intrusive. With a simple and intuitive game design a game UI 
can in fact be almost non-existent. Games, such as Limbo 
and Inside (Playdead) uses no HUD and all UI elements are 
limited to small spatial tool tips to show interactivity. 
V. 
EVALUATION OF GRAPHICAL USER INTERFACES IN 
GAMES 
Game GUI performs a vital role in the User Experience 
(UX). This basic analysis into graphic design principles 
examines whether these core elements present from a 
communication perspective – simply posing the question, 
“do the core design principles exist in this game?” Analysis 
of successful use is still subjective in nature – games with 
very aesthetic and fundamentally elegant UI may fail to 
address ergonomic or experience concerns from a technical 
perspective (do the UI elements work well in placement for 
console, for example, or does the UI work well across all 
screen types and sizes?). Addressing graphic concerns still 
go a long way to developing a great UI design. What we can 
determine from the application of the 5 core design 
principles in the analysis performed in this paper is all 5 
graphic design principles are used to some extent in analysed 
games.  
As a work of design, games are no different to any frame 
of reference which seeks to communicate using text and 
image. Successful visual communication occurs with the 
excellent execution of design basics. As per the conclusions 
drawn below, we believe that the games we examined all 
used the core graphic design principles (Section II), despite 
varying genre and platform. 
1) Grid: All games analysed showed evidence of 
columns, boxes and alignment, and consistency of 
placement, which implies the use of a grid system. Some UI 
set-ups appeared to be more complex than others, requiring 
a grid which was at once structured and flexible. This 
speaks to the genre of each game. For example, where 
“Monument Valley” (designed as a mobile app) is by 
necessity very simple, touchscreen orientated and reliant on 
user intuition rather than an expansive UI, “Destiny 2” 
(designed for PC and console) has a long narrative arc, 
involving many and varied elements (such as a curved 
diegetic HUD hinting that its projected on the players 
helmet visor and non-diagetic UI screens, icons and tools 
and meta pop-up layers). 
2) Hierarchy: All games analysed used some form of 
typographic element, with associated hierarchial features, to 
pass on information to the player - be they complex as 
‘Destiny 2’ or ‘Forza Horizon 5’, or more simple in their 
communications like ‘Firewatch’ or ‘Monument Valley’. 
Visually, hierarchy was also achieved through use of colour, 
layering and transparency, to make certain UI features stand 
out as the player required. 
3) Scale: Knowing appropriate scale to use for digital 
outputs is crucial to a working UI. If button scale is too 
large, or text too small, the usability and balance of design is 
thrown out. All the games analysed in this paper displayed 
variance, but addressed issues of scale appropriately. Some 
used scale to bring hierarchy to their UI designs whilst 
others were more dependent on visual contrasts and scale to 
lead the player. 
4) Balance: Some of our analysed games, such as 
‘Firewatch’ and ‘Monument Valley’ were clearly quite 
symmetrical in structure, with centred elements and space 
around the action onscreen. This applied to their UI as well, 
which appeared simple and easy to identify. Deliberate 
asymmetry was harder to find, beyond stand-out examples, 
such as “Persona 5” which straddled the line between chaos 
and order. Asymmetry for balance in all games was present 
to a small degree, but in terms of the UI elements edged 
much closer to favouring symmetrical and harmonious, easy 
to navigate results. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-978-2
VISUAL 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

5) Framing: All games analysed adapt to a frame of 
some kind (and have a margin to work within, where no 
information will cross). Some, like “Hades”, use the more 
literal version of the concept to put containers around UI 
elements. All of the games analysed used boxes for 
information and/or imagery in their UI executions at some 
point, and many (like “Forza Horizon 5”) dynamically 
cropped imagery in their UI screens to help lead the eye. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
    Graphic design principles, applied appropriately and with 
consistency and forethought, can increase positive user 
experiences with game UI and assist in the clear 
communication of information critical to gameplay. In an 
analysis of 5 core design principles as they apply to a range 
of computer games, there is evidence of all being utilised, 
despite the disparity in game genre (be it isometric, first-
person shooter, action-adventure, racing or Zen puzzler). 
The complexity of game structure and choice of UI style 
often dictates to what extent the graphic design principles 
play a role. This paper presents an analysis into graphic 
design principles to examine whether the core elements 
present from a communication perspective. In future studies, 
we plan to conduct a set of user studies to measure user 
experience and test the players’ immersion in gameplay to 
investigate whether the UI elements work well in placement 
for console and across all screen types and sizes. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Lupton, “Design is storytelling”, Cooper Hewitt, New 
York, The Gaze, pp.118-125, Gestalt Principles, pp.126-131,  
2017. 
[2] E. Lupton and J. Phillips, “Graphic design: the new basics” 
[ebook] San Francisco, Chronicle Books, pp.8-11, pp.60-67, 
pp.116-139, pp.186-199, 2015. 
[3] A. Dakinedi, "Top 5 Best Video Game UIs”, Available from: 
https://superjumpmagazine.com/top-5-best-video-game-uis-
db941d6a9357, 2018, retrieved: March 2022. 
[4] Sourcegaming, “Holism: Metroid Prime and the Scan Visor”, 
https://sourcegaming.info/2017/06/28/holism-metroid-prime-
and-the-scan-visor/, 2017, retrieved: March 2022. 
[5] A. Hayward-Cole, “7 basic principles of graphic design”, 
Available from: https://www.lcca.org.uk/blog/careers/7-basic-
principles-of-graphic-design/, 2019, retrieved: March 2022. 
[6] E. Lupton and J. Phillips, “Graphic design basics: core 
principles for visual design”, Skillshare, Available from: 
www.skillshare.com/classes/Graphic-Design-Basics-Core-
Principles-for-Visual-Design/15397, 2021, retrieved: March 
2022. 
[7] M. Bowers, “Level up: a guide to game UI (with 
infographic)”, 
Available 
from: 
https://www.toptal.com/designers/gui/game-ui, 
2020, 
retrieved: March 2022. 
[8] Interfaceing 
Game, 
Destiny 
2, 
“destiny-2-customize-
face.jpg”, 
Available 
from: 
https://interfaceingame.com/screenshots/destiny-2-customize-
face/, 2017, retrieved: March 2022. 
[9] Interfaceing Game, Tom Clancy’s The Division 2, “tom-
clancys-the-division-2-character-profil.jpg”, Available from: 
https://interfaceingame.com/screenshots/tom-clancys-the-
division-2-character-profil/, 2019, retrieved: March 2022. 
[10] Interfaceing Game, Destiny 2, “destiny-2-rifle.jpg”, Available 
from:https://interfaceingame.com/screenshots/destiny-2-rifle/, 
2017, retrieved: March 2022. 
[11] Game UI Database, Forza Horizon 5 ‘Rewards and 
Experience, “Forza-Horizon-511112021-124736-95852.jpg”, 
Available 
from: 
https://www.gameuidatabase.com/gameData.php?id=1225#&
gid=1&pid=45, 2021, retrieved: March 2022. 
[12] Game UI Database, Forza Horizon 5 ‘Pre-Game & Lobby’, 
“Forza-Horizon-511112021-124734-38594.jpg”, 
Available 
from:https://www.gameuidatabase.com/gameData.php?id=12
25#&gid=1&pid=39, 2021, retrieved: March 2022. 
[13] Monument Valley Wiki, “Geometric-Building-Levels-in-
Monument-Valley-Game-by-ustwo.jpg”, Edited, Available 
from:https://monumentvalley.fandom.com/wiki/The_Spire?fil
e=Geometric-Building-Levels-in-Monument-Valley-Game-
by-ustwo.jpg, 2019, retrieved: March 2022. 
[14] Moby Games, Monument Valley Screenshots, “781657-
monument-valley-android-screenshot-many-of-the-puzzles-
are.jpg” 
Available 
from: 
https://www.mobygames.com/game/android/monument-
valley/screenshots/gameShotId,781657/, 
2015, 
retrieved: 
March 2022. 
[15] Moby Games, Monument Valley Screenshots, “781648-
monument-valley-android-screenshot-camera-mode-while-
ida-is.jpg” 
Available 
at: 
https://www.mobygames.com/game/android/monument-
valley/screenshots/gameShotId,781648/, 
2015, 
retrieved: 
March 2022. 
[16] Game 
UI 
Database, 
Firewatch 
‘Title 
Screen’, 
“Firewatch07102020-111051-72794.jpg”, Available from: 
https://www.gameuidatabase.com/gameData.php?id=238#&gi
d=1&pid=1, 2016, retrieved: March 2022. 
[17] Game 
UI 
Database, 
Firewatch 
‘Area 
Map’, 
“Firewatch07102020-111055-51693.jpg”, Available from: 
https://www.gameuidatabase.com/gameData.php?id=238#&gi
d=1&pid=9, 2016, retrieved: March 2022. 
[18] Interfaceing Game, Hades ‘Dialogue’, “hades-dialogue.jpg”, 
Available at https://interfaceingame.com/screenshots/hades-
dialogue/, 2018, retrieved: March 2022. 
[19] Interfaceing Game, Hades ‘Well of Charon’, “hades-well-of-
charon.jpg”, 
Available 
from: 
https://interfaceingame.com/screenshots/hades-well-of-
charon/, 2018, retrieved: March 2022. 
[20] Game UI Database, Persona 5 ‘Player Menus’, “Persona-
511142020-081939-92444.jpg”, 
Available 
from: 
https://www.gameuidatabase.com/gameData.php?id=72#&gid
=1&pid=46, 2016, retrieved: March 2022. 
[21] Game UI Database, Persona 5 ‘Modal: Item Get’, 
“Persona504202020-043344.jpg”, 
Available 
from: 
https://www.gameuidatabase.com/gameData.php?id=72#&gid
=1&pid=25, 2016, retrieved: March 2022. 
[22] K.Lohse, N. Shirzad, A.Verster, N. Hodges, and H.M.Van der 
Loos “Video games and rehabilitation: using design principles 
to enhance engagement in physical therapy” Journal of 
Neurologic Physical Therapy, 37(4), 166-175, 2013. 
[23] W. Cai and V.C. Leung, “Decomposed cloud games: Design 
principles and challenges”. In 2014 IEEE International 
Conference on Multimedia and Expo Workshops (ICMEW) 
pp. 
1-4. 
IEEE. 
2014, 
July.
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-978-2
VISUAL 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

