Simulating Household Electricity Consumption 
 
Mutinta Mwansa, William Hurst, Carl Chalmers, Yuanyuan Shen, Casimiro A. Curbelo Montañez 
Department of Computer Science 
Liverpool John Moores University 
Byrom Street 
Liverpool, L3 3AF, UK 
Email: M.Mwansa@2017.ljmu.ac.uk, {W.Hurst, C.Chalmers, Y.Shen, C.A.CurbeloMontanez}@ljmu.ac.uk 
 
Abstract— The smart grid is an advanced infrastructure that 
leverages communication technology, data analytics and cloud 
computing to control the distribution and consumption of 
energy. Smart grid systems include producers, consumers and 
actors, to ensure a resource saving and efficient electrical 
network. Within the smart grid, the smart meter records the 
consumption of electricity in private homes and businesses 
accurately. The data generated can be used to provide an 
insight into social demographics, household behaviour 
patterns, social clusters, general energy consumption patterns 
and a variety of value-added services. However, one of the 
biggest challenges for researchers in this area is the access to 
smart meter datasets. This is because real world datasets 
contain sensitive consumer information and, therefore, privacy 
is a key concern. Therefore, this paper focuses on simulating 
realistic data collected from the residential smart meter. As 
such, this paper presents a simulation of a home environment 
and the data produced. The validity of the data is justified 
through a visual comparison with a real-world smart meter 
dataset. 
Keywords- Smart Meters; Profiling; Simulation; Visualisation. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Smart meters are a core component of the smart grid. 
Typically, they reduce financial losses, operational costs and 
enable energy suppliers to forecast customer demand [1]. As 
a result, smart meters are being implemented on a global 
scale. Many countries such as the UK, USA, Australia and 
Italy 
are 
already 
advanced 
in 
their 
smart 
meter 
implementation. Additionally, Sweden is one of the first 
countries in Europe to carry out metering reform and large-
scale smart meter roll out. Before the reform, electricity 
consumption data for small customers is typically read on a 
yearly basis and billing is estimated based on the previous 
year’s consumption, instead of actual meter readings. 
Consumer demand for timely and correct billing is the main 
driver for smart meter deployment [2].The smart meter 
system is equipped with a large number of sensors and 
actuators placed in all parts of the grid to monitor and control 
the operational characteristics and behaviour. Based on the 
data collected from these sensors, smart meter entities and 
electricity suppliers (utility companies) are able to make 
more insightful and better decisions. For example, they are 
able to manage and optimise the electricity ﬂows, forecasting 
users’ demand for electricity and balancing the grid more 
eﬃciently; and even detect when there is abnormal energy 
usage in homes. The potential research implications of 
access to this data is significant. For example, considerable 
research has been implemented into the use of smart meter 
data for remote healthcare monitoring [3]. Whereas, other 
research, has focused primarily on load balancing to support 
the efficiency of the grid and resource allocation [4]. The 
remainder of the paper is as follows. A background research 
on smart meter systems is put forward in Section 2. 
Subsequently, the research aims and objectives and the 
methodology is discussed in Section 3. Section 3 also 
presents a sample of the data collected from our smart meter 
case study. Section 4 discusses the methodology and 
techniques used for profiling users. The paper is concluded 
in Section 5. In particular, this paper focuses on the smart 
meter and investigates the novel approaches for consumer 
profiling and for the consumers to monitor energy usage in 
real time. 
II. 
BACKGROUND RESEARCH 
A smart meter is an electronic device that records the 
consumption of energy with high accuracy. However, smart 
meter is part of the much wider Advanced Metering 
Infrastructure (AMI). 
A. The Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) 
An AMI is comprised of systems and networks that 
receive data from smart meters; and it facilitates the 
bidirectional communication between the consumer and the 
rest of the smart grid stake holders. It reduces the traditional 
need for energy usage readings to be collected manually [7]. 
Therefore, the smart meter is able to communicate with a 
gateway through a Home Area Network (HAN), Wide Area 
Network (WAN) or a NAN, which is outlined as shown in 
Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. Advanced Metering Infrastructure 
The HAN is housed inside the consumer premises and is 
made up of different devices, e.g., Meters, Thermostats, 
Electric storage devices, ZigBee transmitters. All of the 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

acquired data is sent to the Meter Data Management System 
(MDMS), which is responsible for storing, managing and 
analysing the data [8]. The MDMS sits within the data and 
communications layer of the AMI. This component is an 
advanced software platform, which deploys data analytics 
while facilitating various AMI applications, including:  
 
Managing metered consumption data. 
 
Outage management. 
 
Demand and response. 
 
Remote connect / disconnect. 
 
Smart meter events and billing [9]. 
This information can be shared with consumers, partners, 
market operators and regulators. The Wide Area Network 
(WAN) handles the communication between the utility 
companies and the HAN. The Head-End System (HES), 
also known as the meter control system, is located within a 
metering company network. 
B. Machine Learning Techniques for Profiling 
The first step to profile behaviour from the data produced 
by smart meters is to model and understand the normal 
patterns. Therefore, the field of machine learning provides 
methodologies that are ideally suited to the task of 
extracting knowledge from these data. A parametric 
approach often used is linear regression, which predicts a 
real valued output based on one or more input values. 
Prediction of a single output variable from a single input 
variable is called “univariate linear regression” whereas 
“multivariate linear regression” indicates multiple features. 
This module is used to define a linear regression method, 
which trains a model using a labelled dataset. The trained 
model can then be used to make predictions. Regression 
analysis is usually the best option and the fastest method to 
analyse the consumption data of buildings [10]. Among the 
statistical 
approaches, 
regression 
techniques 
deserve 
attention due to:  
• 
Relative ease to implement. 
• 
Interpretability of the results. 
• 
The requirement of less computational power than other 
statistical approaches (genetic algorithms, neural 
networks, support vectors machine). 
• 
Satisfactory prediction ability. 
• 
Increased availability of data through smart metering. 
Linear regression is a statistical analysis method used to 
model the relationship between two variables via fitting a 
linear equation to observed data. This relationship can be 
identified between the independent (explanatory) and 
dependent (response) variables. The response must be 
continuous, whereas the independent variables may be 
either continuous, binary or categorical. Linear regression 
can be expressed as: 
 
0
1
y
x




 , 
(1) 
Where Y is the dependent variable, and X is the 
independent or explanatory variable and the betas (β0 and 
β1) are the coefficients that we need to identify to make 
predictions. This is demonstrated in Figure 2.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Simple Linear Regression 
The line is modelled based on the linear equation shown 
in Figure 2 fitted to our data. Here, x and y are known 
variables from our data used to estimate the parameters β0 
and β1 of the regression line. Typically, the parameters are 
estimated by minimising the least squares or the sum of 
squared errors. Therefore, for n observations, the linear 
regression model can be defined as 
 
0
1
,   
1,2,..., .
i
i
i
y
x
i
n







  
(2) 
The random variable ε represents the error term in the 
model, a statistical term that represents random fluctuations 
and measurement errors among other factors out of our 
control [11]. 
Techniques, such as linear regression, can be used to 
predict future energy trends. For example, by using the 
smart meter data readings taken from one month, it would 
be possible to predict with a relative accuracy the expected 
consumption for the following month. In the following sub-
section, a demonstration of the data that is collected from 
smart meters and how it can be analysed to model user 
behaviour is presented. 
III. 
CASE STUDY: REAL-WORLD DATA 
The electronic meters for electricity (smart meters) are 
undergoing an increasing deployment in private homes all 
over the world. As a consequence, an ever growing physical 
communication network, made up of millions of local 
meters, 
has 
been 
established, 
whose 
considerable 
advantages are so far in favour primarily, if not solely, of 
the energy distributors, since they are enabled at simpliﬁed, 
more efﬁcient, and less costly transactions with the 
customers, e.g., for meter reading, billing, and energy 
supply administration. The detail and granularity of the data 
collected can be used in so many ways by utility companies, 
the future challenges faced is the issue of data storage and 
data management costs which prevent initiatives from 
becoming widely adopted. The amount of data produced by 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

two million smart meter customers reaches upwards of 22 
gigabytes per day [15]. Naturally, it is a significant 
challenge to manage this data; which may include the 
selection, deployment, monitoring, and analysis processes. 
C. Data Description 
Any real-time information processing usually requires 
cloud computing [16]. Any delay may cause a serious 
consequence in the whole system, which has to be avoided 
as much as possible. The dataset used in this research is 
comprised of one-month’s energy readings from 5 different 
users. Table 1 demonstrates a sample of smart meter data 
collected over a period of one month (January) for a single 
home occupant. The general supply of energy used on a 
daily basis (the energy consumed) is measured in kilo watts 
per hour (KWH) and can be described as what is used to bill 
the customer. Table 1 shows an example of energy reading 
of an individual household meter. Data is collected over a 
30 min time interval period and the “energy delivered” in 
KWH. The customer key is the primary key used to identify 
the consumer while the End Date Time highlights the time 
and date of the acquired reading. Both the general supply 
and off peak supply are recorded based on the specified 
tariff. 
Table I. SMART METER DATA SAMPLE 
CUSTOMER_KEY 
End Date 
time 
General 
Supply 
KWH 
Off Peak 
KWH 
Year 
8410148 
1/1/13 0:29 
0.081 
0 
2013 
8410148 
1/1/13 0:59 
0.079 
0 
2013 
8410148 
1/1/13 1:29 
0.082 
0 
2013 
8410148 
1/1/13 1:59 
0.085 
0 
2013 
8410148 
1/1/13 2:29 
0.073 
0 
2013 
8410148 
1/1/13 2:59 
0.07 
0 
2013 
8410148 
1/1/13 3:29 
0.07 
0 
2013 
As above, a sample of the dataset is presented in the 
visualisation in Figure 3. In this case, five user’s energy 
consumption over a five hour period is displayed. 
 
Figure 3. Visualisation of Data Sample 
The y-axis displays the energy usage reading, while the 
x-axis displays the time in half-hours. As there are five 
hours, there are ten time stamps on the x-axis. The total 
dataset for the five users is plotted in a scatter matrix 
(Figure 4), which shows the correlation between their 
individual energy usage patterns.  
 
Figure 4. A generic pattern captured for 5 different users showing energy 
usage. 
In order to visualise and analyse the total energy usage 
patterns over a much longer period, the smart meter data is 
loaded into a data model. The software used for this task is 
Microsoft Power BI [17]. Figure 5 presents an example of a 
much larger dataset that is comprised of seventy thousand 
household meter readings showing the energy usage and the 
behaviour trend over a period of 12 months. Here, the 
general distribution of energy readings highlights the energy 
consumptions levels for different households. This type of 
data visualisation could give suggestion to the number of 
occupants living in a given premise. Houses with increased 
energy usage are more likely to have an increased number 
of occupants or devices [12]. 
 
Figure 5. A generic pattern captured for 5 different users showing energy 
usage. 
However, this information can be used by others, either 
maliciously or inadvertently to ascertain an insight into an 
individual’s 
home life. For example, activities or 
occupancies of a home for specific periods can be 
determined. In a general, analysis of granular smart meter 
energy data could result in 1) invasion of privacy; 2) 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
User 1
User 2
User 3
User 4
User 5
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

unwanted publicity and embarrassment (e.g., public 
disclosure of private facts of people’s daily living lifestyles). 
The security policies governing the reliability of the 
smart grid depend on appropriate connectivity protocols and 
the national institute of standards and technology being the 
reference model proposed [16]. Recognizing the urgent need 
for standards to support Smart Grid interoperability and 
security, NIST developed a three-phase plan. 1) Identify an 
initial set of standards that would promote the rapid 
development of the Smart Grid, 2) establish a robust 
framework for the sustaining development of many 
additional standards, and 3) establish the a framework for 
the conformity testing infrastructure that is needed. 
III. 
CASE STUDY: SIMULATION DATA 
As previously discussed, access to smart meter data is 
limited. In this section, a case study on the simulation of 
smart meter data is presented.  
D. Simulationd Design.  
Figure 6 displays a model of a simulated home. The 
home was designed to resemble a moderate family home, 
with a standard set of appliances. 
 
Figure 6. Simulated Home 
The number and type of appliances present in the home 
are customised in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7. Home Customisation 
The properties of the simulated home are detailed in 
Table II. Other properties, such as insulation, construction 
materials, weather sheathing and exterior finish are included 
in the simulation but omitted from Table II. 
Table II. SIMULATED SMART HOME PROPERTIES 
Input 
Value 
Project Type 
Standard 
Application Type 
New Construction 
Building Type 
Multi-Family 
Analysis Mode 
Design 
Reference Building 
My Design 
Sim Engine 
EnergyPlus 
Building: Finished Floor Area 
4500 
Building: Bedrooms 
18 
Building: Bathrooms 
8 
By running the simulation, data is constructed for a given 
simulation period. A visualisation of the energy readings 
from the simulated home is presented in Figure 8. The 
months are displayed on the x-axis and the total energy usage 
values for a given day are displayed on the y-axis. 
 
Figure 8. Simulation Data Visualisation Sample 
In the following section, a discussion is presented on the 
use of real-world smart meter data in comparison to the 
simulated data generated by the artificial home. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Figure 9 displays real-world energy readings from a single 
home. The home is picked at random from the data set, but it 
meets the following criteria:  
 
Data shows that there is an occupant in the premises  
 
They live in a standard house 
Each morning demonstrates a sudden change in user 
behaviour. The energy usage, in KWH, is shown in the y-
axis while the time the reading was taken is shown in the x-
axis. The graphs indicate the time when the consumer 
becomes active in the morning. These activity start times 
vary depending on each user and readings are captured for 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

the whole 24 hour period. These types of behaviour can be 
attributed to the consumer’s morning, afternoon and evening 
activities and is a key indicator for understanding and 
identifying alterations in routine.  
 
Figure 9a. Measured power load over a 24 hour period 
on day 1 showing occupant using energy mostly in the 
moning  and late evenings. 
 
 
Figure 9b. Measured power load over a 24 hour period 
on day 2 showing occupant using energy in the 
morning, mid-afternoon and late evenings. 
 
 
Figure 9c. Measured power load over a 24 hour period 
on day 3 showing occupant using energy throughout 
the day. 
 
 
Figure 9d. Measured power load over a 24 hour period 
on day 4 showing occupant using energy in the 
morning and late evenings. 
 
 
Figure 9e. Measured power load over a 24 hour period 
on day 3 showing occupant using energy throughout 
the day. 
 
 
By the efficient analysis of the energy use data, different 
energy consumption patterns of different household are 
demonstrated 
below 
and 
corresponding 
energy 
use 
behavioural characteristics are identified. Along the x-axis is 
the hours of the day over a 24 hour period with the readings 
taken for each day for 5 consecutive days for each house. 
The y-axis values refer to the energy usage in kilowatts 
(KWh). Using this data, we will build up a pattern of 
expected behaviours and identify a trend. Figure 10 displays 
the simulated data home patterns over a 12-month period. 
The green line is the total energy usage, whereas the orange 
and the blue line depicts the individual energy readings for 
unit 1 and unit 2 in the simulation study. Similarly to the 
real-world data, on visual inspection, patterns in the energy 
consumption are apparent. For example, similar spikes in the 
energy use on a weekly basis, lower energy use in the 
summer months and higher energy use during winter. 
 
Figure 10. Simulated Home Graph Visualisation 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In 
this 
paper, 
several 
visualisations 
of 
electricity 
consumption patterns both from a real-world dataset and 
from a simulated smart home have been conducted. Smart 
meters produce considerable volumes of data, presenting the 
opportunities for utilities to enhance customer service, lower 
costs and improve energy efficiency; and for customers to 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

reduce their bills and save energy. The availability of such 
information results in more informed consumers who can 
better self-manage their electricity usage, choose low energy 
saving appliances and thus contribute to the reduction of 
greenhouse gas emissions. Therefore, we conclude that the 
analytic techniques and methodology proposed in this paper 
can be practical and useful to benefit the consumers and 
utility companies as well as the governments. Our ambition 
is that our work will lead to a realistic simulated smart meter 
dataset that other researchers can use for investigations into 
home profiling.  
This research project is funded in part by the EPRSC - 
EP/R020922/1. Owing to the ethical sensitive nature of this 
research, the data underlying this publication cannot be made 
openly available. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Skopik, F. and Smith, P.D. eds., 2015.Smart grid security: Innovative 
solutions for a modernized smart grid .  Syngress. 
[2] J.Zheng, D.W. Gao, and L.Lin, “ Smart meters in smart grid: An 
overview. In Green Technologies,” Conference IEEE, pp. 57-64, 
April, 2013. 
[3] E.D. Knapp and J.T. Longil, “ Industrial Network Security: Securing 
Critical Infrastructure Networks and Smart Grid, SCADA and other 
Industrial Control Systems,”  Chapter, 12, 2015. 
[4] Espinoza, M., Joye, C., Belmans, R, and De Moor, B., 2005. Short-
term 
load 
forecasting, 
profile 
identification, 
and 
customer 
segmentation: a methodology based on periodic time series. IEEE 
Transactions on Power Systems, 20(3), pp.1622-1630. 
[5] Bedingfield, S., Alahakoon, D., Genegedera, H, and Chilamkurti, N.,  
Multi-granular electricity consumer load profiling for smart homes 
using a scalable big data algorithm. Sustainable cities and society, 40, 
pp.611-624,2018. 
[6] Virone G, et al. Behavioral patterns of older adults in assisted living. 
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed 12(3), pp. 387–398,2008. 
[7] M.Popa, Data Collecting  from Smart Meters in an Advanced 
Metering Infrastructure, Proceedings of 15th International Conference 
on Intelligent Engineering Systems, pp. 137-142,2011. 
[8] D. Niyato and P.Wang, “Cooperative transmission for meter data 
collection in smart grid,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 40, 
pp. 137-142, 2012. 
[9] Y.T. Hoi,  et al. “The Generic Design of a High-Traffic Advanced 
Metering Infrastructure Using ZigBee,” vol. 10, pp. 836-844, 2014. 
[10] Malekian, R et al.  A novel smart ECO model for energy consumption 
optimization. Elektronika ir Elektrotechnika, 21(6), pp.75-80, 2015. 
[11] A. C. Rencher and G. B. Schaalje, Linear Models in Statistics. 
Hoboken, NJ, USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2007. 
[12] Bartusch C, Odlare M, Wallin F and Wester L. Exploring variance in 
residential electricity consumption: Household features and building 
properties. Applied Energy 2012;92:637–643 
[13] World Health organisation on Ageing 2015, accessed 19 march 
2018,<http://www.dw.com/en/aging-health-who-call-to-action-as-
world-population-over-60-set-to-double-by-2050/a-18751636#> 
[14] Chalmers, C., Hurst, W., Mackay, M., & Fergus, P. Smart Meter 
Profiling For Health Applications. In the Proceedings of the 
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, July 2015 
[15] Choo, K.K.R., 2011. The cyber threat landscape: Challenges and 
future research directions. Computers & Security, 30(8), pp.719-731. 
[16] Advanced metering Security Threat Model (DRAFT); R Robinson, J 
McDonald,B Singletary, D Highfill,N Greenfield,M Gilmore 
[17] T. Lachev, and E. Price, 2018. Applied Microsoft Power BI: Bring 
your data to life!. Prologika Press. 
[18] Coalton Bennet and Darren Highfill. Networking AMI Smart Meters, 
IEEE Energy 2030, November 2008. 
[19] Bera, S., Misra, S. and Rodrigues, J.J., Cloud computing applications 
for smart grid: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and 
Distributed Systems, 26(5), pp.1477-1494, 2012. 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

