A Study on 3D Surface Graph Representations
Long H. Nguyen, Abdullah Karim
Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas, USA
long.nguyen@ttu.edu, abdullah.karim@ttu.edu
Abstract—Surface graphs have been used in many application
domains to represent three-dimensional (3D) data. Another ap-
proach to representing 3D data is making projections onto two-
dimensional (2D) graphs. This approach will result in multiple
displays, which is time-consuming in switching between different
screens for a different perspective. In this work, we study the
performance of 3D version of popular 2D visualization techniques
for time series: horizon graph, small multiple, and simple line
graph. We explore discrimination tasks with respect to each vi-
sualization technique that requires simultaneous representations.
We demonstrate our study by visualizing saturated thickness of
the Ogallala aquifer - the Southern High Plains Aquifer of Texas
in multiple years. For the evaluation, we design comparison and
discrimination tasks and automatically record result performed
by a group of students at a university. Our results show that 3D
small multiples perform well with stable accuracy over numbers
of occurrences. On the other hand, shared-space visualization
within a single 3D coordinate system is more efﬁcient with
small number of simultaneous graphs. 3D horizon graph loses its
competence in the 3D coordinate system with the lowest accuracy
comparing to other techniques. Our demonstration of 3D spatial-
temporal is also presented on the Southern High Plains Aquifer
of Texas from 2010 to 2016.
Keywords–Scientiﬁc visualization; time series visualizations; 3D
horizon graph; space reduction; underground water aquifers.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Time series charts are graphical representations of quan-
titative values changing over time
[1]. Line chart is the
simplest way to visualize time series where we have one axis
represents for a time period and the other axis represents
for its quantitative values. Since its invention by William
Playfair (1875-1923) [2], a lot of research has been conducted
and has invented different variants of time series with better
visualization in certain ways. One approach that researchers
try to target is the representation of multiple time series where
line charts visualization become difﬁcult because of the limited
vertical space, as well as its high visual clutter. Two other
popular techniques are small multiples and horizon graphs that
we will discuss later in this paper.
Small multiples represent lines in its own space to reduce
visual clutter. Because space is allocated per line, it requires
to compact itself in order to ﬁt inside the vertical screen
resolution. This causes difﬁculty in value comparing between
points on the same line due to the scale reduction. Later on,
horizon graph was invented. In horizon graph, the gap between
the line and baseline is chunked into multiple layers, and the
higher layer is overlaid on top of lower ones. The color is
also used to ﬁll the gap between baseline and the area formed
by the line chart and the boundaries of its layer. The horizon
graph is proven as space reduction while gaining identity and
information extraction solution for multiple simultaneous time
series representations in 2D visualization
[3]. This solves
the problem of visual clutter while still representing multiple
series.
Horizon graph which is represented in 2D space has grown
its usage since its ﬁrst invention. In recent years, people are in-
creasing to higher demand with 3D or even multi-dimensional
data expecting multi-dimensional space or even merging to
virtual space to see the representation. Together with this
trend, 3D visualization techniques also evolve to solve more
complicated information visualization demand from multi-
dimensional data. With a standard surface graph, users can
deal with few simultaneous series only.
In this work, we study 3D version of split space techniques
(small multiples and horizon graphs) to accommodate space
and data comparison problems in the world of 3D visualiza-
tion. We address the lack of perception capabilities in repre-
senting 3D data by evaluating various tasks requiring multiple
concurrent displays through monitored laboratory experiments.
Our main motivation for this research is to provide guidelines
for graphical designers who are in need of methods to represent
3D spatial-temporal graphs for their applications. In addition,
we stress advantages and disadvantages of each graph type for
certain use cases. In the demo, we represent spatial-temporal
data visualization of the saturated thickness of the Ogallala
aquifer. In summary, our main contributions are:
•
We present 3D version of horizon graph and small
multiple that can address the space and perception
capability in presenting multiple concurrent series.
•
We provide a guideline for 3D designers in visualizing
surface graph data.
•
We demonstrate our sample visualizations in the
Southern High Plains Aquifer of Texas and conduct
a user study for each visualization technique.
We understand that providing more interactions will bring
more capabilities to users in catching information from the
graph. However, to evaluate the visual effect itself, we will
just provide basic interaction such as zooming, and rotating
graph meshes in the 3D coordinate system. Other alternative
methods such as hierarchical aggregation [4], temporal queries
[5], temporal clustering
[6] or further interactions are not
considered in the scope of this paper.
Even though our demonstration is the spatial-temporal data
of the Ogallala aquifer, we believe that the technique and its
analysis result can be applied to any multi-dimensional data
visualization representing in 3D coordinate system.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: We discuss
the related work in the next section. Then we provide an
overview of our research questions, our evaluation criteria and
discuss some current 3D visualization techniques in represent-
ing surface graphs. In Section
V, we discuss our study in
detail with hypothesis, equipment, tasks and study design. We
analyze and discuss our result in Section
VI. Finally, we
conclude our paper with future plans.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-577-7
VISUAL 2017 : The Second International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

II.
RELATED WORK
In this section, we do not intend to survey all visualization
and perception techniques for geospatial-temporal representa-
tions
[7]. Instead, we will discuss some related research on
graphical perception and some spatial-temporal visualization
techniques in two or 3D coordinate systems.
A. Graphical perception
Graphical representation of statistical data evolved for
years even before computers were invented. The initiative work
presented by Eells et al. at [8] starting toward a higher demand
which different graphical representations are compared to
obtain a greater visual effect. In the next year, Croxton et
al. [9] compared bar charts to circle diagrams for the accuracy
of judgment. He then continued to question why most users
of statistical charts found linear comparison represented by
charts has more accuracy than other area charts comparison.
He discussed the related capability of bars, squares, circles, and
cubes by some simple comparisons at [10]. Peterson et al. at
[11] tried to ﬁgure out “How accurately are different kinds
of graphs read?” by reading values from different graphical
representations of statistical data.
Cleveland et al. at
[12] set scientiﬁc foundation for
graphical analysis and data representation under the name
graphical perception and deﬁned it as the visual decoding of
information encoded on graphs. Simkin et al. at [13] conﬁrmed
by evidence that people have generic expectation about types
of information will be the major messages in some types of
graph. A comparison is conducted and revealed that the most
accurate of judgment is in bar charts then divided bar charts
and least accurate is the pie charts. However, the representation
involves only two charts simultaneously.
Lohse et al. at
[14] presented a cognitive model to
understand perceptual and cognitive processes people use to
decode information from a graph. They conducted an em-
pirical study in predicting reaction time, level of difﬁculty
to acquire information between computer simulated graphical
perception and actual performance of users. After two years,
Gillan et al. [15] discussed a componential model of human
interaction with the graphical display. From human-computer
interaction point of view, the model explains human interaction
with graphs. Later on, he brought this model to study with
various graphical representations, such as line graphs in linear
modeling, scatter plots, stacked bars, and pie charts.
Huang et al.
[16] argued that time and error measures
are limited in providing essential knowledge that is useful for
graphical design. They conducted three user studies to evaluate
and demonstrate the usefulness of cognitive perspective that
goes beyond merely measuring time and error. Spence et al.
[17] used a series of experiments to investigate the perception
of percentages in bar charts, pie charts, and tables. And
very recently, Heer et al.
[18] conducted two controlled
experiments to measure the effect of chart size and layering
and evaluate their effect in value comparison tasks.
Barﬁeld et al. at [19] discussed the relationship between
2D or 3D graphs displayed on paper or computer and the
problem-solving performance of experienced and novice man-
ager with respect to each representation by measuring solution
times, conﬁdence in answers and effectiveness of solutions.
Each of these studies are focus on how a visual encoding
and representing affects the accuracy and/or response time
of discriminating values of the underlying data. Nevertheless,
most of these researches discussed those visual factors with
the 2D visualization techniques. There are still remaining
questions on how well these techniques perform when dealing
with multi-dimensional data and representing as 3D charts.
B. Spatial-temporal data visualization
One of the earliest demonstrations related to spatial tem-
poral data is Napoleon’s march towards Moscow. Its visual
encoding uses color, size, text annotation, and position to
represent different states of Napoleon’s army in 1812 [20]
in one snapshot. Nowadays, data visualization tools become
more important when the demand in data dimension increased.
David et al. [21] presented abstract interface using recent web
based JavaScript libraries to visualize large complex sets of
spatial temporal data over the web.
D¨ubel et al.
[22] shown that 2D and 3D visualization
techniques exhibit different advantages and disadvantages in
human perception. Aigner et al. [23] discussed analytical view
on factors, and providing samples to visualize time oriented
data. Andrienko et al. [24] introduced the use of interactive
visualization tools to address problems of spatial temporal
data.
Tominski et al. [25] brought 3D icons into a map display
for representing spatial-temporal data. There are also event-
based methods being integrated for reducing the amount of
information to be represented. The approach relies on two
popular concepts: 3D information visualization and informa-
tion hiding. The technique is inherited by three-step process
for information visualization: overview ﬁrst, zoom and ﬁlter,
and then details-on-demand which were presented by Keim et
al. [26].
In supporting with the third dimension, Carneiro
[27]
presented a case study of Geneva with 3D Geneva project.
It aims to evaluate if users would potentially be interested
to integrate the third dimension in visualizing the available
geographical data. Koussa et al. [28] proposed web based so-
lution for 3D geographical information system using multilevel
spatial database structure and layer management technique to
visualize and analyze the data.
Treinish [29] discussed human problem solving and deci-
sion making performance varies enormously (100:1) with dif-
ferent presentations of high-resolution incorporated predictive
weather data. More recent work was done by Kehrer et al.
[30] who summarized existing methods for visualization and
interactive visual analysis of multifaceted scientiﬁc data and
proposed a categorization of approaches.
III.
DEFINITIONS, DATA SET AND METHODOLOGY
In this section, we discuss some common deﬁnitions that
are used throughout the paper. We also brieﬂy introduce our
data set and methodology in this research.
A. Deﬁnitions
Saturated thickness is the vertical thickness of a hydro-
geologically deﬁned aquifer in which the pore spaces of the
rock forming the aquifer are ﬁlled with water [31].
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-577-7
VISUAL 2017 : The Second International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

Graph type is the type of graph used in representing
information. In this research, graph type is either surface
graphs, small multiples or horizon graphs. If we do not mention
whether these types are 3D or 2D, it is implicitly understood
that the graphs are in 3D coordinate system.
Study year is the year that the study data belongs to. When
discussing its graphical representation, we mean that it is a
surface graph representing the data of that year.
B. Data Set
We use saturated thickness data from 2010 to 2016 to create
visualizations in the study. We choose this data set because it
has both spatial, temporal dimensions which fulﬁll our research
objective in this work. Besides, these data sets are part of our
research project in visualizing the aquifer.
C. Methodology
Our research goal is to effectively visualize the saturated
thickness of the Ogallala aquifer in a 3D coordinate system
that requires little space but also maintains the visual richness
necessary for comparison tasks. To do so, we ﬁrst designed
a model in which the geographical locations encompassing
the Ogallala were used as the base ground. Because this
model considered only the thickness of the Ogallala at a given
location, these locations described a ﬂat plane. The surface of
the model represented the saturated thickness of the Ogallala,
producing an image resembling a terrain and so called a surface
graph. We represent the surface graph via different techniques
(simple surface graph, small multiple and horizon graph) and
conduct a user study to evaluate its effectiveness based on user
perception.
IV.
EVALUATION CRITERIA AND VISUALIZATION
TECHNIQUES
In this section, we discuss evaluation criteria and visual-
ization techniques individually to justify each case.
A. Evaluation Criteria
We reuse some evaluation criteria described in [32] to
evaluate each surface representation. Table
I summarizes
attributes for the three surface techniques surveyed in this
paper. We discuss these techniques in the following section.
•
Space management: This criterion describes how
space is utilized in a graphical representation. In other
words, it is whether space is shared or split into
multiple occurrences. Shared space is represented in
the same coordinate system. So, all series are overlaid;
hence, it is easier for comparison. The height of the
space required is proportional to the biggest quantita-
tive value of the data in all study years. However, if
there are more study years, it may introduce clutter
which makes it hard for users to identify the graphs
and compare one to another. On the other hand, in
split space visualization, whether there are less or
more occurrences, each graph has its own space to
be presented. It means that this technique requires the
space to be compressed to ﬁt all the graphs. Hence
the perception of information may be reduced.
•
Space per study year: This is the vertical and hor-
izontal (a rectangular cube) amount of display space
allocated to each graph. This characteristic is not a key
factor, but it is important as any visualization should
ﬁt in a monitor screen size. We aim to use as little
space as possible without negative consequences to
its visualization effect.
•
Identity: This criterion tells how easy it is to distin-
guish between occurrences. Obviously, it is more dif-
ﬁcult to identify graphs in shared space visualization.
It is required to use graphical methods such as colors
and styles to convey the graph identity. The split space
techniques preserve the identity of the graphs.
•
Visual clutter: This factor refers to clutter associated
with representation techniques for a large number of
graphs.
In addition, we add a new criteria to evaluate the effec-
tiveness of the representation technique, called information
identiﬁcation.
•
Information identiﬁcation: One of the key factors
that affects user preference for one graph type over
others is its information identiﬁcation property. One
graph stands out from other graphs because it conveys
information clearly and makes it easy to ﬁnd informa-
tion within the graph. To measure this factor, we can
use its accuracy test and the time it takes to complete
related tasks.
TABLE I. PROPERTIES OF 3D VISUALIZATION TECHNIQUES
SURVEYED IN THIS PAPER.
Visualization
Space
Space per
Visual
Information
Technique
Management
Study Year
Clutter
Identiﬁcation
Simple Surface
Shared
S + h
Medium
Medium
Small multiple
Split
S/N + h
Low
Medium
3D Horizon
Split
S/(N*2*B) + h
Low
Low
In Table I, S is the available space, N is number of study
years, B is number of bands and h is the minimum height
required to view the entire surface (to view the depth level of
the surface).
B. Simple Surface Graph
Simple surface graph is a common graph that we represent
in 3D space. Each axis represents one dimension of the data.
In our demonstration, the ground plane (Oxy) is the longitude
and latitude, and the vertical (Z) axis is the saturated thickness.
With this type of graph, we can intuitively see that the space
required to represent is shared between graphs and equal to the
rectangular cube surrounding the vertical height and horizontal
width of the graphs.
Adding more graph surface is achieved by presenting it in
the same coordinate system and with different surface colors or
styles to identify itself. To make the 3D effect more efﬁcient,
we can use the same color with different bands or a line
grid along the surface to improve differentiation of height
levels in the graph. In this paper, when we overlaid multiple
study years, we received informal feedback that multiple colors
make confused users, so it is unfair in comparison with other
techniques. Therefore, we decided to keep one color for each
study year.
Figure 1 shows an example with four study years of satu-
rated thickness of the Ogallala. Each study year is represented
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-577-7
VISUAL 2017 : The Second International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

Figure 1. Saturated thickness surface graphs of the Ogallala in 2010 (blue),
2012 (orange), 2014 (green) and 2016 (purple) in the shared space
visualization technique.
in a separate color. As shown in Table
I, these graphs are
shared space so that we can easily compare saturated thickness
over years. Distinguishing identity is already challenging be-
cause the surfaces are overlaid and hide each other. The mix of
the colors with the complexity of each graph introduces clutter
as well.
C. Small Multiple
Small multiple for surface graph visualization means that
we split the space into sub spaces separated by a plane. Each
graph lies inside the allocated space and has its own coordinate
system. However, these coordinate systems have the same scale
to maintain comparison capability. In other words, with this
type of graph, we no longer add graphs into the same graph
space hence it is critical to have the same axes scaling across
all allocated spaces to allow comparison between graphs. The
more we compact the graph, the shorter and smaller amount
of space we require to represent them. However, to a certain
limit, we can’t compress the space more because it will be
harder to tell whether it is a 3D mesh or just a thick plane.
Figure 2. Saturated thickness surface graphs of the Ogallala in 2010, 2012,
2014 and 2016 (from bottom to top) with small multiple representation.
In Figure 2, we demonstrate small multiples of three study
years of saturated thickness of the Ogallala aquifer. We rescale
the height of the saturated thickness in accordance with the
scale of the coordinate system in each allocated space. This
made the saturated thickness look shorter compared to its
original simple surface graph. Obviously, the space to represent
each graph is now horizontally and vertically reduced to (S /
N) + h as demonstrated in Table I. In addition, we gain the
identity property in this case since each year representation is
separated. The saturated thickness value can be measured by
its height or color represented in the graph. This feature makes
3D small multiple different from its 2D version that the line
height is only measured by its value in the Y axis.
D. 3D Horizon Graphs
The horizon graph was originally represented as two-
tone pseudo-coloring
[33]. Latter on, it was developed and
introduced under the name ”Horizon graph” by the company
Panopticon [3]. The graph is chunked into multiple layers. The
upper layer is overlaid on top of a lower layer. Each layer is
encoded with a different color to convey its height information.
Its construction steps are represented in [3].
We reuse the concept of horizon 2D in 3D horizon graph
visualization that upper layer of the graph is moved down
to the base ground plan. Its color band is still the same as
other visualizations. The allocated space per graph is reduced
to (S / (N * 2 * B)) + h as described in Table
I. This
makes the horizon graph use the least space compared to other
techniques we have discussed. Figure 3 provides an example
of 3D horizon graphs for four study years.
Figure 3. The 3D horizon graphs of the Saturated thickness of the Ogallala
in 2010, 2012, 2014 and 2016 (from bottom to top).
V.
USER STUDY
Our intention of this research is to introduce a 3D ver-
sion of horizon graph and small multiple, and explore user
performance on these techniques under different space and
cardinality constraints. Does the 3D horizon graph perform
better over other techniques? How does each type of graph
beneﬁt users in certain conditions?
To investigate these research questions, we designed a
quantitative user study approach to measure correctness per-
formance and time it takes for different combinations of visu-
alization techniques and number of study years. In particular,
we present interfaces of surface graphs, small multiples and
3D horizon graphs. With each graph type, we present two,
three and four study years for comparison and discrimination
tasks. The measurement matrices are correctness of each task’s
answer and the time requires to complete each trial.
A. Hypothesis
It is intuitive that shared space surface graph and split space
graph techniques have different strengths and weaknesses for
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-577-7
VISUAL 2017 : The Second International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

tasks with different visual spans. Also the number of study
years would strongly affect to user legibility.
•
H1
Simple surface graph will outperform other
techniques on small number of surfaces(for example,
with 2 surfaces sharing the same coordinate). We
predict that, the simple graph will outperform with few
study years when the visual clutter is small and has
less negative effects. When the number of study years
increases, the visual clutter becomes more problematic
and deducts graphical perception.
•
H2 Small vertical resolution will reduce small mul-
tiple performance. We want to conﬁrm this premise
that the display space will have a strong impact to
user performance.
•
H3
Small multiples out perform other techniques
when there are more occurrences. Besides the height
attribute, 3D small multiples also use color scale to
represent the height property in order to improve its
legibility in a compact space. Horizon graph technique
does not perform as well as it does in the 2D visual-
ization comparing to the small multiple technique.
B. Visualization Tasks
There are many tasks related to assessing graph representa-
tions. However, our hypotheses are based on the premise that
each graph visualization technique has different strengths and
weaknesses for different tasks. So through in-depth discussions
with water resource experts, taxonomists, and ontology re-
searchers, we identiﬁed two primary tasks important for visual
identiﬁcation of saturated thickness of the Ogallala:
•
Maximum: a simple exact location comparison
across all study years [34].
•
Discrimination: a dispersed location comparison
between study years [13].
1) Maximum (Exact location comparison):
We require
participants in this task to ﬁnd in a study year with the highest
value at a speciﬁc location. So within a single graph type,
there are several study years. We deﬁned a location A that
has the same longitude and latitude in all study years and ask
participants for the year with highest saturated thickness.
2) Discrimination (Dispersed location comparison): This
task expects users to determine which study year has highest
saturated thickness value at a location speciﬁc to each study
year between graph types. We randomly select a location
in each study year and ask participants to ﬁnd the highest
saturated thickness across all study years.
C. Environment and equipments
The experiments were conducted in a monitored laboratory
which each user gets a short training before doing the tasks.
Then we explain the tasks to users and ask him/her for a
trial to get familiar with the test tool before doing actual
tests. All experiments were conducted on a standard iMAC
desktop computer 27 inches equipped with a keyboard and a
mouse. The screen is set to 5120 x 2880 resolution. The test
application was maximized on the screen. Participants only
used the mouse during the experiments.
D. Participants
We recruited 10 subjects (5 males, 5 females), aged be-
tween 22 to 25. Participants were all volunteers and had normal
or corrected normal vision with no color blindness. We also
conduct screening to make sure students capable of using
computer and have some graph experience. For these reasons,
sophomore students or above who had taken courses that have
graphical representation get selected.
E. Trial condition
Our one shot trial test has a monitored number of simul-
taneous study years displaying on the screen. There is only
a single graph type representing study years on each screen
to avoid confusion to participants. With simple surface graph,
we represent each surface with its own color. The other graph
types have color scale to represent the height of saturated
thickness. The darker the color is the higher value of saturated
thickness we observe.
All trials are run with full window screen with only
zooming and rotating interaction. These factors are used to
allow user to rotate and understand other faces of the graphs
or look into details on zooming experience. To answer any test
questions, there will be a form with radio buttons for selection
of correct answer(s) and a conﬁrmation before the answer data
transferred to our recording system.
F. Procedure
First we train participants with explanation of the surface
graphs, small multiples and 3D horizon graphs. We also
introduce simple interaction with graphs such as zooming and
rotating to view different faces of the graph.
After the training phase, participants are required to do
practice test to make sure the test application is understood,
and become familiar with the graphs. They are also required to
explain concepts of each graph type to conﬁrm theoretical and
practical understanding. In addition, we introduce the concept
of saturated thickness, and how it is described in the graphs.
Participants sit in front of the monitor at comfortable distance
(around 50cm) to them. It is possible to ask questions during
the training phase but it is not allowed for the real trials.
Participants are required to ﬁnish all trials for a particular
graph type before moving to other ones. They are instructed
to complete the trials as quickly as possible. To avoid clicking
mistakes, there is always a conﬁrmation button for selection
before moving to the next question.
G. Study Design
The following factors are included in our study:
•
Visualization type (V): Simple surface graph, small
multiple and 3D horizon.
•
Number of simultaneous displays (N): 2, 3 and 4
years.
•
Task (T): Maximum and Discrimination.
From these factors, we have V x N x S or 3 X 3 X 2 = 18
combinations for trial conditions. Each condition is repeated
twice so we have a total of 36 trials per participant. The tasks
are ordered from simple to complex for user to be prepared
at the end. The order of graph types and order of number of
study years are random.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-577-7
VISUAL 2017 : The Second International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

There are 10 participants and each has 36 trials. Hence,
the study system collects for a total of 10 x 36 = 360 trials
for entire experiment.
VI.
RESULTS AND EXPLANATION
We consider accuracy as the key factor for evaluation. Since
it does not matter if participants perform extremely fast within
a given visualization, but in the end of the test session, the
answer is incorrect. We will evaluate overall task completion
accuracy and time to see the impact of number of study
years. Then, we will look into comparison about accuracy and
completion time of two tasks to see how graph type affects
perception.
A. Average completion accuracy and time
From Figure 4, we can conﬁrm our hypothesis H1 again:
the simple surface graph is more accurate with small number
of occurrences (two occurrences) and it dramatically drops by
number of study years from 90% to 68% at four occurrences.
The 3D horizon graph always has lowest accuracy rate. Its
performance drops quickly from 65% at two occurrences to
42% at four occurrences. On the other hand, the small multiple
graphs slightly decrease percentage of accuracy. The change
of percentage is not signiﬁcant so we can tell that the small
multiple technique stably maintains visual effect compared
to other techniques when number of study years increases.
In particular, the small multiple technique starts to get more
accurate from 3 occurrences compared to normal surface graph
(hypothesis H3). However, the accuracy is deducted with all
graph types (hypothesis H2).
Figure 4. Percentage accuracy (in %) of tasks by number of study years
Below, we plot the average completion time of all tasks
from our results. Figure 5 indicates that when number of study
years increases, it requires more processing time in perception
in order to do the task. It doubles the perception time in case
of simple surface graph, from 09 seconds with two study years
until around 19 seconds to complete the same task with four
years representation. In contrast, the small multiple and 3D
horizon graph gradually increase its completion time that it
can be explained by the complexity of the representation.
B. Breakdown of completion accuracy by tasks
To understand how graph types make a different in per-
forming tasks (simple and complex tasks), we visualize the
relationship between accuracy difference between the two tasks
( T1 - T2) and number of study years as line graph. Each line
stands for a graph type and its height is the accuracy difference.
If the performance gap keeps increasing by study year, it means
Figure 5. Average completion time of tasks by number of study years
that the visualization technique has poor representation for
number of occurrences.
From Figure
6, we found that task
T1 is always more
accurate than task
T2 across all graph types (Because the
points are all positive). The 3D horizon graph always has a
higher gap and increases quickly from 10% with two occur-
rences to 35% differences with four occurrences. The small
multiple slightly increases and keeps stable between three and
four occurrences.
Figure 6. Accuracy difference between tasks ( T1 - T2) by study years
From these analyses, we can see that graph type does affect
user perception. It helps users to capture information in dif-
ferent ways so that the accuracy and time does vary with each
representation. Depending on the need, 3D graphic designers
can decide the graph type to visualize the information.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we present the results of a user study
approach in understanding perception regarding surface graph
representations in 3D space. The results show that a few
number of simple surface graphs is best for the maximum
task however it shows huge clutter or overlapping resulting
in information hiding with more occurrences in the graphical
space. Moreover, the space that is required to visualize the
graph is proportional to the saturated thickness of the graphs.
The small multiple technique outperforms for larger numbers
of study years. Even though the 3D horizon graph has the most
compact space, its accuracy is still bottleneck.
It is obvious that the 3D representation looks more elegant
compare to the 2D representation. Therefore, we are excited
about our future work, which is to improve the performance
of the 3D horizon graph by providing more interaction such
as a slider to look into any slice of the graph mesh. Each slice
represents the projection of the graph cut onto a plane. We
will then investigate if this additional view will bring better
information capturing for user. In addition, we will investigate
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-577-7
VISUAL 2017 : The Second International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

more formal validation methods with support of statistical
testing to ensure the correctness of our methodology.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Time
series,”
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time series
[Accessed
date: June 17, 2017].
[2]
“William playfair,” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William Playfair [Ac-
cessed date: June 17, 2017].
[3]
R. Hannes, “The development of the horizon graph,” 2008.
[4]
N. Elmqvist and J.-D. Fekete, “Hierarchical aggregation for informa-
tion visualization: Overview, techniques, and design guidelines,” IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 16, no. 3,
2010, pp. 439–454.
[5]
H. Hochheiser and B. Shneiderman, “Dynamic query tools for time se-
ries data sets: timebox widgets for interactive exploration,” Information
Visualization, vol. 3, no. 1, 2004, pp. 1–18.
[6]
L. Kaufman and P. J. Rousseeuw, Finding groups in data: an introduc-
tion to cluster analysis.
John Wiley & Sons, 2009, vol. 344.
[7]
B. Bach, P. Dragicevic, D. Archambault, C. Hurter, and C. Sheelagh,
“A review of temporal data visualizations based on space-time cube op-
erations,” in Eurographics Conference on Visualization.
Eurographics,
2014.
[8]
W. C. Eells, “The relative merits of circles and bars for representing
component parts,” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
vol. 21, no. 154, 1926, pp. 119–132.
[9]
F. E. Croxton and R. E. Stryker, “Bar charts versus circle diagrams,”
Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 22, no. 160, 1927,
pp. 473–482.
[10]
F. E. Croxton and H. Stein, “Graphic comparisons by bars, squares,
circles, and cubes,” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
vol. 27, no. 177, 1932, pp. 54–60.
[11]
L. V. Peterson and W. Schramm, “How accurately are different kinds of
graphs read?” Audiovisual communication review, vol. 2, no. 3, 1954,
pp. 178–189.
[12]
W. S. Cleveland and R. McGill, “Graphical perception: Theory, exper-
imentation, and application to the development of graphical methods,”
Journal of the American statistical association, vol. 79, no. 387, 1984,
pp. 531–554.
[13]
D. Simkin and R. Hastie, “An information-processing analysis of graph
perception,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 82,
no. 398, 1987, pp. 454–465.
[14]
J. Lohse, “A cognitive model for the perception and understanding of
graphs,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors
in computing systems.
ACM, 1991, pp. 137–144.
[15]
D. J. Gillan, “A componential model of human interaction with graph-
ical display,” ACM SIGCHI Bulletin, vol. 25, no. 3, 1993, pp. 64–66.
[16]
W. Huang, P. Eades, and S.-H. Hong, “Beyond time and error: a
cognitive approach to the evaluation of graph drawings,” in Proceedings
of the 2008 Workshop on BEyond time and errors: novel evaLuation
methods for Information Visualization.
ACM, 2008, p. 3.
[17]
I. Spence and S. Lewandowsky, “Displaying proportions and percent-
ages,” Applied Cognitive Psychology, vol. 5, no. 1, 1991, pp. 61–77.
[18]
J. Heer, N. Kong, and M. Agrawala, “Sizing the horizon: the effects
of chart size and layering on the graphical perception of time series
visualizations,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 2009, pp. 1303–1312.
[19]
W. Barﬁeld and R. Robless, “The effects of two-or three-dimensional
graphics on the problem-solving performance of experienced and novice
decision makers,” Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 8, no. 5,
1989, pp. 369–385.
[20]
E. R. Tufte, The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. Cheshire,
CT, USA: Graphics Press, 1986.
[21]
A. David and C. J. Tauro, “Web 3d data visualization of spatio
temporal data using data driven document (d3js),” International Journal
of Computer Applications, vol. 111, no. 4, 2015.
[22]
S. D¨ubel, M. R¨ohlig, H. Schumann, and M. Trapp, “2d and 3d
presentation of spatial data: a systematic review,” in 3DVis (3DVis),
2014 IEEE VIS International Workshop on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 11–18.
[23]
W. Aigner, S. Miksch, H. Schumann, and C. Tominski, Visualization
of time-oriented data.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2011.
[24]
N. Andrienko and G. Andrienko, “Interactive visual tools to explore
spatio-temporal variation,” in Proceedings of the working conference
on Advanced visual interfaces.
ACM, 2004, pp. 417–420.
[25]
C. Tominski, P. Schulze-Wollgast, and H. Schumann, “3d information
visualization for time dependent data on maps,” in Information Visual-
isation, 2005. Proceedings. Ninth International Conference on.
IEEE,
2005, pp. 175–181.
[26]
D. A. Keim, C. Panse, and M. Sips, “Information visualization :
Scope, techniques and opportunities for geovisualization,” in Exploring
Geovisualization, J. Dykes, Ed.
Oxford: Elsevier, 2004, pp. 1–17.
[27]
C. Carneiro, “Communication and visualization of 3-d urban spatial data
according to user requirements: case study of geneva,” in Proceedings
of the XXI ISPRS Congress, vol. 37, 2008, pp. 631–636.
[28]
C. Koussa and M. Koehl, “Proposal of 3d gis for spatial data visual-
ization and analysis over internet.”
[29]
L. A. Treinish, “Visual data fusion for applications of high-resolution
numerical weather prediction,” in Proceedings of the conference on
Visualization’00.
IEEE Computer Society Press, 2000, pp. 477–480.
[30]
J. Kehrer and H. Hauser, “Visualization and visual analysis of multi-
faceted scientiﬁc data: A survey,” IEEE transactions on visualization
and computer graphics, vol. 19, no. 3, 2013, pp. 495–513.
[31]
R.
W.
B.
J.
A.
Schloss,
“Current
saturated
thickness,”
http://www.kgs.ku.edu/HighPlains/atlas/atcst.htm
[Accessed
date:
June 17, 2017], last revision 2000.
[32]
W. Javed, B. McDonnel, and N. Elmqvist, “Graphical perception of
multiple time series,” IEEE transactions on visualization and computer
graphics, vol. 16, no. 6, 2010, pp. 927–934.
[33]
Saito et al., “Two-tone pseudo coloring: Compact visualization for one-
dimensional data,” in Information Visualization, 2005. INFOVIS 2005.
IEEE Symposium on.
IEEE, 2005, pp. 173–180.
[34]
H. Lam, T. Munzner, and R. Kincaid, “Overview use in multiple visual
information resolution interfaces,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, vol. 13, no. 6, 2007, pp. 1278–1285.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-577-7
VISUAL 2017 : The Second International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

