Visual Analytics for Big Data with the Focus on
Mixed Reality an Exploration
Marina Tropmann-Frick
Department of Computer Science
Hamburg University of Applied Sciences
Hamburg, Germany
marina.tropmann-frick@haw-hamburg.de
Abstract—Visualization of big data using mixed reality is
challenging and promising at the same time. In this work, we
present a comprehensive overview of the existing work in this
area with a focus on several aspects of visual analytics. Even
if the methods used in different scientiﬁc papers and projects
are similar, the approaches and results differ very often, due
to speciﬁc goals of the visual representations. Using our work
the professionals can better understand the reality-virtuality
continuum and choose an appropriate approach more easily
in order to solve their speciﬁc big data analytical visualization
problem.
Index Terms—Augmented Reality, Big Data, Mixed Reality,
Virtual Reality, Visual Analytics, Visualization, Visual Interaction
I. INTRODUCTION
Visualization has always been an important part of data ex-
ploration. Every analytical procedure requires some illustration
of concepts, techniques, results, etc. This includes primarily
presentation of mostly abstract data or workﬂows for data
processing in visual form for easy understanding. Visualization
went through many phases over time and has become more
and more diverse due to new types of data and manifold data
processing techniques. Starting with cave paintings and maps,
visualization evolved into simulations and 3D representations.
Forms, types and displays changed due to a better understand-
ing of human seeing and perception. A human eye possesses
approx. 70 % of all human sensory receptors, and the data
is passed to the brain with the highest bandwidth. Our brain
is able to process visual information in parallel using large
arrays of neurons, extracting features from every part of the
visual ﬁeld simultaneously. Treisman described in [1] the
result of brain processing as a set of feature maps. This parallel
processing proceeds whether we like it or not and is mostly
independent of what we choose to pay attention to (although
not where we look). It is also rapid. Colin Ware indicates in
his book [2] that if we want people to understand information
quickly, we should present it in such a way that it can be
easily detected by these large, fast computational systems in
the brain.
The process of thinking or exploring that accompanies human
conscious perception, cannot be done entirely inside peoples
heads [3]. Mostly, an interaction with cognitive tools is nec-
essary to support the process. These tools can be of different
kinds, e.g., pencils and paper, calculators, or computer-based
tools and information systems. Computer tools alone are
insufﬁcient, human interaction is highly important. Especially,
visual analytics strongly relies on effective interaction of a
human and a machine. As we described in [4], the Human in
the Loop (HiL) concept is characteristical for the continuous
support of machine processing by human feedback. In the
context of Visual Analytics, HiL stands for providing continu-
ous feedback, correcting algorithmic approaches and selecting
appropriate techniques during the analytical process.
A. Visualization and Visual Analytics
Visualization and Visual analytics are both dealing with
visual representation. Their scope, application and impact
are, however, different. Visualization provides techniques for
presentation of data or relationships for the purpose of expla-
nation, interpretation, communication etc.
Visual analytics encompasses a process of knowledge discov-
ery by supporting the analyst to discover patterns in data,
building formal models that can be processed by machines, and
developing new hypotheses. This domain is often deﬁned as an
interdisciplinary approach to support exploratory knowledge
discovery especially regarding large and complex data sets [5],
[6], [7].
Visual Analytics focuses on the whole analytical process
and is not limited to visualization and automated analysis.
It also includes the entire infrastructure for creating visual
analytics tools. Processing power and capacity of existing
technologies allow to implement visual analytic techniques to
huge amounts of heterogeneous and dynamic data (Big Data),
where visualization cannot be used. Several visual analytics
tools were developed in the last years, e.g., [8], [9] or [10].
The purpose and effectiveness of these tools varies depending
on utilization scenarios, provided visualization techniques and
user knowledge.
B. Visual Analytics with Mixed Reality
The application area of Visual Analytics can be roughly
divided into two parts [11]
scientiﬁc area and information
representation for special purposes. The mixed reality tech-
niques are already widely used in the scientiﬁc area [12].
However, the development of such techniques for information
representation in general remains challenging. Due to the
complex concepts behind mixed reality, it is more appropriate
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-799-3
VISUAL 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

to implement them to domains with highly dimensional and
unstructured data where other techniques cannot be used.
The idea of using virtual reality for visualization of huge
datasets is not new. Steve Bryson pointed out already in
1996 the challenges, possibilities and opportunities of such
approaches [13]. Over time, the technical requirements and
system capabilities changed enormously, and new concepts,
such as Be the Data [14], emerged in this ﬁeld.
Fig. 1. The reality-virtuality continuum [15].
II. MIXED REALITY
One of the ﬁrst descriptions of mixed reality can be found in
[15]. Figure 1 represents the concepts of this work. There are
many stages between real and virtual worlds. The transition
from one environment to the other cannot always be divided
into some clear steps. The term mixed reality describes here
the whole bandwidth between reality and virtuality, including
augmented reality and augmented virtuality.
The displays for mixed reality evolved enormously in last
decades. The technology ranges from smartphones over head-
mounted displays to transparent displays on the front panel
or windscreen of vehicles. Ronald Azuma [16] describes
the future presentation techniques depending on the devices
selected for presentation. Which aspect of mixed reality is
presented, depends on device and the built-in display. Virtual
reality glasses are mostly capable to hide or cover the real
and present new virtual environment. Glasses for augmented
reality (optical see-through), such as Magic Leap or HoloLens
from Microsoft provide the possibility to present the whole
bandwidth of mixed reality not isolating the user from the
reality at the same time.
Most of the previous work for visualization of big data
with augmented or virtual reality was made in the area of
complexity reduction, design optimization or improvement of
interaction possibilities [17]. For the reduction of complexity,
ﬁltering, aggregation or dimension reduction techniques can
be used to reduce the amount of presented data. Design
techniques aim to optimize the data presentation depending
on user requirements.
In this regard, the authors of [18] pursued the approach of
adapting and mapping the ﬁltered data based on a user’s view-
ing direction. The investigation revealed a potential solution
for the visualization of big data by combining complexity
reduction and optimization within the visualization.
Markus Tatzgern [19] developed a technique to eliminate am-
biguity when mapping comments to two-dimensional objects.
Instead of two-dimensional objects, three-dimensional objects
are used that are recognized by a camera and annotated with
comments in augmented and virtual reality.
James A.Walsh and Bruce H. Thomas [20] developed a
portable AR system for the visualization of real-time data from
various sensor data. Their approach allows the visualization of
large amounts of data, but it does not support multidimensional
analyses.
III. VISUAL ANALYTICS FOR BIG DATA
Humans use their cognitive perception and visual intelli-
gence to generate meaning from data from their surroundings
[21]. Various visualization methods are available for this
purpose, for example in the form of diagrams. Interactive
technologies not only make it possible to visualize data, but at
the same time, for example, enlarge or reduce selected areas, or
perform other manipulations. This means that Visual Analytics
is not a speciﬁc tool, but an agile process in which the focus
is not only on technology but more on human interaction [22].
The Institute for Visual Analytics in Vancouver [51] explains
that the process starts with humans, who ﬁrst have to learn to
understand the context and the data. Only after the data has
been cleaned and pre-processed, the visualized presentation of
the data can be used to derive information and get insights.
At the same time, the understanding of the context increases,
which means that Visual Analytics cannot be deﬁned as a
sequential, but as an iterative process.
A. Challenges
Big data is often described by the three original Vs: volume,
velocity and variety. In the meantime, new V-terms have been
added, so that there exist now up to 10 Vs, see [23] and [24].
Often, however, it is only veracity and value that are added,
depending on the purpose and the nature of the data.
With the better ability to handle large amounts of data, on the
technical and human side, big data is getting constantly bigger
and the requirements are more and more increasing [25].
The challenges for the tools are constantly renewed by the
constant digitization of the world, as new types of data and
larger amounts are added. It is already possible to prepare data
to a certain level (semi)-automatically. Many of these tools are
already adapted for big data to ensure better analysis support
[26].
Even if these tools can now cope with high-dimensional data
sets, if the data also contains spatial and temporal dimensions,
the preparation becomes much more complicated again. These
dimensions have the property that in many cases they duplicate
the data records for every point in time and space. The number
of records increases by several dimensions. The complexity
of the data grows accordingly and increases the effort to ﬁnd
suitable visualizations and to display all relevant dimensions.
This often lead to ”clutter” and to visualizations with too much
information at the same time, which leads to a higher cognitive
load for the user and thus to poorer results.
Comparing and recognizing trends and patterns in big data
becomes then a problem [27]. This makes interactions, e.g.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-799-3
VISUAL 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

selection and zoom, a necessity to be able to view the different
facets of big data and to be able to choose the visualized
dimensions dynamically [23].
B. Opportunities
Visualizations that show as much information as possible at
once mostly have a problem with data that is both spatial and
temporal, because these dimensions are difﬁcult to dispense
with. This limits the ﬂexibility to select parameters of the
visualization. Mixed reality is a possibility to address these
issues. It is particularly helpful when displaying spatial data.
At MIT e.g., tweets were displayed on the campus in a scanned
campus environment [28].
The ability to realize more complex animations is also a plus.
A perfect example of this is the Reddit Place [29]. A total of
16.5 million pixels were edited on a white 1000 x 1000 pixel
canvas in 72 hours (Fig. 2), whereby every Reddit user could
make a change every 5 minutes [30]. It would be difﬁcult to
place all possible information from the experiment in static
images. Elements would also be lost on the desktops in 2D or
3D, since interactions are more complicated and 3D elements
cannot be perceived in details. The individual information
can only be presented and understood through meaningful
interaction.
Greg Bahm created a visualization for VR [31] that shows
some of the potential very well. It contains a mixture of
animation, spatial representation, diverse interaction and suit-
able visualization of useful parameters. Class relationships can
also be recognized well in VR models [32], since another
dimension is available for distribution and 3D interactions are
possible. The visualization can thus be viewed from all sides.
Thus, VR brings new possibilities, but also challenges,
whereby the visualizations have to be reconsidered for the
proper presentations [33].
Fig. 2. Reddit Place visualization [31].
C. Spatial Presentation
Stereoscopy as a part of virtual and mixed reality allows to
visualize three-dimensional data without dimension reduction.
3D displays usually use the binocular parallax cue (disparity)
to create an impression of depth. The representation of depth
is in this case a simulation of the depth perception process
through our visual system.
There are various display technologies available on the market
or developed in different scientiﬁc projects. A good overview
is given in [36] and [37]. Available display technologies can
be divided in stereoscopic and auto-stereoscopic displays.
Stereoscopic displays require special glasses to separate the
views for the left and right eye. The auto-stereoscopic displays
perform the view separation on their own and can be used
without glasses. Most often, the separation is done by a special
lens system (Alioscopy, Dimenco) or through parallax barrier
(Nintendo 3DS). The multiview auto-stereoscopic displays are
able to present simultaneously multiple views, thus increasing
the freedom of movement and creating more voluminous effect
that greatly improves the 3D experience. E.g., headtracked
auto- stereoscopic displays are multiview displays combined
with a head tracking technology. Based on head position, the
observer is presented with a different point of view allowing
great freedom of movement, e.g., Fraunhofer HHI’s Free2C
display technology [38].
The spatial cognition works better this way and spatial re-
lationships are easier to recognize [39]. Richardson et al
[40] showed in 1999 an example using maps and virtual
environment (VE). Relationships, such as distances, can be
better estimated in VE. However, maps also have advantages,
e.g., with more precise estimations over several ﬂoors.
Virtual reality enhances visual representations by adding an
extra dimension. Nevertheless, the third dimension is not a
universal remedy, since it only adds another feature to the
representation [41].
However, the advantage is visible in the Reddit Place visu-
alization (Fig. 2). Using the third dimension for selectable
parameters, e.g., a heatmap about the number of changes,
lifetime, or color changes over time, attention is drawn to the
points of interest.
The stereoscopic representation contributes also to a signiﬁ-
cantly better perception. Another example is visualization of
insect trajectories, see Figure 5 [35]. The time axis for move-
ment paths of insects serves here as an additional dimension.
This allows an easy visual perception of pauses and speeds.
One of the early approaches [34] shows the usage of a three-
dimensional Treemap for visualization of the Unix ﬁle system
(Fig. 3). Due to transparency of the individual cubes and their
hierarchy, it is possible to get a simple overview of the system
structure.
Fig. 3. Visualization of the Unix File System [34].
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-799-3
VISUAL 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

An important aspect here is whether the visualization is
helpful and simpliﬁes the work, at the same time meeting
requirements varying from case to case. In [28] the developed
visualization was helpful in order to be able to get an overview
of the geographic location and averaging tweets on the MIT
campus (Fig. 4).
The authors of [42] compare two- and three-dimensional visu-
alizations. They support the statement that the increased load
generated with mixed reality is justiﬁable due to perception
simplicity and comprehensibility of data representation.
Fig. 4. Visualization of tweets on the MIT campus [28].
D. Interaction in Higher Dimensions
Interactions within visualizations of big data are essentially
important for understanding of highly dimensional and dy-
namic data. Mixed reality technologies support a variety of in-
teractions with the represented data. Simulations or animations
can be seen in the same context [43]. Scaling and zooming
are some of the simple examples of interactions with data.
Mixed reality allows to perform also natural interaction with
the visualization using gestures and making it possible to walk
around the data [44]. The authors of [45] describe 5 patterns
for possible interaction with mixed reality visualizations:
• Selection
• Manipulation
• Viewpoint control
• Indirect control
• Compound.
All of the options described are useful when considering
data. Many interactions are, however, computationally expen-
sive and can affect the effectiveness of the visualizations. Users
should consider very carefully, which interactions can be most
useful in a speciﬁc use case.
The visualization of insect trajectories (Fig. 5) supports the
possibility of visual queries among other interactions with the
visualization.
Interactions and manipulation of data in the analytical process
is characteristical for the Human in the Loop approach. The
main concept is the continuous support of machine processing
by human feedback. In the context of visual analytics, this
concept occurs in terms of providing continuous feedback and
correcting algorithmic approaches within the analysis.
Fig. 5. Visualization of insect trajectories with visual queries [35].
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this paper we present an overview of mixed reality
approaches and examples and explain how they can be used
for further analytical processing.
The provided overview and the presented examples show that
mixed reality offers additional value for data visualizations.
We found out that the main advantage is better perception of
data, due to stereoscopic representation. Spatial relationships
can also be better understood in such visualizations.
After mastering the challenges, there are several options for
using mixed reality (as well augmented and virtual).
The form of visualization of big data can be optimized in such
a way that multidimensional data can be presented in a more
understandable way [46].
One of the examples is the Google Earth VR application,
which enables a user to travel in virtual space to any place
on Earth. In addition to the locations, a user recognizes
distances and height differences and experiences them in a
more memorable way than with a two-dimensional display
[47].
Furthermore, the combination of big data with augmented
reality in the form of assistants for navigation can simplify our
everyday life in the future. For example, current data can be
extracted from ofﬁcial sources as well as from social networks
in order to derive load factors for roads or public transport or
to make predictions in order to show the fastest route via an
AR / VR interface [48].
Another important example of visualizing big data with mixed
reality is to display data for applications in medicine. For
example, the virtualized structures could be displayed in real
time during an operation thus supporting the surgeons [49].
The combination of the mentioned technologies results also
in new learning methods, which lead to a higher mental
performance [50], as well as a more efﬁcient adaptation of
the cognitive load.
Our work can serve to better understand the reality-virtuality
continuum and helps professionals to choose an appropriate
approach to solve their speciﬁc big data analytical visualiza-
tion challenge.
Although, we did our research based on a big amount of
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-799-3
VISUAL 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

scientiﬁc and practical approaches, the speed with which
the technologies in this ﬁeld are developing is enormous.
To describe all possible relevant approaches in detail, this
publication would not be sufﬁcient by far. In our future work
we intend to compare some of the newer approaches more
detailed and present our results to the scientiﬁc community.
REFERENCES
[1] Treisman, A. Preattentive processing in vision. Computer Vision, Graph-
ics and Image Processing, 31, pp. 156177, 1985
[2] Ware, C. Information visualization: perception for design. Morgan
Kaufmann, 2020
[3] Hutchins, E. Distributed cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press., 1995
[4] Tropmann-Frick, Marina; Andersen, Jakob Smedegaard. Towards Visual
Data Science - An Exploration. In: International Conference on Human
Interaction and Emerging Technologies. Springer, Cham, pp. 371-377,
2019
[5] Thomas, J. J. and Cook, K. A.: Illuminating the path. Nat. Visualization
and Analytics. 2005
[6] Keim, D., Andrienko, G., Fekete, J.-D., Gorg, C., Kohlhammer, J. and
Melanon, G.: Visual Analytics: Deﬁnition, Process, and Challenges. In:
LNCS. pp. 154–176. Springer, 2008
[7] Mansmann, G. Ellis and F.: Mastering the information age solving
problems with visual analytics. Taylor and Francis Group. 2010
[8] Strobelt, H., Gehrmann, S., Pﬁster, H. and Rush., A. M.: LSTMVis:
A Tool for Visual Analysis of Hidden State Dynamics in Recurrent
Neural Networks. In: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics. (24)1, pp. 667-676. 2018
[9] Bailey, S. M., Wei, J. A., Wang, C., Parra, D. and Brusilovsky.,
P.: CNVis: A Web-Based Visual Analytics Tool for Exploring Conf.
Navigator Data. In: Electronic Imaging. 2018
[10] Chandrasegaran, S., Badam, S. K., Kisselburgh, L., Peppler, K.,
Elmqvist, N. and Ramani, K.: VizScribe: A visual analytics approach
to understand designer behavior. In: International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies. 100 pp. 66-80. Elsevier. 2017
[11] E. A. Widjojo, W. Chinthammit, and U. Engelke. Virtual reality-based
human-data interaction. In International Symposium on Big Data Visual
Analytics (BDVA), pp. 16. Nov 2017
[12] A. van Dam, A. S. Forsberg, D. H. Laidlaw, J. J. LaViola, and R. M.
Simpson. Immersive vr for scientiﬁc visualization: a progress report.
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 20(6):2652. Nov 2000.
[13] Bryson, S. Virtual reality in scientiﬁc visualization. Commun. ACM,
39(5):6271. May 1996
[14] X. Chen, J. Z. Self, L. House, and C. North. Be the data: A new approach
for lmmersive analytics. In 2016 Workshop on Immersive Analytics (IA),
pp. 3237. March 2016.
[15] Milgram, P., Takemura, H., Utsumi, A., Kishino, F. et al. Augmented
reality: A class of displays on the reality-virtuality continuum. In Tele-
manipulator and telepresence technologies, volume 2351, pp. 282292,
1994.
[16] Ronald Azuma. Making augmented reality a reality. In Applied In-
dustrial Optics: Spectroscopy, Imaging and Metrology, pages JTu1F1.
Optical Society of America. 2017
[17] Neven AM ElSayed, Bruce H Thomas, Ross T Smith, Kim Marriott, and
Julia Piantadosi. Using augmented reality to support situated analytics.
In Virtual Reality (VR) pp. 175176. IEEE. 2015
[18] Blaine Bell, Steven Feiner, and Tobias Hllerer. Viewmanagement for
virtual and augmented reality. In Proceedings of the 14th annual ACM
symposium on user interface software and technology, pp. 101110.
ACM. 2001
[19] Markus Tatzgern, Denis Kalkofen, Raphael Grasset, and Dieter Schmal-
stieg. Hedgehog labeling: Viewmanagement techniques for external
labels in 3d space. In Virtual Reality (VR), 2014 IEEE, pp. 2732. 2014
[20] James A. Walsh and Bruce H. Thomas. Visualising environmental
corrosion in outdoor augmented reality. In Proceedings of the Twelfth
Australasian User Interface Conference, Volume 117, pp. 3946. Aus-
tralian Computer Society, Inc., 2011.
[21] Donald D. Hoffman. Visual Intelligence, in German: Visuelle Intelli-
genz: wie die Welt im Kopf entsteht. Klett-Cotta, 2000.
[22] Ekaterina Olshannikova, Aleksandr Ometov, Yevgeni Koucheryavy, and
Thomas Olsson. Visualizing big data with augmented and virtual reality:
challenges and research agenda. Journal of Big Data, 2(1):22, 2015.
[23] Quang Vinh Nguyen and Ulrich Engelke. Big data visual analytics:
Fundamentals, techniques, and tools. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2017 Courses,
SA 17, pp. 2:12:203, New York, NY, USA, 2017. ACM.
[24] George Firican. The 10 Vs of big data, February 8, 2017.
[25] S. A. Hirve, A. Kunjir, B. Shaikh, and K. Shah. An approach towards
data visualization based on ar principles. In 2017 International Confer-
ence on Big Data Analytics and Computational Intelligence (ICBDAC),
pp. 128133, March 2017.
[26] E. A. Widjojo, W. Chinthammit, and U. Engelke. Virtual reality-based
human-data interaction. In 2017 International Symposium on Big Data
Visual Analytics (BDVA), pages 16, Nov 2017.
[27] K. Reda, A. Febretti, A. Knoll, J. Aurisano, J. Leigh, A. Johnson,
M. E. Papka, and M. Hereld. Visualizing large, heterogeneous data in
hybridreality environments. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications,
33(4) pp. 3848, July 2013.
[28] A. Moran, V. Gadepally, M. Hubbell, and J. Kepner. Improving big
data visual analytics with interactive virtual reality. In 2015 IEEE High
Performance Extreme Computing Conference (HPEC), pages 16, Sept
2015.
[29] Brian Simpson, Lee Matt, and Daniel Ellis. How we built r/place, 2017.
[30] Josh Wardle and Justin Bassett. Looking back at r/place, 2017.
[31] Greg Bahm. VR data visualization learnings from the place viewer, 2017.
[32] Neville Churcher, Warwick Irwin, and Ron Kriz. Visualising class
cohesion with virtual worlds. In Proceedings of the Asia-Paciﬁc Sym-
posium on Information Visualisation - Volume 24, APVis 03, pp. 8997,
Darlinghurst, Australia, Australia, 2003. Australian Computer Society,
Inc.
[33] R. J. Garca-Hernndez, C. Anthes, M. Wiedemann, and D. Kranzlmller.
Perspectives for using virtual reality to extend visual data mining in
information visualization. In 2016 IEEE Aerospace Conference, pages
111, March 2016
[34] Jun Rekimoto and Mark Green. The information cube: Using trans-
parency in 3d information visualization. In Third Annual Workshop on
Information Technologies and Systems. WITS93, pp. 125132, 01 1993.
[35] K. Reda, A. Febretti, A. Knoll, J. Aurisano, J. Leigh, A. Johnson,
M. E. Papka, and M. Hereld. Visualizing large, heterogeneous data in
hybridreality environments. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications,
33(4): pp. 3848, July 2013.
[36] N. S. Holliman, N. A. Dodgson, G. E. Favalora, and L. Pockett. Three-
dimensional displays: a review and applications analysis. In: IEEE
Transactions on Broadcasting 57.2 (2011), pp. 362371.
[37] H. Urey, K. V. Chellappan, E. Erden, and P. Surman. State of the art in
stereoscopic and autostereoscopic displays. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
99.4 (2011), pp. 540555.
[38] Hopf, K., Chojecki, P., Neumannn, F., Przewozny, D. Novel autostereo-
scopic single-user displays with user interaction. In: Three-Dimensional
TV, Video, and Display V. International Society for Optics and Photon-
ics, 2006. S. 639207.
[39] C. Donalek, S. G. Djorgovski, A. Cioc, A. Wang, J. Zhang, E. Lawler, S.
Yeh, A. Mahabal, M. Graham, A. Drake, S. Davidoff, J. S. Norris, and
G. Longo. Immersive and collaborative data visualization using virtual
reality platforms. In 2014 IEEE International Conference on Big Data
(Big Data), pp. 609614, Oct 2014.
[40] Anthony E. Richardson, Daniel R. Montello, and Mary Hegarty. Spatial
knowledge acquisition from maps and from navigation in real and virtual
environments. Memory and Cognition, 27(4):741750, 1999.
[41] C. Chen and T. Hsu. Game development data analysis visualized with
virtual reality. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Applied
System Invention (ICASI), pages 682685, April 2018
[42] Patrick Millais, Simon L. Jones, and Ryan Kelly. Exploring data in
virtual reality: Comparisons with 2d data visualizations. In Extended
Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, CHI EA 18, pages LBW007:1LBW007:6, New York, NY,
USA, 2018. ACM.
[43] N. Brunhart-Lupo, B. W. Bush, K. Gruchalla, and S. Smith. Simulation
exploration through immersive parallel planes. In 2016 Workshop on
Immersive Analytics (IA), pages 1924, March 2016
[44] Stefan Marks, Javier E. Estevez, and Andy M. Connor. Towards the
holodeck: Fully immersive virtual reality visualization of scientiﬁc and
engineering data. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference
on Image and Vision Computing, New Zealand, IVCNZ 14, pages 4247,
New York, NY, USA, 2014. ACM.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-799-3
VISUAL 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

[45] Jason Jerald. The VR Book: Human-Centered Design for Virtual Reality.
Association for Computing Machinery and Morgan; Claypool, New
York, NY, USA, 2016.
[46] Andrew Moran, Vijay Gadepally, Matthew Hubbell, and Jeremy Kepner.
Improving big data visual analytics with interactive virtual reality. In
High Performance Extreme Computing Conference (HPEC), 2015 IEEE,
pages 16. IEEE, 2015.
[47] Dominik P Kser, Evan Parker, Adam Glazier, Mike Podwal, Matt Seeg-
miller, Chun-PoWang, Per Karlsson, Nadav Ashkenazi, Joanna Kim,
Andre Le, et al. The making of google earth vr. In ACM SIGGRAPH
2017 Talks, page 63. ACM, 2017.
[48] Xiaoming Li, Zhihan Lv, Baoyun Zhang,WeixiWang, Shengzhong Feng,
and Jinxing Hu. Web vr gis based city big data 3d visualization and
analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.01051, 2015.
[49] Jos Incio, Joo Ribeiro, Jaime Campos, Sara Silva, and Victor Alves.
Augmented reality in surgery. Next-Generation Mobile and Pervasive
Healthcare Solutions, page 96, 2017.
[50] Gulsun Kurubacak and Hakan Altinpulluk. Mobile Technologies and
Augmented Reality in Open Education. IGI Global, 2017.
[51] Vancouver Institute for Visual Analytics (VIVA). http://viva.sfu.ca/. Last
visited 20.01.2020. .
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-799-3
VISUAL 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

