A Review on the Development of a Virtual Reality Learning Environment for 
Medical Simulation and Training 
 
 
Kieran Latham, Patryk Kot, Atif Wariach, Dhiya Al-
Jumeily. 
Faculty of Engineering and Technology 
Liverpool John Moores University 
Liverpool, United Kingdom 
Email: {K.Latham, P.Kot, A.I.Waraich, 
D.Aljumeily}@ljmu.ac.uk  
Mani Puthuran, Arun Chandran 
Consultant Interventional Neuroradiologist 
NHS The Walton Centre 
Liverpool, United Kingdom 
Email: {Mani.Puthuran, 
Arun.Chandran}@thewaltoncentre.nhs.uk
 
 
Abstract—This paper aims to discuss specific immersive 
Virtual Reality Medical Training platforms developed as 
research projects in the use of Virtual Reality for Medical 
Training. It looks at the technology that is utilised by different 
applications and investigates the methodologies employed in 
the development of immersive applications. This paper 
identifies some critical strengths for Virtual Reality Medical 
Training applications, such as the reduction of risk to 
practitioners and patients, and the ability to simulate complex 
scenarios that in real-world practice would be hard to 
reproduce. 
Keywords- Gamification; Immersive Application; Medical 
Training Simulation; Virtual Reality Learning Environment. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Technological advancement in the area of Virtual Reality 
(VR) and medical training, has seen a surge in the number of 
institutions investigating the development of an immersive 
application for the pedagogical dissemination of anatomical 
knowledge and the practical training of medical procedures, 
both at commercial and research level. Many institutions are 
coming up with ways to utilise VR to enhance the learning 
experience of medical practitioners by creating immersive 
simulations for users to practice. As identified by the Virtual 
Reality Society [1], a Virtual Reality Learning Environment 
(VRLE) is a platform, which allows users to engage with 
content actively and can improve the user’s ability to 
develop better cognitive abilities, spatial awareness and even 
be used to perform hazardous tasks in a risk-free 
environment. Another form of immersion is the Cave 
Automatic Virtual Environment (CAVE) [2]. In this 
environment, projectors are directed to between three and six 
of the walls of a room-sized cube, and typical setups include 
either having projection screens installed to receive camera 
projections of the virtual world, with the user wearing 3D 
glasses to distinguish better what is around them. However, 
companies are coming up with CAVE systems that can 
utilise Flat Panel LCD screens and optical tracking for a 
much more immersive and dynamic CAVE system [3]. In 
the medical industry, especially, many institutions are 
looking for immersive solutions to disseminating medical 
knowledge in more interactive ways and to guiding medical 
professionals 
through 
complicated 
procedures. 
These 
procedures require repetitive and consistent training of the 
user in order to improve the success rates of procedural cases 
[4]. Section II of this paper will discuss the advantages a 
VRLE has on medical simulation, and the effect each one 
has on the quality of training provided. Section III discusses 
some significant works related to Immersive VR medical 
platforms and looks at the tools and techniques utilised 
within the research projects. The methods involved in 
assessing the effectiveness of the virtual reality simulator, in 
terms of heuristics and quality of training by providing users 
with training scenarios and ways of providing qualitative and 
quantitative feedback. Section IV will conclude the paper by 
discussing the findings of the research. How users utilised 
the applications and the benefits and limitations identified by 
the researchers. As well as potential avenues for future 
investigation. 
II. 
THE PURPOSE OF A VRLE 
A vital aspect of the discussed immersive VR 
applications are the advantages they offer to traditional non-
immersive VR training platforms. While it is beneficial to 
the user to provide them with an immersive training 
experience in which to improve their technical skills and 
coordination, There are multiple advantages to immersive 
VR applications as identified below. 
A. User Engagement and Immersion 
The fundamental purpose of a VRLE is to provide users 
with a content-rich learning environment for them to train in 
and better engage with content related to what they are 
learning. As identified by Byl et al [5], where qualitative 
discussion backed by user experience questionnaires 
identified that the virtual simulator provided a high-quality 
experience which when combined with its efficient usability 
made for an exciting experience that maintained the user’s 
engagement. It demonstrates that a VRLE will benefit a 
user’s development when it provides an immersive 
experience and improves the quality of training. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

B. Bespoke Training Platforms 
Another benefit of a VRLE is that it can be tailored to 
provide users with training in a specific subject or role, 
allowing for training programs to be developed and utilised, 
evidenced by Lam et al [6]. They identified that the use of a 
training simulator developed for cataract surgery allowed 
trainees to learn a specific set of skills required to perform 
this type of procedure effectively. It is clear from this that a 
VRLE has the potential to enhance the quality of learning, by 
allowing for the creation of a simulator with specific training 
scenarios in mind that can allow trainees to learn skills 
essential to their role effectively.  
C. Risk-Free Training and Assessment 
A standard belief across most VR platforms is that they 
provide users with a risk-free environment to train in that 
allows them to associate themselves with hazardous 
situations with little to no chance of actual harm occurring. 
The notion of risk-free training identified by Li et al., 
explains that an advantage of medical training within a 
VRLE is that the user is provided with a safe virtual 
environment to train inside. In this project, training 
Clinicians perform laparoscopic procedures in a virtual 
environment, allowing them to develop an understanding of 
the steps involved in the procedure [7]. The trainees are also 
able to develop a better understanding of the surgical 
equipment and the human body through Virtual Reality 
training. The user can associate themselves with the 
complicated procedures and associate themselves with the 
risks involved that are likely to cause complications for the 
patient. In addition to this, the ethical approval requirements 
for simulating training are less demanding than if a trainee 
was to practice on a live patient, so that is an added 
advantage to virtual simulation. 
III. 
RELATED WORKS 
The purpose of this research project is to provide 
interventional radiologists with a VRLE in Endovascular 
Surgery, and as such, background research has been 
conducted into the area of existing medical VRLE and has 
identified several publications pertinent to this research 
project. These articles provide an insight into the 
methodologies they employed, how they approached their 
testing scenarios, and any conclusions they identified 
through the completion of any experiments. Identified 
through background research is that VR is used to identify 
medical simulators on a PC, regardless of whether these 
applications utilise immersive technology such as head-
mounted displays or haptic feedback controllers. As such, 
this review will look at applications specifically for VR 
technology, looking at how researchers developed these 
applications, how they tested the simulators, the feedback 
received, and any noticeable differences using VR. 
A. Tools and Techniques 
The identification of what software and hardware were 
used to develop these immersive applications is crucial to the 
development of a VR training simulator. By identifying 
essential tools and techniques will help in creating a 
workflow to develop an application of similar nature and 
provide an understanding of what is available and commonly 
used in the development of medical simulations. The 
following is a list of such tools. 
 
1) Süncksen et al [8]: The purpose of this research 
project was to identify whether a VRLE created that 
recreated radiographic procedures could improve the skills 
of practising radiologists. When developing the VRLE 
designed for x-ray imaging, authors opted to use Unity 3D 
game engine, which is a powerful engine used to create 
interactive visual applications [9], the completed application 
provides users with a visual representation of an operating 
theatre with c-arm interaction for radiography. Radiographic 
images produced are based on Computed Tomography (CT) 
and as such, use complex datasets commonly used in the 
medical industry. The DICOM Toolkit (DCMTK) is a 
plugin developed for Unity that allows for the importing of 
Digital 
Imaging 
and 
Communications 
in 
Medicine 
(DICOM) datasets, which are datasets produced by 
radiography [10]. The purpose of this is to convert DICOM 
data into readable datasheets to be visualised in-game inside 
Unity. For the virtual reality implementation of the 
application, the researchers opted for the HTC Vive [11]. 
The Vive utilises two stationary sensors that can track the 
user in an open environment and provide a full room-scaled 
environment, 
allowing 
users 
to 
walk 
around 
the 
environment and interact with objects more realistically. 
2) Harrington et al [12]: Researchers developed a 
VRLE as a novel approach to providing Doctors with a 
training platform to improve their critical thinking and 
decision-making regarding patient care. The simulator 
developed by Harrington, C.M., et al for decision making 
utilised the Unity 3D game engine for the development of 
the simulator. Additionally, for extended functionality and 
platform support for Oculus VR in Unity, Oculus Utilities 
was installed to Unity, the toolkit provided additional 
features for use with the Gear VR. Furthermore, Autodesk 
3DS Max 2014 was used for the 3D modelling and design 
of the virtual environment used in the simulator and 
provided the VRLE for the application. The simulator was 
designed to run on the Samsung Gear VR HMD, which is 
powered by the Oculus platform and consists of a Gear VR 
HMD. This setup allows the user to interact with the 
simulation, listen to what is said, assess the situation around 
them and make decisions.  
3) Byl et al [5]: The simulator developed in this research 
project is a novel platform for the training and improvement 
of medical ultrasound imaging and spatial cognition for 
doctors. In order to develop this simulator, the researchers 
opted to follow a similar method to Süncksen, M., et al [8]. 
The researcher decided to use the Unity 3D game engine for 
the development of the immersive application, which is used 
to present the virtual world and training scenario that will 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

provide users with a content-rich learning environment. 
Additionally, the application made use of a “visualization 
toolkit for artificial and medical volumetric image data”. It 
works like the DCMTK toolkit used in the x-ray imaging 
software, which allows for the realistic simulation of 
medical imaging in the application to improve immersion. 
In this instance, however, the toolkit appears to be 
homogenous to the Department of Applied Sciences at 
Flensburg University [5]. The application also utilises the 
HTC Vive HMD and haptic feedback controllers, which 
allows them to look around the virtual environment and 
interact with objects within, as part of the training scenarios. 
TABLE I.  
IDENTIFIED TECHNOLOGIES FOR VR DEVELOPMENT 
Project 
Tools 
Platform 
Engine 
Plugins 
1) X-Ray 
Imaging [8] 
HTC VIVE 
Unity 3D 
C# 
DCMTK [10] 
2) Critical 
Decision 
Making [12] 
Gear VR 
Unity 3D 
C# 
N/A 
3) Medical 
Ultrasound 
Imaging. [5] 
HTC VIVE 
Unity 3D 
C# 
Visualisation Toolkit for 
Artificial 
and 
Medical 
Volumetric Image Data [5] 
 
Additionally, 90% of Samsung Gear apps and 53% of 
Oculus Rift games use Unity and C# for development. While 
the papers do not go into detail as to why they chose the 
HTC Vive, initial research suggests that the HTC Vive is 
capable of full room tracking using external trackers, 
providing enhanced motion tracking and more accurate 
tracking as opposed to the Oculus Rift. In terms of visual 
ability, the HTC Vive provides users with a complete 
resolution of 2,160 x 1,200 (1,080 x 1,200 per eye), and a 
field of view of 110 degrees, which combined with a 90Hz 
refresh rate allows for an improved immersive experience 
inside the HTC Vive [18].  
B. Methods and Approaches 
A crucial part of the research is how the users interacted 
with the system. Providing users with a series of objectives 
that enable researchers to assess the users level of ability and 
user experience of the application. The following is a list of 
conventional methods used for this purpose. 
 
1) Süncksen et al [8]: In the x-ray imaging application, 
the aim is for the user to correctly reproduce radiographic 
images, with the constraints of the game being that users 
complete the challenge in an efficient amount of time, with 
a minimal amount of patient radiation dosage. The user is 
provided with text-based instructions and imagery to show 
the expected output and what the users must do to achieve 
this. Additionally, the user is scored based on three 
variables: accuracy of the radiographic image, amount of 
time taken, and patient dosage, with points being provided 
based on the user's score, while also comparing the users 
score to an expert’s score. Furthermore, to improve the 
development of spatial awareness, a non-medical mode 
exists in which users must identify objects hidden in a box, 
correctly, to improve their skills in c-arm navigation. 
2) Harrington et al [12]: For this project, researchers 
developed an application that places the user at the centre of 
a traumatic situation in which they need to make critical 
decisions and diagnoses pivotal to the patient's survival, 
RSCI Medical [19]. The application has the user following a 
patient through the early stages of hospital arrival, listening 
to the doctors and nurses provide information about the 
situation. Users then choose an option regarding patient 
care, which contributes to a score at the end, based on 
whether the patient survived. It requires the user to critically 
think and lets them experience the quick paced and stressful 
environment where it is imperative to take on multiple 
sources of information at once in order to succeed in making 
the right decisions.  
3) Byl et al [5]: This paper on ultrasound imaging takes 
an unconventional approach to gamifying the training of 
ultrasound imagery by taking users out of a medical 
environment and into an industrial setting, with the 
objective being to conduct ultrasound scans on packages 
containing objects to determine that the contents were 
packaged in the correct box in the correct way. This 
scenario allows the user to gain experience conducting 
ultrasounds and analysing what is seen on screen, allowing 
them to determine whether what they are seeing is correct. 
The simulation uses a point system that increments as the 
player makes correct guesses, as well as how long it took for 
users to make decisions, and the total number of correct 
answers. Additionally, a leader board is provided to 
compare high scores to other users as an incentive to 
perform better and obtain a higher score. 
C. Evaluation and User Experience 
As a part of the user experience, researchers can record 
qualitative and quantitative feedback from users regarding 
the user’s experience of an application, the functionality, and 
determine the applications overall effectiveness. 
 
1) Süncksen et al [8]: While utilising the application, 
users had several tasks to accomplish; this exposed the user 
to multiple aspects of the system, which would allow for a 
variety of responses from the users. Users provided 
feedback in the form of a user experience questionnaire 
(UEQ) [14]. Users were asked to provide quantitative 
feedback regarding the usability and effectiveness of the x-
ray imaging application. 65.85% (27) of users agreed 
wholeheartedly that the system is adequate for medical 
training, 29.27% (12) of users agreed and provided 
additional feedback on potential improvements, 2.44% (1) 
of users mostly agreed that the application was useful, 
lastly, 2.44% (1) of users disagreed with the notion of using 
this application for medical training. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

2) Harrington et al [12]: The application evaluated the 
use of VR technology for the training of Doctor’s critical 
thinking and ability to diagnose patients in a stressful 
environment. The user experience questionnaire used a 
Likert scale between 0 and 7; scores were considered 
negative if they were below 3, with scores above five 
classed as positive. User feedback identified that the RCSI 
Training Simulator received positive results with an average 
score of 5.09 out of 7 regarding Immersion and Realism of 
the VR simulation, 5. Regarding the method of learning, it 
was rated 5.7 out of 7 as a useful teaching tool, with 58% of 
candidates claiming their belief that there currently are not 
enough patient management simulators available.  
3) Byl et al [5]: Evaluation of the novel application for 
medical ultrasound imaging was conducted using User 
Experience Questionnaires which provided quantitative 
responses regarding aspects of the system using a Likert 
scale between -3 and 3, with results between -0.8 and 0.8 
being neutral. Nine users tested the application: 6 male and 
three male participants, with five already possessing 
experience with VR technology. Quantitative responses 
from the UEQ looked at six factors: Attractiveness, 
Perspicuity, Efficiency, Dependability, Stimulation, and 
Novelty. Results showed that the Attractiveness, Efficiency, 
Stimulation, and Novelty categories all scored good results 
over 0.8. Regarding Perspicuity and Dependability, users 
believed improvements could be made to improve 
information dissemination, a modification of object 
transforms to accommodate changes in users height, and 
audio cues to support their stimulation. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The literature review conducted in this paper indicates 
that the use of VR technology is indeed beneficial to the 
learning experience of medical professionals. The feedback 
from users regarding the projects revealed that most users 
believe VR to be a useful tool for medical training and 
assessment. The training applications reviewed benefitted 
from a content-rich and realistic working environment for the 
user’s training. The applications developed also utilised a 
point system, which would keep score of the user’s progress 
throughout the tasks and be indicative of their performance, 
which provides accurate measurement for supervisors to 
refer to when reviewing the user’s progression when 
training. Furthermore, a common occurrence in these 
projects was users initially struggling to understand how to 
accomplish tasks within the simulation, this combined with 
the low number of users that have experienced VR, indicates 
a lack of familiarity with VR technology and immersive 
applications. 
The lack of familiarity about VR in the medical 
community could be worth investigating, potentially 
identifying methods in which VR could further enhance the 
quality of quality as identified by the reviewed projects. 
Furthermore, the use of gamification in medical training as a 
metric for progress review could be reviewed further to 
develop a greater understanding of the impact this could 
have on monitoring progression within medical training 
platforms. 
REFERENCES  
[1] Virtual Reality Society (2011) Virtual Reality Learning 
Environments [online] 
Available at: https://www.vrs.org.uk/virtual-reality-
education/learning-environments.html 
[Accessed: 18th February 2019] 
[2] C. Cruz-Neira, D. J. Sandin, T. A. DeFanti, R. V. Kenyon, 
and J. C. Hart, “The CAVE: audio visual experience 
automatic virtual environment,” Communications of the 
ACM, 
[online] 
vol 
356, 
pp.64–72. 
Available 
at: 
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=129888.129892, 
1992. [Accessed 18th Feb. 2019]. 
[3] A. Febretti, “CAVE2: A Hybrid Reality Environment for 
Immersive 
Simulation 
and 
Information 
Analysis,” 
Proceedings of SPIE - The International Society for Optical 
Engineering, vol 8649, pp.01-13. [Accessed 30th May. 2019]. 
[4] M. Maytin, T. P. Daily, and R. G. Carillo, “Virtual reality 
lead extraction as a method for training new physicians: A 
pilot study,” PACE - Pacing and Clinical Electrophysiology, 
vol 383, pp.319–325, 2015. [Accessed 25th Feb. 2019]. 
[5] B. Byl, M. Süncksen, and M. Teistler, “A serious virtual 
reality game to train spatial cognition for medical ultrasound 
imaging,” 2018 IEEE 6th International Conference on Serious 
Games and Applications for Health, SeGAH 2018, pp.1–4, 
2018. [Accessed 19th Feb. 2019] 
[6] C. K. Lam, K. Sundaraj, and M. N. Sulaiman, “Computer-
based virtual reality simulator for phacoemulsification 
cataract surgery training,” Virtual Reality, vol 184, pp.281–
293, 2014. [Accessed 18th Feb. 2019]. 
[7] L. Li, et al, “Application of virtual reality technology in 
clinical medicine,” American journal of translational research, 
[online] 
vol 
99, 
pp.3867–3880. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28979666, 
2017. 
[Accessed 19th Feb. 2019]. 
[8] M. Süncksen, et al, “Gamification and virtual reality for 
teaching mobile x-ray imaging,” 2018 IEEE 6th International 
Conference on Serious Games and Applications for Health, 
SeGAH 2018, pp.1–7, 2018. [Accessed 19th Feb. 2019]. 
[9] K. Yang and J. Jie, J, “The Designing of Training Simulation 
System Based on Unity 3D,” In: 2011 Fourth International 
Conference on Intelligent Computation Technology and 
Automation. [online] IEEE, pp.976–978. Available at: 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5750762/, 
2011. 
[Accessed 30 May 2019]. 
[10] M. Eichelberg, et al, “Ten years of medical imaging 
standardization and prototypical implementation: the DICOM 
standard and the OFFIS DICOM toolkit (DCMTK),” 
Proc.SPIE, 
5371. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://doi.org/10.1117/12.534853 [Accessed: 29 May. 2019] 
[11] J. Egger, et al, “HTC Vive MeVisLab integration via OpenVR 
for medical applications,” PLOS ONE, [online] 123, 
p.e0173972. 
Available 
at: 
https://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0173972 [Accessed 
30 May 2019]. 
[12] C. M. Harrington, et al, “Development and evaluation of a 
trauma decision-making simulator in Oculus virtual reality,” 
American Journal of Surgery, [online] vol 2151, pp.42–47. 
Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjsurg.2017.02.011. 
[Accessed 18th Feb. 2019]. 
[13] J. Kim, C. Y. L. Chung, S. Nakamura, S. Palmisano, and S. K. 
Khuu, “The Oculus Rift: a cost-effective tool for studying 
visual-vestibular interactions in self-motion perception,” 
Frontiers in Psychology, [online] vol 6, p.248. Available at: 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

http://journal.frontiersin.org/Article/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.0024
8/abstract [Accessed 30 May 2019]. 
[14] M. Schrepp, et al, “Design and evaluation of a short version 
of the user experience questionnaire (UEQ-S),” IJIMAI - 
International Journal of Interactive Multimedia and Artificial 
Intelligence, vol 3, pp.103-108, 2017. [Accessed 29th May. 
2019]. 
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

