Approximate Convex Decomposition for Real-time Terrain Fracturing 
Namil Lee 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Korea University 
Seoul, Korea 
e-mail: 2namil@naver.com  
JungHyun Han 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Korea University 
Seoul, Korea 
e-mail: jhan@korea.ac.kr  
Abstract— This paper proposes the Terrain Approximate 
Convex Decomposition (TACD) method. It extracts features 
from the regularly-sampled height map, uses the features to 
decompose the height map into a set of convex hulls, and then 
applies the fracture patterns to the convex hulls. The TACD 
method runs at real time and presents realistic effects. It can 
be integrated with games and virtual reality applications. 
Keywords-terrain; height map; fracturing. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Fracturing or fragmentation refers to the process by 
which an object is shattered into small pieces. It is a desired 
effect especially in games, but real-time terrain fracturing is 
not easy to implement.  
It is generally required to use pre-defined fracture 
patterns for real-time fracturing, but the terrain area is 
basically a 2D surface and is too wide to apply such a pattern. 
This paper tackles the problem by decomposing the input 
terrain surface into 3D convex hulls, each of which is 
independently combined with a fracture pattern.  
This paper presents the real-time terrain fracturing 
algorithms in the following organization: Section II presents 
the basics of pattern-based fracturing. Section III proposes 
what we call Terrain Approximate Convex Decomposition 
method. Section IV presents the experimental results and 
Section V concludes the paper. 
II.
CONVEX-HULL FRACTURING
This section first presents how fracturing is made with a 
pattern, and then how the terrain is fractured in terms of 
features and convex hulls. 
A.
Pattern-based Fracturing 
For real-time fracturing, we use a pre-defined fracture 
pattern. Figure 1 shows the flow of fracturing. The input 
object is decomposed into convex hulls, to which the fracture 
pattern is applied so that the intersection of the convex hulls 
and fracture pattern produces many facture cells. The cells 
will be physically simulated to bring the fracturing effects. 
B.
Feature Extraction 
The most commonly used terrain model is the height 
map, which stores discrete elevation data on the grid. The 
first step of terrain fracturing is to extract features from the 
height map.  
Figure 1. Fracturing flow. 
In our study, we used a 256×256-resolution height map. 
Its base is the xz-plane with y-coordinate zero, and the terrain 
surface is a mesh of 3D triangles constructed with 2562 
vertices. Figure 2-(a) shows a cross section of an example 
height map, which was simplified to have 11×11 samples 
just for visualization purpose. The red and green points 
represent the features. The red-colored features are extracted 
through the Laplacian operation on the surface curvatures of 
the height map. The green-colored features represent the 
boundary of the 256×256-resolution height map volume.  
C.
Convex Hull Decomposition 
If we computed the convex hull for the entire height map 
shown in Figure 2-(a), we would have a big convex hull, as 
illustrated with the red boundary. It is not efficient to apply 
the fracture pattern to such a big convex hull.  
In order to decompose the height map into a set of 
smaller convex hulls, we need to extract another group of 
features, such as the red point in Figure 2-(b). It represents a 
point with the locally-maximal concavity. A wide height 
map may contain a number of such features, and they are 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-577-7
VISUAL 2017 : The Second International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

extracted through flooding-based watershed technique [1]. 
Figure 3 illustrates the process.   
Figure 2. Features in the height map. 
Figure 3. Flooding-based watershed. 
Figure 4. Convex hull computation. 
Figure 5. Height map and terrain surface. 
Given a set of four or more nearby feature points, a 
cutting plane is defined, as shown in Figure 4-(a). Then, a 
convex hull is obtained with the cutting plane, as illustrated 
in Figure 4-(b). In the current implementation, we use the 
Random Sample Consensus (RANSAC) method [2] for 
defining the plane and the Quickhull method for computing 
the convex hull [3]. 
III.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The proposed system was implemented in Direct3D 11 
on Intel i7-3770 3.40GHz CPU, 16GB RAM, and GeForce 
GTX 980 Ti.  
Figure 6. Terrain fracturing due to bombing. 
Figure 5 shows the height map of resolution 2562 and the 
3D polygon mesh constructed from it. Figure 6 shows the 
fracturing effects. The low-frequency terrain in Figure 6-(a) 
produces 142 fracture cells, and fracturing takes 28.6ms. The 
high-frequency one in Figure 6-(b) produces 205 fractures, 
and fracturing takes 30.63ms. The higher-frequency terrain 
surface produces more fractures, which consume more time.  
IV.
CONCLUSION
This paper presented a novel terrain fracturing method 
based on fracture pattern, where the features are extracted 
from the height map, and then the height map is decomposed 
into convex hulls using the features. The fracture patterns 
apply to the convex hulls. The method can be integrated with 
games and virtual reality applications. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Institute for Information & 
communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded 
by the Korea government (MSIP) (No.R0115-16-1011). J. 
Han is the corresponding author. 
REFERENCES
[1]
E. Zuckerberger, A. Tal, and S. Shlafman, “Polyhedral 
surface decomposition with applications,” Computers & 
Graphics, vol. 26, no. 5, 2002, pp.733 –743. 
[2]
M. A. Fischler and R. C. Bolles, “Random sample consensus: 
A paradigm for model fitting with applications to image 
analysis and automated cartography,” Commun. ACM, vol. 24, 
no. 6, 1981, pp.381–395. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-577-7
VISUAL 2017 : The Second International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

[3]
C. B. Barber, D. P. Dobkin, and H. Huhdanpaa, “The 
quickhull algorithm for convex hulls,” ACM Trans. Math. 
Software, vol. 22, no. 4, 1996, pp. 469–483. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-577-7
VISUAL 2017 : The Second International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

