Industrial Augmented Reality (IAR) as an Approach for Device Identification 
within a Manufacturing Plant for Property Alteration Purpose 
Tshepo Godfrey Kukuni  
Department of Electrical, Electronic, and Computer 
Engineering 
Central University of Technology, Free State 
Bloemfontein, South Africa 
email: tgkukuni@gmail.com 
Ben Kotze  
Department of Electrical, Electronic, and Computer 
Engineering  
Central University of Technology, Free State 
Bloemfontein, South Africa 
e-mail: bkotze@cut.ac.za 
Abstract—In 
this 
article, 
a 
possible 
solution 
to 
the 
identification and detection of components in a process is 
investigated within a controlled network environment. This 
seems necessary as the component is not always identifiable 
with small or no previous knowledge to the design and 
implementing phase. Augmented Reality utilising identifiers 
such as machine vision is investigated rather than the current 
Quick Response codes or Radio Frequency Identification. If 
identified at its position, the data and device details are then 
available to the user for viewing or editing purposes. This 
project is still in its startup phase thus real data will be 
addressed and discuss in a follow-up article.
Keywords- industrial augmented reality; image processing; 
virtual reality; mixed reality; augmented reality; RFID; QR 
codes; manufacturing plants; SCADA. 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, the demand for software resources has 
increased drastically due to the rise in smartphones 
hardware [1]. As a result, researchers have predicted that 
Mixed Reality (MR) will have the potential to play a very 
big role in our future daily lives, such as in education, 
medical, production, etc. It is with such reasons that Virtual 
Reality (VR), which is a component of the MR technology, 
can be transmuted into Augmented Reality (AR) by adding 
real elements such as live video feeds to the virtual world. 
Acquiring information about the surrounding objects 
effectively is a crucial factor for many people including 
people with disabilities such as the blind. The introduction 
of the AR application, which is denoted as a powerful user 
interface technology that augments the user`s environment 
with computer-generated entities can accomplish this task 
by making use of AR technologies [2]. 
The 
information 
about 
reality 
becomes 
more 
interactive between the user`s perceptions of the real and 
virtual world in an AR environment. The reality happens 
through the application of the real-time object detection and 
recognition algorithms that will enable recognition of the 
surrounding objects in the real environment in order to align 
the computer-generated images with these objects in an AR 
view [3]. 
In comparison with VR, users can see virtual and real-
world objects concurrently in an AR system. Since both VR 
and AR are virtual objects related phenomena’s, the concept 
of enhancing the illusions that the virtual objects are present 
in a real scene has led to more research attention focusing 
on the occlusion problem.  
The problem with occlusion occurs when real 
objects are in front of the virtual objects in a scene [4]. 
However, the information can be inserted in a contextual-
dependant way, which therefore allows AR to act as a 
substitute for the traditional assembly.  
The concepts of utilising AR technology as a 
possible Quick Response (QR) code improved system 
through the use of Machine Learning (ML), by integrating a 
well-known AR toolkit, is proposed as a good way to obtain 
good reputation data. Furthermore, this process can be 
automated, and robust tracking can be achieved utilising this 
method [5]. 
The basic concepts in AR applications depend on 
the identification of real-world objects on the screen by 
tracking them, then augmenting the scene with an artificial 
object. Tracking is often combined with some estimation of 
the correct 2D or 3D world coordinates for proper 
placement of augmentation in the scene. The application can 
further be discriminated to build artificial markers for object 
detection and those with the ability to use “natural” image 
features [6] - [8].  
The AR application is to be developed and 
incorporated in the manufacturing plant, using data that is 
obtained from the sensors that are identical to the 
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system 
data. This data will accord the opportunity for reading and 
altering of certain properties of the devices within the 
manufacturing plant. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

No real applications of this process technology have been 
found for implementation, thus the reason for the study.  
This paper proposes an optimal and efficient model 
utilising Machine Vision (MV) to detect and identify devices 
based on their positions within the manufacturing 
environment with the aid of the AR application. Problem 
statement outline the reasons for conducting this study, then 
the aim and objectives of how this study will be conducted.  
Furthermore, the methodology section outlines the 
procedure in which the development of the prototype will be 
carried out and lastly the conclusion section outlines the 
overview of the feasibility of the study. 
II.
PROBLEM STATEMENT
Despite the greatness that AR brings in the Industry 
4.0 platform, there have been constraints associated with 
AR technology. The predominant constraints are categorised 
into two, namely technology and environment.  
Technological constraints on mobile AR are aligned 
with the resources on most smart devices. This constraint is 
substantiated predominantly with limited memory, limited 
computational capability as well as the limited graphics 
capability.  
It is with such reasons that Industrial Augmented 
Reality (IAR) capabilities need to further be investigated 
concerning object detection, recognition, and identification 
of devices within a manufacturing environment.  
In a controlled network, the identification of 
components in the process is difficult without the 
knowledge 
and 
background 
in 
the 
design 
and 
implementation process. Thus, the concept of device 
identification with the aid of AR application utilising 
identifiers such as MV other than QR codes and Radio-
Frequency Identification (RFID) codes needs to be 
investigated. 
The challenge currently experienced by industry is the 
development, implementation, and integration of MR 
systems such as VR and AR systems that will have the 
capability to augment manufacturing operations and deliver 
cost-effective, time-efficient and ameliorate the quality of 
service (QoS) and products.
This research seeks to develop an efficient and optimal 
model to use AR Application, as well as MV to detect, 
identify and alter the device properties in the manufacturing 
environment. 
A. The objectives of this study 

To prove that vision-id could be used for device 
identification rather than tags or QR codes.  

To use AR application to detect errors, faults or 
device malfunctions in the manufacturing plant.  

To develop a test bench that will operate as a 
manufacturing plant.  

To determine the details of the devices by means of 
their 
position 
in 
the 
process 
within 
the 
manufacturing 
environment 
utilising 
MV 
technology. 
B. Original contributions expected from the research 

Includes recognition of automation structures/ 
components by means of vision for identification 
of such process.  

By means of identification, the user will have the 
capability to view and adjust the parameters of the 
process in the scaled plant.  
III.
LITERATURE REVIEW
In recent years, computers have gained a great deal of 
popularity due to their capability to make human life much 
easier, and this has also affected the success of businesses 
that are universally linked to the decisive approach for the 
establishment of innovative technologies. As the growth and 
improvement in technology inflated, mobile devices also 
gained widespread recognition and are considered a 
technological 
game-changer 
due 
to 
their 
powerful 
processors, etc.  
Milgram et al. [7] present the AR definition as a 
continuum figure where he highlights the (closeness of the 
AR system to the real environment) and Augmented Virtual 
(AV - closer to the virtual environment), which both lie 
between the real and the virtual environment as highlighted 
in Figure 1.  
                       Figure 1. Reality-Virtuality Continuum [7]. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

Milgram`s definition of AR is supported by Azuma 
and Stapleton; however, despite support from other authors, 
Milgram did not cover the 3D aspect of the AR technology. 
Furthermore, to this discussion, Gausemeier [8], developed 
an application with interest in the information display. 
The 
study 
focused 
on 
image-based 
object 
recognition and tracking for AR applications for inserting 
information into the user’s field of view through a mobile 
device (MD) system.  
Gausemeier et al. model development are aligned 
with the 3D-CAD file to the 3D model of the derived object. 
From the video point of view, Gausemeier used streams, 
edges, 
color 
and 
textile 
information. 
However, 
Gausemeier`s method is based on extracted pictures for 
filtering and comparison as compared to utilization of a live 
video in real-time for object detection and identification. 
Silva al et. [9] in his paper outlines the method of 
utilising Bayesian Network Model, by calculating the 
probability of an event. Silva`s model is a simplification 
model based on Jensen Bayesian network model [10].  
Silva classifies this model as a simplified model by 
discarding the third element which in this case is the texture 
and focuses his study only on the color and shape. 
Antonijevic et al. [11] highlight the combination of 
IEC 61850 feature with augmented reality technology for 
providing added value visualisation capabilities in the 
substation automation domain. However, Antonijevic study 
despite using IEC 61850 as the communication tool, the AR 
application is still based on device identification utilising 
QR codes rather than MV. 
Dos Reis et al. [12] present an application that uses 
a paranomic augmented environment to extend the 
information shown to power systems operators supporting 
data interpretation, monitoring, and manipulation. However, 
dos Reis, study is based on a live environment and proved 
the feasibility of IAR.  
Furthermore, to IAR application, Marcincin et al. [13] 
present new attitude in imaging of combined working 
environment and its practicality for realising the principle of 
the utilisation of half-silvered surface, which provides the 
advantages for displaying AR objects directly in the 
working view of the user and free motion without hardware 
device connectivity.  
IV.
METHODOLOGY
In recent years, the QR codes have been identified as 
an improvement technology to Bar Code (BC) technology. 
The introduction of QR technology came about the 
limitations that are experienced in BC technology such as 
storage capacity and character type.  
The QR codes introduction came about the capabilities 
of encoding and decoding of the different types of data such 
as binary, numeric, alphanumeric, etc. as indicated in Figure 
2. QR codes are pinpointed to have a significant problem 
associated with slow QR detection.  
Figure 2. Multiple bar code to 2D [14].
A key upcoming type of technology (MR) will be used 
in the same principle in which QR technology has upgraded 
the BC technology. 
The device tracking will be utilising the high-resolution 
camera, MV and OpenCV library. While the AR 
application, which is regarded as the computer technology 
that enhances real environments through visual represented 
information which has the following features:  

Object tracking;  

Ability to superimpose virtual objects on to user`s 
view of a real-world scene;  

The positioning of virtual objects in a real-world 
scene;  

To combine real-world images with virtual images 
in real-time.  
MV is defined as knowledge and approach cast-off to 
provide an image-based automatic examination for quality 
control, process control and robot guidance [15]. MV is 
regarded as a real-world component as highlighted in Figure 
3. 
There are several shortcomings such as light intensity 
for the camera to sense. However, such shortcomings will 
be depicted by the Arduino which acts as the control system 
due to its interface with sensors and sending of data to the 
SCADA were the user can monitor and be alerted of any 
anomalies within the factory. However, the very same 
information can be obtained using the AR app.  
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

Figure 3: Industrial machine vision system for inspection [16]
Industrial Machine Vision (IMV) comprises of the 
following components: Lighting, Optics, Image sensing, and 
Image processing.  
As the sensing happens, AR applications will be 
used to identify the devices based on their positions and 
outlines their details and the Artificial Intelligence (AI) of 
the system will kick-off in the background. Then, the AR 
application will be activated to detect and identify the 
devices while communicating with the SCADA to have 
identical data.  
The sensory part of the system will have the input 
functionalities for reading in the manufacturing plant`s 
temperature, humidity, light intensity, and motor speed. 
This sensory data will register out the pneumatic outputs on 
the SCADA App and this data can also be obtained using 
the AR App.  
The light sensor will be a critical sensory part of 
the study since the study is based on MV. The reasons are 
that MV depends on image acquisition utilising cameras 
with high resolutions whilst light depends on the light 
sensors. The light sensor will control the light intensity of 
the plant to allow the camera to operate optimally by using 
vision to capture accurate data. With this said, the study will 
be divided into 3 sections namely; sensing, automation and 
vision.  
Automation will be accomplished by applying the 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) algorithm that will learn the 
environment as well as the behavior of the devices through 
Machine Learning (ML) application. This will be 
accomplished by the development of a vision application 
based on open-source software called OpenCV due to the 
cost affiliated with this software. C++ based software called 
OpenCV provides the tools needed to solve computer vision 
problems and also can process low-level image functions 
and high-level algorithm [17].  
In addition, OpenCV will provide a common 
infrastructure for computer vision applications and also 
accelerate the 
use of 
machine perception in the 
manufacturing environment. 
Figure 4: Proposed architecture solution for AR identification     
solution in Manufacturing Environment
Figure 4 highlights the proposed system for the AR 
application solution interfaced with a SCADA system for 
device detection and identification based on the AR 
application developed in Unity3D on an Android platform.  
The SCADA application will be developed in C 
language through the use of Arduino microcontroller which 
will be interfaced to the physical sensors. Furthermore, the 
Graphical User Interface (GUI) will be developed in C# 
language using Microsoft Visual Studio 2012. MV will be 
realised by the use of an open source library called OpenCV 
technology. This MV processing will be realised through 
the use of a high-quality resolution camera and it will be 
used to identify objects on the conveyer belt for the Robotic 
Arm (RA) to pick. 
SCADA will be linked to all the system 
components of the manufacturing plant such as conveyer 
belt, motors driving the conveyer belt, RA as well as the 
sensors that will provide the manufacturing environments 
with data such as motor failure, motor speed, light intensity, 
temperature, and plant humidity. These sensors will indicate 
when to activate the cooling system etc, or how negatively 
the light intensity affects the vision camera. In addition to 
the sensor’s responsiveness, the SCADA will save the 
information for later analysis. However, data analysis is not 
accounted for in this study.  
MV will be accomplished by the use of a high-
resolution camera which will be placed on a fixed position 
on top of a servo motor to monitor, detect and identify the 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

devices 
(motors 
and 
a 
robotic 
arm) 
within 
the 
manufacturing plant.  
 Several OpenCV algorithms such as Canny edge 
detection, image recognition, color detection, and shape 
detection will be utilised on one side of the study utilising 
MV. Due to the progress in AR technology, related 
researches along with advanced computer hardware and 
software has let to AR technologies in getting more 
attention. 
An AR Application will be built with several 
functionalities such as identification, detection, and 
recognition of devices (motors and a robotic arm). An AI 
application will be embedded in the background of the App 
for device recognition.  
The application designed for this study will be used 
for detecting the factory phenomena such as temperature 
and humidity obtained by SCADA technology. Then, 
SCADA will act as the control system to control the 
movement of the motors to direct the conveyer belt within 
the factory. The object recognition, identification, and 
detection will be based on the motors as indicated in Figure 
4 for detection and identification of motor information such 
as motor speed, motor direction, motor model, etc. 
However, an embedded identifier will be used as the focal 
point to the motor and robotic arm but in an interacted 
manner with the motor information. The device details 
obtained from the SCADA will match the device details 
provided by the AR application to improve productivity and 
have an earlier notification of device malfunction within the 
manufacturing plant.
V.
CONCLUSION
This paper has proposed an efficient and optimal model 
that considers the use of AR for use in manufacturing plants. 

An approach in device detection and identification is 
presented where image processing through image 
acquisition is utilised for device identification. The 
knowledge of the devices and their positions within the 
manufacturing plant will be known through the use of an 
Android device that will identify those devices utilising 
AR technology. 

MV will be used to identify objects of a certain shape 
and color. Furthermore, all the sensory data from the 
sensors will be displayed on the SCADA system. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Acknowledgment for financial assistance and 
academic assistance from Central University of Technology, 
Free-State (CUT, FS), Black Engineers Enterprise (BEE), 
Calvary and Selosesha YMG   
REFERENCES
[1] C.-F. Lin, S.-W. Lo, P.-S. Pa and C.-S. Fuh, "Mobile 
Application Design of Augmented Reality-Digital Pet," p. 21. 
[2] G. Reitmayr and D. Schmalstieg, "Location-based 
Applications for Mobile Augmented Reality," vol. 18, p. 1, 
2003.  
[3] V. Beglov, "Object information based on marker recognition," 
Finland, 2013, p. 1. 
[4] Y. Tian, T. Guan and C. Wang, "Real-Time occlusion 
handling in Augmented Reality Based on Object Tracking," p. 
2886, 29 March 2010.  
[5] H. Kato and M. Billinghurst, "Marker Tracking and HMD 
Calibration for a Video-Based Augmented Reality Conference 
System," In IEEE and ACM International Workshop on 
Augmented Reality, p. 4, October 1999.  
[6] D. Wagner and D. Schmalstieg, "First steps towards handheld 
augmented reality," In ISWC`03, p. 3, November 2005.  
[7] P. Milgramn, H. Takemura, A. Utsumi, and F. Kishino, 
"Augmented Reality: A class of displays on the reality reality-
virtuality continuum," Telemanipulator and Telepresence 
Technologies, pp. 282-292, 1994.  
[8] J. Gausemeier, J. Freund, C. Matysczok, B. Bruederlin, and 
D. Beier, "Development of a real-time image-based object 
recognition method for mobile ar-devices," In AFRIGRAPH 
03: Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on 
Computer graphics, virtual Reality, visualization and 
interaction in Africa, pp. 133-139, 2003.  
[9] R.L. Silva, P.S. Rodrigues, D. Mazala, and G.Giraldi ” 
Applying object Recognition and tracking to augmented 
reality for information visualization,” p.5,3 June 2014. 
[10] F. V. Jensen and T. D. Nielsen, Bayesian Networks and 
Decision Graphs, Second ed., 2001, pp. 41-42. 
[11] A. Antonijevi, S. Sucic, and H. Keserica, "Augmented Reality 
for Substation Automation by Utilizing IEC 61850 
Communication," p. 3, 8 March 2018.  
[12] P. R. dos Reis, D. L. G. Junior, A. S. de Araujo, G. B. Junior, 
A. C. Silva and A. C. de Paiva, "Visualization of Power 
Systems Based on Panoramic Augmented Environments," p. 
1, 30 September 2014.  
[13] J. N. Marcincin, J. Barna, M. Janak, and L. N. Marcincinova, 
"Augmented Reality Aided Manufacturing," p. 27, 2013.  
[14] T. G. Amaral, V. F. Pires, J. F. Martins, A. J. Pires and M. M. 
Crisostomo, "Image Processing based classifier for detection 
and diagnosis of induction motor stator fault," p. 7, 11 
February 2014.  
[15] D. Wave, "Two-dimensional code fromthe bar code," 
[Online]. Available: https://www.qrcode.com/en/index.html. 
[Accessed 29 May 2019]. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

[16] S. Sathiyamoorthy, "Industrial Application of Machine 
Vision," vol. 03, no. 01, p. 1, January 2014. 
[17] B. G. Batchelor and D. W. Braggins, "Commercial Vision 
Systems," in Commercial Vision: Theory and Industrial 
Applications, 1992, p. 406. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

