Profiling with Smart Meter Data in a Virtual Reality Setting 
William Hurst, Casimiro A. Curbelo Montañez 
Department of Computer Science, 
Liverpool John Moores University 
Liverpool, UK 
Email: {W.Hurst, C.A.CurbeloMontanez}@ljmu.ac.uk 
 
Abstract— Visualising complex data facilitates a more 
comprehensive stage for conveying knowledge. Data-to-day, we 
are surrounded by data. Each one of us is also a regular 
creator of data. For example, even simply surfing the internet, 
and following links, generates information that is collated by 
the website owner. Similarly, the introduction of the smart 
meter has meant that we are now generators of data from 
using electivity and gas in our home. Organisations are finding 
increasingly more interesting ways to manipulate datasets such 
as this. For example, smart meter data is being increasingly 
used for predicting load balancing within the smart grid and 
for the development of remote healthcare monitoring services. 
It is clear that by visualising complex datasets, finding answers 
to complex questions in an understandable manner becomes 
possible. Yet, interpreting large datasets using virtual reality is 
a concept that is still in its infancy. Therefore, in this paper, a 
visualisation of smarter meter data in a virtual reality setting, 
is demonstrated. The aim of the work is to i) outline an 
approach for data visualisation in virtual reality and ii) 
demonstrate how a virtual assistive environment can be 
created for remote healthcare monitoring. 
Keywords- Data Visualisation; Virtusal Reality, Smart Meter. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Today, information generated from different domains 
continues to accumulate and is being collected at increasing 
rates as a consequence of living in a big data era [1]. This 
field is expected to keep growing and get more complex so it 
is important to innovate continually and develop new ways 
of understanding the gathered information [2]. The intricacy 
of the models used for analysis increase with the data 
complexity; this makes it even more of a challenge to deliver 
effective communication and visualisation of the data to end 
users. Therefore, in order to identify patterns and to provide 
insights about the data’s architecture it is key to understand 
the information in a more convenient way. This should be 
achieved via the development of meaningful tools for the 
analyst and standard users. 
The visual representation of data plays an important role 
when presenting complex findings in an informative and 
engaging way. This, combined with advanced analytics, can 
be integrated in methods to support the creation of 
interactive and animated graphics on different platforms, 
including desktops and various mobile computing devices 
[3]. However, less traditional visualisation methods, such as 
those using immersive Virtual Reality (VR) platforms, 
represent a powerful and innovative approach for multi-
dimensional data visualisation that can outperform traditional 
desktop visualisation tools [4]. 
Smart meters are a rich source of granular electricity 
consumption data. This has raised considerable attention in 
the recent years on a global scale due to the numerous 
advantages smart meters provide [5]. Supported by the 
Advance Metering Infrastructure (AMI) [6], smart meters 
enable real-time monitoring of energy usage by recording 
electrical data such as voltage, frequency and energy 
consumption information [7]. This high-resolution data 
collected from smart meters can ultimately provide valuable 
information on the electricity consumption behaviours and 
lifestyle of the consumers. Therefore, allowing the 
development of remote monitoring systems to assess 
independent living in populations with Dementia or 
Alzheimer’s disease [8]. In this sense, institutions such as the 
National Health Service (NHS) in the United Kingdom (UK) 
are able to use the data collected remotely to explore the data 
in a novel way and provide an assessment of the patient. 
Based on these ideas, a virtual assistive environment concept 
is simulated in this paper for remote healthcare monitoring 
using data collected from smart meters. 
This paper focuses on the visualisation of smart meter 
data in a virtual reality setting to maximise the perception of 
the data scape geometry and provide a more intuitive way to 
explore high dimensionality and abstraction inherent in the 
data. The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section II 
presents a background discussion on visual data analytics in 
VR and highlights related projects. Section III outlines the 
methodology adopted for this work. Section IV presents the 
implementation and a discussion on the work. The paper is 
concluded in Section V. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
VR interfaces have been broadly used in many fields 
including scientific visualisation with numerous commercial 
and academic software systems developed in the field of 
physics, astronomy, biology, medicine, and engineering 
among others [9]. The benefits of using such technology 
provides a better understanding and manipulation of the data 
which facilitates a more efficient and comprehensive 
analysis [10]. In this sense, VR technologies have the 
potential to assist decision makers when dealing with 
analytical tasks. Users can be immersed in the dataset to 
explore it from a different perspective, with the possibility of 
extracting knowledge from the inside-out instead of from the 
outside-in as typically conducted using 2D techniques. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

A. Visual Data Analytics using Virtual Reality (VR) 
Despite the success of VR in scientific visualisation, it is 
still in its infancy in the field of information visualisation. 
VR environments: immersive (specifically head mounted 
displays) and non-immersive (desktop) 3D worlds, where a 
virtual world is enhanced with abstract information. 
Traditionally, Science Visualization [11] and Information 
Visualisation [12] have been the main areas of visualisations. 
In the first case, data from scientific experiments is 
represented using three-dimensional visualisations, with 
various uses in biology, medicine, architecture and 
meteorology among other fields. On the other hand, 
Information 
Visualisation 
emerged 
to 
facilitate 
the 
comprehension and interpretation of the data to users 
utilising graphics. In addition to these two areas of 
visualisation, the field of Visual Analytics [13] has emerged 
in the past few decades. Visual analytics (VA) combines 
visualisation, data mining and analysis methods with suitable 
user interaction. To provide advanced insights in the data, 
especially high dimensional data. Users can be immersed 
into the data via Immersive Analytics (IA), which is derived 
from the VR and VA fields, and uses stereoscopic 
visualisation to immerse an individual into a virtual 
environment.  
VR has been used to model statistical visualisations in 
large sets of data points [14]. The authors in [14], for 
example, developed an application for statistical analysis 
using the C2 immersive VR environment [15], and then 
compared it against a more traditional workstation-based tool 
for high-dimensional data visualisation, XGobi [16]. Users 
were tested in how well they detected and selected clusters, 
intrinsic dimensionality and radial sparsity, using several 
graphic methods to analyse the data (i.e., brushing and grand 
tour). Results demonstrated that the added dimension 
provided by C2 enables the users to make better decisions 
about the structure of high dimensional data. This, in turn, 
indicates the benefits of using C2 environments to improve 
user’s productivity for structure and feature detection tasks in 
comparison with XGobi. System experience plays an 
important role when analysing the data in favour of those 
users with more experience interacting with desktop 
environments. Slower interactions in the C2 system were 
apparent for people with no previous experience in VR. 
However, the intuitive nature of virtual environments can 
accelerate the learning process when using immersive 
environments such as C2. 
The role of VR (and also Augmented Reality (AR) and 
Mixed Reality (MR)) in Big Data visualisation has been 
highlighted in [17]. The authors provide an overview of past 
and current visualisation methods in the field of Big Data 
while discussing important challenges and solutions towards 
the future of Big Data visualisation using immersive 
analytics (the combination of VR and Visual Analytics). 
These challenges are related to current technology 
development, as well as human limitations [18]. Advances 
using such techniques, will ultimately help improving human 
challenges related to their ability to manage the data, extract 
information and gain knowledge from it. 
In the utility domain, VR has vaguely been explored with 
some exceptions where AR instead of VR has been used 
[19][20]. Therefore, this represents an ideal opportunity to 
investigate how Immersive Analytics can be used to extract 
knowledge from smart meter readings (i.e., anomalies). 
Angrisani et al. [19] utilised augmented reality to develop an 
approach to improve home power consumption awareness. 
The authors included sensors into the system, designated to 
measure power factor, current and active power consumed 
by household appliances. Experiments conducted using the 
AR reality system allowed users to access electrical 
consumption associated with appliances’ corresponding load 
in a simple an easy way rendering the power values in a 
smart device (smartphone or tablet). Based on the 
information reported, the users were able to decide whether 
to switch the appliances off or not. The experiments 
conducted showed the potential of AR in energy monitoring 
within household context. 
B. Virtual Reality Applications 
Other VR applications have been explored in our previous 
work where we demonstrate the use of VR for training and 
productivity enhancement. For example, in [21], a VR crane 
simulation is outlined, as presented in Figure 1. The aim of 
the application is to train drivers/operators in a safe 
environment, improving the productivity behind the training 
stage of crane operation. The application allows the user to 
move the crane around and the view changes dynamically. 
The prototype shows where a crane can be positioned within 
a real-world 3D virtual environment, taking into account the 
swing and rotation of the crane beam. 
 
Figure 1. Virtual Crane Simulation [13] 
In [22], a VR proton beam therapy unit is constructed 
using an actual building information model of a proton beam 
therapy treatment unit. The application acts as a metric for 
supporting patients by providing an opportunity for the 
individual to be prepared mentally for the treatment process. 
 
Figure 2. Virtual Proton Beam therapy Unit [14] 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

The application presented in Figure 2 has the potential to 
be a staff training metric. The interaction is simplified and 
provides an effective platform for inducting new staff into 
the treatment room and processes involved. Both projects 
are a clear demonstration of the role VR can play in the way 
we understand out environment, and it is a clear 
transformative technology for training and communication.  
Building on this background investigation and our related 
VR development work, in the following section the 
methodology adopted for this project is presented. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
In the methodology, an overview of the process flow 
adopted for this research is presented. The data employed in 
the visualisation and the techniques used to structure the 
data for use in a VR setting are also outlined. 
A. Process Flow 
The process involves a six-step pipeline, as outlined in 
Figure 3.  
 
Figure 3. Process Flow 
The data source in this paper is comprised of smart meter 
data from 10 homes, collected over twelve months. The 
energy readings are taken at 30-minute intervals. An 
overview of the data is presented in Figure 4, which displays 
the total energy usage for one individual in the dataset. The 
y-axis displays the KiloWatt Hour (KHW) energy usage and 
the x-axis is the rowID for the energy reading within the 
dataset.  
 
Figure 4. Data Overview 
The x-axis, therefore, corresponds to time and displays 
the progression of the energy usage over one-year. 
However, it is the anomalous points in the data that are of 
specific interest. For example, patterns or changes in energy 
consumption, which deviate from the norm that may be 
indicated by an anomalous point in the dataset. Given the 
size of the dataset, simply visualising the raw data would 
not be an ideal metric for exploring the data in a virtual 
environment. For that reason, a Local Outlier Factor (LOF) 
algorithm is applied to the data.  
B. LOF Clustering 
The LOF process filters the data. Anomalies then stand 
out from the overall dataset. In order to calculate a LOF 
anomaly score, the number of variants according to the 
mathematical combination is calculated in (1). The LOF 
anomaly score measures the local deviation of density 
through determining how isolated the value given by k-
nearest neighbours. 
 






1
1
1
1
n n
n
k
n
k
k k





 






   
(1) 
A value of 1 indicates that an object is comparable to its 
neighbours (inlier). Likewise, a value below 1 indicates a 
dense region. A value significantly above 1 indicates an 
anomaly (outlier). Any value above 2 is considered, as we 
are interested in the higher-value outliers in the dataset to 
ensure that they are clear anomalies. The dataset, presented 
in Figure 4, is presented subsequently as a LOF plot in 
Figure 5. Through visualising the anomalies in this way, 
outliers can be highlighted more clearly, through deviations 
from the dense regions of data. Individual anomalous data 
points, with an associated time stamp, stand out by having a 
greater outlier value. 
 
Figure 5. LOF Visualisation 
Once the data had been processed through the LOF 
algorithm, it can be inserted into the VR environment. 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
For the 3D development, Unity game engine is employed. 
Models are created externally in a 3D modelling 
environment and imported into the scene.  
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

A. Import Data into Unity 
Inserting the raw LOF results into Unity process is 
displayed in Figure 6. The data points are represented by a 
simple smart meter 3D model in the 3D space. The LOF 
results are not constrained to a small space, and are 
disbursed of a significantly large area, which cannot be 
explored easily in a VR environment.  
 
Figure 6a. Plotting Data in unity 
 
Figure 6b. Plotting Data in unity 
The 3D data exploration room is visible in Figure 6b. 
This demonstrates the scale of the data plotted into the 
world. Ideally, the data should resemble a 3D plot of the 
LOF anomaly scores, such as the one displayed in Figure 7. 
Where, as before the x-axis shows the row ID from the 
dataset, the z-axis displays the anomaly score and the y-axis 
shows the density. In this case, the data is confined to a 
small ‘explore-able’ space.  
 
Figure 7. 3D LOF Plot 
B. Normalising th Data on Import 
Therefore, in order to constrain the data points to a room 
environment that would allow the user to explore the data 
requires a normalisation process. Within Unity, a ‘data plot’ 
game object is inserted, which correlates the data points to 
an x, y, z, co-ordinate in the 3D space. This is displayed in 
Figure 8. The process is achieved by scaling all the values 
between 0-1, with the maximum and minimum values from 
the dataset used to define the size of the data plot in the 
environment.  
 
Figure 8. Data Normalisation 
At this point, a First Person Shooter (FPS) asset is 
included in the game world, to allow the player to explore 
the environment and the dataset. The data plot is also moved 
closer to the floor, as displayed in Figure 9. 
 
Figure 9. FPS View of the Data Plot 
In an ideal setting, the game world would allow for 
multiple users, who can explore remotely and discuss the 
data patterns being visualised. To simulate this concept, 
characters are added, as displayed in Figures 10 and 11. 
   
 
Figure 10. Scene Character Examples 
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

  
 
Figure 11a. Characters in Scene 
 
Figure 11b. Characters in Scene 
The final prototype scene is displayed in Figure 11b. The 
centre disk is projected as a hologram within the scene. This 
is implemented using a shader in Unity. The interaction 
within the environment is rudamentary and can be presented 
using the standard KLM interaction times, as presented in 
Table II. 
TABLE I. KLM INTERACTION TIMES 
KLM Interaction Times - PC 
Task 
Time (seconds) 
Abbreviation 
Mental preparation 
1.35 
M 
Home on Keyboard/Mouse 
0.40 
H 
Pointing 
1.10 
P 
Press left click 
0.10 
Kl 
Press right click 
0.10 
Kr 
Turn left (A Key) 
0.28 
Kl 
Turn right (D key) 
0.28 
Kr 
Move Backward (W key) 
0.28 
Kb 
Move Forward (S Key) 
0.28 
Kf 
For example, walking around the room from the console 
to the data plot would inolve the following steps 
 


  
 
 
 *  
Task A
M
H
Sb
n



  
 
(2) 
C. Discussion 
The next stage of the development is three-fold. 1) To set 
up the real-time insertion of data into the environment and 
2) to integrate smart meter data at lower sampled intervals, 
as actual patient monitoring from 30-minute samples is a 
considerable challenge. For example, in related work, by 
using 10-second intervals the detection of household 
appliances is possible [7][8]. 3) At this stage we will 
employ supervised machine-learning algorithms, such as a 
Support Vector Machine (SVM) and the Bayes Point 
Machine binary classifier, to detect actual device 
interactions. Algorithms will be developed to construct 
device usage, time, day and device combinations. This 
forms the premise for actual activity construction within the 
home environment. This means the VR process could be 
personalise for individual use. In order to associate devices 
with behaviours, selected algorithms for behavioural 
modelling may include the back-propagation trained feed-
forward neural network classifier, the levenberg-marquardt 
trained feed-forward neural net classifier, for example. 
These techniques are well-known algorithms and are 
selected for their ability to learn normal and abnormal 
values in a dataset [6-8]. By using the above techniques, the 
ambition of the work is to set up a real-time remote patient 
monitoring VR application. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presents proof of concept demonstration of the 
use of VR and the integration of a dataset. The future 
direction of this work will include adding interactivity with 
the data point, so that users will be able to view the time 
stamp and the anomaly score of the data point. In addition, 
we will also experiment with the inclusion of other datasets 
so that the user will be able to view more than one person at 
once for the comparison purposes in the game environment. 
The NPC characters will be replaced by actual avatars of the 
users allowing clinicians to monitor patients remotely from 
a shared 3D environment.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This research project and the special track session are both 
funded by the EPRSC - EP/R020922/1. Owing to the ethical 
sensitive nature of this research, the data underlying this 
publication cannot be made openly available. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Lin, H. Wang, J. Li, and H. Gao, Data source selection for 
information integration in big data era, Inf. Sci. (Ny)., vol. 
479, pp. 197–213, Apr. 2019. 
[2] J. Dill, R. Earnshaw, D. Kasik, J. Vince, and P. C. Wong, 
Expanding 
the 
Frontiers 
of 
Visual 
Analytics 
and 
Visualization, 1st ed. London: Springer London, 2012. 
[3] Intel IT Center, Big Data Visualization: Turning Big Data 
Into Big Insights: The Rise of Visualization-based Data 
Discovery Tools, Intel IT Cent., no. March, pp. 1–12, 2013. 
[4] L. Wang, G. Wang, and C. A. Alexander, Big Data and 
Visualization: Methods, Challenges and Technology Progress, 
Digit. Technol., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 33–38, 2015. 
[5] Y. Wang, Q. Chen, T. Hong, and C. Kang, Review of Smart 
Meter Data Analytics: Applications, Methodologies, and 
Challenges, IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, pp. 1–1, Feb. 2018. 
[6] R. Rashed Mohassel, A. Fung, F. Mohammadi, and K. 
Raahemifar, A survey on Advanced Metering Infrastructure, 
Int. J. Electr. Power Energy Syst., vol. 63, pp. 473–484, Dec. 
2014. 
[7] C. Chalmers, W. Hurst, M. Mackay, and P. Fergus, A Smart 
Health Monitoring Technology, in Intelligent Computing 
Theories and Application. ICIC 2016. Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, Springer, Cham, 2016, pp. 832–842. 
[8] C. Chalmers, W. Hurst, M. Mackay, and P. Fergus, Smart 
meter profiling for health applications, in 2015 International 
Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), 2015, pp. 1–
7.  
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

[9] M. Lanzagorta, L. Rosenblum, E. Kuo, and R. Rosenberg, 
Using Virtual Reality to Visualize Scientific, Engineering, 
and Medical Data, Sci. Vis. Conf. 1997, p. 161, 1997. 
[10] R. J. Garcia-Hernandez, C. Anthes, M. Wiedemann, and D. 
Kranzlmuller, Perspectives for using virtual reality to extend 
visual data mining in information visualization, in 2016 IEEE 
Aerospace Conference, 2016, vol. 2016–June, pp. 1–11. 
[11] H. Wright, Introduction to scientific visualization. 2007. 
[12] C. Ware, Information Visualization - Perception for Design, 
vol. 53, no. 9. 2013. 
[13] J. Dill, R. Earnshaw, D. Kasik, J. Vince, and P. C. Wong, 
Expanding 
the 
Frontiers 
of 
Visual 
Analytics 
and 
Visualization, 1st ed. London: Springer London, 2012. 
[14] L. Arms, D. Cook, and C. Cruz-Neira, The benefits of 
statistical visualization in an immersive environment, in 
Proceedings IEEE Virtual Reality (Cat. No. 99CB36316), 
1999, pp. 88–95. 
[15] L. Nelson, D. Cook, and C. Cruz-Neira, Xgobi vs the c2: 
Results of an experiment comparing data visualization in a 3-
d immersive virtual reality environment with a 2-d 
workstation display, Comput. Stat., 1999. 
[16] D. F. Swayne, D. Cook, and A. Buja, XGobi: Interactive 
Dynamic Data Visualization in the X Window System, J. 
Comput. Graph. Stat., vol. 7, no. 1, p. 113, Mar. 1998. 
[17] E. Olshannikova, A. Ometov, Y. Koucheryavy, and T. 
Olsson, Visualizing Big Data with augmented and virtual 
reality: challenges and research agenda, J. Big Data, vol. 2, 
no. 1, p. 22, Dec. 2015. 
[18] B. Sommer, M. Baaden, M. Krone, and A. Woods, From 
Virtual Reality to Immersive Analytics in Bioinformatics, J. 
Integr. Bioinform., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 4–9, Jun. 2018. 
[19] L. Angrisani, F. Bonavolontà, A. Liccardo, R. Moriello, and 
F. Serino, Smart Power Meters in Augmented Reality 
Environment 
for 
Electricity 
Consumption 
Awareness, 
Energies, vol. 11, no. 9, p. 2303, Sep. 2018. 
[20] How EDF Energy is using augmented reality in its UK smart 
meter rollout | Engerati - The Smart Energy Network. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.engerati.com/smart-
infrastructure/article/ict-data-management/how-edf-energy-
using-augmented-reality-its-uk-smart. 
[Accessed: 
05-Jun-
2018]. 
[21] W. Hurst, N. Shone and D. Tully., Investigations into the 
Development of a Knowledge Transfer Platform for Business 
Productivity, Submitted to the Third IEEE International 
Congress on Information and Communication Technology, 
pp. 159-164, 2018 
[22] W. Hurst, K., Latham, D. O’Hare, A. Sands and R. Gandy, A 
Case Study on the Development of a Virtual Reality Proton 
Beam Therapy Unit, 5th Springer International Conference on 
Interactive Digital Media, 2018 
 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

