Visual Public Protection Disaster Relief and Critical Infrastructure 
(Visual PCI) 
 
Aurel Machalek, Dominic Dunlop, Carlo Simon, Ralf Hoben 
University of Luxembourg 
Interdisciplinary Centre for Security, Reliability and Trust 
Luxembourg, Luxembourg 
email: firstname.lastname@uni.lu 
 
Abstract— A 2013 Decision of the European Parliament and of 
the Council requires relevant national and appropriate sub-
national level authorities to establish risk assessments covering 
the full spectrum of consequences. These may be expressed in 
terms of human, environmental, economic, and political/social 
impacts. Modern society is increasingly dependent on critical 
infrastructure and on the services that it provides. The loss of 
one of these services may hit the public immediately in manners 
which are not always predictable. Furthermore, the amount of 
time that a given service is unavailable will affect other services 
through numerous direct and indirect dependencies, which are 
seldom considered. Natural or man-made disasters, and 
combinations of both, will have effects that are difficult or 
impossible to foresee without the appropriate tools. Due to the 
rapid progress in electronic communications and information 
technology, one would expect today’s crisis managers to have 
access to situational awareness and to the tools needed to inform 
their decisions. While much has been achieved for single-service 
operational headquarters like those of police, firefighting and 
ambulance services, there are no solutions that address the 
interactions and interdependencies of all critical functions and 
all critical infrastructure in a Public Protection and Disaster 
Response context. If a crisis develops when some aspect of 
critical infrastructure is partly or completely unavailable, crisis 
managers must make decisions using a very different 
framework compared to that used to handle limited incidents in 
normal times. Considering the difficulties resulting from the 
dependencies and interdependencies of critical infrastructure in 
normal times, making good decisions is becoming more and 
more difficult for crisis managers during a crisis. These 
challenges, combined with the enormous and possibly tragic 
consequences of suboptimal crisis management, provide good 
reasons to explore the subject. 
Keywords-component; Visualisation; Augmented Reality; 
Augmented desktop; Data visualisation; 2D/3D Visualisation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The main objective and ambition of the Visual Protection 
of Critical Infrastructure (Visual PCI) project is to create a 
coherent system for visualisation of all crisis management 
activities and assets able to handle full real-life complexity. 
There are many existing visualisation systems for specific 
aspects of crisis management, but all are strictly focused on 
their own narrow slice of the crisis management domain. Our 
goal is extremely ambitious: there is no known system capable 
of visualising all aspects of a crisis management situation 
simultaneously.  
Visual PCI’s ambition is to provide a novel and integrated 
tool for risk assessment, planning activities and crisis 
management at international, national, and appropriate sub-
national levels. 
The value of a system as a whole is generally much greater 
than the sum of the values of its parts considered in isolation: 
it is much better to have a car than just to have four wheels. 
The same is true for IT systems and simulation systems. A 
system capable of coherently simulating or visualising several 
aspects of a phenomena can also take into account 
interdependencies and feedback between those aspects, so 
raising the quality of simulation or visualisation to an entirely 
new level.  
Consequently, the main value of Visual PCI is to create a 
coherent visualisation system capable of handling multiple 
aspects of crisis management at the same time, in accordance 
with selection criteria applied by the end user. Such a wider 
view will allow the end user to perceive interdependencies 
between various crisis-related phenomena and activities that 
could otherwise pass unnoticed. Thus the project will allow an 
appreciation of a crisis situation having a completeness far 
beyond the abilities of any existing system. The project’s 
primary contribution is to allow interaction with – and 
visualisation of – the multiple layers that are relevant under 
disaster emergency conditions. The project will also build on 
the work done in the coMap project[1], which explored the 
specific roles which people should have when making 
decisions using table-top visualisation systems, and how such 
policies can be enforced.  
If accepted by relevant end users, at national or even 
European level, Visual PCI has the potential to influence 
standardisation activities, as implied by [2],  [3],  and [4]. 
Because Visual PCI will rely on standards already used at 
a European level, data input from statistics and geospatial data 
will be facilitated, and previously-developed models may be 
used with no or little modification by all implementations. 
Thus, the use of Visual PCI in Member States is facilitated, 
while a federation of implementations may serve at European 
level. 
Visual PCI will be designed to be used in different 
configurations comprising: 
• 
A stand-alone solution, 
• 
Multiple identical implementations in a distributed 
architecture to maximise Information Assurance by 
means of redundancy, 
• 
Inside a federation to allow exchange between 
neighbouring implementations, 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-520-3
VISUAL 2016 : The First International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

• 
In a hierarchical structure able to respond to 
organisational concepts and to provide scalability, 
and 
• 
Any combination of these. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The Visual PCI project is aware of some recent projects in 
related areas of national risk assessment, public protection and 
disaster response as well as critical infrastructure. The 
following projects have been analysed for their relevance; 
Visual PCI differs from all of these in the novelty of its 
integrated tool for risk assessment, activity planning, and 
crisis management at international, national and appropriate 
sub-national level, accommodating human, environmental, 
economic and political/social impacts. 
CRISADMIN: Critical Infrastructure Simulation of 
Advanced Models on Interconnected Networks resilience [5], 
was concerned with the evaluation of the impact of large 
catastrophic events, such as terrorist attacks on critical 
infrastructure, by deploying/developing a decision support 
system. 
THREVI2: Threat-Vulnerability Path Identification for 
Critical Infrastructures [6] focussed on: identification of 
potential hazards and threats to CI systems; assessing the 
vulnerability of CI systems or components against these 
hazards; and defining accurate scenarios. 
FACIES: Online Identification of Failure and Attack on 
Interdependent 
Critical 
Infrastructures 
[7] 
defined 
cooperation strategies for automatic detection of failures and 
attacks on CI, by promptly identifying a failure and/or attack 
on several interdependent types of critical infrastructure. 
CISIM set out to improve an existing framework for 
simulating the resilience of critical information and 
communication technologies of CT) infrastructure against 
threats, such as power failures, floods and terrorist attacks. 
DISASTER 2.0: This project [8] investigated ways of 
strengthening public resilience to disasters by identifying: 
technologies, such as social media and semantic webs, that 
government organisations use to communicate with the 
public; innovative ways in which these technologies have 
been used; and how the public use these technologies during 
disasters. 
CRISMA: Modelling crisis management for improved 
action and preparedness [9], this project focused on large scale 
crisis scenarios with often irreversible immediate and 
extended 
human, 
societal, 
structural 
and 
economic 
consequences and impacts. The project developed a 
simulation-based decision support system for modelling crisis 
management, aiding improved action and preparedness. 
DRIVER: The Driving Innovation in Crisis Management 
for European Resilience) project [10] is developing an 
environment that will allow research and innovation to 
flourish in crisis management. The experiments that it enables 
may inform the building of scenarios for Visual PCI. 
Finally, the use of a multi-touch table in disaster 
management is explored in [11]; this is just one aspect of the 
remit of Visual PCI. 
III. 
VISUALISATION 
The rapid development approach to a risk assessment 
support tool through visualisation with the early involvement 
of end users is the key to the success of Visual PCI. 
Visualisation of model building, data input, situational 
awareness and simulation is essential for user ergonomics. 
While the basic components for visualisation must be 
developed by IT professionals, it is also necessary that trained 
end users can add and modify elements in order to refine the 
models. Visualisation will provide confidence to end users 
about their ability to use Visual PCI and to improve the 
solution over time by fine-tuning the models. Visualisation 
will produce confidence in making risk assessments by 
allowing the navigation of risk chains through mouse clicks in 
order to check the origins of given risks and their impacts. 
Visualisation will also support situational awareness by 
producing maps with overlays providing relevant information 
about incidents, Public Protection and Disaster Relief (PPDR) 
resources and critical infrastructure services. Finally, Visual 
presentation of alternative courses of action will support crisis 
managers' decision process. 
For example, the visualisation of Fig. 1 illustrates the 
dependency of the road network on electrical power. During 
blackouts, the lack of security services in tunnels, of 
illumination, and of control by traffic lights reduces the 
capacity of the road network. 
The visualisations will also show time-driven effects like 
the build-up of traffic jams or changes in strategic fuel stocks. 
Slow and fast motion can be used as required by end users. 
Visual PCI requires the following components: 
• 
A robust visualisation component to facilitate the 
input and interpretation of information, the adaptation 
of models and the creation of scenarios to provide 
planning support for working groups and situational 
awareness and decision support for crisis managers. 
Fig. 2 shows a possible visualisation of an urban area. 
 
Blue: 
Highways with interchanges 
Red: 
Power supply network with transformers 
: Power distribution areas 
Figure 1.  Visual PCI 3D Model representing Luxembourg 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-520-3
VISUAL 2016 : The First International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

• 
A database holding statics and discrete information 
regarding population, environment, economic and 
political/social aspects, as well critical infrastructure 
and PPDR elements. The data required will be driven 
by the area of responsibility of the implementing end 
user. 
• 
A computation environment, allowing the models to 
compute risk assessments and to run simulations 
regarding the impact of threats and hazards. 
• 
A lightweight and flexible interface infrastructure for 
heterogeneous data sources allowing the updating of 
relevant data from different stakeholders, including 
real-time data from sensors. 
• 
A 
document-generation 
capacity 
to 
produce 
periodical and updated risk assessments as required 
by end users. 
IV. 
VISUALISATION: POSSIBLE SCENARIO  
The following section explains how a planning group 
would use the interface during an incident. 
As seen in the background of the figure 2, the interface 
consists of a large display providing selected information 
about a plane crash for the entire planning group, while an 
interactive table is used by a reduced number of people from 
the core team to make the actual decisions. The types of screen 
provided by Visual PCI will be in line with identified user 
requirements. 
The large, wall-mounted display provides key statistics, 
still and live pictures showing the incident, the evolution over 
time of the number of victims confirmed and remaining at the 
site, and the first responder coverage capacity at the site. In 
the lower right, the functional layer of the highway system 
shows possible access routes and the expected delays 
ambulances will encounter. Zooming into the incident area 
provides details of the chosen location. 
The concept of Visual PCI will allow planning groups to 
input a minimum of data to set the scene for a scenario. Once 
the site and the date/time have been chosen, Visual PCI is able 
to extract from its database the information required to display 
the vicinity of the scenario, to estimate the traffic situation and 
to provide the probable number of people around the site. 
(This is not an exhaustive list of possible data types.) The 
information will be presented immediately in a way which is 
designed to avoid information overload and to reduce the time 
needed to reach decisions. 
The team will then input the data relating to the incident. 
In the case of a plane crash, it is necessary to provide the 
number and categories of victims. The presumed injuries of 
the survivors will dictate the urgent work load of the rescuers. 
It will also be possible to predict the time necessary to register 
the victims and thus provide this information with a delay (as 
in real world accidents). Weather conditions may be chosen 
as a function of the season. 
Visual PCI will show the PPDR resources available to 
intervene on the site, such as police patrols, ambulance crews 
and firefighters active or on standby in the region. The data 
available on traffic density and the weather conditions will 
dictate the travelling times to the scene. The use of blue lights 
by the emergency services will be considered by the 
simulation. 
In risk assessment mode, Visual PCI will use a model 
response to simulate the evacuation of wounded people to 
hospitals. This simulation may then be repeated by Visual PCI 
for varying crash sites, number of wounded people and 
date/timing considerations. 
The same scenario may be used for training crisis 
managers. In this setting, the model will wait for trainee input 
before dispatching PPDR resources. Fig. 3 provides a possible 
screenshot of the interactive table during training. Visual PCI 
may be configured to provide to the trainee key with 
information about predicted outcomes of possible decisions. 
Those may include traffic information or reduced emergency 
service efficiency for non-optimal options. This function will 
speed up training and enhance the confidence of the trainee 
through the provision of visual feedback. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Visual PCI scenario 
 
Figure 3.  Visual PCI scenario interactive table display 
 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-520-3
VISUAL 2016 : The First International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

In planning mode, selected scenarios developed by 
particular planning groups may be used by planning boards 
having differing vocations and expertise. This multi-
disciplinary approach will enhance overall effectiveness. 
The Visual PCI system will make use of a variety of 
technologies. For example, we expect to use Kivy1 (an open 
source Python library) to allow for interaction on the multi-
touch surface. Kivy is also cross-platform, ensuring that the 
outputs of the project are not tied to a particular vendor. 
Additionally, 
an 
appropriate 
3D 
modelling/game 
environment, such as Unity 3D 2  or perhaps open source 
alternatives such as Crystal Space 3 will be considered. In 
order to allow for iterative and rapid development, high level 
programming languages such as Python or Ruby will be used. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Visual PCI will simplify and optimise risk management, 
planning and crisis management and therefore speed up 
recovery and costs and the number of victims. But Visual PCI 
will bring even more: 
Visual PCI will know the local critical infrastructure and 
its dependencies and interdependencies. It has the capabilites 
being adaptable to local circumstances and of following the 
evolution of the infrastructure. 
While Visual PCI is for crisis managers, the tool may also 
be used to detect infrastructure weaknesses and to predict 
future bottlenecks if fast-growing infrastructure outpaces the 
evolution of supporting structures. Therefore, Visual PCI has 
the potential to assist not only in risk assessments and PPDR 
planning, but also in national or regional development 
activities. 
Visual PCI has the potential to influence the development 
of European Resilience Management Guidelines and 
demonstration through its pilot implementation. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Tarik and S. A. P. Ag, “Support for Collaborative Situation 
Analysis and Planning in Crisis Management Teams using 
Interactive Tabletops,” Proc. 2013 ACM international 
conference on Interactive tabletops and surfaces, pp. 273–282, 
ISBN: 978-1-4503-2271-3. 
[2] “Decision No 1313/2013/EU of the European Parliament and 
of the Council of 17 December 2013 on a Union Civil 
Protection Mechanism,” Official Journal of the European 
Union, L 347, 20.12.2013, pp. 924–947, ISSN: 1977-0677. 
[3] International 
Electrotechnical 
Commission 
(IEC), 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), “Risk 
Management — Risk Assessment Techniques,” (IEC/ISO 
31010:2009), ISO, Geneva, Switzerland. 
[4]  “SEC (2010) 1626 Final Commission Staff Working Paper, 
Risk Assessment and Mapping Guidelines for Disaster 
Management,” European Commission, 2010. 
[5] S. Armenia et al., “CRitical Infrastructure Simulation of 
ADvanced Models on Interconnected Networks resilience 
— Final Report,” FORMIT Foundation, Rome, Italy, 2014. 
[6] F. Naghali, “Creating an ontology for critical infrastructures 
topology and assets taxonomy,” PhD thesis, Politecnico 
Milano, Italy, 2013. 
[7] E. E. Miciolino, R. Setola, F. Pascucci, J. Lopez, M. M. 
Polycarpou, “FACIES: a Testbed for Distributed Fault and 
Attack 
Identification 
in 
Interdependent 
Critical 
Infrastructures,” 2nd International SCADA LAB Workshop, 
Seville, Spain, 2014. 
[8] R. Beneito-Montagut, D. Shaw, C. Brewster, “Disaster 2.0: 
Emergency Management Agencies use and adoption of Web 
2.0,” Aston University, UK, 2013. 
[9] A. Garcia-Aristizabal et al., “Dynamic scenario concept 
models”, 
2013. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.crismaproject.eu. 
[10] “DRIVER: Innovation in crisis mamanagement,” Crisis 
Response Journal, vol. 11, no. 3, p. 86, March 2013. 
[11] K. Nebe, F. Klompmaker, H. Jung, and H. Fischer, “Exploiting 
new interaction techniques for disaster control management 
using multitouch-, tangible- and pen-based-interaction,” Proc. 
14th international conference on Human-computer interaction: 
interaction techniques and environments, Part II, pp. 100–109, 
2011, ISBN: 978-3-642-21604-6
 
                                                           
1  
https://kivy.org 
2  
https://unity3d.com 
3  
http://crystalspace3d.org 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-520-3
VISUAL 2016 : The First International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

