A Data Modelling and Visual Analysis of Science and Technology Policy Keyword
Seung Su Chun 
Division of Information & Knowledge 
Korea Institute of Science and Technology Evaluation and Planning  
Seoul, South Korea  
dabins@kistep.re.kr 
Abstract— Recently, enterprises and major countries are 
increasing their R&D investment for economic growth through 
science and technology upbringing. As the size of investment 
increases, it becomes more difficult to understand and analyze 
the status and performance of detailed projects, programs and 
technologies. This paper deals with a method of analyzing the 
relationship between major technological keywords by text 
mining large scale policy documents for R&D investment. This 
methodology helps us better understand the relationship 
between the complicated policy/technology and the investment 
flow, and support the analysis with a visualization of the 
relationship. 
Keywords-technology policy; data mining; network model; 
visual analysis 
I.
DATA PROPERTY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
POLICY  ANAYSIS
In today's R&D investment, it is essential to understand 
the 
relationship 
between 
investment 
structure 
and 
technology. Analysis of investment policy in research and 
development is essential for understanding the relationship 
between detailed programs and technology. In addition, to 
coordinate investment in R&D, it is necessary to understand 
the relationship between technologies as well as investment 
flows. Recently, a network analysis methodology that can 
grasp the relationships between various entities through 
intuitive visualization and apply sophisticated analytical 
methods has been suggested as a useful approach. Network 
analysis is one of the Business Intelligence analytical 
methods for strategy establishment, rapid decision making 
and risk management. It can model meaningful data by 
networking 
complicated 
data. 
The 
development 
in 
technology and the maturity of an information-knowledge 
based society accelerate technological competition among 
enterprises and countries [1]. These sophisticated systems are 
designed to find useful information from the large data 
repositories and developed to be used quickly in decision 
making. The availability of data, such as big data systems, 
has become widespread, and researches have been actively 
conducted on visualization techniques for computational 
thinking and rapid decision support [2]. The progress of 
intelligent 
systems 
through 
relational 
meaning 
and 
interpretation by structuring and modeling analysis of data 
and information is being promoted in various fields.  
Here, we have demonstrated the application of data 
structuring methods and visualization techniques for the 
analysis of unstructured data statistics on R&D policies. 
II.
VISUAL ANALYSIS OF NETWORK MODELING
In the past days, investment analysis used to be based on 
business classification. But it is important to analyze the 
linkage between business and technology in convergence-
oriented R&D, and the visual analysis becomes very useful. 
Network modeling is used as a key process for network 
analysis visualization by conceptually defining the entities 
that are components of a network map and the relationships 
between them. The action of policy production, refinement, 
evidence, and diffusion can be seen as a composition of 
content types such as knowledge, people, and activity. 
Complex policy documents can be classified into people, 
services, processes and resources, and reconstructed into 
hierarchical networks [3]. Firstly, we have organized the 
policy document as in Table 1 and extracted the keywords 
from the contents of the document by the text mining 
technique. We have visualized the relationship between 
keywords as shown in Figure 1 by analyzing the proximity 
(distance) and relevance (frequency) between the keywords 
in the context and sentences in the document. 
Figure 1. Example of keyword based network analysis 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-577-7
VISUAL 2017 : The Second International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

TABLE I. 
META MATRIX OF POLICY KEYWORD
Table 1 shows the document classification system for R&D 
investment, which is used as the attribute value of keyword 
and relation. The document classification in Table 1, such as 
the policy decision process, is used to analyze the frequency 
changes and topic relationships of specific keyword topics 
extracted through text mining. The data of keywords 
identified as entities (nodes, points) that can generate a 
network map can be classified into five types: policy, 
program, project, performance, and human. The extracted 
keywords can represent the relationship between the 
categories with the document classification of the meta-
metrics as an attribute. The same keywords extracted from 
the meta matrix documents express the relationship between 
different categories and visualize them by constructing main 
topics between the categories [4][5]. The keyword based 
network model is important to understand the decision flow 
for a specific technology because decision-making in R&D 
investment, establishment of strategies, and evaluation and 
adjustment of R&D programs are all sequentially processed. 
III.
POLICY TOPIC DETECTION AND MODEL ANALYSIS
The aim of this paper is to analyze and visualize the 
analytical relationship between keywords using the existing 
business classification method, which employs text mining. 
This section describes how to calculate the relationship 
between policy documents and keyword topics. In order to 
understand the implied meaning of knowledge, the 
interaction and effects between topics should be analyzed in-
depth as they are the meaning unit of knowledge [6]. In the 
analysis of the relationship between keywords, we use the 
Celton index method for properties such as connectivity 
between nodes and proximity. In this study, we define the 
process (P) document of classification as Table 1 and 
analyze the relevance of the extracted keywords for the 
Selton index. The keyword-based network model was used 
for efficiency analysis of the technology topic. At first, the 
intensity of relations may be quantified based on the 
connection intensity between certain topics. Pi is the number 
of i in a certain topic, and Pj is the number of j in a certain 
topic, and Pij is the number of i and j in a certain topic. If the 
intensity of relations is r, and r is calculated as the distance 
between the context and the frequency of appearing at the 
same time between different topics, then:   
j
i
ij
P P
P
r =
The connection relations are divided into degree, closeness 
and proximity, and have absolute value and relative value. 
The Degree Centrality (C) of having the most nodes between 
topics has a higher connection intensity when certain topics 
are revealed in other major areas of knowledge, and it has a 
central role in this area. Distance refers to the inter-context 
distance between any keyword topics. The Closeness 
Centrality has a central role when certain topics are close to 
other topics, and distance (D) Dij is the shortest course which 
connects between topics i and j, and g is the number of the 
overall node. In the network, the extracted keyword topic is a 
node. When the relation value r between the topics is high, 
the edge is constituted. The Between Centrality, where 
different networks are connected, plays a mediating role in 
the relation and is necessary for interpreting relationships of 
different topics. gjk is the shortest course number between 
two topics (j and k), gjk(i) is the frequency of passing topic i 
between two topics  j and k(j≠k), and g is the number of the 
overall node. Through centrality analysis between topics, we 
can interpret meaningful characteristics of the knowledge 
model, and expand the range with difference and connection 
between knowledge models. 
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have described the method of 
visualizing the relationship of keywords extracted through 
text mining in the policy document for technology 
investment and analyzing them by network. This topic 
network visualization helps to understand the relationships 
between specific keywords easily and helps interpret the 
structure of relations with document classification according 
to the policy process. We have also demonstrated a method 
for interpreting the meaning according to the network 
structure and the distance between keyword topics. In future 
work, we will apply this technique to a large amount of data 
and complex documents, and also develop a tool to visually 
analyze the relational path between specific keyword topics. 
REFERENCES
[1]
G. Yezersky, “General Theory of Innovation, International 
Federation for Information Processing,” Vol.250, Springer, 
2007, pp. 45-55. 
[2]
N. L. Rovira, “the future of computer aided innovation, IFIP 
International 
Federation 
for 
Information 
Processing,” 
Springer,  Vol.277, 2008,  pp. 3-4. 
[3]
C. Heitmeyer, “Using abstraction and model checking to 
detect safety violations in requirements specifications,” IEEE 
Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 24, no. 11, 1998.   
[4]
W. Chan, “Temporal Logic Queries,” Proceedings of CAV 
2000, Springer, LNCS 1855,  2000. 
[5]
X. Wang and T. Vitvar, “WSMO-PA: Formal Specification of 
Public administration service model on Semantic Web 
Service Ontology,” IEEE ICSS’07, 2007.   
[6]
W3C, “Web Service Description Language (WSDL),” ver.2.0 
recommendation,  2007. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-577-7
VISUAL 2017 : The Second International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

