Augmented Reality for Enhancing Life Science Education
 
Abstract— Augmented Reality (AR) has the opportunity to be 
a disruptive technology in the delivery of educational materials 
at all levels, from public outreach activities to expert level 
teaching at undergraduate and postgraduate levels. The 
attractiveness of AR as a teaching tool is its ability to deliver a 
blended learning experience created from the mixing of the 
virtual and real environments or materials in the classroom. 
This allows students to learn in a variety of ways to mix 
didactic, experiential and kinaesthetic learning. We have 
developed, and are in the process of developing, AR 
applications that aim to transform the learning space into one 
that is highly interactive, so this paper will discuss the potential 
impact of such teaching interventions on higher education. 
Keywords- Augmented reality; education; visualisation. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
One contemporary paradigm in higher education is the 
tailoring of educational resources towards a so-called 
“digitally native” audience who, for the most part, have 
grown up surrounded by digital technology. The students 
entering higher education today are demanding a high 
standard of education that incorporates the digital world in 
which they live. There is sometimes a tendency to aspire to 
incorporate digital technologies into everything that is 
carried out in a higher education institution, but it is not 
digital natives rather digitally aware students that we should 
be developing [1]. Furthermore, students require an ability to 
be prepared for the future, especially in a fast-paced, ever 
changing world were digital literacy, and skills associated 
with it are seen as essential [2]. Further to this, the life 
sciences are one such area where this requirement for a 
digital skill set is a necessity as much of the current research 
relies on digitalisation of data. For example, this could be in 
the form of genomic data or population statistics of various 
patient sub-groups [3].  This paper will discuss the 
development and testing of an augmented reality (AR) app 
for teaching metabolism, especially glucose metabolism and 
insulin signalling.  Section II discusses the background to the 
project; Section III describes the implementation of the AR 
app; Section IV shows results from testing; and Section V 
discusses the conclusions of this work. 
A. VR/AR in Education 
As a consequence of the required skills set a life science 
undergraduate needs and the inherent requirement to develop 
digitally-driven approaches to delivering a high quality 
education, the use of augmented reality and virtual reality 
has become an emerging theme. A simple literature search in 
the PubMed (The National Center for Biotechnology 
Information) database for the terms virtual reality and 
augmented reality in education shows the rapid growth of 
both areas (Figure 1). 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
Number of Publications
Publication Year
VR
AR
 
Figure 1. PubMed results by year for virtual and augmented reality 
publications. 
Search terms of “virtual reality AND education” and 
“augmented reality AND education” were used to identify 
the total number of publications in each year from the first 
year that a publication appeared in the PubMed database. VR 
(blue line), virtual reality; AR (red line), augmented reality. 
Note – there was one publication for augmented reality dated 
1989, which is excluded from the data shown. 
B. Aims 
This paper will describe the results of a consultation on 
the use of digital visualisation technologies in the teaching of 
life science subjects and the creation and testing of an AR 
application to aid in the teaching of metabolism, specifically 
linked to glucose and insulin signalling. 
C. Study Methods 
The present study was conducted in the School of 
Medicine, Medical Sciences and Nutrition at the University 
of Aberdeen. Ninety participants were self-selected by 
completing a survey as part of a second year undergraduate 
biochemistry course that forms part of the core curriculum 
for most life science degree programmes. Of the ninety 
questionnaire participants, eight were randomly selected to 
John Barrow, Conor Forker 
Institute of Medical Sciences, 
University of Aberdeen, 
Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, UK 
e-mail: {j.barrow, 
c.forker.15}@abdn.ac.uk 
Andrew Sands, Darryl O’Hare 
Imagin3D, Office 4,  
CTH, Sci Tech Daresbury,  
WA4 4FS, UK 
e-mail: {devteam, 
darryl}@imagin3d.co.uk 
William Hurst 
Department of Computer Science, 
Liverpool John Moores University, 
Liverpool, 
L3 3AF, UK 
e-mail: W.Hurst@ljmu.ac.uk 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

take part in a focus group and seven volunteered to test an 
AR application linked to the teaching of metabolism. 
The questionnaire aimed to identify student preferences 
in the teaching structure-function relationships in the life 
science subject areas. The focus group aimed to question 
participants on their preference for digital technology and 
how it can integrate with their teaching. The testing of the 
AR application aimed to identify their views of AR in 
education having been exposed for the first time to this kind 
of technology in the classroom. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Virtual 
and 
augmented 
realities 
(VR 
and 
AR 
respectively) allow immersive and visual experiences for the 
user. In VR, this will be via the use of a head-mounted 
display that is either a standalone device or a device tethered 
to a computer that drives the visualisation hardware. VR can 
also be delivered using smartphone technology and a headset 
viewer that allows the user to display a VR image on the 
smartphone screen. When using tethered or standalone VR 
headsets, there is a requirement for high-end computer 
hardware to run the software, but for smartphone VR the 
requirement for accelerated hardware is less so and the 
headset smartphone holders are also relatively inexpensive or 
can even be created by the user (e.g., Google Cardboard). In 
AR, the experience is different from VR as it allows the user 
to overlay digital content in the real-world environment and 
interact with that content. This offers some distinct 
advantages over VR as it allows the user experience to be 
shared amongst groups rather than being a single-user 
experience, and it also provides an opportunity for users to 
mix learning styles when the AR is combined with more 
traditional forms of teaching materials such as texts or 
lecture slides. This mixed approach could provide a powerful 
tool that satisfies many learner styles, allows collaborative 
learning, and provides increased scope to bring subjects to 
life in a way that has not been possible before. 
A. VR/AR in Educational Context 
In an educational context, VR offers some distinct 
advantages over standard teaching practices in that it can 
allow students to simulate scenarios, such as surgical training 
of medical students [4], or allow students to understand 
abstract concepts that are not visible like protein structure 
and function [5]. AR also offers advantages as it can allow 
the delivery of mixed methods teaching were students have 
traditional learning from written materials coupled with 
visualisations of the processes involved [6], or provide 
interactions between real-world objects and the digital 
visualisations [7]. 
In many education settings where budgets are often 
constrained or limited, the use of smartphone technology to 
deliver VR or AR experiences becomes a more attractive 
proposition. This also ties in with more and more students 
having their own devices that are capable of delivering high 
quality digital experiences as smartphone technology 
becomes increasingly more powerful. Moreover, students are 
required in many higher education institutions to use their 
own devices to record attendance, interact with classes 
through online voting systems and other institutional 
resources 
such 
as 
timetables 
and 
virtual 
learning 
environments. This means there is a real opportunity to 
develop classroom activities that make use of the ‘bring your 
own device’ (BYOD) model. It does also present challenges 
as BYOD means there will be variable technologies in 
circulation in any given student cohort. Operating systems, 
hardware specifications and graphics capabilities will vary 
widely, so careful consideration may need to be given if 
students were to use their own devices for VR or AR 
applications. 
B. A TPACK Model of AR Education 
There is growing evidence that digital visualisations help 
students understand abstract concepts, which can be viewed 
through the lens of the technological pedagogical content 
knowledge (TPACK) framework [8]. This framework (see 
Figure 2) highlights the importance of the interplay between 
technology, discipline knowledge and teaching practice to 
deliver a modern and relevant programme of study, 
especially in the life sciences were digital technology is 
crucial in virtually all research areas. In higher education 
institutions, 
the 
expectation 
is 
that 
subject-specific 
knowledge and expertise is provided by academic staff 
alongside effective teaching practices. The one area where 
there is perhaps some variation is in the ability of the 
academic to embed technology into the classroom and 
provide students with a modern curriculum that integrates 
technology into their learning. AR offers just such an 
opportunity 
without 
changing 
traditional 
curricula 
significantly, as it allows the blending of instructive teaching 
with digital visualisations. 
 
Figure 2.  Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge Framework 
[9]. 
C. 3D Literacy and AR in Life Sciences Teaching 
The ability to understand three-dimensional structures is 
crucial in virtually all life science disciplines, from a gross 
anatomical level to the sub-cellular and molecular levels.  
One could describe this skill set as a ‘3D literacy’ [10] that 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

plays a pivotal role in a full appreciation of the concepts that 
underpin biological processes and functionality. Traditional 
teaching methods in the life sciences will often be didactic in 
practice, with possible inclusion of models to highlight 
structural aspects of how processes work. In anatomy and 
physiology disciplines, this will often take the form of 
physical cadaveric specimens, but where this is not possible, 
teaching will rely on physical models to highlight structure-
function relationships in the human body. In the molecular 
life science disciplines, this concept of structure and function 
is just as valid, and as such, various physical chemical 
structure models will often be used to explain the processes 
involved at a sub-cellular level.  The use of models coupled 
with some functionality can teach molecular concepts well, 
with two examples being the concept of polarity of water 
molecules or structure-function relationships in proteins 
[11][12]. 
More recently, it has been possible to create models 
using 3D printing. The advantages of this technology are that 
the teacher can create models of virtually any kind of 
structure to aid in their teaching, but it does have drawbacks 
as it can be time consuming and technically difficult to create 
certain structures (e.g., very thin or overhanging structures) 
due to constraints in the 3D printing process. There are a 
huge variety of examples that utilise 3D printing and as with 
traditional models used in teaching they have been used in all 
areas 
of 
the 
life 
sciences 
were 
structure-function 
relationships are important for understanding [13][14]. All of 
the above teaching examples have several drawbacks, be that 
expense, time to create models, lack of functionality or 
movement in the models or that these models do not allow 
for mass participation in larger class sizes due to the limited 
number of models available. 
AR has the possibility of addressing some of the issues 
with more traditional forms of structure-function teaching.  If 
we follow the design principles set out by Dunleavy [15] 
then AR has the possibility to: 1. Enable and then challenge; 
2. Drive by gamified story; and 3. See the unseen. All three 
of these principles can be relatively easily achieved using 
AR. There are many areas were AR has been implemented 
with varying degrees of success, but it holds most promise in 
those subjects were an appreciation of three dimensional 
space and structure is crucial for a full understanding of the 
subject.  It has therefore been most successfully employed in 
subjects such as anatomy were it is crucial that students 
understand the spatial arrangements of tissues and organs, 
and were cadaveric material is not always available [16]. AR 
has also been used in more abstract subjects such as 
structural biology were students will understand molecular 
and sub-cellular processes much better if they can appreciate 
how the structure of molecules often dictate their function 
[17]. 
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
The implementation of the AR application presented in 
this research was a three-stage process, involving 1) 
Modelling the different 3D assets; 2) Texturing and setting 
up the game-engine mechanics and 3) AR implementation. 
A. Modelling 
Nine different 3D models were created for the application. 
These are presented in Table I. 
TABLE I. SCENE MODELS AND THEIR ROLES. 
Model 
Role 
Character 
Core 
element, 
in 
the 
application produced in high 
detail 
(73k 
polygons), 
as 
displayed in Figure 3. 
Chocolate bar 
Minor 
model, 
present 
to 
demonstrate eating. 
Intestines and Gut 
Core 
component 
for 
the 
application. Created in detail 
to show overall gut/digestive 
system construction. 
Veins/Arteries 
Core 
component 
for 
demonstrating the biological 
processes taking place, but 
with low poly (300 polygons).  
Blood Vessels 
Low poly (50 polygons each), 
animated objects in the scene 
to demonstrate blood flow and 
scale. 
Cells 
The cells are prominent in the 
application. They are very low 
poly, with the details being 
added through the texturing. 
Muscle Cells 
The muscle cells, again are 
low 
poly, 
and 
are 
the 
recipients of the glucose and 
insulin molecules. 
Glucose 
& 
Insulin 
Molecules 
Low poly, small objects in the 
scene 
but 
core 
to 
demonstrating the biology. 
 
Figure 3. 3D Character Mesh. 
Following the modelling process, textures were added 
within the game-engine environment directly. By texturing 
within the game engine, it allowed for the inclusion of 
shaders on the models; resulting in a higher quality of 
texturing and realism. 
B. Texturing and Game Engine Mechanics 
The texturing process was crucial for adding detail to the 
3D modelling process and creating a relatability for the 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

students when operating the AR application. An effective 
texturing process also ensured that the models maintained a 
low poly count, as the detail was generated by the textures 
rather than the 3D models themselves. A low poly count is 
necessary to ensure that the AR application runs smoothly on 
hand held devices (i.e., tablets and smart phones), which 
have a limited processing and graphics capability in 
comparison with a PC/Laptop.  
As Figure 4 displays, the character is semi-transparent, in 
order to allow the intestines and digestive system to be 
visible. Food is also animated travelling down the throat into 
the stomach, as the character bites the chocolate bar. An 
organic texturing was applied to the various cells and tissues 
as shown in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 4. Character Texturing. 
 
 (a) 
 (b) 
Figure 5. Organic Texturing with the Game Engine. (a) Cells, (b) Blood 
Vessel with Blood Cells (Centre), Muscle Cells Right) and Pancreas Cells 
(Left). 
High-resolution texture images were used. With the 
model being AR, it is possible to zoom in and view the assets 
at close inspection. Bump map and height maps were also 
applied to the models so that they did not appear flat on 
projection. The other technical challenge involved the UVW 
mapping as many of the models are spherical in appearance. 
The final scene composition is displayed in Figure 6. The 
composition consists of a character, with food passing down 
the throat as an animation; a close up view of the digestive 
system enclosed in a box next to the character; and a close up 
view of the biological process taking place within the blood 
stream. 
 
Figure 6. Final Composition. 
C. AR Setup 
The AR was set up using standard black and white QR 
code markers to project the models on (as shown in Figure 
7b). However, under testing the models often ended up 
projecting with glitches or delays. The model project on QR 
is displayed in Figure 7. 
 (a) 
 (b) 
Figure 7. Model Project in AR. (a) Up-close texturing (b) model projected 
on QR code in Game Engine. 
Instead, advanced QR markers were used to improve the 
stability of the projection, as displayed in Figures 7a and 8. 
The app was then deployed on both Android and Windows 
tablets, as displayed in Figure 8. 
 
 
Figure 8. App Functioning on Windows Tablet. 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

Following the deployment of the app, it was then field-
tested in a classroom environment at the University of 
Aberdeen. 
 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Participants in the test completed an online questionnaire 
asking them to think about their views on gamification and 
the use of digital technology in their education as part of a 
second year undergraduate biochemistry course. 90 students 
(out of a class of 150) participated in the questionnaire and 
as a demographic, the vast majority (95%) were 19-24 years 
of age (i.e., an age group considered to be ‘digital natives’). 
A. Initial Questionnaire Findings 
When asked if they enjoy lectures, on a 5-point Likert 
scale, 40% enjoyed roughly half of their lectures and 49% 
enjoyed almost all lectures. 76% of participants agreed or 
strongly agreed that lecturers were good at explaining 
abstract concepts, suggesting that most students can 
understand and follow the lecture material being delivered, 
however only 22% strongly agreed so there is a large 
proportion who could have their learning enhanced at least 
partially. Similarly, a large proportion of the 90 participants 
agreed that lecturers made classes exciting and engaging 
with 63% agreeing or strongly agreeing to this statement, 
with 27% neutral showing that there is a decrease in student 
satisfaction compared to lecturers explaining abstract 
concepts well.  51% of participants agreed or strongly agreed 
that they make detailed lecture notes, with 25% disagreeing 
with this statement and 23% neutral, showing that 
approximately half of the students do not make detailed 
notes of the lecture material. 38% of participants were 
neutral and 19% agreed or strongly agreed that PowerPoint 
slides were boring, suggesting that there could be room to 
improve teaching provision away from standard teaching 
practices.  
In answer to the statement that they prefer a hands-on 
approach to learning than being in lectures, 45% agreed or 
strongly agreed, 25% disagreed and 30% were neutral, 
showing the majority would possibly benefit from additional 
teaching methods. When asked the question of how lectures 
could be made more enjoyable, the free text responses were 
analysed, and the top 5 words identified in the responses 
were “interactive”, “engaging”, “examples”, “videos” and 
“interaction”.  This is promising for the use of AR in the 
classroom as it shows that for engagement initiatives to be a 
success they should incorporate interactivity. 
When asked if they consider themselves a “gamer”, 42% 
and 19% strongly disagreed or disagreed respectively, and 
only 22% agreed or strongly agreed, which shows that any 
technology implemented into their learning should be 
adapted for the novice gamer audience and be easy to 
understand and interact with. Overall, 98% of participants 
own a smartphone (either Android or iOS), 93% have a 
laptop and 40% have a tablet, which means that only a very 
small percentage of the class do not have smartphones, so 
would minimise the cost if students were to use their own 
devices. 
When asked if the use of games in class will help student 
learning, the majority (52%) agreed or strongly agreed that it 
would, and only a small fraction (15%) disagreed or strongly 
disagreed.  This coupled with 92% agreeing or strongly 
agreeing that being able to “see” abstract concepts would 
help their learning, would strongly suggest that a highly 
visual and interactive AR approach would provide students 
with an excellent learning resource. 
When asked the open-ended question of what they would 
like included in an educational app, the most common 
remarks were “keep it engaging”, “abstract concepts”, “3D 
structures” and “providing an interactive experience with 
more difficult theories”. The results are plotted in a word 
cloud in Figure 9, where the larger the word, the more often 
is appeared in the feedback comments. Clear requirements 
for the application to be ‘engaging’ and ‘interactive’ are 
prominent in the feedback. 
 
Figure 9. Pre-Survey Feedback Comments. 
B. Focus Group 
Based on the questionnaire feedback, we next organised a 
focus group made up of eight randomly chosen participants 
who indicated they wanted to take part in further discussions.  
The focus group was intended to gather views and opinions 
on the role that visualisation apps could play in teaching on 
the second year undergraduate biochemistry course.  The 
following questions, which emerged from the questionnaire 
data, were used to encourage discussion: 1. Do you have 
difficulty visualising and learning abstract concepts?  2. How 
do you currently learn these difficult topics?  3. What would 
be the best use of gamification to teach lecture topics? 
In summary, AR was favoured over VR and the 
participants would prefer any AR content to be used in a 
tutorial rather than lectures so that information from lectures 
could be consolidated rather than being taught for the first 
time. Several participants would also like to be able to pick 
up the AR app if required rather than it being a compulsory 
session that they must attend, which would allow them to use 
the additional visualisations if they required them to aid their 
learning. Accurate use of 3D models would be preferential 
over simplified models or models that do not resemble the 
actual structures being visualised. 
C. AR App Usage Feedback 
Following development of the AR app, it was tested with 
seven randomly selected participants (different individuals 
from those who participated in the focus group) to 
understand if students would prefer to use AR in their 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

education. The AR app was developed to run alongside 
written materials that explained how three processes work in 
a specific metabolic process. 43% of participants strongly 
agreed and 57% agreed that the AR app motivated them to 
understand the processes being visualised, with nobody 
remaining neutral or disagreeing. 58% of participants 
strongly agreed or agreed that the AR app enhanced their 
learning and 42% where neutral. 57% strongly agreed and 
43% agreed that the class was enjoyable and fun, and they 
rated the class overall with the same scores. When asked if 
they would like to see more AR in the classroom, 86% 
responded “absolutely” and 14% said they were not sure as it 
would depend on the class. 
When asked which subject areas AR technology would 
be most useful for, the following subject areas: enzyme 
activity and protein structure, biochemistry, molecular 
biology, genetics, bioenergetics, immunology, physiology, 
neuroscience, enzyme activity and enzyme structure.  
Additionally, participants stated, “I think it’s a great idea, 
and would definitely help information we’re taught 
traditionally just from being able to visualise processes”; “it 
would be very useful to see how enzyme activity and protein 
conformation works”; “it's really cool and [would] be a great 
asset in classes and for learning concepts which are more 
abstract to understand. 
 
Figure 10. Post-Survey Feedback Comments. 
It also helps people to gaze into the future and feel like 
they are part of…learning in a new direction”. Again, the 
feedback was plotted in a word cloud as displayed in Figure 
10. Key positive words, such as ‘great’, ‘future’, ‘helps’ are 
prominent in the feedback. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In conclusion, the application proved successful with 
end-users and received primarily positive feedback. The 
deployment of the application on Android and Windows also 
meant the up-take of the application had a wide reach. In the 
future, we will investigate the deployment of the application 
on an iOS device. 
There were some challenges with the initial model 
implementation as it did not show the correct processes, but 
this was overcome with clear communication between the 
development team and the scientists on the project. 
There are also alternative approaches to delivering this 
kind of visualisation in class using VR, which will also be 
explored in the future, but as already described, the use of 
VR would change the class dynamics as it is a highly 
personalised experience even though it may be more 
immersive. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Henderson, N. Selwyn, G. Finger, and R. Aston, 
“Students’ everyday engagement with digital technology in 
university: exploring patterns of use and ‘usefulness,’” J. 
High. Educ. Policy Manag., vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 308–319, May 
2015. 
[2] L. C. Larson and T. N. Miller, “21st Century Skills: Prepare 
Students for the Future,” Kappa Delta Pi Rec., vol. 47, no. 3, 
pp. 121–123, Apr. 2011. 
[3] V. Marx, “The big challenges of big data,” Nature, vol. 498, 
no. 7453, pp. 255–260, Jun. 2013. 
[4] N. E. Seymour et al., “Virtual Reality Training Improves 
Operating Room Performance: Results of a Randomized, 
Double-Blinded Study,” Ann. Surg., vol. 236, no. 4, p. 458, 
2002. 
[5] M.-J. Garcia-Bonete, M. Jensen, and G. Katona, “A practical 
guide to developing virtual and augmented reality exercises 
for teaching structural biology,” Biochem. Mol. Biol. Educ., 
vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 16–24, Jan. 2019. 
[6] A. Sugiura, T. Kitama, M. Toyoura, and X. Mao, “The Use of 
Augmented Reality Technology in Medical Specimen 
Museum Tours,” Anat. Sci. Educ., Nov. 2018. 
[7] D. 
Behmke 
et 
al., 
“Augmented 
Reality 
Chemistry: 
Transforming 2-D Molecular Representations into Interactive 
3-D Structures,” Proc. Interdiscip. STEM Teach. Learn. 
Conf., vol. 2, no. 1, Jan. 2018. 
[8] M. J. Koehler, P. Mishra, and W. Cain, “What is 
Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge (TPACK)?,” 
J. Educ., vol. 193, no. 3, pp. 13–19, Oct. 2013. 
[9] Reproduced by permission of the publisher, © 2012 by 
tpack.org 
[10] J. R. Roberts, E. Hagedorn, P. Dillenburg, M. Patrick, and T. 
Herman, “Physical 
models 
enhance molecular three-
dimensional 
literacy 
in 
an 
introductory 
biochemistry 
course*,” Biochem. Mol. Biol. Educ., vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 105–
110, Nov. 2006. 
[11] T. Herman et al., “Tactile teaching: Exploring protein 
structure/function using physical models,” Biochem. Mol. 
Biol. Educ., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 247–254, Jul. 2006. 
[12] J. L. H. Johnson, S. H. Yalkowsky, and Ed Vitz, “A three-
dimensional model for water,” J. Chem. Educ., vol. 79, no. 9, 
p. 1088, Sep. 2002. 
[13] S. C. Meyer, “3D Printing of Protein Models in an 
Undergraduate Laboratory: Leucine Zippers,” J. Chem. Educ., 
vol. 92, no. 12, pp. 2120–2125, Dec. 2015. 
[14] M. Vaccarezza and V. Papa, “3D printing: a valuable resource 
in human anatomy education,” Anat. Sci. Int., vol. 90, no. 1, 
pp. 64–65, Jan. 2015. 
[15] M. Dunleavy, “Design Principles for Augmented Reality 
Learning,” TechTrends, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 28–34, Jan. 2014. 
[16] R. Barmaki et al., “Enhancement of Anatomical Education 
Using Augmented Reality: An Empirical Study of Body 
Painting,” Anat. Sci. Educ., Jan. 2019. 
[17] P. Safadel and D. White, “Facilitating Molecular Biology 
Teaching by Using Augmented Reality (AR) and Protein Data 
Bank (PDB),” TechTrends, pp. 1–6, Oct. 2018. 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-724-5
VISUAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Applications and Systems of Visual Paradigms

