AGILE Web Development using WebBPMN
Riccardo Cognini
Research Unit
e-Linking Online System
Camerino (MC), Italy
Email: riccardo.cognini@e-lios.eu
Alberto Polzonetti
Research Unit
e-Linking Online System
Camerino (MC), Italy
Email: alberto.polzonetti@e-lios.eu
Abstract—In recent years, many web applications regulated by
workﬂows were developerd in order to permit the collaboration
between many stakeholders during the execution of Business
Processes. Generally, these kind of systems are implemented using
web technologies in order to be easily designed, implemented
and to be available in different operative systems and platform.
Standard general purpose Business Process Modeling languages
such as BPMN (Business Process Modeling and Notation) can
be used to design the workﬂow of these systems, but they lack
in the deﬁnition of which web technology has to be used to
implement each single business activity. Another problem due to
the complexity of this application is to choose the right software
design process to be ﬂexible enought to deal with changes in
requirements and in software code itself. In this paper, we propose
a novel business process modeling notation named webBPMN
including elements that can be used to model web applications
regulated by workﬂows. The notation can be combined with AG-
ILE design process in order to develop ﬂexible web application.
We experimented the approach designing the Business Process of
the internship web application of the University of Camerino.
Keywords–Web Application; Business Process; Metamodel.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Inter-organizational Business Processes (BPs) permit to
different stakeholders to successfully cooperate in order to
reach a common target goal [1]. Each stakeholder involved
in the BP pursues its objectives within the cooperation and
shares its competencies and processes to provide the integrated
functionality. Implementing a software system that allows that
cooperation among different stakeholders is not an easy task.
It requires a deep analysis of requirements, activities ﬂow and
how the actors interact.
Furthermore, many software systems are web based appli-
cations in which there are many stakeholders that collaborate
in the same environment [2]. In several cases, these software
systems are based on a BP, it means that stakeholders have to
perform in a speciﬁc way a predeﬁned set of activities in order
to reach goals. For instance, in an e-commerce web site there
is a speciﬁc BP that drive the buyer and the seller in order to
complete the purchasing of goods.
One of the main issues during the design phase of a
software system is the deﬁnition of the ﬂow of activities
that have to be performed by stakeholders [3]. Languages
such as Business Process Modeling and Notation (BPMN) [4],
UML Activity Diagram (UML AD) [5], Yet Another Workﬂow
Language (YAWL) [6] or EPC [7] are used to deﬁne the
ﬂow of activities in imperative way. The main problem of
these languages is that they are general purpose and do not
provide speciﬁc elements to design workﬂows for web based
applications.
Another issues in software engineering is to ﬁnd a suitable
way to reach all the requirements and the request of customers.
Traditional software engineering design processes such as
waterfall or iterative approaches lack in ﬂexibility since they
are to structured and they do not react to requirement chenges.
In this paper, we propose webBPMN, a BPMN 2.0 varia-
tion, in order to include elements that can be used to design
web application based on BP using an AGILE development
technique. In particular, we consider new types of tasks and
sub-processes assuming that a single atomic activity can be
performed in single Web Page Task and that a web page can
be used in order to perform many activities, then it is a Web
Page Sub-Process. Other elements to specify client/server side
functions and events are also designed. We also comabine
webBPMN with the AGILE process in order to design a
software that implement a structured procedure but at the same
time it is quick and reactive to changes.
The proposed approach was used to design the BP of
the internship procedure of the University of Camerino. Its
software system was implemented starting from a webBPMN
model.
The paper is structured as follow. Section II provides
background material related to BP modeling and AGILE. In
Section III the webBPMN notation is explained, the in Section
IV the approach is described. Then Section V is about related
works and, ﬁnally, in Section VI we treat some conclusions.
II.
BACKGROUND
In this section background materials about Business Pro-
cess Management and AGILE are provided.
A. Business Process Management
Business Process Management (BPM) “includes concepts,
methods, and techniques to support the design, administration,
conﬁguration, enactment, and analysis of Business Processes”
[8]. “A BP is a collection of related and structured activities
undertaken by one or more organizations in order to pursue
some particular goal. Within an organization a BP results in
the provisioning of services or in the production of goods for
internal or external stakeholders” [9]. Public services structure,
their input and output, the interdependencies among different
elements can be modeled and implemented using notations and
tools supporting the BP abstraction.
The accuracy of the BP modeling phase is critical for
the success of an organization in particular in scenarios in
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

Figure 1. BPMN 2.0 Core Elements.
which it is necessary to adapt to changing requirements. In
order to design a BP different classes of languages have been
investigated and deﬁned.
In our work, we refer to BPMN 2.0 an Object Management
Group standard [4]. It is the most used language by domain
experts due to its intuitive graphical notation. We have mainly
used process diagrams, focusing on the point of view of system
users. The following BPMN 2.0 elements (Figure 1) are the
core elements of the language and those we will use on the
approach.
•
Events, which are used to represent something that
can happen. An Event can be Start Event represents
the points in which the BP starts, and End Event is
raised when the BP terminates. Events are drawn as
circles.
•
Activities, which are used to represent a generic work
that a company performs within a BP. An Activity can
be atomic - Task - or not - Sub-Process. Activities are
drawn as rectangles with rounded corners.
•
Gateways, which are used to manage the ﬂow of BP
both for parallel activities and choices. Different types
of gateways are available, the most used are followed
reported. Parallel Gateway has to wait all their input
ﬂows to start and then all the output paths are started
in parallel, it can behave as a fork respects to output
paths or as a merge respects to input paths. Exclusive
Gateway gives the possibility to describe choices both
in input and output, it can be activated each time the
gateway is reached and when executed it can activate
exactly one output path. Inclusive Gateway gives the
possibility to select among multiple output paths each
time they are reached, it can behave also as inclusive
merge. Gateways are drawn as diamonds.
•
Data Objects, which permit to model documents,
data, and other objects used and updated during the
BP. Objects can also be characterized by a state. An
activity can require or can generate a data object in a
particular state, whereas if the state is not explicitly
reported the activity is state independent. A data object
cannot be in two different states at the same time. If
the same object is linked to the same activity spec-
ifying two different states, this means that states are
exclusive with respect to each other, therefore when
the activity is executed it needs the data object in one
of the available states. A Data Object is represented
by a portrait-oriented rectangle that has its upper-right
corner folded over. States are represented using text
within squared brackets located under the object name.
Using BPMN it is also possible to deﬁne the participants
(or stakeholders) involved in a BP. Pools can be used as
elements containers in order to specify the activities that have
to be executed by a single participant, they are represented via
rectangle containers. Participants can communicate each other
using Message Flow that specify that a particular task or event
can be performed only if a message from another participant
is received. Message Flow are graphically represented via
a dotted arrows. An example of BPMN model in which
participants communicates is shown in Figure 2. The BP shows
that there are two participants, they are Participant 1 and
Participant 2. Participant 1 starts the execution of the BP and
then he sends a message to Participant 2 executing the task
Send a Message. Participant 2 starts the execution of his BP
when he receives the message from Participant 1, it is why
there is a Start Message Event. Then, Participant 2 executes
the tasks Check the Message and Responde in order to send a
message to Participant 1 and ending his BP. When Participant
1 receives this message, he has to choose if execute the task
Do Action 1 or Do Action 2. After the execution of the chosen
task the BP execution ends.
B. Agile Web Development
An agile approach to web development is an attitude that
promotes adaptation, cross-functionality, and continual collab-
oration amongst a team. To be agile, programmers and Project
Manager must constantly be thinking months in advance
and must adapt to any changes that may happen. They are
planning early on, meeting with your team in scrum huddles,
establishing deliverables, meeting goals ahead of schedule
and making continual improvements. It is necessary that the
team is completely ﬂexible to changes during the development
process. Within this ﬂexibility, the team anticipates changes
and respond accordingly, then the team must predict, execute
and adapt.
A cornerstone of agile web development is also the scrum
process in which the team has a quick meeting, discusses
progress and implementation, and then goes their separate
ways, while still functioning as an autonomous unit. Afterward,
all relevant information is continually relayed to the client
and the projects are divided into sprints and user stories.
It helps foster proper communication and maintain an ideal
agency/client relationship. Adopting an agile process helps
eliminate unnecessary wastes of time and allows software
companies to allocate those precious minutes and hours on
actions and processes that add value to your website. Agile
web development can easily be summed up with one word:
efﬁciency. Compared to traditional software engineering, agile
software development mainly targets complex systems and
product development with dynamic, non-deterministic and
non-linear characteristics, where accurate estimates, stable
plans, and predictions are often hard to get in early stagesand
big up-front designs and arrangements would probably cause
a lot of waste, i.e., are not economically sound. These basic
arguments and previous industry experiences, learned from
years of successes and failures, iterative and evolutionary
development [10].
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

Figure 2. BPMN 2.0 Model Example.
C. The SCRUM Approach
Scrum appraoch is written from the perspective of the
customer. By thinking of what the customer desires/needs,
it allows the development team to better understand how to
achieve goals for the website. A simple way to look at this
is to think of this by using the following sentence: As a
(role) I want (feature) so that (beneﬁts). As you collect user
stories, you begin to acquire a product backlog, which is a
collection of user stories. These helps facilitate direction and
milestones. There are three core roles in the Scrum framework.
These core roles are ideally collocated to deliver potentially
shippable Product Increments. They represent the Scrum Team.
Although other roles involved with product development may
be encountered, Scrum does not deﬁne any team roles other
than those described below.
•
Product Ownner The Product Owner represents the
product’s stakeholders and the voice of the customer;
and is accountable for ensuring that the team delivers
value to the business. The Product Owner writes
customer-centric items (typically user stories), prior-
itizes them based on importance and dependencies,
and adds them to the Product Backlog. Scrum Teams
should have one Product Owner [11].
•
Development Team The Development Team is re-
sponsible for delivering potentially shippable incre-
ments (PSIs) of product at the end of each Sprint (the
Sprint goal). A team is made up of 39 individuals
who do the actual work (analyse, design, develop, test,
technical communication, document, etc.). Develop-
ment Teams are cross-functional, with all the skills as
a team necessary to create a Product Increment. The
Development Team in Scrum is self-organizing, even
though there may be some interaction with a project
management ofﬁce.
•
Scrum Master Scrum is facilitated by a Scrum Mas-
ter, who is accountable for removing impediments to
the ability of the team to deliver the product goals and
deliverables. The Scrum Master is not a traditional
team lead or project manager, but acts as a buffer
Figure 3. webBPMN Main Elements.
between the team and any distracting inﬂuences. The
Scrum Master ensures that the Scrum framework is
followed. The Scrum Master helps to ensure the team
follows the agreed processes in the Scrum framework,
often facilitates key sessions, and encourages the team
to improve. The role has also been referred to as a
team facilitator or servant-leader to reinforce these
dual perspectives [12]
III.
WEBBPMN
The proposed language named webBPMN is a BPMN 2.0
variation in which standard BPMN tasks and sub-processes are
replaced with activities designed for web based applications
implementing workﬂows. A new type of data object is also
introduced in order to model the type of data used by web
pages to communicate. These kinds of elements are described
as follow.
•
Web Page Task is an atomic activity performed in
a generic single web page (Figure 3-A). When the
activity is performed a new page will be open. In this
kind of task the stakeholder has to interact with the
software system via a web page. For instance, a Web
Page Task can be related to a search page or a form
that the stakeholder has to ﬁll;
•
Web Page Sub-Process is a composed activity per-
formed in a complex web page (Figure 3-B). In this
kind of activity the stakeholder should perform more
that one activities in a single page beside client side
technologies (such as Javascript/AJAX) or/and some
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

Figure 4. webBPMN Elements that can be used in a Web Page Sub-Process.
events can happen. For instance a Web Page Sub-
Process can be used to represent a page in which a
web chat is implemented. A Web Page Sub-Process
may contain a set of speciﬁc BP elements that are
able to specify the behaviours of the activity. Such as
in many others BPMN sub-processes a start and and
end event should be insert. The list of elements that
can be inserted inside are described as follow.
◦
Web Function Task is an atomic activity that
can be performed in a web page without open
a new page (Figure 4-i). It can be performed
automatically or manually by an user, it can
be client or server side. For instance, it can
be used to call a web service in asynchronous
way or to perform any server side request via
AJAX;
◦
JavaScript Based Timer is an event that is
trigged by a timer for 1 or more times (Figure
4-ii). For instance, it can be used to refresh
the page or to update the list of messages and
users connected in a web chat;
◦
JavaScript Based Event is a generic client
side event that can be trigged by an user action
such as change the value in a dropdown list
(Figure 4-iii). For instance, it can be used to
represent the event that is trigged when there
is an error in a Web Form input ﬁeld. When an
event like that is trigged a Web Function Task
should be performed;
◦
Service Based Event is a generic event that
is trigged when a Web Service respondes to a
call (Figure 4-iv). For instance, it can be used
to start activities when a login server responds
to a request;
•
Web Form Data Object is a particular type of data
that can be generated by a web form (Figure 3-C), it
means that it can be generated only by a Web Page
Task or a Web Page Sub-Process. A Web Form Data
Object is composed by a set of values and eventually
by a set of data ﬁles. This data object is generated by
a web page and it can be consumed by another web
page. For instance, this data object can be generated
by a form in which an user has to log into the web
application and then it can be consumed in another
page in order to verify the credentials.
Using webBPMN a BP designer can use all the standard
BPMN 2.0 elements except tasks and sub-processes. Pools
should be used to deﬁne which web pages can be accessible by
a speciﬁc stakeholders. The interaction between stakeholders
can be deﬁned via standard BPMN Message Flows. Gateways
are used to drive the route of the ﬂow and deﬁne which pages
should be open for each stakeholder.
IV.
THE APPROACH
The approach that we proposed expects three different
steps.
•
The ﬁrst step is performed by Software designer with
skills in BP modeling. Using a story telling approach,
he collects all the requirement by the customers.
The requirement will be grouped in order to divide
the work in different modules. Each modul can be
implemented by one or more programmers. To be
Agile in this step, the Software designer should divide
the requirements using the SCRUM approach [13].
In this speciﬁc context the Software designer can be
considered the SCRUM Master.
•
In the second step, the Software Designer designer
model the webBPMN model of the web application.
From this point until the end of the development
he will work as SCRUM Master, so he will remove
impediments that afﬂict the development team.
•
In the last step, starting from the webBPMN models
the development team starts to implement each singol
task. After each task implementation there is a meeting
with the Product Ownner in order to evaluate the work
that was done.
A. Use Case
The described approach has been applied to model the Web
Application of the Students Internship Business Process of the
University of Camerino. This is a service that the Univeristy
has to put in place in order to permit studens to start an
internship in Italian Companies - in University of Camerino
each Bachelor student must do an internship to graduate. The
proposed webBPMN is shown in Figure 5, it is just a simplied
version of the real one.
Three stakeholders are involved in this business process,
the student that has to apply for an internship, the related
company and the Internship ofﬁce of the University.
The trigger of a process instance is the student that has
to do an internship. First, the student accesses to the Login
Page that is modeled as a Web Page Sub-Process since several
function are needed to verify the identity of the student. The
Web Function Task Request ESSE3 credentias is delegated to
request username and password of the student, then the Web
Function Task Connect to ESSE3 (LDAP Server) connects the
user to ESSE3 system in which credentials are stored. The
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

Figure 5. Internship BP of University of Camerino.
response arrives in the Service Based Event, if the credentials
are correct the page related to the Select an Internship in the
List Web Page Task is open. In this page, the student can see
the list of available internships, he/she can choose one of them
in order to open the detail page of the internship speciﬁed by
the See Internship Details Web Task Page. The student can
candidate to the internship or return to the page in which there
is the list.
When the student applies for an internship the related
company receives a communication. Then, the company will
log to the system via the Log to the System Web Page Task in
order to check the student application in the Check Application
Web Page Sub-Process. In this page the company checks the
information about the student (Check the Applicant Student
Web Function Task) and, optionally his CV (Check the Student
CV Web Function Task). The company can choose the student
for the internship of not, in case the student is chosen the Send
Conﬁrmation of Selection Web Page Sub-Process is open. In
this page, e-mails are sent to the student and to the Internship
ofﬁce of the University via Send the Mail to the Student and
Send the Mail to the Internship Ofﬁce Web Function Tasks.
These tasks are performed automatically by an JavaScript
Based Timer that repeat the execution until mails are sent
correctly.
When the company chooses a student for an internship, the
Internship ofﬁce receives a mail. The ofﬁce has to log to the
system via the Log to the System Web Page Task and then
upload the P7M ﬁle related to the internship via the Upload
the P7M of the training project Web Page Task.
Notwithstanding the complexity of the Web Application
modeling of the scenario has revealed that webBPMN permits
to deﬁne which activities have to be performed in each web
page.
V.
RELATED WORK
In literature, there are just few languages to model web
applications. Usually, languages provide few models to design
different requirements of the web the applications.
The model Object Oriented Hypermedia (OO-H) is used
to design generic web applications [14]. In particular, OO-H
provides a navigation model named Navigation Access Dia-
gram (NAD) that provides the necessary constructs to represent
how web site user navigates between links. It is similar to
the concept explained in this paper in which web pages are
represented as business activities, but the used semantics is not
able to represent the activities that can be performed in each
web page. There are some language similar to OO-H such as
Object-Oriented Hypermedia Design Method (OOHDM) [15],
they share the same base approach.
Another interesting language is UML-based Web Engineer-
ing (UWE) that is an object oriented and iterative approach
based on UML [16]. Also in this language, there is a navigation
model to specify how users navigate between links of the web
site. Also in this case, the activities that users have to perform
in each page are not deﬁned by the model.
Web Modeling Language (WebML) is a language to design
web sites [17]. It provides an high-level graphical represen-
tation providing different models in order to design several
aspects of the designed web application. In this case there is
the Composition Model that speciﬁes the pages provided by
the web application, instead the Navigation Model speciﬁes
how pages are linked together.
The main issue of these language is that they are not
focused on the BP modeling. They can be used to design a
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

generic web site also if it is not regulated by a BP. It means
that they do not provide a full speciﬁcation to manage all the
possible situations that can happen in a BP. Instead, thanks to
BPMN base notation webBPMN provides a set of elements
that can be used to describe many situation and, thanks to the
variation of the semantics of the BPMN activities it is possible
to adapt the language for the web application modeling.
A language similar to webBPMN is WebWorkFlow that is
an object oriented workﬂow modeling language [18]. It can be
used to design simple activities ﬂows for web application. The
main lack of the language is that it does not provide a graphical
representation since it is mainly used to generate an executable
application. It means than also the elements provided by the
language are not so much and their semantics are more related
to programming languages than BPs.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK
In this paper, we present an approach that combine a BP
modeling language with AGILE approach in order to design
web application in more efﬁcient wway. The BP notation
proposed seems particularly suitable to specify which functions
have to be implemented in which web page and the AGILE
approach seems to be very useful to understand better the
requirements and the needs of the customers. The experiment
related to University of Camerino Internship BP provides
encouraging results.
In the next future we plan to extend the webBPMN
notation including new elements in order to specify in a better
way web technologies and functions. For instance, we will
include the concepts of Session and Cookies extending again
the BPMN data objects. We are implementing a modeling
environment to use the webBPMN notation, we are using
ADOxx (http://adoxx.org/) to design the webBPMN meta-
model. At the end, we will continue the experimental work
considering other use cases in the e-government scenario.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the University of
Camerino.
REFERENCES
[1]
V.
Vathanophas,
“Business
process
approach
towards
an
inter-
organizational enterprise system,” Business Process Management Jour-
nal, vol. 13, no. 3, 2007, pp. 433–450.
[2]
A. Ginige and S. Murugesan, “Web engineering: an introduction,”
MultiMedia, IEEE, vol. 8, no. 1, Jan 2001, pp. 14–18.
[3]
M. Dumas, W. M. van der Aalst, and A. H. ter Hofstede, Process-aware
Information Systems: Bridging People and Software Through Process
Technology.
New York, NY, USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2005.
[4]
B. P. M. OMG, “Notation (bpmn) version 2.0 (2011),” Available on:
http://www. omg. org/spec/BPMN/2.0, 2011.
[5]
OMG, OMG Uniﬁed Modeling Language (OMG UML), Superstructure,
Version 2.4.1, Object Management Group Std., Rev. 2.4.1, August
2011. [Online]. Available: http://www.omg.org/spec/UML/2.4.1
[6]
W. M. Van Der Aalst and A. H. Ter Hofstede, “Yawl: yet another
workﬂow language,” Information systems, vol. 30, no. 4, 2005, pp.
245–275.
[7]
J.
Mendling,
“Event-driven
process
chains
(epc),”
in
Metrics
for Process Models, ser. Lecture Notes in Business Information
Processing.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008, vol. 6, pp. 17–57.
[Online].
[8]
M. Weske, Business process management concepts, languages, archi-
tectures, 1st ed.
Springer, Nov. 2007.
[9]
A. Lindsay, D. Downs, and K. Lunn, “Business process - attempts to
ﬁnd a deﬁnition,” Information and Software Technology, vol. 45, 2003,
pp. 1015–1019.
[10]
C. Larman, Agile and iterative development: a manager’s guide.
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2004.
[11]
R. Pichler, Agile Product Management with Scrum: Creating Products
that Customers Love (Adobe Reader).
Addison-Wesley Professional,
2010.
[12]
E. Leybourn, Directing the Agile organisation: A lean approach to
business management.
IT Governance Ltd, 2013.
[13]
J. Sutherland and K. Schwaber, “The scrum guide,” The Deﬁnitive
Guide to Scrum: The Rules of the Game. Scrum. org, 2013.
[14]
P. Plessers, O. D. Troyer, and S. Casteleyn, “Event-based modeling
of evolution for semantic-driven systems,” in Advanced Information
Systems Engineering, 17th International Conference, CAiSE 2005,
Porto, Portugal, June 13-17, 2005, Proceedings, 2005, pp. 63–76.
[Online]. Available:
[15]
D. Schwabe and G. Rossi, “An object oriented approach to web-based
applications design,” Theor. Pract. Object Syst., vol. 4, no. 4, Oct. 1998,
pp. 207–225. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1096-
9942(1998)4:4¡207::AID-TAPO2¿3.0.CO;2-2
[16]
N. Koch and A. Kraus, “Towards a common metamodel for the
development of web applications,” in Web Engineering, ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, J. Lovelle, B. Rodrguez, J. Gayo, M. del
Puerto Paule Ruiz, and L. Aguilar, Eds.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2003, vol. 2722, pp. 497–506. [Online]. Available:
[17]
S. Ceri, P. Fraternali, and A. Bongio, “Web modeling language (webml):
a modeling language for designing web sites,” Computer Networks,
vol. 33, no. 1, 2000, pp. 137–157.
[18]
Z. Hemel, R. Verhaaf, and E. Visser, “Webworkﬂow: an object-oriented
workﬂow modeling language for web applications,” in Model Driven
Engineering Languages and Systems.
Springer, 2008, pp. 113–127.
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

