WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017. ISBN: 978-1-61208-557-9
7
Ontology Based Aspect Oriented Opinion Summary Methodology
Dervis Kanbur 
Kuveyt Turk P. Bank R.D. Center, Kocaeli, Turkey 
Department of Computer Engineering 
Yildiz Technical University 
Istanbul, Turkey 
E-mail: dervis.kanbur@std.yildiz.edu.tr 
Mehmet S. Aktas 
Department of Computer Engineering 
Yildiz Technical University 
Istanbul, Turkey 
E-mail: mehmet@ce.yildiz.edu.tr
 
 
Abstract— Enterprises selling over the web generally request 
feedbacks 
from 
customers 
on 
their 
purchased 
products/services. Thanks to e-commerce in an increasingly 
developing structure, the number of customer feedbacks grows 
rapidly. Due to the great increase in the number of e-
commerce enterprises and customers, it becomes difficult for a 
potential customer to read these feedbacks while making 
decisions. It becomes almost impossible for the producer to 
monitor these feedbacks as well. Product feature extraction 
from customer reviews is an important operation in opinion 
mining. The extracted features help to assess the opinions 
written by customers who have purchased specific products 
and they provide opinions of customers regarding their 
positive/negative experiences. Because most of the customer 
reviews are asyntactic plain texts, methods should be 
developed for extraction of implicit and explicit product 
features expressed in customer reviews and comments. In this 
research, we aim to develop a methodology that examines the 
opinions, thoughts and comments, written in Turkish, about 
the products and summarizes the features of the products and 
the emotional processes related to these properties. Our study 
differs from others in that product characteristics expressed 
using synonyms or word groups can be identified, and features 
can be detected with greater accuracy using ontologies that 
include product specifications. Our study offers successful 
results in product feature extraction. Experimental work on 
opinion/idea/comment for some products on e-commerce sites 
shows that our methodology yields positive results. 
Keywords-text 
mining; 
sentiment 
classification; 
review 
summarizing; synonym word group; ontology; 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In the developing and globalizing world, measuring and 
evaluating customer satisfaction for organizations operating 
in the trade field and using this information to improve 
customer experience has become a key to gain advantage in 
today's competitive market. Thus, organizations that develop 
new products / services or market improved products / 
services will be able to effectively increase service qualities, 
capture customer trust and reach a stable customer portfolio 
in product usage.  
Because the number of skilled workers is likely 
disproportional to the workload, the number of customers 
and products in today’s commercial enterprises, monitoring 
customer satisfaction becomes quite difficult/impossible. The 
features such as obtaining written opinions/suggestions of 
customers on products over the Internet, rapid analysis of 
these data and assessments on products with minimum 
human resources in a fast way, shall free the way of doing 
business actively and developing products according to 
customers’ requests for enterprises and enable maximum 
customer satisfaction. 
With the development of technology from the other side, 
the rapid development of the virtual store network increases 
the number of online shopping and the variety of products 
sold. Through the virtual shopping world, the need for 
comments of customers who have purchased the same 
product before has become prevalent. Nevertheless, 
customers become used to writing feedbacks for products 
they purchase. As a result, thereof, products with more 
comments indicate an increased popularity. Thus, some 
products collect more comments. Hundreds of comments on 
these products from different sources (in other words, 
different e-commerce sites) make it difficult to assess the 
general satisfaction degree of customers browsing through 
these comments. It is not possible to make a general 
deduction for customers who read a part of these comments. 
At the early undeveloped stages of data handling, we 
observe that data analysis reveals the competitive aspects of 
firms. As time passed, the competitors acquiring these 
capabilities have removed this advantage. So, for today’s 
enterprises, development of more complex data analysis 
approaches become obligatory, in order to get a step ahead. 
To help marketing people get ahead safely in this 
challenging competition environment, an independently 
sponsored research unit, Harvard Business Review Analytic 
Services [7] within the Harvard Business Review Group has 
researched how leading marketing enterprises integrated 
customer and marketing data and how they used it to 
increase their companies’ performance. This research has 
revealed that the data source used for customers and 
marketing activities were the most important element in 
competition.  
As the Internet world grows up and social media is used 
more frequently, it becomes possible to take customer 
reviews through various channels. It is essential to respond 
positively to customer needs in sales & marketing. 
Monitoring and responding to these needs shall help 
companies in reaching maximum customer satisfaction and 
provide an improvement of marketing data at a significant 
rate. In this case, the need for an application capable of being 
implemented rapidly and easily by companies, analyzing 

WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017. ISBN: 978-1-61208-557-9
8
customer reviews, performing certain deductions on the 
product according to the analysis is among the reason 
motivating our research. 
The aim of this research is to increase the quality of 
products/services in line with feedbacks of customers and 
ensure customer satisfaction within the product sales and 
service sector and to develop a methodology for creating 
mutual satisfaction through win-win strategy. The method 
we propose in this research shall collect customers’ 
feedbacks dynamically, make deductions on product features 
by analyzing the reviews, and enable figuring out the 
positive/negative aspects of products. 
A. Research Questions 
In order to achieve the motivation mentioned above, the 
research questions we have determined are as follows: 
1) R.Q-1: What should be a method that can process 
customer comments for products sold on the Internet and 
automatically extract the properties of the products and then 
summarize the positive or negative opinions of the 
customers based on their product characteristics? How 
should the architecture of the software that implements such 
a method be and how can it be developed? 
2) R.Q-2: How should a methodology be developed that 
will reveal whether the product features revealed by the 
analysis of the data obtained from the customer comments 
are the actual product characteristics? 
B. Contribution of Research  
The increase in online resources where different 
ideas/opinions/comments are shared, and the fact that these 
shares are in different formats, reveals the need to develop 
methods to collect data. Within the scope of this research, a 
web crawler application has been developed to find, 
download, parse, and collect customer comments (texts 
containing comments/ideas/ thoughts) in such sources. In 
order to extract product features from collected customer 
comments and to perform feature based sentiment analysis, 
the following functions have been implemented in order: (1) 
Extracting product features from Turkish comments, (2) To 
determine whether each feature is used with the word group 
that contains positive or negative expression according to 
Turkish grammar rules (3) Identifying Product features, 
identified with different words but with the same meaning, 
and combining under one feature title (4) taking advantage of 
ontology, 
comparing 
actual product properties 
with 
determined properties (5) summarizing sentiment analysis 
results. In the scope of this research, a methodology which 
can determine the properties of products from the 
interpretations entered by the customers and can analyze the 
emotions related to these properties is proposed. A prototype 
implementation of the developed methodology has been 
developed and the success of the methodology has been 
demonstrated through experimental work on the prototype. 
C. Organizational Structure 
In the Introduction, we talked about our motivation to 
trigger this research. The main issues related to our similar 
researches and researches are summarized in literature 
review. In the part “Proposed Software Architecture”, we 
talked about our methodology for analyzing customer 
comments and determining product characteristics. In the 
part "Development", how the methodology used in the 
system developed in the research is realized is explained. In 
Section IV, the success of the proposed methodology is 
examined. In Section V, the results we have obtained after 
conducting the research are discussed. 
 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW AND BASIS TOPICS 
In this part, we will discuss the studies performed on 
extracting 
product 
feature 
from 
customer 
reviews.  
Generally, these studies are sorted into different classes as 
frequency based approach [1], statistical approach [11], and 
relational based approach [2]. Since the methodology we 
provide in this research is in the frequency-based approach 
category, we concentrate on studies in this area especially if 
we do not review the literature. The most prominent work in 
this category is the method proposed by Hu and Liu, which 
extracts the most frequent terms from the reviews as product 
features [1]. In this research, It was assumed that the product 
features shall be expressed clearly by nouns or noun phrases 
in the sentence. Association Rule Mining was implemented 
to find frequently repeated words. When the frequently 
repeating features’ list is generated, all words expressing an 
opinion around these features are figured out. The main 
disadvantage of this method is that some words that are not 
actually product features may be extracted as a feature 
because they are used frequently. After identifying the 
features in the texts, it is necessary to reveal the opinions 
associated with these features. The works done in this area is 
categorized as opinion mining. In opinion mining studies 
focuses on the following processes: 
A. Subjective Classification 
In this category of studies, a given text/sentence is 
searched if it contains any opinion [1] [12]. These studies 
consider whether a sentence contains a positive or negative 
opinion rather than the general document.  
B. Sentiment Classification 
It is the process of trying to find out whether a given 
sentence is positive/negative or neutral. In this category, 
sentiment based classification studies are inspired by 
cognitive linguistics [13]. In some studies, the texts were 
classified with certain specific sentimental words [14]. In 
these researches, each word was added to a dictionary and it 
was marked to detect if it has a positive/negative expression. 
The statistics found using a search engine in a study, which 
was developed for common languages such as English and 
an effective study, which uses WordNet, were matched with 
words and documents and a learning technique was 
generated [8]. In some studies, sentiment classifications were 
performed using machine learning techniques [9]. The other 
studies in this area have not been designed to give 
knowledge of which opinions indicate which feature. 

WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017. ISBN: 978-1-61208-557-9
9
 
 
C.     Opinion Summarizing 
It is a function that is worked on to express multiple 
opinions or a long opinion text in a short way. Several 
summarizing techniques basically work on two categories. 
Creating templates and extracting passages. Most studies in 
this area were developed in a single document. Whereas 
some studies were performed on multiple documents 
containing the same information in order to search for 
similarities and differences [10]. 
Our study was performed on Turkish reviews and 
different words, abbreviations or loan word groups are 
checked through an available list and the recall value is being 
increased by combining words which were extracted as 
different features. It is distinguished from previous studies in 
its being performed on Turkish reviews, assessment of loan 
words, and detecting synonyms.  
The study we have proposed in this paper is based on 
Turkish interpretations and allows us to extract more 
accurate features by combining different word, abbreviation 
or foreign word groups which express the same feature (in 
other words, the words that are expressed as different 
features but which express the same feature). By using field 
ontologies, it is checked whether the determined properties 
are met in ontology. Our developed feature extraction 
method is separated from existing studies by being able to 
determine on the basis of Turkish interpretations, use of 
ontologies and synonyms and to collect them under the same 
heading. 
Product features are extracted from multiple customer 
reviews in our work. In this respect, it differs from the 
traditional text summarization. A method that works on 
multiple comments / text clusters instead of a single text has 
been developed. Our goal here is to extract product features 
on multiple texts, rather than finding similarities or 
differences in texts. Again, within the scope of our study, a 
list of words and phrases for adjectives with positive or 
negative meaning in the Turkish language was extracted and 
their sentiment ratings were determined. In our study, 
sentiment analysis was done at the sentence level, not at the 
document level. By using the sentimental adjectives in the 
sentences, positive or negative opinions related to the 
product features in the sentence were determined. 
III. 
THE PROPOSED METHODLOGY 
The details of our methodology given in Figure 1 are 
given below. The Turkish Feature Identification System 
works on data (eg: e-commerce site selling X Television 
Brand, the source of X product) obtained by finding, 
gathering, decomposing comment texts of a product with a 
specific source. These data may be obtained from a single 
source where the product is sold, or it can occur in different 
environments if the product is sold in more than one source 
(e-commerce site). These environments may be sampled as 
e-commerce websites, social media groups, opinion 
expressing websites. As shown in Figure 1 the study was 
performed on data acquired from selected e-commerce and 
opinion expressing web sites. The system is designed to be 
used for analysis and reporting of customer reviews by 
integrating it to these web sites. Through the integration of 
this system with companies’ e-commerce websites, it would 
be possible to observe how the product generates opinions 
from performed reviews. This would increase the customer 
satisfaction and contribute positively to the product 
marketing. 
A. Data Collection 
In this phase, texts containing comments/ideas/opinions 
are obtained in the data source. Within the scope of this 
research, because of the difficulty in finding a ready dataset 
prepared in Turkish, reviews from two selected websites 
(arabainceleme.com, hepsiburada.com) were extracted and 
prepared for processing. However, since the method we 
propose is extensible, it can be integrated into the system 
from other data sources so that it can provide output in the 
format the system expects. 
B. Data Pre-Processing 
In our study, some preprocessing techniques were used. 
Primarily, stop words likely to recur in reviews, which are 
required by the language, were cleared. Then, the roots of 
words were obtained by stemming on the words which made 
the texts containing comments/opinions/ideas. Within the 
scope of word rooting function, because some words from 
the Turkish language had the same roots, there was a 
problem of not to be able to pick the right structure in 
stemming. In such cases, the next words were examined and 
formation of a combined structure was checked.  
For example, a sentence including the expression 
“kullanım kılavuzu(user manual)” may be given as an 
example of this problem. When we observe the stem of the 
word “kullanım”, the verb  “kullan” appears. But its suffix 
“ım” indicates that this word may be used as a noun. In such 
words, the following word was examined to recognize its 
type.  Because the word “kılavuzu” has a noun root and it 
has a noun generating suffix “u”, the previous word 
“kullanım” was assumed as a noun. In following parts of the 
contribution, the algorithm which discovers Turkish 
compound words shall be explained in detail. 
C. Extracting Feature From Data 
In the process of extracting features from data, the 
Zemberek Natural Language Processing library was used 
[15]. An ontology related to the product features was created 
by making use of the data dictionary of the Turkish 
Language Association. Classification Based on Associations 
Figure 1.  The Proposed Methodoloy Workflow 

WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017. ISBN: 978-1-61208-557-9
10
(CBA) algorithm was used to find the frequency of the 
words in the obtained sentences. Recall and Precision 
metrics were used to measure the obtained values. The 
process of extracting properties is made up of the following 
sub-steps: word tagging, compound word detection, 
extraction 
of 
frequently 
repetitive 
product 
features, 
extraction of opinion words, extraction of opinion sentence 
tendencies, and combination of related words. We explain 
these sub-steps in detail below. 
1) Word Tagging 
After the removal of stop words, we have tagged the 
remaining words. Figure 2 shows a tagged sentence after the 
process. 
The example sentence in Figure 2 is as follows: “Tam 
ihtiyaçlarıma göre bir araç, düşük viteslerde gaza biraz 
yüklenmek gerekiyor ama hızını aldıktan sonra gerçekten 
etkileyici (the car design as my needs, in low gears the needs 
to load to gas a bit, but it's really impressive)”. For each 
sentence in the comment contained in each comment text, an 
identifier is assigned to each word, and the tagged data are 
recorded in XML as shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
2) Turkish Compound Word Detection 
In our implemented word tagging structure, the word’s 
structure is extracted in relation to its stem. However, some 
features of the products may be expressed phrases 
constructed from noun phrases, adjective clauses, loan words 
and different compound words. Detection of these structures 
was determined within the scope of this study. A compound 
word detection algorithm specifically developed for Turkish 
language is shown in Figure 3. Within the context of this 
study, it is assumed that the words that express opinions are 
adjectives. However, considering that a product feature can 
also be expressed by adjective phrases, the adjectives used in 
such a case are considered to be part of the word groups 
expressing the product characteristic, and no sentiment 
analysis is performed on the adjectives in this case. 
a) Detection of Various Structures from the Same Stem 
In the tagging process, data root detection is performed 
by stemming on the word. However, detection of real tags of 
words in two different structures with roots having the same 
letters has appeared as a problem in front of us. We have 
tried to tag these words with multiple structures by 
combining them with following words.  
For example; "gaz pedalı çok hafif" and "araç gaz ile 
çalışırken performansı düşüyor", the word "gaz" in the 
sentences has a different meaning in each term. While the 
"gas pedal" word group is a name proposition in the first 
sentence, the other sentence does not have such a formation. 
For this reason, it is necessary to correctly determine in what 
sense the word is used in order analyze the sentences 
correctly. In order to distinguish the words in this situation, 
we proposed a compound word detection algorithm as shown 
in Figure 3. 
In the given algorithm detail, the sequential operations 
are as follows: 
The block between lines 4-45 processes words in the 
given sentence. 
The block between lines 5-25 handles the cases in which 
the word root is a noun. In this case: 
 
If the next word has got a noun-phrase suffix 
 
If the next word has got one of the nouns –den and –
in suffixes 
 
If the next word is a verb and has got one of the –me 
(passive voice) -im -in suffixes  
 
If the word has got noun-phrase -ın suffix  
 
If the word has got a possession suffix –lı or absence 
suffix –sız 
 
If the word has got a noun –de suffix and if the 
previous word is verb 
if the word has one of these conditions, it is deduced that 
"this word may be part of the combined word". 
The block between lines 26-44, handles the cases when 
the word root is a verb. In this case: 
 
If the word has got only one suffix and the next word 
is an adjective 
 
If one the suffixes of the word is a negation suffix, 
and the next word is a noun and has got a noun-
phrase –ı suffix. 
 
If the word has got two suffixes and one of them is 
necessarily an –erek suffix and the previous word is 
a noun. 
 
If the word has got two suffixes and one of them is –
dik –en or –im, and the next word is a noun and has 
one of the noun-phrase suffixes –ı –ın –de. 
if the word has one of these conditions, it is deduced that 
"this word may be part of the combined word". 
In line 45, if the word is marked as a compound word, it 
is added to the compound word list. 
Lines 50-70 deal with the words on the compound word 
list. If a word / word group has the following conditions, this 
word / word group is combined with the next word itself. 
 
If it is not compound and is a noun and is nominative 
case 
Figure 2.  Example of Tagging Sentence 

WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017. ISBN: 978-1-61208-557-9
11
 
If it is not compound and has got a noun-phase 
suffix –ın 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If it is compound and the second word has got –ın –
ın suffixes. 
The algorithm finally extracts the combined word list in 
the sentence. 
This algorithm was developed to extract Turkish 
conjugated words and does not contain all grammar rules. To 
be able to contain all the rules of the Turkish language, it 
needs to be developed further. Since the algorithm is used on 
the sentences established in the daily speech language, it has 
been seen that not all grammatical rules are sufficient for this 
process in such studies. Some exclusion rules have been 
added to control situations such as foreign word usage.  
b) Detection of Foreign Words and Abbreviations 
Foreign words and abbreviations appeared as another 
issue to work on at tagging. Since the words in the sentence 
which are commonly used or which originated from 
traditional words used for technologies and product features 
cannot be solved with a Turkish natural language processor, 
a controlled dictionary containing these words has been 
created. 
For these cases, the words / word groups encountered in 
the sentences are labeled using the abbreviations and foreign 
word controlled-dictionary created for these situations. Since 
the foreign words have been overused in the domains of the 
comment texts we have worked on, this controlled dictionary 
has produced very effective results in extracting the product 
features. Since the foreign words have been overused in the 
domains of the comment texts we have worked on, this 
controlled dictionary has produced very effective results in 
extracting the product features. 
3) Detection of Frequently Repeated Product Feature 
After tagging studies, an a priori algorithm was used to 
calculate repetition frequencies of words and word groups 
[16]. Repetition frequency of tagged items consisting of 
word roots in reviews, and the details about in which review 
and which sentence they appear, was kept in a file based 
storage environment for analysis. The reviews generally 
include sentences within the scope of the same topic. When 
opinions on the same product are combined in this way, noun 
and noun groups in sentences indicate product features. 
Frequently used words and word groups are assumed to be 
product features. 
4) Extraction of Opinion Expressing Words 
We have handled adjective and adjective expressing 
words in sentences to extract sentiment expressing words. 
Sentimental words express personal thoughts of reviewers 
about products. In case of multiple features in a sentence, the 
sentimental adjectives are evaluated relative to the most 
frequently repeated word or word group. Positive or negative 
expression forms in the Turkish language are not limited to 
adjectives. In order not to miss adjectives from words with 
the same letter clusters but different structures, adjective 
building statuses of suffixes rather than word stems are 
handled. 
When we look to the stem of the word “etkileyici” in the 
sentence given in III.C as an example, the word “etki” does 
not express the meaning of an adjective. However, while the 
suffix “le” gives a verb meaning, the suffix “ici” makes the 
1 Procedure PhraseDetector 
2 List phrasedList=new List; 
3 for each word in sentence{ 
4   isPhrased=false; 
5   if word_root is NOUN{ 
6     if count(word_eco) = 1 and exists(next_word){ 
7        if (next_word_eco contains ("ISIM_TAMLAMA_I" or  "ISIM_BELIRTME"  
8       or "ISIM_CIKMA_DEN" or "ISIM_SAHIPLIK_SEN_IN" or  
9        "ISIM_TAMLAMA_IN")) 
10        or (next_word_root is VERB and next_word_eco contains  
11      ("FIIL_DONUSUM_ME" or "FIIL_EDILGENSESLI_N" or  
12      "FIIL_DONUSUM_IM")) 
13      or (next_word_root is NOUN and word is Lean and next_word is Lean) 
14            isPhrased=true; 
15      }       
16      else if (word_eco contains("ISIM_BULUNMA_LI" or  
17      "ISIM_YOKLUK_SIZ")){ 
18         if(phrasedList.add(word_root,next_word_root); continue next;                   
19      } 
20      else if (word_eco contains("ISIM_KALMA_DE") and exists(before_word)){ 
21         if(before_word_root is VERB and !(before_word_eco  
22         contains("ZAMAN"))) 
23            isPhrased=true; 
24      } 
25   }//end if word_root is NOUN 
26   else if (word_root is VERB){ 
27      if (word_eco.size = 1 and next_word  is not ADJECTIVE) isPhrased=true; 
28      else if (word_eco contains("OLUMSUZLUK_ME") and word_eco.size = 2){ 
29         if(next_word_root is NOUN and next_word_eco  
30         contains("ISIM_TAMLAMA_I")) isPhrased=true; 
31      }  
32      else if (word_eco contains("FIIL_SUREKLILIK_EREK") and  
33      word_eco.size = 2){ 
34         if(exists(before_word) and before_word is NOUN) 
35         {    phrasedList.add(before_word_root,word_root); continue next;} 
36      } 
37      else if (word_eco contains("FIIL_BELIRTME_DIK" or  
38      "FIIL_DONUSUM_EN" or "FIIL_DONUSUM_IM") and  
39       word_eco.size >= 2){ 
40            if (next_word_root is NOUN and next_word_eco  
41             contains("ISIM_TAMLAMA_DE" or "ISIM_TAMLAMA_IN" or  
42             "ISIM_TAMLAMA_I")) isPhrased=true; 
43      }  
44   }//end if word_root is VERB 
45   if (isPhrased)phrasedList.add(word_root,next_word_root); 
46 } end for 
47 
48 List newPhrasedList = new List; 
49 for each phrased_word in setBirlesikKelime{ 
50   boolean isAdd = true; 
51   if((phrased_word[0] is FOREIGN_WORD) or phrased_word.size = 1 and  
52    phrased_word[0] is NOUN and phrased_word[0] is Lean or 
53    phrased_word.size = 1 and phrased_word[0].eco  
54    contains("ISIM_TAMLAMA_IN") or phrased_word.size = 2 and 
55   phrased_word[1].eco contains("ISIM_TAMLAMA_IN" or 
56   "ISIM_TAMLAMA_I")){ 
57      if (exists next_phrased_word){ 
58         if(next_phrased_word.size =1 and next_phrased_word[0].eco 
59          contains("ISIM_TAMLAMA_I") or next_phrased_word.size =2 and 
60         next_phrased_word[1].eco contains("ISIM_TAMLAMA_I")){ 
61            List<WordSet> kList = new ArrayList(phrased_word[0]); 
62            if (phrased_word.size = 2) kList.add(phrased_word[1]); 
63            kList.add(next_phrased_word[0]); 
64            if (next_phrased_word.size = 2) kList.add(next_phrased_word[1]); 
65            newPhrasedList.add(kList); 
66            isAdd = false; 
67         } 
68      } 
69   } 
70   if (isAdd) { newPhrasedList.add(phrased_word);  } 
71 } 
72 return newPhrasedList; 
73 en  
Figure 3.  Turkish Compound Word Detection Algorithm 

WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017. ISBN: 978-1-61208-557-9
12
word an adjective and indicates a sentiment. In the method 
we propose, accepting the word groups that express such 
opinions as adjectives, sentiment sentences are revealed. 
5) Extraction of Opinion Sentence Tendency 
Studies on sentiment analysis aim at classification of the 
given text as positive, negative, or neutral. For example, it is 
possible that all of the reviews/comments about a soccer 
team or a TV program on social media are classified as 
positive or negative using natural language processing and 
text mining techniques. Here, the right situation or the wrong 
idea is not sought and the current situation is detected. 
Various methods for opinion mining may be developed. For 
example, distinguishing words as positive/negative and 
classification of reviews as positive/negative according to the 
number of words is one of the essential methods. 
 
 
 
While performing object-oriented opinion extraction 
through reviews, opinion mining through number of words, 
frequencies of words such as nouns, adjectives, adverbs, or 
verbs was a technique that we have used. In this approach, 
primarily noun word groups are detected, and by adding 
adjective word groups defining these noun word groups the 
infrequently repeating sentiments are eliminated. Scoring is 
done through adjective or adjective groups. Utilizing the 
adjective dictionary that exists at our disposal, the adjectives 
in the sentence are found to have negative or positive levels. 
The adjectives are subjected to these levels of aggregation 
and a score is calculated for the generic. All scores in the 
comment are summed up and a score is calculated for the 
comment. According to the calculation made, it is concluded 
that the score is positive if it is +, negative if it is - or neutral 
if it is 0. In this calculation, the WordOrientation and 
SentenceOrietation algorithms shown in the study of Hu and 
Liu [1] are used. The calculated scores for some features are 
shown in Figure 8 and Figure 13 by the OrientationScore tag. 
6) Combination of Associated Words 
In the processes up to this point, the identification of 
words which frequently repeat and express positive / 
negative opinions has been emphasized. Because of 
the…….. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
variety in the grammar of the Turkish language, and the use 
of foreign words, we have seen that words expressing the 
same features have qualified as different features, and some 
very frequently expressed features remained under a 
threshold value and were not qualified as features. In order to 
reduce this situation as much as possible, we have focused 
on the integration of the words which are synonymous and 
express the same situation. 
 
 
 
 
 1 Procedure SynonymController() 
2 begin  
3  for each word sentence si 
4  begin    
5           var synword = synonymList.find(word.stemmed) 
6           if synword is not null 
7                       word.synonymId=synword 
8                       word.text=synword.Text 
9  endfor; 
10 end 
Figure 4.  Ontology Diagram for Product Features – TV 
Figure 5.  Algorithm for Turkish Associated Word Extraction 
Figure 6.  Ontology Diagram for Product Features - Car 

WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017. ISBN: 978-1-61208-557-9
13
 
 
Figure 7.  System Architecture Model 
Since it is not enough to check the comments one by one 
and remove synonyms, the abbreviations and foreign words 
are also grouped. For this purpose, ontologies have been 
created that cover the product features related to the 
products. These ontologies are given in Figure 4 and Figure 
6.  
In this way, controlled dictionaries created by experts for 
product specifications are created. This allows us to further 
increase the success of our feature extraction method. The 
algorithm we use is presented in Figure 5. Synonyms are 
detected on line 5 and values are assigned to synonyms on 
lines 7-8. 
The flow architecture of the system is shown in Figure 7 
above. 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
Our proposed methodology was implemented using C# 
and Java technologies. Java version 1.8.91 and C# version 
4.6.1 were selected. The open source Zemberek Natural 
Language Processor was used as a Turkish word processor 
[15]; Protege 5.0.1 (protege.stanford.edu) was used for 
ontology development; the Jena library (jena.apache.org) has 
been used to process ontology data. These projects, which 
we use to improve our methodology, have been chosen 
because they are open source projects with specific 
developer support. The general architecture of our developed 
prototype software is shown in Figure 7.  
The developed prototype software was designed in order 
to parse the product reviews performed instantly or 
asynchronously on the e-commerce website or product 
review website, to detect product features, and to perform 
extractions from product reviews. 
In our proposed system, each idea/opinion/comment is 
considered to be a resource. In this structure, customers 
create their own comments and evaluations on e-commerce 
or evaluation sites.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 contains this sentence as an example “ekran 
gayet uygun boyutlarda (the screen is of a very good size)”. 
Figure 8 depicts our data model of a TV model, based on the 
comment text entered by a user, in XML format. As can be 
seen from Figure 8, the data structure has upper data fields 
related to comment text such as ReviewId, Date, and Author. 
In addition, it shows the content of the text, such as 
"SentenceId", "WordId", "Text", "Tag", "StemmedText", 
"FrequencyId", "SynonymId", "Date", "Author" There are 
data items in the text that indicate the frequency of their 
passage in the text. 
We have carried out our experiments on texts that 
express comments/opinions/thoughts for two different 
product types: Automobile and Television. We used data sets 
consisting of customer reviews of 5 car brands and 5 
television models. Review texts were collected via 
"arabainceleme.com" and "hepsiburada.com" sites. For each 
comment text, the title of the text, the content of the text, the 
date and time the text was entered, the name of the author, 
the location of the author, and the rating value of the author 
are exhibited. 
For each product, 100 comments were captured and 
downloaded by scanning the text and converted to XML 
documents as the example in Figure 8 shows. The texts were 
Figure 8.  Parsed Review Content 

WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017. ISBN: 978-1-61208-557-9
14
 
 
separated using the Zemberek Natural Language Processing 
library, and the words and phrases in the texts were tagged. 
For each sentence in the product interpretation, these 
terms are tagged if they contain the user's opinions. The 
features of these sentences are also determined. For feature 
identification, the method of feature identification proposed 
by Hu and Liu [1] is expanded. Here, unlike the work of Hu 
and Liu, the synonyms and feature words are united. It also 
provides the tagging of the different words that have the 
same meaning. The terms entered for the product features 
entered by the users are compared with the terms of the 
ontologies we create to ensure that the correct product 
attributes are tagged. For each product, a list of features 
included in the comment text is produced. 
 
TABLE I.  
PRODUCT FEATURES PRECISION AND RECALL 
RESULTS  
Product 
Feature 
Extraction 
Hu and Liu Approach 
Proposed Approach 
Product 
Precision 
Recall 
F-Score Precision 
Recall 
F-Score 
VW 
Golf 
0.8667 
0.1585 
0.2680 
0.9444 
0.4146 
0.5763 
Seat 
Leon 
0.9474 
0.2195 
0.3564 
0.9706 
0.4024 
0.5690 
Renault 
Megane 
0.7667 
0.5610 
0.6479 
0.8133 
0.7439 
0.7771 
Opel 
Mokka 
0.8082 
0.7195 
0.7613 
0.8108 
0.7317 
0.7692 
Nissan 
Qashqai 
0.8036 
0.5488 
0.6522 
0.8406 
0.7073 
0.7682 
LG 
32LF580N 
0.6667 
0.1167 
0.1986 
0.6885 
0.9767 
0.8077 
Vestel 
40FA5050 
0.7143 
0.2326 
0.3509 
0.8571 
0.5581 
0.6761 
Vestel 
40FB7100 
0.6667 
0.0667 
0.1212 
0.6531 
0.7442 
0.6957 
Vestel 
48FA8200 
0.6429 
0.2093 
0.3158 
0.7727 
0.3953 
0.5231 
Vestel 
48UA9300 
0.7500 
0.2791 
0.4068 
0.8667 
0.6047 
0.7123 
 
For each product, the number of features extracted using 
the proposed method is summarized in Table 1. Here, all 
features in the comment text are manually tagged to 
determine whether the features detected by the method are 
correct features. Values for the recall and precision metrics 
were determined by comparing the properties found by our 
method with the properties of the products manually 
identified. Here, the detection of product properties (Hu and 
Liu's method) based on only the frequency values was 
compared to the frequency-based product feature detection 
(recommended method) attachment and discovery metrics 
after combining the synonymous features under a single 
feature. In extracting the feature count, the threshold value 
we use for the frequency rate is taken as 10%. 
When we examine the comparison given in Table 1, we 
see the effect of combining the synonyms as the reason for 
the differences in the results. The results show that we can 
achieve higher finding and fixation values because of a large 
number of frequently used features and the presence of 
different feature names that mean the same. We also did the 
evaluation based on our product. The results are shown in 
Figures 9-12. Based on the product-based evaluation, our 
approach suggests that it allows for more accurate traits. 
However, we see that the features that rarely appear in 
comment texts are features that are not of great interest to the 
general public. 
Outputs from the sentiment analysis are shown in Figure 
14 and Figure 15. Sentimental analysis values of the 
sentences we operate are calculated by taking advantage of 
the grades of the adjectives they possess. In this research, 
adjectives we have identified in the sentence are assigned 
values from a controlled list composed of rated adjective 
 
Figure 9.  Precision metric values in different product feature detection 
approaches for automotive products 
Figure 10.  Recall metric values for different product feature detection 
approaches for automotive products 

WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017. ISBN: 978-1-61208-557-9
15
 
 
words and word groups. The values corresponding to the 
adjectives that existed in the properties we extracted were 
given value assignments at the frequency of repetition of the 
properties and sentiment analysis values were obtained. Each 
of the rated adjectives in our hand is rated as positive (1), 
negative (-1), or neutral (0). These sentimental analysis 
values given to the extracted features are calculated in 
proportion to the frequency of repetition of the feature, the 
frequency of the adjectives it possesses, and the grades of 
these adjectives. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13 deals with the statement "Ancak(CON) 
donanım (NOUN) konusunda (NOUN) eksik (ADJ)", 
(however, the hardware is a bit lacking). The approach we 
have proposed is that the "donanım konusu" sentence is a 
compound word. "eksik" is perceived as a negative adjective.  
 
 
 
 
 
When viewed in this way, the word "donanım konusu" is 
marked as a property by being associated with the "donanım" 
attribute from the ontology diagram, and has a score of -1 in 
the sentiment analysis calculation because it is passed along 
with a negative adjective. 
 
 
 
The methodology we propose and the software we 
  
The sentiment analysis results of the features that we 
have obtained and shown with OrientationScore tag, appear 
in Figure 14 and Figure 15. While positive comments gain 
Figure 11.  Precision metric values for different product feature detection 
approaches for TV model 
Figure 13.  Sentence Example for Output of Sentiment Analysis 
Figure 12.  Recall metric values for different product feature detection 
approaches for TV model 
Figure 14.  Sentiment Analysis values for the top 10 features in the VW 
Golf car 

WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017. ISBN: 978-1-61208-557-9
16
weight in some features, some seem to gain negative 
comments, others are neutral. These figures give us 
information about the good and bad features of the products. 
 
 
 
 
 
V. 
RESULTS AND FUTURE WORK 
Within the scope of this research, a method is proposed 
that can process the Turkish comments made by customers 
for the products sold online, automatically extract the 
features of the products, and then summarize the positive or 
negative opinions of the customers based on the product 
features. 
The methodology we propose and the software we have 
developed for this methodology yields very successful 
results in deriving the actual features used in the sentence. 
The experiments we have conducted to test the success of 
our proposed method have shown the effectiveness of our 
proposed approach, including the fact that the recall and 
precision metric values we obtained in the results are high. 
Within the scope of this study, the performance ratios for 
product feature inferences were tested from texts that 
expressed comments / opinions / ideas. In future studies, we 
will develop our ontologies to extract product features more 
effectively. In addition to this, we will expand the scope of 
our experiments by increasing the number of texts that 
specify the comments / opinions / thoughts we have selected. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study is being supported by the TUBITAK-3501-
Career 
Development 
Program 
(CAREER) 
with 
the 
Project ID: 114E781. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Hu and B. Liu. “Mining and summarizing customer reviews”. 
In Proceedings of ACM-KDD 2004, pp.168-177. 
[2] R. Kumar V. and K. Raghuveer. “Web User Opinion Analysis for 
Product Features Extraction and Opinion Summarization”. 
International Journal of Web & Semantic Technology (IJWesT) 
Vol.3, No.4, October 2012, pp.69. 
[3] V. Brindha and M. Kathiravan “Text Mining For Infrequent Noun 
Feature Extraction And Sentiment Classification”. International 
Journal of Emerging Technology in Computer Science & 
Electronics (IJETCSE), ISSN: 0976-1353 Volume 13 Issue 4 –
March 2015, pp.323-326. 
[4] S. H. Ghorashi, R. Ibrahim, S. Noekhah, and N. S. Dastjerdi “A 
Frequent Pattern Mining Algorithm for Feature Extraction of 
Customer Reviews”. IJCSI International Journal of Computer 
Science Issues, Vol. 9, Issue 4, No 1, July 2012, pp.29-35. 
[5] L. Ferreira, N. Jakob, and I. Gurevych “A Comparative Study of 
Feature Extraction Algorithms in Customer Reviews”. 2008 IEEE 
International Conference on Semantic Computing, August 2008, 
pp.144-151. 
[6] L. Zhuang, F. Jing, and X. Zhu “Movie review mining and 
summarization”, Proceedings of the 15th ACM international 
conference on Information and knowledge management, Virginia, 
November 2006, pp.43-50. 
[7] Harvard Business Review Analytic Services Report, Marketing in 
the driver’s seat: Using Analytics to create customer value 
February 2016 
[8] P. D. Turney, “Thumbs Up or Thumbs Down Semantic Orientation 
Applied to Unsupervised Classification of Reviews”. Proceedings 
of the 40th Annual Meeting on Association for Computational 
Linguistics, July 2002, Philadelphia, pp.417-424. 
[9] B. Pang, L. Lee, and S. Vaithyanathan “Thumbs up? Sentiment 
Classification Using Machine Learning Techniques.”  Procedings 
of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing (EMNLP), Philadelphia, July 2002, pp.78-96. 
[10] I. Mani and E. Bloedorn “Multi-document Summarization by 
Graph Search and Matching”. Procedings of the 14th national 
conference on artificial intelligence and 9th conference on 
Innovative applications of artificial intelligence, Rhode Island, 
July 1997, pp.622-628. 
[11] J. Yi and W. Niblack “Sentiment Mining in WebFountain”. 
Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Data 
Engineering, April 2005, Volume 0, pp.1073-1083. 
[12] V. Hatzivassiloglou and J. Wiebe “Effects of Adjective Orientation 
and Gradability on Sentence Subjectivity”. Proceedings of the 18th 
conference on Computational linguistics - Volume 1, pp.299-305. 
[13] M. Hearst ”Direction-based Text Interpretation as an Information 
Access Refinement”. In Paul Jacobs, editor, Text-Based Intelligent 
Systems. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1992, pp.257-274.. 
[14] R. Tong “An Operational System for Detecting and Tracking 
Opinions in on-line discussion” SIGIR 2001 Workshop on 
Operational Text Classification, Volume 1, p 6. 
[15] A.A. Akın and M.D. Akın “Zemberek, an open source NLP 
framework 
for 
Turkic 
Languages” 
https://github.com/ahmetaa/zemberek-nlp [retrieved: 04, 2017] 
[16] F. Coenen “LUCS KDD implementation of CBA”, Department of 
Computer 
Science, 
The 
University 
of 
Liverpool 
http://www.csc.liv.ac.uk/~frans/KDD/Software/CMAR/cba.html 
[retrieved: 04, 2017] 
Figure 15.  Sentiment Analysis values for the top 10 features of Vestel 
48FA200 television 

