Discovering Geographical Patterns of Crime Localization in Mexico City 
Roberto Zagal-Flores1, Félix Mata-Rivera2, 
Instituto Politécnico Nacional,  
UPIITA-IPN1, 2 
Ciudad de México, México 
e-mail: rzagalf@ipn.mx1, mmatar@ipn.mx2 
Christophe Claramunt3, Edgar Catalan-Salgado4 
Naval Academy Research Institute3 
Brest Naval, 29240, France 
Instituto Politécnico Nacional, ESCOM-IPN4 
Ciudad de México, México 
 e-mail: claramunt@ecole-navale.fr3, ecatalans@ipn.mx4
 
Abstract. The search for a better understanding of crime 
patterns in large urban areas is still a crucial issue that 
deserves novel research methods and approaches. In 
particular, combination of institutional databases and novel 
information medias such as social networks appear as a 
promising trend that might favor development of more 
efficient 
criminal 
information 
management 
and 
crime 
prevention systems. However, most existing systems do not 
take into account to the best of our knowledge the geographical 
dimension although this might provide a better representation 
of how crimes spread over space and time. The research 
presented in this paper develops a knowledge discovery 
approach based on a close integration of official, social and 
geographical data sources.  The result is a modeling approach 
that provides a-priori knowledge of safe and unsafe places and 
the ones that are even candidates to become unsecured places. 
The aim is to not only give an overall geographical 
representation of crime patterns that might be useful for 
decision-makers, but also web-based resources to the citizens. 
The whole approach has been applied to Mexico City. 
Keywords-GKD; Crossing-data; Social Web mining; Geo-social 
Web Analytics; Web ontology. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The research presented in this paper is grounded in the 
assumption that social networks offer novel resources to 
reflect 
population's 
opinion 
on 
insecurity 
problems 
occurring in urban zones. For instance, In Mexico City, 
people often denounce complaints, events, and unsafe 
places. Many Facebook pages and Twitter accounts also 
regularly report crimes that citizens suffer thus providing 
rich descriptions often located in space and timely stamped. 
Therefore, it clearly appears that if such crime data can be 
geographically analyzed, then it will be possible to build 
services to citizens and decision-aided systems to municipal 
authorities [20]. 
Over the past few years, many novel research 
approaches have been designed and developed based on 
social web mining and Geographic Knowledge Discovery 
(GKD) [5]) in order to solve novel challenges related to the 
integration of unstructured social data and structured data 
sources [23]. In fact not only these novel unstructured data 
sources require development of novel data integration and 
representation mechanisms, but also sound approaches to 
evaluate quality and veracity of the incoming data. It has 
been recently shown that quality and certainty of opinions 
and denunciations expressed on social networks can be 
increased when linked and related to additional data sources 
[5].       
Crossing data would allow validating, confirming, or 
discovering non-intuitive knowledge at first sight (e.g., 
location and profile of the place or victim of a given crime). 
Therefore, external social data sources such as news 
websites, as these regularly report and discuss situations, 
events, or facts from different perspectives, can be 
combined with other web data sources to discover and 
search for geographical and temporal patterns. 
On the other hand, news media might are likely to 
influence social perception of the insecurity problem as they 
occur in a given city. It has been particularly observed that 
for example social perception of insecurity in Mexico City 
has increased up to 69% [7], where 64.2% of the population 
reported that in the last three months, they modified their 
habits for fear of being a victim of a crime. 
The research presented in this paper introduces a 
preliminary GKD social framework applied to crime data. 
The main contribution relies on the crossing of different 
datasets to discover some geographic and temporal crime 
patterns as reflected by social media, institutional data 
sources and the final public perception. The remainder of the 
paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines related 
work. Section 3 introduces the GKD social framework. 
Section 4 develops the data extraction while Section 5 
presents the preprocessing process. Section 6 discusses the 
lessons learned from the analysis of crime data. The data 
crossing approach is presented in Section 7. Section 8 
presents the preliminary results obtained and some 
evaluations. Finally, Section 9 draws the conclusions and 
outlines future work. 
II. RELATED WORK 
Studies on crime data have been conducted by many 
research domains such as spatial data mining, geographical 
analysis, Big Data analysis and crime prediction. For 
example, the work in [1] presents a collaborative community 
alert application that enables citizens to publish a complaint 
at the time a crime occurs, and to inform other users close to 
that area. In Mexico City, a web system regularly and 
interactively informs the state of insecurity in different 
neighborhoods [2]. A survey of crime prevention systems 
has been recently published and includes an analysis of the 
main web and mobile crime information systems, but so far 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

there are no approaches that integrate unstructured social 
data and official data sources [19]. 
A series of spatial data mining approaches have been 
applied to the metropolitan area of Washington DC to 
discover and extract patterns from crime datasets [8] [9] 
[10}. A spatiotemporal-textual search engine and pattern 
discovery 
approach 
identify 
crime 
categories 
from 
collections of crime information [8]. The work developed in 
[9] provides a smart device-based Internet application to 
enable real-time location-based and search for crime 
incidents and reports. This system has the advantage of 
leveraging crowdsourced data to provide safe paths and 
crime analytics. The integrated framework proposed in [10] 
is also based on natural language processing whose objective 
is to extract, rank and score some crime events in space and 
time. Colocation analysis has been explored using 
geographical analysis and machine learning algorithms to 
identify and categorize regular patterns of crimes in some 
given locations [11]. For instance, the relationships between 
drink locations and habits (e.g., bars, alcohol, respectively) 
and crimes have been studies and show that crimes are often 
related to such behaviors. Next, the authors developed a 
neighborhood graph-based approach that searches for spatio-
temporal patterns. A Geographical Information Systems 
(GIS) approach searches for criminal hot spots and drug 
cases in China [21]. Understanding the reasons behind crime 
patterns in space and time is also a domain of study that has 
been considered by machine learning algorithms, this is a 
crucial issue for crime prediction studies [18]. A crime 
analytics system based on temporal prediction analysis has 
been suggested in [22]. The authors developed a predictive 
system based on natural language processing, and whose 
objective is to identify the intensity of some crime events, 
using a combination with social-based data, public and 
private data. 
Overall, and despite the novelty and interest of the above 
mentioned approach, most of them do not completely take 
advantage of the potential offered by a combination of crime, 
social and spatio-temporal data. We believe that such 
integration should provide novel means for discovering new 
geographical and temporal patterns, as well as an evaluation 
of the degree of certainty associated to such trends. The 
research presented in this paper proposes a hybrid semantic 
approach that considers such challenges, and combines and 
crosses social and official crime data using ontology 
exploration and machine learning techniques.  
III. THE GKD SOCIAL FRAMEWORK 
The GKD social framework is fed from official and 
unofficial sources, data from the national public security 
system [16], verified user publications, Facebook and 
Twitter communities, as well as news web pages.  
The information collected refers to descriptions of 
criminal events and complaints, which will be analyzed and 
displayed on a crime map. The goal is to characterize crime 
from a geographical perspective. What characteristics 
describe a crime place? What is the geographic and spatial 
profile of a crime place? How often does a crime occur in a 
particular place? What places can become a potential place 
where a crime can happen? The geographic information is 
provided by collaborative maps and official cartography 
from the local government. 
Our approach adapts knowledge discovery in databases 
(KDD) methodology, which refers to the non-trivial process 
of discovering knowledge and potentially useful information 
within the data contained in some information repository 
[2]. Our framework uses four phases: 1) retrieval and 
extraction of data related to crime, events, and social 
complaints by geographical areas from Facebook and 
Twitter, news web pages, and official data sources; 2) 
semantic analysis of data using crime web ontology; 3) 
classification, which considers supervised machine learning 
techniques to separate the crime activity and geographic 
patterns; and 4) crossing geographic patterns and official 
data to acquire new knowledge and evaluate the certainty of 
social data. Finally, the main principles of our approach are 
illustrated in Figure 1 and are part of a previous work [5].  
 
Figure 1. A GKD Social Framework for Crime Data 
Figure 1 shows the main phases of our approach; the 
GKD is the combination of the semantic analysis and 
machine learning layers. The first layer uses the ontology to 
pre-classify all the unstructured data obtained from the web 
and social networks. The second layer makes the 
classifications for official and social data (it means 
structured and unstructured data). The following subsections 
will explain each one of these phases: 
IV. 
DATA EXTRACTION  
The extraction process consists of retrieving the reports 
of complaints from official sources (a fragment of the 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

information can be seen in Figure 2) and unofficial sources 
(see a sample of publication in Figure 3). 
 
 
Figure 2.  Data from National Public Security System (data in Spanish) 
In the case of Figure 2, complaint data were obtained 
from [2], and it contains fields, such as municipality 
(location of the crime), type of crime, subtype of crime, and 
date. Figure 3 shows a post (in Spanish) retrieved from a 
Facebook community specializing in citizens' reports of 
crimes called "Ecatepec on alert" (text in Spanish « 
Ecatepec en Alerta»). Ecatepec is a municipality (in the 
country of Mexico) with high crime rates, and it is located 
near Mexico City. 
Regarding the number of crime complaints dataset in 
official and unofficial sources, a Facebook page named 
"Ecatepec denunciation" (in Spanish « Denuncia Ecatepec 
») extracted 6771 posts of complaints. In opposite, the news 
web page named "A Fondo Estado de Mexico" (site of news 
crime) only extracted 100 datasets from complaints. 
 
 
Translation: Ecatepec on alert, "My motorcycle was stolen today 
at 3 am at the Devil's Curve. The numberplate is 8N6VZ. It was at the 
Méxibus in Adolfo Lopez Mateos station." 
Figure 3.  Nonofficial information from Facebook (post in Spanish) 
V. 
PREPROCESSING 
 The data extracted is processed with a computational 
linguistic process whereby the text is cleaned and converted 
to lower case, words are lemmatized, and punctuation marks 
and emoticons are eliminated. An example in Figure 4 
shows an original post from Facebook about a complaint, 
then below shows the result processed linguistically. 
 
 
Lemmatization: autorobado denunciar dia ayer 18 
noviembre 7 35 pm victima asalta mano armada 
valle de aragon primero seccion quitar carro 
versa modelo 2016 placa mzg 4071 color grises 
plata informa agradecer hacer medio 
 
Translation: 
Complaint 
Ecatepec, 
#StolenAuto 
"Hello 
Complaint Ecatepec, yesterday November 18 at 7:35 p.m. I was 
the victim of an armed robbery in the Valley of Aragon first 
section. A car Nissan Versa model 2016 was stolen. The 
numberplate is MZG-4071, and the color is gray silver. If anyone 
has reports, I would be grateful." 
Output: "StolenAuto report day yesterday 18 november 7 35 
pm victim assault armed hand valley of Aragon first section car  
Nissan versa model 2016 plate mzg 4071 color gray silver informs 
thank to do medium" 
 
 
Figure 4. Lemmatization of a Facebook post 
A. Location analysis 
Once the data is cleaned and processed, the following 
phase consists of determining the location where the event 
occurred. It is limited only to data containing terms, words, 
or names of places. The process uses GeoNames [17], 
gazetteers, and a terms dictionary. This phase comprises 
three steps: 
 
1. The first step consists of identifying all place 
names within the data and it is achieved using a 
prebuilt specialized terms dictionary. It ensures that 
the tweet, post, or data from the web page 
describes a geographical place (the data that cannot 
be identified are discarded.) 
2. The second step disambiguates the possible names 
for the same geographic location but with different 
granularity (municipality, colony, street, and 
avenue). Then, the GeoNames web service [17] is 
used to determine the granularity of the place. 
3. In the third step, a gazetteer is used to identify 
place names and synonyms within a particular area. 
Figure 5 shows an example of this analysis.   
 
 
Ecatepec -> a geographical location 
Ecatepec of Morelos -> a geographical location 
Ecatepec of Morelos -> a synonym: Ecatepec 
Ecatepec -> a part of the State of Mexico 
 
 
Figure 5. Location Analysis 
 
The location analysis is an experimental phase. Hence, it 
can be enhanced by machine learning methods [4]. 
 
B. Semantic analysis  
This process focuses on social network data and web 
pages. The analysis consists of pre-classifying the data to 
determine to which category the security domain belong to 
(e.g., security, theft, complaint) by using an ontology 
prebuilt based on concepts derived from security domain. In 
particular, the ontology helps to determine if the data 
describes a crime, complaint, or they are part of another 
context. The algorithm OntoClassifier is shown as follows. 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

OntoClassifier Algorithm  
______________________________ 
1. Begin 
2. Let q[i] elements of user query 
3. N = 0 
4.  while n < i 
5.   parsing and identification (q[i]) 
6.   node.start() 
7.     while node != null 
8.     j++, i++ 
9.     if similarity(concept_name) 
        conVec[j]neighborhood_relations(node) 
        node.next() 
10.     geoVector[k] = geographic_search(conVec[j]) 
11.   thematic_and_social_search(conVec[j]) 
12.   temporal_search(conVec[j]) 
13.  j++, k++, n++ 
14. End 
 
The algorithm works as follows: the input is the data 
extracted from social media and web pages; then, the 
ontology is explored using the algorithm OntoClassifier 
(adapted from [3]). Each term identified by the social media 
source is correlated with the Ontology. If a match occurs, the 
context of the concept (all neighborhood concepts) is 
extracted, and they are stored into a vector (Algorithm 1, 
lines from 4 to 10). The vector is used to determine which 
domain and category the data belongs; it is known by using 
the hyperonym relation of the ontology. This relation 
indicates the domain and category. In that way, the output 
obtained is a pre-classification of data showing what type of 
crime is described or mentioned in the data by using three 
parameters: time, thematic, and location components. The 
classification is based on the scale of categories used in [2]. 
An example of the output appears in Figure 5 where a 
console screenshot is shown after the OntoClassifier program 
is executed and the matching is listed. 
 
 
Robar motoneta à Delito tipo Robo de auto 
3 am à Hora 
Placa à Atributo con valor à 8n6vz 
Translation:"  
Steal motorcycle -> Auto theft -> type of crime, 
3 am -> Time,  
Plate -> Attribute with value -> 8n6vz” 
 
 
Figure 6.  Post pre-classification process 
 
 
As Figure 6 shows a pre-classified post, in the first line 
(in Spanish) the term "Steal scooter" is pre-classified as a 
crime; "Theft." In the second line, the text "3 am" is 
classified as a time component. In the third line, the term 
"vehicle registration plate" is classified as a value attribute, 
and finally, the numeric value "8n6vz" is extracted. 
The ontology was designed based on the methodology 
suggested in [6] and the concepts that are used more often in 
social networks. A brief extract of the ontology is shown in 
Figure 7. The ontology describes the nature of the crime 
context in Mexico City.   
 
 
Figure 7. Crime Ontology (fragment)   
 
In addition to this process, a data dictionary is based on 
a taxonomy that was built using the data from Statistical 
Classification of Crimes (CED, by the acronym in Spanish). 
The CED offers classification in three categories: crimes 
against people, crimes against society, and crimes against 
the state (they are available at [24]). The taxonomy is 
applied as a refinement process in the classification of crime 
type using the OntoClassifier on the data.  
VI. 
LEARNING FROM DATA CRIME 
In this stage, characterization is processed and the data is 
classified using machine learning methods. The main goal 
of the classification is to get the separation of the crime 
activity and geographical profile. The characterization is 
performed by using three classification algorithms: C5.0 
Decision Tree (DT), Naive Bayes (NB), and Support Vector 
Machine (SVM). These algorithms have been applied in 
previous approaches like [4][12] and represent a layer of 
supervised learning. In this stage, when a pre-processed 
crime document (from social networks or web sources) is 
assigned to a crime class (e.g., carjacking category), two of 
the three classifiers has to match in the same class. In the 
case that the three algorithms assign the same object to 
different classes, the SVM result is chosen because this 
classifier has a better performance according to our tests. 
The classification process is executed twice (each 
execution uses TD, NB and SVM): 
Classification by crime profile: This is the categorization 
of a new document into a specific class of crime, such as 
carjacking, assault on passersby, and kidnapping. To 
improve the visualization of discovered results, a sub-
process detects and highlights relevant words inside a 
classified document, for example, gun, knife, car, violence, 
thieves (persons, guys), schedule (night, day, morning, time 
stamp). This sub-process uses a bag of crime words (based 
on a weighted selection of concepts from our ontology) and 
considers the lexical and grammatical information of the 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

classified document [13]. 
Classification by geographical area: in the previous pre-
processing phase, a location analysis was developed to 
obtain a general location (e.g., state or municipality). 
However, it is necessary to classify the specific location; 
this allows a correlation between crimes, crowdsourcing 
complaints, and localities.  The classes are known places in 
municipalities or states: popular zones, tourist sites, 
buildings, and others. 
Finally, the cross-validation is used to estimate how 
accurate a predictive algorithm will be in practice. In K-fold 
cross-validation, the sample data are divided into K subsets. 
One of the subsets is used as test data, and the rest (K-1) as 
training data. This ensures that the classifications are 
independent of the partition between training and test data. 
The preliminary results of K-fold cross-validation show that 
the SVM algorithm maintains an average accuracy of 87 
percent. The DT and SVM algorithms have a performance 
of around 78.77 percent. However, for small data, NB 
develops a higher performance than the other two classifiers 
[4]. 
Finally, the WEKA software [25] was used to test the 
performance of the classifiers and make an analysis of the 
output obtained. 
VII. CROSSING DATA 
After identifying the "type of crime," it is possible to 
correlate this information with other data sources to 
discover unexpected knowledge. For example, a post 
extracted from Facebook that belongs to the "carjacking" 
class and whose text contains the plate number, the 
framework can use the official database of stolen vehicles 
(vehicle information system of the Mexican government) 
[14] and search the number of the "vehicle registration 
plate." If that number exists, one can conclude whether the 
car was stolen or not and discover the level of certainty of 
the information extracted. 
Besides using official [15] and collaborative maps, one 
can discover additional geographical relations around the 
crime locations. For example, the post with the text "A 
Honda Civic car was stolen violently near to 'Parque 
Lindavista' mall by three armed men wearing sports clothes 
at 9 p.m" (by crime profile, the post is classified as 
"carjacking" class). "Parque Lindavista" is a known mall of 
the Delegation Gustavo A. Madero in Mexico City 
(geographically, the post was classified in the "popular 
zone" class) and there are hospitals around the mall 
(crossing with official maps). We discover that carjacking 
occurs in desolate urban areas. Another observation is that 
this crime happens in Ecatepec municipality (in the State of 
Mexico, Mexico) in similar conditions to Delegation 
Gustavo A. Madero: at night, by two or three armed men, 
and in desolate zones. 
Other patterns regarding carjacking are the number of 
individuals who are committing this crime (in this case, two 
or three persons), the use of cars without a number 
registration plate, and the co-occurrence of crimes like drug 
trafficking and carjacking. According to the official data, 
carjacking happens regularly in Mexico City and in the 
country of Mexico. 
VIII. PRELIMINARY RESULTS AND DATA VISUALIZATION 
This section outlines and shows the preliminary results 
of the experiments made in the city of Mexico. The input 
data includes around 105,036 users, 1,396,408 datasets from 
Twitter, 25,360 posts from Facebook, and 150,000 from 
news web pages. The following attributes were considered 
in the dataset:  type of crime, year, month and number of 
complaints, places where it occurred, the number of users 
and sources used. 
In Figure 8, the areas with a similar unsafe geographical 
profile are represented in red. 
  
 
Figure 8. Zones with similar unsafe geographical profile (Mexico City) 
 
While Figure 9 shows a prototype user interface for data 
visualization and patterns discovery, crimes are also 
clustered in categories and key terms.    
 
 
 
Figure 9. User interface for visualization of geographic patterns  
 
Figure 10 shows how the carjacking crime behaves in 
the last seven years in the first six months and different 
geographic places. 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

 
 
Figure 10. Behavior of crimes in unsafe geographic profiles 
 
Figure 9 and Figure 10 show the integration of official 
and social media data.  
IX. CONCLUSIONS 
The preliminary research presented in this paper 
introduces a GKD approach that combines Semantic and 
Machine Learning techniques, data correlations applied to 
discover patterns and the emerging levels of data certainty. 
The preliminary results identify and show the geographical 
profiles of unsafe places, patterns, and crime behaviors in 
different geographical areas. 
Future work will consider additional classification 
experiments and depped learning methods using different 
crime data sources. At the interface level, we plan to 
develop some user-oriented interfaces designed with 
usability 
principles, 
advanced 
data 
visualization, 
experiments using Stanford API, and mobile applications 
development. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors of this paper thank God, CONACYT project 
number 1051, the Laboratorio de Cómputo Móvil-UPIITA, 
COFAA-IPN, SIP-IPN project 20171086, and Instituto 
Politécnico Nacional (IPN) for their support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Semaforo.com.mx. (2017). NGO Crime and Safety Report. [Online] 
Available at: http://www.semaforo.com.mx/ [Accessed 1 Apr. 2017]. 
[2] 
Webmining.cl. (2017). KDD Knowledge Discovery in Databases | 
WebMining. 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
http://www.webmining.cl/2011/01/proceso-de-extraccion-de-
conocimiento/ [Accessed 1 Apr. 2017]. 
[3] 
F. Mata, and C. Claramunt, GeoST: geographic, thematic and 
temporal information retrieval from heterogeneous web data sources. 
In Web and Wireless Geographical Information Systems (pp. 5-20). 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011. 
[4] 
A. Sampson, Comparing classification algorithms in data mining, 
Master of Science, Central Connecticut State University, 2016. 
[5] 
R. Zagal-Flores, M. Mata, and C. Claramunt, Geographical 
Knowledge Discovery applied to the Social Perception of Pollution in 
the City of Mexico. 9th ACM SIGSPATIAL International Workshop 
on Location-Based Social Networks. San Francisco, California, USA.  
[6] 
M. Corcho, et al., Methodologies tools and languages for building 
ontologies. Where is their meeting point? Universidad Politécnica de 
Madrid, Campus de Montegancedo s/n, Madrid 28660, España, 2001.  
[7] 
C. Jasso López, “Perception of Insecurity in Mexico”, Mexican 
Journal of Public Opinion, Volume 15, July–December 2013, Pages 
12-29, ISSN 1870-7300. 
[8] 
X. Liu, C. Jian, and C. Tien Lu, A spatio-temporal-textual crime 
search engine. In Proceedings of the 18th SIGSPATIAL International 
Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems (GIS 
'10). ACM, New York (2010), NY, USA, 528-529.  
[9] 
S. Shah, F. Bao, C. Lu, I. Chen. CROWDSAFE: Crowd Sourcing of 
Crime Incidents and Safe Routing on Mobile Devices (Demo Paper).  
ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS’11, November 1-4, 2011. Chicago, IL, 
USA. ACM, ISBN 978-1-4503-1031-4/11/11.  
[10] B. Wang, et al.., An integrated framework for spatio-temporal-textual 
search and mining. In Proceedings of the 20th International 
Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems (2012), 
New York, NY, USA, 570-573.  
[11] P. Mohan, et al., A neighborhood graph based approach to regional 
co-location pattern discovery: a summary of results. In Proceedings of 
the 19th ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances 
in Geographic Information Systems (GIS '11)  
[12] J. Han, J. Pei, and M. Kamber, Data Mining: Concepts and 
Techniques. Elsevier, Jun 9, 2011 - 744 pages. 
[13] G. Sidorov, “Should Syntactic N-grams Contain Names of Syntactic 
Relations?”. International Journal of Computational Linguistics and 
Applications, Vol. 5, No. 1, 2014, pp. 139–158. 
[14]  www2.repuve.gob.mx. 
(2017). 
Consulta Ciudadana. 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
http://www2.repuve.gob.mx:8080/ciudadania/ 
[Accessed 1 Apr. 2017]. 
[15] inegi.org.mx. 
(2017). 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
http://www.inegi.org.mx/geo/contenidos/mapadigital/ [Accessed 1 
Apr. 2017]. 
[16] Secretariadoejecutivo.gob.mx. (2017). Secretariado Ejecutivo :: 
Inicio. 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
http://www.secretariadoejecutivo.gob.mx [Accessed 1 Apr. 2017]. 
[17] Geonames.org. 
(2017). 
Geonames. 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
http://www.geonames.org [Accessed 17 Apr. 2017]. 
[18] 18. C.-H. Yu, W. Ding, P. Chen, and M. Morabito, “Crime 
forecasting using spatio-temporal pattern with ensemble learning,” in 
Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining: 18th Pacific-
Asia Conference, PAKDD 2014, Tainan, Taiwan, May 13–16, 2014. 
Proceedings, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 174–185. 
[19] 19. T. Moon, S. Heo and S. Lee, Ubiquitous Crime Prevention 
System (UCPS) for a Safer City, Procedia Environmental Sciences, 
Open Access Journal Volume 22, 2014, ISSN 1878-0296. 
[20] J. Ratcliffe, “Crime mapping: spatial and temporal challenges,” in 
Handbook of Quantitative Criminology, pp. 5–24, Springer, New 
York, NY, USA, 2010 
[21] L. Lei, The GIS-based Research on Criminal Cases Hotspots 
Identifying, Procedia Environmental Sciences, Open Access Journal, 
Volume 12, 2012, Pages 957-963, ISSN 1878-0296,  
[22] Hitachi Data Systems unveils new advancements in predictive 
policing to support safer, smart societies." Mena Report, 29/08/2015.  
[23] F. Mata, et al., “A Mobile Information System Based on Crowd-
Sensed and Official Crime Data for Finding Safe Routes: A Case 
Study of Mexico City,” Mobile Information Systems, vol. 2016, 
Article ID 8068209, 11 pages, 2016. doi:10.1155/2016/806 
[24] www3.inegi.org.mx. (2017). Clasificación Estadística de Delitos 
(CED). 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
http://www3.inegi.org.mx/sistemas/clasificaciones/delitos.aspx 
[Accessed 10 Jan. 2017]. 
[25] cs.waikato.ac.nz. (2017). Weka 3 - Data Mining with Open Source 
Machine Learning Software in Java. [online] Available at: 
http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/ [Accessed 10 Jan. 2017
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

