Extending Web Modeling Language to Exploit Stigmergy: 
Intentionally Recording Unintentional Trails 
Aiden Dipple, Kerry Raymond, Michael Docherty  
Faculty of Science and Technology 
Queensland University of Technology 
Brisbane, Australia 
aiden.dipple@student.qut.edu.au 
k.raymond@qut.edu.au 
m.docherty@qut.edu.au 
 
Abstract—Software development and Web site development 
techniques have evolved significantly over the past 20 years.  
The relatively young Web Application development area has 
borrowed heavily from traditional software development 
methodologies primarily due to the similarities in areas of data 
persistence and User Interface (UI) design.  Recent 
developments in this area propose a new Web Modeling 
Language (WebML) to facilitate the nuances specific to Web 
development.  WebML is one of a number of implementations 
designed to enable modeling of web site interaction flows while 
being extendable to accommodate new features in Web site 
development into the future. Our research aims to extend 
WebML with a focus on stigmergy which is a biological term 
originally used to describe coordination between insects.  We 
see design features in existing Web sites that mimic stigmergic 
mechanisms as part of the UI.  We believe that we can 
synthesize and embed stigmergy in Web 2.0 sites.  This paper 
focuses on the sub-topic of site UI design and stigmergic 
mechanism designs required to achieve this.    
Web Collaboration; virtual pheromones; stigmergy;  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Our research analyses a number of User Interface (UI) 
designs within popular Web 2.0 sites.  The UI designs 
observed provide representations of user feedback along with 
representations of behavior trends from unintentional 
interactions which have been recorded.  Examples of these 
UI designs can be seen in Facebook where users “Like” 
other user contributions causing an area of focused interest.  
Another example can be seen where Facebook has 
introduced a new “Seen By” representation of feedback 
where the number of users navigating to a specific article 
that has been broadcast is presented as a trail of evidence or 
virtual footsteps.  This mechanism of users indicating 
content of interest and trail forming through unintentional 
footsteps closely matches a phenomenon called stigmergy.  
Stigmergy is a term originally used to describe the apparent 
decentralized coordination amongst certain insects when 
performing tasks such as food foraging and nest building [1].  
While we observe that popular Web 2.0 sites contain these 
features there is no evidence to suggest that these designs 
were influenced by stigmergy. The UI designs observed in 
Facebook might have been introduced without initially 
understanding their similarity to stigmergy but we see an 
increasing number of web sites introducing similar 
mechanisms trying to emulate the same success that has been 
achieved in Facebook.  The primary research question we are 
working on is whether these mechanisms can be synthesized 
into a generic design pattern that can be introduced as 
standard Web site UI elements to enhance coordination. 
Web Modeling Language (WebML) is a method of 
modeling data content, user interaction and navigation flow 
for various Web 2.0 applications. WebML provides a way to 
design the mapping of a data model to different UI views and 
the navigation paths between those views.  Given the unique 
requirements of web site development compared to 
traditional software development the Object Model Group 
(OMG) is establishing a standard in the area.  The OMG has 
released a current Request for Proposal (RFP) [2] to 
formalize syntax, metamodel, UML profile and associated 
interchange format for languages used to model interaction 
flow.  WebML is one modeling language implementation 
currently being considered for inclusion in the standard.  The 
most pertinent aspect of the WebML framework to our 
research question is that WebML is designed to be extensible 
to facilitate new concepts, interface types and event types.  
Given the Web 2.0 UI designs which we have observed and 
a thorough analysis of how they correlate to stigmergy we 
believe that we can introduce the UI mechanisms as standard 
elements during web site implementations. 
II. 
STIGMERGY 
Stigmergy is a biological term that was first introduced in 
1959 by a French zoologist named Pierre-Paul Grasse [3].  
The term was used to describe how insects appear to 
coordinate successfully despite having no centralized 
management 
structure 
or 
direct 
observable 
intercommunication [1].  Stigmergy specifically refers to an 
indirect communication where the insects use signs mediated 
within the environment to aid their coordination.  An 
example of stigmergy can be seen in the way that ants leave 
a pheromone trail during food foraging activities.  The trail 
provides a signal to other ants as to which direction a food 
source can be found while the strength of the pheromones 
indicate the relevancy of any specific trail as being the 
current trail to follow.   A positive feedback system is 
created where the trail strength will increase as more ants 
follow the trail and successfully return with food.  
Furthermore, the environment enacts upon the sign causing 
atrophy and entropy to diminish the signal strength.  This 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

 
 
decay provides the negative feedback to ensure only the most 
current trails can be sensed thereby ensuring that old trails 
don’t interfere with the food foraging activities after the 
associated food supply has been depleted.   
Previously [4] we have introduced a model of stigmergy 
including the concept of a stigmergy grand purpose and the 
core components of stigmergy: the agent, the environment, 
and the sign.  The model is illustrated in Figure 1.   
 
Figure 1.  The Stigmergy Cycle. 
The model as illustrated in Figure 1. ties together the core 
components of stigmergy, an inner band representing the 
attributes of the components, and an outer band representing 
the dynamics acting on those attributes.  Furthermore, the 
outer band dynamics are either internal to each component, 
or defining the interface between components.  Our model 
describes the dynamics of equilibrium between positive 
feedback (contributions) and negative feedback (decay) 
illustrating how the positive feedback is contributed by the 
agent, where the negative feedback is applied by the 
environment.  The paper where we presented the model was 
focused on a holistic model of stigmergy which applies for 
the world of entomology, the human world and the virtual 
world.  This paper is focused specifically on how the 
varieties of stigmergy manifest as Web environment UI 
elements. In context to this paper, these three components 
correlate to the users of Web environments, and the 
contributions that the users make.   
There has been a significant amount of research focused 
on stigmergy in robotics and Web environments [5, 6].  Web 
environments provide a close facsimile to stigmergy in 
physical environments where a large number of users 
coordinate in a highly organized manner, specifically based 
on indirect communication through the contributions they 
make within the Web sites.  In Facebook (see Figure 2. ) 
there are similarities to the pheromone marker already 
observable in the Web.   
 
Figure 2.  Example of a Facebook LIKE mechanism. 
Another variety of stigmergy describes the development 
of unintentional trails within the environment.  An example 
of this is best shown by people wearing a path into a lawn 
when a short-cut is taken across the lawn.  This unintentional 
trail is similar to another type of UI mechanism found within 
Facebook (see Figure 3. ).   
 
Figure 3.  Example of a Facebook SEEN-BY mechanism.. 
Stigmergy provides a model of both active contributions 
and passive interaction with both varieties having numerous 
examples within the Web.  The examples above for the two 
varieties of stigmergy have been categorized as marker-
based [1] and sematectonic [7].  Marker-based stigmergy 
describes an explicit modification of the environment by 
leaving a sign with the intention of signaling other agents.  
Furthermore, Marker-Based stigmergy is broken into two 
sub-types: qualitative and quantitative [1].  This sub-type 
categorization is to clarify the difference between single 
contributions being sufficient to elicit a response as opposed 
to an accumulation of responses being required.   
In contrast to the explicit method of leaving 
contributions, sematectonic stigmergy is defined as a 
modification to the environment as a by-product of actions 
being performed.  These by-products are occurring 
inadvertently and unintentionally to the primary task being 
performed.  For example, when considering a path being left 
in a lawn when people take a short-cut across it they have no 
intention of signaling to others that they have taken a short-
cut.  The short-cut is the purpose of the action, but the 
environment will retain the footstep impact as an alteration 
of the environment.  There is no explicit foot-step left in the 
environment (obviously excluding cases such as wet feet 
leaving wet foot prints) however the action has altered the 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

environment and the cumulative foot-step action manifests in 
the format of a path rather than something recognizable as an 
aggregation of individual feet traces. 
If we consider the two different varieties of stigmergy we 
can divide the notion of intentionality of communication as 
being either explicit or implicit [8, 9].  Marker-based 
stigmergy can be considered as an explicit form of 
communication where the contribution made by the agent is 
intentional; it is explicitly left with the intention of the sign 
being interpreted as a signal.  Sematectonic stigmergy can be 
considered as implicit communication where the primary 
activity being performed by a user leaves implicit 
modifications to the environment unintentionally just as with 
a trail.  We would consider that an explicit sign left 
unintentionally would not constitute a signal, but could be 
interpreted as one.  Similarly we would consider that an 
intentional generation of an implicit trail would be a 
counterfeit and also not be considered stigmergic, although it 
must be noted that it can trigger the same behavior in agents 
receiving the signal.   
III. 
WEB MODELING LANGUAGE 
Web Modeling Language (WebML) is a platform 
independent way to express the interaction design, data 
model and business rules of Web application development 
separately from the implementation platform [10].  WebML 
permits the formal specification of the data model, interface 
composition and navigation options and ultimately be 
supported by tools for the auto-generation of code.  WebML 
describes a visual notation for designing Web applications 
which is intended to be exploited by the visual design tool 
WebRatio [11]. 
WebML specifications are based on four perspectives: 
1) Structural Model: Data Model for dynamic content. 
2) Hypertext Model: Site Views of the data model, 
which in turn are comprised of two sub-models: 
a) Composition Model: Page composition and how the 
data model maps to a view. 
b) Navigation Model: How pages are inter-linked 
(contextually and non-contextually via passed parameters).  
3) Presentation Model: Layout and graphic appearance 
of pages independent to output device. 
4) Personalization Model: Individualisation of pages 
based on User / Group categories, prefereneces, etc. 
The four modeling perspectives describe the principal 
facets of data-driven Web sites and therefore provide an 
excellent experimentation lab for our research when 
attempting to test stigmergic mechanisms.  WebML 
represents specifications using XML.   Examples of XML 
for the data entities of the structural model, data within a 
page view and the navigation links (including parameters in 
the case of contextual links) are provided.   
IV. 
INCORPORATING STIGMERGY WITHIN WEBML 
At this stage we are determining whether our 
implementation would be an extension to the existing 
WebML classes or a design pattern within the modeling 
language using the existing classes.  The simplest outcome 
of our research would be to prescribe a design pattern to 
follow when creating web sites which incorporate stigmergic 
mechanisms but we anticipate that a more prescriptive 
approach would be to create explicit stigmergic extensions to 
WebML.  Initial examination of the WebML XML elements 
suggests that they would be easily extended to include 
additional attributes which support runtime instantiations of 
the stigmergic mechanisms.  Furthermore the WebML 
submission to the OMG RFP describes ViewComponent as 
objects that display data or accept input [12].  This verifies 
that WebML can be extended to provide customized 
visualization components to display the stigmergic signals 
and trails to Web users. 
We endeavor to design User Interface (UI) mechanisms 
to record both intentional and unintentional web site 
interaction based on our model of stigmergy.  To provide 
environment mediated communication our UI mechanisms 
will need to trigger events which record user activity within a 
persistence layer specifically for stigmergy data.  To enable 
the environment to provide negative feedback the 
environment must be able to trigger its own events to modify 
the stigmergy data.  As discussed in Section III, WebML 
provides a collection of standard UI components with 
associated user and system triggered events to facilitate this 
within the Hypertext Model.  WebML also provides the 
Structure Model that can facilitate stigmergy data persistence 
and access in conjunction to site specific data. 
This section describes specific UI mechanisms available 
within the WebML Hypertext Model (including the ability to 
create custom controls) and how they apply to input and 
output components, events and persistence observed in 
examples of web-based stigmergy.  We generalize these 
specific components into conceptual mechanisms which 
facilitate that contribution (input) and representation 
(output).  For example, UI components such as drop-down 
lists, sliders and radio buttons are all representations of a 
single option selection, but each are different in their visual 
presentation.  Understanding the fundamental mechanisms 
can extend the collection to encompass new UI components.   
To incorporate stigmergy into WebML we need to 
understand the general ways the system would receive input, 
and how it should display output.   If we consider our model 
of stigmergy (see Figure 1. ) we understand that this will 
correlate with the environment having the facility to record 
contributions, process them and represent them back to users.   
A. Qualitative, Marker-Based Stigmergy 
Qualitative stigmergy is defined as discrete stimuli that 
can trigger a response in agents that encounter it.  An 
example of this can be seen in Facebook with the “Share” 
functionality or within text messaging using emoticons [13].  
Emoticons are icons included within the body of text 
messages to indicate to recipients the feeling or mood 
associated with the text (e.g.: “smiley faces”).  The senders 
and recipients of text messages understand the associated 
meaning of the icons and as a result the emoticons add 
significant meaning to a text message without the use of 
language.  The marker-based variety of stigmergy requires 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

 
an intentional contribution by the user, and must incorporate 
a UI control enabling the user to create the contribution.    
In the example of the Facebook “Share” we observe that 
a single user can broadcast content discovered by the user 
performing the “Share” so that it is visible to that user’s 
group of friends (or level of privacy as selected).  This 
represents the simplest input mechanism where there is only 
the requirement to intentionally trigger an interface element 
and that the user is aware of what signal it will contribute to. 
The example of text messaging emoticons requires users 
to inherently know what emotions specific icons correlate to.  
There needs to be some UI mechanism for informing new 
users of the possible icons and their definition (e.g.: a 
context-sensitive, online help web function).  Depending on 
how esoteric the required knowledge of available icons and 
their meaning are there might need to be instructions on 
appropriate reactions.  The UI requires an administration 
function to define the possible icons in a given context.  This 
administration function is considered outside the scope of 
this paper and is listed as an outstanding issue in Section V. 
Our examples all generalize to one case: existing Web UI 
components which trigger an event (e.g.: radio buttons, etc).  
Each mechanism in the examples above equate to the user 
being presented with single or multiple options, however 
only a single option can be selected.  We consider the 
generalized input mechanisms observed in the examples in 
this sub-section are: 
 
Single option intentionally triggering event.  
 
Single selection from predefined options using 
controls restricting selection and intentionally 
triggering event. 
 
User generated/input of content with predefined 
meaning (e.g.: using ascii text such as “:)” to be 
transformed to an icon representing a smiling face). 
If we consider the output representations in the Facebook 
“Share” example and the text messaging emoticon example, 
the pattern can manifest in virtually any form.  There are 
some simple and reusable patterns observed where verbatim 
representation or image substitution per associated option is 
provided.  E.g.: smiling face emoticon entered as text and 
displayed either verbatim as “:)” or transformed as “”.  
Conversely 
there 
might 
be 
customized, 
proprietary 
implementations required such as colour coding of warning 
types using the green for safe, red for danger representations.  
Again these UI components map to existing (or extendable) 
components within the WebML Hypertext Model which use 
event listeners to process data from the Structure Model.   
Within Facebook we see the representation mechanism 
as an embedded link to the shared content providing a 
preview as a teaser to get other people to “View”, “Like” or 
“Share” further.  NOTE: The sharing of content by a user 
doesn’t necessarily mean that the following user whose 
behavior is triggered by the signal will choose the same, 
single-option response.  The emoticon example represents 
the user entered text within a text editor and requires the user 
to only enter tags with predefined meanings (and understand 
the connotation of those representations). 
Our output examples clearly show that there are business 
rule requirements to access at stigmergy data layer and to 
present that data to the user with specific representation.  The 
output mechanisms seen in our examples for this variety of 
stigmergy are: 
 
The (hyper-linking or verbatim) display of a UI 
component, whether contextually driven (e.g.: 
Display of the “Shared” content whether textual, 
image, html, multimedia, etc) or non-contextually 
(e.g.: “Terms and Conditions of Service” links). 
 
The input which was entered textually, but that 
requires recognition and interpretation by users who 
understand the signal representation (or the 
transformation where images are substituted). 
We must remember that these abstractions are solely for 
our examples and is not intended to be an extensive list of all 
UI manifestations possible.  An extendible WebML standard 
will enable future additions as required. 
B. Quantitative, Marker-Based Stigmergy 
Quantitative stigmergy is based on an accumulation of 
stimuli that do not differ qualitatively but that will reach a 
threshold and increase the probability of triggering a 
response.  An example of this is demonstrated within the 
Facebook “Like” functionality which is a type of 
endorsement/acknowledgement system.  A user who has 
made a contribution is hoping to provoke the response from 
their friends to “Like” it.  The more people who “Like” the 
contribution increase the attention that the contribution 
receives.  As the SUM total of people increases the 
probability of more people responding to the page increases, 
creating a positive feedback loop. 
A more complex example of quantitative marker-based 
stigmergy is where there is more than just the single-option, 
signal contribution possible.  In the online auction site eBay 
we have an example illustrated with the reputation feedback 
(see Figure 4. ).  There are a number of different criteria to 
answer, and each criteria has a 0 – 5 choice options where 0 
represents a very negative feedback and a 5 represents a very 
positive feedback.  As with the example in Section A if we 
generalize the mechanisms then we observe a single-choice 
selection from a group of possible options, however in this 
example there are multiple categories aggregated into a 
single contribution.  The eBay example uses a non-standard 
UI component of a 5 star rating system.  However any single 
selection UI controls (e.g.: drop-down list, radio button 
group, slider, etc) could be effectively used. 
 
Figure 4.  Example of an eBay feedback mechanism. 
Just as with qualitative contributions, the WebML 
Structural Model will store the contribution triggered by 
events from the Hypertext Model.  The UI has no other 
purpose than to facilitate the contribution of the stigmergic 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

signal.  The generalized input mechanisms observed in the 
examples in this sub-section are: 
 
Single option intentionally triggered.  
 
Single selection from predefined options using 
controls restricting selection and intentionally 
triggering event. 
When considering output the Facebook example the 
response of “Like” is signaled to all parties with access to the 
original contribution and displayed as a simple SUM total of 
the number of people who have intentionally chosen to 
respond with a “Like” to the same contribution, and re-
ordering the original contribution higher within the news 
feed.  All contributions are based on the same qualitative 
stimuli, with the environment providing an accumulation 
function as part of the output mechanism presented to the 
user.  As with qualitative contributions, the UI components 
link the WebML Hypertext Model through event listeners to 
process and present data from the Structural Model.   
The eBay reputation feedback signal appears to be a 
composite, aggregation function of all purchase history for 
the user via multiple criteria.  We see that the input 
parameters of multiple-choice to multiple criteria are 
transformed through the aggregation function and result in an 
output value that is applied to the users’ current reputation 
status value (either positive or negative). We can see how the 
environment (which consists of other users) and the user 
provide the positive and negative feedbacks to the signal and 
how the WebML Structural and Hypertext Models can 
facilitate that.   An interesting observation is that Wikipedia 
has adopted this quantitative, marker-based mechanism for 
soliciting user feedback on the quality of specific articles and 
pages [14].   
We consider the generalized output mechanisms seen in 
our examples for this variety of stigmergy are: 
 
UI component display or modification representing 
the aggregate function of the contribution. 
C. Sematectonic Stigmergy 
Sematectonic stigmergy is defined as a modification of 
the environment as a by-product of actions being performed.  
These 
by-products 
are 
occurring 
inadvertently 
and 
unintentionally to the primary task being performed.  
If we consider the “Seen By” example in Facebook we 
understand that the user is not making any intentional 
contribution by viewing a specific piece of broadcasted 
contribution, 
however 
their 
action 
of 
viewing 
the 
contributions has been recorded in the environment.  The 
user has left a trail for others to see.  In the Facebook 
example the user has only clicked on a hyper link in response 
to another users suggested interest point (see Figure 3. ).  
A more complex example of sematectonic stigmergy can 
be seen in the Amazon recommendation system (e.g.: 
“People who bought this also bought …”), where product 
purchases made by a user are used as suggested items of 
interest to other users.  In this example the input is virtually 
any potential sale item as the contextual input to the 
aggregation function.  Irrespective of what manifestation the 
contextual input takes, we can observe that while the content 
type can take virtually any form the abstract mechanism 
equates to hyperlinks and interaction flow points.  These 
interaction flow points occur whether based on following 
hyperlinks or other action events (e.g.: selecting the 
“purchase now” button on Amazon).   
In both examples we see unintentional user-triggered 
events which store that activity in the persistence layer.  We 
consider the generalized input mechanisms observed in the 
sematectonic examples in this sub-section are: 
 
Unintentional trace logging via event-triggered 
interaction incidental to using primary functionality. 
In the Facebook example the current state of “Seen By” 
is visible to all parties with access to the original contribution 
and displayed in two different ways: The first representation 
is a simple SUM total of the number of people who have 
intentionally chosen to view the contribution but who did not 
have the intention to let people know that.  The second 
representation is the discrete list of the users who view the 
contribution and the date-time of viewing.   This second 
representation can be seen in the top section of Figure 3.  
The instigating behavior in this example is the viewing or 
navigating to a user contribution with the unintentional by-
product of leaving a trail. 
The Amazon recommendation example shows how the 
contextual input can result in an aggregate function used to 
influence other site user purchasing behavior just as 
described in the qualitative, marker-based variety of 
stigmergy.  Again we see that the output is represented 
through UI components linking the WebML Hypertext 
Model through event listeners triggering business rules to 
process and present data from the Structural Model. 
A final and important example of output representation 
was demonstrated in a trial of Wikipedia article edit 
contributions [15].  In an attempt to display the verifiability 
of articles which had been edited (relatively) recently the 
article would have its page display a colour-tinted 
background.  The background colour of the article page (or 
part thereof) would appear a pinkish-red colour to signal that 
article had previous un-validated modifications.  This colour 
would slowly change through orange and yellow pastels until 
an undisclosed number of visitors to the article would 
presumably 
indicate 
that 
no 
ensuing 
modifications 
(indicating potential corrections) would imply that the 
original modification could be considered appropriate and 
correct.  The importance of this example is that it relies on 
the user’s cultural understanding of colour association where 
warm colours such as red/orange imply caution and where 
green / white (default representing standard conformity) 
imply safe and reliable state.  This illustrates the potential for 
new and insightful ways to provide implicit representation 
rather than using explicitly defined categories and numerical 
values. 
We consider the generalized output mechanisms seen in 
our examples for this variety of stigmergy are: 
 
UI component display or modification representing 
the aggregate function of the contribution. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
This paper has presented the varieties of stigmergy and 
briefly provided Web site examples of how the input and 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

output for each variety might be implemented.  Our 
examples have explored simple implementations along with 
more sophisticated implementations.  An initial analysis of 
User Interface (UI) components indicate that they might be 
independent to the variety of stigmergy they apply to.  For 
example, we see that both qualitative and quantitative 
marker-based stigmergy can use a single selection type input 
element irrespective of the different types of output 
implementation.  Similarly the output implementation of 
both quantitative marker-based stigmergy and sematectonic 
stigmergy appear compatible.  If we are able to decouple the 
input/output implementations from the stigmergy varieties 
then we might enable a level of reuse of these mechanisms. 
Our analysis has been focused on our UI observations 
which clearly correlate to the WebML Hypertext Model 
(both Content and Navigation Models).  By definition 
stigmergy stipulates that communication occurs indirectly 
through environment mediated signs and indicates some 
form of data layer must exist.   
Our model of stigmergy describes both positive feedback 
from users and negative feedback from the environment.  
The stigmergy data within the WebML Structural Model will 
therefore require data persistence accessible by the UI 
components as well as environment triggered events.  This 
will be analyzed and included in the next phase of research 
when designing how stigmergy integrates with WebML.  
This metadata persistence is expected to also afford the 
administration of available qualitative marker-based options 
(e.g.: available text messaging emoticons and associated 
images/icons) and integrate into some form of tag disclosure 
through integrated online help. Our current work involves 
providing a model of how stigmergy as a design pattern 
integrates 
with 
WebML 
framework 
extending 
UI 
components and events within the Hypertext Model and how 
that maps to the Structural Model within WebML.   
In the Facebook “Seen by” example we illustrate a single 
stigmergic mechanism resulting from a single input 
component (e.g.: The following of a link to a suggested 
content article) and how it can have two different output 
representations.  The Facebook example showed that there 
can be a SUM aggregate function of the users who visited 
the suggested content, but also a chronological listing 
identifying the distinct database entry level data including 
the date/time of the event.  This clearly highlights that when 
incorporating stigmergy into WebML we must accommodate 
multiple output visualizations (and different view locations 
where they are accessed) representing the single output state. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
What we hope we have clarified in this paper is how 
different stigmergic mechanisms might be implemented such 
that there is both an intentional and unintentional set of input 
elements.  These input elements map to relevant output 
elements which include both visualization and representation 
(embodiment) of the contributions.  This representation is 
determined by aggregation functions which are calculated 
using the business rules against persistent data for the 
specific stigmergic mechanism.  These generate signals and 
trails ranging from simple SUM aggregate functions to 
multi-criteria and multi-selection aggregate formulation into 
a final representation. 
Stigmergy is not merely input and output mechanisms as 
presented within this paper; they are only part of the 
stigmergy phenomenon.  For the mechanisms to work as 
intended a web site must be built analyzing the grand 
purpose of the site, and how stigmergic mechanisms can be 
employed to improve site coordination.  The intra-site 
location of where the mechanisms are deployed (e.g.: 
specific users or role groups) ultimately depends on the 
development project sponsor.  Similarly the WebML 
Personalization Model of a Web site might employ a fee 
paying structure where access to the mechanisms might be 
restricted.   These issues are accommodated for within 
WebML and are ultimately expected to make the efficacy of 
introducing stigmergic mechanisms into Web application 
design significantly value-added. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Theraulaz, G. and Bonabeau, E. A Brief History of Stigmergy. 
Artificial Life, 5, 2 (1999/04/01 1999), 97-116. 
[2] Object Management Group IFML RFP. City, 2012. 
[3] Grasse', P.-P. La reconstruction dun id et les coordinations 
interindividuelles chez Bellicositermes natalensis et Cubitermes sp., La 
theorie de la stigmergie: Essai d'interpretation du comportement des 
termites constructeurs. Insectes Sociaux, 6, 1 1959), 41-80. 
[4] Dipple, A. Stigmergy in Web 2.0: a Model for Site Dynamics. ACM 
City, 2012. 
[5] Van Dyke Parunak, H. A Survey of Environments and Mechanisms 
for Human-Human Stigmergy. City, 2006. 
[6] den Besten, M., Gaio, L., Rossi, A. and Dalle, J.-M. Using Metadata 
Signals to Support Stigmergy. City, 2010. 
[7] Wilson, E. O. Sociobiology: The New Synthesis. Belknap Press of 
Harvard University Press, 2000. 
[8] Tummolini, L. and Castelfranchi, C. Trace signals: the meanings of 
stigmergy. In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 3rd international 
conference on Environments for multi-agent systems III (Hakodate, Japan, 
2007). Springer-Verlag, [insert City of Publication],[insert 2007 of 
Publication].  
[9] Tummolini, L., Castelfranchi, C., Ricci, A., Viroli, M. and Omicini, 
A. 'Exhibitionists' and 'Voyeurs' Do It Better: A Shared Environment for 
Flexible Coordination with Tacit Messages. City, 2005. 
[10] Brambilla, M. Interaction Flow Modeling Language RFP: first 
cornerstone towards the standardization of WebML. City, 2012. 
[11] The Web Modeling Language. City, 2009. 
[12] Brambilla, M. Interaction Flow Modeling Language (IFML). City, 
2012. 
[13] Corporation, M. Emoticons. City, 2012. 
[14] Rosenblatt, G. Wikipedia Now Crowd-Sourcing Article Ratings. City, 
2011. 
[15] Harvey, M. Wikipedia to highlight unreliable entries in colour. City, 
2009. 
 
 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

