Electronic Voting and Its Use - E-elections 
 
Juraj Fabus 
Department of Communications 
University of Zilina 
Zilina, Slovakia 
email: juraj.fabus@fpedas.uniza.sk 
Iveta Kremenova 
University of Zilina 
  
Viktoria Fabusova 
University of Zilina
 
 
Abstract— The paper is devoted to the issue of electronic 
signature in the Slovak Republic. It identifies perspective area 
for electronic signature use - electronic voting. It discusses 
possible factors that are essential for the introduction of e-
elections to life for citizens of the Slovak Republic.  
Keywords-Electrocic voting; security; national ID card. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The subject of this paper is the possibility of using an 
electronic signature within the concept of e-voting. The aim 
is to raise awareness of electronic signature, to increase 
interest in its use, as well as to describe the conditions 
necessary for the introduction of e-voting. 
For example, Estonia is the only country in the world that 
relies on Internet voting in a significant way for legally-
binding national elections — up to 25% of voters cast their 
ballots online. Independent evaluation [1] of the system 
urgently recommends that Estonia discontinue use of the 
system. 
The reason for which e-election should be introduced is 
so, that the Slovak citizens, who live abroad, and the number 
of which is estimated at around 250,000, can also participate 
in elections. Today they need to handle long and difficult 
election by post and mainly for this reason, their voter 
turnout is so low. 
In Section 2 we describe why it would be good to use e-
voting in Slovakia. In Section 3, the requirements for 
protocol used in electronic voting are introduced. Section 4 is 
about the up and downs of e-elections. Last section – Section 
5 – is about eID card project and the possibilities of 
implementation of e-elections in the Slovak republic.  
II. 
ELECTRONIC VOTING 
With regard to electronic voting, the most asked question 
is its application in national elections. The benefits is 
particularly in financial savings, speeding-up of results 
counting, simplification of act of election and to increase 
participation of younger generation. The field of its use is 
much broader, ranging from regional elections through 
referendum, various selection procedures up to the polls. 
Such use of electronic elections in Slovakia requires the 
necessary legislative amendments. 
On the other hand, the electronic voting as a cheap and 
quick way to vote could lead to the creation of new 
institutions. The use of e-voting could be quickly fastened in 
the university environment, where we can expect computer-
proficient people, and where complicated legislative changes 
are not necessary [2]. 
III. 
SECURITY PROTOCOL OF E-ELECTIONS 
Implementation of e-voting protocol consists of several 
phases (Figure 1), which must be performed in a prescribed 
order. 
In the Constitution of the Slovak Republic, it is stated 
that suffrage is universal, equal, direct and conducted by 
secret ballot. Electronic voting should be able to enable 
citizens to realize this right. Possible election fraud and 
particularities of electronic voting deliver additional 
requirements:  
• 
Eligibility - Only eligible voters who meet certain 
well-defined criteria may participate in the vote. 
Verification of the eligibility to participate in the 
elections together with mechanisms to avoid 
multiple counting of voters' votes, must be part of an 
electronic election scheme. If not, dishonest 
participant can manipulate with the election results. 
• 
Election verifiability - voter should be able to verify 
that his vote was recorded and counted correctly in 
the election results. We distinguish between 
individual 
and 
universal 
verifiability. 
This 
requirement is important for the confidence of voters 
in the electoral system, including the results. Then, 
uncontrolled authorities would not be able to 
manipulate the election results without verification 
of voters or others. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-485-5
WEB 2016 : The Fourth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

• 
Repudiation of vote - Scheme should have 
mechanisms to deal with inconsistencies in the 
various stages. For example, if voter finds that his 
vote was not counted in the election results despite 
the fact that he participated in the voting, there 
should be a mechanism that would be able to 
demonstrate his legitimate complaint against the 
electoral authorities. 
• 
Justice - No one should have access to partial results 
if the elections are still ongoing. This information 
can be misused in a pressure on voters who have not 
yet participated in the election. 
• 
Secrecy of voting - in electronic voting envelope, the 
selected option must not identify the voter. Each 
links between the ballot and the voter has to be 
deleted. This requirement protects the privacy of the 
voter in the election, so that he cannot be penalized 
in any way for the vote. 
• 
Urgency of elections – after the vote, voter would 
not be able to obtain the document, with which 
would be able to prove his choice to someone else. 
This requirement is to impede vote buying [2]. 
In technological terms, system for electronic voting could 
operate in different ways. To prevent abuse of the system, 
the system should be based on qualified electronic 
signatures. It is a condition for online communication 
between authorities and citizens. 
There are two basic types of protocols in an e-election - a 
scheme based on blind signature, and a scheme based on 
homomorphic encryption [3]. Blind signature, as introduced 
by David Chaum [4], is a form of digital signature in which 
the content of a message is blinded before it is signed. A 
homomorphic encryption scheme is a crypto system that 
allows computations to be performed on data without 
decrypting it. 
With qualified electronic signature, the voters would 
encrypt the vote by the public key and add the proof of the 
correctness of the encrypted message, i.e., it comprises a 
vote of one of the possible candidates only. After signing this 
report it will be sent to registration server. It checks the 
voter's eligibility to participate in the election, verifies the 
signature and fairness of accompanied evidence. If all is 
well, encrypted vote of the voter can be published. 
IV. 
BENEFITS AND RISKS OF E-ELECTION 
For young people who are accustomed to work with the 
Internet, e-elections would represent a more comfortable 
alternative that reflects their lifestyle. Any qualified voter 
would be able to vote from anywhere with internet access. 
On the other hand, especially for representatives of the older 
generation who are not adept in using computers, there 
should still be a space to participate in public affairs in 
classical way. 
There are real technical risks of e-voting over the 
internet, which should not be overlooked. As a threat, we 
consider an attack to disrupt the election services with a 
consequent avoidance of the vote. It is desirable to describe 
the possible internal and external attacks on individual 
components 
of 
the 
electoral 
system. 
Creating 
and 
maintaining people's confidence in the accuracy and security 
of the electoral process is the basis for the use of electronic 
voting [2]. 
V. 
SITUATION IN SLOVAKIA 
Implementation of e-elections in the Slovak Republic 
should be realized on a long-term concept of informatisation 
of society and should not be done quickly, because currently 
our country is not ready for such elections yet. 
The first major step toward introducing of e-elections 
into practice was disclosure of the call for project on a 
national electronic ID card by the Ministry of Finance. This 
card should contain components to implement qualified 
electronic signature. Legal acts carried with it by a citizen, 
will be then unquestionable. So, the state would provide (and 
delivered as well) an electronic signature free of charge to 
every citizen to communicate with other bodies. Such 
identification card creates good starting conditions for the 
nationwide e-voting use.  
The price of ID card with electronic-signature and the 
costs associated with its use can influence Slovaks on 
whether or not to use public services online, and decide 
whether the vicious circle will finally break, as the weak 
extension of the qualified electronic signature hinder the use 
of services. Lack of services on the other hand, inhibits 
expansion of e-signature [5].  
By the end of April 2016, more than 804,000 Slovak 
citizens had eID cards. Less than 39,000 of them requested 
also the certificates that enable the creation of advanced 
electronic signature. The Ministry of Finance is responsible 
for the implementation of eID cards. It is not clear why 
people do not apply for advanced electronic signature (free 
for first five years). Research in this area will be needed. 
In [6], the authors proposed a concept of academic 
election system that can provide voting services for different 
university applications, e.g., university information system 
portal, virtual collaboration, video conferencing system, etc. 
This election system was tested in the project “Modern 
European elections” [7]. Background process of e-elections 
is technically highly complex. But for voters casting votes it 
looks like a simple task. During the simulation, the students 
inserted the voter card into the chip reader and then entered 
the PIN. After that, from a desktop application, they selected 
a party for which they wanted to vote and with a click their 
choice was sent.  
Other, not less important conditions are legislative 
changes, expanding the availability of broadband Internet, 
the political will and other factors. Also it is appropriate 
to establish an expert commission which will assess the 
social, technical and legal aspects of the use of computerized 
elections in Slovakia in the context of the development of 
eGovernment. In view of all the conditions to be met, it 
seems unrealistic to put the nationwide elections into practice 
prior 2017 [2]. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Current state of the electronic signature has positive and 
also negative effect on the situation in the Slovak Republic. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-485-5
WEB 2016 : The Fourth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

The electronic signature is not exerted nowadays because of 
the small extension. It is assumed that these problems will 
soon be removed, and the competent authorities will pursue 
the main idea of an electronic signature. Research projects, 
such as the “Academic election system” and “Modern 
European elections”, which are initiated from bottom, can 
help to gain the necessary experience with the creation and 
use of electronic elections. They open public discussion on 
the future of e-voting in Slovakia. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Springall, T. Finkenauer, Z. Durumeric, J. Kitcat, H. Hursti, M.  
MacAlpine. J. Halderman, “Security Analysis of the Estonian Internet 
Voting System”, In Proceedings of the 21st ACM Conference on 
Computer and Communications Security (CCS ’14), November 2014. 
[2] M. Novotný, “Electronic voting - a sci-fi or near future?”, Available 
from: 
http://www.itnews.sk/tituly/infoware/free-clanky/2009-11-
09/c130130-iw-elektronicke-volby-sci-fi-alebo-blizka-buducnost,  
[retrieved: may, 2016]. 
[3] R. Sampiegethaya, R. Poovendran, “A Framework and Taxonomy for 
Comparison of Electronic Voting Schemes”, Elsevier Computers & 
Security, vol. 25, 2006. 
[4] D. Chaum, “Blind signatures for untreaceable payments”, Crypto 82, 
1982. 
[5] G. Jarosova, “Online election at the earliest in 2014”, Available from: 
http://fwd.etrend.sk/vsetko/online-volby-najskor-v-roku-2014.html, 
[retrieved: may, 2016]. 
[6] M. Novotny, “Design and analysis of a practical e-voting protocol”, 
in the Proceedings of FIDIS/IFIP Internet Security & Privacy 
Summer School 2008, Springer IFIP, vol. 298, 2009. 
[7] Modern European elections Project Website. Avaliable from: 
http://ics.upjs.sk/evolby, 
[retrieved: 
may, 
2016]
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Phases of an implementation of security protocol in electronical election implementation (Source: own processing). 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-485-5
WEB 2016 : The Fourth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

