Cultural Based Adaptive Web Design For Wellington Institute of Technology 
Lakshmi Sivadas 
School of IT 
Wellington Institute of Technology 
Wellington, New Zealand 
Email:Lakshmi.Sivadas1988@gmail.com 
Abdolreza Hajmoosaei 
School of IT 
Wellington Institute of Technology 
Wellington, New Zealand 
Email:Reza.moosa@weltec.ac.nz 
Abstract— Currently academic institutions’ websites are used 
for evaluating the standard of institutions. The institution’s 
website is an important marketing tool because it is an 
advertising forum to students.  Website is a kind of 
promotional material which exchanges academic images to 
students which will in turn provides revenue to institution. 
Poorly designed website is risky because it will create a 
negative impact about academic institution. The role of 
academic website is very important for student’s decision to 
select an academic institution because every student will 
examine website before enrolling. There are many features 
that attract users to a website; one among those factors is 
cultural attributes. Web designers should adapt a cross 
cultural web design by considering the culture of the targeted 
audience. A well-designed website with improved user 
interface which would incorporate various cultural factors will 
definitely increase the revenue of institution. The aim of this 
research is to evaluate the web interface of Wellington Institute 
of Technology institute (Weltec) based on the various cultural 
dimensions of Asian students and to provide some suggestions 
to design an interface layout for Weltec web interface, which 
can satisfy Asian students’ cultural attributes. 
Keywords - Web Interface Design; Academic Institution Website; 
Cultural Attributes; Website Satisfaction.
I.
INTRODUCTION 
     Nowaday’s lots of researches have been conducted in the 
field of anthropology on the cultural differences and 
similarities. The primary reason for increasing the number 
of research in this area is because the web has become a 
medium for promotion and marketing. Therefore, it is 
essential that a web interface design reflects the cultural 
preferences of target audience [1]. According to Hofstede, 
the culture is the collective program of mind that 
differentiates the people from a group from another group 
where the mind stands for thinking, feeling and acting 
towards beliefs, attitudes and skills [2]. Culture can also be 
defined as patterns of thinking that influence people how to 
communicate with user interface [3]. 
     Nowaday’s academic institutions’ websites are used for 
evaluating the standard of institution [4]. The most 
important marketing tool for an institution is to have an 
effective website because website is an advertising forum to 
students. The website is a kind of promotional material 
which exchange academic idea to students, which in turn 
provides revenue to institution. A poorly designed website 
is risky because it will create a negative impact about 
academic institution. When students visit academic 
institution website they must find it easy to navigate and 
access information otherwise they will leave the website and 
institute will lose potential candidates. According to Davis 
and Lindridge as cited by [5] , cultural factors must be 
considered in web design which can increase aesthetic 
quality and success of website. A well-designed website 
with improved user interface incorporated with various 
cultural factors will definitely increase the revenue [6]. 
Therefore, while designing a web interface, relevant 
visitors’ culture attributes should also be considered.  
     Wellington Institute of Technology (Weltec) is an 
internationally recognized Centre of education, providing 
education for more than 11,000 students every year and 
offering more than 150 programs. In the competitive world, 
website should be designed efficiently to satisfy and to 
attract more students to Weltec. The Weltec web interface 
design should adapt a cross cultural web design by 
considering the culture of the targeted audience. The aim of 
this research is to evaluate web interface of Weltec based on 
the cultural dimensions of Asian students and to provide 
some suggestions to design an interface layout for Weltec 
web interface which can satisfy cultural dimensions of 
Asian students. 
In Section II, we describe the influence of cultures on 
web design. Section III describes the Hoftstede’s cultural 
dimensions. Related works are explained in Section IV. 
Research approach and findings are described in Section V 
and finally, Section VI covers the conclusion of research.  
II.
THE INFLUENCES OF CULTURES ON WEB DESIGN
     In 2001, Sun [7] studied about the effect of culture on 
web site and stated that users use cultural priorities to 
evaluate the quality of a website. Studies conducted by 
Smith, Dunkly, Minoch [8] stated that use of design 
components according to user’s culture will definitely 
increases the user satisfaction, usability and friendliness of a 
website. Marcus and Gould stated in [9] that it is possible to 
analyze the culture effects in terms of web design 
components like images, icons and navigation. Galdo, 
Fernandes, Russo and Boor in [10] emphasized that 
designer should include the cultural factors such as icons, 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

symbols and colors in web page design. The culture is very 
important aspect while designing a web interface because it 
can help users to interact much better with the interface. 
Therefore, 
it 
is 
necessary 
to 
incorporate 
cultural 
characteristics in interface design [11]. Good understanding 
of cultural preference is necessary before designing web 
interface. Culture is a major factor that has to be considered 
to create a global interface design because users will feel 
more comfortable while interacting with the interface that is 
designed according to their culture [12]. Global interface 
should include a diversity of culture to provide support for 
users [13]. Users will be from different background so that 
their expectations towards the interface will be also different 
so it is very important to satisfy cultural features to increase 
usability of web interface [14].
III.
HOFSTEDE’S CULTURAL DIMENSIONS
     One of the goals of this study is to identify the cultural 
dimensions that must be considered in website design. For 
this purpose, we have done literature review on several 
cultural models, such as Victor’s Model [15], Hall’s Model 
[16], Trompenaar’s Model [17]  and Hofstede’s Model [18] 
. In this study, we selected Hofstede’s cultural model 
because Hofstede’s theory describes clearly the attributes of 
culture. Hofstede’s theory is very popular in field of cultural 
research and has been cited more than 3500 times and 
included in more than 9000 articles [1]. Hofstede is the 
ninth most cited european in 2011 according to social 
science citation index [19].  Ford and  Kotze argue in their 
article [1] “Designing usable interfaces with cultural 
dimensions” that the web interface that follows the 
Hofstede’s  cultural dimensions will provide more user 
friendlyness in web layout. 
     Greet Hofstede worked as a psychologyst for IBM and 
conducted a study during the period from 1978 to 1983. He 
collected data from more than 100.000 IBM employees 
from 53 countries through interview and survey. Stastical 
analysis of large set of data was done and each country was 
given a rating from 0 to 100 [9] . In 1990, Hofstede 
published ‘Software of mind’ with more details of culture in 
an organization with his five cultural dimensions Power 
Distance, Individualism Vs Collectivism , Masculinity Vs 
Femininity , Uncertainty avoidance and Long Term 
orientation Vs Short term orientation. Power distance refers 
to inequalities among the people in society and how power 
is distributed [20]. Individualism refers to individuals are 
expected to take care of themselves and collectivism expect 
family member or relatives can look after a person [21]. 
Masculinity refers to difference in the emotional roles 
between genders [22] . Uncertainty Avoidance deals with 
feel of anxiety for a member of society in a particular 
situation 
[23].
Long 
term 
orientation 
stands 
for 
encouragement towards the future growth whereas short 
term orientation stands for present and past [24].
IV.
RELATED WORK
     Work1- Cultural Similarities and Differences in the 
design of University web sites [25]: This research was done 
by Ewa Callahan to understand the cultural differences and 
similarities in the web interface design of universities based 
on the Hofstede’s Cultural dimensions. To conduct the 
study 900 universities website from 45 different countries 
like Malaysia, Austria, United States, Japan, Sweden, 
Greece and Denmark were chosen. Graphical elements and 
information organization of home page were mainly 
analyzed by content analysis methods. Correlation between 
each cultural dimension was calculated. The result of 
analysis with respect to power distance positively, 
individuals/collectivism negatively masculinity/femininity 
positively and uncertainty avoidance positively were 
correlated. The result of analysis shows web page layout 
choices are different all around the world but still there were 
a few similarities like simple menu that were chosen by 
most of the countries.  
     Work 2- Arabic Interface analysis based on cultural 
markers [26]. The primary goal of this research was to 
analyze the most important cultural markers in the 
educational websites of Arabic countries.  Nine universities 
including Zayden University, UAE University, Sharjah 
University, the global university of science, Kuwait institute 
of Medical specialization from Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, 
Dubai, Abu Dhabi and Sharjah were selected for analysis. 
After identifying the cultural markers, the markers were 
related to Hofstede’s cultural dimensions. Hofstede’s power 
distance value for Arabic nation is high. The findings of this 
study for power distance is also high. The individualism and 
collectivism is less according to Hofstede’s dimension. The 
result supports Hofstede’s claim. Hofstede said Arab 
countries have a more score in masculinity. This study 
supports masculinity therefore value of Hofstede for Arabic 
country can be partially correlated to findings. Hofstede 
claims that Arab countries have high uncertainty avoidance 
and there is no score for the long term versus short term 
orientation. Moderate support for long term orientation was 
found in this study. 
     Work 3- Cultural Variability in Web Content [27]: A 
comparative analysis of American and Turkish Websites has 
been done in this work. This research was conducted in 
Bebek Istanbul University in Turkey in January 2010.  US 
based company websites and their Turkish counterparts 
were selected for study.  Web content analysis was used to 
verify Hofstede’s cultural dimension in 88 websites. Firstly, 
after literature review a list of website features were 
identified which represents different cultural traits. Then 
focus group study with six students where conducted to find 
out the website features. The web features identified by 
students in US and Turkish websites were evaluated. 
Finally, fourteen web features that represent Hofstede’s 
cultural dimensions were discovered.  The websites were 
analyzed with the absence and presence of the website 
features. There was a difference in ten features among the 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

fourteen features between Turkish and Us Websites.  There 
was no Power distance in Turkish website. Turkish website 
displayed more collectivism than US website. Turkish 
websites show lower Masculine. US websites displayed 
more Uncertainty avoidance than Turkish websites.  
     Work 4- Cultural Values and Interpersonally in Spanish 
and British University Websites [28]: This research was 
conducted in Spain by Francisco Miguel Ivorra. The 
primary goal of research was to study the impact of 
Individualism in Peninsular Spanish and British University 
websites. According to Hofstede findings, Spain is 
moderately individualistic and UK is highly individualistic. 
In this study 30 university websites from Spain and UK 
were selected randomly.  The section “Reason to study at 
the university” was selected to analyze. The Observation 
and quantitative analysis were used and statistical analysis 
with Chi square test was done to find result. The findings of 
the research show Spain has highly tribal culture with the 
presence of Individualism. Similarly, UK also has tribal 
culture in a moderate rate.  
     Work 5- Website Design and localization [29]: A 
Comparison of Malaysia and Britain has been done in this 
research. Two researchers Tanveer Ahmed and Haralambos 
Mouratidis conducted a study to explore the cultural values 
in Malaysian and British websites and how these values are 
reflected in web interface design based on Hofstede’s two 
cultural 
dimensions 
Power 
distance 
and 
Individualism/Collectivism. For this purpose, the author 
selected six different websites from three areas like 
Banking, Tourism and Education. Research method for 
analyzing the cultural elements, was content analysis 
framework and analysis procedure for analyzing the cultural 
elements. After analysis the authors found a considerable 
difference in the cultural values in Malaysian and British 
websites. The findings of research show Malaysia have high 
index of power distance whereas British value for power 
distance is low. The Malaysian’s have high collectivism in 
contrast Britain is highly individualistic. 
V.
RESEARCH APPROACH
     Based on Hofstede’s cultural model, we designed a 
questionnaire and distributed among 80 Asian students at 
Weltec that come from India, China, Philippine, Sri Lanka, 
Nepal and Middle East countries. Subsequently, based on 
the survey results, Weltec website was evaluated to examine 
whether the website interfaces meet all the cultural criteria 
of Asian students. 
A. Data Collection 
     In this study, a quantitative survey was conducted. 
Among the 19 questions of questionnaire, 5 questions were 
related to power distance, 3 questions were related to 
uncertainty avoidance, 4 questions were related to 
masculinity, another 4 were related to collectivism and last 
3 questions were about short-term orientation. For each 
question, respondents may select five rating fields strongly 
agree, agree, neither agree nor disagree, disagree and 
strongly disagree respectively shown by number 5 to 1. 
B. Data Analysis 
     The opinion of respondents was firstly separated based 
on nationality and entered in separate spreadsheets. 
Statistical data analysis was performed using Microsoft 
Excel. The response for each question was entered as 
numeric value; strongly disagree=1 to strongly agree=5. For 
each cultural dimension average was calculated.  
The table below shows the result of data analysis (PD= 
Power Distance, MAS = Masculinity, COL=Collectivism, 
ST = Short- term orientation, UA = Uncertainty avoidance). 
TABLE I. RESULT OF CULTURAL DIMENSIONS VALUE 
PD
MAS
COL
ST
UA
INDIA
2.52
2.35
3.94
3.92
4.62
CHINA
2.61
2.58
3.67
3.55
4.33
PHILIPPINES
2.16
2
3.77
3.33
4.90
SRI LANKA
2.60
2.70
3.72
3.43
4.40
NEPAL
1.9
1.72
3.47
3.43
4.36
MIDDLE 
EAST 
2
2.42
3.90
3.10
4.53
     The survey results for all six asian countries 
(India,China,Philiphines,Sri Lanka,Nepal and Middle East) 
were similar for five cultural dimension as shown in 
Figure1. The cultural dimension values for asian countries 
in Uncertainity, Collectivism, Short term orientatin are  
high, and low for  power distance and masculinity. 
Figure 1. Cultural dimensions value for 6 asian countries  
C. Research Findings 
     The major aim of our research is to investigate whether 
cultural dimensions of Asian students are reflected in 
Weltec website. In this research, we examined design 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
SURVEY RESULTS
UA
COL
ST
MAS
PD
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

characteristics of Weltec website using a set of guidelines 
developed by Marcus for mapping of Hofstede’s cultural 
dimensions into web design components.  
     Power Distance: Survey data shows Asian countries 
have low power distance. Therefore, the Weltec website 
should have the five design features listed in the table 
below. 
TABLE II. CULTURAL WEB COMPONENTS FOR LOW POWER 
DISTANCE 
Components of cultural factors
Identified in Weltec 
Website 
1
Less Structured access to Information
Yes (Pass)
2
Less Focus on Authority
Yes (Pass)
3
Shallow Hierarchies
Yes (Pass)
4
Photos of Students
Yes (Pass)
5
Images of public space and everyday 
activities 
No (Fail)
     Among the five web characteristics, only four web 
characteristics were satisfying, the fifth feature images of 
public space and everyday activities is absent in Weltec 
website (please refer to TABLE 2). As example, there is no 
public image in homepage of Weltec (shown in Figure 2).  
Figure 2. No public images in home page. 
     Masculinity: The study shown low score for Masculinity 
which means Asian students of Weltec prefer femininity in 
website design. TABLE III shows the failure of Weltec 
website.  
TABLE 
III. 
CULTURAL 
WEB 
COMPONENTS 
FOR 
LOW 
MASCULINITY 
Components of cultural factor
Identified in Weltec website
1.
Vivid color scheme
No (Fail)
2.
Presence of female themed 
images 
No (Fail)
     For example, when students open the information 
technology page they wish to see different color schemes 
with female oriented themes in Weltec website instead of 
pictures of only male students. The Figure 3 shows there is 
no female image in homepage of School of IT at Weltec. 
Another design issue, in the picture below we can see only 
one font color (Green) is used instead of multiple colors.  
     Collectivism: From the survey result, collectivism has 
high score so the Weltec website should reflect images of 
group achievement and group learning activities. Table IV 
shows the failures. 
    Figure 3. No female Theme in weltec website. 
TABLE 
IV. 
CULTURAL 
WEB 
COMPONENTS 
FOR 
HIGH 
COLLECTIVISM 
Components of cultural factor
Identified in Weltec website
Images of group learning activities
No (Fail)
Images of group achievements
No (Fail)
Images of institutional success
Yes (Pass)
   Figure   4. No group success stories. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

Figure 5. No group learning activities. 
     The Weltec website displayed individual success stories 
and pictures instead of group success stories and group 
achievement images (shown in Figures 4 & 5). When we 
observed Weltec website we were not able to find images 
with a group of students sitting together chatting or learning. 
In the courses web page, among the four photos only one is 
displaying image of two students and rest of all photos are 
presenting a single person (shown in figure 5). 
Uncertainty Avoidance: From survey results, it is very clear 
that Asian students of Weltec prefer high uncertainty 
avoidance which means students expect assistance facilities. 
TABLE V describes the website characters to meet high 
uncertainty. 
TABLE 
V. 
CULTURAL 
WEB 
COMPONENTS 
FOR 
HIGH 
UNCERTAINITY 
Components of cultural Factor
Identified in Weltec website
Simple, Clear, prominent and 
limited choices 
Yes (Pass)
Navigation stated with strict rules
No (Fail)
Presence of site map
No (Fail)
Messages, contents & visuals with 
direct meaning 
No (Fail)
Presence of Search engine and 
Institutional calendar 
Yes (Pass)
Figure 6. Navigation stated without strict rules. 
Figure 7. No clear description about the course. 
Figure 8. No direct Meaning. 
     When we investigated Weltec website for high UA 
features, we couldn’t find the strict rules for navigation. 
Refer to Figure 6 when user clicks on the international tab, 
it navigates to the screen displayed in the Figure 7 and then 
when user clicks the top program tab it again takes user 
back to home page (Figure 8). In this navigation, user will 
be expecting to view list of programs offered by Weltec but 
there are no strict navigation rules. The Figure 7 displays the 
details about post graduate diploma in Information 
Technology. That page provides details regarding course fee 
and intake but course subject details and prerequisite of 
course are missing which is very important for a student to 
choose a program. In Home page there is a tab named 
“Current Student” but when clicked on the tab thinking it 
will be displaying details about current students but it takes 
user to a page where rules and regulations for newly 
enrolled students are listed. Moreover, there is no site map 
in Weltec website to provide support in uncertain situation. 
Short-term Orientation: The survey response for short term 
orientation score is high. Table VI shows the failure of 
Weltec website for components of this attribute. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

 TABLE VI. CULTURAL WEB COMPONENTS FOR HIGH SHORT 
TERM ORIENTATION 
Components of cultural factors
Identified in weltec 
website 
Daily routine indicator of weltec
No (Fail)
Allow students to complete task quickly
No (Fail)
Daily activities or current events of 
weltec 
No (Fail)
Presence of short term goals of weltec
No (Fail)
Figure 9. No daily activities. 
     Daily routine indicator of Weltec was not displayed in 
home page. Daily activities or current events of Weltec were 
not listed. Short-term goal of Weltec was not given. The 
most important one, enrolling into a course is a long process 
taking the students into many long pages that need scrolling 
and its time consuming. In Figure 9, we can see the latest 
stories but not the daily activities or current events.  The 
short –term goals of Weltec is not displayed in home page 
of Weltec. 
VI. CONCLUSION
     Based on the discussion of Hofstede’s cultural 
dimensions, this article explored how academic institutions 
might make their websites design more usable and attractive 
fpr Asian students. The important question which is brought 
up in this research is ‘What is the approach to design a 
website 
which 
would 
appeal 
to 
diverse 
cultural 
backgrounds?’. This paper represented an approach aiming 
to 
enhance 
academic 
institution 
website 
interface 
attractiveness via an attending majority of Asian visitors’ 
culture. We proposed an approach for website design with 
focusing on cultural factors of website visitors. Based on 
our survey, it was proved that the Weltec website is not 
fully Asian culture oriented and does not fully reflecting the 
cultural requirements of Asian students. Weltec website 
designed according to Cultural factors will increase usability 
and attract more students to Weltec. Weltec should consider 
cultural factors of target audience to achieve more desirable 
outcomes. 
REFERENCES
[1]G. Ford and . P. Kotzé, "Designing Usable Interfaces with 
Cultural Dimensions," South Africa. 
[2]G. Hofstede, Cultures and Organizations: Software of the 
Mind, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997.  
[3]E. G. Blanchard and D. Allard, "Modeling a User’s Culture," 
in IGI global, switzerland, 2010.  
[4] (. (. 1.-1. ©. P. C. w. T. M. M. International Journal of Basic 
and Applied Sciences, Walayat Hussain and A. Ahmed, "The 
Importance of Higher Education Websites and its Usability," 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/274470588_The_imp
ortance_of_Higher_Education_Website_and_its_Usability. 
[5]S. D. B. Eristi, "CULTURAL FACTORS in WEB 
DESIGN," Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information 
Technology , 2005-2009.  
[6]"13 Advantages of Having a Website For Your Business," 
Dogulin 
digital, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.dogulindigital.com.au/advantages-benefits-
website-for-business/. 
[7]R. Rimondi, "Intercultural aspects of Web Design:," 
PsychNology Journal, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 101-120, 2015.  
[8]D. L. F. T. M. Smith A., "A Process Model for Developing 
Usable 
Cross-Cultural 
Websites," 
in 
Interacting 
with 
Computers, 2004, pp. 63-91. 
[9]A. Marcus, "Cultural Dimensions and Global Web User-
Interface Design: What? So What? Now What?," January 2000. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/249779007_Cultural_
Dimensions_and_Global_Web_User-
Interface_Design_What_So_What_Now_What. 
[10]P.and. B. S. Russo, " How fluent is your interface? 
Designing for international," in Proceedings of 4th Conference, 
Boston: Addison-Wesley., 1993.  
[11]W and. B. A. Barber, "Culturability: The Merging of 
Culture and Usability.," in Proceedings of the 4th Conference 
on Human Factors and Usability, 2005.  
[12]B. 
P. 
C. 
Shneiderman, 
"Designing 
the 
user 
interface:Strategies for effective human-computer," Reading, 
Mass.: Addison, Wesley, 2010. 
[13]A. G. E. Marcus, " Cultural dimensions andglobal web 
user-interface design: What? so what? now what?," in 
Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Human factors and web, 
Texas, 2000.  
[14]A. H. S. E. M. J. Hurst, " Dynamic detection of novice vs. 
skilled use without a task model," the Human factors in 
Computing Systems, 2007. 
[15]D. Victor, International Business Communications, Harper 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

Collins , 1992.  
[16]E. Hall, The Silent Language, Doubleday, 1959.  
[17]F. Trompenaars, Riding the Waves of Culture, London: 
Nicholas Brealey Publishing, 1993.  
[18]G. Hofstede, Culture’s consequences (2nd ed.), Sage 
publishers, 2001.  
[19]J. W. Bing, "Hofstede's consequences: The impact of his 
work on consulting and business practices," ITAP International, 
2004. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.itapintl.com/about-
us/articles/hofstedes-consequences. 
[20]A. Emilie W. Gould, "Cultural Dimensions and Global 
Web Design," [Online].  
[21]G. Hofstede, "The 6 dimensions of national culture," 
hofstede's insight, [Online]. Available: https://www.hofstede-
insights.com/models/national-culture/. 
[22]G. J. M. M. Hofstede, Cultures and Organizations: 
Software of the Mind, USA: McGraw-Hill, 2010.  
[23]C. Smit, "What is uncertainity?," Culture matters, 21 
October 
2016. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://culturematters.com/what-is-uncertainty-avoidance/. 
[24]G. Hofstede, Dimensionalizing cultures: The Hofstede 
model in context., 2011.  
[25]E. Callahan, "Cultural Similarities and Differences in the 
Design of University Web sites," November 2005. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1083-
6101.2006.tb00312.x/full. 
[26]S. F. M. A. Mohammadi Akheela Khanum1, "Arabic 
Interface Analysis Based on Cultural Markers," Riyadh. 
[27]E. A.-S. E. A.-A. Gaye Karaçay-Aydın, "Cultural 
Variability in Web Content: A Comparative Analysis of 
American and Turkey websites," International business 
research, Turkey, 2010. 
[28]F. M. Ivorra, "Cultural Values and Interpersonality in 
Spanish and British University Websites," EPiC Series in 
Language and Linguistics, Spain, 2017. 
[29]H. M. ,. P. Tanveer Ahmed, "Website Design and 
Localisation: A Comparison of Malaysia and Britain," 
International Journal of Cyber Society and Education, London, 
2008. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

