Using Semantic Indexing to Improve Searching 
Performance in Web Archives 
Arshad Khan*, David MartinΨ, and Thanassis TiropanisΨ 
*National Centre for Research Methods (NCRM), University of Southampton 
Southampton, UK  
Email: a.khan@soton.ac.uk  
Ψ Geography and Environment, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK  
Email: D.J.Martin@soton.ac.uk  
Ψ School of Electronics & Computer Sciences (ECS), University of Southampton, Southampton UK 
Email: tt2@ecs.soton.ac.uk  
 
Abstract—The sheer volume of electronic documents being 
published on the Web can be overwhelming for users if the 
searching aspect is not properly addressed. This problem is 
particularly acute inside archives and repositories containing 
large collections of web resources or, more precisely, web 
pages and other web objects. Using the existing search 
capabilities in web archives, results can be compromised 
because of the size of data, content heterogeneity and changes 
in scientific terminologies and meanings. During the course of 
this research, we will explore whether semantic web 
technologies, particularly ontology-based annotation and 
retrieval, could improve precision in search results in multi-
disciplinary web archives. 
Keywords—Semantic indexing; archive searching; multi-
disciplinary web archives; semantic searching; linked data 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Information scientists have long been struggling to 
find a system that can help them organize disparate 
collections of web archives (or, in a general sense, web 
resource archives) so that users can have access to 
complete and coherent collections [1] in a much more 
meaningful way. Although both web archives and web 
repositories are sometimes used to refer to archives of 
web resources, the term web archive will be used through 
the remainder of this paper. 
The prevalent access in web archives is based on the 
search over automatically extracted metadata from web 
documents [2] which have to be indexed for keyword 
searching. Providing broader access (unlike the current 
keyword search) to the collection of those web archives 
via an ontological framework structure could not only 
increase the utilization of these hard-earned resources but 
also make them more research-oriented, structured and 
flexible to cope with the changing needs of users [1], 
especially the research community. 
The problem with conventional text based searching 
in web archives is that it only categorises the content in 
the archive on the basis of instance occurrence and query 
weighting with no attention paid to context, relevance, 
terminological coherence or relationship between web 
pages, nor does it relate the web pages of the repository 
to external sources on the web of data.  
Web resources archives contain complex collections 
of research materials in online domains that can serve 
distinct communities, for example social scientists or 
historians who desire to search information based on 
contextual 
and 
provenance 
information 
[3]. 
We 
understand that semantic web technologies will be of 
tremendous help in identifying and integrating such 
heterogeneous documents inside web archives and 
enabling context and meaning-based search in them by 
exploiting existing vocabularies and domain-specific 
ontologies. 
To further investigate the above issues, a thorough 
review of the most relevant research was carried out 
under the umbrella of web archiving, searching strategies 
in web archives and the application of next generation 
semantic web technologies. Particular attention has been 
given to linked data to see if users’ searching experience 
could be improved by locating more precise and relevant 
information in web archives and repositories. In almost 
all cases, past research has focused on individual 
components of a typical web page in a particular domain 
such as semantically annotating and linking research 
datasets in biology, e.g., [4] multimedia objects in a 
newspaper archive, or [5] research publications (usually 
in proprietary formats) in scientific publication archives, 
to generate semantic metadata and generate improved 
search results. 
This paper will describe the application and extension 
of keyword searching in web archives of multi-
disciplinary research data  by annotating web documents 
using more specialized and archival domain-specific 
ontologies and subsequently searching over the annotated 
metadata and instances of data i.e. Knowledge Base 
(KB). We will also take into account the existing and 
widely used classification systems e.g., thesaurus, 
typologies and taxonomies of social science to see if they 
can be synthesized into building an annotation ontology 
for creating annotation metadata. 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

II. CORE AREA OF RESEARCH 
The development of a single on-line resource built by 
subject experts (e.g., a site presenting the methods and 
results from a research project in a social science 
discipline) can be time-consuming and expensive (in part, 
because they are not IT experts) and the full value of the 
resource only comes into play close to the point at which 
project funding ends. Those online resources not only 
provide a valuable personal development resource for 
researchers wishing to benefit from the training or data 
provided, but also provide an important repository of 
social, economic, historical and human knowledge. They 
are frequently created as the end-product of particular 
projects by academics and researchers associated with 
particular disciplines.  
Following the completion of a project, the materials 
contained in some of these resources are considered for 
archival purposes so that they remain available despite 
the end of funding and dispersal of teams.  This is an 
increasingly familiar situation as funders and institutions 
seek to develop repositories to increase the impact and 
availability of their work.  Such archives or repositories 
of web resources enable users to search for information in 
the collection using basic keyword searching which 
proves to be ineffective simply because they retrieve web 
pages, datasets, and research papers merely on the basis 
of incidental mentions of a term in users’ queries.  Such a 
searching strategy misses the context, relationship, 
historical details and other attributes of a particular 
resource which would have enabled users to extend their 
exploration to other related records in the archive. One 
such web resources repository is the ReStore repository 
[6] which will be used as a test-bed for the 
experimentation and search performance evaluation 
described here.  
 
 
Figure 1: An overview of web resource, creation, development and its 
archival into a web resource archive, e.g., ReStore repository 
 
 
Figure 1 shows a typical web resource development 
and archival process involving funding of a research 
project, development of a web resource by the project 
team based in higher education institutions, and the 
archival of the resource in a web archive such as ReStore 
repository. 
Figure 1 also presents an opportunity to think about 
the problem which may arise at the time of searching the 
respective archive having different online materials 
created as part of various social science research projects.  
III. THE PROBLEM 
Some of the frequently observed problems stemming 
from the current searching methodologies include, but are 
not limited to: 
 
The typical keyword-search, usually based on 
keyword-matching or phrase-matching algorithms, 
hardly takes into account context, relevance and 
relationship between web documents, data, people, 
organizations, projects and other artefacts.  
 
Too many web pages make it almost impossible for 
users to go through and look for relevant information 
as a result of searching. 
 
The outputs of the same research project may be 
spread out over several repository/archive services, 
e.g., published research papers uploaded to an 
institutional repository, core research data uploaded 
to another data management service such as 
Economic & Social Data Service (ESDS) and 
videos/audios uploaded to video sharing services 
such as YouTube, Google videos etc.  
Essentially, the content of valuable online resource 
collections becomes disintegrated and spread across 
different online archives. These are in most cases 
findable by standard search engines but with no 
classification hierarchy or associated relationships that 
links to their siblings (parts of the same web resource) or 
external, related objects that could be made available to 
users. An example would be research on a similar topic 
undertaken either in the past or currently. Similarly, a 
research funding organization may be funding another 
project in the same field or related workshops may have 
been offered as part of different projects.  These types of 
relationship are well understood by the academic 
researcher but not readily amenable to discovery via 
existing searchable metadata.  
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
The overall purpose of this research is to establish 
whether accuracy and relevance in search results are 
improved both at system level and in terms of user 
experience when searching for information in a 
repository of web resources having a meaningful 
semantic index.  
We have outlined the current state of searching in 
website archives which largely employ only keyword-
based searching techniques to retrieve information. We 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

are now able to formulate the following research 
questions which will act as a driving force for this 
particular research.  
 
1. Can keyword-based searching be applied to 
semantically indexed metadata created by the 
semantic annotation process to enhance 
information retrieval in web resource archives? 
2. Can domain-specific terms in an Ontology and 
their expressions in KB improve precision and 
recall in search results when added to the keywords 
search? 
3. Does semantic indexing of ontology and KB along 
with inferencing cater to the heterogeneous types 
of data contained in web archives in terms of 
relationships, relevance? 
4. Does the scale of searching over large multi-
disciplinary web resources in web archives effect 
system performance in terms of the number of 
queries submitted at a particular point of time and 
the time it takes for the system to retrieve relevant 
information from multiple data sources? 
It is important to remember that in all of the above, 
users of such archives have to be kept in the forefront of 
the research as they will be the ultimate beneficiaries of 
any new systems based on such research in the future.  
 
V. PROPOSED ONTOLOGY-BASED SEARCHING 
SYSTEM 
Figure 2 shows the building blocks of the 
experimentation environment which will enable us to 
conduct various experiments and evaluate search results 
performance in different scenarios.  
The results have to be evaluated while keeping in 
view traditional RDBMS keyword-based searching 
techniques which are usually applied in many web 
resources archives including the ReStore repository.  
Figure 2 shows basic components of the experimental 
setup including KIM (Knowledge & Information 
Management) platform with inherent support of GATE 
(General Architecture for Text Engineering), Open 
source full-text search engine Lucene,  ReStore 
repository domain ontology fully mapped to KIM 
ontology and the resulting semantic metadata or RDF 
triples store with searching interface on top of it. It also 
follows that by incorporating the existing semantic web 
technologies and linked data concepts, we can enhance 
searching performance in web archives. A quantitative 
approach towards measuring performance has been 
adopted to evaluate accuracy of search results. 
Sesame RDF repository will be an OWLIM semantic 
repository for managing RDF triples in addition to 
inferencing and SPARQL query evaluation during the 
course of various experimentation. 
 
 
                                                       
Figure 2: Proposed Semantic indexing based searching architecture built on 
KIM platform incorporating RDF(s) Sesame semantic repository and 
distributed (shared) ontological framework. 
 
VI. THE CHALLENGE OF SCALE 
Annotation of web documents containing different 
types of data on a large scale is certainly an issue, but the 
presence of a well-modelled ontology representing the 
domain of interest could address that issue to a large 
extent. Also the trend of submitting lengthy search 
queries [7] is making it increasingly difficult for 
keyword-based search engines to perform well as users 
are becoming more and more interested in the context 
precision, related information and the source and 
provenance of what is being searched.  
The challenge is therefore of  improving performance 
of the keyword-based search using semantics without 
losing search scalability [8] and users’ interaction 
experience, to which they have become accustomed as 
the web has become an essential component of their 
lives. However it still remains to be seen whether the 
different environments in which web resources have 
originally been created (e.g., web served, harvested or 
manually collected), archived and indexed could 
influence the accuracy of results and performance of 
systems. 
During our experimental setup we will analyse the 
above from different perspectives in order to support our 
research and solidify the basis of our findings. We have 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

already started the actual annotation work along with 
indexing and retrieval of information. We have already 
made progress in formulating the research framework and 
will proceed to undertake it in order to be able to evaluate 
performance 
in 
different 
scenarios, 
e.g., 
scale, 
heterogeneity of documents and retrieval of related 
information. 
VII. ONTOLOGY ARCHITECTURE OF RESTORE REPOSITORY 
In Figure 3, we have put together very basic terms 
and concepts (classes, properties) in a container with a 
view to mapping and extending them to other ontologies 
and storing the resulting annotation metadata (instances 
of classes or KB together in the form of integrated 
ontologies. The KB and mapped network of ontologies 
are assumed to be searched at a time to produce relevant 
and accurate results with a view to evolving it iteratively 
as 
new 
terms 
are 
added. 
GATE 
will 
process 
structured/semi-structured content in documents and 
OWLIM 
represents 
RDF 
triple 
store 
containing 
inference, querying engine for information retrieval. 
 
Figure 3: ReStore synthetic ontology architecture to be integrated into the 
KIM’s bootstrap ontology KIMO to aid in (a) annotating domain-specific 
(Social Science Research Methods) resources in ReStore repository (b) 
searching relevant information in integrated ontologies. 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The core purpose of conducting this research is to 
find out if searching over the content of archived web 
resources could produce more accurate, meaningful and 
trust-worthy results by using semantic web technologies 
and linked data techniques. In today’s world of blogs, 
wikis, CMSs and social networking, the speed of 
publishing information on the web has greatly increased 
thereby affecting information consumption due to 
information overload. The problem is particularly acute 
in relation to web resources developed as part of specific 
research projects.  Despite their value, in most cases these 
disappear from the effective searching spectrum due to 
non-availability of meaningful metadata (except basic 
bibliographic page-specific metadata), lack of linkage to 
contemporary research and lack of full exposure to the 
mainstream web. Such highly specialised web resources 
become almost un-searchable, or in some cases 
misrepresented in search results in web archives where 
searching is performed using keywords matching 
algorithms.  
This paper describes a research agenda which is 
focused on the addition of extra semantic meaning to the 
existing content of a web resources archive (in our case 
the Restore repository so as to permit more effective 
searching which takes account of similar content within 
and beyond their parental domain in order to make them 
part of the structured and meaningful web of data.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors acknowledge the support of ESRC Award 
No. RES-576-25-0023. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
P. Wu, A. Heok, and I. Tamsir, “Annotating the Web 
Archives–An Exploration of Web Archives Cataloging 
and Semantic Web,” Digital Libraries: Achievements, 
Challenges and Opportunities, pp. 12-21, 2006. 
[2] 
M. Costa, and M. Silva, "Towards information retrieval 
evaluation over web archives." pp. 37-38. 
[3] 
P. H. J. Wu, A. K. H. Heok, and I. P. Tamsir, 
“Annotating Web archives—structure, provenance, and 
context through archival cataloguing,” New Review of 
Hypermedia and Multimedia, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 55-75, 
2007/07/01, 2007. 
[4] 
C. Berkley, S. Bowers, M. B. Jones, J. S. Madin, and M. 
Schildhauer, "Improving data discovery in metadata 
repositories through semantic search," Proceedings of 
the International Conference on Complex, Intelligent 
and Software Intensive Systems, CISIS 2009. pp. 1152-
1159. 
[5] 
P. Castells, F. Perdrix, E. Pulido, M. Rico, R. Benjamins, 
J. Contreras, and J. Lorés, "Neptuno: Semantic Web 
Technologies for a Digital Newspaper Archive," Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science C. Bussler, J. Davies, D. 
Fensel et al., eds., pp. 445-458: Springer Berlin / 
Heidelberg, 2004. 
[6] 
"ReStore repository: A sustainable web resources 
repository," 14/01/2013, 2013; http://www.restore.ac.uk. 
[7] 
M. A. Hearst, “'Natural' Search User Interfaces,” 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 60-
6767, Nov., 2011. 
[8] 
S. Kara, Ö. Alan, O. Sabuncu, S. Akpınar, N. K. Cicekli, 
and F. N. Alpaslan, “An ontology-based retrieval system 
using semantic indexing,” Information Systems, 2011. 
 
 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

