The Elements From the Learning Process: A Study About Online Education in the 
State of Mato Grosso/Brazil 
 
Danilo Garcia da Silva 
Federal University of Mato Grosso – UFMT 
Cuiabá, Brazil 
e-mail: danilogsilvas@gmail.com 
Kátia Morosov Alonso 
Federal University of Mato Grosso - UFMT 
Cuiabá, Brazil 
e-mail: katia.ufmt@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract—The learning process exists when you have 
interaction, interactivity and mediation. This paper proposes 
to identify the relationship between such elements, when you 
have mediation by Digital Technologies of Information and 
Communication; in fact, it connotes learning. Based on 
research done on Virtual Learning Environments, we sought to 
analyze if these elements are present on the learning pathways 
of students, and if it affects their permanence on the courses. 
As a result, we verified if there would be a consolidation of 
interaction, interactivity and mediation in the triad subject-
environment-subject, enabling the learning process. This is a 
qualitative research case-study. The collection of data focused 
on the Virtual Learning Environment, Moodle, with teachers, 
students, and tutors as subjects and its source as the 
undergraduate courses from the Brazilian Open University of 
the Federal University of Mato Grosso. The conclusion of this 
research allows for the identification of elements that are part 
of the learning process, as mentioned, consolidated on Moodle, 
and points to the learning process and its dynamics, that goes 
beyond the relationship established in these environments, 
inducing effective learning pathways. 
Keywords-virtual 
learning 
environment; 
interaction; 
interactivity; mediation; Moodle; learning pathway. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION – FIRST APPROXIMATION 
Technologies are part of a dynamic process that occurs at 
a quick pace in our society, encompassing different social, 
economic, 
political, 
ethical, 
aesthetic, 
cognitive, 
methodological and educational factors. 
The increase of these technologies, and their massive 
presence in our lives, are the result of the intensified use of 
Digital Information and Communication Technology (DICT) 
[1] that permeate almost all areas of our lives; this eventually 
altered the way we perform most of our everyday activities. 
The use of DICT became a fundamental and significant part 
in the process of human development. When it comes to 
education, there has been an adoption of Virtual Learning 
Environments (VLE's) as technologies that can mediate the 
educational process. 
We must underline that the intense use of DICT and 
VLE's in the educational process is connected with the 
experience of online education. This has limited the field of 
discussion; however, recently we observed the extensive use 
of these technologies, including in the classroom. The 
context of education with the use of these technologies has 
caught our attention because it enables, through technical 
outcomes, to see the relationship between pedagogical and 
technological mediation. 
In a socio-interactive perspective [2], that considers 
interaction, interactivity and mediation as a basis for the 
consolidation of learning, we are interested in investigating if 
these elements have been properly identified on their 
learning pathways in VLE. 
Based on this premise it would be possible to detect if the 
learning elements are noticed by the subjects, since VLE's 
allow us to create teaching and learning situations, like 
mediated activities that constitute in sharing actions. Hence 
the question: How have interaction, interactivity and 
mediation been conceived and experienced by the subjects 
that share a VLE? 
It is understood that these technologies support different 
teaching and learning organizations, allowing for flexible 
routes and pathways in their courses. It can also, 
simultaneously, contain different pedagogical models and 
student profiles. Furthermore it is possible to work in this 
“area”, creating, updating, storing, recovering, distributing 
and instantly sharing information in many formats and types 
of media [3]. 
To deal with the answers of the previously mentioned 
question, we start from the principle that these technologies 
have transformed into cultural artefacts, and as such they 
constitute 
symbolic 
instruments 
that 
represent 
the 
relationship between the subjects and the social and 
educational practices [2][4][5]. 
In order to work with the proposed objective, this work 
has been divided, besides the introduction, into three 
sections. Section II is dedicated to the theoretical foundations 
that support this analysis. Section III discusses the 
methodology, the subjects and the locus of this research. The 
last section, Section IV, will demonstrate the evidence that 
has been gathered during this investigation and it will 
conclude the paper. The most relevant result of this study is 
the identification of the occurrence of interaction, 
interactivity and mediation during the educational process 
with an intense use of VLE's. This highlights the importance 
of such elements in the learning process. 
II. 
THEORETICAL CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE STUDY AND 
CONCEPTS ABOUT THE ELEMENTS OF LEARNING 
In general, the literature that deals with the topic of 
VLE's has been dedicated mainly to the promotion of 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-333-9
WEB 2014 : The Second International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

interaction, interactivity and expansion of the educational 
mediation process in these environments. 
Through a systematic survey and a literary review, we 
identified that there is research dealing with the following 
topics: a) the insertion of artificial intelligence mechanisms 
as conversational agents and intelligent agents in virtual 
environments [6]-[11]; b) the mapping of Information and 
Communication 
Technology 
(ICT) 
for 
learning 
in 
collaborative works [12]-[16]; c) the development and 
evaluation of an interactive learning virtual object [17]-[20]; 
d) the use of immersive 3D virtual environments to simulate 
the feeling of a real classroom [21]-[24]. 
It is also worth mentioning the surveys [25]-[31], which 
seek indications between interaction and learning mediation 
on VLE's. Having our observations in mind, it is necessary to 
say that all the work and effort that has been used to foment 
and understand the process of learning on a VLE (mediated 
by DICT) is restricted to the investigative bias of these 
authors, with regard to the search for new and different 
techniques, methods and/or methodologies to identify and 
promote learning. 
In regards to the incipience of research that works with 
interaction, interactivity and mediation related to VLE's, it is 
necessary to advance into analyses that will allow a better 
understanding of the different dimensions of the educational 
process, in order to overcome the mechanical and inefficient 
usage of these environments and their resources. 
It has been observed on the national scenario of online 
courses, that there is a distinct preference for the Modular 
Object-Oriented Dynamic Learning Environment (Moodle) 
[32] learning environment by Higher Education Institutions 
(HEI's); the reason being, it is a solid management system 
for virtual courses. In regards to costs, there is a bonus, since 
it is free software that is exempt of license fees for 
installation and use; this naturally leads public educational 
institutions, with emphasis on federal institutions, to use it 
for the development of their courses. 
All the investigated courses use virtual environments to 
specifically manage and develop academic activities. 
The potentials offered by VLE's for course management 
are assigned to the reasonable range of resources available 
for 
communication, 
interaction, 
and 
availability 
of 
educational materials. In this environment, the availability of 
resources follows, in theory, the objectives and principle 
guidelines defined in the pedagogical projects of the courses. 
According to Taborda [33]: “the structure of Moodle is 
based on the socio-constructionist (sic) theory, based on the 
concept that people learn better when engaged in a social 
process of knowledge building. [...] The platform enables 
interaction between all participants, including collaboration, 
critical reflection, allowing maximum interaction and 
integration between the virtual community. Moreover, it 
offers a variety of tools that can enhance the interactivity 
between the participants of the course”. 
On the other hand, the conception of education/learning 
that governs a pedagogical course doe not always allow for a 
dynamic educational process. 
During the educational process, the perception of those 
involved, the attitudes, the behaviors and the monitoring of 
the learning pathway reveal established intentions and 
practices in the process of teaching and learning, using 
Moodle in the technological mediation. 
Thus, it is observed that the pedagogical practices impose 
dynamics on the VLE, that ultimately define usage modes, 
ratifying or not, the intentions of its developers. On the VLE, 
there are resources that teachers rely on, and these above all 
help them to adapt and mould the didactic and pedagogical 
objectives imposed. 
To fulfil our research we present our contribution to the 
concept of the learning elements presented. 
We seek to highlight the way in which teachers, students 
and tutors "navigate" on the VLE, in order to interpret 
pathways that comply with the objectives of the education 
process, with mediation, interaction and interactivity. 
We place ourselves in a position of reflection, on the 
ways that man has created to connect with the world, 
individually or collectively, and this is not restricted to 
biological or social factors. In this evolutionary motion, 
something that has captivated the attention of so many 
researchers is connected to the actions that these subjects can 
develop, be it our relationship with one another, or with one's 
self, or even with one's surroundings. 
According to our perspective, we seek to understand 
interaction (which plays a key role in the individual and 
collective educational process), interactivity (recurring in the 
context and resources of DICT as a promise of a 
communicational ideal), and mediation (as a means of 
exchange in an individual and collective educational process, 
and as a way to capture the world) on VLE's. This view 
makes us see that we should not only seek to verify the 
potential of VLE's and their resources, but also, how these 
environments have been placed symbiotically in our day-to-
day lives, each time gaining more strength in educational 
contexts. 
The perspective on interaction should be considered as a 
model where participants exchange, negotiate and give 
meaning to the act of communication. In this way, 
interaction is defined as an “action among the participants of 
a meeting” [4]. Focus is given to the relationship established 
between the interacting subjects, disregarding the superiority 
of an emission pole, since we seek to evaluate the dynamics 
of the process, where all interlocutors are active in the 
communication process. 
In a sociological perspective, interaction can be 
understood in two ways: as a process of exchange 
established between two or more individuals, or as a social 
activity, which will characterize a reciprocal action between 
two or more individuals where inter-subjectivity occurs [34]. 
At its etymological root, the word interaction means “inter–
act”, “action–relationship between”. 
This study's proposal, based on the subject-VLE 
relationship, is that interaction will be understood in the 
context of interpersonal relationships. Thus, we agree with 
[35], that says that the relationship in the virtual context, 
intends to be fully interactive, and it should be developed 
like the approach to an interpersonal one. 
With regards to the concept of interactivity, we have seen 
that it has been used in a diffuse and flexible way in an 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-333-9
WEB 2014 : The Second International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

investigation that unveils interaction in virtual environments. 
This generalization is an issue that now seems to be 
irrevocably linked to the resources of DICT, adding 
resources and computer equipment [5][36]. According to 
Valle [36], the term "interactivity" emerged in the twentieth 
century as a neologism in the area of computing. 
In the field of digital technologies, interactivity tunes an 
ideal of communication between humans, directly or 
indirectly mediated by machine. In relation to this demand, it 
is recommended to break from communication models 
propagating the transition mode of communication from 
“massive" to "interactive" [37]. 
According to Freitas [38], interactivity is related to the 
communicational expression that allows users/authors of an 
online course to participate and actively intervene, so that 
everyone has the possibility to participate, contribute, and if 
necessary, modify the developmental process of the course. 
Vygotsky [2] states that mediation under a cultural 
perspective, is the culture that becomes part of human nature 
in a historical process that shapes the psychological 
behaviors of man. Since man, in his life has a relationship 
mediated by instruments, we can say that mediation is 
central, because in this process it is possible to distinguish 
basically two types of mediating elements: the instruments - 
that interpose between man and the world/his surroundings 
and enlarge the possibilities of transformation of nature; and 
the linguistic sign – that has language as a way to establish 
communication. In other words, this means that when we 
think about a certain object we can imagine it without having 
to see it, by means of abstractions or mental representations 
like a materialization of the object in the real world. 
According to this understanding, mediation would therefore 
come from a symbolic system, human language, that acts 
between the subject and the object of knowledge [2]. 
III. 
RESEARCH APPROACH AND LOCUS 
Based on the above, the locus of this research was 
consolidated in the undergraduate online courses that 
compose the programs of the Brazilian Open University 
(UAB) and the Federal University of Mato Grosso (UFMT). 
We opted for this location because UFMT is the first public 
federal institution of higher education in the state of Mato 
Grosso (MT), a state that spans the continent, and 
consequently serves municipalities that are far from it's 
capital, practically isolated from major centers. Online 
education is making it possible to bring higher education to 
these places. UFMT, supported by UAB, has been 
experiencing staggering process development, expansion and 
externalization on the courses in this area. The selection of 
the courses was based on several criteria, among them being 
the requirement of having the courses’ workload either in its 
final stages or completed to a minimum of 60%. Four 
courses met the criteria, namely: Public Administration 
2009, Pedagogy 2009, Brazil/Japan Pedagogy agreement, 
Natural Sciences and Mathematics 2009. 
The criteria of at least 60% of the course load is backed 
up by records, which show a reduction in the number of 
participants (withdrawal, dropping out, giving up), before 
getting to the intermediate phase of the courses. The reasons 
vary, such as the failure to establish a rhythm of study, not 
following up activities or consequently the accumulation of 
activities and reading material, that ultimately lead to 
renunciation or abandonment, as found in the courses 
investigated. 
In regards to the organization on Moodle, the 
investigated courses (Public Administration 2009, Pedagogy 
2009 and Natural Sciences and Mathematics 2009) had 
groups of about 23 students, with the exception of Natural 
Sciences and Mathematics 2009, that had 20 students. All 
courses were accompanied by teachers, tutors and 
pedagogical coordinators. 
Another course that is an exception to the rule is 
Pedagogy, of the Brazil/Japan course, organized on the 
environment in 15 classes. Each class had an average of 18 
students that were accompanied by teachers, tutors and a 
counselors coordinator. Consider the following summary 
table. 
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY OF COURSES, CLASSES AND STUDENTS AND 
RESEARCH LOCUS, OWN SOURCE  
Courses 
Classes 
Students 
Public Administration 2009 
15 
345 
Natural Sciences and Mathematics 2009 
10 
200 
Brazil/Japan Pedagogy agreement 
15 
270 
Pedagogy 2009 
6 
138 
 
The observation of these courses in the virtual 
environments occurred during the first term of 2013. The 
data collection on Moodle occurred between the 20th and 
29th of May, for all courses, except for Public 
Administration in 2009, collected June 5th to 8th. 
We selected in each course, classes that concentrated the 
highest record of activities in the Moodle environment. We 
obtained a total of 4 classes, one for each course. 
Although the selection of subjects involved students, 
teachers and tutors, the main focus of research was aimed at 
students. Teachers were the ones who worked with the 
selected classes and courses and they had the greater records 
of activity in the environment. The data collected suggests 
that these were teachers who maintained an effective 
relationship grounded in the elements of learning. 
We had a total of 126 subjects, and we choose 6 of them 
to conclude our analysis. 
As the focus of research and analysis of the object, we 
use a qualitative research approach. With this approach, we 
tried to understand and to give meaning to the facts and 
identify phenomena as manifested. The definition of the 
initial criteria to delimit the research scenario (courses – 
classes – subjects) was established by the observation of the 
courses' projects that were developed with the help of 
Moodle. The observation and analysis of the environment, 
including the resources of information and communication, 
and the organization of the courses and their projects, 
resulted in the initial criteria of this research. As a result, to 
define the procedures and steps of this investigation, we 
opted for a case study. This qualitative method, utilizes 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-333-9
WEB 2014 : The Second International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

observation as one of the procedures to understand the 
dynamic, living and natural processes in research, allowing 
us to intensely and thoroughly analyze many aspects of a 
phenomenon, real problem or situation [39][40]. So, 
therefore, the attributes are what the study details. 
In order to improve the reliability of the data collected 
during this research, we resorted to a process of 
methodological triangulation. This technique involved the 
use of different instruments for data collection and analysis, 
allowing comparisons of the data. 
Based on the techniques and tools that the case study 
enabled us to have (documents, files, interviews, direct 
observation, participant observation and physical artefacts), 
there was the possibility to expand and complement them 
[40][41]. Besides the analysis of the documents, a 
questionnaires ware electronically sent via Moodle, with the 
objective of identifying events and the perception of the 
subjects of the learning elements in their learning pathway 
on the online courses. 
Interviews were done via Skype and Google Hangout, in 
order to tackle specific questions from the questionnaire. 
Finally, to analyze the results, it was decided to group 
them, based on “units of significance” and reports/testimony 
from the subjects, allowing us to infer knowledge related to 
the conditions of production/acceptance of these very same 
messages. 
IV. 
EVIDENCE GATHERED FROM THE STUDY 
The distribution of valid responses per course, of the 126 
respondents, was set as follows: Public Administration in 
2009, with 65, that corresponds to 52%; Natural Sciences 
and Mathematics 2009, with 32, that corresponds to 26%; 
Pedagogy 2009, with 18, that corresponds to 14%; and the 
Brazil/Japan Pedagogy agreement, with 11, that corresponds 
to 8%. 
We emphasize that the questions were organized into 
three major core meanings, that in general, could be 
understood as: a) identify and analyze the profile of these 
subjects; b) understand how and where they study and what 
they think about online courses; and c) gather teacher and 
tutor perceptions and their relationship to this educational 
process, as well as unveiling the universe of perceptive 
learning elements and the motivations for the development 
of the course. 
Even considering, in terms of percentage, that the 
Pedagogy courses concentrate the highest number of 
females, this is not a reality that is reflected in the 
investigated context. The proof is that when we consider the 
responses of the subjects of the courses of Public 
Administration and Natural Sciences and Mathematics 
totaling 78%, we see that these correspond to the 67% 
female audience and 33% male. 
Considering the context of current digital users and new 
digital users [42][43], we noticed that students who 
participate in the courses are divided into three groups, 
namely: a) 20% aged between 26 and 30 years; b) 19% 
between 31 and 35, and c) 16% between 36 and 40 years. 
These students are characterized as being workers, because 
79% of them work and of this total, 59% do so in the area of 
their chosen course. 
In order to have a good outline of the profile of these 
students, we aimed to verify whether or not they already had 
some experience with online courses, and if so, if this was 
the first undergraduate degree they had taken part in. The 
data showed that in 68% of cases, this was their first 
undergraduate degree, and only 43% of this total 
corresponded to an online course, with prevalence of the use 
of a VLE. 
We also inquired if these students had their own 
computers and access to the Internet, or if they relied 
exclusively on other locations, such as, for example, public 
spaces. It was evidenced that all students had a computer and 
only 5% lacked access to the Internet. 
An interesting fact that caught our attention is the 
phenomenon of Internet cafés that, in Brazil, and no less in 
the state of Mato Grosso, were characterized as prime 
locations for access to the Internet, especially in less 
advantaged social groups [44]. With regards to Internet 
access in the municipalities of the state, relatively far from 
the major centers and the capital, this scenario would suggest 
poor quality of service and low connectivity, considering the 
reality of Mato Grosso, a state of large, expansive territory. 
However, this scenario was not confirmed. About 83% of the 
investigated public had a broadband connection, although at 
a high cost for local standards. 
When choosing a place to study with Internet access, the 
residential area predominated (86%) over the working area 
(9%). It was also noted that the computer lab, on campus, 
represented only 2% of the preference in this scenario, which 
led us to infer that these spaces are used by those who do not 
have an Internet connection in their homes. 
In the second significant finding, we observed that 68% 
of the subjects utilize computer resources strictly to study, 
making the Internet and the virtual environment of the course 
as a priority “local” for studies. Summed up, of the answers 
of these subjects totaling 60%, when asked about what were 
motives that led them to use the Internet, there were two 
responses: free searches for information on the theme of the 
course studied and discussion on the VLE and targeted 
searches, with reference to the bibliography indicated by the 
course materials. Taken together, these responses totaling 
60%. 
The preference for studying on the virtual environment 
prevailed over the other choices. Many pointed out that this 
"space" favors the realization of activities and interactions 
with colleagues on the course. We began to see the 
interactive nature of learning on the learning pathway as 
much as in the aspect of the virtual environment and course 
material, and also in relation to each other, characterizing the 
social dimension of the process. 
For 64% of the interviewees, the choice of a distance 
course, online, is due to the unavailability and flexibility of 
time that is not possible with face-to-face courses. 
In the context of the courses in question, 81% of subjects 
in the study estimated they studied with Moodle 3 to 5 hours 
(56%), and 6 to 10 hours (25%), distributed over a week, 
with almost daily access to the virtual environment. Being 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-333-9
WEB 2014 : The Second International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

directly responsible for one's studies, it is important that the 
student has time, and establishes a work routine to dedicate 
to the course, this being a fundamental part in the conditions 
for success [45]. 
The third significant finding, served both to understand 
the perceptions of teachers and tutors and their relation to the 
educational process, and to unveil the perceptive universe 
about the elements of learning and the motivations for the 
development of the course. 
To assume that the mediation process can incorporate 
interaction between subjects [2], we questioned students 
about when they interacted with the tutors, and what their 
reasons were for doing so. In the responses, it was found that 
the frequency of interaction between students and tutors is 
linked to educational activities to be undertaken in the 
course, however, it is not restricted to this. A contingent of 
56% of students, in addition to having questions about the 
content or activities to perform, highlighted the social factor, 
because, regardless of the activities they must perform, they 
sought interaction with the tutors. 
According to Pallof [45], the relationship established in 
online courses enables us to maintain spaces conducive and 
favorable to the educational process. Although the contents 
of this interaction does not strictly have significant value to 
those that study, the feeling and strengthening of the learning 
community still maintains that they, dare we say, adapt 
themselves in lively and dynamic spaces. 
In regards to interaction, subjects value accompaniment 
on their learning pathway, in this case, the students. It is left 
for teachers and tutors to deliberate about pedagogical 
activities and the development of the course, instructing 
students about the studying procedures. 
Among the answers (70%) to the question “how did the 
interaction between teachers and student occur?”, we found 
that the students interact with the teacher only during face-
to-face meetings (40%) and/or when they have questions 
about the content or activities (30%). With respect to the last 
answer provided, we saw that the tutor may be filling the role 
of teacher and also intermediating in the process of clarifying 
any of the students’ doubts. As a final point on interaction, 
we analyze what happens between classmates. We found that 
59% of interactions occur whenever possible, regardless of 
the demands of the course. Adding up to 35%, the interactive 
relationship is predicated in the classroom's face-to-face 
moments and also when there are discussions about the 
course activities or content. Regarding the motivation to do 
the course, we got the following answers: the necessity to 
obtain a degree and the desire for a better job. Both account 
to 52% of the total responses. In other responses (48%) we 
found the love of learning, the desire to better themselves 
and the opportunity to connect and build relationships with 
others. 
For 58% of them, what makes them remain with the 
course is the fact that they are learning, moved/driven by  the 
relational character and interactive nature established in the 
VLE. 
Based on what has been presented, we identify that 
interaction gives conditions not only to mediation but also to 
interactivity. We also caught a glimpse of the necessity of a 
better understanding of the perceptions related to interaction 
with the courses, especially the ones related to the use of 
Moodle and the materials utilized there. 
Secondly, we observed that the interaction on the course 
is almost entirely (97%), understood as a fundamental and 
contributing element to the process of learning for the 
subjects. Equally the Moodle environment and course 
materials are recognized as interactive allowing learning 
(93%). 
So, the results demonstrate the occurrence of interaction, 
interactivity and mediation, and they are considered by the 
subjects as fundamental in their learning pathway and their 
educational process. 
CONCLUSION 
In conclusion, the use of DICT, especially VLE's, 
requires pedagogical proposals based on interaction, 
interactivity and mediation to have effective learning 
processes. Thus, for the success of the teaching processes, it 
becomes necessary to have these elements which are 
fundamental to learning and determine the learning pathways 
of the students during their training on the VLE online 
courses. With respect to broader generalizations, the idea 
remains that learning is revealed in the dynamics and the 
triad of the aforementioned elements. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Kerckhove, “The Skin of Culture: Investigating the new electronic 
reality,” São Paulo: Annablume, 2009.  
[2] L. S. Vygotsky, “The social education of the mind: the development 
of higher psychological processes,” 6th ed. São Paulo: Martins 
Fontes, 1998. 
[3] E. Schlemmer, “Methodologies for Distance Education in the Context 
of Educating Virtual Learning Communities,” In R. M. Barbosa, 
Virtual Learning Environments. Porto Alegre: Artmed, 2005. 
[4] A. 
Primo, 
“Computer-mediated 
interaction: 
communication, 
cyberculture, cognition,” Porto Alegre: Sulina, 2007. 
[5] M. Silva, “Interactive Classroom,” Rio de Janeiro: Quartet, 2001. 
[6] L. M. A. Santos, “The insertion of an animated conversational agent 
in a virtual learning environment from the theory of cognitive load,” 
[thesis], 2009, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, 
2009. Available at: <http://www.lume.ufrgs.br/handle/10183/19017> 
2014.03. 07. 
[7] R. S. Rabello, “Interaction and autism: use of intelligent agents to 
detect communication deficits in synchronous environments,” 
[thesis], 2010, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, 
2010. Available at: <http://www.lume.ufrgs.br/handle/10183/26482> 
2014.03. 07. 
[8] P. Norvig and S. Russell, “Artificial Intelligence”. São Paulo: 
Campus, 2004. 
[9] R. B. Heller, M. Procter, D. Mah, L. Jewell and B. Cheung, Freudbot: 
An investigation of chatbot technology in distance education. 
Proceedings of the World Conference on Multimedia, Hypermedia 
and Telecommunications, 2005. 
[10] P. Bii, Chatbot technology: A possible means of unlocking student 
potential to learn how to learn. In: Educational Research (ISSN: 
2141-5161) vol. 4(2). February 2013, pp. 218-221. 
[11] M. Wooldridge, An Introduction to Multi-Agent Systems, John Wiley 
& Sons, Ltd, 2002. 
[12] G. G. Hornink, “Online Mapping: IT methods at school with teachers 
who design expertise through out education,” [thesis], 2010, State 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-333-9
WEB 2014 : The Second International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

University 
of 
Campinas, 
Campinas, 
2010. 
Available 
at: 
<http://www.bibliotecadigital.unicamp.br/document/?view=00078288
6> 2014.03. 07. 
[13] G. Stahl, T. Koschmann, and D. Suthers, Computer-supported 
collaborative learning: An historical perspective. In: SAWYER, R. K. 
(Ed.). Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. Cambridge. 
2006. pp. 409-426. 
[14] M. Compiani and R. P. Schnetzler, Categories of interaction and 
discourse between teacher and students. A case study in geosciences. 
In: Banet, E. e and Pro, A. (Coord.): Investigation and innovation in 
teaching of the sciences, v.1, Murcia: University of Murcia, 1998. 
[15] P. Dias, E-moderation and mediation in collaborative learning 
communities. Education, Training & Technologies, Portugal; vol.1, 
no.1, 2008, pp. 4-10. 
[16] M. Axt, M. T. Longhi, O. Bastos Filho, P. D. Silveira, and L. N. 
Guimarães, Maga Vitta: Conversational Ecological Agent in an 
Interactive Collective Construction Environment for Basic Education. 
In: R. M. Viccari , P . J. Jaques, and R. Verdin (Org.). Agent-based 
tutoring systems by cognitive and affective modeling, Hershey, PA, 
USA: Information Science Publishing (IGI Global). 2008. pp. 73-95. 
[17] F. S. N. Góes, “Development and evaluation of virtual object 
interactive learning on diagnostic reasoning in applied nursing to 
newborn preterms,” [thesis], 2010, Nursing School of Ribeirão Preto, 
University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, 2010. Available at: 
<http://www.teses.usp.br/teses/disponiveis/22/22133/tde-04082010-
095024/> 2014.03. 07. 
[18] M. E. K. L. Santos and L. H. Amaral, Evaluation of virtual learning 
objects in the teaching of mathematics. REnCiMa, v. 3, no. 2, jul/dez 
2012, pp. 83-93. 
[19] E. L. Silva, “The educational objects, metadata repositories and in the 
information society”. Ci. Inf., Brasília, v. 39, no. 3, 2010, pp.93-104. 
[20] R. Schibeci, D. Lake, R. Phillips, K. Lowe, R. Cummings, and E. 
Miller, Evaluating the use of learning objects in Australian and New 
Zealand schools. Computers & Education, New York, 2008, pp. 
271—283. 
[21] R. Marcelino, “Virtual learning environment integrated 3D virtual 
world and remote experiment applied to the theme of the resistance of 
materials,” [thesis], 2010, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, 
Porto 
Alegre, 
2010. 
Available 
at: 
<http://www.lume.ufrgs.br/handle/10183/27926> 2014.03. 07. 
[22] S. Ullrich, H. Prendinger, and M. Ishizuka, MPML3D: agent 
authoring language for virtual worlds. ACM. Yokohama, Japan. 
2008, 
pp. 
134-137. 
Available 
at: 
<http://www.researchgate.net/publication/220982464_MPML3D_age
nt_authoring_language_for_virtual_worlds/file/32bfe50d08c9f31a51.
pdf> 2014.03. 07. 
[23] E. 
Schlemmer, 
D. 
Trein; 
and 
C. 
Oliveira, 
The 
Metaverse:Telepresence 
in 
3D 
Avatar-Driven 
Digital-Virtual 
Worlds.@tic. Revista d’innovació educativa. (no 2). 2009. 
[24] D. Livingstone, and J. Kemp, Integrating Web-Based and 3D 
Learning Environments–Second Life Meets Moodle. In: Upagrade 
Magazine, vol. 9, no. 3, 2008, pp. 8–14. 
[25] J. S. Costa, “Collective authorship in a virtual environment from the 
perspective of the training of teachers in the English language,” 
[thesis], 2008, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, 
2008. Available at: <http://www.lume.ufrgs.br/handle/10183/15583> 
2014.03. 07. 
[26] L. F. Máximo, “The effectiveness of computerised feedback on the 
autoregulation of distance learning courses: a case study in the area of 
computing,” [thesis], 2009, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, 
Porto 
Alegre, 
2009. 
Available 
at: 
<http://www.lume.ufrgs.br/handle/10183/17432> 2014.03. 07. 
[27] S. H. S. Koch, M. C. P. Maciel, and L. M. Passerino, The mediation 
in distance learning: possibilities of mapping the signs. Proceedings 
of 9 th WCCE 2009, Bento Gonçalves, Brasil, 27-31 July 2009. pp. 
01-12. 
[28] B. F. T. Azevedo, “Minerafórum: a resource to support qualitative 
analysis in discussion forums,” [thesis], 2011, Federal University of 
Rio 
Grande 
do 
Sul, 
Porto 
Alegre, 
2011. 
Available 
at: 
<http://www.lume.ufrgs.br/handle/10183/49337> 2014.03. 07. 
[29] M. T. Longhi, “Mapping affective aspects in a virtual learning 
environment,” [thesis], 2011, UFRGS, Porto Alegre, 2011. Available 
at: <http://www.lume.ufrgs.br/handle/10183/39578> 2014.03. 07. 
[30] M. P. Gozzi, “Teaching mediation online in postgraduate courses: 
specialization in engineering,” [ thesis ], 2011, Faculty of Education, 
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, 2011. Available at: 
<http://www.teses.usp.br/teses/disponiveis/48/48134/tde-20012012-
091452/> 2014.03. 07. 
[31] C. E. P. Severo, L. M. Passerino, and J. V. Lima, E-mediation: a 
proposal of a miner tool for virtual learning environment. In: IFIP 
World Conference on Computers in Education, 2009, Bento 
Gonçalves. Technology and Education for a Better World. Porto 
Alegre: WCCE, 2009. pp. 233-236. 
[32] Moodle. Available at: <http://www.moodle.org> 2014.03.17. 
[33] M. Taborda, “Virtual Learning Environments in Higher Education: 
from Theory to Practice,” 2007 Curitiba: Annals of the event. 
Curitiba: 
ABED, 
April, 
2007, 
pp. 
1-10. 
Available 
at: 
<http://www.abed.org.br/congresso2007/tc/52200744828PM.pdf> 
2014.03. 07. 
[34] .M. L. Belloni, “Distance education,” 3rd ed. Campinas: Authors 
Associates, 1999.    34 
[35] A. Primo, “Mutual and reactive interaction: a study proposal,” Journal 
of Famecos, n. 12, p. 81-92, June, 2000.    33 
[36] L. do Valle and E. D. B. Bohadana, “Interaction and interactivity: 
revisiting online distance education,” Educ. Soc. [online]. 2012, 
vol.33, no.121, pp. 973-984. ISSN 0101-7330. 
[37] P. A. Lévy, “The emergency of cyberspace and cultural changes,” 
[lecture at the Workshop Festival of Arts and Culture, Municipality of 
Porto 
Alegre 
], 
October 
1994. 
Available 
at: 
<http://www.caosmose.net/pierrelevy/aemergen.html> 2014.03. 07. 
[38] R. C. Freitas and M. de A. Dutra, “Usability and Interactivity in 
Online Courses for Web Systems,” in the Brazilian Journal of IT in 
Education. vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 48-58, May/August 2009. Available at: 
<http://www.br-ie.org/pub/index.php/rbie/article/viewFile/98/85> 
2014.03. 07. 
[39] R. E. Stake, “Investigation with Case Studies,” 5th ed. Madrid: Ed. 
Morata, 2010. 
[40] R. E. Stake, “Qualitative research: studying how things work,” 
Transl.K. Reis, Technical Rev.: N. Jacks. Porto Alegre: Peso, 2011. 
[41] R. K. Yin, “Case Study: Planning and Methods,” Transl. D. Grassi. 
3rd ed. Porto Alegre: Bookman, 2005. 
[42] J. Palfrey and U. Gasser, “Born in the digital age: Understanding the 
first generation of digital natives,” Porto Alegre: Artmed, 2011. 
[43] M. Prensky, “Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants”. Available at: 
<http://www.marcprensky.com/writing/Prensky%20-
%20Digital%20Natives,%20Digital%20Immigrants%20-
%20Part1.pdf> 2014.03. 07. 
[44] R. Mauricio, “Without Lan houses, the digital inclusion fails in 
Brazil,” Available at: <http://www.abcid.org.br/sem-lan-houses-
inclusao-digital-falha-no-brasil> 2014.03. 07. 
[45] R. M. Pallof, and K. Pratt, “The virtual student: a guide to working 
with students online,” Porto Alegre: Artmed, 2004.   
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-333-9
WEB 2014 : The Second International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

