Impact of Message’s Length over Likes, Comments and Shares  
The Mexican Universities Case 
 
Gabriel Valerio, Natalia Herrera, Dagoberto Herrera 
Center for Knowledge Systems 
Tecnológico de Monterrey 
Monterrey, NL., México 
gvalerio@itesm.mx, a00808904@itesm.mx, 
a00808906@itesm.mx 
 
 
María del Carmen Rodríguez-Martínez 
Faculty of Health Sciences  
University of Malaga 
Málaga, Spain  
marrodmar@uma.es 
 
 
Abstract—In a society inundated by information, the ability of 
capturing other´s attention is a valuable resource. Social 
media, particularly Facebook, are important spaces to 
exchange information between organizations and their 
followers. Universities have been leaders in the social media 
usage for this goal.  Thus, the objective of this research was to 
explore the impact that text message length could have relating 
the amount of likes, comments and shares that a post receive. 
A quantitative analysis was made with 31,590 posts from 28 
universities and 1,270,621 likes, 80,620 comments and 252,399 
shares generated. Research results allow concluding that the 
most successful messages are short and that the message length 
can increase if supported by another media. 
Keywords-Facebook 
fan 
pages 
publications; 
attention 
economy;  message’s length. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
We live in a society drowned in information. We are 
exposed to an incredible amount of information that bombs 
our brain through our senses. Economist Herber Simon 
points out that the richness of information creates poorness 
of attention [1], and this is due to the fact that persons have a 
limited capacity, because of their sensorial organs, to process 
signals and only those sufficiently intense are finally 
perceived [2].  This situation has become more evident 
nowadays because millions of persons use the Web to share 
their needs, discoveries and personal interests, phenomenon 
known as crowdsourcing [3], while at the same time content 
suppliers fiercely compete for the persons’ attention with the 
goal of orienting attention towards their web sites and sell 
products and services [2]. 
Attention is a limited resource that we should 
administrate the best way possible. This applies to those 
professors in their classrooms, enterprises in their marketing 
strategies and any other who wants to capture others 
attention. Every day different information suppliers (parents, 
professors, enterprises, governments and so on) have a battle 
to capture the attention of their receptors. A message must 
include the necessary elements that enable capturing the 
attention before others. One of those key ingredients is 
without doubt the ability of perceiving the meaning of the 
message with the least effort and in the shortest possible 
time. So much information is available to be consulted that 
we can do not have the means to spend too much time and 
effort checking the message. Hence, the characters amount 
included on messages is important.   
Facebook, Twitter and other social networks have turned 
into propitious spaces where companies can transmit 
information to their current and potential clients. For many 
companies, online social networks are important tools for 
marketing. In order to be in the mind of their consumers, the 
main challenge is to identify the correct mix of promotional 
elements like advertising, sales promotion, public relations 
and publicity [4] [5]. 
However, the transmission of the message does not 
assure the reception of itself. The company can make the 
effort of sending valuable information to their clients, but if 
they are not receptive to such information, it will never have 
the expected effect on the company. While it is difficult for a 
company to certainly know how many followers of their 
social networks are impacted by their messages, there are 
variables that can help to provide an idea of such impact. The 
concept of engagement, widely addressed in the research of 
social networks impact in businesses, refers to the set of 
reactions that a follower experiences regarding a received 
message. Typically, these reactions include the amount of 
comments received, the amount of acceptance declarations (I 
like) and the number of times the message gets to be shared.  
Probably, due to the amount of university students using 
social networks, one of the areas that have been incorporated 
into the use of social networks as a communication tool with 
stakeholders is education, particularly in the case of 
universities.  
Online social networks have been representing a new 
alternative to communicate news, solving doubts, share small 
lessons, and other actions related to keeping a good relation 
between faculty and students [6][7][8]. 
Thus, the objective of this research was to explore the 
impact that text message length, generated by Facebook Fan 
pages administrators of Mexican universities, could have on 
the amount of likes, comments and shares that they produce. 
This paper has the following structure: 1) Method, where 
subjects, recollection data procedure and analysis method are 
described; 2) Results, where the finding from the data 
recollection is presented, and 3) Conclusions, where the 
implications of the results are proposed. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-333-9
WEB 2014 : The Second International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

II. 
METHOD 
When obtaining the sample research, the QS Latin 
American University Ranking [9] was analyzed. In it are 
registered 46 Mexican universities. From the 46 available 
universities, 28 were selected fulfilling the following criteria: 
a) the university must have a Facebook fan page; b) the fan 
page must be official and global (universities with only 
multiple local fan pages and no global fan page were 
discarded); c) the fan page must be at least 1 year old (this to 
guarantee that the fan groups are relatively consolidated) 
and; d) the fan page must not register inactivity greater than 
6 months during the observation period (April 30th, 2012 to 
April 30th, 2013). 
Once the sample was chosen, information was gathered. 
Information gathering was aided by Facebook Query 
Language (FQL), a consulting language that allows the 
extraction of users’ public data of Facebook through an 
interface that resembles the one of Structured Query 
Language (SQL). From it, 31,590 contents were collected. 
Such contents generated 1,270,621 likes, 80,620 comments 
and were shared 252,399 times. These were the total of data 
used to perform a statistical analysis.  
For specific effects of data analysis, a quantitative 
methodology in which the dependent variables correspond to 
the number of: likes, comments and shares associated to an 
engagement level was implemented; the independent 
variable is the text length quantified in the amount of 
characters found in the broadcasted messages.  
The use of a conventional statistical test was excluded 
since the number of likes, comments and shares have a 
highly positive skewed distribution.  
 
III. 
RESULTS 
Results obtained after implementing the previously 
mentioned methodology are shown as follows. With the aim 
of exploring if the impact of the text message length 
regarding the different variables that typically compose 
engagement (likes, comments and shares) is different to that 
using other media (images, photos, videos, links) in the 
message, results analyzing entries implementing only text 
and entries using other type of media are displayed. The 
following graphs represent with dark gray circles the reaction 
proportions (likes, comments or shares) that an entry 
receives when having only text and with light gray circles 
those entries which, besides text, use other multimedia. To 
facilitate the lecture, the X axe scale is logarithmic.  
 
Figure 1 helps to perceive the impact of the text length 
regarding the amount of likes:  
 
The majority of entries (99%), both those using text 
and other media and those with only text, record less 
than 13.2 comments per 1000 fans.  
 
A small group of entries (1%) distinguishes from 
others due to the amount of comments they 
registered (between 13.2 and 170.8 per 1000 fans 
with a mean of 24.7 comments). This small group 
has a media length of 109.4 characters. 
 
Most (78.2%) of the distinguished entries implement 
other media besides text. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The impact of the text length regarding the amount of likes 
 
Figure 2 helps to perceive the impact of the text length 
regarding the amount of comments: 
 
 
The majority of entries (99%), both those using text 
and other media and those with only text, record less 
than 1.49 comments per 1000 fans.  
 
A small group of entries (1%) distinguishes from 
others due to the amount of comments they 
registered (between 1.49 and 170.5 per 1000 fans 
with a mean of 3.5 comments). This small group has 
a media length of 221.5 characters. 
 
Most (64.7%) of the distinguished entries implement 
other media besides text. 
 
 
Figure 2.  The impact of the text length regarding the amount of comments 
 
Figure 3 helps to perceive the impact of the text length 
regarding the number of shares:  
 
The majority of entries (99%), both those using text 
and other media and those with only text, record less 
than 3.23 shares per 1000 fans.  
 
However, 
a 
small 
group 
of 
entries 
(1%) 
distinguishes from others due to the amount of 
shares they registered (between 3.23 and 366.11 per 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-333-9
WEB 2014 : The Second International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

1000 fans with a mean of 8.3 shares). This small 
group has a media length of 192.7 characters. 
 
Most (94.6%) of the distinguished entries implement 
other media besides text. 
 
 
Figure 3.  The impact of the text length regarding the number of shares 
As we can see, all the three different kinds of reactions 
(likes, comments and shares) have more possibility to be 
successful when the message length is short. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
With the gathered results, it can be concluded that entries 
with a greater text length (more than 1,000 characters) are 
not successful in terms of amount of likes, comments and 
shares they receive. However, it is not concluded that all 
short text messages will have a high impact. These 
conclusions resemble those found in the Track Social 
company research [9] regarding the company fan pages in 
different industries. 
While it cannot be concluded that an inverse correlation 
between message length and the amount of likes, comments 
and shares exists, it can be concluded that messages with a 
higher amount of reactions relatively include fewer 
characters. Moreover, it can be concluded that the set of the 
most successful entries (1%), messages using text and other 
media, tend to be more shared; also, messages implementing 
only text are more commented.  
This opens that door to conclude two things: short 
messages are the most successful and the text length can be 
increased if accompanied by any other type of media.  
The results of this research are important because they 
enable the opportunity to recommend university community 
managers to moderate the amount of characters to be used in 
their entries. While the results agree in many ways to those 
found in [9], there are not enough elements to assure that this 
behavior will be obtained in other fields. It is assumed that 
since the followers of university fan pages are young adults. 
This emphasizes the need of working with short messages 
inside social networks. It seems that the economy of 
attention, term coined more than 40 years ago, is more 
present that ever and the message length can be a key factor. 
It is important to say that the Fan Page administrators can 
erase their publications in any moment. In fact, numbers 
analyzed could have a variation if, for example, 
administrators erase messages that could have an adverse 
effect.  
Could happen that a message has many reactions, but 
most of them are negatives. That’s why is important to note 
that, in this research, the term “successful” was used just in 
terms of the number of reactions, but not in terms of the 
sentiments transmitted. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Simon, H.A. “Designing organizations for an information-rich 
world”, 
in 
(M. 
Greenberger, 
ed.), 
Computers, 
Communications, and the Public Interest, pp. 38–52, 
Baltimore: John Hopkins Press, 1971. 
[2] Falkinger, J. “Limited Attention as a Scarce Resource in 
Information-Rich Economies”. Economic Journal, 118(532), 
2008, pp. 1596-1620. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0297.2008.02182. 
[3] Huberman, B. “Social Computing and the Attention 
Economy”. Journal Of Statistical Physics, 151(1-2), 2012, pp. 
329-339. 
[4] Weinberg, B.D., Pehlivan, E., Social Spending: Managing the 
Social Media Mix. Business Horizons 54(1), 2011, pp. 275-
282. 
[5] Mangold, W.G., & Foulds, D.J., “Social media: The new 
hybrid element of the promotion mix”. Business Horizons, 
52(4), 2009, pp. 357-365. 
[6] De Haro, J.J. (2010), Redes sociales para la educación. 
Madrid: Anaya Multimedia, 2010. 
[7] Meso, K.,  Pérez, J. A. y Mendiguren, T. (2011), “The 
implementation of social networking in higher education 
college, vol. 12, 2011, pp. 137-155. [retrieved: march, 2014] 
from: 
http://iesgtballester.juntaextremadura.net/web/profesores/tejue
lo/vinculos/articulos/r12/07.pdf 
[8] Vivar-Zurita, H., García-García, A., Abuín-Vences, N., 
Vinader-Segura, R., Núñez-Gómez, P., y Martín-Pérez, M.A 
(2012). “Innovation in higher education: Facebook as a 
teaching tool”. Revista de Comunicación Vivat Academia, 
117, 
530-544. 
[retrieved: 
march, 
2014] 
from 
http://www.ucm.es/info/vivataca/numeros/n117E/PDFs/Vario
s17.pdf 
[9] Top Universities. “QS Latin American University Rankings - 
2012.”. 
[retrieved: 
march, 
2014] 
from 
http://www.topuniversities.com/university-rankings/latin-
american-university-rankings/2012. 
[10] Track Social.  “Optimizing Facebook Engagement – Part 3: 
The Effect Of Post Length.” [retrieved: march, 2014], from 
http://tracksocial.com/blog/2012/06/optimizing-facebook-
engagement-part-3-the-effect-of-post-length/  
 
 
 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-333-9
WEB 2014 : The Second International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

