SmartSocialMarket: A Social Commerce Architecture
Luca Salvatori∗ and Fausto Marcantoni∗
∗University of Camerino, 62032 Camerino, Italy
Email: {luca.salvatori,fausto.marcantoni}@unicam.it
Abstract—The evolution of the approach users have with the
World Wide Web - particularly towards social media - has led
to the need of e-commerce platforms aimed at user interaction.
Offering a service focussing only on online shopping is no
longer satisfactory. In order to provide a successful user-seller
interaction, further Web 2.0 tools need to be offered. This
development of electronic shopping - which provides new business
opportunities - is called social commerce. This paper aims at
describing the SmartSocialMarket architecture, which is based
on e-commerce components and, at an upper level, on social
components. Social components allow for the provision of tools
that can improve the user interaction within the platform, and
can also offer new market opportunities to sellers.
Keywords–Social commerce, Collaborative commerce, Collabo-
rative shopping, Social shopping
I.
INTRODUCTION
Social media - also called consumer-generated media -
play a key role in Web 2.0. These internet applications can
be virtual communities, blogs, wikis, photo and video shar-
ing, networking sites, social bookmarking and other social
applications [1]. In particular, the use of social networking
websites has recently increased signiﬁcantly. This tendency
seems not to be going to stop any time soon, and in fact, it will
improve over time [2]. On a daily basis, users communicate
with their friends and share information on social networking
platforms such as MySpace, Facebook and YouTube [3][4].
Practically, consumers turn into active content writers starting
from being clients with no chance of interaction [5]. Such
social activities lead to the creation of stable trust relationships
among stakeholders, which, according to a wide number of
researchers, could guarantee an increase of the economical
power of business transactions [6][7]. This phenomenon, which
can be considered relatively new, has been developing over
time. Many researchers are focussing on it, as it is able to
offer numerous research opportunities, both theoretical and
practical.
The name “social commerce” comes from the combination
of “social networking” and “e-commerce”. Users can carry out
business transactions or simply browse for selling/purchasing
opportunities within a highly collaborative and social envi-
ronment. More in detail, users can generate contents such as
reports, ratings, photos and videos to be shared with others
[8][9]. Both sellers and purchasers can take advantage of this
new business method. Sellers improve their income thanks to
the advice and suggestions coming from purchasers, which
help companies know their customers’ taste about brands
and products of their interest [10]. At the same time, these
opinions can attract new potential buyers. Through this shared
information, customers are more aware of the quality and
features of the products they like. This ensures they have more
power within the whole business interaction.
The aim of this study is describing social commerce
architecture.
This paper has the following structure: Section 2 introduces
the concept of social commerce; Section 3 shows the architec-
ture of social commerce and analyses the modules that build
it; Section 4 shows the SmartSocialMarket in practice; Section
5 draws the conclusion of this work.
II.
BRIEF VIEW OF THE SUBJECT
Social commerce can be deﬁned as internet-driven and
social media-mediated business. This fosters the word of
mouth through Web 2.0 and thus the exchange of information,
opinions and ratings between purchasers and sellers.
This deﬁnition derives from studies made by many re-
searchers who have provided different other deﬁnitions and
insights on this phenomenon themselves.
Dennison deﬁnes social commerce as word of mouth
applied to e-commerce [11].
A signiﬁcant number of researchers shares a wider deﬁ-
nition of social commerce. It is described as a social media-
mediated form of trade where a more creative and collaborative
approach is used by both sellers and purchasers [12][13]. In
other words, social commerce is considered to be the execution
of business transactions through social media and Web 2.0
in general [14]. Therefore, social commerce consists in the
evolution of e-commerce and in the use of social media as
tools to support purchasers during the different stages of the
purchasing process.
Other professionals provide a deﬁnition of social commerce
that comes from the concept of social network. These represent
social commerce as the whole of collaboration and shopping
activities carried out by customers in an environment which is
similar to the social network one [15][16].
Finally, starting from the seller point of view, other re-
searchers describe social commerce as a collaboration among
those, which ensures they gain money out of it [17][18].
Despite the different deﬁnitions of social commerce pro-
vided, researchers agree on deﬁning the main difference
between social commerce and e-commerce. Whereas in e-
commerce users mainly carry out individual activities that
keep them isolated and not connected to the community, social
commerce customers interact with it thanks to the use of the
services and tools provided. For example, they can express
their preferences and opinions, and also get to know the
other community members’. As Huang and Benyoucef suggest,
implementing such kind of commerce leads to the analysis of
many disciplines, such as marketing, computer science, soci-
ology and psychology [19]. With regards to marketing, social
commerce represents the tendency to implement marketing
tools during the online trading stages. These tools inﬂuence the
customers’ purchasing decisions [20]. Technically speaking,
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-407-7
WEB 2015 : The Third International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

social commerce is described as the implementation of tools
as referral schemes, purchasing groups and social wish lists to
support business activities [12][21].
About the social relevance of social commerce and its psy-
chological component, the implementation of this technology
encourages users to actively enter the Web community so that
they are inﬂuenced by relevant contents shared by other users.
These entail shop reliability and product quality [22][23].
III.
SMARTSOCIALMARKET ARCHITECTURE
A. Architecture description
The SmartSocialMarket architecture is a modular type
architecture (Figure 1), whose system is divided into two
macro components: the e-commerce management and the
social relationship management.
Figure 1. SmartSocialMarket Architecture
The ﬁrst represents the e-commerce basic and usual compo-
nents about the system itself, whereas the social management
is the advanced part. This enables the management of the
customer-customer and customer-seller social interaction.
This second component will be described thoroughly, as
it represents an innovative architecture area. It entails all the
management components of the social relations among e-
commerce customers. Thanks to such functionalities, users
can interface with other consumers so to create some sort
of community. The exchange of information creates social
presence in the community and trust relationships that convince
users to buy more. This is because such purchases are believed
to be safer in terms of shop and product trustworthiness.
Moreover, the recommendation system component allows to
provide users with advice tailored to their future purchases via
dedicated algorithms. This advice takes into account the user’s
relationships with other consumers and their link to products.
Beside these two macro components, other two core areas are
represented by the monitoring and login management, which
embrace both the business and social parts of the architecture.
At an inferior layer we ﬁnd the legacy system, which
consist of the already existing company infrastructure and in-
formation about products and customers, represents an inferior
level of the structure.
More in detail, the two macro components present several
parts. The e-commerce management component is composed
by the catalogue, cart, discount, customer, seller, checkout,
order, shipping and payment management. The social manage-
ment component consists of social wish-list, recommendation
system, transaction ratings, product reviews and communica-
tion management.
B. Analysis of the individual components
The most important stakeholders who interact with the
platform are the customer and the seller.
The customer takes advantage of all the potential social and
purchasing functions that the platform provides, whereas the
seller represents an active user who is able to take advantage
of the all potential dealer features. This last stakeholder is
interested in the sale process in order to increase their proﬁts
and visibility; they also need to increase their customers
knowledge in order to gather new products. Some architecture
components regard the customer activities, others are related
to the seller and others to both.
As concerns the e-commerce macro component, it em-
braces the catalogue, customer, seller, cart, checkout, order,
discount and shipping and payment management.
The catalogue management component, which applies to
both the customer and the seller, has to organise the activities
related to the products and categories. It allows the seller to
insert and update new categories in the system and relate the
products to these features: price, title and description. This
component also manages the product stock. With regards to the
customer side, the catalogue management component allows
them to view the product information and its features. This
component is linked to the discount management component
- because a discount might be applied to a product or to a
category - and to order management components in order to
provide the details of other products the customer ordered.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that this component is synced
with the legacy system so that the company and the social
commerce data are aligned.
The customer management component has to manage the
commerce accounts, the accounts group, the customer data and
its shipping addresses. In particular, the commerce accounts
consist of the customers e-mail, username and password; the
accounts group consist of a list of accounts which have been
created for a particular aim, as making the account easier to be
found or managing discounts in a quicker way. The customer
data are usually their name, last name, ﬁscal code, phone
number and residence address. Finally, about the shipping
addresses, this component has to allow the customer to insert,
delete and update their address. Another task of this component
consists in showing the customer information to the seller who,
in this way, gains a total view about them.
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-407-7
WEB 2015 : The Third International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

The customer management component is linked to the
checkout and order management components to which it
provides the customer addresse and commerce account in-
formation. It also interfaces with the discount management
component because a discount can be applied to a customer
or to a group of them. Finally, it is connected with the login
management component in order to transmit the customer login
data.
Another important task is that it syncs the information
with the legacy system which consist in the already existing
company customer, in order to manage the customer both
ofﬂine and online.
The seller management component organises the accounts
of sellers who can work in the system using a seller proﬁle.
This component links with the login management component
in order to transmit the seller login data.
As regards the cart management component, it allows
the customer to add products in the basket, update the already
ordered quantity and delete an item from the user cart. This
component is linked to the catalogue management component.
As a matter of fact, it has to know some product information
too, for example, their stock level or their base price. It
also interfaces with the discount component to calculate that
speciﬁc product discounted price. Finally, this component has
to give the cart information to the checkout component so that
this knows what products have been ordered by the customer.
The checkout management component organises all the
customer order conﬁgurations. Some tasks of this component
regard the managing of the shipping and payment type, the
customer address where the ordered products are to be shipped
and the billing address. This component is linked to the
customer management component, from which it is possible
to retrieve the customer information, and the cart management
component, in order to know what the products ordered by
the customer are. In addition, it interfaces with the order
management component in order to communicate when an
order is conﬁrmed. Finally, it connects with the payment and
shipment management components to know the payment and
shipment type and the price related to the order.
The order management component allows sellers to or-
ganise the already conﬁrmed orders. Sellers can view and
modify the details that concern the order status, the ordered
products, the shipment and payment methods, the customer
data and the address where to ship the items and the billing
address as well. In order to obtain these details, this component
has to interact with the catalogue, shipment and payment and
customer management components. This component is also
linked to the checkout management component because it
needs to know when a customer conﬁrms an order to save
it in the order list. Finally, it connects to the transaction rating
management component because the consumer can express a
personal opinion and give a vote about their conﬁrmed order.
The discount management component allows sellers to
organise the discount that can be applied to a particular product
or to a speciﬁc product category; on the other hand, it can be
associated to a customer or to a set of them. The discount
can be applied in percentage or as amount. This component
is linked to catalogue management component, because a
discount can be applied to a product or to a category, and it
interfaces with the customer management component because
a discount can be applied to a customer or to a group of
them. Finally, it is important that the discount management
component can sync its data with the legacy system data in
order to guarantee the same discount both in ofﬂine and online
shopping.
At the end of the process, the shipping and payment
management component organises all data related to the
shipping and payment method. The seller can set the shipping
type and price that can vary according to the order destination
country, weight, price or size. This component interfaces with
the checkout management component to provide it with infor-
mation on the payment and shipment type and price related
to the order. It also interfaces with the order management
component to provide the information concerning the order
shipping and payment.
With regards to the social commerce macro component,
it embraces the social wish-lists, the recommendation system,
the product reviews, the transaction ratings, and the commu-
nication management.
About the social wish-list management, the aim of this
component is to organise all customer and seller activities
related to the wish-list in the social context. It allows the
customer to manage particular products lists called wish-lists.
More in detail, the customer can add or remove a wish-list
where the desired products can be added or removed. Wish-
lists can be used for the customer’s own tracking of their
desired products, but at the same time, they can be shared with
other purchasers, being those also searchable and accessible
to any user of the platform. Furthermore, sellers can view the
customer social wish-lists and monitor their preferences. This
component is linked to the catalogue management component,
because it needs the product details in order to add them to the
social wish-list, and to the recommendation system component
in order to give it the desired products list to inﬂuence the
creation of product recommendations.
The recommendation system management is composed
by two activities: data collection and data extraction. The
aim of the ﬁrst activity is to collect the relationship between
customer and customer, and between customer and item.
Furthermore, the seller can decide what degree of priority
to give to a product in order to inﬂuence the algorithm
that generates the recommendation. Then, during the data
extraction phase, this component selects some items in order
to meet the customer tastes and suggests them to buy these
products. In order to generate advice, the recommendation
system uses sentiment analysis algorithms so that it can
interpret comments left by consumers and guess if they are
satisﬁed or not with a given product (polarity classiﬁcation).
The recommendation system management interfaces with the
social wish-list, products review, chat and order management
in order to extract the customer data related to their tastes
and preferences. In addition, this component interfaces with
the newsletter management component in order to send the
product to be suggested.
About the product review management component, its
aim is to allow customers to write reviews based on a 5-star
scale and related to a particular product. In this way, user
create a so called “usergenerated content”. Another task of
this component is to allow customers to read reviews writ-
ten by other purchasers. The reviews represent an important
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-407-7
WEB 2015 : The Third International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

tool because they are capable of exerting inﬂuence on other
consumers in their purchasing decisions. This component is
linked to the recommendation system component in order to
give it information on the user preferences,which are useful to
generate product suggestions. It also interfaces with catalogue
and customer management components because it needs to
know who the customer who created the review is and to what
products the review is associated.
The transaction rating component allows customers to
generate reviews and vote about a shopping transaction. In this
way, customers can express their personal views about seller
reliability, shipment velocity, payment safety and product qual-
ity. Customer reviews are useful to encourage other shoppers
to buy on the social commerce platforms. It also allows sellers
to inspect customer reviews in order to accept or reject them as
purchasers. Moreover, it allows sellers to view the transaction
ratings written by consumers in order know what the consumer
satisfaction rate towards social commerce is. This component
is linked to the order management component because when
the customer inserts a personal opinion and votes, they have
to relate it to a speciﬁc order.
The last social commerce management component is the
communication. The aim of this component is facilitating
information sharing among customers and sellers during the
online purchasing activity, making it similar to a joint (ofﬂine)
shopping trip to a shop or a shopping centre. In this way,
customers can communicate regarding product proﬁles, ask
suggestions, exchange opinions, compare experiences with
others and ﬁnd the desired products more efﬁciently.
In addition it organise all seller and customer activities
related to sending marketing emails. Practically, it allows
customers to sign in the mailing list and allows sellers to
manually insert new customers in it. Thanks to this component
sellers can also create a new marketing email and send it
to all contacts in their mailing list. In particular, sellers can
communicate with customers about new discounts, special
sales or the arrival of new products. About chat management,
this component links to the customer management component
because the consumer needs to know what the other available
clients are, in order to use the chat tool. As regards the newslet-
ter, this component is linked to the catalogue management
component because it allows sellers to automatically insert
the product details and their related Web pages in the email.
It also interfaces with the discount management component,
in order to know what product are discounted, and with the
recommendation management component in order to know
what products the email alerts need to suggest.
As mentioned above, beside these two macro components,
there are two independent elements: the login management
component and the monitoring component.
The login management component allows users to au-
thenticate into the system inserting their own username and
password. After a successful authentication, they can access
as “customer” or “seller” and perform only the operations that
have been enabled for their relevant proﬁle. If the authentica-
tion fails, the system informs the user with a warning message
containing an error description, and allows them to insert their
credentials again. This component links to customer and seller
management components in order to receive the customer’s
login details and the seller’s data. The authentication step is
required for the customer to conﬁrm the order, to view the
conﬁrmed order list, to use the chat, to submit a transaction
rating and a product review and to manage the social wish-
list, therefore this component is linked to the components
that provide such services. Regarding the seller, the login is
a fundamental step in order to perform almost all adminis-
trative tasks: managing other sellers, customers, catalogues,
discounts, newsletters, shipping and payment methods, orders,
chat, transaction ratings, recommendation system, social wish-
list and performing monitoring tasks.
About the monitoring component, it represents the main
component of the infrastructure that is related to the seller
stakeholder. It allows the seller to monitor the customer
preferences and needs. This activity makes the seller aware
of their potential customers and potential needs, predicting
the market trends and maintaining a valuable relationship with
them. This component is essential for the trust infrastructure,
as it ensure transparency and safety. Social commerce and
social networking websites are frequently exposed to social
engineering attacks. Therefore, activities such as disclosing
conﬁdential and sensitive information on publicly accessible
or even internally shared workspaces may end up in security
breaches and invasion of privacy. This component links to
almost all other social commerce and e-commerce components,
because it is used to supervise the social commerce activities.
IV.
SMARTSOCIALMARKET IN PRACTICE
The graph in Figure 2 represents the activity diagrams
explaining the above described architecture. The grey back-
ground boxes show the social activities, while the white
background ones show activities that are linked to ordinary
business operations.
Following the ﬂow of operations conducted by a said user
within social commerce is made possible by referring to this
graph. Such social commerce has been implemented according
to the architectural features of SmartSocialMarket.
At the beginning of their operations, users can view com-
ments and ratings given by other customers who have already
purchased goods through social commerce. Understanding how
inﬂuential the meaning of this information can be on the path
customers are walking is a key element. This function is carried
out by the transaction rating management component of the
architecture. Users can choose to view a category of products
managed by the catalogue management component or a list of
products supplied by the recommendation system management
component without the need to check comments and ratings.
Practically speaking, consumers can browse the social com-
merce freely, viewing the speciﬁc product categories they have
selected. Alternatively, they can opt for a guided browsing,
resulting from the tips the system provides about the products
that are considered to be most appropriate for that user. The
user can subsequently view all the features of a product, such
as title, price and description. The management is carried out
by the catalogue management component.
The client can perform three different operations during
this phase.
The ﬁrst one consists of viewing the comments and ratings
other users have left about a given product, so that it is
possible to evaluate any potential purchase at best. This activity
is managed by the product review management component.
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-407-7
WEB 2015 : The Third International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

Figure 2. SmartSocialMarket Activity Diagram
During this phase the user can write their own report on
the product and go back to view the others’, or go back to
viewing the product or the product category without leaving
any comment or vote.
The second operation a user can carry out is buying a
product following a simple and immediate method: adding the
product to their cart and staying in the product view page.
This activity is managed by the cart management component.
In this way they can keep on browsing the social commerce
and make further purchases or view their cart (this function is
also performed by the cart management component).
The third operation consists in adding the product to their
personal wish-list, thanks to the support of the social wish-
list management component. Once this operation has been
completed, the user can go back to viewing other products so
that they can make more purchases or gain information about
their wish-list and the products that have been added to it.
When viewing the list, users can cancel orders that they have
previously placed, viewing details of any products on the wish
list or make their wish list turn into a real cart. In this way,
clients can buy products in which they have been particularly
interested over time and which, therefore, have been added to
the wish-list. Once such “conversion” has been done, users can
go back to viewing their wish list or their cart. While checking
the cart, they can edit the quantity of products they want to
order or go back to view them again, so that they can make
further purchases. Users can view checkout information, which
is managed by the checkout management component, and go
back to viewing wish lists or input and edit their purchase data
as shipping and billing addresses, and shipping and payment
modes. Finally, they can conﬁrm their order.
If they wish, users can rate and comment the transaction
they have just completed, so that they can advise other users
before their purchases. This is a key activity, as the comments
users have made about their transaction can be read by another
potential buyer and can condition their purchasing decision
about that product.
V.
TECHNOLOGY
Table I summarizes all the comparison factors among the
major e-commerce platforms available for the CMS Umbraco,
implementing an e-commerce managing system, without pro-
viding any social service. However, these platforms can be
considered as a basis for possible social commerce develop-
ments.
The Umbraco platform has been chosen thanks to its
features and potential. This CMS has proven to provide more
ease of development when compared to other CMSs as Joomla!
and Wordpress when it has been examined carefully and after
practical applications. It also provides the platform administra-
tor with an excellent management support. The advantages of
the use of Umbraco are related to the possibility of extending
its administration panel widely and easily. This can be done by
using Umbraco’s own structures or by writing speciﬁc back-
end modules. Other advantages are related to the possibility of
immediate integration of portions of codes written and deﬁned
by the developer (the so called “macros”).
To achieve our purpose, the elements regarding the devel-
opment of a social platform have been taken into account.
Speciﬁcally, for each platform it has been veriﬁed if they use
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-407-7
WEB 2015 : The Third International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

TABLE I. MAIN E-COMMERCE PLATFORM FOR UMBRACO
uCommerce
uWebShop
Tea Commerce
Merchello
Use of external
database tables
YES
NO
NO
YES
Easy management
of many products
YES
NO
NO
YES
Customization
level
HIGH
LOW
MEDIUM
HIGH
Stability level
on Umbraco 7
YES
NO
YES
NO
Open Source
NO
NO
NO
YES
Price
Free
with
restriction
from
299
1299
Ex. VAT
Free
Umbraco database tables or external ones. We also veriﬁed if
the management of several products might create problems
about the platform performance and usability for the user.
Finally, we focused on the level of platform customization, its
stability degree in relation to the latest version of Umbraco,
price and license (open source or not).
Between the analyzed e-commerce platforms, Merchello
represents a good choice to develop social commerce on Um-
braco 7. Although this platform presents low stability, because
of its youth, Merchello possesses the highest improvement
level.
Alternatively, the uCommerce platform can be considered
more complete and more stable than Merchello. However,
uCommerce is not open source so it could not result suitable
for an extended e-commerce implementation.
VI.
CONCLUSION
The social commerce phenomenon has attracted re-
searchers and business managers’ attention more and more.
Its implementation - which implies researchers have to steadily
face challenges - is nowadays a warranty of business oppor-
tunities for sellers and of innovative and more stimulating
purchasing modes for consumers.
This paper aims at showing the SmartSocialMarket ar-
chitecture of a social commerce, describing it both in its
complexity and in its single components. In particular, a
detailed analysis of the single activities each module carries
out has been introduced, together with an explanation about
how each of those interfaces with the others. Starting from
this description, it was possible to show how this architecture
can be executed in practice.
An Activity Diagram has been built and it includes all the
activities users can complete in order to place an order in a
potential social commerce that is implemented as this architec-
ture describes. The activities that describe the social interaction
among consumers have been shown in such diagram, so that
they can highlight the added value of a social commerce as
opposed to an e-commerce.
This implementation provides many services that are able
to allow a strong social interaction among consumers and
among these and sellers. An example of this is the possibility
to leave comments and ratings about products and completed
transactions.
Implementing social commerce is also beneﬁcial to sellers.
A deeper knowledge of the consumer tastes and interests
guarantees the chance to foresee the market demand and gain
monetary growth.
Finally, this article has provided a description of the
activity diagram ﬂow, showing how a generic user can create
a purchase process within social commerce. Thinking about
the future, the aim is to apply this architecture to a real
social commerce, so that it is possible to compare the actual
beneﬁts that this implementation causes. Consequently, it will
be possible to focus on the behaviour of those components
that, for their wide variables and implementations challenges,
represent a harder research effort. Such research will need to
be applied to the solving algorithms.
REFERENCES
[1]
K.-Y. Kwahk and X. Ge, “The effects of social media on e-commerce: A
perspective of social impact theory,” in System Science (HICSS), 2012
45th Hawaii International Conference on. IEEE, 2012, pp. 1814–1823.
[2]
K. K. K. Hari and S. P. Rajan, “A clubbing of e-commerce and
social networking sites,” in Ubiquitous Computing and Multimedia
Applications (UCMA), 2011 International Conference on. IEEE, 2011,
pp. 8–9.
[3]
G. Swamynathan, C. Wilson, B. Boe, K. Almeroth, and B. Y. Zhao, “Do
social networks improve e-commerce?: a study on social marketplaces,”
in Proceedings of the ﬁrst workshop on Online social networks. ACM,
2008, pp. 1–6.
[4]
S. Li and E. Karahanna, “Peer-based recommendations in online b2c e-
commerce: comparing collaborative personalization and social network-
based personalization,” in System Science (HICSS), 2012 45th Hawaii
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 733–742.
[5]
H. Ickler, S. Sch¨ulke, S. Wilﬂing, and U. Baum¨ol, “New challenges in
e-commerce: How social commerce inﬂuences the customer process,”
in Proceedings of the 5th National Conference on Computing and
Information Technology, NCCIT, 2009, pp. 51–57.
[6]
S. Kim and H. Park, “Effects of various characteristics of social
commerce (s-commerce) on consumers trust and trust performance,”
International Journal of Information Management, vol. 33, no. 2, 2013,
pp. 318–332.
[7]
C. S.-P. Ng, “Intention to purchase on social commerce websites across
cultures: A cross-regional study,” Information & Management, vol. 50,
no. 8, 2013, pp. 609–620.
[8]
T. Koivum¨aki, R. Svento, J. Perttunen, and H. Oinas-Kukkonen, “Con-
sumer choice behavior and electronic shopping systems–a theoretical
note,” Netnomics, vol. 4, no. 2, 2002, pp. 131–144.
[9]
B. Choi, C. Lee, H. Lee, and M. Subramani, “Effects of web retail
service quality and product categories on consumer behavior: a research
model and empirical exploration,” in System Sciences, 2004. Proceed-
ings of the 37th Annual Hawaii International Conference on.
IEEE,
2004, pp. 10–pp.
[10]
E. Turban, N. Bolloju, and T.-P. Liang, “Social commerce: An e-
commerce perspective,” in Proceedings of the 12th International Con-
ference on Electronic Commerce: Roadmap for the Future of Electronic
Business.
ACM, 2010, pp. 33–42.
[11]
G. Dennison, S. Bourdage-Braun, and M. Chetuparambil, “Social
commerce deﬁned,” White paper, vol. 23747, 2009.
[12]
C. Wang and P. Zhang, “The evolution of social commerce: The people,
management, technology, and information dimensions,” Communica-
tions of the Association for Information Systems, vol. 31, no. 5, 2012,
pp. 1–23.
[13]
S. Parise and P. J. Guinan, “Marketing using web 2.0,” in Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, Proceedings of the 41st
Annual.
IEEE, 2008, pp. 281–281.
[14]
R. Gonc¸alves Curty and P. Zhang, “Website features that gave rise to
social commerce: a historical analysis,” Electronic Commerce Research
and Applications, vol. 12, no. 4, 2013, pp. 260–279.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-407-7
WEB 2015 : The Third International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

[15]
Y. R. Kang and C. Park, “Acceptance factors of social shopping,”
in Advanced Communication Technology, 2009. ICACT 2009. 11th
International Conference on, vol. 3.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 2155–2159.
[16]
X. Chen and J. Tao, “The impact of users’ participation on ewom on
social commerce sites: An empirical analysis based on meilishuo. com,”
in Multimedia Information Networking and Security (MINES), 2012
Fourth International Conference on.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 810–815.
[17]
A. T. Stephen and O. Toubia, “Explaining the power-law degree
distribution in a social commerce network,” Social Networks, vol. 31,
no. 4, 2009, pp. 262–270.
[18]
D. Kim, “Process chain: A new paradigm of collaborative commerce
and synchronized supply chain,” Business Horizons, vol. 49, no. 5,
2006, pp. 359–367.
[19]
Z. Huang and M. Benyoucef, “From e-commerce to social commerce:
A close look at design features,” Electronic Commerce Research and
Applications, vol. 12, no. 4, 2013, pp. 246–259.
[20]
E. Constantinides and S. J. Fountain, “Web 2.0: Conceptual foundations
and marketing issues,” Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing
Practice, vol. 9, no. 3, 2008, pp. 231–244.
[21]
R. G. Curty and P. Zhang, “Social commerce: Looking back and
forward,” Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science
and Technology, vol. 48, no. 1, 2011, pp. 1–10.
[22]
W. Suraworachet, S. Premsiri, and N. Cooharojananone, “The study on
the effect of facebook’s social network features toward intention to buy
on f-commerce in thailand,” in Applications and the Internet (SAINT),
2012 IEEE/IPSJ 12th International Symposium on.
IEEE, 2012, pp.
245–250.
[23]
Z. Gan, J. He, Q. Ding, and V. Varadharajan, “Trust relationship
modelling in e-commerce-based social network,” in Computational
Intelligence and Security, 2009. CIS’09. International Conference on,
vol. 1.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 206–210.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-407-7
WEB 2015 : The Third International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

