Semiotic Annotation of Video Commercials:  Why the artifact is the way it is? 
 
Elio Toppano 
Dipartimento di Scienze Matematiche, Informatiche e Fisiche (DIMA) 
University of Udine 
Via delle Scienze, 208 – Udine (Italy) 
 
 
 
Abstract—Traditionally, semantic annotation of audiovisual 
texts is used to describe expressive features and content of a 
product for a more efficient and effective browsing, retrieval, 
filtering or reuse of the resource.  Drawing on semiotic 
theories, this paper proposes a new concept of annotation – 
called semiotic annotation – whose goal is to describe the 
multilayered structure of meanings inscribed within the 
audiovisual by its author/designer. The advantages of this kind 
of annotation is discussed with respect to means/ends analysis 
of video commercials. A case study is then illustrated that 
exploits a semiotic compliant informal ontology proposed in a 
previous 
work 
to 
assess 
the 
effectiveness 
of 
the 
conceptualization and the annotation method. 
Keywords-video; 
content 
annotation; 
semantic 
web; 
semiotics. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
According to a recent report published by Cisco [1] 
video is currently representing and will represent in the 
future - together with gaming - one of most important parts 
of the global Internet traffic growth. We may expect that 
video advertising will follow this trend and thus will be a 
fast-growing opportunity on line and one of the most 
promising ad formats in the future. Nowadays, web video 
advertising covers a wide range of products differing in 
production quality, time length and distribution. The 
universe of content is broad and varied ranging from 
professionally produced content, generally, repurposed from 
Broadcast Video and Cable Networks to clips created and 
uploaded by everyday people, i.e., user generated content. 
Distribution and formats also vary ranging from linear 
and non-linear in-stream video to in-display video and 
combinations thereof packaged together in a compelling 
way [2]. Most ad videos are narratives, that is, they told a 
micro-story aimed at presenting a product-service or 
communicating brand identity. This paper is about video 
annotation [3]. We address this problem following a 
communication-based design approach [4] according to 
which video is seen as a mediator between the intentions of 
the designer (i.e., author) and the interpretation of the user. 
Intentions (e.g., brand's identity communication, product 
advertising) are assumed to be inscribed within the artifact 
through 
semantic transformation 
[5] 
and 
implicitly 
communicated to the user by the video expression and 
content. In the following, we will take the perspective of the 
author/designer of the video rather than the final user. We 
are interested in how meaning is intentionally constructed 
and articulated during the design process, how it shapes the 
audiovisual and how users can infer the designer’s 
intentions – both informative and persuasive - and recognize 
that they are users, i.e., that their experiences with the 
product have been anticipated. In line with this objective, 
annotation is conceived of as an activity aimed at describing 
the experiential project envisaged by the author and 
embodied within the product [6]. It is performed by the 
author/designer during the development of the audiovisual 
artifact and requires a set of annotation descriptors (i.e., 
concepts and relative terminological realizations) that could 
be used not only to describe how the artifact is made and 
functions but also why it is the way it is. The paper is 
organized as follows. The next section elaborates more on 
the motivations lying behind our work. Section III 
introduces the concept of Semiotic Annotation which is at 
the core of our approach. Section IV summarizes some basic 
requirements the design of an ontology supporting the 
approach should satisfy and suggests a possible solution. 
Section V describes a method for video annotation and 
exemplifies it in a specific case. Section VI discusses 
benefits and limitations of the approach. Finally, Section 
VII draws some conclusions.  
II. 
MOTIVATIONS 
The term annotation can be understood in two different 
ways: i) as an activity (i.e., the process by means of which 
metadata are attached to other data) and ii) as the result of 
the activity. [7] proposed a formalization of annotation in 
terms of a quadruple: the annotated data (i.e., the subject of 
annotation), the annotating data (i.e., the object of 
annotation), the annotation relation (i.e., the predicate that 
defines the type of relationship between annotated and 
annotating data) and the context in which the annotation is 
made. Traditionally - see for example Mpeg7 [8] [9] - 
metadata are used to describe the expressive characteristics 
(e.g., visual and audio features) or the semantic content of an 
entire multimedia product or of specific product fragments. 
Contextual information, if present, refers to the people 
involved in the development of the document (e.g., the 
scriptwriter, the video-maker, the sound designer), the place 
and time of its production, its spatial and temporal scope, the 
target user. Seldom if ever, contextual metadata refer to the 
design process itself, such as, for example the designer’s 
intentions behind the product, the effects that the designer 
intends to evoke in the user, the rationale behind specific 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

functional and expressive design choices. As a consequence, 
traditional annotation approaches do not allow means/ends 
analyses [10]. For example, they do not support neither 
teleological explanations (i.e., Why the artifact is the way it 
is?) nor causal explanations (i.e., How a specific 
communicative goal/intention or impression has been 
achieved in terms of specific visual and aural choices and 
compositions). The rationale is that the aim of current 
annotation approaches is more focused on product filtering, 
retrieval and reuse of documents than on critical analysis, 
explanation and evaluation. Following recent developments 
in the field of Interaction Criticism [11], and Design for 
Experience [12] [13] we claim that means/ends metadata 
could add value to the product and could be useful both for 
the designers and the users. More specifically, designers 
could exploit this knowledge: 
• 
for highlighting the concerns and design choices 
made during multimedia development; 
• 
for the analysis and comparison of multimedia 
products during the phase of competing analysis in 
order to understand why they are designed the way 
they are and how they differ from one to another; 
• 
for the synthesis of new products because 
means/ends metadata implicitly codify design 
knowledge that can be fruitfully extracted and reused 
in new projects; 
• 
for the evaluation of the internal coherence of 
products because means/ends metadata explicate the 
relationships existing between design choices taken 
at different aggregation and abstraction levels; 
• 
for the "diagnosis and repair" of communication 
because 
means/ends 
metadata 
allow 
the 
identification of symptoms (i.e., discrepancies 
between the intended meaning of the product and the 
actual one) and the localization of causes. 
These activities are particularly important in some 
application domains such as transmedia projects, web 
marketing, brand driving and management where issues 
related to the differentiation of advertisement products (e.g., 
web sites, advergames, video clip, etc.), internal product 
coherence, effective communication of brand identity, time 
consistency of portfolio products are paramount. The 
annotation of multimedia product with means/ends metadata 
could be also useful to the user: 
• 
to make more informed choices, i.e., to better 
understand if a product is adequate with respect to 
her values, needs, desires, preferences; 
• 
to better exploit the concept of genre in document 
retrieval. This is because means/ends annotation 
allows to anchor the genre classification to several 
internal properties of the product (e.g., content, 
discourse structure, expression qualities) and their 
relationships; 
• 
to reconstruct the designer’s intentions inscribed 
within the multimedia product (this is the well-
known design stance by Dennet [14]). This is helpful 
in order to understand a product’s technological 
mediation, i.e., the way the product may affect the 
experience and the actions of the users [15]. This 
calls for a more responsible ethical attitude by the 
side of the designers and for a better awareness of 
the persuasive role of technologies by the side of 
users; 
• 
to evaluate the authenticity of a product’s brand by 
comparing the brand identity (i.e., the constellation 
of meanings-values the brand says to adhere to) with 
the  actual meanings embodied and communicated 
by its marketing portfolio (e.g., video commercial).  
III. 
A SEMIOTIC APPROACH 
We address annotation by drawing on results obtained 
within the fields of semiotics and narratology [16] [17]. As 
stated by Scolari [17] Semiotics studies objects (texts, 
discourses) to understand processes (sense production and 
interpretation). It focuses on the meanings inscribed within 
a product and the potential experience that these meanings 
may trigger or evoke in the final users. It is both empirical 
and critical. It is based on the analysis of concrete products 
from a phenomenological perspective and is aimed at re-
constructing the experiential project - a reading proposal or 
contract - that has been implicitly inscribed into the product 
by the designer-author starting from the product expression 
(i.e., its sensorial qualities) and explaining how semiotic 
materials (i.e., written text, images, music) and their 
combination may support such a project. From Semiotics 
we borrow the methodology of interpretive multimodal text 
analysis. Among the various semiotic research traditions 
that succeeded and stratified in time we are interested in 
those approaches that consider the meaning as the result of 
an interpretive process that can be articulated on different 
conceptual planes or layers. This is because we need a set of 
conceptualizations that could be used to build the 
means/ends ladder that we are looking for. Therefore we 
have taken as a reference the Generative Semiotic of Text 
by Greimas [18] [19] which we have integrated with some 
contributions coming from Socio Semiotics [20] and 
Enunciation Theory [18]. We propose to use the term 
“Semiotic Annotation” instead of the more commonplace  
term “Semantic Annotation” to emphasize this kind of 
approach. Looking at a video - and more generally at a 
multimedia product - from a semiotic point of view requires 
a new perspective on annotation. We consider the video 
presentation - i.e., the real time succession of multimodal 
events occurring during the interpretation-execution of 
digital data and instruction by a HW-SW platform - as a 
structured whole of signs (or semiotic resources) belonging 
to several representational modalities (e.g., written and 
spoken language, image, music, sound, audiovisual). These 
signs play the role of annotated data and the meanings 
referring to configuration of sensorial qualities of signs 
(expression), and arrangement of semantic entities (narrative 
content) as annotating data. In other words we annotate the 
flow of events as occurring during the execution of the 
presentation with the experiential (e.g., sensorial, narrative 
and relational-emotional) project envisaged by the designer 
and inscribed by her into the product [6]. We stress the fact 
that these meanings are always context sensitive and depend 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

on the socio-cultural environment of the interpreter. 
Moreover, the intended meanings could be different from 
those attributed by the actual user if she does not correspond 
to the implied user (called the addressee). Only when the 
actual user projects herself into the implied one (i.e., there is 
a cooperation between sender and receiver) it can be said 
that the communication is truly effective. 
IV. 
REQUIREMENTS FOR SEMIOTIC ANNOTATION 
In this section, we present a list of requirements for the 
design of a semiotic compliant narrative video annotation. 
We have aggregated the requirements into three main 
classes 
namely: 
syntactic, 
semantic 
and 
pragmatic 
requirements. At the syntactic level, the conceptualization 
should enable the annotator: 
• 
to structurally decompose the video presentation 
using different spatio-temporal aggregation levels 
and conceptual abstractions. As an instance, it 
should be possible to look at the video as a spatial 
configuration of regions within single key frames, 
or as a temporal sequence of individual shots, 
scenes, sequences, episodes, etc. Moreover, it 
should be possible to look at the video in terms of 
low level features; patterns of features (e.g., visual 
figures) that support a semantic construct such as an 
object, 
event 
or 
symbolic 
association; 
configurations of objects, subjects and events 
representing more abstract constructs such as 
situations, entire discourses and stories; 
• 
to relate together the annotations pertaining to the 
same/different aggregation levels or conceptual 
abstractions by several types of relationships (e.g., 
spatial, temporal, logical, rhetorical, typological, 
mereological, causal/teleological relationships); 
• 
to have multiple alternative annotations describing 
the presentation from different points of view (e.g., 
multiple coexisting alternative discourses/stories). 
At the semantic level, the conceptualization should 
enable the annotator: 
• 
to describe basic kinetic and plastic features of 
visual segments (e.g., shapes, colours, positions, 
textures, 
sizes, 
cinematic 
movements, 
visual 
contrasts, rhythms, etc.) as well as spectro-
morphological features of audio segments (e.g., 
time features such as amplitude, envelope, etc. and 
spectral ones such as pitch, timbre, harmonicity);    
• 
to represent meta-attributes such as for example 
aesthetic impressions (e.g., visual balance, order, 
symmetry) and product character [21]; 
• 
to describe representational meanings such as 
figurative formants in conceptual and narrative 
images [20]. More specifically to describe narrative 
structures by specifying all fundamental entities 
constituting a storyworld such as participants, 
actions, goals, settings [22]. To represent stories at 
different abstraction levels and using different 
dramaturgical schemas (e.g., the canonical scheme 
of Greimas [18], or the Hero’s Journey by Campbell 
[23]) 
At the pragmatic level, the conceptualization should 
enable the annotator: 
• 
to describe the interpersonal meaning associated to 
the presentation. As an instance, it should be 
possible to annotate the presentation with data 
regarding the inscribed addresser and addressee 
(i.e., the simulacra of the empirical sender/ 
receiver); their relationship, their attitude with 
reference to the content of the presentation, the 
intended effect the author wants to evoke in the 
actual 
receiver 
such 
as 
affective 
responses 
(emotions, mood, feelings); 
• 
to describe the subjects of discourse (i.e., the 
subjects that are responsible for how a story is 
narrated and expressed by a text) and their 
relationships both with the characters of the story 
and the simulacra of the sender/receiver; 
• 
to represent the deep values intended by the author 
(e.g., brand values) and the way they are inscribed 
within the video product.  
Finally, the conceptualization should provide the 
annotator with a set of relationships that can be used to link 
all the above aspects together in order to build the desired 
means/ends ladder: deep values with storyline, the elements 
of the story with discourse segments and expressive 
qualities; 
expressive 
qualities 
with 
impressions 
and 
interpersonal meanings and so forth. We have recently 
proposed an informal conceptualization - not yet an ontology 
- that provides a core set of basic descriptors that can be used 
to perform a semiotic annotation according to the above 
requirements [24].  
 
 
Figure 1. A schematic view of the infrastructure developed for video 
annotation  
 
Figure 1 shows a conceptual model of an infrastructure 
we are developing to provide various kinds of automatic and 
manual annotation services. Currently, semiotic annotation is 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

performed  manually by expert annotators using the 
EUDICO Linguistic Annotator (ELAN) environment [25].  
We are using this tool to make a series of annotation 
experiments whose aim is to assess the effectiveness of the 
conceptualization proposed in [24] and to create a 
preliminary data base of annotated resources that could be 
used in the future as a ground truth for automatic annotation 
algorithms. Automatic annotation is currently limited to the 
emotions expressed by audio tracks. It is performed by using 
jAudio and specific supervised learning techniques provided 
by Weka. Non-expert annotation of emotions in videos can 
be performed manually by users using mobile devices. Users' 
annotations provide data for the learning stage of the 
automatic annotation subsystem. In the next section we will 
illustrate in detail an example of expert annotation using 
ELAN.  
V. 
A CASE STUDY 
ELAN is a multimodal annotation tool that is widely 
used within the domain of Multimodal Discourse Analysis 
[26]. It enables the annotator to define a reference 
vocabulary and use it to describe an audiovisual product at 
different 
aggregation 
and 
abstraction 
levels 
(called 
annotation tiers). An annotation tier can be either alignable 
or referring. Alignable tiers are directly linked to the time 
axis of an audiovisual clip and can be divided into 
segments; referring tiers contain annotations that are linked 
to annotations on another tier which is called a parent tier 
and can be alignable or referring. Thus, tiers form a 
hierarchy where the root must be an alignable tier. The tool 
saves annotations in the XML format based on ELAN XML 
Schema. For the analysis of the audio component in the 
temporal and spectral domains the Praat software has been 
used [27]. Pratt results can be imported within ELAN and 
easily integrated with visual annotations.  
In order to provide an example of semiotic annotation 
we will focus here on an advertisement clip by Pepsi-Cola 
[28]. The clip produced in the late 1980’s is based on the 
bodycopy  “Pepsi Cola. The choice of a new generation”. A 
delivery van of Pepsi Cola reaches a crowded beach. The 
young driver gets out, opens the side door and switches an 
amplifier on; two loudspeakers emerge from the roof of the 
van. The boy brings a bottle of Pepsi near the microphone, 
uncaps it, pours liquid into a glass and drinks emitting an 
“Ahhhh” of pleasure. People attracted by puffing of gas and 
the boy’s expression rush to the van to quench their thirst. 
A systematic procedure has been envisaged for the 
analysis and annotation of video commercials (and more 
generally of audiovisual products). The procedure consists 
of the following basic stages: 
• 
Stage-0 (Whole clip annotation). The whole clip is 
represented by an alignable annotation tier linked to 
a single segment (ClipSegment). This tier represents 
the root of the hierarchical multi-tiers annotation. In 
the case of the Pepsi Cola clip the ClipSegment last 
29.5s at the frame rate of 30fps. The tier is 
annotated with the multimedia genre and the 
intention/goal of the product.  In this way the genre 
and goal are directly linked with other annotations. 
• 
Stage-1 (Textual decomposition). The root segment 
(ClipSegment) is represented by several textual 
structures 
(T-Structure). 
Some 
structures 
are 
associated to the visual representation modality, 
others to the aural modality. In the considered 
example, a structure (T-Structure1) is used to 
decompose ClipSegment into a sequence of T-
Segments representing individual shots.  By the 
term shot we intend a series of visual frames 
produced by the camera in an uninterrupted 
recording operation. A further textual structure (T-
Structure2) is used to annotate special transition 
edits and effects like fades, dissolves, overlayed 
text, etc. Finally, another structure (T-Structure3) is 
used to decompose the ClipSegment on the base of 
continuous 
sequences 
(T-Segments) 
of 
homogeneous sound objects. In the Pepsi example 
these 
sequences 
include 
silence, 
speech, 
environmental sound and effects. In more complex 
examples it could be necessary to devote a separate 
textual structure to each constituent of a complex 
audio sandwich e.g., music, effects, speeches, 
environmental sounds as well as to sound 
transitions. It should be stressed that visual and 
aural structures are not necessarily aligned in time. 
Speech and music for example can continue while 
the camera switches from one shot to the next one. 
• 
Stage-2 (Textual annotation). In this stage a set of 
referring annotation tiers are introduced and 
associated to previous visual and aural structures to 
annotate single shots, transitions and sound objects 
with tonal and rhythmic sensorial qualities such as 
colour, shape, texture, timbre, pitch, movement, 
tempo, etc. Further tiers can be used to annotate 
intended hedonic impressions (e.g., emotions, 
mood), and meta-attributes (e.g., product character). 
• 
Stage-3 (Discourse decomposition). The root 
ClipSegment is represented by one or more 
discourse 
structures 
(D-Structure). 
The 
decomposition is based on scene analysis. A scene 
(D-Segment) is defined as a - not necessarily 
continuous - sequence of frames representing a 
narrative situation characterized by a stable setting 
(i.e., place, time and mise-en-scene). In the case 
under consideration, we use a single discourse 
structure (D-Structure1) which is decomposed into 
17 D-Segments. Scene boundaries corresponds to 
changes in settings from outside to inside the Pepsi 
Cola van and vice-versa. 
• 
Stage-4 (Narrative structure decomposition). Each 
scene (D-Segment) is annotated by a narrative 
structure composed by narrative programs [18] [19] 
and their logical and temporal relationships.  
• 
Stage-5 (Narrative program annotation). A set of 
referring annotation tiers are introduced and 
associated to previous narrative structures to 
annotate single narrative programs. For each 
narrative program a set of tiers is used to separately 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

describe the main components of the program 
namely the actor (subject of doing), the action, the 
effect (subject of state, transition) and the object of 
value. In the example under consideration, D-
Segment7 and D-Segment9 (a scene inside van) is 
annotated by a narrative structure composed by the 
temporal sequence of two narrative programs. The 
first program (D-NP4) refers to the boy (D-Agent) 
grasping the bottle of Pepsi (D-Action) thus making 
user aware of brand (D-effect). The second narrative 
program (D-NP5) refers again to the boy (D-Agent) 
who uncaps the bottle and pours drinks content (D-
Action) thus getting object of value, i.e., the 
product/brand (D-Effect). 
• 
Stage-6 (Relational analysis and annotation). The 
root segment (ClipSegment) is analyzed in order to 
identify the markers of addresser and addressee. As 
an example, in the Pepsi Cola clip, the bottle of 
Pepsi including the logo and trademark represents 
the addresser (i.e., the brand Pepsi). The people 
approaching the van to buy the product is a 
representation  (a surrogate) of the addressee. A set 
of further tiers have been introduced and linked to 
the 
ClipSegment 
to 
represent 
interpersonal 
metafunctions [20] expressed by visual and aural 
features. 
According 
to 
social 
semiotics, 
a 
character’s gaze, size of shot, vertical and horizontal 
camera angle, are related to engagement, social 
distance, power and involvement relationships 
respectively. In the same way, tone of voice in 
speech, sound perspective, volume, can be used to 
evoke various degrees of intimacy or distance 
between the characters of the story (and indirectly 
the brand) and the user. The clip aims at 
establishing both empathy and trust between 
users/consumers and actors. Empathy can occur 
between the boy and the user, which is urged to 
share with crowds the sensation of freshness. The 
user is also invited to trust that the experience 
ensured by brand Pepsi – the addresser – is 
authentic; that drink (and indirectly the brand) is 
indeed an object of value in that context, so 
worthwhile purchasing.  
Several temporal relationships among annotations 
belonging to different tiers are implicitly described through 
the relations existing between their corresponding tiers. For 
example, all referring tiers associated to the same alignable 
tier inherit its time decomposition. As a consequence their 
annotations are automatically time aligned. Figure 2 shows a 
screen shot of ELAN illustrating a subset of the tiers used to 
annotate the Pepsi Cola clip. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
It is important to recognize that semiotic annotation is 
model based: it exploits a meta-model (i.e., an informal 
ontology) of the narrative video genre. The meta-model [24] 
makes explicit different assumptions, conceptualizations 
and theories shared within the semiotic field. One 
assumption is that the realization of a commercial video 
amounts to the construction of meaning and that the 
meaning rests on the relationships existing between the text, 
discourse and story layers rather than on the single elements 
of the video.  
 
 
 
Figure 2.  A screenshot of ELAN representing a subset of annotation 
tiers associated to the Pepsi Cola clip. 
 
These relationships provide the video with the kind of 
unity, internal coherence and sense it shows. As a 
consequence, as discussed in the Section IV, the meta-
model is multi-layered and relational. In this context, the 
annotation represents a kind of intermediate level knowledge 
[29], connecting the abstract concepts of the ontology, that 
are used, as descriptors, in the annotation, to the specific 
values these concepts take in the concrete video under 
consideration. Under this perspective, the annotation 
unfolds the design knowledge that is embodied in the 
artifact. It shows how the meta-model has been instantiated 
by the author of the video in the concrete artifact. 
The availability of design knowledge provides several 
benefits for the designers and the users as well. It allows to 
answer several questions about the product. These questions 
- that are the competence questions associated to the 
ontology - refer, for example, to the way a narrative is 
decomposed into narrative programs; how a specific 
narrative program has been translated at the textual level (in 
terms of visual and auditory qualities); who is involved in 
the story (as well as in discourse) and which functional role 
he/she is playing (e.g., subject of action, subject of value, 
simulacrum of the sender/receiver, narrator, and so forth); 
how social distance and involvement are evoked through the 
visual and the auditory features (e.g., by selection of shot 
size, direction of the eye gaze, horizontal and vertical 
position of video camera; or by selection of sonic 
perspective, panorama, pitch distribution, etc.). The 
annotation can be used for search and retrieval (e.g., search 
all videos or parts of videos where a specific narrative 
program is represented or where a specific social distance is 
employed) but we think that design knowledge inscribed 
within the annotation is fundamentally useful for explaining 
the way a specific video functions from a communicative 
point of view: how meaning is constructed - in that video - 
by the interplay of several elements located at different 
levels of the means-end semiotic ladder. For designers, in 
particular, the annotation affords extraction of the design 
knowledge embodied within the video in order to reuse it, 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

evaluate its internal coherence or take inspiration from it in 
developing new products. They can exploit the annotation to 
compare two or more video of the same author or brand in 
order to search for redundancies and variations. They can 
aggregate videos on the base of similarities in the way they 
function (i.e., how they instantiate the meta-model) with the 
goal of constructing portfolios or exhibitions. This may 
benefit several target users such as, for example, artists, 
architects, industrial designers. For generic users, the 
annotation presents a more fundamental benefit. It is known 
that every artifact - and technology, in general - plays a 
mediation role: it changes the way users perceive and 
experience the world as well as the way they act in the 
world [30]. The mediation effect is usually made 
transparent, in the sense that is not visible.  However, recent 
studies in the field of Philosophy of Technology claim that 
such an effect should be made opaque and comprehensible 
to users [31]. In the case of advertisement products - such as 
the video commercials - this means to make explicit the 
rhetorical mechanisms that are at the base of their 
persuasive and informative functioning. This is useful for 
the user in order to better understand how the video has 
been designed to satisfy the author's intended goals, why it 
functions as it does, what sort of culture it will encourage or 
resist. Moreover, the disclosure of motivations, methods, 
and intended outcomes is one of the ethical principles in 
persuasive design as discussed in [32]. Semiotic annotation 
may support this principle and contribute to the diffusion of 
a critical attitude toward multimedia and a greater 
awareness of the social effects this kind of products may 
produce.  
In the specific case study under consideration, semiotic 
annotation is useful to explain how the Pepsi Cola video 
functions. The video tries to persuade to consume the Pepsi 
Cola by means of a narrative telling us "the process of 
persuasion of buying/consuming a Pepsi Cola". This process 
includes the following steps: 1) insert yourself in a familiar 
situation (the delivery van of the Pepsi Cola reaches the 
crowded beach); 2) draw attention and represent a positive 
and euphoric experience of consumption (loudspeakers 
attract people; the experience of the boy drinking the Pepsi 
is communicated both visually and auditory); 3) activate in 
the consumer a desire to have a similar experience through 
the planning and realization of a purchase behavior (people 
rush to the van to buy the Pepsi). The persuasive goal is 
realized through three types of relationships: between the 
user and the product; between the user and the subject using 
the product, and, finally, between the user and the people-
crowd on the beach that desire the product and activate 
themself to buy it. It is sufficient to view and hear the 
protagonist (the boy) uncapping the bottle, drinking the 
liquid and emitting the "Ahhhh" of pleasure to activate, in 
the user and in the crowd, a similar experience on the base 
of a common competence of what does it means to drink a 
cold beverage. Semiotic annotation allows the annotator to 
associate the shots of the video to the various phases of the 
persuasive process; to describe each shots by representing 
its associated narrative programs and visual and auditory 
qualities; to describe the technical and discursive 
mechanisms that are used to address the user and to engage 
him/her; to evaluate the degree of verisimilitude associated 
to the video by analyzing the kinds of sound objects that are 
used and the use of subjective or objective shots; etc.  
Semiotic annotation is different from pure keyword or 
concept annotation. The task is not simply to attach 
subjective comments, notes, interpretations or remarks to 
audiovisual segments but to unfold the generative process of 
sense making inscribed within the product. As a 
consequence the annotation should be performed by the 
video author since he/she is in a privileged position to 
provide valuable knowledge about design decisions. 
Alternatively, it could be made by other subjects such as 
critics or commentators, preferably with the help of the 
author. Anyway, the annotation should be considered as a 
constitutive part of the video. Through its indexical nature it 
points to features of the video and connects them to general 
concepts and issues making them topical for further 
discussion. It adds value to the product since it supports 
interpretation, clarification and comprehension.  
One critical question regards the complexity of the task. 
Semiotic annotation requires deep knowledge about 
semiotic theories and well developed analytical skills. Part 
of this expert knowledge is embodied in the meta-model 
[24] that provides the relevant conceptualizations and 
vocabularies for the description. This is a benefit with 
respect to more general (i.e., not model-based) approaches. 
Automatic tools can be used to support low level analysis of 
expressive qualities such as shot detection, dominant colour 
identification, spectro-morphological analysis of sound 
objects, basic video statistics, etc. However, for the more 
abstract levels, the human intervention is still needed. 
Manual 
annotation 
is 
time-consuming 
but 
our 
experience showed that, for video commercials, it is a 
feasible approach due to the limited time extension of these 
kinds of texts. The effort, in this case, is largely rewarded by 
the benefits connected with the unfolding of new design 
knowledge as discussed beforehand. For longer texts such 
as films and documentaries the manual approach is surely 
unfeasible without appropriate supporting tools. This is a 
direction of possible future research work. A final remark 
regards the scope of applicability of semiotic annotation. 
Although semiotic theories can be fruitfully applied for the 
analysis of a wide range of genres of texts (and recently to 
physical artifacts as well) we consider persuasive discourses 
(such as video commercials, advertising images, learning 
objects and advergames) the most interesting fields of 
application. The rationale is that these kinds of texts are 
intentionally developed to affect the experience and 
behavior of the intended users so they are usually carefully 
designed to achieve these persuasive goals. Therefore, it is 
particularly interesting to unfold the design thinking 
embodied in such types of products. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper focuses on annotation of video commercials 
viewed as mediators between the intention of the 
designer/author and the interpretation of the user.  
The main contributions can be summarized as follows: 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

• 
a new concept of annotation called semiotic 
annotation has been proposed to support means/ends 
description of video texts. The concept emphasizes 
the multilayered and interrelated nature of meanings 
embedded within the product. More specifically, a 
(narrative) video is conceived of as a structured 
system composed by three interrelated layers: story 
(what is depicted in the product), discourse (how it 
is told) and text (how the discourse is manifested 
through multimodal resources) [33]; 
• 
a systematic method has been outlined that can be 
used to manually annotate commercial video using 
ELAN as the annotation tool and the informal 
ontology proposed in [24] as the source of 
descriptors. The empirical annotation work done 
with the ELAN tool has showed the effectiveness of 
the 
proposed 
conceptual 
framework. 
A 
formalization 
of 
the 
conceptualization 
using 
Protégé is under development. The aim is to build 
an OWL-2 ontology that can be linked to DOLCE 
and could support a rich set of competency 
questions not currently supported by the simple 
query engine by ELAN. 
 Semiotic methods of analysis and descriptions are 
currently under utilized in the field of multimedia semantic 
annotation [10]. This paper strives for being a preliminary 
step toward a more "semiotic aware" attitude in this field. 
REFERENCES 
[1] CISCO, "Cisco Visual Networking Index: Forecast and 
Methodology, 2015-2020," White Paper, Cisco, 2016. 
[2] IAB, "Digital Video In-Stream Ad Format Guidelines," 
Interactive Advertising Bureau, 2016. 
[3] C. G. M. Snoek, and M. Worring, ”Multimodal video 
indexing: a review of the state-of-the-art,” Multimedia Tools 
and Applications, Vol. 25, pp. 5-35, 2005. 
[4] N. Crilly, A. Maier, and P. J. Clarkson, “Representing 
artifacts as media: modelling the relationship between 
designer intent and consumer experience,” Journal of Design,  
Vol. 2, No.3, pp.15–27, 2008. 
[5] T. M. Karjalainen, "It looks like a Toyota: Educational 
approaches to Designing for visual brand recognition," 
International Journal of Design, Vol.1, No.1, pp. 67-81, 2007. 
[6] R. Eugeni, "Media Experiences and practices of analysis. For 
a critical pragmatics of media," International Workshop 
“Practicing Theory”, University of Amsterdam, March 2-4, 
2011. 
[7] E. Oren, K. H. Moller, S. Scerri, S. Handschuh, and M. 
Sintek, "What are Semantic Annotations," Technical Report, 
DERI, Galway, 2006. 
[8] J. 
M. 
Martinez, 
“MPEG-7 
Overview,” 
ISO/IEC 
JTC1/SC29/WG11 N6828, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 2004. 
[9] A. B. Benitez, J. M. Martinez, H. Rising, and P. Salembier, 
“Description 
of 
a 
single 
multimedia 
document,” 
in 
Introduction to MPEG 7: Multimedia Content Description 
Language,” B.S.Manjunath, P.Salembier, T.Sikora (Eds.), 
Wiley, pp.111-138, 2002. 
[10] R. Troncy, B. Huet, and S. Schenk, Multimedia Semantics, 
Metadata, Analysis and Interaction, Wiley, 2011. 
[11] J. Bardzell, and S. Bardzell, “Interaction criticism: a proposal 
and framework for a new discipline of HCI,” Proc. CHI2008, 
ACM, New York, USA, pp. 2463-2472, 2008. 
[12] P. Wright, J. Wallace, and J. McCarthy, “Aesthetic and 
experience-centered 
design,” 
ACM 
Transactions 
on 
Computer-Human Interaction, Vol.15, No.4, Article 18, 2008. 
[13] G. Cockton, "When and Why feelings and impressions matter 
in Interaction Design," Invited keynote address, Proc. Kansei 
2009, Warsawa, Poland, 2009. 
[14] N. Crilly, “The design stance in user-system interaction,” 
Design Issues, Vol. 27, No. 4, pp. 16-29, 2011. 
[15] L. Anticoli, and E. Toppano, “Technological mediation of 
ontologies: the need for tools to help designers in 
materializing ethics,” International Journal of Philosophy 
Study, Vol.1, Issue 3, pp. 23-31, 2013. 
[16] C. Bianchi, "Semiotic approaches to advertising texts and 
strategies: narrative, passion, marketing," Semiotica 183, 1/4, 
pp. 243-271, 2011. 
[17] C. Scolari, "Transmedia storytelling: Implicit consumers, 
narrative worlds, and branding in contemporary media 
production," International Journal of Communication, Vol.3. 
pp. 586–606, 2009. 
[18] A. J. Greimas, and P. Courtès, Semiotics and language. An 
analytical dictionary, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, 
IN, 1982. 
[19] E. Toppano, and V. Roberto, “Semiotic Design and Analysis 
of Hypermedia,” in Proc. 20th ACM Conference on Hypertext 
and Hypermedia,  HT2009, Turin, Italy, 367-368, 2009. 
[20] G. Kress, and T. van Leeuwen, Reading images. The grammar 
of visual design. Routledge, New York, 2003. 
[21] L. Janlert, and E. Stolterman, “The character of things,” 
Design Studies, Vol. 18, No. 3, pp. 297-314, 1997. 
[22] M. L. Ryan, "Narrativity and its modes as culture-trascending 
analytical categories," Japan Forum, 21(3), BAJS, pp. 307–
323, 2009. 
[23] J. Campbell, The hero with a thousand faces. New World 
Library, 2008. 
[24] E. Toppano, and V. Roberto, “Semiotic-based conceptual 
modelling of Hypermedia,” Proc. Image Analysis and 
Processing, ICIAP2013, Napoli, Italy, Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, Vol. 8157, pp. 663-672, 2013.  
[25] B. Hellwing, and D. Uytvanck, “EUDICO Linguistic 
Annotator (ELAN),” Version 2.0.2, software manual, 2004. 
[26] K. L. O’Halloran, Multimodal discourse analysis. In K. 
Hyland and B. Paltridge (eds.) Companion to Discourse, 
London and New York: Continuum, 2011. 
[27] P. Boersmimedia a, and D. Weenink, "Praat: doing phonetics 
by computer," available from: http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/ 
[28] Pepsi 
Cola 
clip 
[online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=edfRG9lREHc Accessed: 
2 february 2017.  
[29] J. Lowgren, "Annotated Portfolios and other form of 
Intermediate-Level Knowledge," Interactions, pp. 30-34, 
2013. 
[30] P. P. Verbeek, "Materializing Morality: Design Ethics and 
Technological Mediation," Science, Technology & Human 
Values, Vol. 31, No. 3, pp. 361- 380, 2006. 
[31] Y. Van Den Eede, "In between us: on the transparency and 
opacity of Technological Mediation," Found. Sci. 16, pp.139-
159, 2011. 
[32] D. Berdichevski, and E. Neuenschwander, "Toward an Ethics 
of Persuasive Technology," Communication of the ACM, 
Vol. 45, No. 5, pp. 51-58, 1999. 
[33] N. J. Lowe, “A cognitive model,” in Bernstein, M., and Gerco 
D. (Eds.) Reading Hypertext, Eastgate Systems, 2009.
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

