 
The Contradictions of Social Media Crowdsourcing in Crises Management of 
 War-torn Societies 
 
 
Khaled Saleh Al Omoush 
 
Associate Professor 
Al-Zaytoonah University of Jordan 
 
Amman-Jordan 
 
email: k.Alomoush@zuj.edu.jo 
 
 
Abstract— 
This 
research 
aims 
to 
investigate 
the 
contradictions of social media crowdsourcing in crisis 
management in war-torn societies incorporating five intrinsic 
paradoxes. These contradictions were derived from the 
literature and practices of social media crowdsourcing in 
Syria. It concluded that these contradictions represent 
profound influential factors on the value of social media 
crowdsourcing in such crises. The identification and analysis of 
such contradictions enhances the efforts of reinforcing the 
positive interactions and diminishing the negative practices to 
support the value of social media crowdsourcing in crisis 
management. Furthermore, the research presents technical 
and ethical solutions to enhance the participation value of 
social media crowdsourcing. 
  
Keywords—social media crowdsourcing; usefulness; call for 
peace; wisdom; truth; sense of community. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Social media has become an integral part of people's daily 
lives. It has provided an unprecedented opportunity and 
preferred platform to communicate and collaborate [1]. 
Furthermore, it has been widely adopted in voluntary 
organizations as a means to create civic engagement and 
organize collective actions [2]. Recent emergencies and crises 
have shown the positive impact of using social media in the 
collective crises management [3].  
Several studies [1][4][5] emphasizes the role of social 
computing and the advances in social media in empowering the 
concept of crowdsourcing. Crowdsourcing is a combination of 
the words outsourcing and crowd [6]. The term first appeared 
in 2006 to describe the act of taking a job traditionally 
performed by a designated agent and outsourcing it to an 
undefined group of people [7][8]. Crowdsourcing has emerged 
as an efficient way to  solve a wide range of tasks [9]. 
However, 
previous 
research 
[10][11] 
confirmed 
that 
crowdsourcing is enabled only through the technology of the 
web including social media. Events of the current civil wars in 
the Middle East are showing new kinds of powerful crisis 
communities, which are made possible by new social media 
that supports crowdsourcing approaches.  
In war-torn societies, social media crowdsourcing is tightly 
connected to the off-line society. It not only facilitates the 
integration of the offline and online environments, but also 
fosters 
on-the-ground 
activities. 
The 
antagonism 
and 
differences between and within the crowds become problematic 
when social media crowdsourcing is used to participate in crisis 
management in war-torn societies. In fact, it is the mirror of 
off-line contradictions.  Usually,  the crowd of war-torn society 
is not unified but is rather drawn in different crowds including 
loyalists,  opponents and  pacifists that are  made up of 
different ethnic and religious subcrowds. The perception of 
social media crowdsourcing effects cannot be understood in 
isolation from the reasons of using it [5]. The literature has 
provided 
different 
fundamental 
explanations 
for 
the 
motivations of social media crowdsourcing. In contrast, 
crowdsourcing is encountering a wide range of risks and 
ambiguities resulting in  contradictions that are derived from 
the syncretism of crowds that participate in crisis management, 
and from the decoupling that can be operated when such efforts 
are implemented on the social media. Such contradictions 
embedded in the social media crowdsourcing might harm crisis 
management efforts threatening the life and safety of people. 
Resolving these contradictions became the challenge of 
crisis 
management 
stakeholders. 
Understanding 
such 
contradictions in a helpfully and ethically responsible manner is 
essential [7]. The current civil wars prove that the operators of 
social media services share the citizens of such societies the 
challenges of maximizing the value of social media 
crowdsourcing through minimizing contradictions in the 
practices of crowds. Furthermore, the investigation of 
crowdsourcing contradictions helps understand the structure of 
the online communities, which can connect to on-the-ground 
activities [4]. The analysis of these contradictions enhances the 
efforts of reinforcing the positive interactions and diminishing 
the negative practices to support the value of social media 
crowdsourcing in crisis management.  
Based on the aforementioned discussion, the purpose of this 
research is to investigate the contradictions and their impact on 
participation value of social media crowdsourcing in crisis 
management in war-torn societies. Based on the previous 
literature review and following up on the Syrian crisis via 
social media, the present research has derived five intrinsic 
paradoxes. Furthermore, the research presents technical and 
ethical solutions to enhance the participation value of social 
media crowdsourcing in crisis management. The reminder of 
this paper is organized as follows: Section II provides a review 
of the literature research, which has been published in the 
subject area of social media crowdsourcing in crises situations. 
Section III presents the research model and the respective 
constructs. Finally, section IV concludes and outlines the future 
work. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
Crowdsourcing can be described as an umbrella term for a 
set of tools and techniques that deal with the process of 
outsourcing work to large and possibly unknown groups of 
people [9]. In fact, disasters and crises are areas where 
crowdsourcing is having a real impact [4].  
A review of the current literature reveals that the recent 
research on social media crowdsourcing in crises situations can 
be classified into three major categories. A considerable stream 
of research [2][4][5] was oriented to investigate the role of 
social media crowdsourcing in crisis management. It is worth 
mentioning that most of these studies has been dedicated to 
develop different crowdsourcing applications to involve the 
crowds in the crises management employing the unique 
capabilities of social media. The literature review also revealed 
that many of recent studies [1][12] investigated the role of 
social media crowdsourcing in generating and using big data 
during disasters and emergencies. A significant stream of 
research [7][12][13] intended to study  different issues on the 
response to crises through the use and analysis of big data. The 
third category of literature included considerable body of 
research [14][15][16] conducted to determine motivations and 
uses of social media crowdsourcing via Mobile during disasters 
and crises. In this regard, a considerable body of research (e.g., 
[17][18]) has been conducted to investigate the role of social 
media in the efforts of search, rescue, and emergency response. 
It  is worth mentioning that the vast majority of previous 
studies addressed the topic of social media crowdsourcing in 
terms of natural disasters and short-term human-made 
emergencies and crises, such as terrorist attacks. Furthermore, 
they have revolved around the existence of a wide range of 
authorities, such as police, fire, emergency medical and other 
governmental authorities that can be relied upon to coordinate 
the efforts of emergency and crisis management. In such cases, 
people directly affected by the crisis are often excluded from 
information processing and interpretation, and marginalized in 
subsequent response decision-making that affect their very 
lives [13]. In addition, most of the aforementioned studies 
proposed that the social media crowd is unified. 
Although there is an extensive and evolving interest in the 
role of social media crowdsourcing in crises management, 
study on contradictions of online crowds' practices  is still very 
limited and no study had been undertaken to examine the 
contradictions of social media crowdsourcing in crises 
management of war-torn societies. Additional efforts for 
understanding this contradictions are worthwhile. 
III. RESEARCH MODEL 
The research model has two main tasks, including diagnoses 
contradictions 
and proposing 
solutions to them. The 
investigation of contradictions embedded in the social media 
crowdsourcing during civil wars seeks to identify possibilities 
for capturing the positive practices and diminishing the 
negative practices associated with it  in order to support the 
value of social media crowdsourcing in crisis management. 
However, the research model represented in Figure 1 proposes 
that, during large-scale and long-term crises that arise out of 
civil wars, the participation in crisis management via social 
media crowdsourcing incorporates a number of contradictions 
in the practices of crowds. These contradictions represent 
profound influential factors on the value of social media 
crowdsourcing in such crises conditions. 
 
  
 
Figure 1. The research model 
 
The present research suggests two main solutions, that can 
be classified into ethical and technical solutions. This is  to 
minimize the negative impact of such contradictions on the 
efforts of participating in crisis management via social media 
crowdsourcing. Based on the previous literature review and 
following up on the crowds of civil wars on social media in the 
Syrian crisis, the present study has derived the contradictions as 
shown in Table I. 
 
TABLE I. CONTRADICTIONS OF SOCIAL MEDIA CROWDSOURCING 
 
+ 
References 
 
References 
Perceived Usefulness   [3][5][14] 
Perceived Risks 
 [16]-[23] 
Call for Peace  
 [3][5][25]  
Incitement to Violence  [24] - [26] 
Wisdom  
 [8][27][28] 
Impulsiveness 
 [10][15][30] 
Truth  
 [3][5][12] 
Rumors 
 [23][30][31] 
Sense of Community   [14][26][34] Narcissism 
 [35]-[38] 
 
Below, is a more detailed discussion of each dimension 
research model. Later on, the research presents technical and 
ethical solutions to enhance the participation value of social 
media crowdsourcing in crisis management. 
 
A. The Value of Social Media Crowdsourcing 
The convergence of social computing has generated new 
horizons to explore and use the capabilities of social media 
crowdsourcing in the humanitarian crises, especially those 
associated with armed conflicts in the civil war-torn societies. 
With the absence of governmental institutions, millions of 
people are still steadfast in their country and struggling to 
survive using all means available. In such case, citizens have 
only themselves to rely on, coping with unpredictable events, 
and encouraging each other to stay in their homes in spite of the 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

risks. In such situations the collaboration of citizens is 
becoming more and more indispensable, where citizens are 
moving from a reactive behavior to a proactive outlook 
characterized by free involvement and self-responsibility 
[2][3]. In such large-scale and long-term crises, one of the 
greatest challenges to those involved in crisis management 
efforts, including citizens, is to have efficient, stable, and 
accessible tele-communication platforms for reaching a large 
amount of people on a limited amount of time and resources 
[2][3][4]. 
The effectiveness of social media tools, including SNSs, 
image and video hosting sites, Wikis, and blogs, has been 
increasing in every area of human life in recent years [5]. In the 
past few years, the initial role of social media as a means to 
keep in touch with friends, family and colleagues has evolved 
and they are becoming a more important means of 
communication 
and 
collaboration 
during 
emergencies, 
disasters, and crises [6]. Nowadays, Syrians are employing are 
employing 
social 
media 
crowdsourcing 
effectively 
in 
exchanging, disseminating, and sharing information, solutions, 
and advices on how to deal with the different and complex 
features of the crisis. These features include securing the basic 
human needs, such as foods, drinkable water, emergency 
medical centers and necessary medications, fuel, and 
identifying the sources and places of their availability. They 
also include identifying the safe places and roads and early 
warning for new conflict hot spots. Mobile social networking 
has also provided an interactive platform to transfer the public 
needs, trends, opinions, and mood to the different parties of the 
crisis and promote the reconciliations and settlements between 
all parties. They are playing a vital role in transferring the truth 
of events, hardship, miseries, tribulations of humans under this 
crisis to the outside world, and reuniting refigure families, and 
following up the affairs of missing and abducted persons. In  
Syrian case, it has been of great value for Syrians and the world 
to satisfy the need to have the latest and unique information 
available during crises. The growing phenomenon of citizens’ 
journalism through social media has been a great value in 
providing the first-hand account of Syrian crisis events as they 
occur in the forms of images, video and audio messages, and 
information, thus contributing to the enhancement of the 
general public’ situational awareness at real-time. The 
participants continually negotiate and direct the tension 
between the negative and positive contradictions  to determine 
the continuity of participation value in social media 
crowdsourcing. 
  
B. The contradictions of Social Media Crowdsourcing 
1. Perceived Usefulness Versus Perceived Risks 
In the past few years, the initial role of social computing as a 
tool to keep in touch with friends, family and colleagues has 
evolved and become more important mean of communication 
during emergencies, disasters, and crises [14]. Social media 
crowdsourcing 
provides 
an 
online 
environment 
to 
communicate, track, and share factual information and hard 
facts in real time to avoid keeping the crowd in the dark [3] [5] 
[14]. Furthermore, it provides the people with the opportunity 
to engage actively in the crises management rather 
than being merely passive information consumers [5][14].  
In Syrian civil war, civilians  are employing social media in 
disseminating, analyzing and sharing information and advices 
about the sources and places of foods, drinkable water, fuel, 
emergency medical services and necessary medications. In such 
societies, social media also represents a valuable channel to 
send an early warnings raising awareness of the risks and how 
to respond and act in emergency situations.  
As tempting as the capabilities of social media might appear, 
the incorporation of these new media into the repertoire of 
crisis management comes with risks that are cannot be 
neglected. In general, when dealing with any form of 
outsourcing of tasks, including crowdsourcing, the risks are 
non-trivial especially for groups that are more distant 
geographically, culturally, and intellectually where many 
situations arise that cannot be foresee [21][22]. According to 
Buecheler et al. [10], with no pre-defined contracts between 
parties like in traditional outsourcing, crowdsourcing is an 
extreme case of dealing with the unknown, where the 
individuals of the crowd are a priori unknown. In essence, by 
engaging in social media crowdsourcing, the people decide to 
deal with various degrees of risk of the free actions of others. A 
number of researchers (e.g., [16][19]) agreed that because of 
the perceived risks of social media use, users may change their 
evaluation of membership value over time. 
In the periods of political unrest or civil wars, the personal 
information could lead to activities being left in a vulnerable 
situation that jeopardizes their wellbeing [5][23]. Protecting 
activists is one of the most important challenges social media 
crowdsourcing  faces in such societies, particularly in view of 
the surveillance techniques used by conflict parties to identify 
the online opponents [5]. Photos, video footage, message or 
status updates may contain a visual evidence of an individual 
being present and help identify his identity and disclosing of 
private and confidential personal details [23]. In such 
circumstances, activists social media crowdsourcing are 
encountering a wide range of risks and threats, including, but 
not limited to, exposing the private information, identity theft, 
detention or imprisonment, harassment, threats to relatives, 
torture, kidnapping, or even killing. In many instances, the use 
of social media by members of the crowds can result in harm to 
specific individuals who were erroneously identified through 
vigilante justice and potential harm to responders, including 
members of the crowd, who may be operating in a crisis [23]. 
 
2. Call for Peace versus Incitement to Violence 
In war-torn countries, striving to live in peace is a 
multidimensional motivation that can be fit as a title to the 
needs for survival and safety. A review of pages, blogs, videos, 
and posts reveals a third active crowd involved in the current 
crises striving to end the war. These neutral groups are working 
hardly to provide reliable information about events of crisis. 
They are promoting peaceful coexistence, forgiveness, 
reconciliation, and rejection of foreign interferences. They look 
for all parties in the conflict in a kindly and conciliatory 
manner. Sometimes they attack all the parties holding them the 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

responsibility for the killing, destruction, and the displacement 
of millions of civilians.  
Social media crowdsourcing has provided an open arena to 
these groups to deliver messages about disarmament, peace 
building, and reconciliation [3][5]. They have a permanent 
online presence, through their posts, comments, and likes on 
the online pages and blogs of the parties to the conflict or what 
so called loyalists and opponents. Furthermore, social media 
crowdsourcing has allowed the voices of ordinary citizens to be 
amplified communicating and submitting human rights abuses 
and committed war crimes. In the Syrian crisis, it has played an 
influencing role in exposing the use of banned weapons, calling 
to neutralize civilians and populated residential areas, and 
maintaining ancient relics. Unfortunately, the voice, activity, 
and number of these groups are less than those who call for 
violence taking side to one party of the conflict. 
The promotion of violence is a common trend in civil armed 
conflicts. The growing tension online is going parallel with 
cases of actual violence [24]. Many previous studies 
[24][25][26] affirmed the role of social media in catalyzing and 
amplifying 
violence 
by 
one 
group 
against 
another. 
Unfortunately, social media became a platform for organized 
hate groups to recruit, steering, and organize attacks against 
their antagonists.  For example, in the current Syrian civil war, 
the conflict parties are using social media to incite violence that 
is fueled by deeply rooted hostility between different ethnic, 
religious, ideological groups or other minority communities. 
Antagonists have also used social media to explain how their 
opponents were planning actions to attack  and evict 
individuals and communities in order to justify the social chaos 
and vigilante violence against a particular political, ethnic or 
religious group or any antagonist. 
The promotion of extremist rhetoric encouraging violent 
acts is also a common theme across the terrorist social media 
platforms [25][26]. Social media crowdsourcing has provided a 
unique opportunity to disseminate the terrorist ideology and 
broadcast its messages around the world under cover of 
religion. Terrorist organizations have increasingly turned to the 
social media to advocate the incitement to violence using 
variety of messages promoting and glorifying acts of terrorism, 
such as suicide attacks.  
3. Wisdom versus impulsiveness 
The wisdom of crowd is probably one of the first ideas that 
come to mind when referring to crowdsourcing. In the age of 
social media, crowdsourcing can be seen as online collective 
problem solving and a synergy of skills and resources to share 
wisdom to achieve collective objectives [27][28]. The power of 
crowdsourcing and harvesting the wisdom of the crowd stand 
on the collective collaboration through the ability of a group to 
find better solutions to the same problems, solve more 
problems than its individual members, and engage in 
intellectual collaboration in order to create, innovate, and 
invent [8][27][28]. The most recent studies of crisis 
management [3][5] reveal that social media supports the 
creation of informal users’ networks facilitating the flow of 
ideas, and have an important role in the collective generation, 
dissemination, sharing, and refining of knowledge to assess and 
response to emergencies. 
The outcome of wisdom of the crowd depends to a great 
extent on the level of coordination and collaborative efforts of 
crowd members participating in crisis management [5][8]. 
According to Bellomo et al. [29], unanticipated and unintended 
irregular motion of individuals into different directions due to 
strong and rapidly changing forces in crowds lead to the 
collective confusion and chaos raising the challenge of crowd 
impulsiveness. Actually, a major challenge that crisis 
management faces with social media crowdsourcing is the 
multiplicity and heterogeneity of players and channels of 
communication that exist during a crisis situation. In this 
regard, Buecheler et al. [10] demonstrated the risk involved 
when using crowdsourcing for decision making and to what 
extent the assumption about the wisdom of the decisions of 
crowd agents is justified. Roman [15] also explained the 
inherent weakness of crowdsourcing differentiating between 
the wisdom of crowds and the "mob that rules" in terms of 
accuracy, verity, correctness, and the reliability of exchanged 
information. Polarization between the perceptions of various 
conflicting crowds is a key issue [3]. Too much data within 
little time might also trigger fear and anxiety and eventually 
result in mass panic [7]. According to Kotsiopoulos [30] 
activists, respondents and security officers may be put at risk 
by citizens inadvertently exposing sensitive information. The 
data being inputted by individuals can include moving and still 
images, 
location 
information, 
temporal 
information 
descriptions of needs as well as other information [7]. As a 
result, existing data sets become quickly outdated and do not 
reflect people’s experience of their current environment. 
4. Truth versus rumors 
The content of the social media can be the primary source 
for knowing better and understanding more accurately what is 
really happening [3][5][14]. The growing phenomenon of 
citizens’ journalism has been a great value in providing the 
first-hand account of events as they occur in the forms of 
images, video and audio messages. Many of previous studies 
(e.g., [1][2]) show that information obtained through 
crowdsourcing is often more detailed and just as accurate as the 
information gathered through official channels.  
When civilians are faced with uncertainty and lacking a full 
knowledge of risks, they will look to trusted sources of 
information for guidance [12]. Actually, the literature reveals 
widely divergent and mixed views in addressing the truth issues 
raised by the use of social media in crises. Many of authors 
(e.g., [3][5][12]) have perceived social media to be more 
trustworthy than traditional or formal media channels during 
emergencies and crisis. At the same time there is an 
apparently contradictory trend (e.g., [23][31]), which believes 
that the absence of a thorough ethical, legal, and verification 
framework contributes to the general skepticism towards the 
trustworthiness of social media in crisis situations. However, 
the aforementioned views have expressed their concerns, with 
varying degrees about the trustworthiness of information 
provided through social media, reliability and credibility of 
digital volunteers, responsibility and accountability of ICT 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

providers, and the use of misinformation as a weapon of 
psychological warfare waged by opponents against each other.  
War-torn societies live in a world in which vast amount of 
data are created and stemming from various sources through 
social media on a constant and ongoing basis. The content of 
social media does not follow a process of validation to confirm 
its truthfulness. This abnormal big crisis data represents an area 
of concern constituting a major challenge against the 
trustworthiness and competence of such data. For example, 
rumors, deceptive information, lies, half-truths and facts, 
myths, counterfeit and fake videos and statements that are 
spreading on social media became essential elements in the 
narration of the events in the Syrian civil conflict. Reposting 
and sharing can make the rumors spread very quickly and get 
out of control. This could lead to panic in a crowd, which 
would not be justified by facts but only spread through 
misinformation [3]. Incidents in Syria crisis showed that 
crowds have utilized social media to take law enforcement into 
their own hands based on false information suggesting that 
certain individuals as being perpetrators [30]. Furthermore, 
when reporting about a crisis event, people can use different 
slangs and choose a hashtag or topic they find relevant, making 
it very difficult to understand the actual content of a post [2]. 
This results in redundancy of information on different social 
media tools holding the risk of conflicting facts [31]. 
5. Sense of Community versus narcissism  
The sense of community concept refers to the individuals’ 
subjective feeling of attachment and belongingness to a bigger 
and stable structure, which can be relied upon for a variety of 
purposes [32]. People with a strong sense of belonging to a 
community feel a strong emotional connection to the rest of the 
members, who support each other and believe that the 
community can fill their needs and indeed does so. The 
literature [26][32][33] revealed that the interactive nature of 
social media helps build a sense of community among 
individuals 
from 
different 
geographical 
locations 
and 
backgrounds, encouraging the creation of networks to share 
their feelings, thoughts, and assist each other. Social media and 
more specifically, SNSs have provided an unprecedented 
opportunity to bring individuals and groups of people together 
constituting a new kind of societies seeing beyond the self. 
According to Subba and Bui [33], the rise of SNSs is resulting 
in a greater sense of participation, less dependence on official 
expertise, and a greater trust in collaborative problem solving.  
In war-torn societies, SNSs can help create a sense of 
community that gives individuals the feeling that they are not 
alone in the crisis and that there are others experiencing similar 
hardships and difficulties [14]. They have provided a fertile 
ground for sympathy and empathy sharing the pain of victims. 
Howell and Taylor [34] explained that what became apparent 
during crises events is the outpouring of support within and 
outside communities, and while there was a range of reasons 
for people starting up community pages and getting involved in 
social media, the overwhelming driver was a sense of 
community.  
Social media has revealed an entirely new method of self-
presentation. A major characteristic of social media is that 
anyone can create a platform to voice his thoughts and set up 
his own online participations. The social media represents a 
source of individual appearance and record the self at the scene 
of a crisis [23]. Many studies have examined the effects of 
social media on the increased levels of narcissism [35][36][38]. 
Narcissism is a pervasive pattern of grandiosity, need for 
admiration, and an exaggerated sense of self-importance [38]. It 
is associated with positive self-views traits, including 
intelligence, physical attractiveness, and power to create a 
positive impression. The narcissist, rather than experiencing 
inner growth, is on a path of obsessive focus on self, which acts 
as a barrier to positive relationships with others. However, 
social media allows people in crises situations to employ social 
relationships in order to regulate narcissistic esteem. According 
to Simsek [37], they can even have more than one identity to 
present themselves as a complete individual. Narcissists do not 
focus on interpersonal intimacy, warmth, or other positive 
aspects of relational outcomes. Instead, they use relationships 
to appear popular and successful [35]. Posting of selfies on 
social media is  an major  trait of narcissism [37]. 
In civil war, the need of narcissists for sensational coverage 
of events may create ethical problems when citizen journalists 
quickly assign blame under weak supporting evidence and 
exploit the vulnerability of the victims without respect for their 
opinions, privacy or emotions. Another example is taking 
selfies in front of victims' bodies to the people killed in the war. 
 
B. Ethical and Technical Solutions 
The contradictions of social media crowdsourcing in war-
torn societies are showing that the most prevalent challenges 
revolve around  ethical infringements and technical lacunas that 
have to be addressed. Therefore, the present research suggests 
ethical and technical solutions to maximize the participation 
value of social media crowdsourcing in crisis management. 
1. Ethical solutions 
Social media crowdsourcing is still an evolving field and 
many of the ethical issues it raises have yet to be resolved. As 
an increasing number of crowds members involved in crisis 
management of war-torn societies come to the realization, 
understanding how to use social media crowdsourcing in an 
ethically responsible manner is essential to minimize the 
contradictions of social media crowdsourcing [7]. In war-torn 
societies, social media crowdsourcing is tightly connected to 
the off-line society. It not only facilitates the integration of the 
offline and online environments, but also fosters on-the-ground 
activities. A malicious member could easily trick crowds to 
participate in unethical activities online and off-line [2].  
The development of appropriate ethical policy can help 
manage the dilemma between the opportunities and risks of 
social media crowdsourcing in crises of war-torn societies. In 
this regard, these communities can leverage the collective 
knowledge of their members in the form of the ethical 
principles that define a set of universal principles for 
humanitarian action. It is important that the providers of social 
media tools and the digital humanitarian communities 
emphasize ethical humanitarian service based on a set of ethical 
rules, standards, codes, values, and philosophy to be followed 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

by the crowds and their members. The ethical policy need to be 
formulated under the following principles: 
 Support the investigation of truthfulness that complies with 
facts and reality. 
 The devised policy must include prescriptive steps to inform 
and alert the participants in crowdsourcing efforts to behave 
ethically and avoid dragging behind malevolent actors and 
crisis profiteers.  
 The humanitarian imperative comes first. The  protection and 
neutralization of civilians and populated residential areas, and 
maintaining ancient relics must be apriority. 
 Principles must mandate that data on internally displaced 
people be given special protections and safeguard their 
anonymity or privacy. The protection of crowdsourcing 
participants necessitates hiding any visual evidence of an 
individual being present and help identify his identity. 
 Provide a democratic environment for citizens to participate 
in the efforts of such crises in terms of freedom to speak, hold 
opinions, express ideas, discussion, and consensus in which 
all participants are considered and treated equally.  
 The online crowds must provide vulnerable people with 
assistance without discrimination as to geographic, racial, 
gender, ethnic, religious beliefs, class or political opinions. 
 The crowds must prevent the hate speech, which attacks 
persons or groups on the basis of certain attributes, such as 
ethnic origin, religion, gender, race, disability, or political 
orientation. 
 
2. Technical  Solutions 
The current civil wars prove that the operators of social 
media services share the citizens of such societies the 
challenges of maximizing the value of social media 
crowdsourcing through minimizing contradictions in the 
practices of crowds. The present research suggests the 
following technical solutions to achieve this objective:  
 The providers of social medial tools and more specifically 
SNSs, such as Facebook can add new type of pages or groups 
that  are designed to support the crowdsourcing efforts in 
crises management.      
 As a rule, the user profile data should be protected by design 
and the sensitive data should never be shared with third 
parties, nor even be accessible to operators.  
 The providers can develop crowd sensing applications based 
on geospatial crowd sensing to collect data about specific 
events at particular locations or with dynamic and uncertain 
participant locations. 
 Provide citizens with the best practices, instructions, and 
guidances to deal with emergencies, evacuation, relieve, and 
rescue in forms of video, texts or images. 
 Provide large scale maps showing the safe places and roads, 
evacuation routes and conflict hot spots.  
 Providing new filtering tools to detect and prevent using any 
images or video from old or unrelated events.  
 Develop new collections of symbols to distinguish between 
the different kinds of events. Such symbols can help in 
reducing the redundancy of information making it easier and 
faster to access specific content that cover a specific event. 
These symbols are designed to represent, for example, 
distress calls, calls for blood donation, location of field 
hospitals, evacuation routes and conflict hot spots.  
 Develop new functions to evaluate the reliability and 
credibility helping users know better which pages, groups, 
blogs, and digital volunteers can be trusted to become the 
source of reference. For example, the output of evaluations 
can be displayed in the form of gradient colors, ranging from 
green for highly trusted to red for  highly untrusted. 
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Recent emergencies and crises have shown the positive 
impact of using social media in the collective crises 
management. Events of the current civil wars in the Middle 
East are showing a new kind of powerful crisis community, 
which is made possible by new social media that supports 
crowdsourcing approaches. The antagonism and differences 
between and within the crowds become problematic when 
social media crowdsourcing is used for crisis management 
purposes in war-torn societies. 
Crises arising out of civil wars are very complex, bringing 
contradictory practices and discursive contexts [6]. Resolving 
these 
contradictions becomes 
the 
challenge 
of 
crisis 
management stakeholders. Such contradictions embedded in 
the social media might harm crisis management efforts 
threatening the life and safety of people. Therefore, the present 
research aimed to investigate the contradictions and their 
impact on participation value of social media crowdsourcing in 
crisis management in war-torn societies incorporating  five 
intrinsic paradoxes. The research presents technical and ethical 
solutions to enhance the participation value of social media 
crowdsourcing in crisis management.  
The investigation of these contradictions provides a 
conceptual map, which aims to make sense of the ambiguities 
and contradictions inherent in social media crowds in war-torn 
societies. The development of appropriate ethical policy can 
help manage the dilemma between the opportunities and risks 
of social media crowdsourcing in crises of war-torn societies. 
Such communities can leverage the collective knowledge of 
their members in the form of the ethical principles that define a 
set of universal principles for humanitarian action based on 
international humanitarian law. The current civil wars prove 
that the operators of social media services share the citizens of 
such societies the challenges of maximizing the value of social 
media crowdsourcing through minimizing contradictions in the 
practices of crowds. The present research suggests new type of 
pages or groups that  are designed to support the crowdsourcing 
efforts and crowds participation in crises management. 
There are some limitations, which can serve as directions for 
future research. The research model needs to be developed and 
tested empirically. Measurement items can be formulated in 
terms of motivations and threats or positive and negative 
practices. Data can be collected from Syrian refugees or the 
Syrian society itself using an online survey. There are 
thousands of pages and groups on social networking sites, 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

created by Syrian activists, dedicated to Syrian crisis issues. 
These platforms can be employed effectively  to distribute the 
online survey. Furthermore, the future research needs to 
investigate the factors affecting the appearance of these online 
contradictions. The future research also has to discuss in more 
details how each solution will address the contradictions. 
Finally, the suggested technical solutions need further technical 
validation and intensive research in order to evaluate their 
applicability. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. Peng, Z. Yanmin, S. Wei, and W. Min-You, "When data 
contributors meet multiple crowdsourcers: Bilateral competition in 
mobile crowdsourcing," Computer Networks, 95, 2016, pp. 1-14. 
[2] G. Schimak, H. Denis, and P. Jasmin, "Crowdsourcing in crisis and 
disaster management–challenges and considerations," In International 
Symposium on Environmental Software Systems, 2015, pp. 56-70. 
Springer International Publishing, 2015. 
[3] C. Wendling, R. Jack, and J. Stephane , "The use of social media in 
risk and crisis communication," 24. OECD Publishing, Paris, 2013. 
[4] J. Rogstadius, V.  Maja, C. Teixeira, K. Vassilis, and A. Jim Alain, 
"CrisisTracker: Crowdsourced social media curation for disaster 
awareness," IBM Journal of Research and Development, 57(5), 2013, 
pp. 4-1. 
[5] L. Sweta, "Early warning systems and disaster management using 
mobile crowdsourcing," International Journal of Science and 
Research,  3(4), 2014, pp. 356-365. 
[6] A. Lambert, "Disaster Data Assemblages: Five Perspectives on Social 
Media and Communities in Response and Recovery," ,” Proc. The 
System 
Sciences (HICSS), 2016 49th Hawaii International 
Conference on, pp. 2237-2245. IEEE, 2016. 
[7] R. Finn, W. Hayley, and W. Kush, "Exploring big ‘crisis’ data in 
action: potential positive and negative externalities,” Proc. ISCRAM 
2015 Conference, Kristiansand, Norway. 2015, pp. 1-6. 
[8] J. Howe, "The rise of crowdsourcing," Wired magazine, 14(6), 2006, 
pp. 1-4.  
[9] C. Chiu, T. Liang, and E. Turban, "What can crowdsourcing do for 
decision support? Decision Support Systems," 65, 2014, pp. 40-49.  
[10] T. Buecheler, J. Sieg, R. Füchslin, and R. Pfeifer, "Crowdsourcing, 
Open Innovation and Collective Intelligence in the Scientific Method-
A Research Agenda and Operational Framework,", In ALIFE, 2010, 
pp. 679-686. 
[11] D. Brabham, "The myth of amateur crowds: A critical discourse 
analysis of crowdsourcing coverage," Information, Communication & 
Society,15(3), 2012, pp. 394-410.  
[12] A. Jain, et al., "Mobile Application Development for Crisis Data," 
Procedia Engineering, 107, 2015, pp.255-262. 
[13] J. Qadir, et al., "Crisis analytics: big data-driven crisis response,"  
Journal of International Humanitarian Action, 1(1), pp.1-8. 
[14] N. Kaufmann, T. Schulze, and D. Veit, D., "More than fun and 
money. Worker Motivation in Crowdsourcing-A Study on Mechanical 
Turk,". In AMCIS, Vol. 11, pp. 1-11.  
[15] J. Goncalves, et al., "Crowdsourcing on the spot: altruistic use of 
public displays, feasibility, performance, and behaviours," Proc. 
ACM international joint conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous 
computing (pp. 753-762). ACM.  
[16] C. Annamalai, S. Koay, and S. Lee, "Role of Social Networking in 
Disaster 
Management: 
An 
Empirical 
Analysis," 
Journal 
of 
Computation in Biosciences and Engineering, 1(3), 2014, pp. 1-5.  
[17] C. Huang, E. Chan, and A. Hyder, " Web 2.0 and internet social 
networking: A new tool for disaster management?-lessons from 
Taiwan," BMC medical informatics and decision making, 10(1), 
(2010), pp. 57-69. 
[18] D. Yates and S. Paquette, " Emergency knowledge management and 
social media technologies: A case study of the 2010 Haitian 
earthquake," International journal of information management, 31(1), 
2011, pp. 6-13.  
[19] D. Roman, "Crowdsourcing and the question of expertise," 
Communications of the ACM, 52(12), 2009, pp. 12-12. 
[20] B. Debatin, J. Lovejoy, A. Horn, and B. Hughes, "Facebook and 
online 
privacy: 
Attitudes, 
behaviors, 
and 
unintended 
consequences," Journal 
of 
Computer‐Mediated 
Communication, 15(1), 2009,pp. 83-108.  
[21] F. Stutzman, R. Capra, and J. Thompson, "Factors mediating 
disclosure 
in 
social 
network 
sites," Computers 
in 
Human 
Behavior, 27(1), 2010, pp. 590-598.  
[22] H. Watson, L.  Baruh, R. Finn, and S. Scifo, "Citizen (in) security?: 
social media, citizen journalism and crisis response,” Proc. The 11th 
International Conference on Information Systems for Crisis Response 
and Management (ISCRAM). May 2014, pp. 399-303.  
[23] I. Gagliardone, D. Gal, T. Alves, and G. Martinez, "Countering Online 
Hate Speech," UNESCO, France. 
[24] M. Ally and M. Gardiner, "The moderating influence of device 
characteristics and usage on user acceptance of Smart Mobile 
Devices," Proc. The 23rd Australasian Conference on Information 
Systems, 2012, pp. 1-10, ACIS.  
[25] United Nations Office on Drugs and Crimes, “The Use of the Internet 
for Terrorist Purposes,” United Nations, New York, 2012, 
https://www.unodc.org/documents/frontpage/Use_of_Internet_for_Ter
rorist_Purposes.pdf, 2012, pp. 1–158, [retrieved: March, 2017]. 
[26] M. Martinez and W. Bryn, "The wisdom of crowds: The potential of 
online communities as a tool for data analysis," Technovation, 34(4), 
2014, pp. 203-214. 
[27] P. Lévy, "From social computing to reflexive collective intelligence: 
The IEML research program," Information Sciences, 180(1), 2010, 
pp. 71-94. 
[28] N. Bellomo, L. Clarke, P. Gibelli, P. Townsend, and B. Vreugdenhil, 
"Human behaviours in evacuation crowd dynamics: from modelling to 
“big data” toward crisis management," Physics of life reviews, 18(1), 
2016, pp. 1-21. 
[29] I. Kotsiopoulos, "Social Media in Crisis Management: Role, Potential, 
and Risk," Proc. In Utility and Cloud Computing (UCC), IEEE/ACM 
7th International Conference on, 2014, December, pp. 681-686, IEEE. 
[30] S. Mukherjee "The Use of Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn etc. as 
Strategic Tools for Crisis Communication," International Journal of 
Management and International Business Studies, 4(2), 2014, pp. 175-
180. 
[31] A. Lev-On, "Communication, community, crisis: Mapping uses and 
gratifications in the contemporary media environment," New Media 
Society, 14(1), 2011, pp. 98-116. 
[32] R. Subba and T., Bui, "An Exploration of Physical-Virtual 
Convergence Behaviors in Crisis Situations," Proc. In System 
Sciences (HICSS), 2010 43rd Hawaii International Conference, 2010, 
January, pp. 1-10, IEEE. 
[33] M. Taylor, G. Wells, G. Howell, and B. Raphael, "The role of social 
media as psychological first aid as a support to community resilience 
building," Australian Journal of Emergency Management, 27(1), 
2012, pp. 20-26. 
[34] S. Mehdizadeh, "Self-presentation 2.0: Narcissism and self-esteem on 
Facebook," Cyberpsychology, behavior, and social networking, 13(4), 
2010, pp. 357-364. 
[35] E. Ong, et al., "Narcissism, extraversion and adolescents’ self-
presentation on Facebook," Personality and individual differences, 
50(2), 2011, pp. 180-185. 
[36] T. Ryan and X., "Who uses Facebook? An investigation into the 
relationship between the Big Five, shyness, narcissism, loneliness, and 
Facebook usage," Computers in Human Behavior, 27(5), 2011, pp. 
1658-1664. 
[37] A. Simsek, "Techno-psychological Aspects of Social Media 
Behaviors," Journalism and Mass Communication, 5(6), 2015, pp. 
270-278. 
[38] J. Fox and C. Margaret, "The Dark Triad and trait self-objectification 
as predictors of men’s use and self-presentation behaviors on social 
networking sites, " Personality and Individual Differences, 76(1), 
2015, pp. 161-165. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

