Challenges to Enhancing Web Accessibility in Saudi University Websites: An 
Exploratory Study 
 
Asmaa Alayed, Mike Wald, E. A. Draffan 
School of Electronics and Computer Science  
University of Southampton, Southampton UK  
E-mail: {asia1g14, mw, ead}@ecs.soton.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract—This paper aims to provide an exploratory study of 
challenges in enhancing web accessibility faced by web 
developers of the Arabic language version of university 
websites in Saudi Arabia. The number of challenges 
encountered were wide ranging from a lack of accessibility 
knowledge and negative attitude upon disability issues. In the 
light of the study findings, this paper presents some 
recommendations for improving the accessibility status in 
Saudi university websites. 
Keywords- web accessibility; Saudi Arabia; disability; 
challenges; university websites. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
The number of government universities in Saudi Arabia 
has increased dramatically in the last two decades from 7 to 
28 [1]. As a result the number of their websites has also 
increased without any clear guidelines in place regarding 
accessibility, which may hinder some users from benefiting 
from their content. University websites in Saudi Arabia are in 
need to address the barriers that might exclude people with 
special needs from participation in online educational, social 
and professional activities [2]. 
Although 65.9% of the population of Saudi Arabia uses 
the Internet [3], web accessibility has remained a 
problematic issue for Arabic websites in terms of the 
accurate assessment of whether those with disabilities are 
able to enjoy their use on equal terms with their non-disabled 
peers.  
 Over 700,000 people with disabilities live in Saudi 
Arabia which represented around 8% of its citizens in 2015 
[4]. Among them, are those interested in or who need to 
access university websites, for example prospective students, 
undergraduate students or those pursuing lifelong courses. 
With a low level of web accessibility the number of people 
excluded from obtaining the benefits of accessing university 
websites would definitely increase. This is an important issue 
to be taken into account when developing websites, services 
and content.  
Therefore, this paper contributes to this area by exploring 
the challenges in designing and developing accessible 
university websites in Saudi Arabia. A better understanding 
of these challenges would help to inform suggestions and 
solutions for improving access. The contribution of this 
research will be to enhance the accessibility of university 
websites in Saudi Arabia. 
The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Section II 
describes studies on accessibility of Saudi websites. Section 
III presents the research methodology. Section IV presents 
the results. Section V discusses the results and Section VI 
concludes the paper.   
II. RELEVANT STUDIES 
Based on a literature review and to the best of the 
researchers’ knowledge, limited work has been reported on 
identifying the challenges of designing and developing 
accessible Arabic language university websites in Saudi 
Arabia. The study conducted by [2] was the only one found 
to evaluate the accessibility of university websites in Saudi 
Arabia, however, it focuses on the English version of these 
websites not the Arabic one. A few studies, however, have 
been conducted to evaluate the accessibility of websites in 
Saudi Arabia. The very first study in this regard was 
conducted to evaluate the accessibility of e-government 
websites in Saudi Arabia and Oman [5]. One of the stages of 
this study was to survey the webmasters of the e-government 
websites to explore the reasons behind the lack of 
accessibility in their websites. Since then, there has been 
limited research to assess web accessibility of Saudi 
websites, such as [2], [6]-[10]. Generally, there has been 
strong agreement regarding the poor accessibility of the 
examined websites and a lack of awareness of its 
importance. The main violations found were: text 
alternatives for non-text content, no keyboard accessibility, 
compatibility and no identification of the language. 
Moreover, it was reported that a number of accessibility 
evaluation tools have raised a problem since they do not 
recognise Arabic language. 
Although each of these studies has its significant impact 
and contribution on accessibility of Saudi websites, it can be 
seen that little work has been conducted in identifying the 
challenges of designing and developing accessible Arabic 
websites in general and university websites in particular. In 
the USA, for example, there have been studies to explore the 
same perspective, such as [14] and [15]. Therefore, and to 
contribute towards this issue, we present our exploration of 
such challenges in terms of design and development of 
accessible university websites in Saudi Arabia. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
Usually, interviews are used to conduct an exploratory 
study. The interview research method was chosen here 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-485-5
WEB 2016 : The Fourth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

because it enables in-depth discussion and exploration. 
Experts were chosen for interview at this exploratory stage to 
ensure the findings would have more credibility than those 
from a sample of non-experts [16]. When recruiting experts, 
the choice is based on their knowledge and experience in the 
area being studied. Therefore, in this type of sampling, 
sample size depends on saturation, which can be reached 
when no new knowledge or information can be gathered 
[17]. Based on the above recommendations, in this study, 15 
experts from various Saudi universities were interviewed. 
Since this paper concerns the perspective of web developers 
on challenges faced when improving accessibility of 
university websites, a person was considered an expert if 
they had at least two years’ experience of university website 
development in Saudi Arabia or were Saudi university 
researchers with at least two published papers in this area of 
research.  
An invitation was sent by email that requested experts' 
participation. After sending the invitation emails to the 
experts, 15 of them from 9 universities responded by 
agreeing to participate and informed us of their preferred 
method of communication. The interviews were conducted 
face-to-face, over the phone and online, according to the 
availability and location of each expert. Most of the experts 
(12) were developers or designers, and the remaining three 
were researchers in the area of web accessibility. Moreover, 
60% are from long-established universities and the 
remainder is from newly emerging universities. 
In each interview, the expert was presented with a 
consent form to sign and then given a brief explanation of 
the study. After that, open ended questions regarding their 
opinions on accessibility of their websites and challenges 
they faced in enhancing their accessibility were asked and 
the responses audio recorded by the researcher, after 
obtaining permission. 
All the interviews were conducted in Arabic and audio 
recorded, then transcribed. Afterwards, the transcripts were 
translated from Arabic to English by a professional bilingual 
native Arabic translator. Different techniques including 
back-translation and bilingual committee approach suggested 
by [18] and [19] were followed in this study. The Arabic 
version was then checked by three bilingual PhD students in 
Electronics and Computer Science and Linguistics at the 
University of Southampton. Upon a satisfactory review, the 
Arabic version was back translated into English by another 
translator. The final copy was compared to the original 
transcripts to check validity of the translation. Minor 
variations were detected but did not alter meanings. 
To analyse experts’ responses to the interview questions 
the interviews were transcribed and saved into NVivo. 
NVivo is a software tool used to manage and understand 
textual data, and allow for in depth analysis. Experts’ 
responses were tagged using NVivo according to analysis 
themes, collected together into groups and then synthesised.  
IV. 
CHALLENGES TO ENHANCING WEB ACCESSIBILITY 
IN SAUDI UNIVERSITY WEBSITES  
Experts were asked to identify challenges they face (or 
may face) in enhancing the accessibility of university 
websites. After qualitative content analysis of the question 
responses, Figure 1 was constructed to show the challenges 
and the percentage of experts who pointed out the 
challenges. The challenges were as follows: 
A. Negative Attitude Toward People with Disability 
It is clear from Figure 1 that the main challenge admitted 
by the experts was the negative attitude toward people with 
disability. This attitude was reflected by university websites 
and web developers, as they are part of society. Therefore, 
people with disabilities are usually neglected when designing 
university websites in Saudi Arabia as explained by Expert 
C: 
“When we develop the website, we do not think of users 
with different abilities or special needs at all. I think this 
needs to be changed not only in terms of developing 
accessible website but also in all aspects of our lives.” 
B. Lack of Guidelines for University Websites in Saudi 
Arabia 
The experts mentioned the need for guidelines for all 
aspects of the websites including the accessibility, usability 
and organisation of web pages, especially the home page, 
and consistency in the layout across all Saudi university 
websites. Responses from all experts indicated that no 
guidelines, either international or local, were used for web 
accessibility.  
Expert C stated: 
“The focus is on different issues such as aesthetic and 
security of the website. No attention has been paid to 
accessibility issues.” 
Expert D added: 
“No accessibility guidelines are followed at all. What our 
boss asks us to do is copying what other local and 
international universities do in their websites.” 
Expert G explained: 
"No specific web accessibility guidelines are used in our 
website. We are connected to a website for evaluating 
university websites (www.webometrics.info). It puts different 
criteria for the evaluation process and being accessible is 
not one of these criteria. In addition, our university is an 
emerging university established five years ago. The 
population in our region and university students are low 
compared 
to 
other 
long-established 
universities. 
Consequently, university members with special needs are 
extremely low." 
Expert H, I and M mentioned that although they do not 
follow any web accessibility guidelines, they are at least 
committed to consistency across their website by applying a 
single theme to all its pages. 
C. Lack of Training for Developers 
Around 60% of the experts have pointed out that the third 
challenge was the lack of training for developers. This has an 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-485-5
WEB 2016 : The Fourth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

impact on the development of their skills and adaptation to 
new technologies and techniques.  
D. Lack of Knowledge and Experience 
The fourth challenge was the lack of knowledge and 
experience regarding web accessibility, as experts face 
difficulties when looking for resources they need in Arabic. 
As stated by Expert L: 
"Due to difficulties to find technical resources in Arabic, 
we tend to limit ourselves to what we can find in Arabic." 
E. Lack of Adminstrative Support 
Around 53% of the experts cited the lack of support from 
their bosses as one of their challenges. For example, Expert 
D stated: 
"My boss does not want me to produce accessible web 
elements such as, text alternative for images." 
F. Lack of Improvement Plans for Web Accessibility 
Lack of plans for improvement of university websites 
was another challenge.  Expert H mentioned: 
"It is not easy to introduce web accessibility in a 
university 
website, 
therefore 
a 
clear 
and 
realistic 
improvement plan is needed." 
G. Lack of Support for Arabic in Assistive Technology 
Lack of support for the Arabic language in assistive 
technology was an issue raised by 40% of the experts. They 
claimed that in Arabic they do not work, as well as in 
languages, such as English. Despite the accessibility 
techniques provided on websites, assistive technology would 
hinder disabled users from accessing the website. An 
example was given by Expert E for the poor performance of 
Arabic screen readers, which affects the experience of the 
blind people who use them. Expert M agreed on this matter 
and added: 
“An Arabic screen reader was added in some of the 
pages of our website, but the quality of reading is much 
lower than it should be.” 
H. Incorporating Applications into the Website (Integrated 
SW) 
The last challenge, identified by around 27% of the 
experts, was integrating software applications into a website. 
The poor level of accessibility of some of these applications 
would have an influence on the whole website. 
V. DISCUSSION 
From the previous findings, it is apparent that the 
requirements of disabled people are largely ignored when 
developing university websites in Saudi Arabia. Different 
challenges and obstacles which contribute to this problem 
and hinder the implementing of accessibility have been 
identified by researchers and web developers in these 
universities. In general, these challenges vary as they 
concern different issues, such as awareness, technical and 
administrative issues.   
A number of studies have discussed disability in Saudi 
Arabia, such as [11] and [12]. They have reported the 
negative attitude of the community toward people with 
disability as a challenge in conducting research involving the 
disabled or improving services for them. Our findings agreed 
with this aspect since around 87% of the experts cited this 
issue as a main challenge in enhancing web accessibility. As 
reported in [13], the main reason for negative attitudes is the 
lack of knowledge about those with disabilities which could 
be improved by an increased level of knowledge and 
education about disability issues. 
Lack of guidelines for university websites in general and 
accessibility issues in particular is another obstacle that 
needs to be addressed by developing guidelines appropriate 
for university websites in Saudi Arabia and/or adapting the 
existing web accessibility guidelines to the local context. In 
addition, legal enforcement by decision makers to follow the 
guidelines in these universities is needed. 
Other issues regarding lack of training, knowledge and 
experience show a pressing need to raise the developers’ 
skills by training them on up to date technologies. Moreover, 
technical Arabic resources need to be enriched by translating 
the resources into foreign languages.  Lack of knowledge 
was a common finding between the current study and [15]. 
Figure 1 Challenges to Enhancing Web Accessibility Identified by Web Developers of Saudi University Websites 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-485-5
WEB 2016 : The Fourth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

Lack of training was also pointed out as a challenge faced by 
web developers and webmasters in the USA [14]. 
It is obvious that the lack of awareness about web 
accessibility 
and 
its 
importance 
comes 
from 
the 
administrative level which adds to accessibility problems. 
Spreading awareness about this issue should start from the 
managers who then can spread it to their developers. Lack of 
managerial support was also an issue for American 
webmasters as discussed in [14]. 
Lack of improvement plans was another challenge that 
needs to be overcome by developing strategic, stepwise and 
realistic plans for adoption of web accessibility. In addition, 
more work in the area of assistive technology is needed to 
support Arabic language as most of the technologies do not 
satisfy their users. The investigation of the accessibility of 
integrated applications is another issue that would be 
resolved by early investigation before integration into a 
website.  
Accessibility of integrated applications is another issue 
that would be resolved by investigating them before 
integrating them into the website. 
We note that lack of time and budget was revealed as a 
finding from [14] and [15]; however, it was not revealed as 
an obstacle in this study. This indicates that the financial and 
time resources are available and would help improve the 
accessibility situation.    
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this exploratory study, a number of challenges and 
obstacles in enhancing the accessibility of university 
websites in Saudi Arabia have been identified by web 
designers and developers in these universities. A number of 
them were found similar to findings from other studies 
investigating the perspective of web developers. They are: 
lack of training and lack of managerial support.  
Similar to any other exploratory study, this study has 
some limitations. These include the number of experts 
involved in the study (15 experts) and their spread across 
government universities in the Kingdom (9 universities). 
Further in-depth research is necessary by recruiting 
participants from all government and private universities 
which might lead to reveal further accessibility challenges.  
In order to enhance the accessibility in Saudi university 
websites, the identified challenges and obstacles in this study 
need to be overcome. The successful implementation of 
accessibility of university websites would allow people with 
disabilities and special needs to be involved in more 
activities as are their nondisabled peers and to benefit from 
the services offered by these websites. 
REFERENCES 
[1] https://www.mohe.gov.sa/ar/studyinside/Government-
Universities/Pages/default.aspx. [retrieved: May, 2016]. 
[2] M. Rana, M. Fakrudeen, and U. Rana, “Evaluating Web 
Accessibility of University Web Sites in the Kingdom of 
Saudi 
Arabia,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Technology, 
Knowledge & Society, vol 7 (3), 2011,  pp. 1-16. 
[3] Internet Usage in the Middle East,  
http://www.internetworldstats.com/middle.htm. [retrieved: 
May, 2016]. 
[4] http://rs.ksu.edu.sa/82739.html. [retrieved: May, 2016]. 
[5] A. Abanumy, A. Al-Badi, and P. Mayhew, “E-Government 
Website Accessibility: In-Depth Evaluation of Saudi Arabia 
and Oman,”. The Electronic Journal of e-Government, vol 
3(3), 2005, pp. 99-106. 
[6] M. A. Khan and K. A. Buragga, “Effectiveness of 
Accessibility and Usability of Government Websites in Saudi 
Arabia,” Canadian Journal of Pure and Applied Sciences, vol 
4(2), 2010, pp. 1227-1231. 
[7] H. S. Al-Khalifa, “Exploring the Accessibility of Saudi 
Arabia E-Government Websites: A Preliminary Results,” In 
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Theory 
and Practice of Electronic Governance, ACM, Beijing, China, 
October 25 - 28, 2010, pp. 274-278. 
[8] H. Al-Khalifa, et al., “A Pilot Study for Evaluating Arabic 
Websites Using Automated WCAG 2.0 Evaluation Tools,” In 
International Conference on Innovations in Information 
Technology (IIT),  IEEE, April 2011, pp. 293-296. 
[9] H. S. Al-Khalifa, “The Accessibility of Saudi Arabia 
Government Web Sites: An Exploratory Study,” Universal 
Access in the Information Society, vol 11(2), 2012, pp. 201-
210. 
[10] A. Al-Faries, H. S. Al-Khalifa, M. S. Al-Razgan, and M. Al-
Duwais, “Evaluating the Accessibility and Usability of Top 
Saudi E-Government Services. In Proceedings of the 7th 
International Conference on Theory and Practice of Electronic 
Governance, ICEGOV '13, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
2013, pp. 60-63. 
[11] S. I. AlGain and S. S. Al-Abdulwahab, “Issues and Obstacles 
in Dsability Research in Saudi Arabia,” Asia Pacific 
Disability Rehabilitation Journal, vol 13(1), 2002, pp. 45-49. 
[12] M. S. Al-Jadid, “Disability in Saudi Arabia,” Saudi Medical 
Journal, vol 34 (5), 2013, pp. 453-460. 
[13] S. S. Al-Abdulwahab and S. I. Al-Gain, “Attitudes of Saudi 
Arabian Health Care Professionals towards People with 
Physical Disabilities,” Asia Pacific Disability Rehabilitation 
Journal, vol 14(1), 2003, pp. 63-70. 
[14] J. Lazar, A. Dudley-Sponaugle, and K. D. Greenidge, 
“Improving Web Accessibility: A Study of Webmaster 
Perceptions,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol 20(2), 269-
288. 
[15] S. Trewin, B. Cragun, C. Swart, J. Brezin, and J. Richards, 
“Accessibility Challenges and Tool Features: An IBM Web 
Developer Perspective,” In Proceedings of the 2010 
International Cross Disciplinary Conference on Web 
Accessibility (W4A), 2010, pp. 32:1-32:10 . 
[16] A. Bhattacherjee, “Social Science Research: Principles, 
Methods, and Practices,” Textbooks Collection. Book 3. 
[17] G. Guest, A. Bunce, and L. Johnson, “How Many Interviews 
are Enough? An Experiment with Data Saturation and 
Variability,” Field Methods, vol 18(1), 2006, 59-82. 
[18] R. Brislin, “Back-Translation for Cross-Cultural Research,” 
Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, vol 1, 1970, pp. 185-
216. 
[19] R. Brislin, “Translation and Content Analysis of Oral and 
Written Materials,” Handbook of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 
vol 1, pp. 389-444. 
 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-485-5
WEB 2016 : The Fourth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

