A Study on User-Customized Local Information Notification Service Using 
Association Analysis  
 
Eunmi Jung, Jooyoung Ko, Andrew G. Kim*, Hyenki Kim 
Dept. of Multimedia Engineering 
Andong National University, *Appsol.kr INC 
Andong, Republic of  Korea, *Youngju, Republic of  Korea 
e-mail: jeilc@naver.com, sonice@anu.ac.kr, geoner@appsol.kr , hkkim@anu.ac.kr (Corresponding Author)  
 
 
Abstract— Recently, a vast amount of data is being generated 
due to the popularization of mobile devices and the increase of 
various internet services using smart phones. It is necessary to 
quickly provide the local information needed by the user 
through filtering of the information in order to satisfy the 
user's various information needs. Therefore, the study 
proposes a user-customized local information notification 
service system based user past history and local resident past 
history data based on Android. Data used in association 
analysis is weather information. This study helps users to make 
quick decision and provide information for making rational 
choices, and it is helpful for service providers for providing 
efficient service through user pattern analysis. 
Keywords-Local Information; Big Data; LBS; Association 
Analysis. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Big data refers to a large cluster of data. Social Network 
Service (SNS) means online service that creates and 
strengthens social relations through free communication, 
information sharing, and network expansion among users. 
The biggest advantage is that anyone can produce content, 
and deliver content to a large number of people at high speed. 
As portable mobile devices diversify and network becomes 
available anytime, anywhere, a large amount of data is 
created as users use things such as SNS. Also, with the 
advent of the Internet of things, data is being generated from 
individuals or objects anytime and anywhere. These large 
amounts of big data are now recognized as important assets 
and it can be analyzed and reworked to produce meaningful 
information [1].  
Association analysis is the process of finding association 
rules between items that exist between data. It analyzes the 
relationship of specific rules that appear when a user 
purchases a product or uses a service to provide better 
products or services to the user [2]. This study aims to 
provide users with customized local information by 
analyzing the relationship between user past history and local 
resident past history with weather.  The aim is to analyze 
weather factors based on restaurant information and provide 
a recommendation list for users to select restaurants 
according to the current weather. Another aim is to provide 
users with quick recognition of restaurants that were 
frequently chosen by users through visualization. With the 
spread of various mobile devices, it is possible to use 
smartphones regardless of age and living area. In Korea, it is 
not difficult to use wired and wireless communication in 
rural as well as urban areas due to the development of 
network environment. This study is a system design that 
provides local information service more quickly through 
'Associations Analysis' with user history, local history and 
weather. It is determined that the user-customized 
recommendation service user interface helps a user to make 
rational selections.  
The structure of this paper is as follows. Session  2 
describes the related studies, Session  3 describes the design 
of  customized local information notification service, and 
Session 4 describes the conclusion of the paper. 
II. 
 RELATED STUDIES 
There are a variety of efforts from companies and service 
providers to provide better products and services for 
consumers. Data mining is required to find association rules 
in various data [3]. Users register their experiences such as 
product reviews on Internet boards after using products and 
services, and these contents have been analyzed and applied 
to developing products and services. This is a product and 
service improvement method based on user experience. User 
experience is a concept that includes the overall experience, 
such as the emotional response, value, and attitude that users 
experience when using a product or service [4]. The study by 
Hwang used big data analysis to study a user experience 
evaluation methodology focusing on analysis of online 
reviews of Amazon Echo [5].  
Among the analysis methods of big data, association 
analysis is a method of finding the association rule between 
the items existing in the data and figuring out the purchase 
characteristics of the customer. By analyzing the structured 
and unstructured data generated by customers using products 
and services, products and services that are right for the 
customers can be suggested in advance. The study “Spatial 
Association Analysis among Seoul Metropolitan Cities” by 
Park, analyzed the spatial association between Seoul 
metropolitan cities after the 1990s to provide basic data to 
support policy establishment [6].  
In the case of application using Big Data, there is an 
example of solving the difficulties of citizens in Seoul by 
operating a night bus in areas with a lot of nighttime floating 
population. As a result of analyzing big data, using mobile 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

phones, from midnight to early morning in March 2013, the 
bus route was improved by analyzing patterns of traffic 
demand and flow population in a specific area [7]. In Japan, 
the Nomura Research Institute has used a smartphone 
navigation service to minimize the damage to road traffic in 
the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake [8].  
In Park 's study, it was found that affinities, information, 
and reciprocity influence brand awareness in mobile 
advertising through Location Based Service (LBS) mobile 
location - based advertising [9]. Also, the study by Jung 
analyzed the sales data of restaurants to analyze the 
relationship with sales. She found that the number of times a 
consumer visits a restaurant is affected by variables such as 
weather, holiday and newspaper articles, and that weather 
affects restaurant sales [10]. The research in  has been 
conducted to provide users with frequent location 
information and personal recommendation services through 
their location information and usage histories [11]. The 
purpose of this study is to analyze the relationship with the 
weather in choosing restaurants and to provide recommended 
restaurants to help the customer select a restaurant menu 
using weather variables. This study not only helps consumers 
to select a restaurant, but also analyzes the characteristics of 
purchases in restaurants in the area, and in the perspective of 
the vendor, it can help provide the right food for the 
consumers by analyzing the characteristics of the buyers.  
III. 
USER CUSTOMIZED LOCAL INFORMATION 
NOTIFICATION SERVICE DESIGN 
The system designed in the study makes it possible to 
provide local information notification service based on 
Android by using past user history, past history data of local 
residents and weather information. Figure 1 is a conceptual 
diagram of a customized local information notification 
service system.  
 
 
Figure 1. System conceptual Diagram 
 
The data used in the study include past user history, past 
history data of local residents, and weather information uses 
cloudiness and precipitation to classify into clear, overcast, 
rain, and snow. Past user history is used to show the list of 
restaurants that the user often visited in relation to today's 
weather through association analysis with the weather. Also, 
a list of surrounding restaurants that match user menus 
frequently searched by residents is created, a list of 
surrounding restaurants where residents most often take 
deliveries is created, and menus the local residents often 
order in relation to the weather is also recommended. In 
addition it is a service that visualizes the related data on the 
map.  Figure 2(a) shows data obtained from analysis of past 
user history and association analysis with the weather, and it 
is a screen that shows a list of restaurants frequently visited 
by the user. When the menu is selected, it is directly linked 
to order. Figure 2(b) shows a screen visualizing a list of 
restaurants that local residents frequently visit based on 
current location.  
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 2. Favorite restaurants and single stree map 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

 
Figure 3(a) is a screen that shows user –related 
recommended menu lists when a restaurant is selected. 
Figure 3(b)  shows the selected final restaurant order screen. 
'Jajangmyeon' is a Korean food name and Noodles with 
Black Soybean Sauce 
 
 
Figure 3.Menu recommendation and ordering UI 
Table 1 is a table of major associations extracted for 
association analysis. To analyze whether food is associated 
with the weather, we analyzed it using the 'arules' library of 
the R programming language. 
TABLE 1.  MAJOR ASSOCIATIONS EXTRACTION 
lhs 
  
rhs 
support 
confidence 
lift 
{} 
=> 
{jajangmyeon} 
0.533333 
0.5333333 
1 
{rain} 
=> 
{jajangmyeon} 
0.444444 
0.8333333 
1.086957 
{sun} 
=> 
{naengmyeon} 
0.444444 
0.5797101 
1.086957 
 
As a result of extracting major associations, it was 
confirmed that "rain" was 53% within the total, and in the 
case where "rain" and "jajangmyeon" appeared at the same 
time, it was 44% of the total. The effect of "rain" on 
"jajangmyeon" was found to be 83%, which confirmed a 
very high association. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Local information refers to all information relevant to the 
corresponding community, and ‘local information service’ 
refers to a service that provides this everyday and practical 
local information. The study provided a customized local 
information notification service through association analysis 
between weather and delivery food to help quick decision-
making in users and provision of efficient service by 
businesses. Through the study, it was possible to analyze 
restaurant order characteristics in a region and businesses can 
analyze purchase patterns to aid in providing user 
customized service. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by a grant from 2016 Joint-
industry-academic Research Fund of  SMBA, Korea. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Bok, and J. Yoo, “Activation Policy and Case Study of Big 
Data“, Journal of Electrical Engineering & Technology, 
Information and Communications Magazine, Vol. 31, No.11,  
pp.3-13, 2014. 
[2] T. Brijs, G. Swinnen, K. Vanhoof, and G. Wets, “Using 
Association Rules for Product Assortment Decisions: A Case 
Study, KDD”, '99 Proceedings of the fifth ACM SIGKDD 
international conference on Knowledge discovery and data 
mining, Aug. 2013, pp. 254-260 , ISSN 1-58113-143-7 
[3] B. Liu,  W. Hsu, and Y. Ma, “Integrating Classification and 
Association Rule Mining”, Appeared in KDD-98, New York, 
Aug. 1998, pp. 27-31, ISBN 978-1-57735-004-0 
[4] K. Lee, I. Lee, S. Jun, S. Yang, G. Choi, J. Kim, S. Park, and 
M. Han, “How to Measure the User Experience?”, Proceeding 
of HCI KOREA 2016: The HCI Society of Korea, Vol. 2, pp. 
851-856, 2008. 
[5] H. Hwang, H. Shim, and J. Choi, “Exploration of User 
Experience Research Method with Big Data Analysis : 
Focusing on the Online Review Analysis of Echo”, The 
Journal of the Korea Contents Association, Vol. 16, No. 8, 
2016. 
[6] J. Park, H. Chang, and J. Kim, “Spatial Association of 
Population Concentration in Seoul Metropolitan Area” 
Journal of The Korean Society of Civil Engineers D, Vol. 22, 
No. 3D, pp391-397, 2008. 
[7] Seoul, Seoul, Big Data Usage Speed Analysis, [Online]. 
Available from: http://opengov.seoul.go.kr/section/1520565, 
2014.05.12. 
[8] Y. M. Yoon, “Big Data Global 10 Best Practices Big Data – 
Lead the world with Big Data”, National Infornmation 
Society Agency, 2012. 
[9] C. Park, "The Impact of LBS Mobile Advertising on the 
Brand Marketing," Korea Real Estate Society, Vol. 33, No. 1, 
pp. 391-409, 2015. 
[10] E. Jung, “A Study on Prediction Service Modeling Using Big 
Data”, Ph. D. Dissertation, Andong National University, 
December, 2016. 
[11] E. Jung, J. Ko, and H. Kim, “Design of Customized Local 
Information 
System 
Based 
on 
Big 
Data 
Analysis”, 
International Journal of Applied Engineering Research, Vol. 
11, No. 2, pp. 766-769, 2016. 
 
(a) 
(b) 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-557-9
WEB 2017 : The Fifth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

