User Profiles in Information Web Portals 
Carmen Moraga, Mª 
Ángeles Moraga 
Alarcos Research Group 
University of Castilla-La 
Mancha,  
Ciudad-Real, Spain 
Carmen.Moraga@alu.uclm.es 
MariaAngeles.Moraga@uclm.es 
Angélica Caro 
Department of Computer 
Science and Information 
Technologies, University of 
Bio Bio,  
Chillán, Chile 
mcaro@ubiobio.cl     
                                                                                                                                                    
 
Coral Calero 
Alarcos Research Group 
University of Castilla-La 
Mancha,  
Ciudad-Real, Spain  
Coral.Calero@uclm.es 
 
Rodrigo Romo Muñoz 
Department of Business 
Management, University of 
Bio Bio,  
Chillán, Chile 
rromo@ubiobio.cl 
 
Abstract—The number of Web portals is increasing daily. 
These Web portals can be grouped into different types 
according to their purpose. One of these types is ‘Information 
Web Portals’ in which data quality is particularly important to 
users. This paper uses a survey to study the relevance that 
users place on a series of data quality characteristics in this 
type of Web portal. To do this, we determined various user 
profiles based on demographic aspects (gender, age range, level 
of studies and type of organization). We also analysed whether 
each profile prefers some characteristics to others. The results 
obtained will allow designers and developers to know which 
data quality characteristics they should place most emphasis 
on depending on the users of a particular Web portal. 
Keywords-Data Quality; Web portal; Statistical Method. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Internet has become a powerful tool for 
communication purposes, both for the exchange of 
information and ideas and for learning and gaining 
knowledge, and it is even used for participation in local, 
national and international networking. The Internet has also 
come to be used in all aspects of our life in recent years [1]. 
One means to access information on the Internet is through 
Web portals. A Web portal is an entry point to the Internet 
[2-4]. Web portals select, organize, integrate distributed 
contents and enable viewers to access organizational 
services via the Internet [5-7]. Web portals play an 
increasingly specialized role in the online world [3] and they 
also allow the creation of a work and/or business 
environment in which users can navigate in a simple manner 
to rapidly obtain the information that they need [8], thus 
facilitating access to data on the Internet. 
We have found several classifications of Web portal (i.e 
[9, 10]) depending on the type of purpose. In our work, we have 
divided Web portals into the following groups according to 
the principal type of activity that users wish to carry out: 
• 
‘The Search for and Reading of Information’: defined 
as those portals that the user uses solely to obtain 
information (e.g., a TV channel Portal to discover 
what programs are being shown, a cinema Portal to 
see what films are being shown, a newspaper Portal, 
etc.) This type of portal is, therefore, merely 
informative. 
• 
‘Commercial Interaction’: determined by the fact 
that it is used to carry out some kind of on-line 
transaction, such as buying train or airline tickets, 
making downloads of a legal nature, transferring 
money, making payments, etc. This type of portal is, 
therefore, of a transactional nature. 
• 
‘Interaction with other People’: the important aspect 
here is the ability to relate to or get in contact with 
other people, known or otherwise. For example, 
social networks. This type of portal is, therefore, of 
the data-exchange type. 
Although the same users may access each type of Web 
portal, their preferences may be different according to, 
amongst other things, their demographic aspects, for 
example, with regard to gender [11], [12]. Men are, 
according to [13], more analytical and therefore more 
objective, whilst women are more subjective and intuitive. 
The level of the user’s studies also influences Web portal use 
and, as the author states in [14], there is a significant 
difference between the Internet addiction scores of students 
and other professional groups.  
Furthermore, Data Quality (DQ), which is often defined 
as the ability of a collection of data to meet user 
requirements [15, 16], is increasingly more important to 
Internet users [15, 17, 18] . This importance resides in the 
fact that users can use the data obtained to carry out 
everyday tasks and to make decisions both in their jobs and 
in their personal lives. With this, the area of Web portal data 
quality has consequently begun to emerge [19]. The Web 
portal owners are aware that DQ is important to increase user 
reliability, since users can clearly see its usefulness. Thus, 
when the degree of satisfaction increases, the number of 
customers that access the portal also increases. 
All of the above led us to consider that it would be 
interesting to establish whether different user profiles exist as 
regards preferences towards the various characteristics of 
DQ in a Web portal. This was done by studying the 
following demographic aspects: the gender, age range, level 
of studies and type of organization to which Web portals 
users are linked. 
In this paper, we particularly focus on the analysis of DQ 
characteristics for Web portals of the 'Search for and Reading 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

of Information' type (which from here on will be referred to as 
‘Information Web Portals’). The DQ reference model used was 
SPDQM (SQuaRE-Aligned Portal Data Quality Model), a 
DQ model for Web portals which provides 42 DQ characteristics. 
These DQ characteristics are distributed in 4 categories: Intrinsic, 
Operational, Contextual and Representational. [20]. We shall use 
the set of DQ characteristics in the Contextual category, 
since it is the only category in which the importance that 
users place on certain DQ characteristics with regard to 
others may vary according to the type of Web portal.  
Our study will allow us to determine, first, if all the DQ 
characteristics are important for users, and second, which 
are most relevant in comparison to the others according to 
the different user profiles established. 
The results obtained will allow designers and developers 
to discover the most relevant DQ characteristics according to 
the aforementioned user profiles, in order to reinforce these 
DQ characteristics in the Web portal and thus satisfy their users. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: in 
Section 2, the DQ characteristics in the Contextual category 
are defined. Section 3 describes the data-collection method 
used. The various user profiles and their preferences as 
regards the DQ characteristics in the ‘Information Web 
Portals’ is determined in Section 4. In Section 5, guidelines 
for designers and developers are indicated. Finally, Section 6 
presents our conclusions and future work. 
 
II. 
THE CONTEXTUAL DQ IN WEB PORTALS 
As already mentioned, in this work we shall focus on 
‘Information Web Portals’ to determine the relevance of the 
DQ characteristics in the SPDQM Contextual category. 
In SPDQM, the Contextual category highlights the 
requirement which states that data quality must be 
considered within the context of the task at hand. A certain 
type of context must therefore be considered in the 
Contextual category in order to establish the data quality in 
this environment, in our case, the ‘Information Web Portals’. 
This category contains 10 DQ characteristics and 6 DQ 
sub-characteristics (see Fig. 1). Further information on 
SPDQM  can be found in [20].  
Moreover, the importance that is placed on certain DQ 
characteristics in the Contextual category with regard to 
others may be different according to the various user profiles.   
 
 
 
Figure 1. DQ characteristics in the contextual category 
 
III. 
DATA COLLECTION SURVEY 
In order to determine the user profiles and the DQ 
priorities for the different profiles of ‘Information Web 
portal’ users, we decided to carry out an unsupervised 
survey, in which questions related to this type of Web portals 
appeared. We used “the principles of survey research” 
proposed in [21, 22]. 
The questionnaire in this survey was formed of a total of 
21 questions, 4 of which were general, related to 
demographic aspects (Table I), 16 of which were related to 
DQ characteristics in the Contextual category and 1 question 
concerning the definition of the term ‘Contextual’. The 
questions concerning the DQ characteristics had to be easy 
to understand. Pre-test questionnaire was therefore first 
carried out with users who were experienced in the use of 
Web portals and whose feedback allowed us to modify the 
initial 
questions 
and 
obtain 
a 
definitive 
set 
of 
understandable questions for all types of Web portal users 
(Table II). In the questionnaire, only one response was 
possible because we used closed questions.  
The questions were answered using an 11-point Likert-
type interval scale, ranging from strongly disagree (0) to 
strongly agree (10). 
The final questionnaire was distributed to a heterogeneous 
group of 200 Web portal users from Europe and Latin 
America, by e-mail or in printed format. The questionnaires 
were collected in the same manner, and 192 of them were 
returned, signifying that a response rate of 96% was 
obtained. However, 4 surveys had to be discarded because 
they were incomplete. We were therefore left with 188 surveys 
that could be used, thus obtaining a response rate of 94%.  
Once the data obtained with the questionnaires had been 
collected, it was necessary to carry out a statistical analysis 
to investigate the results [23] .  
The starting point for this was the calculation of the 
Cronbach’s alpha to estimate the reliability of the results. A 
value of 0.942 was obtained as a result of this, which 
indicated that the results had good internal consistence. The 
information was therefore reliable. 
An analysis of the sample obtained is shown as follows. 
IV. 
DETERMINING PREFERENCES FOR DQ 
CHARACTERISTICS ACCORDING TO THE USER PROFILE 
In this section we shall determine whether all the DQ 
characteristics identified in the Contextual category in our 
SPDQM model are considered to be important by the users 
of this type of Web portals, and we shall also identify 
whether any of these DQ characteristics are more important 
than others depending on the various user profiles. 
This will be done by carrying out a statistical analysis of 
the results obtained from the survey with the use of an SPSS 
statistical analysis tool and on the basis of the following steps: 
 
 
 
 
 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

TABLE I.  
QUESTIONS CONCERNING DEMOGRAPHIC ASPECTS 
Gender: Male/Female 
Level of studies COMPLETED: High School / Vocational Training/ University/ Post Graduate. 
Type of organization with which you are linked (for study or work purposes). If there are various, please place them in 
the order in which most time is dedicated to them, from greatest to least: Education / Service Sector / Industrial - 
Commercial – Financial / Other (Please state which).  
Age range: Under 25 / Between 25 and 35 / Between 35 and 45 / Between 45 and 55 / Over 55.  
TABLE II.  
QUESTIONS CONCERNING THE CONTEXTUAL DQ CATEGORY 
1.- The data should be sufficiently detailed to facilitate the task at hand.   
2.- The data obtained from a Web portal should be true and reliable (believable).   
3.- In general, the data in Web portals should be understandable for you to consider them valid. (This characteristic is related to those shown in 
questions 1 and 2).   
4.- It should be possible to verify the data, and it would be appropriate to know their author and/or their source, and to be able to obtain a record of 
any modifications made to them.    
5.- The data should be defined in accordance with a regulation, i.e., they should comply with pre-established standards (by, for example, showing 
dates, prices, etc.) thus avoiding situations in which doubts or different interpretations emerge.  
6.- The data provided by a Web portal should contain the appropriate and specific information for the use to which they will be put.  
7.- The data should adapt to user needs (e.g., they should be integrated into other applications or presented in different formats).  
8.- The data should be useful and specially oriented towards the user community that will utilize them.  
9.- The data should be innovative, thus allowing those who use them to obtain new knowledge.  
10.- In general, the data should be suitable to allow the user to obtain advantages thanks to their use. (This characteristic is related to those shown in 
questions 7, 8 and 9).   
11.- The data should be available in the shortest possible amount of time.  
12.- In general, the data should be applicable and innovative, and should be available in a reasonable amount of time. (This characteristic is related to 
those shown in questions 9 and 11).  
13.- The data offered by portals should be useful for their users, and should satisfy their needs.  
14.- It should be possible to obtain the data by using the appropriate quantities and types of resources (by, for example, using the smallest possible 
number of links to locate the data desired).  
15.- The data obtained from Web portals should be exact and concise, thus helping you to find relevant results.  
16.- The data in Web portals should provide the information that users are seeking.  
17.- The data provided by Web portals should have a level of quality that accords with the specific use to which you wish to put them, i.e., in the 
context of the specific area in which you wish to work with them.  
 
A. Study of DQ Characteristics: Descriptive Statistical 
A descriptive statistical analysis was used to show the 
minimum, maximum and mean values of all the DQ 
characteristics (including a question concerning the definition 
of the term ‘Contextual’) with the objective of verifying whether 
all these DQ characteristics are important in ‘Information 
Web Portals’. 11 characteristics with mean values over 8 
were obtained, while the others have values of between 7.57 
and 8, all of them being above 7.5. The mean values given 
by users are thus high (nearer to the maximum value of 10 
than to the intermediate value of 5). This signifies that all the 
DQ characteristics in the Contextual category are, in effect, 
important to the users of ‘Information Web Portals’. 
B. Creation of groups of DQ characteristics: Factor analysis 
This sub-section was carried out with the use of a 
factorial 
analysis 
which 
allowed 
us 
to 
determine 
homogeneous groups of DQ characteristics (denominated as 
factors). These factors permitted a summary to be made of 
the relationship between the DQ characteristics considered. 
Each factor is independent of the others. 
The results reveal the existence of three factors (Table 
III). Factor 1, Factor 2 and Factor 3 represent 53.48%, 7.47% 
and 5.83% of the total variance, respectively. These factors, 
when combined, can therefore explain 66.77% of the total 
variance, which can be interpreted as an acceptable 
percentage. 
The Cronbach’s alpha was calculated for each of the 
factors obtained in order to estimate the reliability of the 
results. Factor 1 obtained a Cronbach alpha value of 0.874, 
Factor 2 obtained a Cronbach alpha value of 0.907 and 
Factor 3 obtained a Cronbach alpha value of 0.862. This 
signifies that the values obtained are good, and that the 
results are therefore reliable.  
If we interpret Table III on the basis of the definitions of 
the DQ characteristics we obtain that the data in Factor 1 
must be understandable to users if they are to consider them 
valid (validity), defined according to regulations and 
standards (compliance), true and reliable (reliability), contain  
detailed information to facilitate the task at hand (scope), 
contain the appropriate and specific information needed for 
the use to which they will be put (specialization), are 
verifiable, and the author or source from which they came is 
known (traceability) and can be adapted to user needs 
(flexibility). For Factor 2, the users wish to find what they 
are looking for (effectiveness), with concise data that will 
allow them to find relevant results (precision), that satisfy 
their needs (usefulness) and using an appropriate quantity of 
resources (efficiency). In Factor 3 the users are interested in 
the fact that the data are applicable, innovative (relevancy) 
and are oriented towards a destination community 
(applicability), that they allow them to acquire new 
knowledge (novelty), to obtain advantages from them (value-
added) and that they are available in the shortest possible 
amount of time (timeliness). 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

TABLE III.  
FACTORIAL ANALYSIS 
Factor 1 
Factor 2 
Factor 3 
Validity 
Effectiveness 
Relevancy 
Compliance 
Efficiency 
Timeliness 
Reliability 
Precision 
Novelty 
Scope 
Usefulness 
Value-added 
Specialization 
 
Applicability 
Traceability 
 
 
Flexibility 
 
 
C. Creation of user profiles: Cluster analysis 
The DQ characteristics have now been organized into 
factors. However, our intention was to discover whether any 
of the DQ characteristics are more relevant than others 
according to the different user profiles. To do this, we 
carried out a cluster analysis in order to group the 
previously identified factors by resemblance or similitude. 
Three groups are also obtained in this case. Each cluster 
may be formed of one or various factors, depending on the 
importance that each cluster gives to each factor. Cluster 1 
contains the DQ characteristics of Factor 2. Cluster 2 contains 
the DQ characteristics of Factor 1 and Factor 3 and Cluster 
3 contains the DQ characteristics of Factor 3 (see Table IV). 
Our next objective was to determine the relationship 
between the demographic aspects and each of the clusters 
identified. This was done by using the contingency tables 
shown in Table V and the following steps: 
1º.- We determined which variable had the greatest value 
for each demographic aspect and each cluster. For example, 
Cluster 1 and the demographic aspect ‘gender’ give us a 
value of ‘68’ which corresponds with the variable ‘male’, while 
the demographic aspect ‘level of studies’ gives us a value of 
‘54’ which corresponds with the variable ‘University’. 
2º.- The value obtained was compared with the other 
values in this variable for the other clusters. In the example, 
the values are ‘55’ and ‘44’ for the variable ‘male’ in 
Clusters 2 and 3, respectively, and the values are ‘50’ and ‘56’ 
for the variable ‘University’ in Clusters 2 and 3, respectively . 
3º.- We chose the greatest of the values obtained for this 
variable. In the example, we selected the value ‘68’, which is 
in  Cluster 1,  for  the  variable  ‘male’,   and  the  value  ‘56’,  
which is in Cluster 3, for the variable ‘University’, and this 
variable was discounted in Cluster 1 (the values shown in 
bold type in Table V). 
4º.- For those variables which did not yet have a selected 
value, we chose the highest value in its row. For example, 
for the ‘Vocational Training’ variable, whose values are ‘7’, 
‘13’, and ‘20’ in Clusters 1, 2 and 3, respectively, we chose 
the value ‘20’ which is in Cluster 3 (the values shown in 
italics in Table V). By following these steps we therefore 
obtain the values shown in bold type and in italics 
(highlighted values) in Table V. 
 These results allow each variable of each demographic 
aspect to be situated in one of the three clusters, which allows 
three user profiles to be determined, as is shown in Table VI.  
The user profile 1 is composed of: men between 25 and 
45 with a postgraduate level of studies who work in 
education belong to Cluster 1 and give priority to the DQ 
characteristics in Factor 2 (Effectiveness, Efficiency, 
Precision and Usefulness). In the user profile 2, there are 
users under 25 and over 55 years of age with High School 
who belong to an Industrial, Commercial or Financial 
organization, of which Cluster 2 is composed, give priority to 
the DQ characteristics that correspond with Factor 1 
(Validity, Compliance, Reliability, Scope, Specialization, 
Traceability and Flexibility) and Factor 3 (Relevancy, 
Timeliness, Novelty, Value-added and Applicability). The user 
profile 3 consists of: women between the ages of 45 and 55 
with vocational training or university studies from the 
service sector or another (i.e., not Education, Industrial, 
Commercial or Financial), belong to the cluster 3 and these 
users place more relevance on the DQ characteristics in 
Factor 3 (Relevancy, Timeliness, Novelty, Value-added and 
Applicability). 
TABLE IV.  
CLUSTER ANALYSIS 
Cluster 
1 
2 
3 
Factor 2 
Factor 1 
Factor 3 
 
Factor 3 
 
 
TABLE V.  
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN DEMOGRAPHIC ASPECTS AND CLUSTERS 
Cluster (%) 
Demographic 
Aspect 
Variable 
1 
2 
3 
Male 
68 
55 
44 
Gender 
Female 
32 
45 
56 
Under  25 
13 
36 
16 
Between 25 and 35 
32 
23 
28 
Between 35 and 45 
39 
7 
20 
Between 45 and 55 
13 
23 
30 
Age 
Over 55 
3 
11 
6 
High School 
7 
32 
16 
Vocational Training 
7 
13 
20 
University 
54 
50 
56 
Level of Studies 
Postgraduate 
32 
5 
8 
Education 
58 
41 
35 
Industrial-commercial-financial 
7 
16 
4 
Service Sector 
26 
22 
34 
Type of 
Organization 
Other 
9 
21 
27 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

TABLE VI.  
SUMMARY OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN DEMOGRAPHIC ASPECTS AND CLUSTER 
Profile/  
Cluster 
Factor 
DQ Characteristics 
Gender 
Age 
Level of Studies 
Type of 
Organization 
1 
Factor 2 
Effectiveness, Efficiency, Precision, 
Usefulness 
Male 
Between 25 and 35 
Between 35 and 45 
Postgraduate 
Education 
2 
Factor 1 
 
Factor 3 
Validity, Compliance, Reliability, Scope, 
Specialization, Traceability, Flexibility 
Relevancy, Timeliness, Novelty, Value-added, 
Applicability 
 
< 25  
> 55  
High School 
Industrial-
commercial-
financial 
3 
Factor 3 
Relevancy, Timeliness, Novelty, Value-added, 
Applicability 
Female 
Between 45 and 55  
Vocational Training 
University 
Services 
Other 
 
Limitations of the study. This work has been carried out 
in a systematic manner. Nevertheless, we are conscious that 
it has certain limitations. The first concerns the quality model 
used since we have limited the research to DQ characteristics 
in the Contextual category of the SPDQM model. 
We have also limited the type of Web portal with which we 
have worked, and have focused solely upon ‘Information Web 
portals’ and have obtained those DQ characteristics which are most 
relevant according to the users’ different demographic aspects. 
In future works we shall consider the other types of Web 
portals and we shall analyse the other categories in the model. 
As will be noted, all these changes will make the results that 
will be obtained more global, which is our eventual objective. 
V. 
GUIDELINES TO DESIGNERS AND DEVELOPERS 
In this section, we show the method used in order to 
create guidelines for designers and developers so that they 
will know which DQ characteristics are most important 
according to the type of user to which the ‘Information Web 
portals’ are oriented and which they intend to develop or 
modify. The designers and developers will therefore be able 
to deal with and use them. 
We used the following steps: 
1.- The type of user towards which the Web portal is 
oriented is identified. The type of user will be determined by 
the demographic aspects: gender, age range, level of studies 
and type of organization with which they are linked (for 
study or work purposes). The following examples will allow 
us to analyse the results: 
Example 1: A ‘Information Web portal’ oriented principally 
towards men between 35 and 45 with postgraduate studies 
and belonging to educational organisations. 
Example 2: A ‘Information Web portal’ oriented 
principally towards women under 25 with ‘High School’ 
studies and belonging to organisations in the services sector. 
2.- The cluster and factor belonging to each demographic 
aspect is obtained (see Table IV and Table VI). 
For example 1: 
- Men belong to Cluster 1 with Factor 2. 
- People between 35 and 45 are in Cluster 1 with Factor 2. 
- People with university studies are in Cluster 1 with Factor 2. 
- People in educational organisations are in Cluster 1 
with Factor 2. 
For example 2: 
- Women belong to Cluster 3 with Factor 3. 
 
- People under 25 are in Cluster 2 with Factors 1 and 3. 
- People with ‘High School’ studies are in Cluster 2 with 
Factors 1 and 3. 
- People from organisations in the services sector belong 
to Cluster 3 with Factor 3. 
3.- The designers and developers will put special 
emphasis on the DQ characteristics in the factor that appears 
most often. If none of the factors are repeated or various 
factors are repeated the same amount of times, they will 
consider the DQ characteristics of those factors. 
From example 1: emphasis should be placed on the DQ 
characteristics in Factor 2. Therefore, in ‘Information Web 
portals’, their users are interested in data that are actually 
seeking (Effectiveness), are obtained using appropriate 
quantity and resources (Efficiency), are exact (Precision) and 
that satisfy their needs (Usefulness). 
From example 2: most importance will be placed on the 
DQ characteristics from Factor 3. In this case, users are 
interested in the fact that the data are applicable and 
innovative (Relevancy), are obtained in the least possible 
amount of time (Timeliness), that they allow them to acquire 
new knowledge (Novelty), permit advantages to be attained 
(Value-added) and data that are oriented towards a destination 
community (Applicability) in ‘Information Web portals’. 
We believe that with this type of guidelines, designers and 
developers will increase the data quality of the Web portals 
as perceived by their users, since they will be ‘tailor-made’. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presents a study whose intention is, on the one 
hand to establish the importance that Web portal users place 
on a group of DQ characteristics and, on the other to 
determine whether these DQ characteristics have a different 
level of relevance according to the various user profiles. 
We determined the set of DQ characteristics to be 
analysed by focusing on those corresponding to the 
Contextual category in the DQ model for Web portals 
denominated as SPDQM [20]. Given that the context in which 
DQ characteristics are analysed has an influence on this 
Contextual category, we decided to focus our investigation 
on Web portals of the ‘Information Web Portals’ type. 
Furthermore, the following demographic aspects: gender, 
age range, level of studies and type of organization to which the 
users were linked, were used to identify the various user profiles. 
The entirety of this study was carried out by using a 
survey as a starting point and then analysing the results 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

obtained from the questionnaire by using the SPSS statistical 
analysis tool. The questionnaire in this survey contained a 
total of 21 questions, 4 of which were general, related to 
demographic aspects, 16 of which were related to DQ 
characteristics in the Contextual category and 1 question 
concerning the definition of the term ‘Contextual’.  
In the analysis that followed we identified three different 
user profiles and we grouped the DQ characteristics 
according to those user profiles such that we are now able to 
indicate the set of DQ characteristics to which more attention 
should be paid in the DQ of a Web portal according to a 
particular user profile. 
All of this should enable designers and developers to be 
guided in the construction of Web portals, in order to make 
them more appropriate for the users at which they are aimed. 
Our short-term future work will be to determine the 
importance of DQ characteristics in the Contextual category 
for Web portals of the types ‘Commercial Interaction’ and 
‘Interaction with other People’. We shall then compare our 
current results with the results obtained in the other types of 
portals. In this way, we will see whether all the types of user 
profiles place importance on the same DQ characteristics in 
all types of portals. Our eventual intention is to make our 
model available to users and developers through a free tool. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been funded by the following projects: 
ORIGIN (CDTI-MICINN and FEDER IDI-2010043(1-5)), 
PEGASO/MAGO project (Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovacion 
MICINN and Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional FEDER, 
TIN2009-13718-C02-01), EECCOO (MICINN TRA2009_0074), 
VILMA (JCCM PEII 11-0316-2878) and GEODAS-BC project 
(Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad and Fondo Europeo 
de Desarrollo Regional FEDER, TIN2012-37493-C03-01). 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Komathi and I. Maimunah, "Influence of gender role on 
Internet usage pattern at home among academicians," The 
Journal of International Social Research, vol. 2, 2009. 
[2] K. Laudon and C. Traver, E-commerce 2009 (5th ed.): Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2008. 
[3] P. Sharma and J. Gupta, "A framework for enterprise-wide-e-
commerce portal for evolving organizations," in A. Tatnall 
(Ed.), Web portals: The new gateways to internet information 
and services. Hershey, PA: Idea Group ed, 2005. 
[4] R. Stair and G. Reynolds, Principles of information systems.: 
Boston, MA: Thomson Course Technology, 2008. 
[5] A. S. Al-Mudimigh, Z. Ullah and T. A. Alsubaie, "A 
framework for portal implementation: A case for Saudi 
organizations," 
International 
Journal 
of 
Information 
Management, vol. 31, pp. 38-43, 2011. 
[6] P. Yang, et al., "The emerging concepts and applications of 
the spatial web portal," Photogrammetric Engineering & 
Remote Sensing, vol. 73, pp. 691-698, 2007. 
[7] M. A. Domingues, C. Soares and A. M. Jorge, "A Web-Based 
System to Monitor the Quality of Meta-Data in Web Portals," 
in IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web 
Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology (WI-IATW'06), 
2006, pp. 188-191. 
[8] H. Collins, "Corporate Portal Definition and Features," 
AMACOM, 2001. 
[9] M. Davydov, Corporate Portals and e-Business Integration 
Emerging Business Technology  Series, 2001. 
[10] C.-T. Liu, T. C. Du and H-H. Tsai, "A study of the service 
quality of general portals," Information & Management, vol. 
46, pp. 52-56, 2009. 
[11] A. Durndell and Z. Haag, "Computer self efficacy, computer 
anxiety, attitudes towards the Internet and reported experience 
with the Internet, by gender, in an East European sample," 
Computer in Human Behavior, vol. 18, pp. 521-535, 2002. 
[12] M. E. Hupfer and B. Detlor, "Gender and Web information 
seeking: A self-concept orientation model.," Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science and Technology, 
vol. 57, pp. 1105-1115, 2006. 
[13] D. Kim, X. Lehto and A. Morrison, "Gender differences in 
online travel information search: Implications for marketing 
Communications on the Internet," Tourism Management 
Information Systems; Armonk; Spring, vol. 28, pp. 423-433, 
2007. 
[14] C. Şahin, "An analysis of Internet addiction levels of 
individuals according to various variables," TOJET: The 
Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology, vol. 10, 
pp. 60-66, 2011. 
[15] C. Cappiello, C. Francalanci and B. Pernici, "Data quality 
assessment from the user´s perspective," in Proceeding on 
International Workshop on Information Quality in Information 
Systems (IQIS2004), Paris, France. ACM, 2004, pp. 68-73. 
[16] D. Strong, Y. Lee and R. Wang, "Data Quality in Context," 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 40, pp. 103-110, 1997. 
[17] L. Pipino, Y. Lee and R. Wang, "Data Quality Assessment," 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 45, pp. 211-218, 2002. 
[18] R. Wang and D. Strong, "Beyond accuracy: What data quality 
means to data consumers," Journal of Management 
Information Systems; Armonk; Spring, vol. 12, pp. 5-33, 
1996. 
[19] M. Gertz, T. Ozsu, G. Saake and K-U. Sattler, "Report on the 
Dagstuhl Seminar "Data Quality on the Web"," SIGMOD 
Record., vol. 33, pp. 127-132, 2004. 
[20] C. Moraga, M. Moraga, C. Calero and A. Caro, "SQuaRE-
Aligned Data Quality Model for Web Portals," in 9th 
International Conference on Quality Software (QSIC 2009), 
2009, pp. 117-122. 
[21] B. Kitchenham and S. Pfleeger, "Principles of survey research 
part 2: designing a survey," SIGSOFT: Software Engineering 
Note, vol. 27, pp. 18-20, 2002. 
[22] B. Kitchenham and S. Pfleeger, "Principles of survey research 
part 3: Constructing a survey instrument," SIGSOFT: 
Software Engineering Note, vol. 27, pp. 20-24, 2002. 
[23] M. J. Norusis, SPSS 11.0 Guide to Data Analysis: Prentice 
Hall, 2002. 
 
 
 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

