Creation of an Interactive and Accessible Online Learning Environment  
 
Jere Kuusinen  
Researcher 
Satakunta University of Applied Sciences  
Pori, Finland 
jere.kuusinen@samk.fi 
Jukka Vuorinen  
Web Developer 
Satakunta University of Applied Sciences  
Pori, Finland 
Jukka.Vuorinen@student.samk.fi
 
 
Abstract— In our project www.kaikille.fi, we planned and 
created an interactive online learning environment, the 
purpose of which is to create a pedagogical model for the 
development of an accessible online service. The site includes 
accessibility-related articles written by experts in this field and 
the site's graphic design and programming was carried out by 
using accessible solutions. 
Keywords: accessibility, usability, responsive design, data 
transfer, Content Management 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The main objective of this website project was to support 
the equality of citizens in society. In order to achieve this 
objective, the online site acts as an interactive and 
accessible online learning environment, which provides 
wide-ranging information about accessibility. At the same 
time, the site design is based on the principle of 
accessibility and the idea that its users become our partners 
in the design project. The site will provide expertise in 
accessibility for all sections of society both nationally and 
internationally.  
The content is divided on the basis of different target 
groups, and the site users are able to search the site for 
concrete information, educational packages or, for example, 
useful links and contact information. In addition, the users 
can determine their own competence level, search 
information of accessibility and find tools for work and 
everyday life and learn about new accessibility solutions 
and network with professionals working in the field of 
accessibility. [1]. “Accessibility means that people with 
disabilities can use the Web. More specifically, Web 
accessibility means that people with disabilities can 
perceive, understand, navigate, and interact with the Web, 
and that they can contribute to the Web. It also benefits 
others, including older people with changing abilities due to 
aging” [2). At this step we concentrated in our project for 
users with visual disabilities. 
Interaction arises from discussions between the users and 
the accessibility experts. In short, the site's accessibility is 
wide-ranging and multilevel, and it includes sections such 
as social, cognitive and physical accessibility and 
accessible technology. The project will also produce new 
empirical knowledge about the implementation of an 
accessible online service. 
The technical development was done to satisfy usability 
and accessibility issues with mobility and persons with 
visual disabilities such as color blindness.  The most 
Worpress themes are designed for blogging and the content 
production. 
Wordpress 
is 
a 
user-friendly 
content 
management system (CMS) for publishing web sites and 
blogs. We wanted to combine the easiness of content 
management, responsive design with one page web design, 
which supports better UX (User Experience) amongst 
mobile users. One page design simply means that the entire 
content of the site is gathered into a one website. 
Our idea was not use alternative theme design other than 
the default theme because we created our own solution for 
data transferring from Back end to Front end side. Final 
way to produce the website is an independed solution which 
is separated from Wordpress common framework. The only 
reason why we used Wordpress is the easiness of writing 
articles, adding images, editing, etc.  
A. Related works 
There has been similar theme design development work 
where CSS and Javascript framework like Twitter Bootsrap 
[3] were used, with different content management systems 
like Wordpress to boost site functionality quickly. 
However, we did not copy other existing techniques like 
using specific commercial plugins Bootstrap CSS plugins. 
Also the keypoint in our work was not only to use 
Bootstrap, but the aim was to develope specific information 
retvieval and processing between Wordpress and our Front 
End solution (website). It is hard to say about the novelty of 
our work. Creating the website dynamically without 
reloading existing page elements again we aimed more 
efficient way to perform a web site when the one page 
design principle is used. This is especially important when 
there the entire website material is gathered into a single 
webpage for supporting better mobile users.  
In other words, we have only a single page, not a 
traditional website, but it includes all educational content 
(written in Finnish) about accessibility. Technically, our 
method was not generic because the alternative, common 
way is just use Wordpress default work with its own 
themes. Further explanations about technical issues are 
explained later in this paper.  
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-333-9
WEB 2014 : The Second International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

II. 
METHODS  
To achieve the project goals, we have utilized responsive 
web design for the site layout. Responsive web design 
enables one visual solution across a wide range of users and 
their devices. It makes the website more flexible with 
different screen resolutions or browser window’s width. We 
decided to use Bootstrap for developing responsive, mobile 
site on our project. Bootstrap also “provides a toolkit 
simple and flexible HTML, CSS, and JS for popular UI 
components and interactions.” [3] The graphical design 
itself was based on work of our own design [Fig.1]. 
The site layout is deliberately left plain and simple and its 
colour scheme takes into consideration the needs of users 
suffering from different types of colour-blindness. To make 
the site layout appear similar to every user, we opted for 
blue on a white background, since colour-blind users see 
the colour blue in a fairly similar way as other users [4].  
A. Information retvieval  between Back End and  
Front End 
The aim of this implementation was to create a website, 
where the content to be presented is searched from the 
content management system (Wordpress) and where the 
website is modified into its final form with the help of 
dynamic technologies in responsive web design. The sole 
task of this implementation was to create a user-friendly 
and accessible way of producing content for websites. We 
did not use the default site template of Wordpress for the 
production of the content of the website at all.  
 
 
FIGURE I.  
SITE GRAPHICAL DESIGN 
 
The aim was to create a faster technical solution, which 
would create the website in a more efficient way than the 
present system of content management. 
To begin with, we created a separate index.html file, 
which included the frame of the HTML code of the website. 
The frame included a variety of definitions such as UTF 
sign coding and a definition for the recognition of the size 
of the user’s display. The style files defining the layout and 
Bootstrap.css were also loaded in this file. Bootstrap.css 
enables responsive web design. After that our own style 
definitions were loaded to complete the layout of the 
website. In other words, several well-known web 
technologies 
were 
used 
in 
this 
solution: 
content 
management, CSS style definitions, JSON, JavaScript and 
responsive web design with Twitter Bootstrap. When the 
styles had been designed, we also created our own 
JavaScript and Bootstrap libraries, which collect, parse and 
forward information to the frame file (index.html). The 
above-mentioned technologies form an entity known as 
Front end.  
B. Information Retrieval and Processing 
Transmission of data objects between our own solution 
and Wordpress was carried out by JSON (JavaScript Object 
Notation). JSON is a simple data-interchange format, which 
is suitable for several software environments. When the 
user presses the button on the website, Front end will send 
inquiries to Back end. The information is retrieved from 
Wordpress on the basis of these questions. The 
backend.php file operates as Back end and it includes 
functions taken directly from Wordpress. These functions 
are used to carry out the inquiries. Therefore, Wordpress is 
not used at all. The inquiry outputs will be forwarded to the 
backend_wp.php file. Backend_wp.php unpacks the echo 
of the outputs of specific functions, saves the outputs in 
variables and collects them into a table. JSON is used to 
send them further to the JavaScrip file in backend.php, 
which placed the inquiry in the first place. 
 
C. Turning Information into a Webpage 
The above mentioned JavaScript file will process the 
information, which is in JSON form and saves it into 
variables with additional HTML tags. Later on, these tags 
are needed for detailed layout and styles. These variables 
are merged into one variable, whose content is placed in the 
HTML frame (index.html) in a dynamic way. The menu 
element (user interface menu) is placed separately only 
when it includes submenus. The functions of the website 
are then added by inviting JavaScript functions from a 
separate JavaScript file. When you click the menu, you 
perform Back end searches again. In other words, that part 
of the website is emptied of its content and refilled by the 
outputs of the search. 
All information is searched dynamically and the HTML 
frame (index.html) does not include ready-made elements, 
but everything is created dynamically on the basis of the 
needs. Wordpress only exists to make content producers’ 
work easier and we did not use its presentation themes at 
all. All information is retrieved into the new solution we 
created, and the content changes take place automatically. 
Our final aim is to reduce the amount of page elements and 
as a result speed up the presentation of the website to users.  
 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-333-9
WEB 2014 : The Second International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

III. 
EVALUATION OF ACCESSIBILITY AND USABILITY 
 
The evaluation of the site's usability and accessibility is 
based on the guidelines on the accessibility of online 
services published by the Web Accessibility Initiative WAI  
(W3C). In addition, we conducted two online surveys with 
the visually impaired and people with learning disabilities as 
target groups. The inquiries included a few of tasks and 
multiple-choice questions related to usability and user 
experience as well as accessibility. The online survey was 
broadly based on the questionnaire designed by Lund [5] 
and the WAMMI questionnaire [6] on a website's ease-of-
use. However, the survey was conducted in such a way that 
we could receive feedback on accessibility. Further, the 
website was tested by Apple’s own screen reading 
programme. The testers were requested to give feedback on 
how they had succeeded in using the site with different 
kinds of assistive aids. The aim of the surveys was to find 
out how to make the website more user-friendly and 
accessible. 
Both surveys were answered by a very small number of 
users. However, there was not a lot of dispersion in the 
answers, and in both surveys some of the answers were very 
similar. Participants were invited from different groups of 
people with disabilities but most of the testers were visually 
impaired. Also, most of them were men. There were 10 
participants in the first survey and 11 in the second one.  
 
 
 
FIGURE II.  
PAGE 
SIZES 
AND 
REQUEST 
COUNTS 
BASED 
ON  
                             GT METRIX SITE LOADING SPEED ANALYSIS 
 
A. Technical evaluation 
Based on our observations in simulations, the fact that the 
colour blue appears to be darker to most colour-blind users 
enhances the visibility of white text on a blue background.  
We evaluated the function of the layout by using online 
services simulating colour-blindness [7] and web page 
screen resolution test services like Webconf [8].  In 
addition, we tested the site with a variety of data terminal 
equipment, such as tablets and smart phones. The site's 
design takes the visually impaired into account by offering 
screen readers for different parts of the user interface or, 
alternatively, by providing access to different page texts in 
an audio format. We also tested site loading speed effiency 
like GT metrix [9]. Based on our tests the page loading time 
was first reduced, but it also varied when the site was 
updated [Fig. 2].  We are continuing the site optimization 
work. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
It is difficult to assess the efficiency of the website, since 
the devices used are of different quality. However, on the 
basis of the usability tests, our solution can be used with a 
variety of web browsers and data terminal equipment. None 
of the testers who answered the questions on usability used a 
mobile device. Positive feedback was given, in particular, on 
the user interface and its efficiency with different assistive 
aids. However, this does not necessarily mean that the 
website in itself functions well but it might indicate that the 
assistive aids, e.g. the speech synthesis programme works 
well. Yet, the testers thought that the user interface mostly 
works well.  The testers mentioned as deficiencies the 
complex dropdown-menus which demand good motor skills 
from their users. The website also has some other 
deficiencies, and therefore, it does not yet conform the 
definitions of W3C A-level accessibility [10]. W3C defines 
three web accessibility levels from the lowest A to the best 
AAA accessibility level. On the other hand the visually 
impaired users only criticised the dropdown-menus but not 
the accessibility or usability of the website. The participants 
also gave positive feedback on the content of the website. 
 
V. 
FURTHER WORK 
In a context of iterative design process, development work 
is done step by step after every feedback session from users. 
Our project is still on early stages. There is still a lot of work 
with providing equivalent alternatives to auditory and visual 
content for peoples with disablities. Also clarifying the usage 
of natural language must be done as described W3C Web 
accessibility guidelines. [10]. At the same time, a lot of work 
has been done for designing the site independence from 
devices. After early phases a lot of data optimization has 
been done especially reducing image sizes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-333-9
WEB 2014 : The Second International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

REFERENCES 
 
[1] Karinharju, Kati. 2013. Accessiblity and participation- an 
interactive 
learning 
environment. 
Esteettömyys 
ja 
osallistuminen- Interaktiivinen oppimisympäristö. [Translated 
into English by T. Huokkola] Project presentation, Pori 
Finland.  
[2] W3C. Introduction to Web Accessibility. [Online]. Available 
from: 
http://www.w3.org/WAI/intro/accessibility.php. 
2014.03.26  
[3] Bootstrap. The most popular front-end framework for 
developing responsive, mobile first projects on the web. 
[Online]. Available from: http://getbootstrap.com. 2014.03.26 
[4] 
Liu, Jeanne. 2010. Color Blindness and Web Design. [Online] 
Available 
from 
: 
http://www.usability.gov/get-
involved/blog/2010/02/color-blindness.html. 2014.03.26. 
[5] Lund, A.M. (2001) Measuring Usability with the USE 
Questionnaire. STC Usability SIG Newsletter, 8:2 
[6] WAMMI 
Questionnaire. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://www.wammi.com/samples/index.html. 2014.03.26 
[7] Coblis, 2013. Color Blindness Simulator. Available from: 
http://www.color-blindness.com/coblis-color-blindness-
simulator/. 2013.12.09. 
[8] Webconfs. Web Page Screen Resolution Simulator. Available 
from 
: 
http://www.webconfs.com/web-page-screen-
resolution.php. 2013.12.09. 
[9] GT 
metrix. 
 
Website 
speed 
and 
 
performance 
optimization.[Online] Available from http://gtmetrix.com.  
2013.12.09.  
[10] Web Content Accessibility Guidelines. [Online] Available 
from: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20 
(WCAG) 
2.0. 
2014.03.26. 
 
 
 
 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-333-9
WEB 2014 : The Second International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

