Potential Big Data Future Challenges for the GoodTurn System 
Katy Snyder, Kevin Daimi , Jacob Vanassche 
Computer Science and Software Engineering 
University of Detroit Mercy 
Detroit, USA 
email: {daimikj, snyderke, vanassje}@udmercy.edu
 
Abstract—GoodTurn is an application designed and 
implemented by the University of Detroit Mercy through a 
grant from Ford Motor Company.  It is a goods-moving 
system. In a manner similar to Uber, the application is aimed 
at facilitating and managing Ford employees’ donation of their 
time and vehicles to assist the community by moving their 
goods and resources. The stakeholders—drivers, donors, and 
nonprofit/nongovernment organizations (NPO/NGO)— will 
use their iPhones and Android-based phones to connect to the 
application free of any charge.  Increasing amounts of data are 
currently being generated.  It is anticipated that the data will 
exceed one terabyte in the next few years.  To address the 
benefits of the availability of future big data, this paper will 
present potential future challenges of the resulting big data’s 
analytics.  In particular, these challenges will address the 
decision-making needs of Ford, NPOs/NGOs, drivers, and 
donors.  The paper will not address the implementation of any 
actual big data analytics using tools as the data is not yet 
completely developed.  However, once the anticipated big data 
is generated, appropriate tools will be employed to obtain the 
needed knowledge and uncover the value of the stored data. 
Keywords—GoodTurn System; Big Data Analytics; Big Data 
Lifecycle; Prediction; Classification; Clustering 
I. INTRODUCTION 
   GoodTurn is a system developed by the University of 
Detroit Mercy with a grant from Ford Motor Company to 
facilitate 
the 
work 
of 
nonprofit/nongovernment 
organizations, NPOs/NGOs, when dealing with donors.  
Ford’s employees volunteer their vehicles and time to move 
goods and resources donated by people to the NPOs/NGOs 
designated locations.  GoodTurn currently runs on iOS-
based devices, with Android and web-based versions being 
developed.  It is anticipated that this application will 
generate big data in the near future. 
   Currently, we are experiencing an explosion in the rate of 
the quantity of big data being generated due to the ever-
increasing amount of data resulting from Web applications, 
networks, log files, vehicle performance, social media 
tweets, mobile applications, transactional applications, and 
sensing devices.  These big data include massive potential 
hidden knowledge that can add business value to a variety 
of 
fields 
including 
healthcare, 
biological 
systems, 
transportation, 
online 
advertising, 
crash 
reporting, 
performance monitoring, energy management, student 
registration and financial services [1]-[3].  Innovations with 
big data vow to transform the way we live, work, and think 
by empowering process optimization, facilitating insight 
discovery and improving decision making [4].  With the 
evolution and improvement of web and other technologies, 
the enormous amount of data of different types is briskly 
generated and the amount of knowledge multiplies 
drastically [5][6].  Users are saturated with data in this big 
data time, however, identifying valuable data to obtain 
worthwhile information and knowledge has never been an 
easy task.  Uncovering valuable information from the titanic 
amount of data is becoming more important, and many 
countries and enterprises are devoting time and money to 
acquirement and analysis of data [7]. 
   Big data is generally defined by the three Vs; Volume, 
Velocity, Variety, and it has been very vital and constructive 
in achieving treasurable values with regards to supporting 
decision making, illuminating new insights, and process 
optimization [8].  The bulk of data created is constantly 
growing and taking the form of a variety of structures, and 
can be in motion and at rest.  For example, Google receives 
over one billion queries per day, Twitter gets more than two 
hundred and fifty million tweets on a daily basis [9], 
Facebook goes through more than eight hundred million 
updates per day, and YouTube causes more than four billion 
views per day.  The data generated is estimated in the order 
of zeta bytes at the present time, and it is intensifying at a 
rate around 40% per year [10]. 
   Big data analytics involves applying advanced analytic 
techniques to exceedingly large and diverse datasets with 
the possibility of including structured, semi-structured, and 
unstructured data to explore new capabilities and insights 
[11].  If big data analytics techniques are deployed in a 
timely manner, the outcome can produce actionable insights 
that add significant value to organizations and help them 
improve the decision-making process, and create various 
opportunities for business improvements and success [12]-
[13]. 
   E. Žunić, A. Djedović, and D. Đonko [14] indicated that 
assorted types of mobile communication devices are more 
frequently used to access applications. They added that with 
mobile devices, anyone can clearly use or even develop a 
mobile application adding to the further explosion of 
applications and data.  Mobile communication networks 
grant an immense range of communication services 
producing a substantial amount of network data [15].  The 
current innovations of wireless technologies in various 
forms and the constantly increasing mobile applications 
have turned mobile cellular networks into both generators 
and carriers of massive data [16].    
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

   The GoodTurn system was developed by the University of 
Detroit Mercy with a grant from Ford Motor Company.  The 
goal of the application is to facilitate the moving of goods 
and 
resources 
donated 
by 
individuals 
to 
various 
NPOs/NGOs.  To this extent, Ford employees (drivers) 
volunteer their vehicles and time to move these goods from 
donors’ locations to the NPOs/NGO’s locations.  The 
GoodTurn application runs on iPhones and will soon run on 
Android-based 
phones. 
 
As 
stated 
above, 
mobile 
applications generate massive data.  It is anticipated that 
GoodTurn will produce a terabyte within the next few years.  
This paper discusses a number of possible big data analytics 
applications when the big data matures.  The outcomes of 
these applications will furnish actionable insight to Ford 
Motor Company, NPOs/NGOs, donors, and drivers.  The 
rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II will 
provide a brief description of the GoodTurn system.  
Section III will introduce the evolution of the GoodTurn big 
data.  The GoodTurn big data lifecycle is presented in 
Section IV.  Section V highlights the potential analytics of 
the future big data.  Finally, the paper is concluded in 
Section VI.  
II. GOODTURN SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
   To get the flavor of the GoodTurn system, sample 
requirements and an overview of the system architecture 
with sample interface will be presented.  Details of the 
GoodTurn software design are introduced in [17].  Security 
of the GoodTurn system is discussed in [18]. 
A. 
Functional requirements 
   The GoodTurn system has been developed using the 
client-server methodology.  The clients will be accessing the 
system using iPhones, and Android-based phones.  The 
GoodTurn system’s functional requirements were gathered 
from Ford employees, non-profit organizations (NPOs), 
non-government organizations (NGOs), and the public.  
Samples of these requirements are shown below.  Here, 
“requesters” represent NPOs or NGOs. 
 
• 
The login screen must contain an option to save the 
user's email. 
• 
The system must allow the requestor to reject a specific 
driver in the future. 
• 
The system must allow the driver to reject a specific 
requestor/organization in the future. 
• 
The system must allow the requester to verify a job was 
completed. 
• 
The system should allow the user to register if they do 
not already have an account. 
• 
The system must allow rating of users that were 
involved in a job. 
• 
The system must allow users that were involved in a job 
to provide feedback. 
• 
The system must provide a list of available jobs. 
• 
The system should allow the driver to accept a job. 
• 
The system must allow drivers to cancel accepted jobs. 
• 
The system must allow the requester to start a new job. 
B. 
Nonfunctional requirements 
   The 
constraints 
on 
the 
GoodTurn’s 
functional 
requirements include performance, usability, security, 
privacy, reliability, and maintainability features.  A small 
sample of these nonfunctional requirements will be 
presented below. 
 
• 
The system should allow drivers and requesters to sign 
in within 5 seconds. 
• 
Displaying blacklisted drivers for a specific requester 
should take no more than 5 seconds. 
• 
Drivers and requesters should be able to use the system 
without any training. 
• 
The system should provide messages to guide the users 
when invalid information is entered. 
• 
Drivers, requesters, and system administrators should 
be authenticated 
• 
Messages exchanged between all parties (drivers, 
requesters, 
system 
administrators) 
should 
be 
confidential. 
• 
The system should not disclose requester information to 
non-drivers.   
• 
The system should not disclose a driver information to 
non-requesters. 
• 
The system must detect, isolate, and report faults. 
• 
Backup copies must be stored at a different location 
specified by the NPO/NGO.  
• 
Errors should be easily corrected using effective 
documentation. 
• 
Additional 
features 
should 
be 
added 
without 
considerable changes to the design. 
C. 
System architecture 
   An architecture embodies the high-level structures of a 
software system.  By examining the architecture, one can 
conclude how multiple software components collaborate to 
accomplish their tasks.  GoodTurn follows the three-tiered 
client-server architectural style.  The GoodTurn system 
architecture is functionally decomposed into various 
functional components.  To illustrate that, Figure 1 is used 
to demonstrate the top-level and first-level decompositions.  
The component, GoodTurn Startup, is further decomposed 
into second and third levels in Figure 2 below.   
D. User Interface 
   To design a user interface for GoodTurn system, the 
humans that need to interact with the system need to be 
identified.  These include drivers, NPOs/NGOs, donors, and 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

system administrators.  Later, settings for each way the user 
can communicate with the system need to be established.  
Samples of the User Interface are provided in Figures 3 and 
4 below. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Top-level decomposition 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Second/Third levels decomposition 
 
 
   
 
 
Figure 3.  Available jobs for drivers 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Requester’s new job 
 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

III.    EVOLUTION OF GOODTURN BIG DATA 
   The GoodTurn system data currently has 404 bytes for 
each of the stakeholders; NPO, drivers, and donors.  In 
addition, there is a total of 76 bytes for the metadata.  This 
will give a total of 480 bytes per a stakeholder.  This 
represent structured data only.   The above data size does 
not include the huge unstructured data resulting from 
various feedbacks fields.  Details of the data are depicted in 
Tables I and II below. 
   There are 75,437 nonprofit organizations (NPOs) in 
Michigan State [1]. Ford Motor Company’s workforce is 
over 201,000 employees worldwide [2][3].  Michigan has 
total of 9,928,300 residents [4]. They contribute the 
equivalent of almost $5 billion to charity each year [5]. This 
implies that many of those residents donate at least once a 
year.  
   The exact figures of NPOs, donors and drivers will be 
determined when GoodTurn is implemented.  These 
numbers of donors, drivers, and NPOs will continue to 
grow.  As an example, the total number of NPOs in 2013 
was 42,886 [6].  Comparing this to 75,437 nonprofit 
organizations in 2017, it can be concluded it is almost 
doubled.  This implies there will be even more data in the 
future.   Based on these figures, it is anticipated that the 
GoodTurn application’s big data will develop in the near 
future ahead 
    
 
TABLE I. INDIVIDUAL STAKEHOLDER DATA TOTALS 
 
Category 
Total Bytes 
Account 
081 
Job 
260 
Chat 
005 
Dashboard 
028 
Misc. 
030 
Total 
404 
 
 
 
TABLE II. METADATA TOTALS 
 
Category 
Total Bytes 
Account Metadata 
28 
Job Metadata 
28 
Chat Metadata 
08 
Dashboard Metadata 
04 
Misc. Metadata 
08 
Total 
76 
 
 
 
IV. GOODTURN BIG DATA LIFE CYCLE 
   The life cycle of GoodTurn big data analytics starts with 
the generation of big data.  Data will continue to accumulate 
and reach more than a terabyte within few years.  A decision 
should be made whether to store this big data on the cloud 
or on the GoodTurn server.  Both approaches involve 
security and cost issues.  The data needed for big data 
analytics will be selected and filtered.  The filtering will 
encompass removing the data items that are not desirable for 
the analytics, and handling missing data values.  Once 
filtering has been taken care of, the needed techniques, 
tools, and algorithms will be applied to achieve the 
analytics.  As discussed in Section V below, the potential 
analytics will concentrate on predictions, classification, and 
clustering.  The outcomes of these analytics would be 
actionable knowledge and insights beneficial to various 
stakeholders.  Once the insights are available, the 
stakeholders; Ford, NPOs/NGOs, drivers, and donors, will 
be able to use these insights to inform decisions.  The next 
cycle will start at big data generation with more data 
generated.  This cycle is depicted in Figure 5 below. 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  GoodTurn big data lifecycle 
V. POTENTIAL ANALYTICS 
   Potential future analytics when the big data matures will 
be discussed.  These proposed potential analytics will be 
linked to the GoodTurn’s stakeholders.  In other words, each 
stakeholder can only own the analytics with which they are 
concerned.  
A. Ford Motor Company 
   The quality of vehicles and quantity of sales are important 
factors in automotive industry. The analytics below should 
address these concerns.  Ford Motor Company also values 
and promotes philanthropic activities for its employees.  
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

   Note that analytics in bullets; 2,3, 4, and 5 will only be 
possible if the GoodTurn system allows comments 
regarding the selected type/model of vehicles in the 
Feedback field.  Currently, this is not the case, but it is 
anticipated that will be the case in the future.    
 
• 
Predicting the demand for specific Ford vehicles: 
NPOs/NGOs select the type of vehicle for moving the 
donor’s goods/resources.  Within the NPOs/NGOs, 
individuals decide the size of vehicle. Selecting the size 
of the vehicle will imply selecting the type/model of the 
vehicle because these data are already available for 
those individuals.  If some vehicles are frequently 
selected, then those vehicles reflect the taste of users 
and could indicate these are preferred or on demand.  
Therefore, the characteristics of those individuals will 
reflect the type of people who would possibly buy such 
vehicles.  Ford can continue to promote these vehicles 
and improve their future models.  For vehicles that are 
infrequently requested, Ford will study the reasons 
behind that and improve these vehicles.  If non-Ford 
employees are allowed to be drivers in the future, 
competitive vehicles will be involved.  If some non-
Ford 
vehicles 
are 
frequently 
used, 
then 
the 
characteristics of those individuals will guide Ford to 
investigate all the design aspects of the frequently 
competing demanded vehicles and make decisions on 
Ford competing vehicles. 
• 
Determining the characteristics of individuals who will 
complain about certain vehicles: Complaining about a 
vehicle should be interpreted as complaining about the 
type and model of the vehicle.  NPOs/NGOs and donors 
provide feedback after the job is completed.  They can 
also provide feedback if they have to cancel the job 
while in transit.  The feedback containing complains 
about the vehicles can be analyzed to find out from this 
sample the type of individuals that might be 
complaining about certain type/model of vehicles in the 
future.  The resulting analytics could lead to improving 
those vehicles.  In other words, those complains would 
be interpreted as buyers’ needs. Therefore, people with 
similar characteristics can be targeted using the 
improved vehicles.  If the complains are about 
competitor’s vehicles, Ford can approach buyers by 
promoting the features/characteristics their vehicles 
have as compared to others.   
• 
Predicting the characteristics and features of vehicles 
that individuals might complain about: Based on 
various complains about the vehicles used in moving 
goods, various features and specifications of those 
vehicles will be analyzed to conclude the features that 
might have caused these complains.  Further testing and 
investigation will be carried out to isolate the focal 
features.  Having done that, those features will either be 
avoided or improved in other models that share the 
same characteristics in the future.  If the complains are 
about competitor’s vehicles, Ford will check if the 
predicted features causing the complains exist in their 
vehicles and improve them. 
• 
Predicting whether a new driver (volunteer) will 
undergo complains: By analyzing the feedback about 
drivers, Ford can use the characteristics of the drivers 
undergoing complains and classify if a new volunteer 
(driver) might encounter complains. This outcome can 
be used to effectively screen future drivers. 
• 
Isolating the characteristics and features of vehicles 
that will experience frequent problems: Vehicles in 
transit can experience problems.  These problems will 
be documented in the feedback.  By analyzing those 
vehicles’ features, Ford can determine the features 
causing the problems and issue the necessary recalls to 
fix these problems.  They can further decide to 
illuminate some features from future vehicles if 
fixing/replacing them becomes costly or displeasing. 
• 
Identify clusters of potential buyers for certain vehicles: 
Taking the possible analytics above, and provided the 
NPOs/NGOs and donors are from specific geographic 
location, Ford can determine the characteristics of such 
a geographic location to identify other geographic 
locations that have similar characteristics to market on-
demand vehicles in those areas.    
 
B. NPO/NGO 
   Nonprofit and nongovernment organizations are interested 
in getting good number of donors, certain types of goods, 
concentrating on geographical areas that have frequent 
donors or many donors, ensuring the selected drivers are 
reliable. 
• 
Identifying geographic locations of possible frequent 
donors: By analyzing the geographic locations of 
current donors, an NPO/NGO can select other 
geographic locations with similar characteristics and 
properties that could possibly provide frequent donors. 
• 
Detecting geographic locations of maximum number of 
donors: Using the current geographic locations 
containing the maximum number of donors (not 
necessarily frequent donors), an NPO/NGO can use the 
qualities and features of these locations to find out 
similar geographic locations to target them for possible 
high volume of donors.   
• 
Anticipation of a needed type of goods: This potential 
analytic can be achieved in two ways.  First, a similar 
analysis to the geographic locations above could be 
carried out to determine the potential geographic 
locations that may donate the needed goods and 
resources based on the traits of current locations 
providing the needed type of goods.  Second, an 
NPO/NGO can use the characteristics of individuals 
who donate such needed type of goods to focus on 
individuals with the same characteristics.  
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

• 
Association of a needed type of goods: NPOs/GPOs can 
look for features of individuals who donate goods that 
complement each other (table and chairs for example), 
and then use these features to aim at possible donors 
who may donate goods which coexist with each other to 
be useful. 
• 
Expectation of the number of certain goods/resources 
needed for disasters such as hurricane, tornado, and 
earthquakes:  This can be achieved by targeting 
individuals (donors) in certain geographic locations, or 
individuals in disperse locations. Using the traits of 
individuals who normally donate goods/resources that 
are useful when a disaster takes place, and geographic 
locations with the maximum number of disaster-needed 
goods donations, the right targets would be determined. 
• 
Predicting potential donors who would default: 
NPOs/NGOs spent time and money in calling donors 
and in following up calls.  Donors that prove they are 
not reliable should be avoided in the future.  To 
accomplish that, characteristics of defaulting donors 
will be identified and used to predict donors who would 
default in the future to avoid them. 
• 
Foreseeing drivers who would default or rejects a 
request after accepting it: Centered around the details 
of those drivers who either do not show up or change 
their minds after accepting a delivery, a future (new) 
driver can be classified as either reliable or unreliable.  
This information can be used to improve screening of 
future drivers.   
• 
Predicting drivers who would never reject a request: 
another approach for predicting the reliability of drivers 
is to explore the details of those drivers who have never 
rejected a request for delivery, and to use the outcome 
of this exploration to conclude if a new (future) driver 
would never reject any request. 
• 
Foretelling drivers who would be willing to drive long 
distance: a number of drivers (volunteers) would not go 
long distance.  This will result in delaying the delivery 
and annoying the donor.  Investigating the qualities and 
characteristics of drivers who carried out long distance 
tasks will help NPOs/NGOs to determine if a certain 
driver would be willing to accept a long-distance 
delivery. 
C. Driver 
   In general drivers need to see NPOs/NGOs do not default 
and provide accurate details on distance, and type, weight, 
and size of goods.  Furthermore, they will be looking for 
reliable donors at pickup locations. 
• 
Predicting the NPOs/NGO’s who might cancel their 
request at the last moment: It is important for a driver 
to know if an NPO/NGO would change their mind to 
avoid wasting time driving to the pickup location and 
not taking care of their other personal obligations.  This 
could be fulfilled by investigating the characteristics of 
NPOs/NGOs who have cancelled their request at the 
last moment and avoid accepting requests from 
NPOs/NGOs who reveal the same descriptions.  
• 
Identifying NPOs/NGOs who will not provide precise 
details about their request:  Drivers can anticipate those 
NPOs/NGOs who will not provide the accurate details 
about the request, such as distance, size, type of goods, 
etc., by scrutinizing the NPOs/NGOs who already did 
that.  If an NPO/NGO is classified as one of these, the 
driver will make sure they will ask for all the details 
before accepting the job. 
• 
Anticipating donors who are most likely going to 
default: Donors who have defaulted before will be 
aimed at to generate an understanding of their aspects.  
Knowing that will help drivers to avoid accepting 
requests from donors with those aspects. 
• 
Projecting donors who will change the request’s 
location after the driver arrives at the original location: 
Drivers can guess whether a donor will change the 
location of pickup upon arrival by probing the details of 
donors who have done that before.  To avoid wasting 
time, the designated driver will be in contact with that 
donor to ensure the address is not changed or to obtain 
the new location before making the selection. 
• 
Expectation of the actual size of goods: Speculating the 
size of goods/resources to be picked up is important for 
drivers.  Improper size might not fit in the selected 
vehicle.  This will result in wasting driver’s time.  This 
could be a result of the NPO/NGO not recognizing the 
right size (entering a wrong size), or the donor changing 
the size upon arrival of the driver.  Both the NPO/NGO 
and donor causing such problem need to have their 
features inspected.  Once their features are identified, 
an NPO/NGO or a donor could be classified as possible 
providers of the wrong size.  Hence, the driver can 
contact either one or both to circumvent wasting time 
and frustration.  
• 
Estimation of the actual distance: It is possible for 
NPOs/NGOs to make mistakes regarding the actual 
distance or even the nearest estimate.  A driver might 
accept a job thinking it is a short distance, but it turns 
out to be a long distance once they hit the road.  To 
avoid such situations, drivers need to seek out those 
NPOs/NGOs 
who 
would 
possibly 
provide 
the 
inaccurate distance.  Analyzing their traits will reveal 
which NPO/NGO need to be consulted regarding the 
distance before accepting the job. 
• 
Predicting the jobs/requests that require heavy lifting: 
Some drivers might have back, shoulder, or neck 
problems.  They are only allowed to lift certain 
maximum weight.  Such drivers realized that 
goods/resources are heavier than what they can manage 
when arriving at the pickup location.  Dissecting the 
NPOs/NGOs that made drivers go through such 
situations helps to conclude their features.  This will 
help drivers to elude NPOs/NGOs with similar features.   
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

D. Donor 
   Donors are concerned about reliability of vehicle and 
driver.  In addition, the facilitating of picking up the goods 
is a priority for them. 
• 
Predicting drivers that are not reliable: Based on the 
behaviors of drivers who either default, or do not arrive 
within the estimated time, donors can predict if a driver 
will not show up or arrive late.  They then make their 
decision regarding the driver using the results of this 
analysis.  
• 
Foretelling NPO/NGO who most likely will delay 
picking up the donations for some time: Donors are 
eager to have their donation of goods/resources be 
taken care off as quickly as possible.  Some 
NPOs/NGOs might delay assigning a driver to pick up 
these goods/resources.  By studying the peculiarities of 
such NPOs/NGOs, donors can guesstimate which 
NPOs/NGOs are most likely to reflect such a behavior.  
• 
Anticipating NPO/NGO who will most likely default on 
providing a receipt: Receipts of donations estimated 
monetary value are important for donors for taxing 
purposes.   Delaying those receipts or not providing 
them will upset donors.  Donors will not be interested 
in dealing with such NPOs/NGOs in the future.  
Conjecturing the individualities of such NPO/NGO will 
help drivers to avoid dealing with those with similar 
characteristics. 
• 
Predicting NPOs/NGOs that might send the wrong type 
of vehicle for the size of the donated goods:  Selecting 
the wrong vehicle for picking up goods/resources will 
be annoying for both drivers and donors and a waste of 
time.  Donors need to have their goods moved as soon 
as possible.   Assessment of traits will help identifying 
those who would possibly behave in a similar fashion.   
VI. CONCLUSION 
   With the notion of big data analytics as the practice of 
exploring huge and diverse datasets with sophisticated 
analytic approaches and methods to reveal hidden patterns, 
unfamiliar correlations, and other valuable knowledge to 
make abreast decisions, this paper contributed by analyzing 
the possible potential future analytics of the GoodTurn 
system to allow the stakeholders; Ford, NPOs/NGOs, 
drivers, and donors, to make informed decisions that 
improve their way of doing things and save them time and 
money.  Various potential predictions, classifications, and 
clustering are suggested based on the future GoodTurn big 
data when matured.  As soon as the big data become fully 
established, big data analytics tools will be adopted to get 
the desirable knowledge and insights for decision making. 
    
REFERENCES 
[1] 
W. Raghupathi and V. Raghupathi, “Big Data Analytics in 
Healthcare: Promise and Potential,” Health Information Science and 
Systems, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 110-119, 2014. 
[2] 
O. Y. Al-Jarrah, P. D. Yoo, S. Muhaidat, G. K. Karagiannidis, and K. 
Taha, “Efficient Machine Learning for Big Data: A Review,” Big 
Data Research, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 87-93, 2015. 
[3] 
H. C. Chen, R. H. Chiang, and V. C. Storey, “Business Intelligence 
and Analytics: From Big Data to Big Impact,” MIS Quartely, vol. 36, 
no. 4, pp. 1165-1188, 2012. 
[4] 
A. L'Heureux, K. Golinger, H. F. Elyamany, and M. A. M. Capretz, 
“Machine Learning with Big Data: Challenges and Approaches,” 
IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 7776-7797, 2017. 
[5] 
D. T. Nguyen and J. E. Jung, “Real-Time Event Detection for Online 
Behavioral Analysis of Big Social Data,” Future Generation 
Computing Systems, vol. 66, pp. 137-145, 2016. 
[6] 
P. Campbell, “Editorial on Special Issue on Big Data: Community 
Cleverness Required,” Nature, vol. 455, no. 7209, pp. 1-1, 2008. 
[7] 
S. Choi, J. Seo, M. Kim, S. Kang, and S. Han, “Chorological Big 
Data Curation: A Study on the Enhanced Information Retrieval 
System,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 11269-11277, 2017. 
[8] 
G. Bello-Orgaz, J. J. Jung, and D. Camacho, “Social Big Data: Recent 
Achievements and New Challenges,” Information Fusion, vol. 28, pp. 
45-59, 2016. 
[9] 
J. Lin and D. Ryaboy, “Scaling Big Data Mining Infrastructure: The 
Twitter Experience,” SIGKDD Explorations, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 6-19, 
2103. 
[10] W. Fan and W. Bifet, "Mining Big Data: Current Status and Forecast 
to the Future," SIGKDD Exploration, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 1-5, 2013. 
[11] X. Amatriain, “Mining Large Streams of User Data for Personlized 
Recommendations,” SIGKDD Explorations, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 37-48, 
2012. 
[12] A. Mehmood, I. Natgunanathan, Y. Xiang, G. Hua, and S. Guo, 
“Protection of Big Data Privacy,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 1821-
1834, 2016. 
[13] B. Matturdi, X. Zhou, S. Li, and F. Lin, “Big Data Security and 
Privacy: A review,” China Communications, vol. 11, no. 14, pp. 135-
145, 2014.  
[14] E. Žunić, A. Djedović, and D. Đonko, “Application of Big Data and 
Text Mining Methods and Technologies in Modern Business 
Analyzing Social Networks Data about Traffic Tracking,” in Proc. 
The 2016 XI International Symposium on Telecommunications 
(BIHTEL), Sarajevo, Bosnia-Herzegovina, 2016, pp.1-6. 
[15] I. Chih-lin, L. Yunlu, S. Han, W. Sihai, and G. Liu, “On Big Data 
Analytics for Greener and Softer RAN,” IEEE Access, vol. 3, pp. 
3068-3075, 2015. 
[16] J. Liu, F. Liu, and N. Ansari, ``Monitoring and analyzing big traffic 
data of a large-scale cellular network with Hadoop,'' IEEE Network., 
vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 32-39, 2014. 
[17] K. Snyder and K. Daimi, “The Application of Software Engineering 
to Moving Goods Mobile App,” in Proc.  The 2017 International 
Conference on Software Engineering Research and Practice (SERP’ 
17), Las Vegas, USA, 2017, pp. 88-97. 
[18] K. Snyder and K. Daimi, “Securing Ford Mobility System,” in Proc.  
The Thirteenth International Conference on Networking and Services 
(ICNS 2017), Barcelona, Spain, 2017, pp. 1-7. 
[19] Tax Excempt World, “NonProfit Organizations in Michigan by 
County,” https://www.taxexemptworld.com/organizations/michigan-
counties.asp, September, 2017, [retrieved: March, 2018]. 
[20] Ford 
Motors 
on 
Forbes 
Global 
2000 
Lists, 
“https://www.forbes.com/companies/ford-motor/,” 2017, [retrieved: 
March, 2018]. 
[21] Wikipedia, “Ford Motor Company – Number of Employees, 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ford_Motor_Company, 
[retrieved: 
March, 2018]. 
[22] Detroit Free Press, “Michigan's population increased for the fifth 
straight 
year 
in 
2016,” 
http://www.freep.com/story/news/local/michigan/2016/12/20/michiga
n-population-increase-census/95631726/, [retrieved: March, 2018]. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

[23] The Nonprofit Sector in Michigan, “Economic Impact of Michigan’s 
Nonprofit 
Sector,” 
https://www.independentsector.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/12/Michigan-1.pdf, [retrieved: March, 2018]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[24] Center on Nonprofits and Philanthropy, “The Nonprofit Sector in 
Brief 
2015,” 
October 
2015, 
https://www.urban.org/sites/default/files/publication/72536/2000497-
The-Nonprofit-Sector-in-Brief-2015-Public-Charities-Giving-and-
Volunteering.pdf, [retrieved: March, 2018]. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-636-1
WEB 2018 : The Sixth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

