Towards Online Engagement via the Social Web 
Ioannis Stavrakantonakis, Andreea-Elena Gagiu, Ioan Toma and Dieter Fensel 
Semantic Technology Institute (STI) - Innsbruck 
University of Innsbruck 
Innsbruck, Austria 
{firstname.lastname}@sti2.at 
 
 
Abstract—The blossom of Web 2.0 has created new 
opportunities for the enterprises. Web users are disseminating 
more information than ever before about their interests, their 
experiences with products and services, their thoughts and 
whatever interacts with them in a daily basis. The challenge for 
the enterprise is to exploit and transform this social media 
explosion into added value on the business plan. The 
enterprises in the new Web 3.0 era should have the utilities to 
disseminate messages in a multi-channel attitude and to listen 
to the discussions around their products and services. 
Furthermore, they should be able to take action and interact 
with these discussions in a productive way for the internal 
improvement of the organization but also for establishing 
strong bonds with the users. The web users for an enterprise 
could be existing customers or potential customers, average 
users or advocates. This paper intends to discuss the 
characteristics and the nature of the online engagement with 
the customers in the scope of business intelligence on the Web. 
Keywords-Social Web; engagement; social media; Web 3.0   
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Web 2.0 has radically changed our communication 
possibilities. More and more communication has been freed 
from the geographic barriers that formerly limited their speed 
and expansion. Active participation and interaction of users 
have created a new platform for people to communicate with 
each other [4]. This platform relies primarily on the actions 
and contributions of users to create “a rich, lively, useful, 
and enjoyable space which draws people back again and 
again” [7]. Considerable bargaining power has been shifted 
from the supplier to the consumer. Tourism organizations 
and enterprises, and particularly travel agencies and hotels, 
have been seriously challenged by this shift or “consumer 
revolution” [10], but at the same time enormous 
opportunities 
have 
been 
opened 
up. 
For 
tourism 
organizations the internet has become one of the most 
important marketing communication channels [19]. 
However, the boom of the internet, dubbed as “the 
growth of the multi-channel monster” by [15], has also 
raised questions about marketing, distribution channels, 
business management and efficient marketing research in the 
tourism sector [13]. Organizations of all sizes, commercial 
and 
not-for-profit, 
regularly 
face 
the 
challenge 
of 
communicating with their stakeholders using a multiplicity 
of channels, e.g. websites, videos, public relation activities, 
events, email, forums, online presentations, social media, 
mobile applications, and recently structured data. The social 
media revolution has made this job more complicated since 
the communication channels grow exponentially, shifting 
from a mostly unilateral “push” mode (one speaker, many 
listeners) to an increasingly fully bilateral communication, 
where individual stakeholders (e.g. customers) expect one-
to-one communication with the organization. Moreover, the 
contents of communication become more and more granular 
and increasingly dependent on the identity of the receiver 
and the context of the communication. 
Organizations need an integrated solution that provides 
management and execution of communication goals in a 
mostly automated fashion, with costs equivalent to mass-
media communication, along with the granularity of 
individual experts, and at the pace of real-time social media. 
We are aiming to mechanize important aspects of these 
tasks, allowing scalable, cost-sensitive, and effective 
communication for small-or-medium sized enterprises 
(SME) and comparable organizations for which information 
dissemination is essential but resources are significantly 
limited. Additionally, it may also help intermediaries such as 
marketing agencies to extend their business scope by 
increasing the cost-effectiveness ratio. The current paper 
presents the concept of online engagement, providing a 
description of the concept in general, as well as the 
methodologies of applying it using tools to listen and 
respond to customers’ needs and demands. 
The structure of the paper is the following. Section II 
defines the online engagement in the market ecosystem 
between the enterprises and the customers. Section III 
presents the objectives of the customer engagement for the 
enterprise. Section IV presents the spiral of online 
communication where online engagement is a major aspect. 
Section V focuses on the use cases of online engagement. 
Section VI discusses the related work in this field, while 
Section VII provides conclusions and directions for future 
work. 
II. 
ONLINE ENGAGEMENT FOR SOCIAL ENTERPRISES 
Customer engagement is not a novel concept for the 
marketing community. On the contrary, it is the main 
objective of any enterprise that has a long-term roadmap in 
the market and aims in the further development of the 
organization. It is hard to find a specific definition for 
engagement as it is dynamically changing through the 
decades and it has been used to refer to anything from what 
the consumers feel when they see an ad, the degree of 
interest, to the way the consumers will respond to 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

advertising. In some cases, engagement has been considered 
to represent all of the above, plus many other qualities. One 
notable definition for engagement has been given in 2006 by 
the Advertising Research Foundation: “Engagement is 
turning on a prospect to a brand idea enhanced by the 
surrounding context”. Similarly, James Speros, the Chief 
Marketing Officer (CMO) at Ernst & Young defines 
engagement as “all about making it relevant to the 
consumer”. Engagement has been associated with a wide 
range of terms, including “involvement”, “experience”, 
“connection”, “wantedness”, “resonance”, “relationship”, 
and “stickiness”. The creation of a “one size fits all”, 
universal definition for engagement seems unlikely, 
particularly in the ever emerging environment of Web 3.0. 
However, the semantics behind the engagement remain the 
same: the enterprise and the customer are engaged in a 
long-term relation, which is beneficial for both sides. 
The current paper aims to discuss the engagement 
procedure in the new era of business, in which enterprises 
should be active in the Social Web sphere, understand the 
opportunities for them in this field and adopt dissemination 
strategies in the social media and networks [5]. The active 
enterprises in social media are aware of the social Web 2.0 
channels of dissemination and are willing to use them to 
reach their audience in a more efficient and scalable way. 
The exploitation of the social media for dissemination 
purposes is the first and very important step for an 
organization in the engagement spiral. Furthermore, the 
enterprise is not the only entity that is disseminating 
information in the Web; individuals are more talkative than 
ever before in the Web ecosystem. People are expressing 
their thoughts and views about anything including products, 
services and brands. The enterprise should be able to listen to 
these voices and input these data in the infrastructure of 
communication with the customers. New customers and new 
audiences are present in the Web sphere and potentially 
talking about enterprises’ products and services. The 
enterprise should not remain silent, but grab the opportunity 
and interact with these people in a relevant, meaningful and 
interesting way. The online engagement is leveraging the 
online communication between the enterprise and the 
audience in a relation, which will drive the design of the new 
products and services. The new business era is more client 
centric than it used to be in the last few years. 
III. 
OBJECTIVES OF ENGAGEMENT 
Customer engagement is formed on the premise of 
listening and responding to customer conversations. On the 
other hand, online customer engagement is inherently 
different than offline engagement as the nature of the 
customers’ interactions with a brand and other customers in 
the online space is defined by the medium used to converse 
(i.e. the online platform or service employed). Discussion 
that takes place on forums or using Facebook cannot be 
replicated by an offline medium. As such, the methods 
employed for offline engagement can no longer be applied 
online. However,  two main questions must be posed. First 
why should an enterprise apply these methods in the online 
space? Second, what are the benefits of online customer 
engagement? The current section aims to shed light on the 
main benefits an enterprise can achieve in brand 
management, 
quality 
management 
and 
transactions 
increment. 
A. Yield Management 
The concept of “yield” refers to the financial and 
economic gains that can result from tourism [16].  Yield 
(revenue) management is mostly about maximizing the short 
term gain of an enterprise by combining segment pricing 
with statistical analysis. Achieving short-term increase of 
income is a valid target for a business entity; however, it is 
difficult to realize in a multi-channel world as hotels are 
confronted with a multitude of option that often come with 
their own constraints (e.g. price constraints on the offers) and 
which, in some cases, generate costs without guaranteeing 
actual income.   
Many solutions to yield management are based on 
complex 
statistical 
methods 
and 
complex 
domain 
assumptions on how variation of the price can influence the 
number of bookings of a service.  However, a multi-
directional multi-channel approach must also rely on Swarm 
intelligence. Observing in real time the reaction of customers 
and competitors will be the key to achieve online marketing. 
Adopting your offer and your price dynamically in response 
to the behavior of your (online visible) environment will 
become critical to economic success. 
B. Brand Management 
The successful brand is the one that is connected 
seamlessly in the minds of the customers with an activity, 
an idea or a fact. In this respect, we could consider the case 
of the energy drink Red Bull. Due to the efforts of brand 
management it has been connected with the need of an 
instant boost to the energy and the performance of the 
human body. Connecting the philosophy of the enterprise’s 
products on something that happens in the real world is the 
best way to keep the business alive. Thus, it is crucial to be 
active in the new field in which the reputation of your brand 
is being shaped and affected in any positive or negative 
way. Social media has given individuals the opportunity to 
voice their opinions in ways that have not been available in 
the past. Spotting out the influencers [8] and the advocates 
of a brand would help the enterprise to understand the 
problems and the difficulties that the key customers are 
facing or what they like most about the products and the 
services. The brand is not only about the quality of the 
product; the brand is a step further, which reflects the total 
customer experience with the products and services.  
In consumer marketing, brands provide the primary 
points of differentiation between competitive offerings [20]. 
The American Marketing Association proposes a company 
oriented definition, which describes the brand as a name, 
term, sign, symbol, or design, or any other feature that 
identifies the goods or services of one seller or group of 
sellers and differentiates them from those of competitors. 
Brands are key organizational assets strategically positioned 
in the market by offering features desired by consumers that 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

are distinct from competition [20]. If we embrace the 
assumption that brands are pivotal resources for generating 
and sustaining competitive advantage [1][14], proper 
management of brands value becomes essential for the 
enterprise’s long-term economic success. Using social 
media a company can encourage the development of loyal 
and engaged customers while launching a new product, as 
well as help retain existing customers and create brand 
advocacy through word-of-mouth. 
C. Quality Management 
Besides the support and facilitation of the different 
marketing processes, the engagement approach could be 
realized as a valuable source of input and feedback from the 
end users of the products and services regarding the 
delivered quality. In the new customer-centric era the 
customer decides what quality is. Furthermore, by taking 
seriously the complaints of the customers, the product 
development team has a unique opportunity to improve the 
final product and the characteristics of it. The quality 
management in the different types of organizations is 
materialized and interpreted in different ways, e.g. for a 
hotel is the quality of the daily hospitality services while for 
a hardware company could be the quality of the next version 
of the end-product. 
D. Transactions Augmentation 
At the top layer of the objectives, as a logical 
consequence, the ultimate goal is the revenue growth via 
engaged customers. The enterprise should have a sound plan 
to monetize the online communication results. Research 
results obtained by [6] show that fully engaged customers 
deliver a 23% premium over the average customer in terms 
of share wallet and profitability growth. For instance, the 
engaged customers of a hotel would choose the same hotel 
in a future visit to the same place as they know that the 
hotelier would treat them in the best way due to their 
connection. Furthermore, a hotel chain would benefit from 
engaged customers as they would choose the hotels of the 
chain for their stay in any place in the world. Consequently, 
there is a plethora of opportunities to transform these 
relations into future transactions. 
IV. 
SPIRAL OF ONLINE COMMUNICATION 
The proposed online engagement approach is considered 
to be in the scope of the top layer at the Semantic Web stack, 
which is the “User Interface & Applications” as presented in 
[3]. This layer includes applications that are exploiting the 
languages and the technologies that have been developed in 
the Semantic Web (Web3.0) era. The vision is to establish 
the fundamentals for the future online communication 
paradigm on top of the semantic technologies in order to 
benefit from their power. 
We start to take the view on interaction and 
communication, i.e., allowing other agents to post to us and 
us to post to communication pieces of others. Therefore, the 
concept of customer engagement comes to play. The spiral 
of online communication refers to the potential infinite loop 
between the producer of a message and the receiver of it 
through one or more communication channels. This 
communication pattern is not only bi-directional but also it 
can be triggered by any of the stakeholders. The traditional 
communication pattern in the past, between an enterprise and 
the audience of potential customers, used to be a one-to-
many relation: as the enterprise was disseminating messages 
and the customers were passively receiving them. In certain 
cases, means to reply to a user comment were available; 
however, means that would have allowed the enterprise to 
begin a conversation in real time with the customer were not. 
As mentioned, this particular aspect has been changed by the 
Social Web. Thus, the enterprise should establish a listening 
method in parallel to the dissemination of the messages in 
order to receive input from the customers even before the 
spread of any message or advertisement. 
A. The listening phase 
Social Media [11] is a term used mostly for web-based 
techniques of human-to-human communication that stresses 
the social, topical, and contextual relations between 
communicating individuals, allowing real-time interaction 
with a large, yet specific audience of partners. Social media 
sites have gained huge popularity in recent years, attracting 
millions of users, on different platforms, who consume and 
create content.  
In order to assess the massive amount of user generated 
content produced by social media, specialized monitoring 
tools have been created. The social media monitoring 
process is the continuous systematic observation and analysis 
of social media networks and social communities. In 
essence, social media monitoring is executed using the 
following steps: data gathering (achieved through web 
crawling and direct access to the streams of the social media 
networks via APIs), data filtering (eliminating “noise”, like 
irrelevant posts, duplicates or spam),  data analysis (natural 
language processing algorithms and sentiment analysis are 
applied to identify key topics, influencers, detractors, as well 
as conversations a company should join) and data 
presentation (presentation of results in a way that is 
meaningful for the company and leads to actionable 
insights). The added value of social media monitoring is that 
it offers access to real customers’ opinions, complaints and 
questions, at real time, in a highly scalable way. 
Currently there is an enormous number of available 
Social Media Monitoring (SMM) tools on the market, thus 
making an educated choice about which tool to use has 
become increasingly difficult. Moreover, creating an 
evaluation framework for such tools has been a challenge for 
many reviewers and market research enterprises. For 
instance, Forrester [9] assesses tools based on three criteria: 
current offering (services and features offered), strategy 
(how they address enterprise-level needs) and market 
presence. Both [12] and [18] have tried to create more 
detailed evaluation frameworks that focus on the basic 
features of a social media monitoring tool, as well as on the 
technology and user interface features. According to the [18] 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

the main features that a tool should provide are the 
following: 
• 
Listening Grid: The listening grid focuses on three 
main aspects: (1) the channels that are monitored 
(e.g. blogs and micro-blogs, social networks, video 
and image websites, etc.); (2) which countries and 
languages the tools provide support for; and (3) the 
topics relevant to the enterprise. 
• 
Analysis: Having established a listening grid, the 
next step is to analyse the data and produce 
actionable reports and insights for the user of the 
tool. 
• 
Engagement: The engagement concept refers to the 
ability of the tool to support reaction and response to 
the social media posts. 
• 
Workflow Management: Workflow refers to the 
process of assigning, tracking and responding to 
social media streams, usually in a team environment 
in order to prevent double responses and missed 
opportunities. 
• 
Near real-time processing: It is crucial for 
enterprises to follow up potential customers or 
customers’ com plaints, questions and thoughts well 
in time. 
• 
API: The social media monitoring tool should 
provide an API solution in order to make feasible the 
integration of the social media monitoring with other 
tools (e.g. customer relationship management tools). 
• 
Sentiment Analysis: Customer sentiments (which 
may be positive, negative or neutral) are determined 
using elements of computational linguistics, text 
analytics, and machine learning elements, such as 
latent semantic analysis, support vector machines, 
Natural Language Processing. 
• 
Historical data: Access to previously captured data 
is required in order to compare the current metrics 
and reports related to the monitored topic with any 
previous state of it. 
• 
Dashboard: The dashboard offers users graphical 
representation of the raw data in the form of charts, 
listings, and historical graphing of queries and 
phrases. 
• 
Export results: In order to comply with their 
customers’ needs, social media monitoring tools 
developers should enable users to download the 
results of their tool’s analysis in different formats 
such as excel workbook or CSV format. 
The aforementioned features were stressed out to be the 
most important for the social media monitoring tools. At the 
same time, these factors comprise the prerequisites for the 
listening phase implementation in the scope of an 
engagement framework. 
B. The engagement phase 
The Social Web must not be used only as a means for 
dissemination, a place to read, but as a place to publish and 
respond to user generated content in the most effective way. 
Therefore, four main requirements must be taken into 
consideration: (1) we must provide a smooth integration of 
write and read activities in both respects; (2) we must ensure 
that we implement the process character of communication 
that is based on a chain of combined read-write processes to 
achieve interaction; (3) we must support cooperation based 
on 
online 
communication 
that 
allows 
engagement, 
transactionality 
and 
economic 
cooperation 
following 
successful online interaction; and (4) we should know 
where, when, who, why and what will communicate in 
response to the feedback that is being collected from the 
social media ecosystem.  
The first important requirement for a proper 
communication tool support is to provide a smooth 
integration of write and read activities in both respects. That 
is, it must offer a) publication means for others in our 
publication channels as well as b) easy means to publish at 
external publication places of others.  
The second 
major 
requirement for a proper 
communication tool support is to implement the process 
character of communication that is based on a chain of 
combined read-write processes to implement interaction.  
This requirement has several sub-features. The tool should 
be able to trace the history and state of a communication.  
For example, in a CRM system workflow and information 
sharing facilities must be provided to allow several 
employees to properly implement the sequential steps of a 
communication. Furthermore, this kind of tools should be 
able 
to 
support 
multi-channel 
communication. 
A 
communication may start with a tweet, a Facebook post, a 
private direct message, and further email communication, 
etc. The communication is not sequential and happens in 
different ways and mediums. In essence it is a parallelized 
interaction of various agents taking the role of a publisher or 
listener.  Supporting multi-agent communication, where 
larger numbers of agents orchestrate a multi-directional 
communication process in parallel is another aspect of this 
requirement. The original basic Sender-Message-Channel-
Receiver (SMCR) model of communication proposed by 
[17] is unidirectional. A sender sends a message through a 
channel to a receiver. The direction of the communication 
and the different roles are fixed. However, the model is 
inadequate for representing current online communication 
which is exponentially more complex than the initial 
telephone communications described by Shannon and 
Weaver. Agents interact and communicate in parallel, 
permanently alternating their role in these acts of 
communication or in Web2.0 terms, users are prosumers, 
i.e., consumer and producer of information. Therefore, we 
have adopted the transactional model of communication and 
its underlying premise that individuals are simultaneously 
engaging in sending and receiving messages [2]. 
Communication is potentially an infinite process, 
however, only when driven by an underlying purpose that 
uses it as a means to an end. The third major requirement 
is support cooperation based on online communication 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

allowing engagement and support transactionality and 
economic 
cooperation 
following 
successful 
online 
interaction.  
Moreover, it is very important to define and specify the 
different characteristics of the engagement approach 
regarding the needs of an enterprise. This perspective of the 
engagement 
process 
comprises 
the 
fourth 
major 
requirement. Each single enterprise and organization has a 
different business plan and the nature of the offered services 
and products is unique. It is crucial to know where, when, 
why, what and who will communicate in response to the 
feedback that is being collected from the social media 
ecosystem. These parameters define a five-dimensional 
space in which all the engagement threads of the enterprise 
and customers can be mapped to. The administrator of the 
tool should be able to decide which type of interaction and 
medium (where) would be the best in order to fulfill the 3rd 
major requirement (transactionality); which are the time 
limits to form the reply (when); if it is necessary to take care 
of the message and initialize a discussion (why); the adapted 
content that should be presented in the context of the reply 
(what); and the appropriate person that could treat 
efficiently the upcoming discussion (who). 
On top of these requirements there is an opportunity to 
automatize different activities with semantics and produce a 
scalable solution that could facilitate the communication 
processes of SMEs. The vision of the authors is to empower 
the SMEs to stay competitive in a market that moves towards 
the personalization perspective in offered services and 
products and human-centric marketing. The one-to-one 
communication between the enterprise and the customer 
(B2C) is not easily materialized by a SME as it needs a 
remarkable amount of resources. 
V. 
USE CASE OF ONLINE ENGAGEMENT FOR SMES 
There is a myriad of potential applications in different 
business sectors and fields for the online-engagement 
paradigm. The current paper presents a use case of the 
concept in the SME’s ecosystem and especially in the 
lodging business domain. 
The hotelier of a small or medium-sized hotel should be 
able to exploit the power of the social media instead of 
being afraid to get involved. The added value of social 
media for the hotelier lies on four major pillars: a) the multi-
channel dissemination; b) the quality management of the 
hotel’s services; c) the development of the business plan 
regarding the feedback from the customers and d) the 
increase of transactionality (i.e. bookings) via the 
dissemination of call-to-action messages. 
The plethora of communication channels that are 
available in the Web sphere should be exploited by the 
hotelier in the most efficient, productive and automatic way 
towards the development of the awareness and visibility 
around the hotel and the business activities of it (e.g. special 
events, 
excursions, 
restaurant, 
sport 
tournaments 
organization etc.). The need of a tool that could be able to 
orchestrate the dissemination process of the hotel is more 
than crucial for a small or medium sized hotel, which is not 
able to hire a team of experts to take care of the social 
marketing of the hotel. The hotelier should be able to 
disseminate any information related to the hotel in an 
abstract way, decoupled from the communication channels. 
The quality management of a hotel is a major aim of the 
owner as it is one of the crucial prerequisites for the success 
and perpetuation of the business. The appropriate tool could 
enable the hotelier to listen to the feedback in the social 
media (not only in review sites like TripAdvisor) from the 
customers and internally exploit this information for the 
improvement of the provided services. This approach 
guarantees the quality of the existing services and the total 
experience of the customers regarding their visit. Moreover, 
listening in real time could help the hotel manage and fix 
any problems that happen during the customers’ stay and 
ensure that the feedback posted by these customers on social 
media channels is positive. For example, considering a hotel 
customer that is expressing on twitter his dissatisfaction for 
the hotel that he is currently staying in his trip regarding the 
hygiene of the room, the response of the hotelier should be 
instant and both online and offline. Thus, the hotelier should 
force an immediate investigation and reaction of the room 
service to his room in order to manage and resolve the issue. 
The response time in this example should be in terms of a 
few hours, the responsible group of responding and being 
assigned the issue is the room service and the place of 
response is offline, at the room of the customer. 
The ultimate goal of any business is the increase of the 
economic transactions and the rise of profit. The engagement 
concept 
promotes 
the 
establishment 
of 
long-term 
relationships between the hotel and the customers. The 
engaged customers cannot only be transformed into 
repetitive customers and visitors of the hotel, but they can 
also become advocates as they influence positively their 
social circles. Personalization is the key aspect in this kind of 
relationships. The hotelier should be able to mechanize in a 
human-centric way the dissemination of information and the 
response to the online discussions in order to increase the 
number of bookings and customers.  
VI. 
RELATED WORK 
The proposed paradigm of engagement includes 
different technologies and concepts that are needed in order 
to build the described approach. The aim of the current 
paper is to define the fundamentals and the requirements of 
a complete and effective online communication framework 
that could empower SMEs to engage their customers and 
any potential customer. In this essence, there is not any 
similar approach available according to our knowledge. 
However, the various components of the engagement 
framework are in the scope of existing fields, like social 
media monitoring and semi-automatic matchmaking.  
The SMM tools are soundly covering the listening phase 
that was previously mentioned in the scope of the online 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

communication and the engagement concept. A large part of 
the available SMM tools are described in the different 
reports and papers that have been already mentioned, like 
[9], [12] and [18]. The social media monitoring technics and 
findings are perfectly reusable and extendable under the 
umbrella of the engagement approach and will be taken in 
consideration during the design of the framework. However, 
this kind of tools does not support the engagement concept in 
the essence that was described in this paper and envisioned 
by the authors. The main objective of the application is to 
enable the SMEs to handle the multi-channel interaction with 
the customers in a semi-automatic way by employing 
reusable communication workflows, which address various 
specific patterns of dissemination and reaction.  
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The engagement concept should be treated by the 
enterprises as an opportunity to build strong ties with their 
customers and turn them into advocates that will add 
positive value to the brand reputation via the online word of 
mouth. By being authentic, transparent, and operating with 
integrity, the enterprise could successfully engage their 
market and build a community of advocates who would 
spread their message virally. The challenges for bringing the 
engagement to the full potential are definitely the scalability 
of the possible solutions and the effectiveness of the 
approaches. In this paper, we tried to put the bases for the 
next step in online communication and specify the 
requirements of an effective engagement framework. 
The future steps beyond this preliminary exploration of 
the online communication space will be the actual design of 
the framework that could address the described ideas and 
concepts. The reference architecture of the framework will 
be based on the aforementioned requirements and 
professional objectives of the small and medium sized 
enterprises. The design of the engagement framework will 
exploit the semantic web technologies and will integrate the 
existing knowledge in communication methods with the 
communication patterns that can be used in the context of the 
Social Web. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Aaker, “Managing assets and skills: the key to a 
sustainable competitive advantage.”, 1989. 
[2] D. Barnlund, “A transactional model of communication.”, 
Foundations of communication theory, 1970, pp. 83-102. 
[3] S. Bratt, “Semantic web, and other technologies to watch.”, 
World Wide Web Consortium, January 2007. 
[4] P. Casoto, A. Dattolo, P. Omero, N. Pudota and C. Tasso, 
“Accessing, Analyzing, and Extracting Information from User 
Generated Contents.”, Handbook of Research on Web 2.0, 
3.0, and X.0, 2008, pp. 312-328. 
[5] D. Fensel, B. Leiter, S. Thaler, A. Thalhammer and I. Toma, 
“Effective and efficient on-line communication”,  2012. 
[6] J. Fleming, C. Coffman and J. Harter, “Manage your human 
sigma.” Harvard Business Review, vol. 83(7), 2005, p. 106. 
[7] J. Freyne, M. Jacovi, I. Guy and W. Geyer, “Increasing 
engagement through early recommender intervention.”, 
Proceedings of the third ACM conference on Recommender 
systems, 2009, pp. 85-92. 
[8] A. Galeotti and S. Goyal, “Influencing the influencers: a 
theory of strategic diffusion.”, The RAND Journal of 
Economics, vol. 40(3), 2009, pp. 509-532. 
[9] Z. Hofer-Shall, “The Forrester Wave™: Listening Platforms, 
Q3 2010.”, Forrester Research, 2010. 
[10] L. Huang, C. Yung and E. Yang, “How do travel agencies 
obtain a competitive advantage?: Through a travel blog 
marketing channel.”,  Journal of Vacation Marketing, vol. 
17(2), 2011, pp. 139-149. 
[11] A. Kaplan and M. Haenlein, “Users of the world, unite! The 
challenges and opportunities of Social Media.”, Business 
horizons, vol. 53(1), 2010, pp. 59-68. 
[12] H. Kasper, M. Dausinger, H. Kett, T. Renner, J. Finzen, M. 
Kintz and A. Stephan, “Marktstudie Social Media Monitoring 
Tools.”, Frauenhofer IAO Studie, 2010. 
[13] S. Liu, “A theoretic discussion of tourism e-commerce.”, 
Proceedings of the 7th international conference on Electronic 
commerce, 2005, pp. 1-5. 
[14] M. Louro and P. Cunha, “Brand management paradigms.”, 
Journal of Marketing Management, vol. 17, 2001, pp. 849-
875. 
[15] S. Mulpuru, H. Harteveldt and D. Roberge, “Five Retail 
eCommerce Trends To Watch In 2011.”, Reproduction, 2011, 
pp. 1-8. 
[16] J. Northcote and J. Macbeth, “Conceptualizing yield: 
sustainable tourism management.”, Annals of Tourism 
Research, vol. 33, 2006, pp. 199-220. 
[17] C. Shannon, “The mathematical theory of communication. 
1963.”, MD computing: computers in medical practice, vol. 
14(4), 1997, p. 306. 
[18] I. Stavrakantonakis, A.E. Gagiu, H. Kasper, I. Toma and A. 
Thalhammer, “An approach for evaluation of social media 
monitoring tools.”, Common Value Management, 2012, p. 52. 
[19] G. Wang, C. Wilson, X. Zhao, Y. Zhu, M. Mohanlal, H. 
Zheng, B.Y. Zhao, “Serf and turf: Crowdturfing for fun and 
profit.”, Proceedings of the 21st international conference on 
World Wide Web, 2012, pp. 679-688. 
[20] L. Wood, “Brands and brand equity: definition and 
management.”, Management decision, vol. 38(9), 2000, pp. 
662-669. 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-248-6
WEB 2013 : The First International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

