Building a Web-based Environment to Support Sponsored Research and
University-wide Collaborations
Fatemeh Jamshidi
Department of Computer Science and
Software Engineering
Auburn University
Auburn, Alabama, USA
Email: fzj0007@auburn.edu
Abhishek Jariwala
Department of Computer Science and
Software Engineering
Auburn University
Auburn, Alabama, USA
Email: avj0007@auburn.edu
Bibhav Bhattarai
Department of Computer Science and
Software Engineering
Auburn University
Auburn, Alabama, USA
Email: bzb0079@auburn.edu
Katherine Abbate
Project Manager, Military REACH
Auburn University
Auburn, Alabama, USA
Email: kma0057@auburn.edu
Daniela Marghitu
Department of Computer Science and
Software Engineering
Auburn University
Auburn, Alabama, USA
Email: marghda@auburn.edu
Mallory Lucier-Greer
College of Human Sciences
Human Development and Family Science
Auburn University
Auburn, Alabama, USA
Email: mluciergreer@auburn.edu
Abstract—At the federal level, an organized partnership exists to
serve military families, an association composed of the Depart-
ment of Defense (DoD), the Department of Agriculture (USDA),
and colleges and universities throughout the United States of
America. Through this partnership, cooperative agreements are
executed to support the needs of service members and their
families. One such cooperative agreement between DoD, USDA,
and Auburn University is Military REACH. This project aims to
bridge the gap between military family research and practice by
mobilizing peer-reviewed family science research into practical
applications for military families and those who work on behalf
of military families. At Auburn University, this project is an
interdisciplinary collaboration between the academic libraries,
the Department of Computer Science, and the Department of
Human Development and Family Science. This paper aims to
represent the Military REACH website and the new searching
functionalities added to the project to increase users’ numbers
using Google Analytics results.
Keywords–Military Families; Applications; Resources.
I.
INTRODUCTION
For the past three years, the Auburn University Libraries
and Computer Science Department have supported the Uni-
versity’s research enterprise in a new way: by adopting a new
collaborative model and serving as a high-level Information
Technology (IT) and data-management consultants to faculty
researchers who are pursuing external funding. A practical
example of this model in action is the Military REACH project
at Auburn University funded by the Departments of Agri-
culture and Defense (USDA/NIFA Award No. 2017-48710-
27339; PI, Dr. Mallory Lucier-Greer). The purpose of Military
REACH is to make research accessible to policy makers,
helping professionals, and military families in a manner that is
inviting, easily understood, and meaningful for their everyday
context [1]. Our team, housed at Auburn University, works
to critically evaluate empirical research related to military
families and translate it into useful tools. These tools are
actively disseminated to policy makers and military helping
professionals to inform their decisions and practices as they
work to support and enhance the lives of service members and
their families. Speciﬁcally, the objective of this project is to
provide high- quality resources to the Department of Defense
(DoD) in the form of research and professional development
tools across the spectrum of family support, resilience, and
readiness. This work is primarily supported by the DoD’s
Ofﬁce of Military Community and Family Policy. The purpose
of this project is achieved through three primary deliverables,
including:
•
Provide timely, high-quality research reports at the
request of DoD.
•
Re-engineer, grow, and promote an online library of
current research and its implications related to the
well-being of military families.
•
Design and market professional development oppor-
tunities, tools, and resources for youth development
professionals.
The Military REACH Project is now in its fourth year and
seems likely to continue; indeed, it has highlighted the library’s
value as an IT partner and led to research partnerships and
collaborative funding proposals with other units on campus.
This paper describes the related functions that are designed
and implemented for each operator. The rest of the paper is
organized as follows. In Section II, we cover some background
about the project. Section III introduces our efforts to serve
military families and covers the design and implementation
of the website. Section IV demonstrates evaluation methods
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-789-4
WEB 2020 : The Eighth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

using Google Analytics. Section V provides evaluation results
of the website. Section VI concludes the project along with
suggestions for future enhancements.
II.
RELATED WORK
Military REACH started by evaluating existing research
in the context of Research Infrastructures (RI) and Digital
Libraries (DL). Recent reviews of digital preservation [2] and
projects that promote research and awareness in the areas of
digital preservation include CEDARS [3].
Two decades of research have worked to improve aware-
ness of the digital preservation challenge and encouraged
some organizations to improve the longevity of their digital
resources. One of the most signiﬁcant streams of research has
been within cultural institutions, sometimes in collaboration
with industry partners, to develop solutions to operational
problems in these institutions [4]. National, regional, and Uni-
versity archives and libraries in Australia, Canada, Belgium,
Denmark France, Germany, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Sweden, Switzerland, the U.K., the U.S., and elsewhere have
investigated the implementation of institutional repositories,
preservation, and strategies for Web archiving.
III.
COLLABORATIVE EFFORTS TO SERVE MILITARY
FAMILIES
Working closely with the Military REACH team in the
College of Human Sciences, the library’s IT department
contributed to the original funding proposal and has guided
network architecture, Web development, IT tools and solutions,
sustainability, data management, accessibility, usage statistics,
and automated methods for identifying recently published
research.
A. Design and Implementation
The REACH Web application has an architecture that can
be implemented into three layers, as shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. REACH System Architecture.
•
Web-based app: This layer is the front-end of the
application, where we mainly use Hypertext Markup
Language (HTML), Cascading Style Sheets (CSS),
and JavaScript in Java Server Pages (JSP). Also, the
Cascade Content Management System (CMS) that we
use to manage the JSP falls under this layer.
•
Application Programming Interface (API) Wrapper:
This layer is the back-end layer, where we use JAVA
to write classes and methods that handle various
functionalities of the website such as search, ﬁlter,
sort, and so forth.
•
DSpace: DSpace is an open-source repository software
package mostly used to create open access reposito-
ries for the scholarly and published digital content.
DSpace is the central database of the application. All
Military REACH related research articles are stored in
this layer. DSpace uses Apache SOLR based search
for metadata and full-text contents, all of which are
stored in a relational database and supports the use
of PostgreSQL. Also, DSpace is used to manage and
preserve all the formats of digital content (PDF, Word,
JPEG, MPEG, TIFF ﬁles). Likewise, it also allows for
a group based access to control the setting for level
based permission to individual ﬁles.
1) Introduction to the Cascade Content Management Sys-
tems: To make the website easy to update, we are also making
use of CMS. Cascade CMS is used in the Web application to
manage site content, allowing multiple contributors to create,
edit, and publish. Content created in a Cascade CMS is stored
in Cascade as an XML ﬁle and displayed in a presentation
layer based on a set of templates. Programming languages such
as Extensible Stylesheet Language Transformations (XSLT),
and Velocity [5] are used to transform the Extensible Markup
Language (XML) ﬁle into HTML/JSP pages.
The typical features of a CMS can be as follows:
•
Content creation (allows users to easily create and
format content)
•
Content storage (stores content in one place, in a
consistent fashion)
•
Workﬂow management (assigns privileges and respon-
sibilities based on roles such as authors, editors and
admins), and
•
Publishing (organizes and pushes content live)
2) Cascade Content Management Systems Beneﬁts: What
makes Cascade extremely beneﬁcial to a Web application,
such as the Military REACH website, is the ease of updating
it. Since it is an interface that can be easily used by non-
programmers, once it is set up, people without a background
in programming can use it to make substantial changes to the
website. The What You See Is What You Get (WYSIWYG)
editors included in the platform allow users to enter text and
upload images even while they lack basic knowledge of HTML
or CSS (languages that are vital for any Web application
development).
The other advantage of having CMS in our website devel-
opment process is its collaborative nature. Multiple users can
log on and contribute, schedule or edit content to be published.
Since the interface is browser-based, Cascade can, therefore,
be accessed from anywhere by any number of users.
Similarly, Cascade CMS has an efﬁcient, reliable way of
sending frequent alerts to the users and site administrators of
pages that have not been updated for a certain duration of time.
The use of in-built features such as the daily content report,
task manager, and content review dates helps an organization
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-789-4
WEB 2020 : The Eighth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

to stay fresh and take necessary steps to keep its users up-to-
date.
Lastly, Cascade has a community of over 100,000 active
users that are frequently using the platform and are readily
available to voice their experiences with using features and
capabilities of Cascade.
3) Use of Cascade Content Management System on Mili-
tary REACH:
•
The Teams page and Resources page of the website
are entirely made in the Cascade CMS. These are the
pages in the website that can be easily updated by even
the non-technical team members in the organization.
•
Other pages, such as the Home page, the Families
page, the Contact Us page, and so on, are more hybrid,
where all of the texts displayed in the pages can
be edited from Cascade. Other major functionalities
within the pages are, however, handled in the back-
end by the developers.
•
Therefore, having Cascade only pages and hybrid
pages simultaneously gives a lot of ﬂexibility for
both the technical and non-technical team members
involved in the organization.
IV.
EVALUATION METHODS
A. Google Analytics
Military REACH has been using Google Analytics to
access the user data since last year (March 1, 2019 - July 31,
2020). Google Analytics data do not include any personally
identiﬁable information. They are presented in the aggregate
data, making it a practical tool used in research settings
without ethical concerns [6][7]. The Web development team in-
stalled Google Analytics by adding a tracking tag for Military
REACH. The tracking tags are a combination of JavaScript and
computer programming language used to develop the website.
The tracking tag code allows contributing different forms of
data related to the users’ behavior on the website as soon as
they visit the Military REACH website. The data can proceed
from diverse avenues. For example, the URL of the page and
the device used to access the site. Tracking code collects more
data on the nature of the visit, such as the contents viewed,
length of the session, average time on each page, location, etc.
This information is in a real-time, interactive dashboard format
that can be viewed by logging in to Google Analytics.
B. User Engagement
This project focuses on several indicators from Google
Analytics to evaluate the level of engagement. These indicators
contain the number of returning users (n), bounce rate, number
of pages accessed per session (n), mean session, and time spent
on each page (minutes, seconds).
The number of returning users mentions the number of
sessions visited through the same client IP. A high number of
returning users indicates a strong level of engagement with the
Web-based platform [6][8].
The bounce rate is a percentage of single-page sessions in
which there was no interaction with the page. A high bounce
rate means minimal interaction with the page; however, it could
also mean that users exit the page after ﬁnding what they
were looking for right away. A low bounce rate can refer to
a high overall engagement, especially for a multi-component
platform like Military REACH. For example, there are not
many available resources that would provide mental health
support on the platform’s home page. Therefore, users will
often need to interact with various searching tools and Web
pages to access the required information.
The number of pages per session indicates the number of
Web pages that the user viewed in a single session. The mean
session duration (minutes, seconds) means the mean duration
of the time users spend on the website. Using these indicators
to increase user engagement can be challenging. There are
different interpretations. For example, many pages per session
could occur from a high level of engagement, while it could
also cause a superﬁcial exploration of several pages. Besides, a
long session duration can result from increased attention, but
it could also be because the user keeps the Web page open
while engaging in the other irrelevant activities.
C. Platform Improvement
Military REACH considers some other indicators from
Google Analytics to inform the improvement of the platform.
These indicators include page views, mean duration of visit,
and bounce rate when accessing self-help tools (e.g., Family
Focus page, TRIP reports page). Besides, the most visited
pages were observed in terms of their overall average time
spent on the page to understand which tools or pages were
most beneﬁcial or viewed.
The entrance rate illustrates a proportion of sessions start-
ing from a given page. In comparison, the exit rate results from
a ratio of sessions ending from a given page. The information
regarding the entrance rate may explain which Web page serves
as the ﬁrst impression for the users. The exit rate may indicate
when users felt disengaged or had adequate data needed for
the session. Google Analytics provides information on the type
of devices users are using to access the website. Such data can
allow us to consider if implementing a mobile app for Military
REACH would be practical or not. The three primary devices
of interest to the current investigation are desktops, tablets, and
mobile phones (counted here as mobile devices).
D. Marketing Strategy
Military REACH aims to reach as many users as possible.
Therefore, we used Google Analytics to inform our marketing
strategy. The research team has been reaching out to various
military-connected organizations, especially around the United
States. Twitter, Facebook, and LinkedIn accounts were also
created to distribute awareness about the platform. To improve
the marketing strategy, the ways used to access the website
were analyzed. The methods include a direct link (i.e., typing
the Web URL directly into a browser); organic search (i.e.,
entry through a search engine); and referrals via another
website via social media via email. Understanding which ways
are most accessible for users can help to improve the marketing
strategy. Military REACH also uses the locations of users from
different countries around the world.
V.
EVALUATION RESULTS
Military REACH started using Google Analytics since
March 2019. The ﬁrst version of the website was based on
a single page application (March 2019 - November 2019).
However, to better access our users’ data, we switched to
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-789-4
WEB 2020 : The Eighth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

multiple page application using Java Server Pages (JSP) and
Servlets (November 2019 - present). The following are the
results from Google Analytics, which show the positive impact
of this change in user engagement and platform functionalities
to serve military families better.
A. User Engagement
The last year of operation for the Military REACH platform
saw 3,131 users from November 2, 2019 – June 11, 2020, and
a total of 1806 users from March 1, 2019 - November 2, 2019
(Shown in Figures 2 and 3).
On average, users visited 5.22 pages per session from
November 2, 2019 – June 11, 2020, and 13.31 pages from
March 1, 2019 - November 2, 2019.
Figure 2. REACH overview presented in Google Analytics (Nov 2, 2019 -
June 11, 2020).
Figure 3. REACH overview presented in Google Analytics (March 1, 2019 -
November 2, 2019).
The results show that user engagement is increasing be-
cause of social media marketing, conferences, and overall
better efﬁciency and effectiveness of the website.
B. Platform Improvement
Visits to the Military REACH Home Page comprised
15.62% (4244/27,111) of the total pageviews from November
2, 2020, to June 11, 2020, with an average duration spent of
1 minute and 20 seconds.
Table 1 presents details of the top ten most viewed pages.
In March 2019 to Nov 2019, the Military REACH home
page, which acts as the landing page, accounted for 51.41%
(7782/15,136) of all entries when the website was still a single
page application using Angular and Typescript. However, after
transforming to multiple page applications, users can access
the resources they are looking for, using shared links on our
social media or email. A list of devices used by Military
REACH users to access the site is presented in Table 2,
indicating that the platform was accessed mostly via desktops
(2112/3130, 67.43%). Furthermore, sessions completed via
desktops had a higher average session duration than those
completed via other devices.
TABLE I. REACH MOST VIEWED PAGES.
TABLE II. DEVICES USED TO ACCESS MILITARY REACH
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-789-4
WEB 2020 : The Eighth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

C. Marketing Strategy
Approximately 89.58% (2804/3129) of the users accessed
the website from the United States. Table 3 shows that the
users accessed the platform from around the world (Figure 4).
Google Analytics was a helpful tool to process the evalua-
tion of the open-access, Web-based Military REACH platform.
The process evaluation provided information about the
ways to keep users engaged, marketing strategies, and the
aspects of the platform that required improvement.
TABLE III. LOCATIONS OF USERS FROM GOOGLE ANALYTICS.
Figure 4. Map overlay about locations of users from Google Analytics.
Google Analytics was a helpful tool to process the evalua-
tion of the open-access, Web-based Military REACH platform.
The process evaluation provided information about the
ways to keep users engaged, marketing strategies, and the
aspects of the platform that required improvement.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Google Analytics results helped the Military REACH team
analyze the website’s usage to serve military families better. It
shows that after adding more features to the search, function
users are using the website in a practical way and spending
more time on the website. Compared to the ﬁrst two years,
website usage almost tripled last year.
According to the Google Analytics results, 31% of users
have access to the website through their phone. Therefore, to
facilitate the accessibility of Military REACH resources, the
team is investigating a mobile application (app).
In the future, Military REACH plans to conduct a pilot
testing of a newly developed mobile app that will be used
for the dissemination of REACH reports, mainly Translating
Research Into Practice (TRIP) reports. We will conduct an
efﬁcacy study to examine the impact of our mobile app
and TRIP reports speciﬁcally for helping professionals who
directly serve military families. Survey data will be collected
from participants (i.e., primary data collection) using Qualtrics
(a survey software used at Auburn University), a secure online
data collection tool. This data will help us understand the
users’ military family knowledge better, their conﬁdence in
serving military families, their satisfaction and reaction to
the app, and make the military family research accessible to
everyone.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Nichols, K. Abbate, C. W. O’Neal, and M. Lucier-Greer, “Mobilizing
family research: Evaluating current research and disseminating practical
implications to families, helping professionals, and policy makers,”
Southeastern Council on Family Relations Conference, Jul. 2019.
[2]
H. R. Tibbo, “On the nature and importance of archiving in the digital
age.” Adv. Comput., vol. 57, Jan. 2003, pp. 1–67.
[3]
K. Russell, “Digital preservation and the cedars project experience,” New
review of academic librarianship, vol. 6, no. 1, Apr. 2000, pp. 139–154.
[4]
S. Ross and M. Hedstrom, “Preservation research and sustainable digital
libraries,” International journal on digital libraries, vol. 5, no. 4, Apr.
2005, pp. 317–324.
[5]
A. Deshpande, A. G¨oll¨u, and L. Semenzato, “The shift programming
language and run-time system for dynamic networks of hybrid automata,”
in Veriﬁcation of Digital and Hybrid Systems.
Springer, Jun. 2000, pp.
355–371.
[6]
E. A. Song, “A process evaluation of a web-based mental health portal
(walkalong) using google analytics,” JMIR mental health, vol. 5, no. 3,
Jul. 2018, p. e50.
[7]
D. J. Clark, D. Nicholas, and H. R. Jamali, “Evaluating information
seeking and use in the changing virtual world: the emerging role of
google analytics,” Learned publishing, vol. 27, no. 3, 2014, pp. 185–
194.
[8]
E. A. Vona, “A web-based platform to support an evidence-based mental
health intervention: lessons from the cbits web site,” Psychiatric Services,
vol. 65, no. 11, Jan. 2014, pp. 1381–1384.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-789-4
WEB 2020 : The Eighth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

