Simulation of Web-Based Multi-Modal Transportation with Multi-Criteria Walking 
for Smart Cities 
 
Monsak Socharoentum 
National Electronics and Computer Technology Center 
National Science and Technology Development Agency 
Pathumthani, Thailand 
e-mail: monsak.soc@nectec.or.th 
Hassan A. Karimi 
Geoinformatics Laboratory, School of Information 
Sciences, University of Pittsburgh 
Pittsburgh, USA 
e-mail: hkarimi@pitt.edu
 
 
Abstract— While current transportation simulations evaluate 
vehicle trips or neighborhood walkability, none can be utilized 
to evaluate trips that require multi-modal transportation when 
walking is always one mode. In this paper, we address this gap 
by introducing the Multi-Modal Transportation (MMT) with 
Multi-Criteria Walking (MMT-MCW) concept. MMT-MCW 
simulation can be used to evaluate various aspects of smart 
cities, such as walkability. The premise of MMT-MCW is 
based on the observations that: (a) walking can be performed 
for other purposes besides merely reaching destinations, such 
as to maintain or improve health and (b) traveler’s 
characteristics and preferences play an important role in 
determining optimal route choices. Selected MMT-MCW 
scenarios were used to evaluate walkability of several cities 
with respect to three criteria: inter-modal transfer locations 
(parking lots and bus stops), elevation of walking routes; and 
walking distance. Results of simulations using these criteria are 
discussed and analyzed. 
Keywords-smart 
cities; 
walkability; 
multi-modal 
transportation; routing; multi-criteria walking. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Multi-Modal Transportation (MMT) with Multi-Criteria 
Walking (MCW) is proposed as a new concept where 
walking is always considered as one mode and can be 
performed for other purposes (multi-criteria) in addition to 
travelling to a destination. Two sets of factors impacting 
MCW are environmental factors and traveler factors.  
Environmental factors, when compared to driving cars or 
riding public transportation, may have a greater impact on 
walking. For example, people may prefer driving cars or 
riding buses over walking due to rain, snow, hilly terrain, or 
air pollution. Location is also an environmental factor that 
influences walking, for instance, fastest walking routes may 
be based on flat and short routes which take priority over 
steep and longer routes. However, when walking is for 
exercise, the steeper and/or longer route may be preferred. 
Traveler factors, such as individuals’ characteristics, also 
have an impact on choosing walking routes [15]. Several 
studies, such as [11], reported a correlation between 
individual behaviors and walking. Studies by Leslie et al. [8] 
and Ewing et al. [3] are examples related to the urban area 
evaluation in terms of neighborhood walkability. Despite the 
benefits of MMT-MCW for evaluating transportation options 
in smart cities, currently, there is no research that is focused 
on evaluation of city’ transportation infrastructures and 
utilities (e.g., parking locations and walking routes).  
To fill this gap, MMT-MCW simulation is proposed to 
evaluate three basic options: (a) inter-modal transfer 
locations (parking lots and bus stops); (b) elevation of 
walking routes; and (c) walking distance. The first option is 
related to MMT, and the latter two are related to MCW.  
MMT-MCW may be implemented in several ways for 
smart cities, for example, as a new service for individuals 
interested in finding routes that include walking components. 
[6] developed a prototype service (called Route2Health) that 
recommends walking sessions, if feasible, for any trip. By 
taking 
origin, 
destination, 
and 
traveler’s 
individual 
conditions as input, Route2Health recommends a sequence 
of transportation modes along with specific details about 
each mode that is most optimal (personalized). MMT-MCW 
can also be implemented to simulate the design and 
evaluation of smart cities. Existing surveys, analyses, 
simulations on or related to neighborhood walkability and 
urban design, such as [2] - [5][7][9][10][14][15], but none 
addresses the issues and scenarios as those possible with 
MMT-MCW. 
The paper’s contribution is a novel integration of new 
and existing Web techniques and technologies for evaluating 
and analyzing transportation options for smart cities. An 
information management tool (simulation) is developed to 
analyze mushing up data and find solutions based on existing 
Web services (Google Map APIs). The rest of the paper is 
organized as follows. Section 2 describes MMT-MCW. 
Sections 3 and 4 discuss MMT simulation and its results. 
The paper ends with a summary and suggestions for future 
research in Section 5. 
II. 
MMT-MCW 
MMT-MCW is concerned with finding: (a) multi-modal 
transportation routes with walking as one mode and finding 
(b) optimal walking paths by considering multiple criteria. 
Walking transfer node and route score are the two main 
factors that MMT-MCW considers in finding optimal 
solutions (routes).  
Three modes of transportation are considered in MMT-
MCW: walking, driving, and riding (bus). We define 
“walking transfer node” as a location where travelers switch 
from a pedestrian network to a vehicular network, or vice 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-407-7
WEB 2015 : The Third International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

versa. In MMT-MCW, walking transfer nodes play an 
important role in finding suitable (personalized) routes. For 
example, change of one parking lot to another (as a walking 
transfer node) may result in a different (and desired) 
solution. With respect to public transportation, the choice of 
a bus stop (as a walking transfer node) determines a specific 
bus route. To identify a suitable walking transfer node, 
traveler’s desired walking distance is separated into 
estimated upper and lower limits. The upper limit excludes 
walking transfer nodes that are located beyond a traveler’s 
maximum preferred distance. The lower limit excludes 
walking transfer nodes that are located closer than the 
desired minimum walking distance. Accordingly, one or 
more suitable walking transfer nodes are identified.  
Route score is used to quantify suitability of a walking 
route in meeting traveler’s criteria. To compute a route score, 
a relevant criterion must be identified and used to formulate 
its associated metric function. Examples of route score 
computation are based on: (1) traveler’s desire to burn a 
desired amount of calories by walking and (2) traveler’s 
preference for a certain level of elevation variation. 
Accordingly, two route scores are required: (1) calories burnt 
on walking and (2) elevation variation.  
To calculate the calories burnt on walking, the ACSM 
walking equation [12] can be used: 
 
EE = (0.1·S + 1.8·S·G + 3.5) ·BM·t·0.005    
(1) 
 
where EE is walking energy expenditure (kilocalories), S 
is walking speed (meters/minute), G is grade (slope) in 
decimal form (e.g., 0.02 for 2% grade), BM is traveller’s 
body weight (kilograms), and t is walking time (minutes).  
To calculate elevation variation, walking surface 
roughness is used. The walking surface roughness refers to 
the standard deviation of the elevations along an entire 
walking route. The standard deviation of a flat walking route 
is zero, and the higher value of walking surface roughness 
refers to higher variation of elevations along the walking 
route. 
III. 
SIMULATION AND DATA COLLECTION 
MMT-MCW scenarios for several geographic areas 
(cities) in the US were simulated. The two attributes used to 
categorize and select the cities were population density and 
elevation range. Population density was simulated to explore 
the influence of high and low population density on walking 
routes and walking transfer nodes. Different elevation ranges 
were simulated to explore the effect of topography on 
walking routes and walking transfer nodes. The US Office of 
Management and Budget uses population density to define a 
statistical area. A statistical area contains one or more cities 
(and/or counties) and can be classified as metropolitan (high-
density 
population) 
or 
micropolitan 
(low-density 
population). Elevation range was classified into hilly 
(elevation range  100 meters) and flat (elevation range  50 
meters); where elevation range = max. elevation - min. 
elevation. The two threshold values (50 and 100 meters) 
were chosen for separating between hilly and flat terrains. 
Two different MMTs were simulated: driving-walking 
and 
riding-walking. 
A 
driving-walking 
trip 
usually 
comprises (in sequence) driving, parking, and then walking, 
and return in the reverse sequence. Unlike the driving-
walking, travellers do not have to begin with the vehicular 
(riding) mode in a riding-walking trip. The trip may start by 
walking from origin to a nearby bus stop then taking bus to 
destination. Walking can also be in the middle to connect 
two different bus routes, and the return trip can be in any 
sequence. For simplicity, the return trips were not 
considered, and walking was assumed as the mode 
connecting the walking transfer nodes and destinations. To 
this end, walking transfer nodes and walking routes were 
used in the simulation. The vehicular route computation 
between origin and walking transfer node was not considered 
since it is not the MMT-MCW’s main contribution. Parking 
lots, bus stops, walking routes, sidewalk slopes, and points of 
interest in several cities were considered in the simulation. 
The data, programs, and parameters used in the simulation 
are described below.  
The desired walking distance between walking transfer 
node and destination was assumed to be one kilometer. Point 
of 
interest 
(POI) 
locations 
were 
selected 
from 
OpenStreetMap [1], and 100 destinations within each city 
were randomly selected (in case the number of POIs in a city 
was less than 100, all POIs were used). To identify suitable 
parking lots, a buffer (inner radius: 0.5 kilometer; outer 
radius: 1.5 kilometer) around the destinations of interest was 
created. For each destination, up to 20 parking lots within a 
buffer were selected as suitable walking transfer nodes (note 
that 20 here is an arbitrary number and a suitable number 
may be determined for each). Bus stops and bus routes data 
were collected from Google Transit Feed Specification [16]. 
For each suitable parking lot and bus stop, up to three 
candidate walking routes were generated (ordered by their 
travel time). Parking lot locations and walking routes were 
retrieved from Google Place API and Google Direction API, 
respectively. Once all candidate routes were computed, 
elevation of points along the walking route of interest is 
retrieved from Google Elevation API, and then (1) was used 
to find calories burned for each candidate walking route. 
Walking surface roughness was also calculated using the 
elevations of route segments. To simulate multiple traveler’s 
characteristics, four body weights (60, 80, 100, and 120 
kilograms) and three walking speeds (60, 80, and 100 
meters/minute) were used. 
IV. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
Figure 1 shows the selected cities (on X-axis), based on 
the criteria discussed in Section 3, the numbers of 
destinations and the counts of destinations that have one or 
more suitable parking lots (on Y-axis). The following 
abbreviations are used in Figure 1: Micropolitan (Mi), 
Metropolitan (Me), Hilly (H), and Flat (F). Most cities in 
metropolitan areas have a large number of destinations with 
suitable parking lots except Bossier and McAllen. Four cities 
(Barre, Kappa, Scottsbluff, and Bossier) have zero or only 
one destination with a suitable parking lot, which are 
considered outliers and excluded from the analyses. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-407-7
WEB 2015 : The Third International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

 
 
Figure 1.  Number of destinations and the counts of destinations that have 
 1 suitable parking lots. 
 
Figure 2.  Comparison of attributes related to PK routes in different cities. 
Figure 2 shows maximum, minimum, and average 
number of calories burned (top left) and walking surface 
roughness (lower left) for walking routes that connect to 
parking lots (PK routes). On X-axis, the first four cities are 
hilly, and the latter four are flat. The graphs indicate that 
hilly cities have wider ranges of both calories burnt and 
walking surface roughness. This is because both calories 
burnt and walking surface roughness are directly related to 
the elevation range of hilly cities and the walking routes. An 
interesting observation is that most cities (except Boulder) 
in the left figure have a similar average calories burnt 
regardless of the elevation range. Although Boulder has a 
similar walking surface roughness compared to other hilly 
cities, its average calories burnt is significantly higher than 
the others. This indicates that walking routes in Boulder are 
better in terms of burning calories. 
Figure 2 (top right) shows the number of suitable 
parking lots and (lower right) shows the number of 
acceptable walking routes. The acceptable walking routes 
refer to walking routes that have their distance fall within 
0.9 and 1.1 kilometer (10% of the 1 kilometer desired 
walking distance). The graphs show that San Francisco has 
the highest average number of suitable parking lots, the 
highest number of acceptable walking routes, and the largest 
range on both attributes (largest variation of results); this is 
expected for a metropolitan city where transportation 
infrastructures are dense. Note that San Francisco is the 13th 
most populous city in the United States [13]. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Comparisons between PK routes and BS routes; A: Number of 
acceptable walking routes; B: Walking surface roughness; C: Average 
calories burnt. 
 
 
Figure 4.  San Francisco: PK routes (upper) and BS routes (lower). 
Figure 3 shows the comparisons between PK routes and 
BS routes (walking routes that connect to bus stops) in San 
Francisco and Santa Clara which were the only two cities 
(among the selected cities) that publish their transit data. 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-407-7
WEB 2015 : The Third International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

Each bar graph represents maximum, minimum, and 
average values. Considering the number of acceptable 
walking routes in San Francisco and Santa Clara, the PK 
routes in San Francisco have higher average value than BS 
routes, while the opposite behavior is revealed in Santa 
Clara’s graphs. This indicates that PK routes and BS routes 
are not necessarily correlated. Considering walking surface 
roughness, BS routes in both cities have narrower ranges 
than PK routes, meaning that BS routes in both cities are 
more similar with respect to walking surface roughness. BS 
routes in both cities are also similar with respect to amount 
of calories burnt. PK routes in San Francisco have lower 
average calories than BS routes, and vice versa for Santa 
Clara.  
 
  
 
Figure 5.  Santa Clara: PK routes (upper) and BS routes (lower). 
Figures 4 and 5 show the spatial distribution of 
destinations and the coverage of PK and BS routes overlaid 
on the cities’ road network. The maps indicate that PK 
routes have more coverage than BS routes in San Francisco 
and vice versa in Santa Clara. 
V. 
SUMMARY AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
This paper presented a new simulation approach for 
evaluating smart cities. Scenarios in some cities were 
simulated. The simulation results show that: (a) despite 
similar elevation range, cities may have significantly 
different average calories burnt for the walking routes 
generated and (b) two cities in metropolitan areas (San 
Francisco and Santa Clara) show that PK routes and BS 
routes are not necessarily correlated. 
Considering that enhancing health and wellbeing of 
people, among other things, is one objective for building 
smart cities,  our proposed approach can be used to evaluate 
smart cities for their environment infrastructures (roadways 
and sidewalks) and transportation infrastructures (different 
modes) and as a simulation tool to design new smart cities. 
Some future research directions are: 
 
Investigating and developing MCW optimization 
algorithms for travelers, such as people with 
disabilities (e.g., wheelchair users and people who 
are blind or visually impaired), people with special 
physical 
conditions 
(e.g., 
people 
with 
joint 
problems), and people with health conditions (e.g., 
people who must be less exposed to air pollution or 
sun light). 
 
Investigating and developing a predictive MMT-
MCW methodology that allows route request well 
in advance and can monitor the recommended route 
up to minutes before the route is taken and update 
the 
recommendation 
based 
on 
changes 
of 
environmental and individual factors.  
 
Investigating 
and 
developing 
MMT-MCW 
simulation platforms for different purposes and 
applications, such as those described above. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. G. Benner and H. A. Karimi, Geo-Crowdsourcing. In 
Advanced Location-Based Technologies and Services (Ed: H. 
A. Karimi). Taylor and Francis, 2013.  
[2] B. B. Brown, et al., “Mixed land use and walkability: 
Variations in land use measures and relationships with BMI, 
overweight, and obesity,” Health and Place, 15(4), 2009, pp. 
1130-1141. 
[3] R. Ewing, S. Handy, R. C. Brownson, O. Clemente, and E. 
Winston, “Identifying and Measuring Urban Design Qualities 
Related to Walkability,” Journal of Physical Activity and 
Health, 3, 2006,  pp. s223-s240. 
[4] R. Ewing and S. Handy, “Measuring the unmeasurable: Urban 
design qualities related to walkability,” Journal of Urban 
Design, 14(1), 2009, pp. 65-84. 
[5] A. Forsyth and M. Southworth, “Cities Afoot—Pedestrians, 
Walkability and Urban Design,” Journal of Urban Design, 
13(1), 2008, pp. 1-3. 
[6] H. A. Karimi and M. Socharoentum, “Route2Health: A Novel 
Routing Service to Assist in Increasing Physical Activity,” In 
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on health 
Informatics, Angers, France, 2014, pp. 43-51. 
[7] A. C. King, et al., “Aging in neighborhoods differing in 
walkability and income: associations with physical activity 
and obesity in older adults,” Social Science and Medicine, 
73(10), 2011, pp. 1525-1533. 
[8] E. Leslie, et al., “Residents’ perceptions of walkability 
attributes in objectively different neighbourhoods: a pilot 
study,” Health and Place, 11(3), 2005, pp. 227-236. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-407-7
WEB 2015 : The Third International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

[9] J. D. Marshall, M. Brauer, and L. D. Frank, “Healthy 
neighborhoods: walkability and air pollution,” Environmental 
Health Perspectives, 117(11), 2009, pp. 1752-1759. 
[10] K. R. Smith, et al., “Walkability and body mass index: 
density, design, and new diversity measures,” American 
Journal of Preventive Medicine, 35(3), 2008, pp. 237-244. 
[11] J. Sun, M. Walters, N. Svensson, and D. Lloyd, “The 
influence of surface slope on human gait characteristics: a 
study of urban pedestrians walking on an inclined surface,” 
Ergonomics, 39(4), 1996, pp. 677-692. 
[12] S. J. Tharrett and J. A. Peterson (Eds.), ACSM’s health/fitness 
facility standards and guidelines. Human Kinetics, 2012, pp. 
141. 
[13] U.S. Census Bureau: State and County QuickFacts.  (2010). 
Retrieved 
April 
10, 
2015 
from 
http://www.census.gov/2010census/popmap/. 
[14] D. V. Dyck, B. Deforche, G. Cardon, and I. D. 
Bourdeaudhuij, “Neighbourhood walkability and its particular 
importance for adults with a preference for passive transport,” 
Health and Place, 15(2), 2009, pp. 496-504. 
[15] A. W. Agrawal, M. Schlossberg, and K. Irvin,  “How far, by 
which route and why? A spatial analysis of pedestrian 
preference,” Journal of Urban Design, 13(1), 2008, pp. 81-98. 
[16] GTFS Data Exchange. Retrieved April 10, 2015 from 
http://www.gtfs-data-exchange.com/
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-407-7
WEB 2015 : The Third International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments

